A PRACTICAL CATECHISM: OR, A view of those principal truths according to
Godliness, which are contained in the Catechism, Divided into three parts:
and serving for the use, (as of all, so) especially of those that first heard
them.

By D. R. B. of Divin, Minister of the Gospel.

ROMANS 7.9. For I was once alive without the Law: But when the Law came, sin
reuyued, and I dyed.

ESAIAS 12.3. Therefore with joy draw ye waters out of the wells of Salvation.

2 COR. 7.1. Having therefore such precious promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and finish our holiness in the
fear of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by I. N. for SAMVEL MAN, dwelling at the sign of the Swanne,
in Paul's Churchyard, 1632.

To the Christian Reader: and in especial to my beloved Auditors and
neighbors, Greeting.
Good Reader,
IT is no new thing, (for stuff and substance) which I offer to thee in this
ensuing tract: how can I, in an Argument of this nature, wherein the object
determines the mind and pen of the Writer? If therefore nouelty be thy aim,
save thy labor. Only for the manner and order of expression, this I would
say, That as the Ancients, look what they desired to fasten upon themselves or
their children, they were wont to conueigh it in the familiarity of a Song or
Rhyme, that it might become their own with ease: So do I here, under the ease
and familiarnesse of Catechism, (which is no other then a form of godliness)
reach out to thee and thine, a direction to Heaven, so that if hereby the truth
as it is in Jesus, may be emplanted in thy spirit in any measure, I have my
desire. Thou will say, Who-euer denied but Catechism serves to this end? I
answer, I wish that the practice of all that catechize and are catechized did
approve it. The slight answer of men betrays them, who being asked, If their
Minister did preach to day? answer, No: he did but Catechize: If the
Preaching of a Catechist were conceived as his best work, could men so speak?
No surely, were Catechizing used to such solemn ends, none but barbarous and
blind ones could be ignorant of the eminency and fruit thereof. I tax none: I
only add, As I bless God that Catechizing is so frequent, and that there are
many able Preachers who aim at a profitable course: So I wish that all who do
not, would follow such examples.

As touching you, my Christian Auditors: You know, one full third part of my
poor labors has been thus (and in this order and aim) to Catechize. And
whereas Job served in the preaching hereof, that the particulars grew to a
larger extent then I looked for; you know that once a year at least, I gave
you a brief view of all the parts in a few Sermons. Which course because I saw
to be profitable then: therefore (bethinking my self now in this my priuacy,
how I might witness the continuing care of my heart for your good) I have
conceived the reviving of that Method, to be the best way to recommend my love
unto you. Written copies I saw would prove so chargeable, that few would have
enjoyed any benefit hereof: and threfore I yielded for your ease (to that
which my self would have shunned) to print the Copy.

I proceeded, you know, (in my Ministry) toward the end of the Satisfaction,
being the second Branch of the second part. I have by my labor since (with Gods
blessings) added the rest of the Parts and their Articles to the end: handling
both one and other (for the most part) according to the proportion of my larger
course: at least few points of Substance omitted. Your loss (in a sort)
becomes your gain in this, That wereas scarce in 2 years you should have
heard that which is here added: Lo, now you have it presented to you at once.
Let not (in any case) this gain of yours become your loss by carelessness:
but let it rather by our diligence become a double gain to you and yours.

Now to the intent that this view of Catechism may be profitable, in few words
conceive it thus. Three words contain all my scope in this Tract: Sin,
Grace, Obedience, Sin, in the first part, that each unregenerate man may know
how to get out of his false peace, seeing himself in the glass of the Law to
be that cursed one. Grace, in the second, that each humbled one under his
burden, may (in the mirror of the Gospel, and the offer of Reconciliation)
behold and embrace the hearty and unfeigned meaning of the Lord to forgive and
save him. Obedience in the third, that each forgiven soul may know, that God,
in showing him mercy, aims not only at the ease of the souls burden, but at
his own honor, in laying on another burden, (though eazy and sweet) of living
by faith, and obeying his Commandments. Set these three then before thy eye as
the scope of the whole: And so each part shall not only profit thee in the
several branches, but much more in the connection of the scope thereof; all
tending to make the soul happy here and hereafter. If then thou meet in the
first part with many Articles and heads of weight, rest not in the doctrine of
the things, but conceive them from first to last, as steps and degrees to
convince thee of sin: that the sense of thy natural estate may make thee and
leave thee such an one in thine own eyes, as thou art in the LORDS. If in the
second thou meet with sundry discourses of the way and mean of Deliverance,
dwell not upon the points themselves, but consider their scope, that GOD, in
offering thee Christ's Righteousness to be thine, speaks as truly and according
to his purpose, in this, as he did in the first, that he might convince thee
of his Righteousness. Likewise in the third so read and mediate of the grounds
therein contained, as remembering that all of them tend to this one mark, That
the truth as it is in Jesus, must convince thee of as great a necessity of
putting off the old and putting on the new man, as before it did of thy
Righteousness. And thus thy reading over and over this Treatise with
meditation and prayer, may through the Grace of Gods Spirit, lead thee toward
Heaven.

And now behold, I would even desire that, as Jeremy dealt with his Prophecies,
Iere. 36.2.
he wrote them in a Role, that they might be in daily view, and better
believed: So those of my people (for I accuse but some) who would never by the
preaching of these points, understand the coherence and use of this Sum of
Godliness, might now stand upon this Pisgah, Deuteronomy. vlt. 1.
and behold this Canaan of Practical Religion, and that goodly Lebanon thereof
especially, I mean the Doctrine of faith in reconciliation, and the new
Creature. The use of the whole Posie of all the Flowers herein bound together
is, That ye be better grounded in knowledge, and hear Sermons daily with
better understanding, discerning and practice. Read therefore and consider.
Pray for blessing also, that this Treatise may return into your bosoms with
double fruit. If you profit not, how shall strangers? In hope whereof, I
commend your Reading to the Lord, and my self to your prayers. Farewell.

A necessary Table of direction how to find any point contained in the
Treatise.
The Table of the first part.
ARtic. 1. Touching the integrity of Adams estate, p. 1. The Explication of it
generally to p. 2. particularly in his body to p. 3. In his soul to p. 4. In
his person, ibi. The uses to p. 7. Artic. 2. Adams fall from his integrity, p.
7. The explication of it. 1. By the description of it* p. 8. 2. The parcels of
it, ibid. partly circumstances, p. 9. partly the causes, either remote, p. 9.
or near, p. 10. The uses, p. 12. Artic. 3. The misery of Adam fallen, both by
sin and punishment, p. 15. The explication of it in general, p. 15, and 16.
In particular, either first sin, and that Original both guilt, p. 17. and
stain, p. 18. So Actual, p. 20. Or secondly, Punishment, p. 21. The uses, p.
22. Artic. 4. This misery is universally ouerspredde the race of Adam, p. 26.
The explication of it general, p. 27. particular, p. 29. the uses, p. 30.
Artic. 5. No possibility to manward out of himself to escape, p. 33. The
explication of it, ibid. and p. 34 The uses ibid. Artic. 6. The Moral Law
preached, soundly reueales this misery, p. 37. The general explication, ibid.
The particular, First, by knowledge of sin, p. 38. and that Actual, p. 40.
First, by dispersing mists of error, p. 41. Secondly, by giving light, p. 43.
and that in tw particulars, First, Themselves, Secondly, Penalties. Themselves,
in five respects. First, Her authority, p. 43. Secondly, Her Coherence, p. 44.
Thirdly, Her Royalty, p. 45. Fourthly, Her integrity, p. 46. Fifthly, Her
extent, p. 47. Then two Penalties, p. 50. Secondly, Original sin three
ways. First, by terms of Scripture, ibid, Secondly; by Comparison with
Actual, p. 51. Thirdly, by her properties. First, Eminency, p. 52. Secondly,
Predominancy, p. 53. Thirdly, Perpetuity, ibid. Fourthly, Generality, ibid.
Fifthly, Bondage, p. 54. The uses, ibid. Secondly, by Conviction of sin, and
that twofold, either of judgment, p. 60. and that either by remoouall of lets,
p. 61 Or effecting the work, and that many ways, p. 63. The uses, p. 66. Or
else of the whole man, p. 68, The explication of it in general, ibid. or
specially, in three things. First, the difference, p. 70. Secondly, the Nature
of it, the effects, and end. First, Nature, ibid. Secondly, the effects, three.
First, stopping of bad course, p. 75. Secondly, vnsettling rotten peace, p. 76.
Thirdly, Spirit of Bondage, p. 78. The uses, p. 79. Then the end, p. 81. The
uses, p. 82. Or the extremities, desperation and presumption, p. 83. 84. and
abuses, p. 85. Here of legal Rebellion: The Nature of it unfolded at large,
p. 87. The uses, p. 92. Then the use of the whole Doctrine of terror. p. 96.
Addition. The Lord vpholds such as he will save, in this extremity and that by
a secret hope, p. 98. Explication of it, p. 99. 100. The marks of it, p. 101.
The uses, 102. to the end.
The Contents of the second part.
ARtic. 1. That there is a deliverance ordained for miserable man out of this
thraldom, p. 112. The explication of it, ibid. the uses, p. 113. A further
opening, p. 114. A further use, p. 116. Artic. 2. The only mean and
meritorious instrument to procure this, is Jesus Emanuel, p. 120. the
Explication, p. 120, 121. Whereby this is done, to wit, by a satisfaction:
where two things. First, the Qualification of his person: First, by union, and
unction: Secondly, satisfaction it self, p. 122. the seven welsprings of
Salvation named, p. 123. prosecuted after: the first, Incarnation, with the use
p. 123. the second, the Godhead, with the use of it. 124. the third, union of
flesh, with Word, and the use, p. 126. the unction and the use, 226. the
fourth, the merit, and first of Active obedience, p. 127 the explication of it
fully to 130. The fifth, the Passive obedience, p. 130. the uses of both, p.
134. the sixth, the conquest, with the use, p. 149. the seventh, the application
of his merit, and by what: with the use, p. 153. Artic. 3. The act of God the
father not imputing sin, etc. is the form of our justification, in it self,
p. 157. the explication of it, ibid. the uses, p. 162. Artic. 4. The mean of
external dispensing this deliverance, is the offer of grace in the Gospel, p.
176. the explication, p. 177. the uses, p* 180. till 187. Artic. 5. That the
Lord offering Christ to the soul, does not offer him barely, but furnished with all the benefits of his satisfaction, p. 207. the explication, and sorts of
these benefits, p, 208. the things to be considered herein are three. First,
the difference, p. 209. Secondly, their order, p. 211, Thirdly, their nature in
special, where, of vocation, ibid. union, p. 213. Justification, p. 214.
Reconciliation, ibid. Adoption, p. 215. Redemption, ibid. Regeneration p. 216.
Sanctification p. 217. Glorification, p. 218. The uses p. 219. Article 6. That
the Subject, upon which the Lord bestows all these good things, is his Church.
p. 223. Explication of sundry Names of the Church, p. 224. The use, p. 228. The
Adiunct of the Church: Communion, p. 234. (though foully mis-placed in p. 187.)
the Explication of it in the qualification and marks of it, ibid. and p. 188.
the exercise of it. First, In graces, p. 561. Secondly, In Ordinances, p. 200.
Thirdly, In Services, both to bodies, p. 203. And souls, p. 205, the use, p.
206. Artic. 7. The use of this whole part, viz. that we believe this
deliverance to be our own, p. 234. The Explication of it, ibid. whereof two
things. First, the condition of faith, wherein it stands, p. 235. Explication
of it, p. 237. the uses, p. 246. Concerning says it self, p. 250. What
particulars faith includes, p. 251. the use of the whole part, p. 262.
The Contents of the third part.
ARtic. 1. That whosoever is in Christ, is a new Creature, p. 6. the Explication,
ibid. Four things considered. First, the Author, p. 8. How he works, p. 9.
Secondly, the Instrument, p. 10. A question decyded about it, viz. How faith
both reconciles and renues, p. 11. what acts it performs, p. 12. Thirdly, the
Subject of it, both in particular, and general, p. 15. Fourthly, the parts, p.
16. the uses of the Article at large, p. 17. Artic. 2. That the Lord requires
that this new Creature thus framed in the soul, break forth into the whole
course and conversation. p. 25 The explication, ibid. things herein
considerable. First, the circumstances concerning the persons, p. 26. or the
conversation it self, p. 26. 27. Secondly, the substance of conversation: and
that in three things. First, the Graces qualifying it, p. 28. Secondly, the
subject of it, and that in three respects. First, the thoughts, p. 32.
Secondly, affections, p. 33. Thirdly, Actions, p. 36. The third is the object
of it, either, God himself, and that both inward in the life of faith, p. 40.
and the exercise of graces, p. 43. And outward both ordinary, p. 44, or
occasional, p. 45. Lastly, toward men, either general, p. 45. or special, as
in marriage, p. 46. Callings, p. 47. trading, ibid. Common life, ibid.
Liberties, ibid. Family government, p. 49. the tongue, p. 50. the uses, 51.
Artic. 3. The platform by which this conversation is to be framed, is, the
Moral Law, p. 56. Explication of it, p. 57. Objections answered, p. 58, 59 How
the Law is made our direction? By Christ, as, First, our Priest, p. 60.
Secondly, our King, p. 61. Thirdly, our Prophet, p. 62. The directions
themselves or Rules, p. 63. the uses, p. 66. Artic. 4. God has ordained
variety of excellent means suitable, for the upholding of our conversation, p.
70. Explication of it, p. 71. their names and distinctions, ordinary,
extraordinary, public, private, p. 74. How we may grow by each of these in
particular, p. 76. the uses, p. 88. Artic. 5. that the conversation of the new
Creature, is beset with manifold lets and encumbrances, p. 92. Explication, p.
93. their several sorts, p. 94. First, Sin. Explication, p. 95. Secondly,
Satan, p. 96. Explication. ibid. The particular kinds thereof, and first the
Temples properties, p. 99. then the temptations themselves, p. 100. The third
world, Explication, p. 107. The sorts, either the dead world, p. 108. or the
living, p. 112. The use, 113. Standing in remedies. Either against sin, p.
115. or Satan and world, p. 118. Artic. 6. God has provided for his people
manifold privileges to encourage them to holy conversation, p. 122.
Explication, ibid. The sorts of them, either temporal. Their names, ibid. or
spiritual. Their sorts, p. 126. The uses, 127. Artic. 7. The use of the whole
part, thorowout to the end.
GEntle Reader, the Author, having sent his Copy, afterward sent sundry
Additions, the insertings whereof in their due place was not easy. Therefore
place them aright thus.

Page 86. line. 19. after these words, [of the Law;] begin the A. to the Q.
thus [ A. Paul does in that place, etc. Also in l. 22. the beginning, blot out
these words [ A. Both may be together.

Page. 130. after the 34 l. ere thou r. the Q. bring in 17. l. in P. 134. from
l. 7. to l. 28. thus, [well I am satisfied, etc.

Page 157. after l. 24. ere thou r. that Q. beginning thus [The Doctrine of,
etc.] bring in all that Section conteind from P. 46 l. 29. till P. 48 l. vlt.

In Page 135. set the Q toward the end of the p. and all the A. of it 7. l.
after, before the 25th l. of p. 134.

Page 187. l. 26 r. this and all following to p. 207. l. 7. I say r* it after
l. 21. of p. 234,

If in some place after sundry uses handled thou meet with the next Q. in this
tenor [what use make you of this] correct it thus, [what further use make you
of this? [to avoid confusion.

The order of this view.
FIrst, I will choose such Scriptures as do naturally, and in brief contain
the sum of each of the three parts; premising a text to each part, that we
may hear God, and not man to speak. Then in the second place I will more
fully subioyne the several Articles of each part, which belong thereto, with
the proofs, openings and use thereof. And both these in form of Catechizing.

The text for the first part.

TITUS 3.3: For we also were in times past, unwise, disobedient, deceived,
serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness, and envy,
hateful, and hating one another.

Question. WHat is the connection of this text?

A. The Cretians, to whom Paul writes, having received the profession of the
Gospel upon them, teaching them to believe in Christ the Lord of all, and to
stand fast in the liberty by him purchased to the conscience; began to think
themselves too good to serve their Superiors, Princes, Magistrates, or
Masters. But the Apostle presses them to a close obedience and walking with
God; both in this and all other commandments. And he urges this point of
obedience to GOD and man (which is the sum of the third part of the
Catechism) by a comparison of the first and second parts of the Catechism*
viz. Sin and grace; thus, It were a shame for Christians to walk under
grace, as they did before, during the time of sin and ignorance. But of this
latter sort were ye Cretians, sometimes, viz. foolish, disobedient, deceived,
etc. Now, since the Grace of God appeared, ye are saved and under grace. Be
ashamed therefore to live now as then, and become obedient.

Thus we see by this Argument the three parts of the Catechism are couched
together.

Q. What is the meaning of the third verse, in which the Doctrine of the first
part is contained?

A. He describes the misery under which these Cretians lay in their
unregeneracy. In which although all be not said which other Scriptures
contain; yet so much is said, as may be a groundwork to the rest. The order
is this. First he lays down the misery of their minds: they were Foolish,
that is, void of all sound knowledge in Gods matters or their own good, mere
spiritual fools in the midst of their carnal wisdom. This foolishnes, is
partly Original, partly actual. Original is the deprauednes of the
understanding, and the guilt thereof. As in fools there is a natural
disability of the powers and Organs of nature, and so an utter impotency to
reach the truth of things* even so in all natural men, whether under me^ues or
without them they are fools in respect of wisdom to salvation. And, as Law
strips fools of all right to an estate, making them obnoxious to a kind of
misery: so does spiritual ignorance rob the soul of Heaven. Secondly, this
foolishnes is actual, standing in the natural defilement of the mind, with all
idle and erroneous thoughts of God and themselves, with pollution of judgment
and understanding issuing thence.

Q. What else does the Apostle add?

A. The next is, Corruptednes of the heart or will expressed in the term of
Disobedience, which is also Original or Actual. Original is the utter loss
of true freedom of the will, in point of Subjection to the mind. So that, as
the mind is wholly blind, so is the will wholly rebellious and vnsubiect, void
of all submission to any Commands of God, quite auerse from any thing which he
does or can impoze: And the guilt heerof is lyablenes to wrath or Justice.
Secondly, hence issue all Actual habits of Rebellion, as Impiousnes,
unrighteousness, intemperancy and the like.

Q. Is this all which Paul describes sin by?

A. No: he uses three other descriptions: first he says they were deceived,
that is, As a fool is cheated easily by every one: so is a spiritual fool:
this touches the Actual Sins of the mind. The second is Serving lusts:
which implies a Slavery to the Devil, world and lusts, lusts of the heart,
lusts of the eye, and pride of life: as a beast led to the Shambles. The third
is, Trading and Conuersing in actual sins, such as accord with the
particular nature of each sinner: some of which distempers are noted, a few of
the co^monest for all the rest, Pleasures and riot, envy, hating, and being
hated, etc. all which are added to give a bitter relish to this misery.

Q Why says he nothing of the other part of misery, standing in the curse?

A. Not because he excludes any essential part of it, but because one text
will not contain all, but that which the drift of it lies unto. Some texts
include all three parts in one Verse, as Ephesians. 5.8. Some express one general
part, some another, and in that part, some one Branch, some another. Therefore
what is here lacking, must be supplied by some other. This for a ground of
Scripture may same, and its good that such draughts of Scriptures be before
our eyes, when we handle these grounds, that as corner stones, they may hold in
the building. The which, God willing, shall be framed more distinctly in the
Article following.

(...) A PRACTICAL Catechism.
The Articles of the first part are these six following.
Question.

WHAT is the general scope of these Articles?

A. All tend more or less to lay forth the substance of the first part, which
is sin, in her colors, and what use the soul is to make thereof.

Q. What is the first of these?

A. Touching the integrity of Adams first

Q. Why, was not man thus miserable from the beginning?

A. No, in no sort. For God created man, male and female in his own image,
Eccles. 7.31. Genesis 1.26. 1 Cor. 11.7. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Read the places.
First, for the matter: in respect of his better part, he was made a spiritual,
immortal, invisible, intellegible being, as God. A little spark of divinity.
Secondly, For the manner, as the one Gods essence is subsistng in three persons,
so one soul in three powers, as natural, sensible, and reasonable. Thirdly,
For endowments, and qualities, pure, lightsome, orderly, righteous, holy, and
perfect in act, though not in power and stability: righteous, but not
righteousness, (for that's the Gospels work) not immutable, but left to his
freedom of will. Fourthly. In his body, although of Earth, yet by the breath of
God putting life into the earthy frame thereof, he was made a creature of
great authority and majesty, a model of the creation: as in Psalm. 8. Read it
over. A Lord and Sovereign under the Creator of all his creatures under
himself. A strange Masterpiece for all to stoop to, even as he only to stoop
to his Creator. Heb. 1. A little lower then the Angels: a petty Viceroy under
the Lord himself. The very ruins of him are admirable, as when we behold the
rubbish of some Palace, we may guess at the first magnificence of it a far
off: so when we see the admirable relics hereof in Philosophers, Moralists,
Politicians, Artists, and natural effects of men, we may guess at the
original.

Q. May there be any thing more distinctly spoken hereof?

A. Yes: for order sake, we may consider this Image of God, in respect of
these three: First, Body. Secondly, Soul. 3. Person.

Q. Touching the body first, how was Adam therein created?

A. We may consider therein two things. First, The production or making
thereof. Secondly. The frame of it being made.

For the former, the Lord addresses himself to it, more solemnly then other
Creatures (for this concerns his body as well as his soul) Let us make man:
not thus, Let man be. As to the other creatures. The Trinity is called to this
work, noting it should be Divine and excellent. Genesis 1.26.


Secondly, The frame of it: being made, it was so as God intended it, a
special resemblance of the Creator: He made not the soul, but man, consisting
of body and soul, according to the Image of GOD. So that, whatsoever
resemblance the other creatures had, Verse. 26. twice repeated.
remotely: Adam had an immediate, near and engraven character of Gods Image,
as might be in a material thing.



yet immortal, and durable nature, never to dye: with a consequent freedom
from all alterations, or impressions by Diseases, or Infirmityes, tending to
dissolution of the same; al pains, distempers, weakness, or the like, removed;
(actually I mean.)

Thirdly, A difference of habit, of proportion, and gesture from

Q. But the Holy Ghost especially aiming at the soul: proceed to speak of
that.

A. The soul of man resembled the Creator much more: and that in three things.

First, The nature of it, like Gods (as has bin said) incorporeall,

Secondly, for the manner, I spoke in the former question.

Thirdly, The several functions and powers thereof, Vrim of distinct, pure and
perfect light: so was his will (as I may say) a Thummim of Holiness, perfect
righteousness, original rectitude, and was thoroughly subject to the edict and
charge of the mind: and so the operations and actions suitable to both.

GOD then sat in the throne of the mind as supreme, the will was subject to
the mind, the actions to both. In the conscience, he enjoyed a pure and true
reflexe of himself in all these: perfectly gladding and comforting himself in
the priuity to this excellency: a Musical harmony without all jar, remorse
or anxiety. The outward acts of the Senses, members, natural, civil,
oeconomicall or religious, ordered by knowledge. There was positive power and
free will to good, and not evil in his nature, (and to evil only negative:)
as now in the unregenerate there is a freedom to evil and not good: and in
the regenerate, partly to good, partly to evil. Only not unchangeably so: not
because (as some dream) he must then have been as God: for many Angels were
created so, and yet but creatures: but because it pleased the Creator so far
and no further to impart himself unto him, for causes whereof base curiosity
must not descant.

Q. What Image of God was in his person?

A. That which I spoke of his bodily excellency (for the instrumentalnes,) is
much truer of his whole Person, that it was an express image of God, First, in
his most reverend and awful behauior, as being under God the Lord of the
Creatures. Secondly, In that honorable enterteynment vouchafed him by the Lord,
even as a Prince into his Palace; all the world being finished in her due
parts and ornaments, man is brought in as The royal Creature, possessed of all
the rich treasure of the Creation, set therein as in a Theater of the
workmanship of God, that all should be subject to him. But touching this, and
those 2 or 3 next Articles (of which and in which there is less doubt and
difficulty) I will shorten my self: until I come to join issue with the
practice of this first part, viz. the use of the Law.

Q. What use then is there to be made thereof?

A. Manifold: for although the crooked nature of man thinks it but her misery,
to think how happy she has been: yet the Lord purposes by this means, to
bring her back to her first excellency, if she will be ruled by him.



This point will better suit the third Article: here only I bring it in, to
stir us up to 2 meditations: First, If sin (as defacing a blemish as it is)
yet could not so quite root out that honor and Majesty of God in man, but
still he has reserved (for universal ends) some relics thereof: (for whence
is it, that the Lord has denied those useful creatures, the horse and the Ox
and others, to feel their own strength, and the curse of man, so that they
should quite renounce his service? Do they not still fear the Shadow of Gods
Image, and are they not awefull, nay do they not yield themselves to his taming
and subduing power?) even Lions, and Bears, and the most savage? If then there
be such a deep Print of this Creating hand; with an indelable character in his
second Image in righteousness, enstamped by the Spirit of Christ; who dare say,
that any thing can ever deface that lasting Image?

And Secondly, what reverend respect should we yield to this Ioh. 9.34.

But Thirdly, especially it should smite a terror and awe into us,

Fourthly, Nay: how fearful a confusion do they bring in, who

Secondly, the recognisance of this first Image of GOD, should occasion to us
(that now by the Ministry of the Law are convinced of our woeful loss) first,
to shame our selves: secondly, to provoke our selves.





Excellency of the fountain it self, a drop of which lighted upon man, as
David, Psalm. 8. concludes: but in particular also, and especially the goodness
of this Majesty, who would communciate himself not only to Angels, but to a
piece of earth, and that in so strange a manner, to make it capable of such
perfection. To see the skil^ and workmanship of Bezaleel in brass and silver,
and wood was strange: but to see the Lords face, greater; were it but in a
leaf, a l^lly, a gnat, which are above all Salomons glory. But to behold his
skill and curious work in man's body, especially his soul, to communicate
himself so far to a piece of clay, what meditation can equal it?

Fourthly, it should teach us much more to believe, how Adam. Oh! it should
convince us of the goodness of mercy, and cast out that enmity of ours, which
cannot beteame God one good thought.

Fifthly, it should teach us the equity of Gods commands, Adam had not faith
given him, therefore GOD cannot justly require the punishment of unbelief. I
answer yes: for although Adam had not the grace he needed not, yet he had such
grace as enabled him to obey, as well in those charges which God should put upon
him, which he losing by sin, is justly punished for it.

Lastly, it should stop the mouth of all cauillers against God, Adam with a
confirmed nature to persevere. Rather let us turn our selves to condemn Adam,
and confess, his judgment was most just, that for so needless and so
frivolous an addition of content to his appetite, he would lose so unspeakable
a Jewel as he forfeited.

Q. But, did Adam continue in this integrity?

A. No. He fell from it by wilful transgression, Genesis 3.7. Romans 5.12. Eccl.
7.29. Romans 5.19. And this disobedience, was the violation of the charge of God,
not to meddle with the Tree of Good and evil. This sin was not a bare eating
of the forbidden fruit, but a compound and fardell of all sins in one; A
proud, disloyal, needless, distrustful, reuolting, discontented,
unthankful, rebellious departing from the blessed God, to a base creature,
even when he was set in the midst of all perfection, above all base objects.

Q. But how could this be, he being Gods Image?

A. He was actually so, but not unchangeably. Therefore having his will left in
her-freedome, and vnestablisht by gracious determining thereof to good: Lo,
when a sensible object is presented by the Devil, first she (as the weaker)
then he by her means, freely chose to leave God, and to embrace the creature.
And hereby, when he was made able if he would, to stand, although so, as he
might fall, he turned this voluntary might, into a necessity of falling, and an
impossiblenes of return by himself.

Q. How lay ye forth this sin, more fully?

A. By two things. First, The description of the Holy Ghost. Secondly, By the
parcels of the sin. For the first, The Scripture calls, Genesis 3.6: Romans 5. 1.
Tim. 2.13, 14.
it That disobedience. That offense. That transgressio^: noting it to be the
compound of all in one, yea the root of all, most odious of all, as being the
first of all, which durst enterfeer with the righteous nature and will of GOD.
But especially Solomon, Eccles. 7. vlt. calls it a Finding out of inventions.
No man can find out any thing that good is, beyond God. God had found out and
bestowed upon Adam and Eve all goodness in perfection: yet cut of a wearynes of
welfare, they would find out beyond him, be wiser then he: supposing to better
their estate; but they found out nothing but their own findings, sin and
sorrow: as it was just they should do, who would go beyond GOD: They found out
indeed new occasion and work which God never set them: and the^^ devised lies
and shifts, but they found out misery to be their portion, when all the rest
vanished.

Q. How by the parcels of the sin?

A. First, by the circumstances. Secondly, by the fall it self. The
circumstances are as the persons belonging to it, First, The Serpent. Secondly,
Satan. Thirdly, Eve and Adam. Touching the first; The Serpent, being the wisest
and subtillest creature, fittest for Satan to work by, and of least suspicion,
both readiest to take fire from hell, and to set Eve on fire therewith, is
used. Satan comes not, we see, without his tew and tackling, but strong and
well prepared: here was the main fight, upon which all his kingdom hung:
either now or never: therefore now he unites al his feats and forces: strength
cruelty, subtilty, diligence, malice, in one. Is there any one wiser and apter
creature, to convey temptation by a voice, then other? That he chooses. Is
either of the two parties si^lier, weaker to be gulled then other? Her he
lights upon. Is this woman at any odd time less her self, weaker then
weakness it self? Then he comes. Is there any way to either lay out the
excellency of the object, or to extenuate the att^mpt urged to alay the charge,
or to traduce the Commander? That he lights on.

The second person is Satan: who had bin an Angel of 2. Cor. 11
^u^ (as other Scriptures do prove) being left justly by GOD to the
temp^tation of Ambition, and aspiring to be as GOD, fell to be discontent with
their estate, and to puff up themselves with pride, Jude. 6.
and to withdraw themselves from their place and forsook their service, (for
how should pride stand before a God of holiness?) Oh! this clipped their wings of
readiness, Psalm. 146. Then all cheerful, loyal seruiceablenes was gone! By
this means, God cast them down to Hell, and there reserved them in chains!
they having lost that they had, and that they desired, turn their rage against
God who had plagued them, and their e^u^ against man his favorite, never
l^nning till they had also cast him out of Paradise.

The Third is Eve: and Adam, who did most immediately

Q. What things observe you in their fall?

A. Things of two so^s. First, The remote causes. Secondly, The more near and
proper. The former were these: First, changeableness of their will. Secondly,
Vnarmednesse against the temptation. Thirdly, the peculiarity of the same.

For first, Let us not blame GOD* but look at man: whose habitual holiness
wanting a confirmation of grace, determining the will against the object then
and thus offered, was corrupted to a passive capablenes of evil. Beware here
of murmuring against God, saying, What was it to make them t^u^ perfect;
wanting an Holy necessity of nature to stand? Oh man, whoart thou!

The Second, was their vnarmednesse. They meant indeed no evil: but they used
not that power to stand, which God had put into them: they watched not to keep
pure, being made so: its not enough for a servant not to purpose to go out of
his Masters work, except he resolve also faithfully to dwell upon it, without
vnsettling. They knew good from evil in the speculation: for they had heard
the charge and threat of God: both of not eating, and of death by eating: but
they feeling all well within for the present, rested too much in it, felt not
their own changeable will, prove to hazard all their pearls at one cast,
feared no hurt from without^ and here they were caught.

Third was, the aptnes of the temptation: the Devil feared not their
perfection, he makes it strong and alluring both in the blinding of their
mind, and bewitching of their heart: Let it not be imagined by you (says he)
that it is sinful or deadly to attempt: God knows the contrary. What shall
it boot you to obey him that enuies your good? A (...) the hurt ye fear; Lo,
by eating ye are sure of a better estate then ye are in. Thus by the strong
bayte of sweetness, he attempts the affection, and so corrupts the judgment.

Q. Proceed to the more near cause of their sin?

A. It is threefold. First, Inward tickling of their affection. Secondly,
Snaring. Thirdly, Secret consent.

First, So excellent a creature could not have bin suddenly surprised, but by
steps. For why? Sin as yet was not: it could not therefore be with them as
with us, Iam. 1.5. We are first led away by concupiscence, but they had none.
Therefore there must be a strong moving and drawing of their minds, a
travail with this indetermined freedom of theirs, to sway it: and this
supplyeth the room of concupiscence. Satan suspends the act of goodness in
them, brings them to a slack remissness, and corrupts their bent of spirit:
as if a man would suffer an enemy to come within gunshot of him, when he ^ight
have kept him out: and so liberty is questioned, as i^ a man would call in
question whether his own be his own or not. This was the first spawne of the
sin. And this stood in foolish credulity, curiosity, and dallyance.
Credu^ity, to secure her self of her own welfare, as if nothing could or
would ^utcher: whereas she should have bin suspicious of the least accident
threatening her. Curiosity, to interchange talk and speech with a creature, she
being the Lady of all creatures, and therefore should not have admitted such a
parlee, but wisely have thought, This is no place for a servant to intrude
himself, and to iangle with me, being uncalled: Speech is not for a Serpent^
it becomes not me to seek better content then I have, by an idle, curious and
vain discourse, which I know not what, whence, nor to what purpose. But this
her vain iangling was her ruin. Then Dalliance in bandying so many replies
one after another (who knows how many?) and venturing to prate of so weighty
athing as her happiness, not doubting that so main a point threatened her Ruin,
but hazz^^ding all upon her own wit, tongue, conceits and answers, as if she
could have plucked back her score at her pleasure, and prevented sin in the
very kindling: I say, what is this but bold venterousnes upon the danger,
because she felt her self as yet untouched?

These three brought forth the second, which was Snaring: for by this tickling
of her, she takes the Devils snare into her will and thoughts, so far, that as
a bird in a grin, she could neither go backward nor forward: but is limed and
hampered with that which at the first she was free from: her wings begin to be
clip^; and now she is ready to tell where her great strength lies: and now an
vnc^eane delight begins to defile her, her freedom staggers, she admits a
thought, What if I venture and try; what hurt can come of it? Now he^ directive
light begins to dazzle, her pureness to be defiled, (...) and false sweet to
expel true: And so ceases to be in her own power, as the bowl rolling down
the hill. And so thirdly succeeds Secret assent to the temptation, and yields
up the inward weapon of her Innocence, to the Devil, rests in the thing
offered, as very good, meet, sweet, delightful, standing upon thorns till she
do, as she is tempted. What wonder? when she refus^^ to be led by that inward
light and grace she had received Therefore God leaves her to call good evil,
and evil good. And so she took it, ate it, gave it her husband, wh^ though
he were not first, yet he was last in the transgression, and yielded to do
as the Devil had drawn her to do; and so both of them disobeyed.

Q. What consider you in the fall it self?

A. Not only the act of the transgression, but with it a fardell of abundance
of foul corruptions of heart. And those are of these two sorts, either more
special, or more general. The special were, Pride, Security and Sloth,
Vanity, Sensuality, Discontent, Sacrilege, Cruelty and unrighteousness, with
the like. More general and fearful, Distrust of GOD. Rebellion against God,
unthankfulness and Apostasy totally from God. For the First, Pride, how
fearful was it for a creature made in Gods Image, to aspire like Satan to be
checkmate with his Maker? Secondly, Sloth and Security in a flacke neglect of
so great a trust reposed in his custody. Thirdly, Vanity in so inconstant and
unsettled curiosity to pry into matters forbidden. Fourthly, Sensuality, to
affect a present contentment to the sense and appetite, upon so infinite
hazard. Fifthly, Discontent with the present estate, so excellent, and so
instantly upon their enjoying it. Sixthly, Sacrilege, in profaning the
ordinance (if it be true that the fruit was Sacramental) and tie of God.
Seventhly, Cruel injustice, in casting away not themselves only, but all
their posterity. But especially the general: First, Woeful distrust, in
ascribing no credit to God either in charge or threat, but rather to Satan's
malicious slanders: and suffering themselves to be pulled from the Simplicity
of Gods Word, 2 Cor. 11.3. enterteyning base thoughts of him, to be false,
envious, yea admitting a root of bitterness and indignation against his love.
Secondly, Rebellion, to dare so ^^enly and with full butt to rush against the
command of God, and to provoke him to try whether he would do as he had
threatened, fearing nothing: And Thirdly, Unthankfulness, and a wearisom
restlesnes in that state of happiness: even departing from God the Fountain of
living waters, when they enjoyed all in him that heart could wish, even
needlessly, in cool blood. Lastly, Apostasy, utter reuolting like tray^^rs,
from that happiness of theirs, and the Lord the Author thereof, to Satan, sinn^
and curse, to t^ll^ and finally for ought was in themselves.

Q. What use is there hereof? does it afford any instruction?

first, from the Serpent: who by abusing his parts, teaches us to boast our
selves or rest in no outward gift of God for it self seeing (if ^^sanc^ified)
it may be isntrumental to such villainy, and dishonor to God, either in our
public or private places, and so prejudicial to our own salvation, as we
should wish rather we had been Idiots, then so egregious. Secondly, from
Satan, We learn that he fears not to attempt the best, and most godly, hoping
to prevail: for if he could bring in sin where none was, how much more
increase it where he finds it? Also to suspect him in his sweet enchantments,
and when he attempts our Eve, that is, our sensual part, overthrowing our
Adam, and judgment thereby, then to handle him roughly, knowing him (by his
messenger) not to be far off. Besides, beware of an aspiring heart, discontent
with our portion and estate: If Adam had argued thus, To what a dignity has my
Creator raised me from the dust? who am I, poor earth, earth, earth! he had
stood firm: but now looking about him and setting up his bristles, lo, pride
causes his ruin! Oh! how safe are we, while we are under!

And lastly, from Eve and Adam, Pro. 1^.18. Vlt.
let us learn not to trust our selves too far in our privations, that we
intend no evil: but be we armed also as well against evil of all sorts, lest
it be with us, as if we had nothing at all in us. Let us beware of dalliance
and admitting parlee with temptations of sensuality, lest we fare as Samson by
Delila, and would feign get off the hook, Judge. 16.16
but cannot, being snared. Thus men think it cannot be dangerous to admire,
praise and accompany beautiful women, to thrust themselves into the company of
fine fellows in their pleasures, and to rush our selves upon snares of deep
worldly business! They purpose not to be caught (they say) til their wings be
singed with their venturing so near the brinke, and then they struggle in
vain. Better had it been for them to have been birds with wings, and so in
vain should the not have been spread for them. And to end this use, how should
the description of Adams sin, for ever fear us from slighting it? We esteem
it by the outward act: but that which makes it so odious, is the Attendant
fearful circumstance of it. To let fall a piece of coin into the di^t^is
little: but to throw it and stamp it under our feet in scorn, is treason. Not
to give all to the use of the Church, (being ou^s) is nothing: but to withdraw
it being Gods, with a lie to the holy Ghost, is mortal. Oh, the sin of Adam is
inexcusable I committed in the full strength of grace, in the fulness of all
Paradise contentment, needlessly for a trifle, when there was no sin to draw
them, and the like.

Secondly, Let it be instruction to show us what little wonder there is to be
made, that now in our corrupt estate, the abundance of gifts, blessings,
encouragements, good helps of nature, education, art; nay, holy ordinances of
God granted us for the better, do not profit 1000 shillings, nay turn to
cu^^upt? Surely if Adam in all his excellency, yet by mere absence of
confirming grace, could abuse his free will to so fearful a fall: we need
not wonder, that in this state of his necessary misery, he profits so little
by all helps: no wisdom or righteousness of his could free him then; and
shall the want of both help him now? Man is set up by God, and yet is a beast.
The Cat was once made a Queen, but in her glory she hunts after a mouse.

Thirdly, Bless God, that in his second grace by Christ, he changed old Adams
perfection into a better and surer, from a selfe-subsistence in grace according
to our own freedom, to a subsisting in another; betrusting us no more with
our own Treasure, but keeping it under the lock and key of his own power in
Christ. So yet look what we come short of Adam in the measure of grace in this
life, we go beyond him in the unchangeableness: for alas! how little are we
fit to be trusted with all, but we would lavish it, if under our own keeping?
The Lord is feign to humble us rather under the burden of our infirmities and
corruptions, because we are not here capable of any great matter. Being so
unfaithful in the smaller, who should trust us with the great treasure?
Lastly, it teaches us to esteem highly of the grace of self-denial, as being
the contrary grace to Adams corruption. For he fell by too much trusting
himself: we stand by the grace of selfe-renouncing. And its not amiss to
consider, how justly the greatest penalty of man stands in the loss of his
freewill, and in the slavery of the will to sin: because this freedom
abused, caused his ruin. So fearful is the error of them that maintain,
that man has still free will in himself remaining to that which is good.

Q. Was there no other thing to make up his misery, save only his fall?

A. Yes. The effects of it caused him to be miserable^ both the effects of
sin and punishment.

For sin first, his actual brought forth original, his original, all
actual sins, and both these procured all penalties: And that thus. God having
threatened him death if he sinned, did justly inflict sin for sin, and gave
him over to his desire, and concupiscence. Seeing he would forfeit his Image
for a trifle, he left him to be as he desired; a mass of corruption and
rebellion. As a pitcher dashing it self against a stone wall, is justly split
to pieces. So that by the wrath of God was inflicted upon him the loss of Gods
Image standing in righteousness and true holiness: a depriuall of the Glory of
God, both in soul and body: as if the LORD should say, Seeing thou would
needs thus rebel, fill thy self with it, be so to the full. Hence came that
utter impotencie of mind and members, to purpose, to will, or execute any good.
Nay, an utter averseness from it, an utter incapablenesse of it, a contrariety
of spirit unto it, Ioh. 14.4. and 5.14. Psalm. 5.15. Romans 7.23, 24. and many
other. For a taste, take these: original darkness, erroneousnes of judgment,
captivity and thraldom of will, insensiblenesse of heart, impotency of the
faculties, enmity to al goodness, total impurity of the whole spirit,
propension to any sin, and unaptness to any good occasioned, seruilenesse of
the will, vnsubiectnesse of the outward man, vnsauorinesse, and in a word, the
death of the grace of creation. This for sin.

So for the penalties, a seed of utter impenitency, dedolency, obstinacy,
apostacy, and excommunication f^^m God, Ephesians. 4.18. From this fountain,
proceeded both actual sins, and act^all pe^alties, sins of commission,
omission, ignorance, presumption, inward habits; as hypocrisy, earthlinesse,
ignorance, errors, profaneness, unthankfulness, hardness of heart; and outward
acts, as in both tables, impiousnes, unrighteousness, intemperancy, and the
like: of which, see Romans 1. and.3. 2. Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So penalties
actual, as the impurity and curse of corc^p^ion and bi^ch, the loss of the
right and dominion of the Creatu^es, the curse upon Gods blessings, hellish
terrors, diseases, p^uerty, discredit, imprisonm^nt, fear of death, guiltynes
of judgment, and utter misery of loss, and sense in hell.

Q. You have laid many things together: and I consent to all: Yet I desire a
little more distinct order of them: being the^e, o^e all these to some few
heads.

A. I will in this Article lay down the order of the point, and leave the
further enlargement of it, to his d^epl^ce in the fifth Article following.
Conceive then the point by the Apostles speech, Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one
man sin entered into the world, and ^eat^ by sin, etc. Where we see, that
the actual sin of Adam, determined not the bound of misery, but brought a
second misery with it, even the misery of our whole nature. While we stood in
Adam, his obedience kept his whole estate and nature entire: but when he fell,
though the sin were a limited thing in act of eating, yet it was an unlimited
excess in respect of the committer, and the frame of his reuolting heart. And
therefore it was just wi h God to plague his whole nature, for this sinful
act: And the plague thereof was, to inflict such a penalty upon Adams nature
(of the Propagation I shall speak in Article 4.) as made it truly miserable,
in stead of being before truly happy. Note then, Adam having actually
disobeied, the Justice of God offended h^gh^ by it, does punish whole nature
for it. As if he had said thus, Have thou indeed freely chozen to leave me in
plain ground? To embrace lust and Satan, and pleasure of appetite before me?
To cast dirt upon my pure Image? Be it then so with thee, as thou desire: Be
that in nature, which thou chozest in thy free will to do. That Image of mine
which thou caredst not to preserve, be stripped off: that image of thine own
invention, which thou preferredst, be satisfied with, fill thy self with,
enjoy and delight thy self with to the uttermost: I will not suffer mine to
harbor with thine, light and darkness, corruption and pureness: therefore
depart, my image, from this sty of uncleanness, and let him who needs would
be filthy, lie down in his filth, and he that would forsake a real fire of
heat, to compass himself in his own sparks, let him lie down in sorrow. As
I threatened, so I sentence thee, In dying, dye: dye the death of thy sin, and
find thy own inventions to thy self: I utterly cut thee off, and
excommunicate thee from my presence, and in token of it, from Paradise the
place of thy former happiness: in one word, Be miserable. Note then whatsoever
Adam brought himself unto by his act of sinning, was Penal: because it was a
stroke of justice. Not only death and all other punishments, before and after
it, but even Original sin it self is a penalty: it is a sln indeed, but its
a penal one, God justly punishing actual with original: and so we must
conceive, that although in us, it be truly sin, yet God inflicting it, did
not infuse it as sin into us, but only as a just penalty of that which Adam,
himself in the freedom of his wicked will, had first forged in his own heart
against God.

Q. How many branches do ye divide this Misery into?

A. Into two. The misery of sin, and the misery of punishment: either of which,
had been misery alone, but justice would not suffer misery to be within
narrower bounds then these: that he who by doing made himself, might by
suffering be made miserable. The former, viz. misery of sin, is either of the
Root, original, or the branches, Actual sin: both making the soul truly
though not equally miserable.

Q. What is the former of these? Show in what the misery of Original sin
stands?

A. In two things. 1. Original guilt. 2. Original stain or Pollution: both
being the fountains of all Actual; guilt of conscience, and pollution of
conscience.

Original guilt is that priuity and reflection of conscience in Adam fallen,
whereby he told himself continually that he had fallen, and therefore must dye
the death, in each kind of it, body and soul. This perpetual alarm of
conscience in his nature was the first part of his sinful misery. And the Holy
Ghost expresses it in those words, They saw they were naked; Genesis 3^
and Adam when God called him, hid himself in the bushes, and gave the reason,
because be was naked. The Lord asks him how he knew it? The meaning was, his
conscience in presenting to him his fault, did gugge him also with fear, and
expectation of revenge. So that, as in his inn^cency, one excellent part of his
welfare was, that he knew himself so: so now one especial part of his woe
is, that the conscience did ring his sin always in his ears, and made him
obnoxious, that is, to fear God in point of that punishment, which he looked
for from his Justice for his sin. And to say the truth, what misery is like
to this? to be ever on the rack of a man's own spirit, suggesting and bo^ding
to him sad things to come for his sin? dogging him as the Tailor, who will not
suffer his prisoner to go one inch from his custody? how bitter does it make
all h^^gs, when as a sword hanging by a twined thread over a man's head, it does
threaten him perpetual ruin? and tie him over (as a band and recognisance of
great forfeit) to the great assize of wrath and judgment, there to answer for
himself? yea and there without all bail or mainprize vnescapeably to suffer
eternal death of body and soul? This the Author to the Heb. 2.15. touches,
saying who all their life time by the fear of death were subject to bondage.
q. d. walked under the chain of this guilt, always afraid lest by death of
body, their soul should slide into hell, to abide there, till the body came
thither. True it is, Adam dyed not at the first committing of the sin: but
had he found no more favor then Caine did, lo, all those 900. years he had
bin tossed and terrified with this guilt, till it had seized upon him. And
whereas ye will say, that those that lived without the law, were better then
we, because they were miserable and knew it not: I answer, they had law
enough in them to hold them under a guilt of horror for such evils as they
committed against the natural light, although ignorance had worn out the true
dint of this conscience. Besides although to know a man's misery, only,
increases it: yet so to know it as we may prevent it, is better, then by not
knowing it, to escape the sent and bondage of that which yet lies upon us.

Q. Wherein the misery of Original stain of sin consists?

A. We may either conceive it in the whole, or in the parts. Touching the
whole, the best way will be, to take the word which the holy Ghost uses, which
is Death. For death is the resolution of nature: and so is this death of the
soul, a total abolishment and corruption of that blessed frame of creation,
(I mean in the point of her Pureness:) in mind by light, in will and heart
by holiness. Now then look how contrary a carcass is to a lively body: so is
this to the life of creation, as in these few things may appear: in the well
framed constitution of body, appear, First, Union of parts. Secondly, Order.
Thirdly, Sweetness and beauty. Fourthly, Strength and actiuity, Aptnes at the
end it serves for. But in a dead carcass, together with the absence of the
life and soul of reason, what appears save contrary effects? Impotency to all
former Operations, Genes. 6.5.
disorder, stinch, and putrefaction, confusion, and yerksomenesse? The general
then is Destruction of the frame of Nature, Romans 3.23
corruption of the Image of God. Touching the parts, both faculties and powers
of the soul and body, it were endless to mention all.

In the mind there is a death of all pure light and knowledge, Ephesians. 5.8
a nakedness of Gods image in point of that ruling and ouerruling power, by
which she conveyed direction to all the inferior faculties, will first, and
then affections and operations: now she is both darkness in her self, and
loss of her birthright, to rule other parts: unto darkness, add death of
judgment, easily received in matter of discerning of the natures and truths of
things, and so also, impotency and languor of apprehe^sion, dullness and
inability to conceive good things: Esaias 44.^0 Romans 7.14 21.
and besides this privative indispositio^, also a positive pronen^s and
propensity to all eui^l of the mind^, I conceits, false, heretical, erroneous
opinions, vain, profane, idolatrous, unsavory imaginations, discourses,
thoughts and judgments, Romans 8.5.
keeping in memory noisome, and ^u^tfull objects.

So secondly, Death of the will, especially* Romans 7.14
in the matter of her subjection to the lore and leaving of the vnderstand^ng:
then also in her faculty of w^l^ing and nillin^, or suspending: corruptnesse in
the freedom thereon by mere bondage both unto sin and by sin, a deprauednesse
of the choosing facul y, and so of ^he rest: yea a disposednesse to will only
and continu^lly evil, to nill good, to suspend only from good, and not evil,
James 4.1 Ecles. 7.27.
to cl^use evil before good. So truly does the Lord complain, That the whole
frame of the soul is only evil continually.

To these add, the death of afflictions in point of their due direction to the
objects, and whole inclination of them to a prepostrous and disordered liking
of ^uill, dislike of good: Ephe. 4.29 Iere. 2.25.
a disposition thereof to extremities on either hand, either to love, hope,
sorrow, fear, pity, shame, zeal, and the rest, more then ought to be, or
under that should be: and thereby to overthrow the course and order of the
whole of the whole conversation.

Esa. 57. vlt.
Join to these the death of the conscience, both in respect of her staruing
death, that she wants matter of excusing, peace and conten, having lost all
welfare: and the death of her pureness^, ^o represent objects to the soul
aright, either with comfort o^ accusation: not to speak of her pronenesse to
be defiled, di^abled, feared, senseless^, and slavish, according to the
corruption of ^he mind both which go together, Tit. 1.15.

Romans 6.8.
As to^ching the spirits, and the senses, and the members, there is a de^t^ in
them of that hability, soundness, vigor, and ser^iceablenesse to the soul in
good things, and a pronenesse and tickling to be vainly and frothily employed,
except worse be offered, even profanely and vnholily. And to conclude, there
is a death of the person, in respect of that right and soueraignety over the
creatur^s, wi^h a sl u^sh pronenesse rather to Idolize them both in the worship
of some, and the love or use of others a declension from Go^, and a revolt to
the base creature, as Eve did to the forbidden fruit.

Q Now what is the misery of Actual sin?

A. The deprauednesse and death of all the operations flowing from the soul
within, or the body without: for whereas these resembled the pureness of the
principle at the first, lo, now, they bewray the contrary: all confusion,
disorder, ignorance and unrighteousness being broken into them. As appears in
this, that in the first table, the soul departing from God, sets up to her
self other gods: profit, pleasure, ease, worldly lusts; worships him after her
own devices: lives as seems best to herself in her conversation, abhorres
his Sabbaths, and the like. In the second, that forsaking the law of
righteousness and sobriety: the soul defiles her self with disobedience and
rebellion to man, to vnnatu all, cru^ll and unmerciful carriage, to
uncleanness, Mat. 15.19 Gala. 5 19 2 Timothy 3.2 3, 4, 5. Psalm 14.2 1 Kin. 8.46
Romans 3 9
to revenge, to wrath, to unjust, oppressing, defrauding ways, to lies,
tricks, and slanderous aspertions: to a continual lusting after
unrighteousness. And all these not only in open acts (which are not so usual)
but in the actual thoughts, desires, proiects and counsels of the heart,
yielding and consenting thereto and delighting to think of, talk of, to love
and commend sinful practizes; as swearing, drunkenness, bebate, wrong,
intemperancy and the like. For these are but one of a thousand of those actu^ll
sins, which as sparkles fly up, from the former furnace. Not all these in
every m^n, but some in one, and some in another, See 1 Cor. 6.7. Such were ye,
some of ye, etc.

Q And wherein stands the second general part of misery, to wit, of punishment?

A. In the manifold penalties both of soul and body: and those properly
express that threat of God, When thou eatest, thou shall dye the death. In the
soul first, (for of all other, these are fearefullest, because they are
sinful penalties of sin) first, an auersenesse from God, or from returning
to God any more, but going from him further and further infinitely: Ephe. 4.14
15. Romans 8.7. Romans 7.23 2 Cor. 2.14 Cannot, etc. As a stone cannot melt.
an insensiblenesse of soul in this double misery: a dedolency of heart
utterly and impenitently hardened in it: an vncapeablenesse of admitting of any
means to draw the soul out of misery to any better estate: a spirit of
resisting and opposition of any such: an infinite peaceablenesse and content of
heart in the present condition, thinking this bondage and hell another liberty
and heaven: and if berest of it, raging as the Bear robbed of her whelps: and
so a pronenesse to be riueted more and more deeply into this woe, with less
and less feeling or believing it. Now these (we must know) are of a deeper dye
then the former, as being cursed of God upon and against a sinful Rebel:
giving him over to himself, and sealing him to wrath and perdition, which
though the Lord does not always enlarge, but rather suspend till the due
season thereof: yet they are all inherent in our corrupt nature.

Touching the body, where shall I begin or end? What languors and diseases
are there incident to the body? what poverty, baseness, beggary and want to
the estate? Gene. 2.17 Esaias 53.4.
what reproach to the name and credit, aspersions, slanders, dishonor? What
misery in family, in Church, Commonwealth? What obnoxiousnesse to Satan, to his
instruments, temptations, mischief, bondage to the ungodly, suites, services,
dependances with hard conditions, crosses, streights, pursuites, losses,
forfeits, death of friends, imprisonment, accidents, and shrewd turns, bad
tidings, confusion in the state, famine, war, pestilence, and a 1000. ways
for him to go woefully out, who came but one way into the world? Besides grief
of mind, melancholy, passions, and distempers of the spirit, bad conscience,
ill marriage, lewd children, ill success, Ruin of estate, and at last a
miserable death? And yet the vpshot of all is worst after, viz. A final
separation from God, and loss of his eternal presence, with the sense of
unutterable, intolerable, unavoidable wrath of God in Hell upon the whole man
for ever, without the least hope of help or redress?

Q I partly conceive this view and map of the misery of the fall: now
conclude the Article with some use of it?

A. First, here is confutation of all Papists, who flatly deny this Article,
and tell us, that our Nature is indeed shrewdly who fell among thieves between
Jerusalem and Jericho, Luke 10.30
and left half dead. But as for us, that maintain this dying the death, this
quite and clean deadness in sins and trespasses, they cannot abide. No (say
they) there be left even in the unregenerate such abilities, and devotions, as
may congruously dispose God to pardon them: And by some help of grace, merit
also full f^rgiuenesse. Yea they boast themselves of their performances, and
d^ties, whereas Paul tells us that all boasting is cut off And tells us, Romans
3.27.
Baptism washes away all original sin, which yet Paul groans under the
burden of being regenerate. Also all P l^gians or their adherents, who affi^me
that old Adam is, as one in a dark dungeon, who by reason of darkness, cannot
see; but if he have a light put in, has his eyes very quick, and can see any
thing: and so we want but light, and then we are able to discern and
apprehend any truth put into us, of our selves: Also such as blanch the matter
with the color of Grace, added to our nature: for by that (say they) nature,
being helped can put on the cords (as Jeremy in the dungeon) and address
himself to come forth. What has a dead man with all the light and help in
the World, to address himself to live?

much good company, commend the Ministers, and welcome them, and maintain
them, should yet be as the Publicanes and sinners: I do not say ye are, but
I say this, Except ye also deny your selves, and behold this misery of your
Natures, ye will fate wo^se in time even by your righteousness, then if ye
had non^! for ^hy? do ye not graffe upon a rotten stock, and guild a rotten
post? So also, such as commend men's natures in the point of religion, saying,
Oh, such are so sweetly natured, courteous, lo^ing, mild and harmless, that
there is but little between them and Heaven! Alas, how many of these sweet
creatures are as bitter enemies to Gods grace, as friends to ciuility and fair
carriage! Also such as aim at religion, only thus far, to color their wings
and tip their tongues, or their outward dealings with some outside: but as for
that heart within, and nature, they suspect not. And to conclude, such as being
told of their passions, defend the^ by their nature, It Is my nature to be so
hot, I have soon done: why poor fool, think thou thy nature is more
excusable then thy passion? and yet what is so common with men to say, then
this, If I were an adulterer or drunkard, I were willing the Minister should
thus sharply rebuke me, but to be so bitter for men's infirmities, and against
that which we cannot do with, nor heal, and avoid, and against unbelief or
the like, me thinks he might be wiser! Oh, God would feign draw thee from the
open to the secret sins of thy heart, lest thy freedom from the grosser should
destroy thee. He would even weary and tire thee by thy cursed nature, when thou
see all thy other defenses are but dawbings with untempered mortar!

Thirdly, This should cause thee to look upward, and to gage the greatness of
Christ's love, which could find in his heart to the height and depth of mercy
cannot be sounded, till thou take measure of it by a Reed of thy misery.
Little sin to forgive, will make Christ little loved. As we see at the
Assyses, that base thief that thinks to conceal some of his robberies, and
is loath to have all come out at once, fearing the mercy of the Judge: when his
inditements come to be read the second time, loses his life. Let us beware
lest it be so with us. Let not us lessen and minse our sins, in hope of more
easy pardon: but if we would magnify the grace of Christ, let us first
magnify and enlarge our sin to the uttermost: if Christ see, that we rather
hope in our small sin then his great grace, we are dead men. The way to get
pardon, is to equal his price to all our misery. Say thus, If Lord, my sin had
been only a share in Adams eating, and no more; or in some actual few evils,
or if in the mere privation of some good things, or in sin only and not in
penalties, or if in bodily only, and not spiritual, or if spiritual only and
not eternal, somewhat might seem to lessen thy love: but surely that love
that would satisfy for all, rather then any should condemn me, is of
unspeakable dimensions! Oh! learn by this how to esteem the price of grace!
If each step of this first part, if each of these Articles make thee not
miserable^ then other, no Article of the second part shall be able to comfort
thee! Be confounded under the ruin of thy misery! and vow with that good
Iabez, If the Lord will indeed rid me of all this great evil that it may not
grieve me! If he will enlarge my coast, and bring me out of this heap of woe,
then he shall be my God and I will make songs of his mercy! Oh! let all that
have been said of this misery, make thee go as she, Luke 13.11. bowed
together, under an intolerable burden! Lay all together, to make up such a
load as may pinch thy shoulders, and cry out, Who shall deliver me! who
could't think such a weight as I have here described could be carried with
ease? especially through so many Sermons of conviction as many hear! Oh! that
any should sleep in such deep debt, so banquerupt as they be, short with
such an intolerable weight crushing them! Surely except there were a plague of
insensinblenesse added to all other misery, it could not but affect men
otherwise. But till sin begin to be out of her element, and feel her misery,
Christ and the soul can never be reconciled in one.

nature stinted and shortened within the compass of some ^ew foul sins? what
hinders (in us) why not all as wel^ any sin should be our beloved? who much ^o
appointed; that in this plenty of Plagues, (the cause whereof of we car^y about
us) so few of these should light upon us? H^th not sin made us a dunghill of
sin, and a sea of sorrow? why then see we so few blind, deaf, lame, dumb,
maimed, out of their wits, poor and miserable crea u^es, as we do? Shall we
by this indulgence be h^rd^ed to think our selves less wre^ched and
miserable then we are? or rather admire that goodness that s^ffers us not to
be so cursed as we deserve?

Q What use is to be made hereof?

A. First, ^t may teach us to acknowledge singu^ar patience in God, to dispense
so merci^ul^y and manifoldly with man, huaing incurred this Promunire with the
Lord, that he did not quite destroy him, but al^oweth him so many comforts,
enco^rag^ments and helps of nature and life, all which he might b ue stripped
him of: All save hell being mere indulgence of m^rcy, as the support of nature
in heal h, in strength, with wits, senses, breath of air, use of Earth, influ
nce of Heaven, marriage, posterity, weal^h, credit, government, etc. more then
he ^ught to damned Rebels, who might have been destroyed when borne.

Secondly, to judge aright of this sin, not to sl^ght it as P^pists, and
profane men do. To count our selves miserable by it: to esteem it above any
actual si^s* to judge of it, not by the matter or act of it, but by the
villainy of it against the Unity of God, his Crowre and dignity. The little
weigh ng of this, has caused men to make such small account of actual sin, to
make it a merryment: as Forn^cation, they will say it is a trick of youth,
etc. And the truth is, from the slender esteem of sin, comes that base esteem
of Christ with many. Whereas, except Christ had been made sin in the root
it self, by imputation, and satisfied for it, all the imputation of actual,
could not have profited us. I^ to raze the picture of a Prince be such a
crime, what is it to deface the Lords? Oh woeful wretches, who dare say
baptism does abolish that which all the grace of Christ cannot wash off, till
death? All other sins are committed in a corrupt estate, this in a pure one,
and therefore CHRIST that immaculate Son of GOD was feign to lay aside all
his holiness, that he m ght cleanse the slain and the guilt thereof (as a
double dye) out of our nature.

One of the miseries of orignall sin, is, that its incapable of the due
conceiving its own woe: but thinks it self in good case, as a drunkard
forgets the sentence of death, and dreams of great wealth. And therefore we
had not need add thirst to this our drunkenness, by esteeming it slight, but
desire the LORD rather that he would awaken us out of this delusion. But more
shall be said of the use of this in the sixth Article.

Q What is all this misery to us, who never sinned his sin?

A. It is ouerspred as a leprozie of the whole body over the whole nature of
mankind, all sorts, sexes, states, degrees: Not one free: as all misery is in
every one, so over all without exception, Psalm. 14.1, 2.3. Pro. 20.9. 1 King.
8.46. Eccl 7 22. Romans 3.9. Iam. 3.2. 1 Ioh. 1.8. Job 14.4. and 15.14. Psalm.
51.5. Examine the texts. All, both Jew and Gentile, Barbarian, Scythian, bond
and free, noble, simple; learned and idiots, yea all who are to be. For as they
are in our loins, so we were in Adams: Adam not being a single person, but in
the whole stead of mankind, before he had issue.

Q. How does this truth appear more clearly?

A. Both by the Scriptu^e and reason. Paul says, Romans 5. that by the
disobedience of one, sin entered into the world, and by sin, death. What is
that? Sin and curse ceazed upon all he whole world, as well as Adam and Eve.
And the like proofs f^llow in all the verses, as verse 14. Death reigned from
Adam to Moses. ver. 17. By one man's offense, death reigned by one. ver. 18. By
the off^nce of one, judgment came upon all to condemnation: and ver. 19, As by
one man's disobedience many were made sinners. So that this Article remoues all
conceit of any man whatsoever (I say mere man) to be exempted from this mass
of corruption: No, Romans 3.12. All are gone out of the way, not one does good,
no not one.

All the sin, all the penalties of sin belonging to Adam himself, belong
to us: we may use Peter's choice word, 1 Pet. 1.18. By the tradition of the
fathers: All these are conveyed to us by the tradition of Adam (not example, but
propagation) no one of all these tokens miscarryed, but as he sent them to us
for a cursed memorial what he had done for us: so were they all and each of
them delivered to us, we fail not in the receiving of the whole sum, to the
uttermost farthing.

Q. But in what order is this mass of evil deryued to us?

A. In this: That first the actual sin of Adam and Eve, eating the forbidden
fruit, is conveyed and made over to us: then original, then actual, then
penalties, all hanging each upon other as the lesser boats tied to the great
ship.

But ye will object, that Paul himself, Romans 5. says, That others sinned not
after the similitude of Adams transgression.

I answer, True: not against a set law as Adam did, but yet they were held
guilty before GOD of Adams sin, as if they had known it. So then, mark,
although we did not indiuidually and personally see, talk with the Serpent,
put forth our own hands and put the fr^ite into our mouth: yet we did eat it
as well as he. And why? Because the sin which Adam committed ere he had be
gotten a son or child, was the sin of nature, not of a Person. As it is
said, Leui himself paid tithes in Abraham: Heb. 7.9.
so we in Adam: he to GOD, we to Satan. And that by the justice of GOD: who,
as he would most justly have imputed the integrity of Adam to us, if he had
stood therein, so might impute his sin. We were all in Adams loins, for
better or for worse. And as it was in the second Adam, the Lord did impute our
sins to him, who yet never sinned after the similitude of ours, against a law:
because he looked at him in the nature he sustained: so he does impute Adams
sin to us, although we in person sinned not, because we sinned in his
nature. And as our Lord Jesus had been wronged, if he had suffered for that
sin which was none of his [and we also were far from Redemption, if
righteousness could not be really settled upon us by imputation] so except
Adams sin were first made ours by imputation, we should be wronged in
sustayning the penalties thereof.

Imputation, I grant, differs in the manner and form of it, being in Christ,
only by Gods account, in us inherent: but still real in both (respects duly
observed.) And thus by partaking with him in the act, we also partake with him
in all the consequents of sin, and penalties following.

If it be demanded (as Paul does there) whether Heathens and Infidels that
lived from Adam to Moses, and so since, were thus (...)?

The^^ s^ cre is, Yea, Sin reigned both in the guilt and punishment^, ^l^ that
time, among millions of sinners, wasting and de^troying generation after
generation: only the difference is, B^^ore Moses there was little sense of it,
they were under the reign of it, the guilt, the pl^gues of it, but still the
never saw the face of their King, lust and co^^ p^^cence, old Adam, the law of
the memb^^s, the sin and curse of Adam: who hurt them, they knew not, only
felt the smart of a blind stroke: never the further off from the misery, but
much further from cause or Remedy. As for the Relic of that law they carried
within them, alas, it was easily dazeled by forgetfulness, or damped by strong
lusts (being dim in it self) but as for the root of the disease, that they
never saw by that law, as after in Art. 5. shall be spoken.

Q. Is there any thing else to be said to open this?

A. Yea: The Lord would resemble this contagion of sin, from Adam to his
posterity, by that speech, Genesis 5.3. that Adam (having sinned) begat a son in
his own Image, who else should have been begotten in Gods. Noting that with
the generation, the sin also was derived. And although this be a dead notion in
the general: yet when we see how the Lord inflicts a sensible mark hereof,
even still in our propagation: as namely, when some notorious vices of
uncleanness, malice, hollownesse, intemperancy, treachery, cruelty, choler, and
fury, do even go in a blood, as in a stream, ouerflowing not only some
families, but even some Countries, which are as by-words and reproaches for
their drunkenness, vanity, pride, and luxury, surely by the actual infection
that appears, the other of original may be discovered unto us.

Q* That it is thus, it appears plainly, but I desire to know by what means
this conueighance is made: for the difference of men i^ this, makes some doubt
of it?

A. That shall not need. All grant it. And all must confess^ that generally it
is by Gods just imputation, which re^l^z^s the infection into the whole race of
Adam. But as touch^ng the way, some thinking it to be by bodily generation,
others by Gods infusion of the soul stained with her bio^* both being unsafe,
this I would briefly say, Man begets man: not a piece of him: and therefore in
begetting man, he must needs beget sinful man also. How that is, I may
express thus: Beside the bodily Traduction, man begets man, in his
Receptiuenesse of the soul, and in these bands and ties, which knit body and
soul, to wit, those Spirits of Reasonable nature; and by the infection of
these spirits, the soul is also corrupted. For my self, I confess it decides
all the doubt, when I think of the realnesses of Gods imputing, though I
should know no more.

Q. What use flows from hence?

A. Still, a good read: would be glad to apply each Article practically to
himself, for the better insight into the nature of his corruption. Each
Article should add to the view of sin. And so does this. For what a depth of
dye, how festred a canker or leprosy, how deadly a poison in this sin of Adam,
which could not be washed out in so many waters as it has passed through in
many hundred generations? Nay the iron-moll and the stain of it is as fresh,
and will be to the worlds end, as at the first, and the fruits much fouler. Its
a true speech, old Adam is not as other old men, crazy with age: his age is
renewed in every new generation: as the father in the son. It must needs be
strong poizon, which has so present a dispersion of it self through the body
into each vein and artery of the whole to make it like it self. What then is
it which God would teach us by this leaven? surely when we see how it has
leauened such a lump of mortality.



although thou have but one, it concerns thee too; for some one may have as
much poizon in him, as some five or six) let these look to themselves: thou
have dispersed old Adam, and sow^e his seed at large: take heed thou be as
careful to root it out, and plant the second Adam in the room of it: else
thy posterity shall be thy greatest hell.

But to all, this I say, sl^ght not this sin of Adam: say not, If I had not
this sin imputed to me against my will, I should never have deserved it. Nay
rather, except thou had deserved it, it had never been imputed: tax thy
self: say thus, I was deceaved by the serpent, ate, and was cursed: had I
been there, I had done no less! Oh, so great and wide an infection, should
breed as large and deep a d^iection of spirit in every one that believes it!
The common speech is, Fornication is but a trick of youth. If a man should
behold this sin in the cloak which God once put upon it, Numb. 25.9. died in
the blood of 24000. men and women, durst he think it a trick of youth? So,
original sin is thought but our nature, and that which cannot be avoided, we
may pity it, but we cannot blame it. No, but you must repent of it, and get
Christ to cover and pardon it, else it will blame and damn you! But to
return, if we would behold this cloak dyed in the blood not of so many
thousands, but millions both of Heathens and Christians, durst we make a (But)
of it? Take heed of such boldness!

If any ask how, I answer, As a man begets a man, so he begets a bad one. If
any question it, how the generation of the body can taint the soul? I answer,
By the taint of the spirits flowing from the power of generation* man not only
begetting a body of man, but a man, in respect of that habitude of or unto the
soul, which habitude being poizoned, the soul is also poizoned therewith. If
this be too dark for any to conceive, let this be enough, that whatsoever the
manner of conueiance be, the curse of God is ineuitably settled upon both the
general and particular nature of man, I deny not but the Lord does mercifully
stop the excess of this ouerflow, so that it is confined from some measure of
outrage in some more then others: which is to be confessed a special
indulgence and providence of God: ^^e man to man should be as a wolf: but
still in the most moral, courteous and civil natures, their corruption
dwells, and they are as far from the true image of God, as the furthest, as
appears by this, that a Publicane may as soon be brought home as a Pharise,
and ^ooner. Therefore, there is no difference he in.

Q. What use learn we hereof?

A. First, sharp reproof to such as soder up this fearful ruin, by any
outward accomplishment, which makes them glorious in man's eye, and to blind
themselves willingly from seeing their abomination before God. If many true
turned to God, having lived under good means, Ministers education, yet have
been deeply humbled by the cursednes of their nature, because they never ^elt
themselves humbled for it: what shall be their case, who have nothing to
commend them, save outsides of ingenuity, morality, gentleness, or better
breed and parts then others, having never beheld the misery of their own
spirit and frame? This world is now so full of debauchednesse, that we may be
glad of such in our common dealings: but such may have cause to be glad of
themselves. Rather let them read that in Act. 17 All are of one blood or seed.
Oh proud heart, boast not of thy self above another: lest those very clothes
of thy pride defile thee, and make thee worse. Say thus, I may be learneder,
ciuiler then another: but worse then another; and if I think my self better,
its because I am worse. This should make even the greatest, Jonas 3. to come
down, and lick the dust, and call corruption and worms their brother and
sister, till grace have separated the precious from the vile.

wonder at this freedom, that when all other respects are alike, one age,
temper, birth, two lying in one womb, as Jacob and Esau, two at mill, two in
one bed, in the field yet one should be taken, the other refused: nay perhaps
the worser, viciouser, baser party of two, of ten, the most despized in a
family taken, the likelyer and better rejected: that grace should put honor
upon one, and shame upon others: As Pharaos butler and baker, being in one
crime, yet differing in Pharaos favor. As those two thieves in the same just
condemnation.

Thirdly, let all Pharisees learn to take this razor, and cut the comb of
their own conceitednesse. When one and the same misery shall be laid upon the
proudest hypocrite and the ^rofanest Publicane, whom the one scorned in respect
of himself, when one hell and judgment belongs to both, the Lord putting no
difference because neither of their hearts purified by faith: nay, when the
younger brother* a base spend^hrift upon his mere submission, without any work
wrought of des^ruing at his fathers hands, shall be accepted and pardoned: oh
what ground of self denial and humiliation o^ght this to be?

Q. But perhaps this misery is not of it self so deep, but there is way
sufficient for man to escape it?

A. No possibility to manward out of himself to e^cape. freedom of mercy
should still tie it self thereto. Nay, no elect child of God can out of
himself, procure the least desert of acceptance, (if separate from Christ) so
much as for himself, much less another. See Psalm. 49.1. Sam. 2.95. Job 4.18.
Job 14.4.

Q. Is there any thing to be added for the proof of this our inabilitie, to
deliver our selves from this misery?

A. This being taken (as it must be) for granted, that all offenses committed
against infiniteness, are infinite in their guilt: and therefore Justice
cannot, (with safety of her self) choose, but require the offense at the hands
of the sinner, both by holding him under guilt and punishment accordingly: how
can it be imagined that there should be any thing in a finite sinning nature
to procure her peace, at the hand of an infinite wronged Majesty? Its true,
that a Prince may at the instance of an equal, yea inferior, pardon a treason,
although no satisfaction be made: because the offense was but finite. But to
think so of God were blasphemous. Again, let the reader look back into the
third Article, and see what is said of the spiritual penalties inflicted upon
man for sin. If they be true, that is, if man be both so insensible of his
woe, so incapable of the way which God has devised to redeem him, so opposite
and rebellious against it, so well satisfied in that his Hell, as if an Heaven:
who can think he should so much as think of a recovery? much less be able
to comprehend any way to get out of it?

Q. What use is to be made hereof?

A. Still each staire must bring this woeful soul lower and lower, till it can
fall no further. These Articles serve to pluck out, each of them one or other,
and all of them, all those false crootches and props which corrupt self-holds
upon, to keep her from catching this deadly fall under her misery. If there be
any evasion for flesh and blood, any starting hole to get out at, she will be
sure to find it. This is the last stop of all: which should quite sink the
proud heart of a sinner, though he carry his chin all this while above water.

To all the former, this one of utter irrecouerablenesse, and desperate
impossiblenesse to get out, should even kill the hopes of a wretched heart, and
burst the belly of it. Hopeless misery should make an helpless soul, lying
panting at the mercy of a Savior, and gasping for breath, that if there be no
more for her, out of her self, then within her, she may give over all. And
while she sees no hope in her self, she may despair in her self. Till this
last Lecture be read and believed by the soul, in vain is Christ offered to
her; while she has a wing of her own, to fly over him with neglect.

Those that come to Christ, must be wholly beaten out of all holds, and those
strong holds of selfe-hopes and self-loues, either of nature mere, or mixed
with some help supernatural: Christ will never be sought to; if any other
can be devised. Sleidan reports, that when some soldiers were surprised in
their Castle, and all thrown down from the top of it to be dashed in pieces:
one of them (among the rest) falling through the bows of a mulbery tree,
clasping thereon with both Arms, stuck by it and saved himself from death.
We may conceive he was loath to dye. Much more are we! From the top of the
first Article of this first Part, to this last and lowest stayre, the Lord
throws down the soul of a sinner, to kill his spirit, and humble him: but so
long as the least crootch lasts, the soul that loves her own corrupt life,
abhorres to be killed.

But in Gods fear let this put an end to all fancies, and corrupt conceits of
flesh: and let it bring the soul to the earth, and cast down every high thing
and strong hold, which sets up it self against the need of a Christ, and the
necessity of faith. Give up now all weapons, and say, If it be thus, Lord,
thou have overcome! I am bereft of all, and I must stand to the mercy of a
Conqueror! I have nothing to merit or help me: it remains now that utter
misery provoke mercy at the hands of a merciful God: with whom the fatherless
shall find it!

To conclude, put case the Angels should mediate for us, yea if a man were for
his own part as free of sin as Adam, yet for that which is past, the offense
of an infinite Majesty, he could not say any thing to it, it is a matter of
higher nature.

Q. What use of this?

A. It quasheth all Popish pride and arrogance, all Pelagian and Popish conceit
of the remnant of free will in us toward our own recovery. Not only in
devising or feeling need of any help, but accepting it being offered by the
help of supernatural light and grace presented. Man is as truly blind in
himself, as in a dungeon of darkness. Though l^ght be offered, he is as
impotent to see it, as unable to procure it in the want of it. The very root
of all error and evil, heresy and profaneness, being nothing else, have
their Ignorance of original thraldom under sin. It should greatly abase us
that we are thus hurt, and know not how: much less how to outgrow it. This
use our age greatly needs; wherein formality is ready to blot out the
impression of all truths of this kind, and nouzle it self in an easy
religion, void of power. Secondly, it teaches what a mystery grace is. It is
true which Paul says, Great is the mystery of godliness, which Christ
manifested. When Christ came and brought light four thousand years after the
Creation, it was as strange as at first. And now when grace finds any man, how
does it prevent him? even as the light comes upon the drunkard in the depth of
his snorting and surfeit. Oh, the sweet peace the sinner finds in his misery!
As Israel made their bondage an ease: so we hell it self our Heaven by
custom. We add delusions to our blindness and senslesnesse, by false
errors of our own and others. We sleep as Peter, between four quaternions
of our keepers, Devil, Sin, Law and Wrath. The Proverb is verified, The
life of an idiot, is the sweetest of all, for he has nothing to trouble him.
So here, the life of a man dead in sin is, not to be aware of it, pinch,
burn, wound him, its nothing to him; threaten, allure, all is one, preach
terror or hope, woe or weal, he is dead. The Law, curse, Christ and grace,
hope of Heaven are indifferent. Nay such a fearful offense is the Word to a
dead sinner, that even that which should occasion conuincement and fear, works
confidence in him: the Jews took the Law (a killing letter) to be the way
and object of justification. Nothing can work the soul to humiliation, save
woeful experience, when all is too late. Thus much for this.

Q. Is there any way then from the LORD, to come to the revealing of this
misery?

A. Yea, and that is the moral Law of GOD Tim. 1.5. The Law is not given to
the righteous, but to the disobedient, etc. where the Apostle diuides the Work
of the Law, into two sorts by implication. One is upon the righteous, as its an
eternal pattern and direction of righteousness: and so it concerns the
third Part of the Catechism, but in this sense it belongs not to this place.
Secondly, as its a mean to urge the ungodly, and to reveal to them their
sinful and cursed condition. Note this double use of the Law, to avoid
confuzion which thousands run into, both in writing, and hearing the Word
preached.

Q. What say you then of such as want this Law?

A. They are of many sorts, yet truly it may be said of all, They are without
the true knowledge of the Law. Touching Heathens, Turks, and Infidels, the
question will be the less, because they wholly want the revealing of the Law:
and therefore of them its verified, That although sin reigns among them in
the guilt and curse of it on Gods part, yet not on their part, by virtue of any
light from God. For sin is not imputed without a Law, that is, Romans 5.14.
not laid to their charge by Gods enlighting their conscience, concerning the
true object, root, nature, or fruit of sin. As concerning those notions
which were left in them, and were in stead of a law, they were only enough to
condemn them, not otherwise. The most ignorant and vicious among them, easily
blew out that dim spark they had, by the blast of their strong lusts, and
were given up to a reprobate sense, and horrible lusts. Their most moral
Philosophers (although to the shame of Christians it may be spoken) hatched up
their sparkles of dim light to some measure, yet as touching the true
knowledge of sin, they had it not: they thought some sins no sins, some sins,
virtues; and some virtues, vices: and the sins they saw, they never saw them
by a word, or in the curse due to them: they saw a dim twilight of an
unknown GOD, virtue, vice, punishment, or reward, and therefore were far
from any true enlighting.

Q. But what does the Law work in particular?

A. Two distinct things: Knowledge and conviction. For the first, read Romans 7.
I had not known sin, if the Law had net said, Thou shall not lust. In which
respect, sin is said to reign from Adam to Moses: yea and under the old Law,
in respect of any conuincement. But since the Ministry of the Word of
reconciliation came, the Lord has enlarged the power of the Ministry of the
Law, as a preparatiue thereto in the hearts of men. As Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.
Those that hear the word plainly preached, and by name the Law, in the true
spirit^all sense and savor of it, they fall down and say, that God is in you
of a truth. Not that the Ministry of Christ is properly Legal, (for we are
Ministers of reconciliation) but not excluding it. Christ came not to destroy
the Law in the doctrine of it; for it leads to Christ, save in the rigor and
dominion of it. The Law then first searches the soul, its the candle of the
Lord, and pierces the bowels of the spirit, those secret windings and corners,
shifts, and euasions of it, be they never so colorable and subtle. It is as
a great torch-light in the dead time of night, in the hand of an Inquisitour,
which searches an house for Papists and Jesuits, and finds them in their
Mass, and takes them with all their books and trinkets. As the persecutors of
the Saints searched all vaults and privy doors, barnes and mowes of hay and
corn, with spears, sharp spits and swords: so is the Law acted by that spirit
of conuincement and search, Ioh. 9. the discouerer of the thoughts: and Heb.
4.12. pierces between the joints and marrow. The Lord has given it authority
over the conscience as his own Bailiff, to hunt out and discern sin in the
colors, in the kinds of it, open, secret thoughts, affections, yea
concupiscence: not the bare letter of the Law, but the spirit; for Paul
(notwithstanding al Gamaliels teaching) knew it not. And the conscience of the
unregenerate, being once thus stirred, is as the light of the Law to bring God
into each privy part. Not a dim twilight, but a Sun at noonetide, which
shines from East to West all over the sphere of Heaven, and makes every soul
come out as Adam from the bushes, by the voice of God: so clearly bewraying a
man to himself, that for the time he thinks all other men see him pointed at
by the finger of GOD.

Q. How is it that the Law of GOD is the reuealer of sin?

A. That most Holy and wise God, who first contrived and uttered it, put the
light of his own pure Majesty into it, and enabled it to discover sin to the
soul, not as other Laws to speak to the ear, but to the conscience: and
although there is no commandment in the whole book of God, Psalm. 19: Psalm.
119. Heb. 4.12. Ephesians. 5.10, 11. Ioh. 3.20.
which comes not from the same Author and spirit of light and truth, yet the
Lord has more peculiarly put this power of Enlightening into this his moral
Law, as containing a more full exact and clear view of all sin, both in the
Nature and penalties of the same: and according to his ordinance, so it
works: not by the bare ten words and syllables, but the effectual Ministry
thereof accompanied with the Spirit. And look what I say of light, the same I
add of co^uiction also and her work: both are put into the Law by the same
GOD whose fingers wrote it.

Q. Is unbelief of the Gospel discovered by it?

A. No, The Law is a model of the righteousness of Creation, in which there was
no need of faith: therefore it only reueales those sins which make us guilty
without a remedy, that it might drive us to seek a remedy. Yet we must not
think it an imperfect light for this cause. For as no man calls the Rules of
Grammar imperfect, because the Rules of Rhetorique are not in it: so none can
call the discovery of the Law insufficient, because it reueales not the sins
against the Gospel.

Q What sins does the Law discover?

A. All sorts, by name Actual and original?

Q. What need any more be said of thi^? have we not heard enough of the nature
of Misery in the third A^ticle, both in Sin and death?

A. Even that we spoke there, flows from no other spring then the Law of God;
only here we add this Article to that, for this cause: In that we only
bounded misery within her Compass, showing wherein it lies simply considered.
But when we add, The Law reueales sin: we mean as sin and the curse
lies upon us, as we are guilty of it and cursed by it: the Law does set the
saddle upon the right horse, and so shows sin in her colors to the soul,
that it might apply the knowledge of it to thee and me in particular: and this
is a further work.

Q. Well, proceed to the enlightening work of the Law about Actual sin: what
is it?

A. First, the Law in the spiritual Ministry thereof, does disperse those
mysts and skales of the blindeye, that suffer not light to enter. Secondly, It
opens and gives light to the eyes to see sin in her true colors. For the
first, According to the sorts of sinners, so does the Law take away their lets
of knowledge. Take three or fore Instances. Put case CHRIST had purpozed to
enlighten a Pharise in the knowledge of sin, he would have remmooued all the
corruptions of the Law, and darkness of the text. They had established a Corban,
which might free a child from the fifth Commandment: as their heirs the
Papists at this day dispense with any murders, or villainies, if for their
Catholic cause and ends. They had curtolled the law in point of her extent,
confining her to some gross crimes, and taken away the key of light from the
people about particulars, They had set up an exposition of their own
invention: they had made what they listed to be sin, and what they pleased
to be none: they had soothed the people up in this course, and sowed pillows
under their elbowes, thinking the law was given them to obey, and not to
enlighten or convince o^ sin. They had taken away four or five sins from
the Law, (as the Papists now do the second Commandment) as ye see in point
of adultery, and divorce of oaths and perjury, of justice and revenge, of love
and charity, Mat. 5. ver. 27, 33, 38, and 43. What was this but to call light
darkness, and darkness light? If then Christ had meant to give them true
light, he would have scattered those false and base conceits and corruptions,
as indeed his Sermon on the mount was chiefly to that purpose.

Secondly, come lower, to those that live in the Church of GOD, many are
ignorant, by mere want of means, as thousands of Congregations at this day
are, though baptized. I remember the speech of a Reverend man, that once on the
Sabbath, lighting upon a Company (as he was going to preach neere-by) who were
some at football, some dancing the Morris, others quaffing in the Ale house,
asked them, Sirs, why do ye thus profane the Sabbath? They answered him,
Alas good Sir, we know not that we do ill in our dancing, or drinking: which
drew tears from his eyes. If then GOD mean to enlighten such, he will give
them a Ministry of light, to teach them what is good and what is evil. So to
come further, put case a third soft has some kind of light, yet still
mainteining a civil, profane, or hypocritical course, what will the Lord do
to enlarge them with clear knowledge? He will take away their bars also.

Q. What are they?

A. These or the like.

Act. vlt. 22. The LORD will remove.

Ioh. 3.19, 20. Men that love darkness, hate light, lest their evils be
discovered.

Pharaoh against the returning waters: because their freehold is touched: lose
their lusts, cosenage in buying and selling, deceit, lying, pride, revenge,
they lose their life.

Heb. 5. Especially of any maine and material points.

Map of that Shire: but if a man would have a due survey of some Town, what
breadth it has, what such a Lordship therein situate is; what lands, woods,
pastures, hopgrounds* he will get a Draught of that Town, or a Survey of
those particulars. So here: If God mean to en^ighten a carnal, general, and
formal professor, or he will take from him his general Map, and subtle
generalities, whereby he detaines the truth in vnrighteousness^, and reach him
a more special Map of sin to study upon.

Sixthly, He will remove his sefeloue, by which he is

Q How does the Law give light to the eyes in knowing Actual sins?

A. Both in themselves, and in their penalties.

Q. In themselves how?

A. Sundry ways: some of which (and the chief) I will note, by them desiring
the wise Reader to judge of the rest.

First, The Law does present the soul with the authority of GOD in commanding,
and sets up her self, not in the senses or back parts of man, but in his
conscience, the most privy chamber of the soul. This no law of man can do.
No, nor can any destitute of the law, be truly seized in conscience by any
sin. But the Law sets up the Lawgiuer in the conscience, presenting him to
her in all his Sovereign Justice, wisdom, and Power, that so, she may
esteem of sin, not as touching man, but trenching upon God in all his
attributes. This is a great discovery, and causes sin to be conceived as it
is, not as the passing act seems, which begins and ceases with time, but this
is infinite in time, merit, extent, and scope, because against an infinite God.
For example. An ignorant man having hurt his neighbor, looks at the sad
consequent of the fact only, how he has hurt him in his name, cattle, wife,
goods, and so the damage is the sin to him. But the enlightened conscience
looks at the Lawgiuer: knowing that not man, but God has made the Law against
hurting man: man is the next, but God is the chief and last object of his
sin. And therefore God must be agreed with, or else conscience will keep it
upon Gods record to appear in due time. And, put case man would be appeased,
yea is satisfied, yea, perhaps man's Law is satisfied by the death of the
offender, yet GOD still must be compounded with, as chiefly offended.

Q. How secondly?

A. It presents it self to the soul in the coherence and consent of the law.
This no man can see except enlightened. S. James cleeres this, Iam. 2.10. He
that breaks one, is culpable of all. Meaning, that such is the chayn of the
law, and so are the words couched together, that being by one and the same
spirit ordained, he that brakes one, violates all: as he that breaks any link
of a golden chain, breaks the coherence. Men think otherwise: But as he who
breaks his neighbors fence, trespasses him as well as if he ranged all over his
ground, because the bond is broken: so here. It were strange to tell a
drunkard, he broke more then the seventh Commandment. But to tell him that he
had broken all (as indeed he has) were strange to him. Not perhaps in actual
deed: but yet in power and effect, because he has broken the bond of that God
who has made all the rest. And yet there is a further thing in it then so: for
in a sort, some actual sin breaks all. As one has described it in
covetousness, so might I do it in drunkenness. For what drunkard makes not
his cup, and companions, an Idol? what cares he for Gods worship, daring to
be drunk in an Alehouse, within the sound of the Preacher? What conversation
toward man looks he at in family, neighborhood, oaths, vows to God or men?
What Sabbaths does he not break? What parents and Magistrates does he care
for? but rather undoes the estate of the one, and contemnes the censure of the
other? What cares he in his cups to break the head of, yea, to stabbe his
fellow? What uncleanness and bastardy is he not guilty of? What booty by the
high way will he balke, and perhaps with bloodshed, to get money to drink?
What lies and slanders? what colors and shifts to defend his villainies and
cover his sin, will he forbear? This is meet to think of, to open the harmony
of a law. But howeuer this be, sure it is there is no sinner, not only
gross; but even secret, who is not guilty of all the Law in the breach of any
Commandment, because his undue carriage fights against the Lord of the whole
Law. The discovery of this light might be as much as some men's souls are
worth: for what is the speech of men? As for unrighteousness, I ask GOD no
mercy! As for stealing (says one) or for adultery (says a second) or slander,
or murder, or usury, I never fear what GOD can allege against me! Indeed
such, or such a sin I ask him mercy for! Well said: but in the mean time
its no thank to thee: GOD and providence suffered thee not, for th^^ would
have broken all as well as one, thy heart was bad enough, if he had not limited
thee! Oh, this light well received, prepares way for conviction.

Q. How thirdly?

A. The Law discouers it self to the soul in the point Royalty. So Saint
James calls it, Chap. 2.8. That as a King is not prescribed against by the
quality of any subject offending, why he may not hold him guilty: so in this,
No person is accepted with GOD in this kind. Oh! its a great discovery of
error! the hear^ of man is proud, and soon exempts and dispenses with it
self by some privilege. But this Royal Law is impartial. As a glass will
show a Queen her spots as well as a poor woman. Paul labors this point, Romans
2. against the Jews privileges. No difference with God. All, both bond and
free, Barbarian, Scythian, Jew, Gentile, none excepted. God has shut up ^ll
under one disobedience. Oh, its a great abating of a proud heart! One sin, one
hell, one wrath, one Tophet for Princes, for subjects, for learned, for idiots,
for noble and base, for Pharisees, and Publicanes! This cuts the comb of the
sinner! Psalm. 149.8. He binds Kings in Cheynes, and Nobles in fetters of
iron! Neither can the poorest escape at a little mash, nor the richest at a
great. Again, his Laws are no copwebs. Apply this (as it is the scope of the
fourth Article sup^a) to thy self.

Q. How fourthly?

A. It discouers it self to the sinner in the point of integrity, and
soundness of her light: That is, opens sin to the soul in one kind as well
as another. Such is the corruption of Adam, that it will suffer much of the
body of sin to vanish in the survey. If sin be either of knowledge or
ignorance, although knowledge shall be of some note, yet ignorance will
vanish. If other sins be of omission or commission, omission sins will
fail in the reckoning. If again sin b^e of presumption or infirmity, Sins
of infirmity are nothing. If presumptuous sins be either of particular
presumption, or or total revolt. Particulars seem nothing to a selfe-louing
rotten heart. But where God enlightens, lo, he discouers sin in all her sexes,
male and female, strong and weak, remembered and forgotten, ignorance, or
knowledge; and in a word one and other; And this also is a great discovery: for
want of which, many a soul never comes to the bar of Gods conviction. But now,
this rule will not only tell the soul the differences of these: to wit, that
one is of greater crime then other; one may both omit and commit sin, and yet
know neither: he may sin of knowledge, yet not of presumption necessarily,
because he may be prevented by fear, Satan, violent lust, and not voluntarily
consent: he may also presume with a different heart: yet the least of these in
their nature is damnable.

Q. How fifthly?

A. The Law reaches forth to the soul her key of knowledge in the point of her
extent. She who has her Ladies keys, knows all, and can fetch out of each
box. So cannot the poor droile in the kitchen. So, this is the privilege of
one that has the Law to be hers. It is a great piece of the light of the Law,
to extend it self in the soul to al parts and degrees of sin.

First, in point of Spiritualnes of the Law: teaching us not to rest only in
open, gross, moral offenses, but to go to spiritual wickednesses. The Law
is spiritually moral as well as externally. Thus Paul, Romans 7.12. The Law is
holy and good, I sold under sin. And 1 Timothy 1.5. The end of the Commandment
is love out of a pure heart, good Conscience, and faith unfeigned. Then it must
be very spiritual: and as well meet with infidelity, hypocrisy, unthankfulness,
impiousnes, profaneness of spirit, security, hardness of heart, contempt of
Word and Sabbaths, etc. as open leudnes of life, riot, stealth, or adultery.
And so also it enlarges the chief breach of a Law to all lesser degrees and
steps to it. As the seuench commandment reaches not only to gross
incontinenty: but to intemperancy, drunkenness, riot, voluptuousnes of senses,
etc.

Secondly, her Inquisition and Search: For the Law, Heb. 4.12. is very
searching and piercing, diuides between the joints and marrow, dare and can go
to any part of the whole man, and fetch out any poizon out of any corner; has
an unlimited Commission from the Lawgiver, to fetch out and bind any
malefactor: not only seen and manifest words and deeds, but also, the most
retired and close thoughts and intents of the heart: the Power of GOD is with
his Law to search for the King, all vaults and dungeons, and nothing is hidden
to the eye, no more then the earth to the Sun. Sins of great consequent
evils, or less small sins, in men's esteem, and great, still, and crying;
hidden from man, and open to his view: granted, or defended: carrying color or
condemned by the world; Old ones, or new: in a word, The Law inquires upon
sin, according to the Anomaly of it, not only the circumstances. And this
was our Saviors chiefescope in that holy Sermon, Math. 5.6, 7. Chapters,
correcting those base limitations of the Law which the Pharisees made, tying men
only to a gross literal sense.

Thirdly, in her aggravating power: whereby she enlarges sin by her
Circumstances, causing it thereby to seem the more odious, and setting the
worse colors upon it; as because such a person committed it, a public man,
against such light, when he needed not, from mere malignity of spirit, in the
midst of blessings, against mercy, Gospel, vows, covenant, etc. which I do
not speak, as if all sins were alike, but because all are sins and culpable.

Fourthly, in her Purity. The Law does not go to tell the soul of each sin:
but sets the Mirror of Gods pureness before her, that she may according
thereto, discern and judge of sin: good and bad, ^rue and evil. Truth (we
say) is a Rule of her self and her contraries. There is a secret pureness in
the Law, whereby the soul discernes an evil in things which the world sees
none in: and again, sees none in some, wherein an hypocrite sees much. For the
former, A soul that has clear and through light in himself, is a Law to
himself in some things of specialty, and accuses it self for the departing
from the pure manner, ends, ground, and measure which GOD requires: as sometime
in the keeping of Sabbath, in use of liberties, in speech or silence, in doing
or abstayning has a Law within him: not so much what this moral precept bids
or forbids, as, what the pureness of it imports. So that look, what sorts
most with will, flesh, case or the inclination of nature, she suspects: yea
even in doubtful cases, yet withdrawes (for safety) rather then ventures upon
terms of her own, abhorres appearances, as well as substance of evil. And as
in matters of God, so in matters of men, this Pureness Rules the case, when
perhaps no Law is at hand, as Phil. 4. Finally brethren, whatsoever is Holy,
whatsoever pure, honest, of good report etc. An heart enlightened can better
judge by this Rule then any thing, and sooner espies what is honest, sauoury,
then any other can d^: yea and by this, casts off al those base additions o^
man which want a word, and therefore although they carry a show of holiness, yet
are base copper coin, both makers and creatures, as Col. 2.23. being far from
pleasing GOD, for lack of a word to carry his pureness into them. This I
thought good to speak of the l^ght of the Law: to give a taste of the rest:
for a wise Reader will guess at the Lion by the paw. Only one thing I would
add, that ^ of these latter things I would crave the Reader to make use of in
the fourth Article of the third part, so far as it may serve for use of
Christian direction: and so I shall there spare this labor.

Q But is all this light requisite for a soul which seeks conviction? or may
less serve?

A. I answer, I do name these, as helps to serve the work of the Law in
conuncing, not to forestall the work of the Spirit. The more sound light the
soul has, the better: howbeit God is free to work in what way and measure
he please. Its one thing to say what light the Law can afford to some (and
does) toward conviction: another, with what degree it may please the Lord to
be content to work. He can use these helps, or perhaps the sight of
original sin, to abase a wretched heart with, greater light or less may
serve him, as he pleases. But the truer the light, the sounder the
Conviction. The Lord does in this case, as the state of the soul best admits
sometimes keeps away exceeding light in all these, lest the sule should lie
oppressed under her burden: culling out some sin with due circumstances of
vileness and shame, to bring the soul upon her knees in a most kindly manner.
He nis or bound herein.

Q. How does the Law present the Penalties, with light to the soul?

A. To add so much here, as may make up that of the third Article: this I say,
That the Lord shows the like power, authority, and efficacy of light in these
as the other: He takes away all distinction of venial and mortal from a man:
presents himself to him in his full justice of revenging al sin without
exception: remoues all cauills and subtle extenuations of punishment as well as
of sin; makes all sin appear mortal to the soul without Christ, and venial
with him. Tells the soul, Deferring of punishment is no remoouall of it: That
some sins go before, some follow after, but all meet earlyer or later in
judgment, Eccles. 12.1, 2. 1. Tim. 5.24. That all sins deserve all
punishments. That the least cost the Lord Jesus his blood, and he that believes
it not, shall pay for it in hell: That God does indifferently hate and punish
all: Tribulation and anguish is to each soul that sins: Cursed is every one:
There is no lying hid from Gods eye: no shift, or evasion besides faith and
Repentance; No amity or Combination of sinners, no joining hand in hand, no
counsel can prevail against God, who has all penalties and executions in his
hand to work by. That the Court of God is not as the Popes: no Relaxations,
Commutations of penance, Dispensations to be had there: That the having our
hell here, is no Release or Heaven for hereafter: but, if we have not had
here, we shall there have all: if we have had here, we shall there have the
full sum of punishment, without Christ. And by this the Lord prepares the
sinner for conviction, following in a far deeper measure, as in the point of
terror shall appear.

Q. How does the Lord reveal original sin to the soul?

A. To add a little of this also to the third Article, the Lord does this many
ways. First, by the special terms of his Word: Secondly, by comparison of
actual sins. Thirdly, by the properties of this original.

Touching the 1. the Lord is in no one thing so emphatical, as in the names he
gives to this poison. He calls it, The Old man, Romans 7.1, 2 Romans 7.7. Romans
7.23, 24, 25. Gal. 5.17. Romans 8.^.
The flesh, Lust, Concupiscence, The law of the members, The Law of sin
reigning in the members, The Old husband who has the wife in subjection, The
body of death, and the like. Which affectionate terms sought for the nonce, do
fearfully lay forth this corruption, to be that which men little think for.
For why? What a tame, still, close, and harmless thing seems this sin,
being yet, if once stirred, a raging Tiger and wild monster? What do these
terms imply, ^^ue that, this sin is the Doe-all in the soul: as she will,
so it must be, and in a word she is al sin, both the length and depth of it:
all that is in sin is in her. And therefore except the Lord Jesus had been
made si^ne (note the word 2 Cor. 5.21.) for us, as well as sinful, he had never
satisfied: his expiation being chiefly for sin in her Nature, and for the
Acts by Consequence^ in which respect he is truly called the second Adam, made
the sin of Nature by imputation, that he might by his nature of Righteousness
and suffering, both satisfy for it, (the loss of God^ Image) and then restore
it. Look upon these texts, and meditate of them.

Secondly, by comparison. For when the soul has had the sea greater
abomination then these, as the Lord tells Ezekiel, Chapter 8.15. Oh! how out of
measure sinful seems it to the soul? how does she cry out, miserable man!
for market thus she speaks, Although actual sins were enough to sink me into
misery, yet I see they were but evil in respect of their part: but now I see a
body of all parts and members, a King in his throne. I see now my self cur^ed
double and treble. No sooner do I get out of one actual sin, or set good
duties against bad with some hope of ease that way, but the Lord beats me
down by my inward nature of sin! yea when I would feign comfort my self in
my duties, and suffering, and prayers; Lo then my very clothes, this venomed
shirt upon my skin, Job 9.31.
defi^es me, and turns al honey into the gall of aspes. Indeed God has freed
me from being a worldling, whose hope is below, from a covetous mizer, Phil.
3.18.
whose God is his Mammon: I am free from open uncleanness, and inward
hypocrisy, and profaneness of heart: but Oh LORD, the nature of these things
dogs me: sometimes the wolf of my nature makes me feel small difference
between my self and these vices! The nature of loving pleasures more then
God, the nature and savor of a proud vain heart, of distrust, of worshipping
God vnsauourily and for form, of self-love and ends, does so dog me, that
its worse ten fold then the breaches themselves. Yea, and the more I seem to
affect the contrary, the more Satan dogs me with them, thoughts, desires and
endeavors after them, (if it be so, be glad) yea, and self-love with them so
blindfoldes me, that often they seem to please me, and make me be as I would
be, and by the suddainenesse of the darts and assaults, prevent my armor, and
so foil me, and lead me captive. So that we see the sting of nature, if
duly weighed, is far greater then of actions.

Q. Proceed to the third, How does the Law present the properties of original
sin to the soul?

A. By ripping up the body of this death, and showing it what is lust, Romans
7.7. etc.

First, Showing it to be sin in an eminency of being. Its more Garnet and
grandfather the Pope: Garnet and the Pope then must be much more so. So, all
the poizon of actual evils, is seated in the original, after whose copy they
write.

Secondly, The predominancy of this sin: both in matter of Fomite^^
Fuel, meaning of the fire of sinful acts. Great farms have and keep
great fires, because of the plenty of wood they have to nourish them. This is
the fuel that maintains all fires in the soul, in hall, kitchen, and
parlour, sins of pride, sins of common formality, sins of base lust: all are
kept upon the altar burning with this fuel, which is set on fire it self by
hell. So, of forciblenesse also: therefore Paul calls it a Law. Princes rule
strongly by their laws, they are as a soul wholly in all and in each part.
Nothing so forcible: there is a necessity in a law. It breaks down and
carries before it all opposites, word, threats, dangers, all counsel,
persuasion, cannot hear, is incorrigible, unchangeable as the Law of Medes and
Persians. It carries the soul to her trade with courage, force, resolution,
and irresistibleness; being the pillar of Satan's kingdom, ruling as a strong
man in sinners, Luke 11.^1.
and keeping all in deep peace.

Thirdly, it is perpetual. We say, The King has a perpetual Luther himself
little molested with covetousness, yet he had this stock still within) how
much more is it true of each sinner?

Fourthly, Its an ouerflowing, and yet a cruel evil (as necessary as it is,
and as forcible.) Fire and water are ill masters, but they burn and ouerflow
naturally: even so here. As in breaches of the Sea, we see tops of Steeples,
and of Towers under water: so, this ouerflowes all the Image of God in us: This
sin goes in the hair and stream of nature, and therefore its called
Concupiscence and Lust, James 4.5. The spirit that is in us, lusts to envy: it
pleases us, because it is natural^, and has a self-louing persuasion which
carries it smoothly, and vnsuspiciously, and by privilege: It is my nature to
smite when I am angry: i^s my nature to be soon ho^: its therefore the more
dangerous and cursed. Its like bread of deceit, and stolen waters, which are
sweet: And this appears, if it be crossed: it rages and f^^ts: As Rachel,
Give me children, or I dye: so here give this old man, this lust, children,
and store of ill fruit, or else she is mad: for she is a fruitful harlot,
above all other.

Fifthly, The Bondage of it. It binds up the soul in death, hardness,
insensiblenesse, incapablenesse of any good, auersenesse to all means of
Grace. As we say of sleep, it cheynes up all the senses: so this all the
powers and members in utter feebleness and unableness to make toward GOD;
Mind, Judgment, Will, Affections all asleep, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that
sleep. Its the sleep of all other parts, and the Nurse that rocks them
also, and the Cradle they all sleep in: yea brings in an utter disability,
languor and decay of all parts, loath to stir, and compting the anguish of
their bondage (by custom) another Heaven. As the Israelites cared sot no
Savior, because so saped in slavery. And lastly, Not only an utter impotency
to any obedience urged by the law: but so rooted a languor, as reiects
whatsoever GOD might impose: in which respect, even the unableness to believe,
is chargeable upon original sin, in respect of that opposite contradiction of
it to all, not actual charges lying upon the creature by law only, but
possible to be imposed by the Gospel. And this for a brief view of the laws
discovery of original sin, especially in her properties.

Q What use is there to be made hereof?

A. Manifold.

from the possibility of sound knowledge of their natural estate, by either
actual or original sin: their rotten grounds (of which supra) are direct
against it.

Secondly, Beware of nouzeling thy self in places under 1 Cor. ^.^.
Had they known the Lord of life, they would never have crucified him.
Ignorance is a necessity of Misery. If thou knewst the gift of God, etc. John
4.10. Oh, that thou had known the things of thy peace! But, alas, hidden!
Think not by ignorance to sleep sweetly under all terrors! Luke 19.42
Such a sheep will have a sad walking. Psalm. 58.4, 5. Be not as the deaf
Adder. Psalm. 32.9. Be not as the Horse and Mule. Beware lest GOD leave thee
to thy self. He that is ignorant, let him be so still. Remember, although
knowledge is not conviction, yet conviction cannot be without it.

Admonition to all sinners to go to work aright, to get sound knowledge of
their estate. Consult not with dead teachers: go not to blind guides, to such
as thy self, to deceyuers: consult not with thy wits and carnal wisdom, thy
corrupt hopes, blind devotions: Refuse no informations, for fear of losing thy
liberty in sin. Esaias 8.19. Should men go from the living to the dead? Oh ye
silly ones, go to the law and the testimony! The Lord that made the Law, has
put this gift into it, to be a Schoolmaster, to send ye by the eight of sin to
Christ? Refuse not the Lords discipline in this first kind, else never seek
further! Oh, how many poor wretches that knew not the right hand from the
left; if they knew sin, what it were to break a Sabbath, to play the
drunkards, Ion 1.4.
etc. How glad would they be? Oh, shall thou neglect the means thou have, and
stand up to the chin in waters and and dye of thirst? Prou.
If without knowl^dge the heart be naught: what is it when men will not come to
the light, lest they should see it? and shun the net, lest they be taken? Oh,
beware both of Pharisaicall making more sins then God ever made or cutting
off those which he has made, from his roll and Law! Oh ^ its now come to this
pass, that, except the Lord put some bitter real rods of affliction upon
men, the L^w is made as a Scarecrow in a field, to the birds, out of the nose
whereof they will pick strawes! But know it; no affliction without the Law can
discover sin.

Psalm. 119.^18.
never were humbled ones, nor believers. I discourage none for measure: That
light which makes all manifest, is enough, be it never so little, if sound.
Read Act. 2.37. Those Jews had pierced CHRIST upon the Cross, but saw nothing
amiss, till Peter's Sermon: that was above all Cross or Crucifix, and truly
enlightened and convinced them! Zech. 12.10. GOD has blessed his Law with
better light then the Pope can bless all his Agnus Deis, or graynes, or the
like, to gage and search the conscience: Oh! do not kick against it, but
Speak LORD, for thy servant hears! Let this light of GOD be attended, yea
dressed by thee morning and evening, that no sin may escape thee! This Aquila
(as mean as it seems, I mean this Law of God) must teach great ones,
Apolloes learned Doctors, and all sorts, to become fools, that they may be
wise. Act. 18.26. 1 Cor. 3.1^
Especially be able to say with Paul, in Holy praise to God, I had never known
lust, had not GODS Law said, Thou shall not lust. Oh! let hypocrites curse it
to the pit of hell for a Puritan Law: but know, except they be her Disciples,
hell must be their portion: for she has chains to bynd the proudest
despizres! Oh! bless God that ever so cleared the Coast and the troubled
waters of thy own conscience, that thou came to see this Nature of thine to
the bottom; For the want whereof, I dare say, thousands band upon the land of
self-loue: never coming to know what an enemy she is to conviction, and to
ea^^h?

Q. Before ye proceed, What is the use of this branch?

A. First, that every one who seeks the true end of this first part of the
Catechism, do willingly open himself and the door of h^s conscience to the
light of this Law, coming into it. Yet I have said, no one of the former five
Articles can be known to a man save by the Word, and especially the law so to
yield up the soul to the clear displaying of thi^ ordinance. For although
nothing can be hid from it, yet it may still be hid to v^, if we stop our
own conscience, and keep some beloved just in a cloister, which will see no
light. Let the Law have her honor in our hearts, that we do truly and sauingly
see whatsoever the former five Articles said of sin: consenting to all, That
they are true. Chap. 1.24. Saint James says, A fool seeing his face, goes
and forgets him. Beware we do not so: but if ever we would come to the
mirror of the Gospel, in which we behold the face of God plainly, let us make
way to it by S. James his Glass: Divide not the things which GOD has put
together. Although the Law have no Christ in it, yet the Maker of it uses it as
a Schoole-dame to him: Let her then point at every l^tter in the Crosse-row,
and rip up every error, and distemper: Gal. 3.2^
do not abuse the rule, nor crook it wilfully as Pharisees, to mistake the
sense, to hide, to descant upon and to diminish or excuse any evil, but let it
be the Lords light set up for the ends that follow. Detain not this part of
the Word in unrighteousness, lest thou never come to the next step, but perish
in a twilight for want of a clear discovery. We are loath to be informed of
that, which when we know, we are loath to renounce: Grace begins at the root
of enlightening. Examine thy self in thy uprightness herein.

Secondly, it lays open the unspeakable justice of God in suffering such
darkness to spread over the world for so many ages, and still in many
nations, who sit in the valley of darkness. We have many travelers into
those Indian parts, who in the beholding of the faces of savages, should
tremble to think, that the Lord for so long should not regard their ignorance,
when yet he suffered a great part of the other Asia, Affrike, and all Europe,
to see light. Oh poor wretches! what can the dim light of common conscience
help to discover darkness? how merry are they in assured destruction? and how
should it yerne the hearts of Christians to behold them? As for the state of
thousands under the government of Protestant Kings, who having Baptism end
the Bible in English, yet never had the blessing of a searching Ordinance, what
shall we ascribe it to, save the wrath of GOD upon a woeful Nation kept, and
content to be kept in darkness, because their works are evil? Both the
leaders and the led must fall into the ditch.

The last use thereof may be instruction to teach us how deep a blindness
is cast upon the soul, in point of discerning her own sin and danger. Nothing
is further off, then the reflex of our own corruption upon conscience: nothing
more teadious then to be it formed of sin in the kind. He that comes to tell
us what we are, is our deadly enemy: and many professors have gone many miles
to get them a Preacher, whom they have persecuted, when he has taught them
the mystery of iniquity in themselves, their privy pride, hypocrisy,
spiritual wickedness of unbelief, ignorance and love of the world, but
especially their old Adam, placking their muffler^ from them, and laying them
naked, and awake to their own conscience. Oh! it is the joy of the
unregenerate man, when he can make himself believe he is not the man, he
yet knows (or may) that he is. Ier. 1^.
Alas! sin lies deep, and Who can gage the deceit of the heart, s^ue only
the Lord, and the spirit of the Law which diuides between the spirit and the
soul?

Therefore how should this teach us both Ministers, and people, to loath all
generalities, and to learn the Law in the true sense, and the
through-enlightning of it? It is a foolish speech of some, who desire that they
might fall into some gross sin, to humble them by. But (howsoever the Lord
awaken some by the loud cry of their foul sins, as drunkenness, blasphemy or
the like) surely that which is likest to prevail with the civil and moral
sort, is, the enlightening of the tenth Commandment. For they can wash off
actual sin, which colors as fast as they offend, laying good against evil:
but when the spring of their cursed nature appears, which runs upon them
continually, I say then this body of death will do it. Romans 7.24.


Q What is the second work of the Law?

A. This conviction (which I call the second work of the Law) is twofold:
partly concerning the judgment, and partly the soul or whole man: the former
I call simple conviction, the latter, conviction with terror. Touching the
difference whereof, note well. When once the soul is thoroughly enlightened, if
the Law proceed in her work, she comes to apply her light to this conuincing
of the soul: and first, by causing the conscience to join against it self,
and to say, Thou art the man: this differs from light, be it never so
particular because it is light with application to the souls self in
special. Again, having been thus convinced in conscience, I am this sinner,
if the Law still work, it proceeds to the second degree of conuincing; Which
is not only an application of sin to her self, but a due yielding of the
soul to lie under the bondage and fear of punishment belonging to such a
sinners woeful estate. A man may hear, and not so much as be enlightened. He
may have great light, and yet never be convinced in conscience. He may be
convinced, and yet never be duly held under any true bondage, as we see in
Saul and others. But the Law works all.

Q. What then is this work of Conviction by the Law?

A. It is the second work of the Ministry of the Law, by the efficacy
whereof, the soul believes her self to be that which she knows, to wit,
this sinful and cursed one. A most powerfu^l work! yet no other then the
poor Minister of GOD enabled by the au^hority of the Law, may and does
perform. For why? when the poor soul sees that the LORD has reached her out
the Key of light to see the wonders of his Law, to ^o idle ends, but that
hereby she might go further, and apply it to her self, confessing her self to
be ^he party: what has she to do, save to let all other guilty ones pass, and
to pass sentence upon her self, confessing She is this miserable sinner?
Neither can any thing h^nder this proceeding, except it be a lewd heart that is
unwilling to put her neck in the collar, and so, detaines the truth and ^ight
of the Law in unrighteousness. But if the Law can prevail, this light shall
prove believing and conviction. See Ephe. 5.13 where the Apostle says, The
light does argue, or convince. For that disputes thus, That soul which is thus
sinful and cursed, is truly mi^erable, and so abydes of her self. But I am
thus sinful and cursed, Therefore etc. The assumption is conviction. The
conclusion is terror. Conuictio^ argues so strongly against her self, that she
reflects the light of the Law upon her conscience, making it her accuser and
Judge, and stopping the mouth of the heart from gaynsaying, or kicking against
the pricks. Thus was it with Paul, Act. 9. hearing that voice, I am Jesus whom
thou pe^secutest: he fell down and asked, True, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? Thus the murderers of Christ were convinced by Peter, they were pricked
in their hearts. This followed they believing the fact, Surely we have pierced
the Lord of life? This was tipified in the handling of the Leper, after the due
view of the Priest, Leuit. 1^.45. he was to lay it to his heart, and cry out,
Unclean, unclean. To this purpose, Paul speaks. 1. Cor. 14.28. But i^ ye
speak in a known tongue, if an Idiot come in, he is convinced of all, and
cries out, God is in you of a truth, I am a woeful wretch. Thus Peter was in
special convinced of his baseness, Luke 5.8. Lord, depart from me, a sinful
man! And David by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. I have sinned. ^o 1 Cor. 4.2, 4. We
manifest our selves to the consciences of all men: that is, preach so: that we
convince you of the truth. So John 16.8. The spirit, (meaning in the ministers
of the law) shall convince the world of sin: their conscience shall not be
able to resist the truth of it.

Q. How does the Law effect this conviction?

A. As in the former work it removed darkness: so in this it remoues three
lets especially first, Deadness of spirit. Secondly, S^oth and ca^e. Thirdly,
Subtilty and hollownesse: And contrarily puts a quickening, and a diligent and
plain consent to the light, into the soul. These it does by a further power
of the ordinance: by the benefit of the key of light, grappling with the spirit
of the mind, and wrestling with it to unlock the bar of it, and set it Wide
open, that it may confess her self to be this party.

Q. What causes this deadness and hardness in the spirit, to be convinced?

A. Love of lusts and custom therein with delight, does defile and besot the
powers of the mind, that as one busy in his game, does not listen to a sad
tale: so neither does this mind the end of the Law in enlightening. That which
our Savior, Ioh. ^.19, 20. speaks of evil works, that They will not come at
the light: may be as truly said of this also, They will not suffer the sight to
come home to them, in the reflex, application, and seasure of conscience. It is
as if an unhappy boy, while one is grafting a tree, should throw a little
pebble between the clift, tha^ the sier and the stock might warp asunder. So
here: corrupt lusts by the sweetness do let the Word (although clearly
know^) from closing with the conscience, so that the Law and the soul are two,
and come not home one to the other.

Q. What is sloth and ease?

A. Loose incogitancy and carelessness, by which men run up and down with
light, as the dog with his chain broken loose. So does a slothful heart even
cut its own throat, as Solomon says, Pro. 1.32. Iam. 1.24.
Ease slays the fool. To this purpose St. James says, He is as a fool,
that beholds his natural face in the Glass, and the spots of it, but forgets
that they are his spots. If he did mind them, he would be afraid to show them:
and would go wash them off. The obedience to this hard conuincing Master, is
harsh: men are content to forget it: at least, that goes out of mind alone,
through lothnesse to fall to it, and then comes the Devil, and puts in business
that must be done, pleasures, company, when yet the heart says, There is a
better work would be done: and indeed, if it were pleasing to the flesh, it
would plead to be done. But now ease and liberty plead against it, and put it
off, saying, One day I will be serious, but the heart is daily worse and worse to
it. For why? All other work should be set aside, to follow this, while the
heart is upon kindling of thoughts and desires to it: lest the quenching of
this spirit do make the heart utterly unsavory to it. Thus Math. 13.7. Cares of
the world, and pleasures choke the Word that it dies. Oh, men say, They cannot
dwell upon a thing so long! But it is your giddines and vanity, which sees not
what a Jewel they forgo for a shadow, which after will sting them without
remedy. As the Prophet said to him who let his prisoner go which was to be
kept, excusing it, That while he was talking of this and that, 1 King 20.40.
he slipped from ^im Thy life shall go for his: so I say, This vanity and ease will
slay the fool.

Q. What is subtilty and slynesse?

A. The worse of the three, viz. when men pretend that they have received the
light to believe it: but they lie, and their false hearts are defiled with some
secret root of bitterness, Heb. 12.15 Number. 22.21
which will not suffer them to be plain. Examples are plentiful. When Baalam
would needs go with the men, against Gods charge, the Lord set his ass to
convince his folly: and again the Angel stopped his way, so that he dashed his
foot against the wall. And thirdly, the Lord oppozed him: but he was so set
upon his wages, that he answered his very ass and smote her. What was the
cause, but a false heart pretending to do no other the^ God bad him, but in
truth meaning nothing less? The like estate are all hypocrites it, who have
their pangs and devotions, often promising that they will do as the light calls
for: but in secret keep a false measure and sooth up themselves, as they are,
wanting truth to do it. And there is nothing more perilous then this, to dally
with sin under pretext of religion and zeal, when yet the heart is utterly
loath to take the point of this knife into it.

Q How does the Ministry of the Law grapple with these?

A. By iogging the soul, and not suffering her to be any of these, but being
more forcible in setting the Word home to the soul, and breaking open that
lock which will not shoot of her self. Some view of this briefly I will give
to the Reader, and so come to the use. Thus then: the Lord does aim at this
(where he will convince) not to suffer the soul to lie in her half
conuincings, but beats her off from all her subtle shifts, washes off her
Colors, and puts her to silence, that she has no more to gainesay: and this
he does many ways.

First, By entering into a solemn judicial course with the soul, and applying
the light to her by particular evidence giving in against her, that she is
this child of death. Take an example. While the Thief hears the Judge give
his charge to the Country, and enlighten the Country in the Law of the Land,
he gives way to all, but is no whit troubled, because its not brought home to
himself, but in general spoken against all thieves, murderers, etc. But when
the sail is delivered, this Thief called and examined, how then? will his
pleading not guilty, serve the turn? No. The Judge calls the witness, reads
the confession, sends out the Jury, who bring in a verdict against him. And how
then? Oh! then he is convinced and cannot deny, but grants, I stole it, my
Lord, I brake the house, I shed blood. Thus the Lord deals here: will not let
the sinner alone, but dogs him with his light: do not remember the time, the
place the odiousness of such a villainy? Can thou deny it? Sp^ac^ truth and
shame the Devil! I know thou have no power to d^ny: confess it then and
discharge thy conscience, give God the Glory. Oh! when the Lord means to go
through y to work, he will suffer no lust, no sloth or falsehood to k^^pe
^ff^^ es ule from her light: But (will she, nill she,) in shall not only
almost, but altogether be convinced. Now, to br^^g the light and the soul
close together, is the great wisdom of the Nathan comes upon David with a
parable of another matter, that he might the more freely speak his mind: and
ha^ing so wound in, falls upon him unavoidably, Thou art the man.

Saul: would not suffer him to lie three or four times over, First. I have
obeyed. Secondly, These were reserved for sacrifice, the rest slain. Thirdl^,
I feared the people, etc. None of his tricks would serve, What then means the
bleating of sheep, and lowing of Oxen? Can dead cattle bleate and low? He
took him in the manner.

Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed, etc.
Now, in all these insinuations, the life of the conuincing Law is unspeakably
forcible, especially the Lord presenting himself, and speaking to a soul
willing to learn. A second course is Violence and Necessity, when no other
course will serve. This the Lord does both by his Threats apart, and sometimes
by the Addition of some works. Thus when Saul would hardly yield to Samuels
words, he falls upon him thus, The LORD has rent thy kingdom from thee, etc.
this rent him from his base Colors! So that sometime the subtillest hypocri^e
must cry cut, GOD has gone beyond him! Thus Josh. 7. No way to get out the
sacrilegious thief, but violence. The Lord therefore causes the lot to be
cast; and first finds out the Tribe that he was of. This would not search him.
Next, he casts a second for the Family in gross: neither could this prevail.
The third time he knocks at his Fathers door; that would not serve. The last
lot lights upon Achaus neck. And then, My son, confess, etc. Josh. 7.
But before, there was no conuincing him. So the Lord is feign to cast a di^ect
lot vpcn men's consciences, and so closely to sting them, that they are forced
to cry out, and can forbear no longer: I am a man: the lot is fallen upon me!
Thus was it with him who was pulled out from his fellows, for want of his
wedding garment. Math. 22.12.
Thus God dealt with the crazy consciences of those brethren of Joseph: they
were feign to be arrested upon ^^ew and cry as thieves, bound and cast into
prison, threatened as spies, ere they were meet to be convinced for felling
Joseph: and then they could say, Genesis 42.21.
This is, because we heard the voice of our brother in the pit, and would not
pity him. Thirdly, the Lord sometimes is feign to circumuent a sinner in his
own course, and to bring forth the long-concealed marks of his sin to his
face: Genesis 28.2^
bidding him deny if he dare, Thus Tamar dealt with Judah in his hypocritical
severity: If I must needs be burnt, says she, then go carry him these
tokens, his Cloak, Staff, and Signet, asking whose they are? and then, Oh,
she is more righteous then I! I instance not in these as if they were close
examples of this kind: but to shadow out the truth. So also, sometimes by
crosses. Thus Manass^^ is said to be taken in the bushes: 2 Chro. 33.1.
meaning, that when God hampered him with sorrow and affliction, he began to
come home to himself. So the prodigal. And truly without such help, the Word
works but little in these days, in which the Spirit of Grace and mourning is
straightened. And lastly, Ier. 31.1^
sometime by patience and long-suffring, strange delyuerances, great blessings
(even in the worst estate) the LORD works some conuincement, as Romans 2.3.4.
and thus Saul (in a pang) was convinced by David's innocence: Come again! 1 Samuel 24, 19.
Who will meet his enemy, and let him go? And that poor blind wretch, ver.
17.25.27
John 9. by his cure, when yet he felt no mercy. These I give as a taste, to
show how the Lord pierces the dead lazy and subtle heart of such as having
knowledge, yet, else, would vanish away in their own misery. By these, aim at
the rest.

Q. What use make ye hereof, ere we go to terror?

A. Very weighty.

John 4.10.
Tremble to think how thick conviction is sown, and how thin it comes vp^
Doubtless if conviction must be the picklock, the body of people are fast
locked up in their sins! men give good words, as Nephtals but as light and
feathery as ever! When Oh Lord, (should thou say) shall that shower come,
that shall fetch up the grain of my light, from under my dry clod? Alas! days
of law conviction are past long ago, we are for nothing but promises! If we
should go only by sense, we might cease preaching. And sure, a good Minister
should tremble to preach many promises, seeing so little conviction.

Admonition both to Ministers and people.

stamp of conviction in our selves, that we might not wrong the Word we
teach. It is not the rolling of speech, our loud words, but sincerity and
simpleness of our scope, that must prevail, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 4.2, 3. Oh,
tell men, 2 Cor. 4.^ Deuteronomy. 29.
If any hear the Words of this Law* and bless themselves with peace, Gods
wrath shall smoke against such! Do not blanch, do not dawbe with bad mortar,
sow no pi^lowes: but rather pluck off men's mufflers and vizors, and cry as
those Boanorges did, Awake oh dead, slothful, suotill heart! Be not beaten
off from this, by the peoples unthankfulness, and repining; plow we with Gods
heifer, and he shall teach our tongues this logique. Study we our selves first,
then the Scriptures, and the Spirit of conuincement shall follow us, wh ch the
w^^ld shall not resist. We shall be a sweet savor to God in all: Eze. 33.3, 4 1
King ^.224
both who are saved, and who perish, if we do thus: else, we shall pay for
their blood. Suffer no Sycophant to dissuade us, as he did offer to Michaiah.
Though the wicked will say, We are informed, and have plowed with other men's
heyfers: and we ^e^er speak well to them: yet in the end, faithful witnesses
shall be honored.

Secondly, the people must be warned to shake off their Let the righteous
smite you: it shall be as balm. The poor man, whose impostume was let out by
an enemy, fared better by him, then by all his Physicians. Hunt out those three
enemies before, and add a fourth of self-love. It is an Adder, which will not
hear the voice of the charmer. The sweetness of usury, pleasures, lawful
liberties, ease, will be as a Delila, to keep off the least conviction of the
Law! How can I want such a sin! Who can prove such a gainful lost to be so
sinful? Surely he will sting thee with it, as Delila did Samson, (when the
sweet is past) who now so enchants thee; and then most of all, when thou
cryest, The bitterness of death is past. Again, think not cch p^ng, or
glimpse of light, or holding of a truth to be conviction: For so the Devil
will betray thee, if ever thou be called to suffer. Nay, in thy ordinary
course, thou will confess a Christ, but deny him before a Papist: Thou will
say, Thy soul is more worth then the World, but stake it for a groate:
Conviction is no opinion, but the ouerpowring of the Conscience. If the truth
be no stronger then the Souls resistance, there is no Conviction; The Martyrs
gave their blood for Transubsta^tiation: Which they had never done, had they
not seen and been convinced of the issue of it.





sold under sin. As he to Achan, Give glory to God! Hug the Surgeon that
lanced thee.

Shame and confusion for sin, Dan. 9. The Publicane durst not look up. Peter
bids Christ depart, for he was utterly confounded at the power of Christ. Thus
they in Ezra. 10. under the rain of Heaven, so thou under this shower, Romans 6
21. What fruit?

Cor. 14.25. God is in you of a truth.

Under thy confusion, till God raise thee up, Habac. 3. let rottenness enter
into bones, that peace may be in the day of trouble. Crust not over thy sore:
wax not weary of this work of God, as most do. A man once thoroughly shamed
and confessing, is hardly after defiled, Lastly, let it end in true
consternation of soul, and terror for thy sin: of which we are to speak.

Q. What is the second work of Conviction?

A. The second is of the whole soul, called terror and bondage. For when the
former work of conviction has prevailed: it works thus, that such a soul is
as under an arrest, and seeing it self this sinner, this cursed one: he is
thereby killed, and the spirit brought into terror and bondage. And this the
Lord sees meet to add to the former, for else as a dog with his chain loose,
so the conscience runs riot with the work of bare knowledge of sin. But if
the dog be fastened to his chain, he is under custody. And this is that
which is so often spoken of in Romans 7. when Paul says, When the Law came, I
dyed. Meaning, in spirit and conscience. That self of iollity, ease and
security which sin afforded, was nipt and quasht, and in stead of it, a sad
item given to the soul, taking away the taste of her morsels, mixing the gall
of aspes with her drink, and stinging her as an Adder, and stabbing her to the
heart as a sword, for her convinced villainies, yea and none more then this body
of death, which still dogs her and wounds her as fast as she licks her self
whole with all her duties, or abstinences, and works, and shifts, proouing her
a slave sold under misery, and showing her a nature, a world of sin and woe,
to bear down all her morality and hypocrisy. An heart under this bondage
cannot be stild with Rattles: the Spring comes so fast, that there is no
stopping it by the wit of man, till a stronger stream turn it back. The like
speech is that, Sin by the Law slew me. He means not any mortification,
but he touches upon that point of the iol^inesse of a sinner, who (that sin
might be out of measure sinful) prides himself in his estate. This pride the
law resists, lets out the rankenesse of it, and abases it with terror of hell
and wrath. And that in so great measure of times, that when God leaves them
from hope, they wickedly bereave themselves of life. And yet this is not grace:
but in the elect a seed of it: without which the Lord were no more fit to treat
with them about salvation, then a Smith to meddle with a wild horse: but when
he has cast him, he can handle him at pleasure. This work in Scripture is
called the Spirit of fear, or Bondage: not bondage to sin, but by it:
whereby, as they who are prisoners under chains, do lie in sorrow and horror
without escape or hope, so do these. Their spirit is enslaued to fear, their
conscience to guilt, accusation to the whip of wrath and justice, yea crushed
down to Hell by the torment of such a spirit, as cannot sustain it self for
the restless anguish thereof.

Q. Seeing this point of legal terror is one of the maine points of this
first Part, tell me, how many things make for the vnderstand^ng of it?

A. Three things especially. First, The difference. Secondly, The nature, the
effects, and end of it. Thirdly, The extremiti^s or abuse of it.

Q What is the difference of it from the former legal works?

A. The work of enlightening casts out ignorance: the work of conuincing,
resists deadness and insensiblenesse. But this third of consternation or
terror, resists that pride and iollity of a sinner, ouerbearing himself and
lifting up himself in his sin without check or remorse. And this latter is
of all other the most proper work of the Law, to tame and beat down the
lofty heart of man, setting up a Law to it self to walk as it lists without
law, or fear.

Q. What is the nature of it?

A. It is a presenting (more or less) of the wrath and pena^ties due ^o sin,
unto the whole man, by the conscience, for the casting of it down at the feet
of God. Mark these heads.

in the open assembly: as it came therefore from God, so it is supported in her
power by God, and serves for his use: in all places to arrest and cast down
all sinners, and carry them to prison under sentence, at the Judges pleasure.

Secondly, It does present the wrath and penalties of sin Ministry is this
voice of God, and Judge of a sinner: Romans 4.15.
therefore called the Ministry of the letter, the messenger of wrath, the Law
of sin and death, Romans 8.2. Not of the wrath of a man against a man, but of
God against a sinner; not able to kill the body, but to cast body and soul
into hell. This law curses from Gods mouth every stale sinner, soked in his
lees: Cursed be every one that abides not in all things to do them: cursed
from God be every liar, swearer, adulterer, hypocrite, worldling: Desolation,
and destruction, tribulation and anguish be upon every soul that sins, high
and low, without bail or main prise! and if God curse, cursed they are, and
who shall bless them? It is no curse of a sin upon a sinner, no Popes curse
with book, bell and candle, (which yet made Kings to tremble and made them as
black as soote, in the opinion of fools) no not the curse of a father, (which
may turn to a blessing, as Jacobs did to Simeon and Leui* but the curse of the
eternal God, whose wrath is the messenger of death, and blasteth indeed
wheresoever it lights, and whatsoever resists it. This wrath, I say (mark
well) in the penalties of it, temporal, spiritual, and eternal, the law
presents to a sinful soul. Temporal in this life, Leu. 26.24. 2 Cor. 15.6
read Deuteronomy. 29. setting God against the soul in all her course, walking
contrary to her, because she has walked so to him, vexing her withal
adversity, and suffering nothing to go current (either in one kind or other)
marriage cross, children cursed, state untoward, success naught, God against
me in all. Spiritual, and far worse penalties in the soul, deserting it and
leaving it to her own impenitency, security, hardness, obstinacy, which is
Gods curse under seal, Lam. 3.65. as a Baylif holding under arrest, even till
hell: eternal at death, even a separation from the presence of God, and a
tormenting of it for ever in hell, in the fullness of this wrath, which indeed
is the dying the death, and yet never dead, without hope, ease, or remedy:

Pet. 2.6. Their damnation sleeps not. Only this conscience (of which Solomon
speaks) Who can bear the load of it? this wounded conscience differs from all
these, and is the object of the Law, thus presenting wrath to it, that by how
much the more it seems in worse case then the other three: yet by this feeling
of God, she might in due time prove better then the best of them. And I say,
conscience is so the next object, that yet the whole man thereby partakes of
this wrath: As Job speaks of himself, Thy fears are upon me day and night:
The arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me, Thou scarest me with dreams and
visions, no rest in my flesh for thee. And chap. 33. My bones clatter, and
stick out, all dainty meat is loathsome, and he is chastned with pain in the
multitude of his bones, his life abhorres bread, his flesh is consumed, his
soul draws near the grave, v. 19, 20, 21, 22. Oh, thus body and soul by
sympathy must stoop under wrath, when God frowns; all parts have sinned, and
all must smart: Psalm. 39.11. When thou art angry for sin, man is made as a
garment moth-eaten! The Lord Jesus himself could not escape it, his soul was
heavy to death, he sweet drops of blood, he thought God quite gone from him!
And yet this (at the worst) is better then any other of the three I spoke of.
And this we have seen and daily do in men (in spite of these hardened times)
the Lord breaks in upon some, and makes the sins of youth and age before them:
Oh, that we could see the fruit of it after! To this I add, The Lord does this
more or less in the soul. I purposely say so, because God is not tied in his
course to any set measure, he can restrain or enlarge as he pleases. Many
under a good Ministry or teaching, having little felt this way of God, doubt of
their humiliatio^: but if they can prove that the Lord has hidden the
violence of terror by long and frequent trayning, that here and there the Lord
has revealed himself more or less to them, with fruit to be desired, let it
not trouble the^. More usually the Lord deals thus with soked sinners, that
they might vomit the morsels which they have long taken in: that by this
course, their change might be more apparent, and for ever these marks of God
might abide in their flesh to awe and bridle them; yet I say, God is not tied:
I have noted greater terrors in the choicest educations (as the case has
stood) then in openest Profaneness.

Fourthly, and lastly I say, the act of this law, is in all this, to is in
nature an intolerable bearing up of a man's self in his estate, a priding of
himself, boldness, boasting of his sin: he is so far from being ashamed,
that till the Law come home to him thus; he is alive, read Romans 7.9. that is
jolly, iocant, me^r^, as the fool that casts arrows, darts, and says Am not
I in sport? A sinners Crown is not his bare sin, in corners and by stealth:
that his woe, his law: but his crown is, his liberty of spirit in it, to do
what he list, to run, ride, talk, practice, to drink, swear, lie and coozen
and no man control him: This is to be alive, (note the phrase) and to say, My
self am my own, my tongue my own, I am bond to none, (see Ioh. 8. ver. 33,) a
free man to go and do as I list: as he said, liberty is to live as a man list.
The crown of a drunkard, or adulterer is, to revel and toss, and defile
himself without fear: as the Pope, who may carry innumerable souls to hell
with him, and who shall say, What do thou? Now I say, this iollity and
boldness and pride in sin, the Lord in his Ministry of the law, resists: and
that he does, when by all I have spoken, he pulles down this sinner upon his
knees, cast his crown in the dirt, dismounts him as he did Saul from his
palfrey Act. 9. and the desperate Iaylor in his profaneness and cruelty, Act.
16.27. and those killers of Christ, Act. 2. saying, Lord what will thou have me
to do? Oh, then has wrath ceazed upon the soul when it has killed this
iollity, and let out this pleurisy out of it! And hence its called the
sacrificing knife, sharper then any two-edged sword, the killing letter, Romans
7.11.
that which slew Paul, not by mortification, but by shedding the blood and
bowels of sins iollity to the ground! Oh, when God comes thus into the
conscience, lo, all is turned vpside down, now I feel the vileness of my pride,
now the wrath of God is upon me for my covetousness: now I feel this fire in
my bones, this sting of a serpent: now I feel what it is to dare heaven, and
to live like a masterlesse hound in the world! ^ King 22.25.
Oh, when that is verified which Micay told Zidkia, Thou shall be glad in that
day to run from chamber to chamber to hide thee: then thy pushing horns, thy
scorn and pride shall be far from thee? When the Lord shall make him that
durst act his parts upon any stage, now not to know what ground to stand upon,
to become as if a man's body should hang in the air, vnsusteined and restless
in it self, not to be able to weild himself for the anguish, confusion and
agonies of a wounded spirit! Oh, then the law has done her part indeed, and
tamed former liberty, and iollity in evil: Examples are not wanting hereof in all places, where this great Minister the law has become. But in the use I
shall apply it.

Q. And what secondly are the effects hereof usually?

A. Among others these three apparently. First, Stoppage of a course in evil
openly. Secondly, Inward vnsettling of a rotten peace. Thirdly, Holding down
the soul under bondage.

The first stopping in a course of evil. This differs f^^^ that effect of
Providence, whereby the Lord does limit the number, and measure of sin in the
wicked, for the preservation of peace ande civil society: for though that be a
divine work, yet its not the immediate work of the law: but either a
Providence without a word, or else by the general power of the Word
restraining sin: but this is a special kind of restraint, issuing from the
work of the Law, for the good of the soul so restrained. And it is a
lothsomnes of the soul, finding no joy in old courses, beholding them with
repenting and yrking of thoughts, wishing them undone, and abhorring to return
to them through the terror of conscience, being under this whip of the Law.
When horror lay upon Saul, Act. 9. his letters in his pocket, and commission
from the Priests, and trade it self of pursiuantship was bitter: no more of
that for the present. As the ague stirring the diseased humors, makes that
stomach loath a Partridge, which before could have eaten resty bacon: so here,
this terror makes the sweetest sin lothed, which before devoured all. And
although this be not grace, yet the Lord is laying a beginning thereof, heerby
in the soul, which in due season may come to somewhat. I remember a pretty
speech of an Heathen in one of his Epistles: who being sick, dare do as while
he is well? who then guzzles, or is unclean, or railes, or is covetous? That
is much truer of this soul sickness; in which the stomach has more list to
vomit, then to eat! Now the reason of this work is, because while the soul
is in her hurry, she has no care to hear God speaking to her: she is so
busy with her trade, that all is spoken as it were in her cast. Besides, the
Lord lothes to work upon a soul, in the heat of her lust: first he will frame
her to his discipline, ere he bestow any grace upon her. And rarely does the
Lord honor any bold reuolting sinner, during his course, till first he have
stopped him some time from it. So then, terror first turns edge, and gets within
and ouergoes a sinner in his way: as Zara ouertakes Phares in his hasty issue
out of the womb. The use briefly (that so I may be short in the maine use when
I come to it) is, first, not to imagine all restraints from evil to be grace;
try them first: God intends them for good, but they are as far from
mortification, as a trembling or Lyon-couchant is from a dead one: The vilest
harlot (that Rosamund in her vault) was actually kept from her uncleanness as
well as chaste matrones: but her heart was as before, her principle was unclean
still. Not the love of good, but lothing of evil restraines legally. For the
time Judas was so far from his pieces, that he chuzes to hang himself rather
then to fall to his trade. And therefore restraint only is not to be rested
in: howbeit God, where he means to proceed sauingly, does restrain
wholesomely, if we could judge: but seeing this is a secret, trust not our
selves or others* herein, till the Lord has by this step trained us further.
Rejoice for the least degree (as I confess in such a loose debaucht age
restraint of some young drunkards would seem high Religion) its better to have
the half loaf, then no bread: but follow the Lord, in the savor of his law,
to a setting a true principle of pureness and grace, and love, to renew and
change thee, Romans 12.9
and to forsake sin with a true, abhorring, as hell.

Q. What is the second effect of this legal consternation?

A. Vnsetting and shaking the prison walls of rotten peace, in a sinful
soul, I say false, secure peace which it takes to her self, and pleases her
self in i^, when God debarres her of all sound peace, Esaias 57 vlt. This is a
fertile sield to walk in, but I will be short. A sinners life is his rotten
peace, both without a law, (by reason of his hurrying on from sin to sin,
without leisure to call himself back, and selfeloue, pleasing himself in the
sight of his eyes, and the joy of his heart) and with, or under a law by sundry
practizes and colors. 1. By nouzling himself under flattering means, such as
are quiet and safe and sow pillowes, threatening no disturbance. 2. Withdrawing
from stirring ones, and resisting them, and expelling them as Ahab did Eli^a
and Micaiah his two enemies, that never spoke good to him. 3. If conviction
assault, yet holding it off with obstinate error or profaneness, and coloring
with half yielding: and show of consent, the heart being rotten. The Law of
God fights against all these, (having once the soul upon the hip and vantage
of terror) and does clear the deluded bribed judgment, stabbes the heart for
her long rottenness and rest in it, rends off and sweepes down with the hand
and besome of the law, all the paper walls and copweb devices she had spun;
and vtters it self both to her self and others, in deep detestation against
the. All that league of a rotten heart with sin, self, hell and danger, Esa.
28.18. the Lord batters against the hard stones of terror, that it may be dashed
in pieces. And so for the time it holds (except the soul shake it off) and
therefore at the worst is infinitely better then all old peace. A just war is
to be preferred to unjust peace always: and the hardest day of terror to a man's
conscience for all his old rex, is better then the sweetest he ever had in
evil and the pleasures of it. Oh, his companions, his excuses, colors and
deceits are revealed to be hellish! the curtain now is opened, and he sees
them all mere Paint of an harlot to keep him in a spiritual fornication. He
is now so far from peace, that he sees hell gaping upon him to devour him
for his sweet pleasures! Let the use be treble.

First, Judge thy self, if thou be not yet come thus far, that thy false peace
is broken off by the law, thou art in woeful case and the man thou were wont.
Oh, how few other do we meet within our Ministry! Me^ will do much to be well
thought of by other men, but take no p^ins for the Ministry of Gods law to hunt
out their soothing and hollow love of themselves: alas, why do ye spend time to
nouzle your selves in self-loue, which ten times might be better spent in
bringing ye out of conceit with your selves, and abhorring your rotten league,
that so the Lord might begin to think well of ye? But men cannot abide to be
thought ill of: what do ye think amiss of them? Even as the life of
banquerouts is, to set a good face on it, and borrow what they can get and
brace it out with their wealth* and go brave in apparel, till ruin come; so
here, men occupy with a stock that is none of theirs, and yet scorn to have
their states suspected, but are as good as the best of all others! Oh, false
peace will bring ye to ruin at last! That ye would catch at, ye shall never
get: but that ye do so shun, ye shall for ever meet with; utter shame with God
and men, and destruction to your selves.

Secondly, Labor for this work of the law, to pull ye down and bewray your
false peace: try your selves by this, that now ye cry out of all dawbers with
untempered mortar, false prophets, and preachers of peace, together with that
Arch-false prophet of self-loue; and cling to the faithful, and count their
wounds Balm: as for your own vainties, they have caused ye to forsake mercy.

Lastly, Let not this be enough that ye are brought thus far; till Christ have
wholly expelled that strong man, who rules and locks up the house in peace,
and till he bring in a true bottom of peace into ye, by sprinkling ye with
his blood that speaks better things then that of Abel. When this Sherif comes,
he will fetch out all dwellers in the house, and break open all: happy are
they to whom the law brings this writ of eiection, especially if the other
Sherif of the Gospel bring in a new and a sound peace.

Q. What is the third effect of the Law?

A. The Spirit of bondage, of which see Romans 8.15. Heb. 2.15 and Heb. 12.12. Ye
are not come to mount Sinai, to those terrors and smoke, which made Moses
himself to say, I quake for feare^ hell speaks of the first condition under
the law: they were past a Taskmaster and Schoolmaster, and were come to mount
Sion, and to the liberty of the first borne, etc. But here he intimates how
they came by it. Now this differs as much from mere fear, as a passage differs
from an act.

The Lord aiming by this to hold and keep the soul who^ he will save, from
all revolt to former lust and liberties. The spirit of bondage is the frame of
a fearful heart, held under slavery and chains of the Law, from all escaping.
As we say, such a man has the spirit of mirth, or Covetousness in which he is
rooted. So in one place a woman is said to have a spirit of infirmity, viz.
Sealth, when her disease had so prevailed ^uer, that she was crazed by habit.
So the spirit of bondage, Gal 4.7, is to be as one sold to i^* that cannot get
out. It might be wondered at, that the Lord should use such a course to do the
soul good: but considering our cursed base heart (which is like the slave, no
longer to be in work, then the whip is upon the back:) it is no marvel.
Take a similitude. We know it is one thing to be rankt in the forlorn band
which goes against the Cannon mouth: another to be beleaguered in a City by a
long siege. The one look at present danger, which when its over, they are past
it: but in the City men are held under continual fear: they see the Image of
Death before their face ten ways; by famine, pestilence, Sword: here one wall
beaten down, there another; here one slain, there another; some dye of
famine, and threaten the rest to follow: so here: to be under bondage, is to
lie under chains as Peter under many keepers: by which means, frequent
terrors assault daily more or less^: and the soul is held to it, as poor
Israel under brick and clay. Never was this Taskemaster of more use then in
these days: wherein men shun legal fears, as Todes or Serpents, or if any
come nigh them, they shake it off with violence. Its yrkesom to the flesh to
be under the whip long: some way of breaking out of this house of Correction
they devise, thinking themselves never well, till they be at their old liberty
out of the hands of so hard a Master. But as it is with the breaker of the
house of Correction or prison, his end is commonly to be hanged: so is it with
such as despize this remedy of a licentious heart.

Now for use of it; beware that we rest not in this feruill state. Whatsoever
the LORD means to do by it in time, when he offers the Gospel to the soul,
sure it is, this is no state to rest in. For why? It differs from true fear as
much as from true liberty. True fear, is the Lodestone to attract the soul to
GOD, and to acquaint it with GOD; thus rather (of it self) dryues it away from
God, especially if it be in any excess. Secondly, This fear has a respect
to sin only as an occasion, to punishment as a cause. As we see in the
Slave who looks not at his Sloth, but the whip. But the true filial fear
looks at sin as the proper cause of fear, but at punishment as the occasion.
Thirdly, True fear softens: this rather hardens and imbitters the heart: As
we see both in the examples of Josiah who melted: and Ahab, who hardend his
heart by his fear, and returned to his pranks. The fear of a condemned man is
an hardner of him, but he that hears of a pardon, relents at it presently.
Fourthly, It has excess in it, both for the constant assault of it without
intermission, in all places, duties, and occasions: and also for the dangerous
inconvenience it brings after it often times: Hinders all fitnes of spirit both
to duty, and in duty, to calling, worship, liberty, solitarines, defiles all,
and is a special spark to light upon the sad and melancholique temper of the
body, (which the Devil seldom fayles in) to make it flash up and blow up the
whole frame of nature! yea even in the godly themselves its a main enemy to
faith, hope, or other graces or duties. Fifthly, And the truth is, look how
the fear of her that played the harlot, differs from the loyal wifes, so does
this from the fear of the regenerate: the one fears danger and hurt from her
husband; the other reuerences him from love. Saul feared David, because he
looked for danger from him, no otherwise. Let the use then I say, be, to take
heed lest we rest in it.

therefore for a moderation of it, and a directing it to the end which God
int^nds it for: and the less good is in it, of it self, the more adore his
wisdom who uses it to good both in ^he restreint of evil, and the preparing
of the heart to more stayednes and sobriety.

Q What is the end of GOD in this work of the Law?

A. To make way for a sinners reconciliation, which otherwise were not possible
to work. As soon catch an Hare with a Tabre, as a wi^d wi^full sinner by the
Charm of the Gospel. That woman of Samaria scoffed at Christ, telling him the
well was deep, and there was no bucket. But when he had well tozed her, she
changed her humor. See Ioh. 33.33. If then, (after long terrors) there be an
interpreter one of a 1000 to decla^^ to man his R^conciliation: he will be good
to him, and be entreated, saying, Deliver him, I have accepted a ransom. But
how appears this ^ Doubtless hitherto appears no such things in all this
tedious Law-course: no, as the Law is for her vs^, so is the Gospel for hers:
neither intimating other, but oppozite save in the intent of the ordeyner. But
if we look thereat, we shall in sundry respects confess this a most wise and
fit way to bring on the remedy.

First, By this means, GOD ioynes all wholesome Doctrine

Secondly, by this consternation, he does tire and weary the

Thirdly, That by the hearesay of it, their hearts might be Perish in their
misery. When the prodigal was brought to husks at the trough: then, and never
till then, the notion of a father pierced him rea^ly. When those lepers saw
their lives past hope, they resolved thus; If we sit here, we are but dead
men: and we can be no worse by the Aramites, then by famine. So, they made
into their Camp. Thus does a cast-downe troubled sinner resolve to do. If
there be a way of possible escape, the matter is not now whether I shall find
it: but, I know I shall surely perish without it: and sure I cannot be worse
then I am: I may be better: I will venture the trial.

The use briefly is,







Q. Conclude with the extremities and abuses of this legal work?

A. First, for the extremities, they are two, legal presumption, and final
despair.

Touching the first, I call it legal, because there is another

Secondly, this presumption is twofold.

One this, when the sinner waxes bold and ventrous Deuteronomy. 29. If any shall
applaud himself (hearing the curse) and say, I shall have peace, adding
drunkenness to thirst: the wrath of GOD s^all smoke ag^^^ (...) man. Such
there are then, yea surely: bondage is of it se^fe yrkesome, but when it meets
with a bold heart, and is not set home by the Law: commonly it prouokes
wearines; and then, seeing that GOD seconds not his Word always with plagues and
death, and curses indeed: the deferring of sentence, sets the heart on gog to
evil, and perhaps worse then before. Thus Psalm. 50. the hypocrite grows to
think God to be like himself. This sin made Adam, and all us cursed,
presumption against threats. Oh, when we thus fall to our old trade, the
Devil falls to his, and finding the soul thus swept, returns with seven
worse then himself. Let us tremble at it, and learn to inure our selves to
hear all threats with fear. Learn to believe this doctrine, which I have at
large described. I speak not now of saving faith, but against presumptuous
boldness against the Law. To credit the Word to be Gods, who cannot lie, may
fall into a supernatural conviction, although not yet saving.

The second presumption is, When the consternation of this is rare, and
dangerous: for its a sign that the heart is secretly false and unpurged: Rest
in no checkes of conscience, where conscience her self is not first purged,
both to check, and also to excuse and comfort the soul in the Satisfaction of
CHRIST.

Q. What is Desperation?

A. The other contrary, offending as much on the left hand, through the excess
of terror. Thus Saul and Judas. And it commonly grows from the first: Satan
never seeking more to poizon with presumption, and dallyance with the Law, then
where he means to snare with the contrary of despair. How often was Saul
convinced of his malice and persecution? But returinng to his vomit, brought
soul and body to a desperate end. So Cain and Judas by their hidious sins
brought themselves to this, that mercy and Christ were not able to do them
good: their sins were grown beyond forgiveness! A woeful fruit of boldness!
And yet just: for he who will undervalue grace in the worth thereof, is justly
left to ouerualue sin in the merit of it. He that never can find season to
believe the Word being offered, is justly left to seek it with violence when
the season is over. And so, either its never time with them (as he spoke of
marriage) or else past time. Many compare these sins with great ado, but the
wiser way is to prevent both, and the latter in the former. Doubtless it is the
sin of the damned, to live in the perpetual despair of release; and in
persuasion that Grace is unable to do them good. Let us know, far worse
sins then these may destroy: let us never presume to venture, so far as to
dye by these.

to ou^ strength, and to keep our despair within the compass of our selu^s,
and any thing in us: but to be far from the least thought of enlarging our
baseness, above the infiniteness of mercy.

Secondly, To nourish in our hearts above all, those

Q. What lastly is the abuse of this work of the Law?

A. Double, each contrary to the other.

First, On the right hand many (not of the worst) abuse

Secondly, on the left hand, those do far worse abuze Pastimes, some their
Pleasures, some their Profits, some their old companions, some prove more
desperate worldlings; and others with Cain to build them Cities, and while out
their time here with singing sad thoughts away: Let these know, that the
course they take, is v^o^ent, and much like to them, who to stop the cry of
their infants, put into the brazen belly of Moloc, did oppress their ears
with the noise of Pipes and Tabrets. As their childrens cry prevailed to bring
an heavy plague upon them, which no Pipes could still: so when the sleep of
these Epicures is over, they shall awake with such sad confuzion, that all the
noise of their Rattles shall not be able to still them. And so much be spoken
of this point of Consternation, and of the three acts of the Law, and the uses
in special. There is one general use to be added afterward.

Q. Before we add the use of Terror in general, one objection offers it
self, viz, that Paul, Rom 7.7. says When the Law came, sin revived: how
then is Terror the work of the Law? Paul does in that place so affirm the
former, that he denies not the latter, adding this, But I dyed: noting, that
both might stand together.

A. Both may be together in one unregenerate man, according to diverse parts.
For when the Law had slain conscience, then concupiscence revived. And we
must distinguish between the natural work of the Law and the accidental:
Terror is the proper work of it, and when its wrought, it is as it ought to
be. But when rebellion arises, its otherwise then ought to be. When the Sun
reuiueth and sweetens the earth, it works properly: when it draws up the
noisome stench of a dunghill to poizon the air, its accidental, coming from
the loathsomnes of the dunghill. So, when sin rebels, she does her kind: for
she does as the devil did when he went out, he foamd and raged and tyrannized
first. It proceeds from the fulness of the stomach of sin, loath and disdayning
to yield to a new guest. But howeuer sin do her kind, yet if the Law do set
her self to do hers, this rebellion shall not hinder the killing power of it:
It shall rather increase it: For when the soul comes to see, how loathsome
sin has made her, that even when the Law by her righteous good nature seeks
to destroy sin, then she most couets it, cleaues to it, and rushes her self
upon it to iustle it aside: this makes her conclude her self out of measure
woeful by sin, out of measure sinful. And when rebellion begins to be
tamed, the heart grows more and more under fear: Although nothing hinder why
both may not at one time be together. Only in the bad, commonly it
increases, till it have cast out all terror, and so causes the soul to wax
worse for the Laws enlightening, because the sweet of sin has so prevailed,
that with an high hand of rebellion it strengthens the iollity of sin, and so
reuiueth. In the godly, in whom God will use the Law as a seed of regeneration,
and a way to a remedy, the Lord will enlarge terror and conuictions so far,
that rebellion shall not stand it out, but stoop with confusion under the power
of it. Its certain, many perish at this second rock of rebellion, having shot
the gulf of ignorance.

Q. Clear this objection more fully?

A. To this end, first, we must clear the Text. Secondly, Lay down the
objection, and answer it.

First, For clearing, note, That Paul by Sin means, original By himself (I
died) he means the powers of soul and body: these must be well
distinguished. Secondly, observe that Paul compares, Sin and himself in this
point, viz, The time before, and the time after the laws powerful coming by
conviction and terror. Before the coming of it thus, Sin was dead, and Paul
alive. What Is that? Sin was alive in point of her stillness, Peace and
Q^ietnesse without any distemper: why? because either no Law came at all, or
else came not in her power. Again, Paul was alive. What is that? Merry, jolly,
lusty, secure, without any fear. Why? Because there was none to oppose. The
death then of sin ere the Law, was no true death, for still her poizon remained
as the snakes in her cold hole. The life also of Paul was no true life, (for
he was dead in point of misery, a dead carrion to the life of God) but alone
only in the matter or his ^o^lity and lustiness^. Thirdly note, Sinn^s death,
and Paul's li^e caused this deep ^o^^e (...) between them both: I la^, her
quietness and their ^^ll ty made them as c^ose as buckle and thong: for why?
sin was glad to see Paul lusty: and Paul was as glad to ^e^ her quiet. Thus
it was between them ere the Law ^ame. But how since? Oh, quite contrary. Sinner
u ued, Paul dyed. How? Sin, perceiving the Law resolu^d not to give over,
till it had divided her and Paul, (who had so long lived at peace together, and
traded with gain and pleasure each by other) and to scour her house of her
guest, whom she so corrupted (the mind, the will, affections, conscience and
members of Paul, being the creation of GOD,) begins to revive, to be no longer
quiet as before, when her trade prospered: but to fret, rage and be unquiet. On
the other side, Paul also seeing the Law resolved to gaster him out of his
wicked haunt, what does he? dies, is all a-mort, forsakes his old mistress
concupiscence, and begins to be weary of his trade. I cannot open it better
then by a Similitude. There is some lewd huswife in an end way of a Town, that
keeps a base Suckling house: and there be many lewd drunkards, companions
that sucken her. Marks Ere the Constable come, she is still and quiet, vtters
no distaste at all, follows her trade at ease, and puts up her wicked gaynes:
and the more quiet she is, the more merry her guests be, throwing all out at
windows, and so, both consent most inwardly to get her, yea, and perhaps while
this league lasts, although the Officer come, yet at first she keeps her
quiet, and they their iollity, and both outface the Law. But mark: The
Officer comes the second time upon them, and they understand he is fully bent
to execute the Law, to pull down the Alehouse, and to divide the keeper and
the guests from each other: how then? Then the Guests all turn iollity into
fear, they are all a-mort well is he that can betake him first to heels, out
goes one: at one posterne, another at another and leave their hostess! What
does she? Alas, she is the housekeeper, she must bide by it, she has forgone
her trade, therefore she mutters and rages, and gives threatening specches, they
will v^do^ a poor woman, etc. And if she can by any means toll in her flayted
guests, she will, and tells them, She must not be so forsaken, they must stick
to her better then so. Howbe^t the Officer is diligent and tells these guests,
I am resolved to break your knot! ye shall no more r^ut here, it shall cost
ye all ye are worth to your skin, rather, and if there be Law to be h^d, I
will break your meetings. As for this base huswife, she does her kind: I never
look to see her honest* I will wat^h her as well as I can: but a^ for reforming
her, I never look for that: I may bynd her to good behauior, fine and yoke
her, and hold her down as I can: but her ill will I look always to have, and
care not for it, and I know (as she can) she will play her pranks. But as for
you of whom I have more hope, let me persuade ye to refray^e. What comes of
this? The base woman frets still, and malignes the Law: but the guests being
over powerd with authority* leave their trade: and the more the woman rages,
the more they are ashamed* not only by the fear of the Officer, but by the
rebellion of their old hostess they grow more to loa h their old trade. This
for the first, to wit, the clearing of the text.

Q. Now how clear you the doubt?

A E^sily. For what is it against Paul's dying, that Sin reuyu^th? what is it
against the Guests shame and dying to their t^d^, that their old hostess
rages? Rebellion is in her not i^ them: they are shamed and flayted, though she
will know no Law.

Q. ^ understand plainly* but now because the point of sin^ rebellion ^n the
conscience terrified, is somewhat vnusually taught, speak a little of it: show
what it is, and so with a little use conclude all.

A. Thus then we may conceive what this sin-reuiuing in the soul cast down,
means, if we distinguish the sorts of Rebellion in general. Its three fold:
1 Natural or corrupt. Second Penal, and the third, Mixed.

Samson to part with his Delila, as for these to be sundred. Here therefore as
both band in evil: so both do conspire in rebellion against all the laws of
God; all his Knight-Marshals, Constables, and Officers: its as easy to rob a
bear of her whelps, as these of their sinful pleasures: and when any thing
is done by the law against; Oh, what a livery do they give it, and Gods officer
for it? Oh, he comes to make vproare and bring in confusion among neighbors,
that lived before at one, Oh! say they, its pity that ever such were suffered,
to break the love and liking that was before! Oh, how they combine to cast him
out, that they might roll back to their old mire! the Minister is to such as
the Marshall in London is to harlots! an ey-sore, a reproach, and common
wonderment! Their gain, their sweet trade, their shrines for Diana are
stopped: therefore now they cry out more then ever, Great is Diana: their
drinking, their lusts, pride and covetousness, were never so sweet to them, as
now the opposition of the Word makes them. The good, and holy law of God, makes
them worse and worse, they rush their crazy souls against the pillar of Gods
truth, and split themselves at it, and become more out of measure sinful.

This is the first rebellion in the vnconuinced: the most ordinary and common
rebellion to be seen now a days, where the Word comes powerfully upon
ignorant consciences, snorting in profaneness. This is not here meant.

The second is Penal, a fruit of this, only increased by the just wrath of
God upon the former rebels: whose chains Lord makes stronger, Esa. 28.22. by
how much the more they kick against the pricks: I say, when the Lord penally
smites them, and suffers them to increase and fulfill the measure of their
lusts, to grow frozen in these dregs, desperate in their lusts: to scorn,
pursue, deface the means, and wax impenitent in their rebellion, so that they
find no place of repenting. See these texts, Mat. 23.32, 34, Act. 41.13. Act.
28.27, and the like: neither is this meant here.

The third is Mixed: When rebellion is allayed with terror

Q. The chieft doubt remaining, is: How a troubled Conscience privy to much
reviving of corruption, may discern, that it comes not from her self, but
from sin?

A. This may be discerned easily by many marks.

First, from the work of the law that has separated her

Secondly, It will appear by this, that rebellion must that cannot be
conscience, nor her self, because she is convinced by an ouerruling Law,
which has killed her freedom.

Act. 25.19. When Demetrius made an uproar against Paul, the Jews also took
occasion to oppose him: but how? Demetrius looked at his gains: and if he
might have them, he was quiet: he oppozed not Paul in his preaching. But the
Jews looked at Paul, as Paul a Preacher of Christ, and in no by-respect. So
here, when the conscience lies in chains and rebels not, sin has lost her
agent: therefore she only looks at her self, and at her trade: if she might
be as she desires, all were well. But when the soul and she consented, they
both oppozed the Law, as the Law; not only by a muttering within of secret
selfeloue: Ponder this.



Q. New finish with some uses what are they?

A. Many there are. But I will only name the less principal, and urge the
scope of the maine.

Job Job. 17 14.
speaks of his flesh, and the worms) even two sisters. As Simeon and Leui
sworn brethren. The cursed prankes which they pla^d in Shechem are not-so
odious, as those which sin and Conscience did in secret, ere the Law came.
They are not to be named. Oh, that the thought of such cheats would gaster men!
making them say, My soul, come no more into her counsel and consent! How much
better is the laws little ease, then such liberty of hell?

Secondly, Let this teach Gods Ministers of the Law to

Thirdly, it confutes the worlds aspsieron upon the powerful 2 Samuel ^0, 21.
I remember Ioabs speech to the woman of Abel, who accused him for robbing the
city of her inhabitants: no (says he) no such thing, God forbid: only there
is one Sheba a traitor here, and if ye cast his head over the walls, lo, I
leave all the rest to their liberty! Oh, that our Apology for our innocence
might speed no worse then his?

Beware all such as nourish rebellion against the least in the Law, and say ^ts
holy: I am the slave that is sold under sin. There is nothing more common
now-a-daies, then to sight against the officer of God his holy Law. We know
that it is compted a pore vantage to strike a Constable such are feign to pay
sweetly for it. Take heed the Lord leave not the natural rebellion to penal,
which would feign relent and yet cannot.



Mean while, let all such comfort themselves in these rebellions of sins: they
are marks of good, signs of the battering of Satan's and sins kingdom! Sin
would never so rage, if she were at as good peace as formerly! Beware of
clozing the second time with this harlot. Beseech the Lord to nourish terror
though it be not grace, yet a seed of it: pray him rather for a time to quash
rebellion, then to suffer rebellion to destroy it. And be of good cheer, the
Lord does all this for good. When he has cooled and rooted out rebellion, he
will after a while root out terror also, and in due time, bring thy soul out
of all her adversity, turning both into a sight of the promise, and hope of the
remedy: only now he is laying the first stone of the building: be patient and
he who begun, shall also perfect. And this may serve for this doctrine.

Q. Now the doubt is taken away, proceed to the general use of the former
point of terror.

A. First, it may teach us to esteem duly of sin, according to her foul
nature. For must it not be a foul odious thing which should bring in such
confuzion, as to turn that Law of God which was given for comfort of
conscience and rule of life, to become the greatest terror, and matter of
vexation? Who looks upon the Officer with fear, save a malefactor? Let us
tremble to think what a disorder sin has brought in!

Q. To conclude then this last Article: What is the use of this second branch?

A. The first use heerof is, to discover what sin is in her kind, when she
may act her self upon her own stage of ignorance. She is an hidious monster.
If that phrase of Paul (I was alive ere the Law came) were understood, it would
help us to know it. When Ezekiel was led to see those Jews in their privy
houses of Idols, Tammuz and the like, he was astonished to see: Should not we
be so if we saw a blind idiot in his kind? He is alive. That is, as the wise
man says of the fool, He casts firebrands and arrows, and says Am, not I
in sport? The life of sin is not only the committing it, (for so it may be in
stealth) but when he is at liberty to it, none to control him: when he may
lie, cog and swear, be drunken, unclean, leading others with him to Hell, and
none say, What do thou? This is the crown, the life, the iollity of a
sinner, to play his parts without rebuke, or remorse. Ease, quiet, and security
in evil, is Satan's kingdom, both while he can bar out all light of the Law
from the soul: and when he can bar out the soul from it. Then he plays
Rex in the soul, and keeps the house shut, holds possession in peace, The
coming of the Law into such a conscience is, as the approach of a Sheriff
with a writ of Eiectio firmae: to drive a man quite out of his possession. And
if we lived in place where, to see the woeful revel and riot which the Devil
keeps in men, who are alive in their sin, it might be a sight little better
then hell. And although the Word reformes not all where it is, yet if it bound
not men from that bold ioility in sin, there would be no living in a Common
wealth.

Iehoiakin Ier. vlt. vlt. because he was content to give up himself to
bondage, the Lord long after lifted him out and made him a Prince: so the way
which the Lord takes with a sinner to lift up his head, is to cast him into
this thraldom, Therefore I say, apply all these six points home to thy heart,
that the next part may prevail the better, when this has gone as far as she
can. To none but to left ones (not in a wood or a Labyrith) but in this legal
conviction; to none but to desolate ones, forlorn, fatherless, stripped, and
cut off from God and hope, plunged into utter self despair, can this next
part of the Catechiseme bring comfort. Not for any worthiness in it, but because
a secure heart resting in her peace and security, cannot savor it. Abhor
then first to stand out in Rebellion: put up thy weapons, and fight not against
God, whose naked arm is against thee. Abhor secondly a dead, blockish,
sensual heart, not affected or moved with this voice: ask thy soul, If the
Cedars and hills shall tremble and melt, Esaias. 64.1. and thy hard heart shall
stand still insensible? Abhor thirdly, a presumptuous heart, which having
heard of some hope, abuses it to forestall the Lords work, and says, Deuteronomy.
29. yet I shall have peace. The wrath of the Lord shall smoke against such.
Abhor fourthly, all means of Satan, which might turn off quite, or dash and
quench this work. Yield not to the impossibility of recovery, run not into
despair, take not thought for thy sweet sin, God will make thee no loozer:
dispute not against the hardness of yielding, the length of it, the fear of
destroying thy self, or that God will never restore thee. Let not melanch^ly
su^prize thee, and beso^ thee: especially beware lest the Re^urre of thy ^usts
and the Devils cream in a Lordly dish do not snare the^ to run out of GODS
blessing into thy old warm sun, after three or four years, to thy old
drunkenness, riot, Alehouse companions, ill counsel, former lusts: sculke not
into corners, to ease thy self of this yoke: let God that put it on, hold it
on his time* t^l he have truly tamed thee: ^f it seem long, know there is
cause. But to be weary of God, and to shake off his yoke in cool blood, is to
cast him off quite nd clean: he will put on a yoke of iron upon such: Let, I
say, this be admonition against what-euer might cross this work. Let it teach
us to pity the loose and ^olly in sin. Oh! Ans. Such as subtly seek to escape
this net, except God let them go quite, shall be most hampered. And yet we
tie not the LORD to one measure of dealing; many under constant means have
waded more easily through this gulf, and Lydia and Zachee were not so deeply
wounded: because the LORD meant to make shorter work: but under ordinary
means, the LORD more or less holds his course. I end therefore thus with
exhortation. Bury not the work of this Spirit under these clods of flesh:
streighten not this spirit of conviction. Beg of God, that by all these s^xe
stayres thou may fall lower and lower, till thou art brought to the Earth.
Here is no place for freewill, for ciuility, or the Religion of a Pharise in
alms, mercy to the poor, good nature, good duties: all these lands vanish in
Gods Map of misery, when God is pulling the conscience upon her knees. Happy
thou, if when the Law seems to have done working in the world, it begins to
slay thee: so that by all these six steps, as Eutychus from the Loft, thou
may be taken up as dead. Ask of thy self, When, LORD, shall my laughter,
light, frothy, merry, quiet heart be met with thoroughly? Not to say only, True
it is there is small cause any of us should be proud (for so thou may, and be
as proud still) but to meet with the Bear and Lion indeed, and be afraid of
devouring, There is difference between a face chalked over, and the palenesse
of one that has lain under a quartan a tweluemoneth. Lie under this work, and
suffer affliction: say, I see the LORD is in earnest, Hell is no painted fire,
the ease of a sinful course differs from that little-ease of the Law: I am in
a straight, I know not whither to turn me! No wealth, friends, credit,
marriage, honor, eating, sleep, play or Music can help^ now. Away now all
old companions: the Lord has laid sorrow upon my, soul, such as no tales or
Iigs can put by: my meat is now mingled with Gall: and GOD seems to forsake
me: wrath, Hell and horror are upon me, my nights are wearisome, my days
miserable. As one in a Forest lost, sees twenty deaths before him, by
wildring, by thirst, by wild beasts, but no escape: so do I fare, not knowing
what weapon conscience will use to devour me. Choose rather to be thus for the
killing of thy flesh, then at liberty to the death of thy soul. And wayt in
this estate upon GOD, till he cause light to break out: which in a word I will
add in the next Question, and so end this part.

Q. But what is this toward conversion?

A. True: If God should so leave the soul. But here mark the connection of
this to the second part following. The Lord, where he means to save, keeps
not the soul always in this anguish, but causes some upholding of his secret
spirit to keep up the soul of him whom he will save, from utter extremity.
This he does, by showing of them a door of hope in the wilderness, as he says
in Hosee. 2.15. causing some glimpse a far off to appear to them, as a
cr^uis of light in a prison-wall: as to consider that GOD has had a gracious
meaning to 1000s whom he has thus humbled, that by Hell lies the way to
Heaven, that GOD delights not in this course, if the Rebellion of the heart did
not require it, that GOD does that which the soul shall not know till after,
he means, to make CHRIST sweet, precious and welcome, not as Honey to a full
Laodicean stomach, he begin to lay some ground of mortification, which in the
due time the Gospel shall perfect. See that in the 10. of Ezra the second
verse, There is hope concerning this thing: also Iona. 3.9. Who can tell
whether GOD will repent? So in Acts. 2. How were those murderers of Christ
stayed by that the Apostles told them? And yet* they had not felt the promise:
But by such glimpse of the Gospel, which GOD requires to be joined with the
Law, the LORD keeps his from revolt to old base lusts (whatsoever come of
them) from a despair of mercy, and undoing themselves, or from a careless
dissolutenes which end goes forward. And having so vpheld them by the chin
from sinking for a time, he does let in light by such degrees as he sees them
meetest to bear, and to keep them low from waxing bold and venterous: till at
length he settle them upon his promise, as in the next part shall appear.

Q. I partly conceive you: howbeit this cloze of the first part, being
weighty, open it a little, and first, what reasons are there, why GOD uses
this method?

A. First, to keep the soul from extremityes of presuming or despayring (of
which see in Article six) both being dangerous rocks, the one separating the
means from the end, running to their old liberties, and yet hoping to fare
well: the other separating the and from the means, after all their humblings
yet thinking there is no mercy for them. See Ier. 2.25. the Lord by this light
at a creuis holds up the soul from both.



Esaias 63.9.
he gives them a little at once: in the former showing himself a pitiful
God, who delights not in the misery of any poor soul, under his lode; or to
add sorrow; in the latter, a wise GOD, to feed with a few crummes, when
morsels will not go down, and to refresh with drops, when draughts cannot be
digested.

Numb. 14.15.
Moses tells the Lord, If he should leave his people in the Wilderness, the
Nations would say, Because he could not bring them into Canaan, he left them
there, So, this is a strong cause.

And lastly, by this hope he shows them, that he is as able to give them his
full promise, and the effect thereof, sound peace, as he can stay them up from
sinking, when they are at so low an ebb of casting down. Not to speak of the
method that God takes with his, to begin early to reveal himself to them, in
his smaller providence and susteinings, that they may learn to trust him the
better, for ever after, even in the greatest.

Q. By what means does he work it?

Ezra. 10.2. read the place.
A. By presenting to them duly the sight of a possibility to get out of their
terror. That he deals not in Afflicting his, as with the wicked. Esaias 27.7.8.
Did he affl^ct them, as those who afflict^d them? He will do it in measure.
That he abhorres excess in his terrors, Esaias 64.12. Will thou refrain thy
self, and hold thy peace still, and afflict us very sore? So chap. 63.15.
Where are thy rollings, are they quite restrained? Psalm. 44.22, 23. Will thou
always be angry? Forget to show mercy? No, he answers himself, Esaias 57.16. I
will not contend for ever, nor be always wroth: for the Spirit should fail
before me, and the souls which I have made. That he bars none from him, who
bar not themselves, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. That there is a necessity of afflicting
them with such tedious terrors, or else he delights not in it: Read Esaias 57.17,
18. For the iniquity of his covetousness, I smote him the went on frowardly in
the way of his heart (viz. till then:) I have seen his ways, and I will heal
him, etc. That he has not done this to destroy but to humble: for alas! Esaias
27.3.4.
if he meant so, What are the bushes to his consuming fire?

And all these he does cause them to digest and stay themselves by, and fasten
upon in more or less measure, to keep them from extremity: causing terror to
decrease, and hope to succeed, as we see in his course with Job, as tedious as
it was, Job 32.40. in sending Elihu, and chap. 40.1, 2, 3. in speaking
himself: for the proportion, both do agree.

Q. I^ this hope, grace, or can any such be said to believe it?

A. No, hope is the fruit of faith: this hope goes before faith. Yet it is
such as the Lord enableth to uphold them between the horrors of the Law, and
the grace of the Gospel: the LORD being as truly in his way with them, whom
he will bring home, even in the first seed, and beginning, as in the
perfitings thereof, if we knew assuredly who they were, See Acts 15.18.

Q. What are the marks of this hope?

A. Such as these.

First, In the entrance it is very weak and staggering, between Jonas 3.9,
Who can tell? Its a great hazard. Only (as it is in Gold-weights, the least
straw will cast them) so here it is, especially when the hand of God casts it
into the balance of the thoughts.

Ninevites, being so put to for forty days, would not have prevented so
general an horror and calamity, by destroying themselves? But God supported
them in secret.

Who knows whether he will assuage anger, and show mercy for all this?

Hab. 3.16. Rottenness entered, that I might have peace. As Hagar, when she
saw the fountain a far off, ended her anguish. Every creature is naturally
weary of trouble by mere time: but a soul under GODS hand, is not weary till
GOD enclines it.

Mark Iona. 3.9. Job 3.26.
if GOD should show mercy? Oh, this is great news to one that was so
oppressed: As Job says, When I look for ease, lo, trouble is present? And the
Church, Lam. 3.17. Thou have removed me far from prosperity: Oh, now
therefore to swither up with thoughts of welfare, is a great change.



Q. What uses are to be made of this Doctrine?

A. First, instruction to GODS Ministers, to discer^e wisely of the season of
staying the troubled heart. For else they may spend much labor in vain. It
fares with an heavy heart, as with the bleeding wound, and the deep humor of
Melancholy: while the dint is, they refuse plaster and counsel. Jobs Job 2.13.
friends sat seven days and seven nights by him, and said nothing, because
they saw the grief was great. And again, when they see the season come, let
them ply GOD his fittest Medicines, as Esaias 50.4. A word in season is as Apples
of Gold.

Secondly, reproof.

First, Of many people, who make their chains heavier they looked not after
it, Exodus 6.9. This is a sullen heart, to make prison to become liberty, and
our meat to be as gall by ill custom, or a Melancholique Spirit: the LORD
delights not in it.

Secondly, All such as, because they cannot feel so strong comforts as they
fancy, therefore quarrel with God, and reject such as he offers them. No, let
not God be tempted by thy frowardness, when he seeks to try thy humilitie^
All Gods people are little ones, Zachees: little things are welcome to them,
till greater come, and every somewhat has some savor with them. They who are
less then any, the least blessing, count each little great, as a pledge of
better to come, they despise it not, because there is a blessing in it. And let
them not grieve Gods Ministers, in slighting of Counsel: but count it a great
privilege: for how many poor souls perish for lack of Counsel, Hos. 4.6?
and lay violent hands upon themselves, which rarely falls out where any
Counselors be. Oh, be base, and vile in thine own eyes, think it a mercy
that thou may tread upon the earth (so the Publican thought, Luke 18.13.) but
the honor of an Angel (for so it is, 1 Pet. 1.12.) to hear one Sermon of
Christ.



Prou. 9.12. Get Abraham's wisdom, Genesis 2^.13. Who al^hough Isaac had the
knife at his throat, yet had an ear to hear the Angel, and an eye to see
the Ram caught in the bush, in stead of his son. So be you apprehensive of
the least sound or syllable of hope: and dispute for God and thy own soul, as
the prizoner at the bar for his life. Seek out, and be wise for thy self,
that is true Wisdom. Prou. 1.32. Catch at a Word from GOD, for so do
Captives, and fearful ones, 1. King. 20.32. and such as fear drowning fasten
upon a rotten reed.

Secondly, Although your hope be small, yet because your straight is great,
consider whether it be not better to venture upon uncertain hope, then upon
assured woe.

Thy case is as the Lepers, 2 King. 7.4. If we sit here, we dye: if we go
into the Camp of Aram, we may dye, but perhaps we may live: Howsoever, we
are but dead men. And so they ventured, and the Lord was with their Resolution.
Do thou so in the strength of GOD and prosper.

Wait upon the LORD, and let there be no creuis of light, but thou may spy
it. For as the LORD would have loose hearts to be beaten from their holds, so
he studies how to speak to a fainting heart, lest it fail, as I noted out of
Esaias 57.18. GOD has comfort for thee and thy mourners: yea for them a far
off, as well as the near, if thou seek not thy own ends.

Lastly, to include all in one, let the last use be to such, that they suffer
not bondage to swallow them up in their legal sorrow: that they think not
their Hell, and Heaven by custom, but as speedily as they can, get out at this
privy door, blessing GOD for such a mitigation of misery, that in the
discharge of the duties of their places, they might attend upon the further
Work of GOD, abhorring to think themselves well, because the Law has them
under bondage, till the Gospel have comforted them. Of which in the second
Part following.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE Catechism.
The Text, Titus 3.4, 5, 6, etc. But after that the kindness and love of God
our Savior toward man appeared: Not by works of righteousness, which we had
done, but according to his mercy be saved us, through the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: Which he shed on ^s abundantly
by Jesus Christ our Savior.


Question. THE connection of this being opened before, what does this text
contain?

A. A clear view of the doctrine of the second Part of the Catechism, I
mean, of the deliverance of a sinner, from this misery, together with the use
of it to all that want it.

Q. Open the parts thereof more fully?

A. Generally the scope is, to oppose deliverance to misery, as appears by the
aduerbe (but) q. d. Thus indeed it was with us by our own deseruings, and Gods
Justice: but yet the Lord could not find in his heart to let us lie thus in our
woeful shiftlesse estate: but when he ^aw none to save, himself saved us, as
a man seeing a perishing creature in a ditch, and ready to despair for lack
of present help, himself stepped forth to help it out: (he of duty, the Lord
of mere goodness) but thus he did, found out a way to set man upon dry land
again, out of the gulf and depth of misery, so that the one was not so
hidious, as this is precious and gracious.

Q. More particularly, what do they contain?

A. A sweet view of the chief parts of this Redemption. First, the first
hidden and secret eternal Workman of this deliverance, and that is God the
Father. In whose bosom this depth lay before all worlds, who foreseeing this
ruin and his endless Justice against sin, yet purpozed not to abandon all
grace out of his heart toward desolate man, but to retain some still in the
bottom of his wisdom and good pleasure. And note, that this appeared not at
first, yet it was there then, and appeared after. This is the cause, why GOD
the Father is here called our Savior, and why he is said to Save us, in ver.
5. viz. as in 2 Cor: 5.17. he is said to Reconcile us: not by meriting it, but
by first and original ordaining it as the first agent in the working of the
Trinity, the deuizer of this Salvation, and of the Lord Jesus the meriter of
it. Now mark, this act of God is described by a double argument.

Kindness, Love, Mercy. Whereof the latter interprets the former Kindness and
Love, noting the remainder of that Goodness of Creation, as if the Apostle
should say, The sin of man could not root out this goodness so, as to take it
from God, but still he had a bottomless goodness and kindness left in
himself. But the third word (Mercy) add^ to them both, q. d. The Lord imparted
himself to Adam, in this goodness of his, ere he was fallen, but he showed
him no mercy, for he needed none. But being become miserable; Lo, he adds
mercy to goodness, and enlarges his first kindness and love by a second
compassion and pity, respecting him now in his blood and misery, in which he
exceeds the former as much as the Sun at noonetyde does the rizing: mercy being
the perfection of love.

The second argument is from the denial of contraries, Not by works of
righteousness, etc. The sum is, this eternal mercy was free in the conception
of it. The LORD foresaw not who should in time embrace this mercy, nor left it
in a middle doubtful uncertainty who should and who not, suspending his
pleasure upon man's will, but he did out of the freedom of grace and mercy
(when as yet no good in us was foreseen, much less actual) when no natural
or supernatural goodness was to be seen in us: even then he saved us,
because he would so do.

Q. What is the second branch of this description?

A. The inst^umentall meriting cause of this salvation set forth in those
words: when this love appeared: and again, verse. 6 Which he shed abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Note the sweet phrase which Paul delights in,
to style both the Father and Christ our Saviors, the latter flowing from the
former. Now, in this point, note, first he says, It appeared. As we see the
like word Chapter second verse 11. The sum is, whereas it had bin impossible
for man or Angel ever to have diued into the depth of this mercy; Lo, the Lord
caused it to appear in the fulness of time, and brake open this sealed
fountain of his bosom, by the manifesting thereof in his Son: for no man at
any time has seen the Father, but the only begotten Son of GOD coming out
of his bosom, has revealed him.

And which is this Appearer, who made mercy appear in himself? Jesus Christ
our Savior. It must be so, that howsoever mercy was hid in the Father, yet
it could not appear but by Jesus our Savior: he truly God and man in obeying
and suffering, must bring justice to kiss this mercy by appeasing that
infinite anger of the Father for sin, and performing such a righteousness for
man, as might afford: a sufficient satisfaction to GOD in his uttermost
justice: Christ, and none else could thus do or suffer, none else may satisfy,
he himself without all this, both obedience and blood could not do it: none
of his love, or prayers or poverty, but Jesus our Savior in this his full
payment, as a surety and a Sacrifice of blood could, save us?

Q. All this is evident: but what else adds the Apostle to make us this
description of deliverance.

A. The third point is the object upon whom this blessing is bestowed,
intimated in these words, Toward (man) and save (us) and shed on (us), etc. By
which as he implies that Man in his misery, the self same man that fell from
God to hell, was the object of mercy: so, the Number of all those to whom the
Lord does sauingly appear in this mercy of his election in Christ are the full
object of mercy, and all that mercy can bestow. The Church of Christ is she, who
is the sole and equal object of Christ: all he did and suffered, was, not for
the reprobate, Ephe. 5.
but the Elect: these he redeemed, gave him self for, that he might make them
a peculiar spouse to himself without spot or wrinkle, as he says to the
Ephesians in plainer terms?

Q. And what are those excellent things which JESUS our Savior has purchased?
does this Text mention them.

A. Yea, very fully: and that both in general and special. For the first, he
says he saved us. Which is as if he had said, he restored and set us in as
good an estate as we lost, and quit us as fully of all our misery, as ever old
Adam did plunge us into it. If he lost us, Christ saved us: if he betrayed us
to bondage, He redeemed us: if he brought us to utter hatred, He reconciled us:
if he condemned us, Christ forgave us: he did deliver us (in a word) from all
sin and curse, and laid a plaster on us, full as broad as the sore. Romans 5.
Yet this must be added, that Not as the offense is, so is the gift. For in
Adam we were so made the Image of GOD, that we lost it presently: but the
second Adam so saved us, pardoned and reconciled us, as never to be lost, never
to be cursed, never condemned the second time.

And more yet, Adam was not created to any happiness save immortality upon
earth, in a created righteousness: We to an uncreated Union and Communion with
God in Heaven, in the presence of God. This in general. More particularly the
words here are three, Saved us, Regenerated us, Renewed us. By the first of
them, understand the negative part of this deliverance, viz. from what he freed
us: Sin, Law, Satan, Wrath, Death, Judgment. By the latter two, the positive
good things purchased us. First, by Regeneration and Renewing, he means all
those graces, which concern our estate in the grace of Justification, standing
in somewhat cut of our selves, the imputation of the righteousness of our Lord
Jesus, remoouing our guilt, and bestowing on us pardon, acceptance to favor,
and right to eternal life, as adopted heirs thereof. And in this respect we
are regenerated and borne again, by reconciliation. Secondly, by the estate of
grace in somewhat within us, which is the Inherency of that Image of Christ,
infuzed into us, and abiding in our nature, soul and body, and all the powers
and faculties of both: purging out and killing old evils, and planting good
anew in the stead thereof. In both these stands the new creature, renewed in
Christ, to true righteousness and holiness in this World, and hereafter, to
the glorious image of God in perfection. And this latter concerns our
Renouation.

Q. Does the Text mention any more?

A. Yea, the instruments of applying these good things to us: And that both
outward, and inward.

Outward, the Word and Sacraments. He names not the Word, but yet includes
it. For a seal is nothing without a covenant. He means the^, that by the word
of truth, the Covenant of Grace, offering us to be reconciled to God, preached
freely, generally, without exception (to such as need it) to all sorts, ages,
sexes, conditions, the Lord (as by an external ordinance) does apply and
convey these good things of Jesus Christ to his elect. And then having so done,
he seals up and assures them, by the answerable seal of Baptism.

Then, the inward instrument of application, (without which the outward is
barren) is the work of the Spirit of regeneration, which attends the Word and
Baptism* and washes the soul by the power thereof, even the Spirit of
Christ. To the which end, this Spirit does engender the grace of faith in the
soul, for the apprehending of our part, in our particular Salvation and
Regeneration: Which grace of faith, although it be not here named, yet is
implied sufficiently in this work of the Spirit. For there is no other way for
the Spirit, to settle these benefits upon us, but faith only, as in the
Articles following shall appear. And thus we see how the Apostle does in this
text most pithily contriue the chief heads of this Part, as in the Articles
following appears.

The Articles of the Second Part.
Q. What is the first Article in this Second Part?

A. That there is a Deliverance, ordained and granted to miserable man out of
this his thraldom. As the matter of Adams creation lay before the Lord, at his
free choice whether to create it, or not: so the object of Redemption (fallen
man) lay at the Lords courtezie, whether or no he would deliver him. If man had
been wholly left to himself, his mends had been in his own hands. in all
outward miseries its otherwise: a man may be lost in a forest and perish:
pursued by enemies, assaulted by diseases, oppressed by death, and perish,
without help. Here not so: misery was the furthest from meriting, but not
occasioning mercy: the Lord freely out of mere mercy, beheld misery, and when
there was none to save, he himself did, yea, used this ruin as a mean of
declaring himself to man, the author of a far more excellent estate then he
lost by his fall. And this purpoze of God the Father to permit the fall, that
he might work his own ends thereby, viz. the setting forth of the riches and
treasure of his grace of election in Christ, by the means of calling and the
Gospel, is that which the Holy Ghost does make the object of the admiration
and astonishment of men and Angels: Who pry into this mystery, as the Cherubins
into the Mercy seat.

So that first note, In the most woeful mine of man, there is a deliverance.
See these texts, Ephesians. ^.1. 1 Thessalonians. 1. vlt. Luke 1.74. Esaias. 63.5.

And secondly, its appointed by the Lord out of the unsearchable treasure of
his wisdom, using it as a mean to declare himself to his Church in all
those excellencies of his attributes, especially the conjunction of mercy and
justice, which in the creation could not appear. See Col. 1.27.28. Ephesians. 2.10.

Q. What use may be made hereof?

A. Singular use, and that many ways, first,

To stay the heart of a distressed wretch in the sight of his misery, by this
light and door of hope: Although far from believing it, yet by hope to
sustain it self by from utter sinking. Oh, bless that fountain which could
not be dried up by sin! rather occasioned it self to mercy by misery.
Wonder why Angels were left remediless, not we! Ponder it in our deep
fears, and remember the Gospel of deliverance is from God as well as the Law
of terror: despair not, the Lord cuts off none, who cut not off themselves.

Secondly, let it teach us to gather to our selves a deeper mercy in store?
dare thou call him an hard Master or adversary, who of his own will and love
cut off his own plea, and devised a delivery, when no man or Angel could
dream of it? Is he like to reject a poor soul, who has laid the foundation
of his grace in such a foundation as Emanuel?





Q What else does this Article contain?

A. Besides this, that God has not left man to sink in his own misery, but
has in his deep wisdom found out the way of his deliverance: this Article
aims at a further end, viz. to make God the Father, the most free and
sovereign worker and applyer of this deliverance to the soul. For what else
should it profit us that he has devised such a way as Christ and such means
as the Gospel believed: except he took it upon him to possess the soul of
it also? And the Holy Ghost is frequent in Scripture, to prove GOD the Father
to be the only free agent in this work: calling him the begetter of us, of
his own free will: Iam. 1.17. Phil. 2.13 Heb. 10.23
the worker of both will and deed in us of his own good pleasure: the
faithful beginner and finisher of his own work. Especially that it is
neither of the willer or runner: Rom 9.16. Ioh. 6.44.
but merely of his mercy that we be called effectually. No man can come to
Christ, except God draw him. God is as sovereign in his applying, as in the
finding out of this way. And why? Surely, because as in the way, so in the
working the soul to it, he seeks his own glory, and the deep riches of his
grace to be magnified, and himself to be adored in the joint meeting of his
justice, mercy, power and truth in one: that through JESUS CHRIST praise may be
given to GOD the Father: and that as all things are from him, Col. 3.17.
and by him, Romans 11.36
so they all may be to him and to the praise of his glory.

This point well weighed, would lead us as by a thread through each branch or
Article of this second part, with light and savor: when we conceive the Lord
Jesus himself only as a Servant of this sovereign will of GOD: who is
therefore called Gods Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3.
read 2 Cor. 3. vlt. when we conceive the offer of Grace his; the benefits
offered* his: yea and not only faith, but also the conditions of it, an humble
and hungring soul, his gift, his preparations: and so, throughout all this
second part, look upon GOD as that free principle, in whose mere will it is
to enlarge or restreine the heart of a man, as he sees good. A point of
special consequence, and properly belonging to this place 2 Cor 5.17.18. he
being at the root of all, and being in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing the sins, till which great work be effected, this
deliverance is not effected in us. And therefore Psalm. 32.1. the Lord is said
to impute no sin, and 2 Cor, 5.21. to make us his righteousness.

And, although I refer the point of Imputation to the second Article of Christ,
(as presupposing his merit of necessity) yet for the Worker, its properly a
consequent of this Article, God doing all his works perfectly: and as I said,
freely for the attaining of his own ends in us, that he who boasts, might
boast of the Lord.

Q Does this point tend to any use?

A. Yea, and that such, as I wish every good hearer and reader of the points
following, to lay it to heart.

For first, this will teach us to conceive in what sense the Lord does offer us
his Christ, command us to believe, and promise to ease us if we hunger, mourn,
be poor in spirit: To wit, that he is far from intimating any power or will
in us, to concur with him in any the least of these, or to ascribe ought to
him that wills or runs. But rather to show what those excellent graces
are, which he freely works in all whom he will save. He for his honor
sake, will effect all these means in whomsoever he has appointed to the end
it self of Redemption. Sweet is that place, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10. That he may be
admired in all such as believe, because they have received our word in that
day. He says not that al they may be admired who have themselves believed: but
he admired in them. For what? Surely not for their working grace in themselves,
but for the works sake of God that has wrought it.

Secondly, this will help us to judge, who those parties are, in all
likelihood, whom God will concur with and assist in the use of means tending
to deliverance. Such is the base slavery of man, that he distrusts him sooner
in no one thing, than in that wherein God offers himself to the soul. As in
Manoa's example and Gedeons appears, Judge. 13.22, and 6.13. Oh, says a
fearful heart, God is free, and need not work, save where he list, and
therefore he is bound to none, and I fear he will work in 100. ere he work
in me! Oh, poor wretch? has he not showed his will, in whom he will work?
Even in those that seek his end more then their own in the use of means. If
thou knowing what God only aims at in all his Redemption, viz. the glory of
his rich grace, and all his holy Attributes (and not at thine or my salvation
for our ends) shall yet go to work here thine own way, then know, God never
did, or will cross his own ends, nor bless any such as set up other ends of
their own against, with, or above his. But this follows soundly; That all
such as in means using, do fix their eye upon Gods purpose, and abase
themselves in the sight of their own silliness, to reach such a thing as
deliverance is; and adore his free sovereign working, as the only able
effecter hereof: all such I say, as thus work with God, and under God, may
know that the Lord will assist them: for why? he assists and seconds his own
way in them who seek his glory above their own salvation.

And although he be so free, that he is tied to none, yet I say (with
reverence) he ties himself graciously to such as do seek him, not
themselves, for else should he contradict his own ends, which is blasphemous.
And this point I desire to be marked. For whosoever they are who will not see this
truth of Gods free working for his own glorious ends: I affirm its
unavoidable, but either they must most murmuringly and repiningly reject the
way of God to Heaven, as contrary to flesh, (which is the greatest sign of a
castaway) or else mix themselves their wits, wisdom, policy, and devices in
the getting of heaven, with Gods grace and mercy and so make Christ only a
Stalking horse to their own parts, and to serve themselves.

Thirdly, this point does most lively instruct us how we may so go to work
in the use of means, as our own Conscience may not accuse us, for taking Gods
office of freedom and souereignty out of his hands. It troubles many (to
instance in one particular) how they should so go to work in hearing,
praying, and Sacraments, for the attayning of the Condition of faith, that is
mourning and hunger, etc. that they might not seek faith upon their own
terms, They see the Word full of promises of ease and comfort, to such as do
mourn: and they would gladly seek Heaven in Gods way* only they cannot see
how a condition to faith can be urged of us, without our own labor and will
be accessory (which if it be, what does our doctrine of the condition differ
from Popery, and her dispsitions?) I answer, The reason of this darkness is,
because men cannot be beaten from this, that in seeking these conditions, they
must seek, first their own good and welfare! This is the maine aim of most
hearers, if they have faith, they are sure to escape hell: and if they have the
conditions of faith wrought, faith will follow: hence the condition is so laid
at by people: eu^n as men covet money for wares, for their use. But poor soul!
tell me if this be thy aim, wherein differest thou from a drunkard or swearer?
Is any man so forlorn, as not to desire to dye the death of the righteous?

Oh (say men) but drunkards use not the means, and we do?

I answer, Yes, (now all sorts use means, none are so vile, but they will be
religious) but I will grant thee it. Is the question whether thou be less ill
then such, or whether thy aim be sound in seeking the condition or no! If so,
then I say, thou in aiming finally that it may go well with thee, differs not
in kind from such an one! No, the honest soul sets up God in his own way of
Christ, in his own ends, the glory of all his attributes (that he may be
admired in working faith in such a wretch) the freedom of his working, that in
all these her own thoughts, affections and zeal, might stink as Peter's nets
did, (when Christ so strangely had fished for him) and the truth is, her scope
is as much to abhor her self, and look into an higher cause, as thine is to
get Heaven for thy self. She seeks the glory of His wisdom, power, mercy and
freedom; who sought out such a deliverance, works it in her, and all that
concern it, faith and the conditions of it: the thought of the Asses is turned
to the thought for the Son: she sees that divine purity and excellency in
being Gods instrument to these ends, that she looses her self, and all in the
meditation thereof, and suffers the Lord to save her, while her soul is set to
adore him in his own ends, as most precious. And setting this aim aside, her
seeking the condition of faith, is but as a moral work with her, savoring of
her self.

Some will allege, Do ye think every weak beginner to be so holy as to
prefer Gods glory to his own Salvation?

I answer, No, not all, but I take them to be in forwardness to it, and not
far from it. And secondly I say, its one thing to ask such a question of a
weak beginner (who would perhaps stagger at it) another thing to say what God
works in such a one, although he know it not! For sure it is, such is Gods
work in his, as to convince them by experience, that all seeking of grace, for
a man's own happiness, is poor seeking (for the present, till God work
better) and all seeking for self must be from self and by self. But when the
boat is tied to the ship of Gods glory, she needs no more rowing of herself,
then the boat does: its enough for her, that she is set upon such a stream,
and tied to such a ship, as can carry her of it self, and drown all her own
welfare in the Lord. Sweet was that speech of honest Mophibosheth of Zilha:
Yea, let him take all, 2. Sam. 13.30.
forasmuch as my Lord the King is come home in peace: The loss of his own
lands was forgot in David's happiness. The greater pity that he should so
requite an innocent: but howeuer he fared at David's hands, do thou so, and try
if the Lord can fail thee! Oh, say thus, Lord so far am I from seeking the
condition of faith, for faith and my self, that I desire to say, If Lord thou
see that a broken heart, mourning, brokennesse, poverty of spirit yea, faith it
self may tend to the glory of the working them in me: Oh, work them! E^se,
Lord, what joy should I find in them as they come from my self? What were
Heaven it self, if it were not to glorify thee there! Lord, I would desire to
have none, rather then in having all to want an heart to admire thee in thy
ways of mercy and truth, or cease to be ravished with the sight of thy glory!
For without this, its impossible but either I must mix my stuff with thinee,
or which is worse, fret and rage at the freedom of thy working. And his I
desire may be weighed: and so much for this first Article.

Q. What is the second Article of this second part?

A. That the only happy mean and instrument ordeind by GOD for the foundation
of his election, and the purchasing or making good this his purpose of
deliverance, was the Lord Jesus, the eternal Word of the Father made Emanuel,
Ephesians. 1.3.
GOD with us. No other name under Heaven is given to save us, by way of
mediation or instrument, but he, Act. 4.12. And this Jesus eternally intended
to the Church, the LORD in the fulness of time sent into the world, to make open
declaration of this work. Romans 3.25 God set him forth as a Propitiation, that
all might see the salvation of God.

And although it be needless for us to descant whether the Lord out of his
deep wisdom could have found out any other way, but this to save us: yet this
we may say, that seeing this is the Lords way, it behooues us to think it the
best. Nay seeing we cannot conceive any other way in congruity, how an infinite
offended Majesty could be satisfied save by an equal person and payment to
his justice, it were an infinite derogation to his wisdom and predestination,
to think, that this was not the only way, not only which is, but which could
be deuized to this end. For seeing a greater and fuller could not be, what
injustice were it for God to put that upon his Son, which might have bin put
upon an inferior mediator? Therefore the Scripture runs upon it as the only
necessary and full way, as Romans 8.3. When through the infirmity of flesh the
Law could not save, God sent his Son, etc. Now as he was that only full,
necessary way: so yet he could not effect this satisfaction by every act or
suffering of his. Not his incarnation or union only, not some reproaches, or
some act of his offices, as Prophet, or King, or Priest, no not some effusion
of blood, but such an one as the pouring out of his soul to death, even that
accursed death, must effect it: because till there was a full content given to
justice, mercy was locked up from discovering it self. Read Esaias 53.12. Esaias
53. vlt.


Now as without this last and chief work, nothing could help us, neither
miracles, tears, preaching or praying: so, all the acts and preparations of
his life standing in order and respect to these, are jointly meritorious and
expiatory for our Redemption: his obedience to parents, walking in calling,
keeping company, temptings, fastings, preachings, and the like.

Q. Tell me, what especial heads may this whole work of his meditation be
referred to?

A. Its a maine point to consider of for the stay of a poor soul, for seeing
the scope of God and Christ was to give and receive so full a price of
reconciliation, that Justice accepting it, the sin and curse of the elect
might as fully be pardoned and removed, as if they had never sinned, or could
themselves have sufficiently satisfied, it imports us to be well seen in the
contents hereof. For look how many heads there are thereof, so many welheads
or springs the soul has to revive and encourage it self by, in the
approaching to the Father.

I answer then, this whole price of Christ stood partly in a qualification of
his person, to be in case to satisfy; Partly in the actual performance of the
satisfaction it self.

Q. Touching the qualification of person, what does it contain?

A. Two parts, Union and Unction.

Q. What mean you by union?

A. Three distinct things.

First, the incarnation or flesh of Christ.

Secondly, the divinity of Christ.

Thirdly, the joining of these two natures into one person: or more truly, the
assuming of the nature of flesh into the second person of the Son of God, not
to swallow it up, but to retain still each his own distinct nature, yet
within Union.

Q. Proceed on and name the rest, that they may be under our view all together,
and then we will touch them briefly in several: What mean you by unction?

A. The calling or separation of the Lord Jesus being thus united in his
natures, to be a meet Mediator: which was the Sanctification of him in time
actually to the work of a Mediator, to which before all time, GOD had deputed
him.

Q. Being thus qualified, what is the performance it self?

A. It stands of two parts: either meriting this price for all the elect, or
actual applying it unto them.

Q. What is the meriting part?

A: It is a double performance, both of Actual obedience to the Law, and
suffering the curse required thereby and due to sin.

Q. And how performed he these two?

A. By way of real suretiship, and no otherwise: for taking upon him the
person of a Mediator, to stand between wrath and us, not by Arbitrament (as in
humane Sequesterships) but by payment for us: lo, he takes therefore our person
upon him, becomes piacular, that is first, seized with our sin by imputation,
that by his righteousness he might deface it, and fulfill the Law broken by
us: and secondly, seized with our curse, that by his suffering death, he might
quit us of the fear and punishment thereof. This ground is to be specially
noted.

Q. Touching the latter of these: his suffering or Passion, (because it has
the honor of a more immediately essential obedience and merit) tell me how
many parts has it?

A. Two, the Sacrifice it self or Passion, and the Conquest or victory ensuing
it, whereby he gave the Passion a full power to become, or rather to be
declared satisfactory.

Q. To conclude, what is the applying part?

A. The act of his interceding Mediation here ^n Earth, and especially in
Heaven, serving to settle the merit of Redemption upon all the elect in the due
season thereof.

Q. You having given a brief view of this maine article, tell m^, why you call
them wilsprings of salvation, show me the number of them, and then in order
show what each of them is, with the use thereof?

A. I first call them so, because the Holy Ghost, Esaias 12.3. terms them so,
and because they are so many grounds of justifying faith, at least means of
warranting the soul to apply a promise if duly preached and heard. Their
number is seven.

First, Incarnation.

Secondly, Divinity.

Thirdly, Personal Union, with Anointing attending it?

Fourthly, Actual obedience.

Fifthly, Passive.

Sixthly, Conquest.

Seventhly, Applying of all to the elect. Some of which, although some do
fever from the matter of Merit, yet we will herein take liberty to differ
from them, by the warrant of the Word.

Q. What is the first, and what mean you by Incarnation?

A. That by the power of the holy Ghost sanctifying the flesh of the virgin,
and without any active principle of conueying sin by man, the Lord Jesus
being conceived in, and borne of the poor Virgin, did submit himself to such
unspeakable abasement as to take upon him the nature of man. Not of Abraham or
Peter, but of mankind, the selfsame nature, which sinned in the generality
thereof: That in and by it, he might obey and suffer those things which the
Divine Nature could not be capable of, and that being seen dwelling and
conuersing among men, he might put it out of question, that not for Angels, but
for our nature, even man, fallen and cursed, he became a satisfaction to God.
And that so he might bring this nature into an happy condition again, and every
one that needs it, might enjoy it without any doubt or distrust. See these
texts, Mat. 1.18. Luke 35. John 1.2. Gal. 4.4.

Q. What use is there of it?

A. Very great, that the soul thirsty after mercy, and yet privy to her own
baseness, might by this flesh of Christ, come the more boldly to plead for
pardon as her own, purchased in her own nature, for her self, whatsoeu^r
Satan or unbelief might object to the contrary. What a comfort is it to think
that our own nature in CHRIST, who is near us, flesh of our flesh, and bone
of our bone, being seized with all our imputed sin, should yet in the same
holy flesh of his, wo^ke out all righteousness, and appease all justice, and
that not for himself who had no sin cleaving to him of his own, but for us,
Esaias 53. verse 4. and 11. Oh, it should cause great consolation and hope in a
distressed fearful soul! But I only point at the uses of these branches for
shortness sake, as a view of that which the larger handling has more fully
taught.

Q. What is the second branch?

A. That the Lord Jesus our Mediator was true God also. Not only that it was
the second person who took flesh, but that God enabled man to do and suffer,
that Gods justice might except against neither as insufficient. Eli has a
speech, 1 Samuel 2.25
If man sin against man, man may be a mediator of accord: but if against
God, who shall be his surety? I answer, man if assisted with the power of God.

Alas! although the flesh of Christ was holy, yet finite and mortal, no more
able to equal Gods offense, then a Dwarf the tallness of a Giant. But as a
Dwarf set upon a Giants shoulders, equals a Giant, so the acts and sufferings
of the flesh of Christ (as flesh) set upon his Divinity, made an equal
satisfaction to Gods offended Majesty. The influence and valor of the Divine
nature, assisting the humane, for the fulfill ing of ^he merit for if the sur^ty
fail in any point, his undertaking is ineffectual. Greatmen must have their
Peers to acquit them and no common persons. S^e Romans 1.3. Ephesians. 1. vlt.

Q What is the use of it?

A. Briefly this, to stay and comfort an heavy heart in the view o^ the heinous
circumstances of her sin, making it out of measure sinful, as depth of
continuance, odious greatness against knowledge, means of grace, with an high
hand. Be not dismayed: He that is thy surety, made not thy peace for small and
some, but all and the greatest: so that thy thought must be how to receive this
fullness, Heb 9 14.
not for the greatness of the sin. The Lord Jesus offered himself up by his
eternal Spirit, that an eternal Majesty might be appeased for sin of an
eternal guilt and curse and such is all sin, but especially crying sin: his
merit is more out of measure deserving, then sin is sinful: and has
merited far more happiness then Adams sin forfeited. Get humbleness and
faith, and then thy great sins shall be as deaw to the sun, and as a
spoonefull of water cast into the Ocean.

Q What is the third thing considerable?

A. Union of both natures into one person, by the vnconceauable work of this
Spirit of God; Its much that a soul and a body, but much more that flesh, and
the Word should be really one person I do not say that the Divinity of Christ
was a nature as the humanity: for Christ was so a nature, that yet a distinct
subsisting person of himself.

But the meaning is, that this person of the Word took the nature of his flesh
into his person, therein to subsist. The flesh of Christ was no person, as
Abraham, or David, but a nature only having no subsisting of it self at all,
but as it dwelt in the Godhead. As Misleto is no plant of it self, otherwise
then it fastens, and subsists in the appletree. So that Jesus Emanuel God and
man, united was the third qualification of the surety.

Assistance could not have caused identity or samenesse, only hypostaticall
union could do that. By virtue whereby not only properties are communicated to
each other in form o^ speech, as, The Lord of life was slain, GOD dyed, etc.
but in real manner, the efficacy of the one nature was imparted to the other.
Yet this union does no more admit confuzion, then separation, no not in the
lowest degree of eclipsing, in death or the grave. See text Ioh. 1.1. ^say. 1.4.
Call him Emanuel, Mat. 1.23.

Q. What is the use hereof?

A. Most sweet lo all broken souls, in their approach to the throne of grace.
What is so bottomless and vnsubsisting a thing in it self, as a soul in the
anguish of conscience? Yet even then look up to Emanuel, and he will unite thy
poor empty, bottomless spirit to his own person, that in him thou may have
a real being and subsistence! Oh, poor soul, who think thy self merely
lost in this thy estate: In time thou shall see it was mercy brought thee to be
out of hope in thy self, that the hope of thy well being might be in him: for
even the flesh of Jesus himself had the like unableness of subsisting, except
the second person had taken it to himself.

Q. What is the unction of Christ?

A. It is a consequent upon his personal union, whereby the Godhead made the
manhood full of himself, and of all gifts and graces of the Spirit; meet to
enable him to his work of mediation, and by name, separated him from men to be
excellent, as to be the Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church. That this was
from the womb, appears by sundry glorious effects exceeding man, as that in
Luke 2. at twelve years old. Yet especially his Baptism was the anointing of
him to the entire and immediate execution of these Offices: for therein he did
more fully receive the anointing with the Oil of gladness above his fellows,
as was prophesied, Psalm. 2. Esaias. 42.1. and Esaias, 61.1.2. He was Priest to
satisfy and pray for, Prophet to teach, and King to rule and deliver his
people. And these offices do mutually serve each other. The use is, that we
his members might acknowledge him an eminent Mediator, as having a calling from
GOD, as those three sorts of Men had under the old Testament. And that we might
be out of doubt, that the acts and sufferings he performed, were allowed,
according to that voice, This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: hear him. And that we, knowing into what treasure the Lord has put
all his graces (even the flesh of Christ) might there seek and find them all.
Therefore 1. Cor. 1.30. Paul says, Of him are we, who is made unto us of the
Father, wisdom (as a Prophet) righteousness (as a Priest) sanctification and
Redemption (as a King. Ioh. 1.17. Revel. 1.6.
) The Lord has made him whatsoever his Church needs, that of his fulness we
might receive grace for fear: And that we also in our measure together with
union to him, might receive his unction, and become Prophets, Kings and Priests
to God, and be conformed to our head in all his excellencies: not in the point
of his meritig, but of his Graces.

Q. Proceed to the fourth, the former part, to wit, the merit?

A. This is yet more essential then the former three. The fourth then I say,
is Active obedience of Christ. I do not separate the active from the passive,
as if either alone could satisfy, or as if I ascribed the effects of either to
the one without the other: but yet distinctly I speak of both for the use of
each of them to the soul. Mark then what I have noted. The Lord Jesus became
piacular for us: not only by bearing our punishment, but by translating upon
himself the real imputation of our guilt, with out the least measure of
inherent guilt. This latter would have disabled his person, (for he must be
separated from sinners, Heb. 7.26.) yet the want of the former would have made
his merit none of ours, and his death unjustly inflicted. Therefore he was made
Sin original and actual: all the sins of the elect were charged upon him:
that he by his perfect obedience might disanull them, and bring in and settle
upon us perfect righteousness.

And as the mi^ery of a man stands in both sin (and guilt and stain), as well
as in curse, so must our Surety perform righteousness as well as bear the
curse. Now this righteousness of Christ is both his Natural and his actual
opposite to this natural and actual unrighteousness of Adam, I say, both the
purity of his humane nature, infused by Union, and also the obedience to the
whole Moral Law to the uttermost extent thereof. And this is as true a part of
the material cause of our justification, as the other of the Passive, though
not to be disioyned.

Q Whereof does this Article obedience consists?

A. Of the whole conversation of our Lord Jesus his life and death; but more
specially of his later part, from his Baptism to his death: In both which
(more or less) he performed the work of his Father, and fulfilled all, both
general and personal righteousness. His whole conversation toward GOD and man
was Holy: toward God, frequent in his Temple worshipping, submitting h^mselfe
to both Circumcision and Baptism, eating the Sacrament of his own Body; often
in fasting, (yea whole nights) and prayer to GOD: most Holy in his Family.
Government, most frequent in doing good. Acts 2.22. JESUS of Nazareth, a man
approved by GOD in many signs and wonders, etc. preaching from City to City,
yea praying for his enemies: so meek, that he sets forth himself as an
example, Math. 11.19, 30 he would not break a br^ised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax, Esaias 42.2, 3. He would not lift up his voice, but as the sheep
which is dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth.

In the judgment of the worst, he did all things well: He grew in Grace and
favor with GOD and men, as he grew in stature; His meditations were Heavenly,
his words gracious, even to admiration, Luke. 4. The works of mercy and
compassion to the miserable, were infinite, toward all he was harmless,
unblameable, confuting them who would gaynsay, and stopping their mouths; In
his outside of carriage very humble, riding upon an Ass, far from worldly
pomp, and poor, without a pillow to lean his head, yet very content never
ate meat but gave thanks: so good to the poor, that he taught his disciples,
It is better to give then to receive, conscionable of the Sabbath: obedient to
parents, content to stoop to a mean trade to live upon: very kind to his
kindred, pious to his friends living and dying: so lowly that he taught his
disciples to be so, by washing and wiping their feet: and so of all the rest.

But especially for the manner, measure, and end ground of all he did, most
sincere and entire: adding thereto, perfection both of parts and degrees, so
that there was nothing amiss, he was a righteous Servant, no guile found in
him: and so at his death, John 17. He professes he had done all the work of
his Father: and till he had fulfilled all the Law, (for which he came, Mat.
5.17.) he could by no means be dissuaded, but called him Devil, who sought
it, yea, to the death and in the death of the Cross he was most obedient,
Phil. 2.5, 6. (for his Active and Passive obedience were mixed inseparably:) but
above all in this was his excellency, that being both Glory and Holiness, he
was not only content to empty himself into shame, but even into the aspersion
of sin, that he might by obedience make a full expiation for it. In a word,
Such an high Priest he was, as, not only for his Nature, but for his practice
was, undefiled and separate from sinners.

And all these he was not for himself, but for others, that nothing might be
wanting to a full satisfaction: and that they who believe in him might fetch
from each part of his life, and obedience, comfort and stay in the infirmity of
their youth, age, crosses, duties, worship of God, graces, and in the wants of
all their services, both ordinary and private, or public and extraordinary.

Q. I would have you open this point more fully?

A. I will endeavor it. Consider then:





Ioh. 17. Why not al^ the rest as well?

Adam had, but to the righteousn^sse which is of faith, and unchangeable, and
to a life in the presence of God, not of Paradise: therefore it requires a
price of a suitable righteousness in Christ, more then a mere surety was bound
to.

But as I said, the former is doubtful: although each defect of righteousn^sse
is a degree of sin: yet there is more in the stain or pollution of sin,
then in the defect of righteousness. When a Traitor is pardoned, though he be
in a possibility of restoring to favor and dignities by his Prince, yet they
are two things, and are often seuerd: and if both concur, the benefit is double.

When thou eats, thou shall dye.

Q. And wherein stood the Passive Obedience of Christ?

A. It partly stood in the condition he undertook, partly the antecedent
sufferings of his life, and most especially the passion it self.

For the first, it was a willing putting of his neck into the collar or
subjection, forgetting (yea empting himself or) his glory so far, as being
Lord of all, to become in the fashion of a servant, chiefly to his Father, also
to men, yea the balest of his sl^ues upon earth, but both for us, and our
salvation, in which respect he refused no terms, but despised all shame, Phil.
2.4.5, 6. Heb. 12.2, 3.

Secondly, (hau^ng subjected himself to be a meet object of suffering and
sorrow,) he became indeed a man of sorrows through his life, inuring himself
b^t^mes to the yoke which he yielded to; as to be borne of mean parentage, to
fall to ^a^ ^^abor for his ^^uing, to ^e in a ^^a^ch as (...), ^r unable to
hire a room in the Inn, to be persecuted and fly into Egypt even at a month
old, to undergo the reproach of the tongue, being called Demoniack, Wine-biber,
Deceauer, enemy to Caes^r, Traitor, friend of Publicanes: to be the object of
tentation, to the vilest and basest creature the Devil himself; to crouch in
soul and body under the sentence of wrath, ready to seize upon him, not only
at the instant but long before, wh ch dried up his moisture as a withered
branch and made him be thought fifty years old, (^r upon) being li^^le above
thirty: losing all his beauty, and being as a man ever under strokes afflicted
and humbled: carrying our common penalties (not personal of this or that
disease) of hunger, thirst, faintness, wearines, harborlesnesse, and poverty,
etc. about him.

To have the influence of his deity always (in a manner) restrained, so that he
appeared not to be that he was to his dearest friends: And therefore he
concealed his glory, further then it made for the discharge of his Office of
Mediator, as a Prophet or a King, for then he stepped out of his baseness. See
Matthew. 11.12. Luke 1^.3^.

Q. And what may be said touching the Passion it self?

A. Somewhat touching the parcels of it: and yet somewhat also touching the
necessity of moderation.

For the parts, first he endured the forsaking of his dearest Disciples; to be
taken by his own servant Judas, by his own special Officers, and at the hands,
of his own Deputies, to suffer most intolerable indignities to be accused,
arraygned, endited, and sentenced, as the vilest malefactor, and that at the
Jail delivery of felons and murderers.

After that (besides their barbarous spitting upon, buffeting, mocking with a
Robe, Crown of thorns, and reeden Scepter,) to be put to that shameful,
accursed death of the Cross; a death for such as not only men compted
villains, but God himself in a sort, held accursed.

To which add the greatest of all, both in the Garden and upon the Cross,
that most bitter Cup of wrath, which he drank from the hand of his Father,
which made him in an agony of Spirit, to sweat drops of blood, to pray, That
the cup might pass from him (from fear of drinking it) and to cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And so, in that deep anguish of his
Spirit to give up the Ghost: all the Devils in Hell banding themselves in that
hour of darkness, to pull him from his steadfast confidence.

Q. What mean you by the moderation of it?

A. That in all this abasement, yet that measure was impozed and no more which
suited to the dignity of the person suffering, and to such a one as in suffering,
merited, and could not be over come by suffering. Hence was it, that he had
intermissions of his agony and fears: so that he could go to and fro to his
Disciples, to admonish them: was vpholden in his senses, understanding, memory,
affections, in the midst of his dolours: showed his power and Godhead even
then in the consternation of his enemies, conversion of the thief: his love and
providence for his Mother and Disciple: rece^ved comfort by the Angels, in the
want of self-support: was dispensed with as touching the measure of torments,
not being capable of those which reprobates in Hell suffer because they can
never satisfy: the Duration, the Disorder and disguisement of these Hellish
terrors, being accidental to his Passion, and to dying the death: only
infinite displeasure of GOD, and true separation of Soul, and Body, which were
essentials, he endured.

So also it was impossible the grave should hold him, Act. 2.24. Yea, and the
period of three days and nights, of 72. hours were abridged to 40.

Q. What did he effect hereby?

A. He being our surety in all this, did for us purchase a full satisfaction
(of which in the question after) and withal first all those benefits, Article
fourth. Then the ratification of his Legacies, and Testament; Heb. 9.16, 17.
Col. 2.14. Ephe. 2.16. Heb. 10.2^.
abolishing of enmity, by Law, Sin, Satan, Wrath, Hell, and Death: As we
know, if a Court be quite put down, all the Officers belonging to it, are
down also. So also, liberty to enter Heaven, by a living way, not the blood of
a beast: with sundry others.

Q. Why does the Scripture so much dwell upon the Passive, and so little upon
the Active obedience, in point of our satisfaction?

A. As I intimated before, the Holy Ghost does more usually (not always, See
Phil. 2.7, 8. Esa. 53.11. Mat. 20.28 Romans 5. ver. 18) express it this way.

First, because in this curse taken away, all the whole satisfaction began to
take effect: as we say that the effect of a Prisoners release is delivery from
prison: not as if that were all his release: yet thence its denomin^ted:
because though the debt be paid before, yet this must follow.

Secondly, because the end of a thing is better then the beginning, and the
consummation of a thing is from the end. Perseverance has (we know) the
preeminence of all obedience, not as if it were any more then a part of it, but
it^ the finishing and making all out of question. Each moment of a Glasses
course is part of the hour, though the last dust of it be the hou^es end. B^t

Thirdly, and especially: beca^se the P ssi^n wa^ the greatest, hardest, and
fullest part of the whole satisfaction. As, fortitude carries the name of
virtue, not ^x^^uding any.

Q. Well, I am satisfied. Proceed to the fifth branch, and so to the use of
both jointly.

A. The fi^th ^s the Passive obedience of the LORD Jesus, not in other passions
and penal ies of his who^e life only: but especially that one upon the c^osse,
the most immediate ob^ation and sacrifice of himself ^or sin: and it
consists in the free yielding up himself to the wrath of his Father, in his
soul and body: in the one, bearing the incomprehensible anger of GOD (though
according to the limitations requ^site for a person that was GOD and merited)
and in the other, the exhaustion of his life-^lood, and separation of body and
soul by that accursed death: that hereby sin with all the penalties inward,
outward, and eternal, with all the power which the Law and enemies had against
us thereby, death and Hell (not excepted) might perfectly be abolished, and the
justice of God infini^ly satisfied R^ad Romans 3.25. Heb. 9.^3.14 1. Pet. 1.19.1
Ioh. 17. Heb. 12.24.

Q What are the uses of the Active and Passive obedience?

A. F^rst, the doctrine hereof may afford us a swer^ meditation (which, as
there are few a^cient or godly writers ^uch aue observed, so it is pity we
should neglect) viz. The excellency of the grace of the Gospel, purchased by
^his Satisfaction. which will appear by a comparison of ^he wo^ke of Creation,
with this of Redemption. The form^r I grant was a solemn work, when the
Eternal Word made (of Earth) the body of Adam, inspiring it with the the
breath of GOD, not only to be a living Creature, bu^ to bear the Image of God
in holiness. And the truth is, Moses describes even this work more solemnly,
then the Creation of any of the other: to show the emi^ency thereof ^boue them.
But when the same eternal Word creates man the ^econd time, Lo, not a breath,
not a f^w words will serve: himself rather must be made a worm, and no man;
God himself must empty himself of his f^lues and glory: his love, his tears,
his miracl^s, his prayers, the baseness of his condition will not all serve
the turn: no other price will be accpted for this, save both the actu^ll
fulfilling of all righteousness, and the shedding (not of drops or ounces of
other blood) but the last hear and life blood that was in his Holy Body, the
blood of the Son of GOD. Here was a work indeed of some d^fficulty! at
which not only the deepest conceit of mortal man, but even the Angels
themselves may stand and wonder and vanish.

Oh! that he view of this might ravish our souls with the worth of grace! to
say, The least dram of grace is more worth, then the whole work of Nature!
who is carried by this meditation above whatsoever this world is, in respect of
the New Creature to count the whole creation as vanity! David, Psalm. 8.
admireth man in that first workmanship of his, as above a^l others in the
world: what then may be said of man renewed and restored to a second Image of
God? if the breath o^ Creation were such a thing, what is Regeneration, that
cost, not a breath, but so great a workmanship of this Active and passive
satisfaction?

Q. ^eeing all this is doubtless the maine Satisfaction, go to the uses o
b^th these in due order: and first tell me why you do put them together?

A. For the latter, I answer, Because as one says, this price is like the
price of a Diamond paid for ten malefactors, which is n^y^her all paid ^or any
one, nor any several part for one, and ^nothe^ for the other: but generally
the wh^le for them al, and e^ch h^uing sha^e in the whole. Let th^re^ore
whatsoever is spoken dstinctly of the benefit hereof, be inclusiuely taken as
that which issues from the insparable merit of both jointly. Now for the uses

First, let us abhor the cocceit of such Sectaries, as imagine that there was
no necessity at all of any such price paying to Justice: nor any bar in Gods
Justice at all, why he might not have showed mercy to sinners, without any
such satisfaction made at all. Its an horrible derogation to the Scriptures,
and to the wisdom of GOD: and sauoreth of a profane audacious spirit, making
sin and grace of small esteem. Rather let it present to us the hideous
nature of sin and justice. Solomon bids us behold the drunkard in his rednes
of color, bluenesse of wounds, that we might loath his sin. But rather
behold it in this glass of the Lord Jesus his satisfaction. Esaias. 63.1. Who is
he that comes from Bozra, with his red garments? I have trod the wine press
of the wrath of the Lord, etc. If the glass of the Law have not done it, let
this do it, yea behold the sins which we count most venial in this object of
Justice. Not the pettyest oath, or least of our vain words could be paid for,
with the price of a lesser thing then the blood of Christ; Justice would admit
of no other. And the Father spared not his only Son in this point: but would
have him drink the dregs of his wrath. What shall become of such wretches then
as despise this price? How shall they struggle with this infinite wrath of GOD,
which the Lord Jesus had bin crushed under as unsupportable, if his Godhead had
not held him up? Now while sin is in her element, its counted as light as
feathers; but being under the weight of justice, and the sense of wrath, it
will prove intolerable. Let us count it so now, whiles we may get it shrouded
under the Lord Jesus: let us sweat water and blood, and feel that in us which
caused those outcryes, My GOD my GOD, why have thou forsaken me? Not to become
Mediators to our selves, but to drive us to him that overcame this anguish,
Hebr. 5.
and was heard in that he feared.

If sin in our selves will not break our hearts, let it break them in the
view of CHRIST broken by them: let us, Zach. 12.10, See him whom we have
pierced, and mourn, Not as Papists who whip their bodies, and cry out of them
that betrayed, accused, scourged and crowned Christ, and crucified him: but as
those who were the Actors of this Tragedy our selves: Act. 2.38.
that (if by any means) our hearts may be pricked as theirs, who heard Peter
urge the killing of the Lord of Life. Oh, unspeakable love* to be willing to be
pierced for Murderers, that they might escape! To say, Oh, Father, here is
the surety, lay no debt or punishment upon these debtors! I have taken all upon
me, if thou will needs have the uttermost, power out thy wrath upon him that
can satisfy, not upon them that cannot! Try whether there be any drop of
mourning in thee, by this due sight of sin and justice, and say, Oh, Lord, if
I were left to be my own satisfier, if thou should have said to Christ, as
once to Moses, Them that sin against me, I will punish, of thee I will
require nothing, Oh, how terrible had our condition been?

Secondly, let this doctrine confute,

First, all Sectaries, who that they might be singular (to say

And whereas they add, Gods Justice accepted this for an equal price of
sin: I answer, Who has taught them to dream of an acceptance, of that which
is not equivalent to Justice? Might they not as well overthrow any necessity of
a satisfying Justice, as teach Justice to accept that which is not Justice? Is
it not well for us, that the Lord will account a truly just satisfaction of a
surety to answer our debt, (which was more then he ought us) but we must go
about to corrupt the price it self, and dream of an imputing of equal
satisfaction to an unequal price? Let us abhor such novelties, and know, if
Christ suffered no more then the malice of man, there remains a necessity of a
second suffering for us, from justice. Let us beware, while we go about to
minse and lessen the sufferings of Christ; lest we destroy the truth of a
Mediator, and bereave the soul of that which should uphold her, in her
conflict with Justice.

Not to speak of unsavory dallyance with those Texts, which are brought to
confute them, Esaias 53. 2 Cor. 5.21. and others. To conclude, except Christ
suffered more then from man, we may say, that many Martyrs exceeded him in their
patience, of whom we read no such outcryes as Christ made.

Lutherans, who teach that our Justification stands in the so applying of
Christ righteousness to a sinner, that he may plead it from the tenor of the
Law; Do this and live. Meaning that we must be possessed with the very
selfsame righteousness wherewith Christ obeyed and suffered.

And this they imagine to be the matter of our justification, and that else God
cannot in Justice acquit us. They say, The elect do sustain one person with
Christ, in all his acts and sufferings, and they are all made theirs: But thus
they make Christ serve to no other ends, but to become our own Mediator, and
to destroy his own.

The error of this conceit arose from a confounding of the valor or worth of
this righteousness, with the substance of righteousness it self. For
although we cannot be justified without imputation of the fullness of the
merit, yet we are not capable of that which merited, except we will become
infinite.

and perfect imputing or accepting of imputed righteousness.

No man is justified without the former: but our faith failing in the
acceptance, must needs be looked upon by God. I confess he sees no sin,
but he pardons it to his in Christ, upon Faith and Repentance: but he
punishes it for their good in mercy. Again, what if we grant, God sees no
sin in them in respect of their justification? Is therefore their
sanctification perfect. Why then did David's adultery displease the Lord? Or why
do we pray, Forgive us our debts? or why says our Savior, Say when all is
done, ye are unprofitable?

Fourthly, it confutes all such as cut off the Active obedience 2 Samuel 10.4
as they cut the garments of David's servants by the middle. I blame them not as
Papists, for denying Christ to be our price, but for their curious dividing of
one member of it, from another. It may be granted them that the Passive is the
more immediate co^summation of the satisfaction: but to conclude, the Active is
most audacious.

They say, Christ was bound to the obeying of the Law, as a man made under it.

I answer, Yea, but except he had been so made purposely for us, he needed
never to be so at all: therefore his willing being so, made the merit the
greater: and although being a man, he must obey: yet seeing his being a man, was
that he might obey for us, it must be of greater desert.

Again as the Passive is the nearer merit, in respect of the estate, in which
we stood accursed: So the Active is as essential in respect of recovering that
Image of righteousness, which makes us like GOD, and in which we were
created. Neither was it Hell could have hurt us without sin.

Besides (to say truth) if Adam after his sin had not been accursed, yet in
sinning only he had been miserable. It is therefore as essential to
Justification, that he be made just, as rid of guilt, and brought to Heaven
as rid of Hell. But of this before.

Q. Be there any other uses besides confutation?

A. Yea.

And first, to teach all Gods people to abhor the slavery

They take as deep thought for God, as for their own welfare. 2 Samuel 14.30.
When Absalon was pardoned, yet he set Ioabs corn on fire, because he might
not be admitted to the Kings presence, chuzing rather to dye, then to hang in
such suspense. And shall a believer rest in his pardon more then in the
righteousness of God, which may make them accepted and beloved? Ephesians. 1.5.

No, the livery they wear is, The Lord our righteousness. Oh, till I be
restored to my blood, to my dignities, to stand before the Lord, to please him,
to feel his Spirit of peace, joy and righteousness, and my Conscience purged
to serve God in holiness, I can feel no comfort!



were rather some great Epicure, Libertine, or Champion of the world?

Fourthly, If this death of the Lord Jesus be our satisfaction,

Commonly we will wear our choice Jewel nearest our heart: and why is this
Jewel which cost the blood of the Son of God so far off it? Surely except
this be our souls crown more, then the crown of the aged are their children,
or the Ministers crown his people, or the husbands his dear wife, (not to
speak of gold, pleasures, or outward welfare) how can it be well with us? If
the perfection of love be joy, and the perfecter the object is, the greater the
love: How is it, that each base shadow of joy can affect us, when this can not?

If our hope were here only in Christ, of all others, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we were most miserable. Nothing here can keep thee from misery; what is then
thy happiness? This satisfaction only. Let it be all in all to thee, the
seasoning of thy blessings, supply of all wants: if thou were left as an owl
in the desert, Hab. 3.17.
if no calf were left in the stall, yet let God be thy salvation. Let thy life
be bound up in it, as Jacobs in Benjamin.

Fifthly and especially, let the chief stream of this points

To all Ministers to teach it, and the people to apply it to themselves in all
their fears, yea the greatest agony, yea death it self; whatsoever thou
forgoest, hold this. For Ministers, let them remember their office (as he to
Archippus) and fulfill it. Paul presses it, compare 2 Cor. 5.21. with 20. Him
that knew no, sin he made sin, that we might be his righteousness. And
what of this? We being Ambassadors of God, as if Christ by us did entreat you,
so we urge, Be reconciled to God. Be no Idols, non Preachers, be no Preachers
of any thing before this: Preach not with a veil as Moses, stand with open
face, and hold this mirror to poor sinners, that they may behold The Lord
their righteousness. 2 Cor. 3.1^*
If the worth of a soul were known by us, and the blood of souls prized and
pitied, hen the preaching and declaring of this righteousness, Job 33. would
be the scope of our labors. We are Ministers or the Law, but only so; as
serving the Ministry of reconciliation. Let us mainly look to this, to save
our selves, and them that hear us: if we have wrought the use of the last
Article of the former part upon them, learn the skill of this second, and
linne not with God, till he say to us, Deliver him, Job 33.24. Mat. 13.44 Genesis
29.20
I have received a ransom. If we could find this vein, and the treasure hid
in this field, all our work would be as Jacobs seven years, for the love of
Rachel, sweet and easy.

For people also secondly: Consider ye who have truly felt that Serpent of the
Law, sting ye mortally in the other part, come, apply the remedy in this: look
upon this brazen Serpent and live, and first I say, feel the strength;
secondly, take hold of it, and make peace for the former: know, without a
promise from God, there is no peace unto ye: and promise there can be none
without this satisfaction.

This is the strength of an offer and a promise: its else (as he spoke of the
Serpent) Nehushtan, and a piece of brass. As sin is the strength of the Law,
so is this price of the blood of Christ, the strength of the promise. Thou have
to deal with the Father in the point of justifying thee: ponder well then this
strength, as thou would try the weight of Gold in the balance. If thou can
feel this strenght so far as to say, Esaias 27, 4. or to hear the Lord say, 2
Cor. 1.10
Anger is not in me, I am appeased, thou beginst well. Anger abides in God,
without this price, and thou art but as the bushes and dry stubble before it.
Be assured then, that no promise speaks to thy soul, and to thy heart, except
it have this strength of Christ, in whom each one is yea and Amen; Look upon a
promise if thou need it, as its furnished with this: for hence comes all wrath
to be turned to love: and this will make God willing to offer and faithful to
perform, else not. That bottomless depth of mercy in thy Judge and enemy,
cannot be gaged without this bucket: by this, thou may reach it.

Again, as this is sufficient strength, so it is that only which can redeem
thee. Let that Mountebanke of Rome who would bring thee to the treasure of
Saints merits, be odious to thee: Say thus, Mica 6. What shall I give the Lord
for the sin of my soul; My gold or pearls, Oil or wine, or the first borne
of my body? No, he has showed me the only way, to be his righteousness. He
redeemed us (says Peter) not with pearls, but with the precious blood of his
Lamb. Will thou go to the holy ones in earth? Alas, they were as vile as thou,
but for this, and they have no more of it then will serve their turns. Will thou go to Heaven to Saints and Angels? Alas, Esaias. 63. Abraham knows thee
not. What then? Mat. 25.6.
will thou go to thy duties, performances, grace? Alas, they have no blood of
expiation in them: all these will say, Satisfaction is not in us. Where then?
Surely here only. If so, abandon all, and cling to this only. And that is
the second branch. Take hold of this sufficient and only sufficient strength
as the Prophet bids thee. Job 9.15. 1 Pet. 3.19.
Carry it with thee to thy Judge and make supplication to him in this strength.
Peter calls it the answer of a conscience, good in the resurrection of Christ.
What ever enemy pursue thee at the heels, this is thy refuge: that here thou
might have strong consolation in all fears, against all enemies.

Fear thou the sins of youth, or age? The Lord Jesus was conceived in the
womb, that the infant (elect) which never saw light, might be saved by him:
youth notwithstanding her disobedience, age for all her rebellion, might be
forgiven. Do thy moral sins, of murder, stealth, uncleanness, swearing
distress thee? This Lord Jesus fulfilled all righteousness for thee. Do thy
spiritual wickednesses oppress thee, and the penalties of them, an
unbelieving, secure, hard heart by the contempt of the Gospel. The Lord Jesus
suffered the pouring out of his blood, to break the heart of those that pierced
him upon the cross. Art thou poor? Thy Satisfier was so. Rich? He was the
Lord of all. Are thy sins great? He dyed for Noah's drunkenness, Lots incest,
David's adultery. Small? Lo, even thy least vain word, cost him his lifeblood.
2 Cor. 5.^1.
But perhaps not some sins, but sin it self and the body of death troubles
thee. He was made sin that knew none. Oh then, whatsoever sin can say, yet
go on to the throne of grace, as Heb. 4.16. and look to find mercy in time of
need. Does the Devil, the gates of Hell, conscience, or the justice of GOD
threaten thee? They can not, save for sin: if they do, thy conscience has
her answer to God against all. And so plead this thy pardon to the Lord. Say
thus, Oh Father, even thou cuttest off thy plea in giving this price, in
accepting it, in offering of it to me: I (Lord) am here before thee, pinched
and damned by my sin, if thou do not reckon it unto me. Oh Lord, I put this
blessed price between me and wrath: LORD, have no power to deny it me. Even I,
if I were left with an orphans estate, could not keep it from him: LORD, I am
fatherless, my orphans stock is in thy keeping: thou tookest it, to bestow
it. Lord, let my soul have strong consolation in her seeking refuge to thee,
because this price warrants me.

If a debtor be in prison, and be bid to come forth, he will answer, I am here
for debt, I cannot: but if urged, he will lay hold upon this Strength, Surely
some Surety has paid my debt: and then his heart answers, I will come out. Oh!
so let this strength be laid hold on by thee, if thou look for deliverance. In
the end of this second part, I shall add somewhat touching faith. Mean time
let this be as the river leading to the Sea.

Q. But what is the word of Imputation, so often used by the Holy Ghost in the
matter of Justification?

A. I am glad you have mentiond it in so good season. I answer, that as this
whole righteousness is the material: so this act of God the Father is the form
and being of a sinners justification. And its such an act of God, as being
satisfied, takes this righteousness, and reckons it to the needing soul as her
own, (although not hers) to put upon her an estate of as full and perfect
freedom and acceptance, as if she had never sinned, or had fully satisfied.
For look how he dealt with our Sur^ty, made him sin for us, that is, imputed
it: which imputation and account the Lord Jesus found to be no trifle, but
real: so does he take his righteousness and compts it ours, that it might
really be ours. Accomptants of sums of money, if they differ and cannot set
things straight, fall to an esteeming of what is owing, and so at length, by
not imputing a sum which yet may be due, or by imputing a sum as paid,
which perhaps is doubtful, grow to a full end. And that which moves them
heerto, is Peace. So here, the Lord inclining to make peace with the soul,
esteems not a debt, which yet is one, and esteems that paid which is not.
Peace makes him to impute that to us, which yet another paid and we could not.
S^e texts. 2. Cor. 5.17. Psalm. 32.1. Romans 5, etc.

And this imputation is a real final discharge, never to be questioned: no
hole can be picked in it by any enemy.

Q. For shortness sake proceed to the use.

A. It is most weighty. First, to teach us to renounce our Athens, he showed
him a Map and asked him where they lay? so in this M^p of Gods justification,
all our abilities must vanish: we know, full sum of debt paid needs no
imputation, t may plead acq^i^tance Come to the Lord for his roial work, his
Fiat, without any thing, empty and base, that thou may concur with him in
that he seeks the Glory of his grace in his Son! Come as Mephib^sheth, a
limping cripple to David, When I was a dead dog my Lord accepted me. 2 Samuel 1^
2 Samuel 2^
As poor Abigail sent for to be a Queen s^yd, Let me be an handmayd to wash
the feet of thy servants. She knew, mere marriage to a King would make a
Queen, without bringing any thing. And thus doing, thy unworthiness shall not
hurt thee, but help on this robe upon thy bare shoulders. Come thus to the Lord
and say, Here, Lord, is a naked wretch: Put on the Lord Jesus upon me, I have
no clothing to hinder thee: thou bidst me put him on: Romans 13. vlt. but Lord,
do thou fit him for me in particular, for my soul, for my sin, against my
curse^ and ^hen take him, Lord, put him on me also, reckon him to me, account
with me in him, and make me his righteousness, as thou made him my sin, and
I shall count it as real, as if I had it of my own.

Latimer preaching to King Edward, told him that once a King of England, had a
cupbearer, who bringing him a cup of wine, by error let it fall at his foot.
The King offended with his rashness, asked him if that were not ill done? He
suddenly answered, No, if it please your Grace, if you think so. Even so in
this, our blessedness stands not in our want of sin, but in the Lord not
imputing it. The bush burnt, but the wonder was, that it was not consumed. The
Lord imputes not thy sin, couers it, takes away the condemning power, imputes
not the actual offenses thereof to thee. He looks at his own Image in thee,
in all thy duties, prayers, there is thy dunghill, and his pearl, he beholds
that which is his, couers that which his thine (not to make thee bold, but thankful
and humble.) If thou have a cup of precious wine, thou say not to thy friend,
Pledge me in water, though thou have put more water then there is wine into it.
Thou esteemest it by the better part. Hold this, and thou may say with Paul,
Romans 7. I my self delight in the Law of GOD: and not I, but sin in me:
though else he said, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! Thus
much of this fifth branch or spring of salvation: drink of this brook, and
thou shall indeed Esaias. 12.3. draw water out of the wells of salvation. I have
binne larger here, because it is the chief of the seven; more brief of the
rest.

Q What is the fifth branch of this Article, and wherein stands it?

A. The Conquest of Christ. For notwithstanding all this satisfaction of Christ
thus performed: yet, if it had been possible for any enemy, to have prevented
him of the effect of it, that he could not have overcome all enemies, and death
it self, his whole work had been frustrate. But this could not be: for he
rose again from the dead, and gave a full being to the merit of his
satisfaction. Conceive the point in three estates of Christ, briefly.

First, Before:

Secondly, At.

Thirdly, After his death.

In the first respect, though the Lord Jesus his flesh was not exempt from
mortality and infirmity, but subject to all through our sin: yet even under
all these through his whole life, he conquered in suffering: for he endured no
more then him pleased: before the time of his death, no enemy had power over
him, to surprise him by any casualty, by any other death, or at any other
season then himself would. In Luke 4. we read, that his own citizens Led him
up to the brow of the Hill to have brkeo his neck. Often were Officers sent, to
take him: stones cast at him: upon the Sea he was subject to the violence of
the waves: none of these had power to fasten upon him, he went through the
midst of them, and through a thousand deaths, without casualty. It was
prophesied of him, Esaias. 43.^.
The fire should not burn him, nor waters devour him: till his hour was come
to suffer that death, and only that which GOD had laid out for him. And then
nothing could hinder.

Secondly, at death, although as our Mediator he must needs drink that cup,
which his Father gave him: yet he was a conqueror even then too, and above any
enemy. Judas, Act. 2.24.
the Priests and Pilate could do no more, then himself was willing to yield
to his Father in. No man takes away my life from me, Ioh. 10.18
I lay it down my self.

He yielded to those that took him, even when he had cast them to the ground
as a Conqueror. And therefore by the Union of his Godhead, even in that hour
and power of darkness, when his life was taken from him, and they looked to
have had all their will on him: all the Infernal powers assaulting him at
once, by reason of the wi^hdrawing of his Divine Nature, and the wrath of God,
yet, even then he gave them the greatest foil of all, and in death overcame
him who had the power of it, and all his instruments; made his Cross, his
Trophee, and his Chariot of Triumph over them all: like Samson who more hurt
his enemies at death, then all his life.

So thirdly, after death, when they had got his dead body into the grave,
thinking that the sealing of the stone could have made him theirs, never to
rise any more: Lo, by his power he kept his union still, and after his forty
hours sleep was over, he resumed his body and soul again, and gave them
another blow worse then all: roze again, conquered their malice, never more to
be conquered, to dye no more: All the enemies in Hell, and upon Earth, could
not any further assault him: his triumph being begun, he was out of their reach.

Q. What use make you hereof?

A. First, the maine use (which is also the scope of this sixth Branch) is, the
assurance which the poor soul under a condition of grace, may take to it
self in pleading her part in this satisfaction. For, what gave a being and
life to this suffering of Christ? Surely his conquest.

If any enemy could have held him under chains from his victorious
Resurrection, all his satisfaction had been frustrate.

But that could not be. It was impossible, as we see Act. 2.24 that death
should hold him. Now then by his conquest, how lively, renowned, powerful a
merit gave he to all his sufferings? He sent his Church into assured possession
of all his merits. Oh, as the author to Heb. 10.22 says, Let us come with this
Assurance of Faith to the throne of Grace, saying Lord, give thy poor needing
servant, the fruit of my Lord Jesus his obebience, the power of his conquest,
the full efficacy of his redemption:

That as he, Rom 1.1. Ephesians. 1.21* by his Godhead declared himself a Co^queror,
and as^u^ed the truth of his merit and death, yea consummated it, (al^hough he
laid upon the Cross, All was finished) so my soul may take hold of this
strength, and claim the life and power of this satisfaction, with fuller
assurance. Oh, let us not want the strength of this persuasion, but press it
and say, Lord, I come to thee in the merit of a Christ not dead but alive, a
Conqueror that made good to me all his sufferings by his victory, and gave all
his enemies a deadly blow, when they looked to have overthrown him. Let this
be the first Use: learn this as the maine, to drink at this cisterne, this
well of Salvation, as the former, and then the other comfortale Uses will
follow of themselves.

Q What other follow hereupon?

A. Sundry consolations to a believing soul, touching the Assurance of Faith
and Perseverance, Victory in Combats, Afflictions, Death it self, and against
the power of the grave.

The Lord Jesus has the key of death in his hand, and will make his, more then
Conquerours in all: nothing shall separate, Romans 8. vlt. any of his from him.

T^uching Faith, how many are the fears that a poor soul has, she shall
never be able to believe? Within her self what weakness, forgetfulness,
melancholy, guilt of Conscience through corruption, a dead heart, slavish and
fearful, presumptuous, hardened by the deceit of sin, unworthiness, neglect
of the season of grace, this body of death oppozing all savor of goodness? and
so even death of body makes them afraid, they may dye ere they believe.

So without them; what temptations against God, and the Scriptures? what
enemies have they to darken and dull them, their senses, understandings and
heart? what enemies of the wicked have they without them? Ill husbands, Wives,
to dismay them, telling them that they cannot be assured in this life of their
salvation.

How do enemies affright them with malice, threats, big looks, disdain and
scorn, putting them in fear they shall never escape out of their claws? In
this variety of affliction, what is there to sustain them? what is it which
teaches them to kiss the rod, Mic. 7.9.
take up their cross, and hear the indignation of the Lord, till he plead
their cause, and bring forth their light? Surely the strength of this their
Captain, and Conqueror the Lord Jesus, who has told them, In the world they
shall have affliction, John 16. vlt.
but be of good Comfort, I have overcome the world. Its he that tells them, till
Gods season of their suffering be come, so much, so long and that very cross
God has ordained for them, no enemy shall do them hurt. And when they do,
he will make it tolerable and easy unto them, do them good for their sakes
that hurt them.

Romans 8.
But above all, they are made Conquerors, and their chin is kept above water,
they fight under hope of victory, and say with the Church, Mica. 7.8. Rejoice
not over me, Oh my enemy, for when I am down I shall rise, and when thou art,
fallen, thy wound shall be incurable.

There is a fable that when the Goat cropped the Vine-branches, she bids the
Goat, Bite and spare not, but she should bear so much Wine as should serve
to sacrifice her. This Vine is the militant body of Christ: so that as he
feared not his enemies, because he subdued them in suffering, so should they

Q What else?

A. Lastly, it comforts them by Faith, in the Conquest of our Lord Jesus,
against the power of the grave. For as it was with their Head, he could not
be held in it: Act. 2.24.
so with them their flesh rests in hope of that triumph; Oh, Hell where is thy
sting, oh Grave where is thy victory?

The full Redemption of their bodies, causes them to fear no death, nor grave.
Nay, their hope makes them say, If we hoped only in Christ here, we were of
all others most miserable: but this conquest makes us happy in all our misery.

Not only that without, but within themselves, their poor Knowledge, Faith,
Patience is sustained with this Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that one day it shall
be better, when all imperfect things shall be done away, the body shake off
corruption, and they see him in whom now they believe: Their life is hid with
Christ in God: Col. 3.3. 1 John 3.2.
and although it appear not now what they are, yet when their Captain comes,
they shall be conquerors as he: therefore in the mean time, though they be
basely esteemed of, and set at naught; yet their spirit of victory and hope
props them up and makes them merry, because a day is coming will pay for all.
But I am loath to dwell at large upon any uses, save the scope of the Article.

Q. Having ended the Merit, proceed to the seventh and last Branch of this
second Article: What is the Applying Work of Christ, and wherein does it stand?

A. It is that solemn part of His Mediation, for the sake whereof he forsook
the earth, and was exalted above all principalities, and sits at the right
hand of God, his Father, that by his intercession alwa^es made, for his Church,
he might apply to all the members, the power of this satisfaction, that it
might work Faith in those that want it, and confirm it in those that have it,
Esaias 53. vlt. The Prophet ad^eth this to the pouring out of his soul, that he
prayed for the transgressors. And S. John gives him the name of our Advocate
with the Father: for this cause, that the Church may enjoy the fruit of his
death continually. And the Au hor to the H^brewes says, That he ever lives
to make intercession for us.

The High Priest under the Law, appeared once a year with blood in the Holy of
Ho^ies, to bring forth a general reconciliation, but the Lord Jesus for ever.
And as the ends hereof are many, to wit, to present the prayers of his people
unto God, to ho^d them close to his Father, and keep them in h^s love, to cover
their daily offenses, and continue their justification and acceptance, to unite
them one to another, and to protect them from enemies: so especially to bless
the Ministry of his Gospel, for the breeding Faith ^n the souls of the
elect, by the preaching of this his blood and death. As we may see clearly in
John 17. (that Heavenly chapter) where all these are described.

Mark then, it is not enough for the Lord Jesus, to procure the price of our
peace, but he plyes the Father with it, and offers up by his eternal Spirit,
the merit and valor of his satisfaction, for the effectual drawing of the
hearts of his people, to believe the Gospel.

His blood is the seed of the Church (for what wete Word Sacrament, but tor
him?) but that which does cherish this seed, and give a body to it in the
consciences of men, is the application of it by this intercession.

More fully thus: As by fulfilling all righteousness, the Lord Jesus has
pleased the Father, and is so gracious to him, that he grants him whatsoever
he asks: so does Jesus to the uttermost improoue this f^uour, and applies
the comfort thereof to all his, that they may understand how powerful and
preuayling he is to obtain whatsoever he desires. And hence it is, that
till his Ascension, the Comforter could not be sent: but after, when he
prayed, then came he, and brought to mind, and sealed to the hearts of the
Disciples, whatsoever they had heard preached before.

So that when we see the preuayling power of the Word and Sacraments in the
weak Ministry of flesh, what shall we ascribe it unto, but the power of this
applying work of our Advocate, who conueyes savor of life, of brokennes of
heart, faith and Regeneration, thereby into the souls of his? And in this
respect h is the Key of his Fathers bosom and fountain, to unlock and set it
open (being sealed before) for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, as Zach. 13.1.

Q. What be the use hereof?

A. As it is singular for all uses to the Church in general and all the lively
members thereof in all Concernements of it whatsoever: as acceptance of their
prayers, being perfumed with the sweet incense hereof; protection of their
persons, safeguard against enemies, sustentation of their souls in grace,
perseverance and the like: so especially that which we read Heb. 10.19.10.21.
Seeing by the blood of Jesus we have a living way made unto us by his flesh:
Let us draw near with a pure heart in assurance of faith. Oh! it should be as
a welspring of Salvation for every dry soul to come unto, even in the greatest
barrenness, deadnes and fear of heart, that the merit of Christ should not
belong to it.

Do but consider this Aduocateship of Christ, continued forever for thee,
Jesus Christ yesterday, to day and for ever, Heb. 13.8. to this end, that the
Gospel and the preaching of the promise might be lively, Heb. 4.
pearcing and powerful to divide the joints and marrow, and to create in thy
soul the fruits of the lips, which is peace.

If thou had the Kings Son for thy Advocate to the King for some suite,
would not thou think there were life in it? Therefore go not to the Word and
Sacrament any more with a dead and sad heart, as if there were nothing in
them, save an outside of man's voice, and efficacy to persuade, behold a Christ
in them, who by his applying power, conueyes into them, strength, savor,
persuasion and grace, that his poor people may not hear his Word as a dead
letter, or receive the Scales as dumb elements, but as divine ordinances
assisted with the Spirit of Christ; and therefore able to breed faith in the
soul, and truly to carry it into the stream of his Satisfaction.

What is the usual complement of most people in their hearings and use of
means, but this, That the Minister is ineffectual to them, they hear with
small light or quickening of heart? The promise, they grant to be faithful,
and the Sacrifice of Christ full of merit: but they are so to such as mix them
with says.

Why poor soul? does the Lord so offer thee Christ in his Gospel, as if he
lef^ it to thee to shift for faith? Is not faith his gift who gave Christ?
Divide not the things which God has put together. Deceive not thy self in the
condition of faith, and assure thy self, the Lord Jesus will give thee both
meat and appetite, the object of his righteousness, Re^e.
and faith to believe it also. He is Alpha and Omega, the author and finisher
of our faith, Heb. 12.2. and he does live for ever with GOD, to make good his
Satisfaction to his people, by giving power to his word to breed faith: that as
it cannot be without it, so it may subsist in it, and our faith might not rest
in man, but in God.

Spirit of persuasion to revive, yea to fill thy soul in thy

Yea, let all the faithful Ministers of God comfort themselves in their
weakness, and defects of preaching, in their deadness of heart to the work
of Faith, in the little success of their labors, in the woeful hardness of
heart in the people: the Lord Jesus, by his Spirit of intercession holds them
as his Candlesticks in his right hand: he does as those two olives, Zach. 4
assist his Lamps, and drop in this oil of gifts and grace upon them: he does
make them as Paul, Zach. 4.5.
able Ministers of Reconciliation, that by them and out of their nothing he
may create the fruit of the lips peace: and he well uphold Gospel, Ministry,
and the power of both, in the midst of the enemies: and although they be never
^o f^r^^us, yet Mica. 2.7. His Spirit shall not be straightened, but his Word
shall still be good to such as walk uprightly. And of these two Articles
seven Branches so much.

Q. What is the third Article of the second Part?

A. That the act of God the Father imput ng the merit of the Active and Passive
righteousness of our Satisfier, to a sinful soul, is the true formal and
being cause of his Justification.

Q This Doctrine of Imputation is somewhat dark to me, Romans 4 6. 2 Cor. 5.17
therefore explane it; and first the phrases used by the Holy Ghost: for
som^time he speaks of Imputing somewhat, sometime of not imputing, and again
in one place, he speaks of Imputi^g righteousness, sometime of Imputing
Faith to righteousness: Romans 4.5. Clear these terms?

A. By the term of not imputing Sin, and not imputing Righteousness; he
intimates in how many respects Christ has helped us: to wit, both to
forgiveness in the one, being made sin for us: and to acceptance in the
other, by clothing us with his righteousness: yet so, as by both Active and
Passive righteousness jointly, not seuera^ly considered. Confer Psalm. 32.1.
with 2. Cor. 5.17, where both covering sin and reconciling, are made the
effects of not imputing sin.

By the second phrase, we must conceive one thing to be meant. For its
familiar with Paul to use these two phrases for one thing, namely, imputation
of Faith, and of righteousness. Not that faith can in any sense be our
righteousness: but because Christ apprehended by faith, is the same thing, with
Faith it self in the Scripture.

Besides, we know, faith must ever concur with imputation in the act of it;
and therefore the Holy Ghost honors it, with the name of being imputed to
righteousness.

That Faith must needs so concur, note three things in this work:

First, God enables the Soul to believe on the Lord Jesus by the promise, and
the spirit thereof.

Secondly, the Soul yields and consents.

Thirdly, God casts hereby this righteousness, (thus believed) upon the
Soul, and imputes it to pardon and life,

Faith then always concurres with imputation: the life whereto may be said of
justification, which it were blasphemy to ascribe to faith (seeing its God that
justifies) but yet Faith is still said to justify, because of her necessary
concurrence.

The which Phrase is tropicall, the instrument being put for the principal
agent. Otherwise in proper speech, alas! How shall poor faith apprehend in the
soul an infinite righteousness, except we take it thus, that God by faith (as
his own instrument) does convey all the object of Christ at once into us?

And this I would have the Reader to mark for two causes.

The first, to decide that Question so much demanded, whether faith apply
Christ in each of his merits particularly, or no?

To which I say, that it is the work of God the Father, to proportion the
merits of Christ Jesus in particular to the souls need: its God the Father,
who accepts the merit, and therefore he only can proportion it. Poor finite
faith (though it know never so much of the particular merit) yet cannot do it,
because the merit is infinite.

Faith only hearing the offer of God (already reconciled and appeased by this
merit) to be freely tendered to her, receaues this tender as God makes it, that
is, all the Lord Jesus made by God to the soul, wisdom, righteousness, and
what else soever.

So that whether we comprehend the thing offered or no, its no material: if we
believe the offer to be truly made to us, we receive it in the kind wherein God
bestows it; and in a word, when we cannot comprehend it, the Lord comprehends
us.

So that faith is casting of the soul upon the offer of Christ from the
Father, giving him all at once in all his good things (which the Spirit
reueales; and the more the better) yet faith is not in this most to be admired
for particular applying each benefit, but for her accepting of what the Lord
has couched in the offer, that is, whole Christ.

Secondly, I say, this answer is to be noted against a Schismatic opinion of
some, that hold, the Act of Believing, to be that which God accepts to
justification.

A dangerous conceit! which makes Christ a mere servant to faith, and under the
color of ascribing honor to faith, takes away all Christ's preeminence. For
although this opinion exclude not Christ wholly, from the reckoning, yet in the
act of justifying, it only gives all to the work of faith. And they say, As
the act of Adams sin condemned him: so the act of our faith iustifies us.

But the Parallel is foolish and absurd. Adams sin might condemn himself and
us: but our faith can neither save ours nor our selves, of it self: that which
it saues us by, is the object and merit which it apprehends, and that by the
act of Gods imputing it to us.

Q. You seem to make imputation an act of Gods free grace: but the word is
used as an act of justice, for Paul says, To him who works, righteousness
is imputed by debt?

A. I answer, Paul there opposing Justification by works, and justification by
Faith, Romans 4.4, 5
(for the more cur^ant expression) uses one word in both cases: but very
improperly. For its as if a man should say to his debtor, Pay me an hundredth
pound, and I will impute it as an whole discharge. This we know is no proper
speech, for in such a case its small thank to him to impute that, for which
he is bound to give acquittance: so that imputing (properly) is gracious.

For it is such an act of God, as coming between our believing and his
justifying, does not legally take any discharge of debt from us, but does
graciously impute that which is not ours, as if it were ours, for the making of
us guiltless and accepted.

Q I conceive you somewhat better. Howbeit I still see that imputation is of
such a thing as is our own really: why then not as well of a thing inherent,
viz. a righteousness of our own, as the Papists dream?

A. Because these two have a wind difference, viz. to be really made ours, and
to be from, or inherently in us. The righteousness of Christ imputed, cannot
justify us, except it be ours, how be it it is so, not because it comes from
within us, but because its cast upon us; and in a word, its not first in us and
then imputed: but first imputed, and then made ours.

Q. But can mere imputation make a thing really ours?

A. Yea. Nothing can be more real then imputation. The imputing of a man is
real, when he imputes an uncertain and undue payment, as if certain and due;
and this is good and firm among men. 2 Samuel 19.19, 23.
David's not imputing Shemei's railing, is a sufficient release to him of the
offense and punishment. The imputing of Adams sin to us, is as real, as if
we had been in the garden with him. Christ's taking our guilt upon him, was as
real, and as really felt, as if himself had been the offender. And shall not
his imputed righteousness be as real as if our selves could in our own
persons have satisfied, or as if we had needed none? Yes verily.

Q. What issues then from this imputation of God?

A. The act of God justifying us really and freely from all our sin and
guilt, and all the curse due thereto, Romans 8.33.
quitting us by proclamation (as I may say) from heaven, by the voice of his
Spirit through faith: so that having disabled all enemies from giving in
evidence, lo, he absolueth us as having nothing come in against us.

As once he scattred those accusers of the woman, Ioh. 9 so that none came in
to accuse her, but turned their backs with confusion, and so discharged the
woman: so does he here: having disabled all evidence against us, he does
impute blamelesnesse unto us, and declare to us our righteousness, yea
proclaiming us righteous.)

And as the Creditor abhorres to receive the debt of his debtors surety, and
yet to count him a debtor still: so the Lord having accepted Christ's price for
us, abhorres so to disable his Sons payment, as to require the debt at our
hands the second time: but rather disables his own Wrath and Justice from
thinking of any further demand of us. And (touching the freedom of it.

Whereas it might be objected, How can that be his free act, which has such a
price paid to purchase it? I answer, no man dare call it free on the behalf of
the Father and Christ: for so its the dearest purchase that the World ever
heard of: but in respect of both the Father and Christ to us ward: the Father
has freely given himself content in his Son, and Christ has freely yielded
it to the Father: so that, (whatsoever it cost Christ) it costs us nothing: we
may come (nay must) without our cost, with empty hands, and buy it for nothing:
so that in truth, the m^re it cost to purchase, and the less it cost us to
c^m^ by the freer, is that justification which absolues us: and the truer is
that of Paul, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace.

Q. What is the use hereof?

A. The Uses are many. Let me begin with you of my own Congregation, to whom
although as dead, yet I speak (this being, as you know, the last Sermon I
preached among you) let I say, my admonition unto you, be this: It has not bin
with you as with every Congregation wherein preaching has been.

To you I may truly say, That now toward these 56. years the Lord Jesus has
been crucified among you. I doubt not but the Lord has thousands in many
Congregations of this land, who though they have wanted that full and clear
light, which you have enjoyed, yet (as faithful servants of God) walk with
him, and serve him instantly day and night in simplicity of heart and innocence
of life.

Give me leave to say unto you, in this five or six years past (besides
Sermons) God has revived the Doctrine of Christ and Sacraments: of
selfdeniall, faith, the satisfaction, the imputation of righteousness, among
you: (and God grant you long to enjoy the doctrine and practice of these
grounds) but what answer shall ye make to God, if as he has walked in and out
at large with you in all his truths, opening unto you all these welsprings of
salvation, and concealing nothing from you, which humane weakness has been
able to utter, you still shall fail and come short of such people, as (I may
truly say) have had but the Baptism of John among them?

Thus I speak in respect of that clear light of all Christ, both in his
satisfaction and Gods imputation, in season and out of season urged unto you.

Remember; To whom much is given, of them much will be required! What would
many Eunuchs. Corneliuies, and Proselites (ignorant of those things that have
been pind to their sleues) give, that the things you have heard might sound in
their ears? Why is all this cost, but that you might also walk in and out,
with God, in all your ways? not only in a moral, abstinent, harmless, and
honest manner (which is a great favor) but with a broken and selfedenied
heart, living by faith daily in this Imputation of a Satisfaction? holding your
part in it yesterday, to day and for ever? Heb. 13.8.
Do ye not account it one thing to live by guess and devout aims: and
another to know your Righteousness; to cleave to it by a promise? to cleanse your
selves by it from all loosenes and privy lusts? to season all your liberties,
to alieniate and supply your crosses, to enable you to all Duties, to fructify
all means, to sanctify all estates, and to make your death happy and welcome?
Beware, beware, lest there be found among poor people (that never heard of
the Doctrines which thus long have sounded in your ears) many, whose
Simplicity, innocence and zeal equals, if not exceedes yours.

Oh! let not any of you be found naked (at the coming of Christ) of this Robe
of his, or lying at these welsprings without power to taste them! be not
unsettled in a Christian course, stand fast in your liberty: go on with God in
all means, duties and graces, yea even in the hardest times, streights and
distempers: suffer no love of the earth, profit, ease, lust to eclipse the
luster of the Lord Jesus which has shined among you: But; as many of Gods
Saints before my parting, and since, have dyed with joy and Triumph by this
imputation of Christ: so strive ye, and run ye as ye may overtake them,
and none may take away this your crown from you!

Secondly, let this be consolation to all faint and weak children

First, tell me, weak soul, if I should come and say, Thou were as holy as
Job, as upright as David, believing as Abraham, zealous as Phinees, would it
not make thy heart leap within thee? Surely although I dare not say these of
thee, yet I dare say this, If all these had not had the Robe of Christ's imputed
righteousness cast over the holiest of all their Graces, their vnhallowednesse
had defiled them, and the greatest of their holiness had not profited the^. And
lo, this Robe thou have as fully, largely and deeply, as the best of all these
ever had.

The imputation of God is equal to all his justified ones: one has no more
then another. If thou could come in and say, That Abraham or Peter had more
Righteousness of Imputation to cover them, then thou, it were somewhat; But lo,
thy Righteousness of imputation is as large as the largest of theirs, If they
have gathered some more patience, some more knowledge, some more love, thanks
and zeal, that others can repeat Sermons, or pray better then thou, follow
thou after them: envy them not: he that had for them, has for thee, I say
not, equal grace, (what shall it need, if it be sufficient?) but I assure
thee, that none has gathered more Manna then an Homer full:.2 Cor. 8.15
so much thou have, and more they have not, then their Homer of the imputed
righteousness. Let this joy thee in thy defects! and teach thee to honor that
God with more and more holiness, who has honored thee with the equal
Righteousness of his best Servants.

eternal Spirit by which the Lord Jesus offered up himself for his elect, (the
weakest as well as the strongest) shall also sustain thee: It is the stock
which thou art (by Imputation) implanted into, which holds thee: not thou, it:
look thou to thy receiving faith, and that shall so enable thee by the virtue
of the gift received, that (whatsoever thy fears now be) that shall uphold
thee eternally, and when thou art weakest, the power of it shall be most
magnified in thee.



The first respect.
And first, in respect of the Nature of it. Other graces of inherence dwell in
the soul, and are active within and upon the soul more or less, as patience,
sobriety, etc, But the Nature of faith (although it be a Gift put into the
soul, yet) stands rather in a Passive receptiuenes then an actiuenes: its
rather like to a Beggar, then a Worker: the Beggar forsaking his bare walls,
seeks out for his living, and takes it into himself from without: the Worker
earnes it, from the principle of his own skill.

There is no grace appointed to that purpose, to which faith is; viz. out of
her home-emptinesse to look out and to receive into her self from God, the
virtue of the Lord Jesus, by this imputing of righteousness: and scowring her
self with water of life from his welspring, and with wealth from his treasures.

Secondly, in respect of the constancy of it: other Graces while they last, do
us great stead: as patience under a cross: thanks, for blessings: but faith
always recea^^s this imputation of Christ from the Father, as well to cover and
beautify us all our life, as at our first conversion, and carries her influence
into each grace, both to strengthen and keep the life of it, and also to cover
the wants of it, yea the defects of our whole course.

No grace can supply faith properly: but faith supplyeth all them. For she
lets into them the virtue of the Lord Jesus, imputed by the Father, to
accept, cover, and purge them all, (not to speak of the work of
sanctification, of which elsewhere.)

Thirdly, in respect of the prerogative of it, that its admitted ^o be all in
all with God for the soul: I may say it is that upon earth in this militant
course, which Holiness shall be in Heaven.

For its faith only which maintains Union, and thereby communion with God.
She is as the Lords privy seal, through whose hands all grants pass and take
effect: no one promise can be Yea and Amen, without her: She receaues from God
a right to all mercies, ordinances, and privileges: concurres with God, in
this great wo^ke of imputing Christ's righteousness, yea, and the Lord dares
trust her with her prerogative.

Its said, Solomon set his mother Bathsheba by him, sit^ing on his Throne; for
she was safe, and would not pull away, but ascribe glory to him, and count
hers to rest in his.

So is faith admitted in a sort to do all under God, to justify, to impute, to
reconcile and the rest: because she is made for the nonce, she is loyal, and
made for the honor of God: all that can be (thinking her self safe when she can
set the Crown upon his head) but abhorring all treachery, She is a Grace that
excels all which Adam ever had: because she hides all her life, hopes, and
welfare with Christ in God: he that steals away her treasure, must rob the
Lord first, who keeps it.

Whereas, Adam in the midst of all his perfection, yet could keep no one
parcel of it, but lost all at once:

She can both apply the promise offered in Christ, and the imputation of
righteousness from God the Father, both at once, and has (in a sort) a kind
of omnipotence with God, and so also, makes that which comes from her, (as
prayer, hearing, Sacraments, and the like) of the same precious, effectual
nature with herself.



So here, if he fail us in any grace, it is in some fruits of faith, as the
grace of thankfulness, love and joy, which are to be imperfect in this life,
and so in knowledge of particular cases, or the like, (none of which, though we
had them, could justify us) but as for the grace of reconciliation, and
imputation of perfect righteousness, which only can accept us, and pardon us,
and cover all our wants, this he has provided to the full for us, even in this
life to enjoy.

I say, in the midst of all imperfection, yet the perfection of that which
cannot be wanted, he has given us. Yea, and this he will have his people to
know: although it is the bane of hypocrites; Yet it is the cordial of each
poor believer; Dogs only will snap at it, to maintain themselves in a
licentious course; but the believer will bless God fot it, and be so far
from laying it in his own way, as a block of Presumption, that rather he will
say, If the LORD has so regarded me, as to account me his perfect
righteousness, in the midst of my unavoidable corruptions of Nature and life;
Shall I turn his grace into wantonness? or shall not I keep all wilful
wickedness from his eyes, who has turned his eye from all my transgressions?

Fifthly, let it be a ground of Self-denial to

I remember what is written of that Worthy, Learned and Holy Scot Master
Rollock, in his life: That being on his deathbed, and much encouraged by them
that visited him, by his worthy labors, I abhor (says he) my Rectorship of
University, Readership of Divinity, and Pastorship of Edinburgh (all which with
great profit to all, he underwent) that I may be found in Christ, clothed
with his righteousness: all mine own is dung in comparison of this.

The fourth Article.
Question. PRoceed to the fourth Article, show what it is, and the Coherence
thereof with the former?

A. It lays forth the mean or way, by which (ordinarily) the Lord exhibits
unto, and settles upon the poor sinner this deliverance.

As touching the coherence, as in the two former Articles, the fountain in
God, and the foundation of it in Christ is described: so in this fourth is
showed, how the soul may know them both to be here: Its said, Heb. 4.13.
That God with whom we have to do, is a Searcher, etc. Note it. The soul in
her distress has to do with God, to his Tribunal she stands hearing her
Judge.

Now, it is not the hearing of his giving of Christ, nor of a satisfaction,
which can quiet her: but this, that she may know its given and performed for
her. Here therefore in this fourth Article, I say, The offended Father has
accepted this satisfaction, is well pleased with it, his heart is made placable
by it, and now his heart is opened, and his bosom of love bared toward a
poor wretch: and this he vtters by a proclamation, and by an offer of grace
to them, if they will believe him to mean as he speaks. See 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
Him that knew no sin, he made sin, etc. And what of this?

Therefore he says, Be reconciled to God. Now when the soul hears of this
ground and building, she feels her self to have somewhat to say for her self
in this her dealing with God: I thank thee, O Lord, for granting it, and for
the price paid: but now, seeing thou have done it that in thy being satisfied,
I might have my part in it, as offered and pind to my sleeue, when I see a thing
more precious then the world, laid in my lap by thy hand, I tremble to think I
should refuse my own salvation.

Q. Because this point is large, therefore lay down some particulars to unfold
it. And first, what is this mean by which GOD reueales this deliverance?

A. The Gospel in the Ministry of reconciliation, is the instrument of this
Revelation, and that both fully and only.

The point is plain, all the Word witnesses it. Paul tells us, that when the
love of GOD appeared, then he saved us: This appearance is the light of the
Gospel, and the arising of the day star thereby in the heart. Read by name,
2 Cor. 4.6. GOD that commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined
into our hearts. See the place. Briefly, hence it is, that its called the power
of GOD to Salvation, Romans 1.16. See Matthew 13.44. 2 Cor. 3. vlt. The field in
which this pearl is hidden, the Mirror in which we behold the LORD with open
face, the Net inclozing the fishes, the Light, the Leaven, etc.

Now yet this Gospel is not the mean, in respect of the bare letters and
syllables of it, but in the Ministry of Reconciliation. See 2 Cor. 3.8, 9.
where Paul calls it the Ministration of Righteousness, and adornes it with
terms of honor above the Laws Ministry.

Especially, See that 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Where Paul speaking of this great gift
of Christ, twice ioynes this with it, And he has made us Ministers of
Reconciliation: as if this were a material point: We the Ministers of God,
beseech you, be reconciled: receive not the grace of God in vain.

As who say, It were a great help to our Faith to consider, GOD has sealed
Ministers to engage their truth for God, that if God do not mean as he
speaks, we are liars.

And lastly, this is the only ordinary way of reu^^ling: (ordinary I say,
because what God can do we speak not) and no other. So that if God revealed
not himself thus to his Church, we should remain as blind as Moles in the
earth. As we had never known sin, but by the Law: so neither Grace, but by
the Gospel. See John 1.17. Nay, much more. For although both stand in
Revelation, yet there is more of the Law left in our ruinous nature, then of
the Gospel: no one sparkle of the latter is in us by nature, it stands merely
in Revealing. Hence Paul so often presses it as a Mystery hidden from the
foundations of the World, ^ Tim. 19.10*
till now the Gospel vnueyled the Curtain. And although the Lord revealed
this in a dark sort and within narrow bounds, and in sundry sorts in times
past, according to their capacity, yet now, only by this mean of his Son in
the Gospel, Heb. 1.1.

Q. But is there not some peculiar thing in the Gospel, by which he reueales
it?

A. Yes: And that is his gracious offer, made to the soul therein: which is
nothing else, but the expression of the Covenant of Grace, that he is willing
a poor soul may come to him without doubting and fear, because he holds out
this Golden Scepter unto it, and bids it, Be reconciled.

Hither refer all those textes wherein this offer is made, both in the covenant
and in the seal of Baptism, Esaias 55.1. He, every one that thirsts, come.
And, Let him that thirsts, drink freely, Reu. 22.17. and John 7.37. In the
great day of the feast, Jesus cried, If any man thirst, let him come. So that
as a Prince, having set up his Proclamation in all places, intimates his mind:
so the Lord by this Tender of Christ, is acquitted from all aspersion of
vnbeteamingnesse.

Especially if we consider those cords of his love, by which he draws the
soul to see his meaning: sometimes by his inuitings to this feast of his
Son, sometimes by his contestations, as Esaias. 55.2. Sometimes by his
entreaties and earnest exhortings, sometimes by his allurements, Genesis 9.26.
H^s. 2.14. to persuade and toll on the heart that hangs off, by the promises
of all the good things which he offreth. Sometimes by his mournings and
passionate lamentations, Math. 23. vlt. Ioh. 3.19. Mar. 16.16
Sometimes by his severe threats to all that ref^ze his offers: all these show
how willing and cordial he is to part with his grace: (Not to add the
freedom, the fulness, the simplicity, the unchangeableness, the fidelity, the
strength and ability to make good that which he offers, all which are the
ingredients of his offer and promise) and lastly, sometimes by the universality
of it, that he dispenceth it without all respect of persons, age, sexes, states
and conditions, who exempt not themselves. But the especial properties of the
offer to be noted for our purpose are three, first, Liberty, secondly,
simplicity, and thirdly, fidelity.

First, Liberty, that he does it freely to whom he pleases, passing by
millions of people in the world, and offering it to such and such nations, as he
did of old to Israel, neglecting the world; so that its merely vnconditionall
and free, as when Paul came to Athens or Ephesus, who had never heard of
Gospel before.

Secondly, simplicity, that the Lord being truly pacified in Christ, offers
the fruit thereof without grudging, falsehood or equivocation, and with an open
heart, meaning as he speaks. Understand me of the Simplicity of his
Dispensation, whereby he declares what his will is that we should do: not of
Secrecy, whereby he decrees what he will do with his Creature.

Thirdly, Fidelity, whereby he does most readily and fully perform whatsoever
he offers to al who put him to the trial, and accept it. But more in the last
Article.

Q. Why are you so large in opening of this?

A. Because its the maine hinge whereupon the door of hope and faith turns:
the offer of God satisfied, being the immediate object to which the soul is to
resolve and empty it self. The offer I say assisted with a promise. For an
offer is no otherwise differing from a promise, then as a general out of which
a particular issues: the promise included in an offer, but yet in special
expressing the covenant of GOD to all that receive the offer, that he will
receive them, be their GOD, both in pardon and in all sufficiency.

Into these the soul does wholly power forth her self: which that we may
understand, consider this, that we have to do with the Father immediately, but
with our Lord Jesus only mediately, as a mean to lead us with confidence unto
him. The Father properly looks at the Son as our Surety, and us, for his
sake: but we look at him directly, and to our Lord Jesus, as our Mediator. So
that look what we can show for our Reconciliation, must come from the Father,
and that is his offer and promise, oath and covenant of mercy. Into that
therefore the poor soul is to resolve it self, all her doubts; fears,
temptations and distempers whatsoever, and so to remain settled. So that it
mainly concerns the soul to understand the nature, ground and properties of
the offer and promise.

Q. Well, I partly conceive you: what use is there of this?

A. Very manifold and weighty.

Judas and say, Ioh. 14.22.
Why have thou revealed thy self unto us, and not unto the world? How should
this woeful desertion provoke us to prize the revelation of this Mystery to us?
As for them, how should we pity them? If Paul wept for enemies, how should we
for Infidels? If we saw one drunk and merry doing to execution, how would we
mourn? These go to hell laughing, and shall we not mourn, (though we live not
by them, Xerxes and Caesar.
as some of us do) yet behold them in their deformed, savage nakedness,
beseeching the Lord to shine upon them with this light and offer of the Gospel.

And secondly, this is terror to all Papists that maliciously 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
as that it should have the least free pass^ge ^r be glorified, but their own
Idols and Mass and Trash set up to demolish it. Oh unreasonable ones. Oh
enemies to the Cross of Christ: Whose God is their belly, whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things! But let them know, Phil. 3.18.
that they shall not long continue, the day is at hand wherein both that man of
sin and all his adherents shall perish with the breath of the Lords mouth,
when his Gospel shall break out.

Secondly, terror to all profane Scorners, Neuters, Atheists,

Thirdly, reproof of al Non-discerners of this Grace of the Pardon in the
Gospel. Oh, the feet of a Minister should be beautiful in this maine
respect, (though others also) because he brings glad tidings of peace! Without
this, what is the tickling of the ear with other sounds? Learn to know what
the pearl is that lies hid in this field, and to discern what Jewel is the
most precious in this Cabinet, and set thy mark upon it.

Luke 14.
ends and liberties before it: and although they dare not be openly profane,
yet suffer not themselves to be convinced of this excellency which the Gospel
offers them, remain still in their ciuility, their hypocrisy, their desires,
and performances, duties and good affections: but alas! The offer of grace and
reconciliation in the Gospel is nothing with them: If all be true which I have
said of this offer, and the properties of it, what shall become of them that
for dross reject it, lay out their money for that which is no bread, Esaias 55.3.
rest in somewhat under the grace of the Gospel? If the moale in the earth had
reason, she would choose rather to live in the air: if the tree had reason, it
would choose a nobler life of sense: if a beast had wisdom, it would covet the
reasonabler nature of a man, but the Lord offering no less to a forlorn lost
sinner then the grace of the Gospel, the life of God and immortality, how few
desire it? But rest in the base estate of temporizing hypocrites, of carnal
professors, to hear, receive, pray, repeat Sermons, and get some few good
desires: but as for that which no hypocrite, or unsound professor can attain
to, a broken, hungry, self deined heart, that Christ and his grace might enter
and dwell there, oh, how harsh is it? Therefore, remember that in Heb. 2.2, 3,
4. If those that transgressed Moses Law, Deu. 29.19
and being convinced thereby, yet said within themselves, I shall have peace,
and so walked stubbornly, adding drunkenness to thirst: Nay, if they that
sinned only in a ceremony, yet by two or three witnesses, were condemned: what
shall they look for that despise the grace of the Gospel, and that offer
which God has honored by so many miracles, and such abundance of Sermons, and
the powerful Ministry of so many preachers? Beware of refuzing such
salvation, as being a more spiritual wickedness, then any moral offense.

Thirdly, its reproof to all cauillers that descant upon

But (say they) we are afraid God means it us not. If we be chozen, we are
sure to be called to believe it: if not, none of their Preachers can give it
us. It must be God (say they) and not man that must work our hearts and draw
us.

But, oh vain iangler, tell me, has not God revealed his Will in his offer?
Do thou know his secrets? Is not his offer ingenuous? Say not in thine heart,
Romans 10.25
Who shall go up to Heaven, or descend, etc? Lo, the Word is in thy mouth, it
is near thee. If Jeremy in the dungeon had told Ebedmelec, he knew not whether
he meant to help him out or no, and so have refuzed to come out, had he not
justly been left there still?

So, when the Lord lets down the ladder of his offer, into thy dungeon, casts
thee his cords and rags to put under thy armeholes, that he may draw thee out,
do thou cavil and say, Lord, I know not whether thou meanst me well or no,
perhaps thou will pull me out a little way, and then let me fall back again,
perhaps I am not elected! Is not this a woeful dishonor to the simplicity of
the offer? Was he ever tied at all to offer it? and do thou distrust his
ingenuous meaning in it?

Thy blood be upon thy own head, in that thou chuzest rather to smite the
Lord to thy own destruction, then to set thy foot in his ladder, and put on
his cords, that thou might come out! The way for thee is first to step upward
that thou may come to the top, then to leap to the top at first, to break
thy neck backward.

The fourth use is, Advertisement to Gods Ministers, to magnify their
Ministry in deed and practice, by beseeching the people to be reconciled to
God. Conceal no part of this truth of God: but above all ply thy Ministry of
reconciliation.

This will sweeten, and familiarize all other doctrine: the first Part of the
Catechism about sin, and the third about Godly life, will follow this second
Part of Reconciliation.

Col. 3. in the end.
Its the office God has put upon thee, O Archippus, fulfill it. Woe be to thee
who may preach, and can, and do not! Or do, and yet do not this.

Thou art one of wisdoms handmayds, one of the Kings servants, sent out to
bring in guests to this feast of his Son: learn thy errand well, mistake it
not, get it by heart, let not the fault of rejecting this call, be laid upon
thee, and thou have saved thy own soul. Paul was so acquainted with this
work, that he says, It was committed unto him: Nay, 1 Timothy 1. he adds, It
was his Gospel. As mayds use to say, I must go dress up my Chambers and make
my beds, not (because theirs, but because it is their office) so Paul calls the
Gospel his and ours, 2 Cor. 4.4. [If our Gospel be hid:] because it was his
office. Let us then all join in preaching it, and offering it, not with a veil
upon our face, as Moses, but 2 Cor. 3.13, 16. with open face show the people
this Mirror, that they may be transformed by it, from glory to glory.

Q. What other uses are there hereof?

A. Especially this, that this Article be a sweet preparatiue unto us, to
frame us to believe. Entertain we not any base, cursed thoughts of GOD in the
simplicity of his offer. Nourish all possible persuasion in thy soul, of his
unfeigned meaning toward thee in this kind: thou can honor him no better,
then to agree with him, in his meaning well to thee.

There is no greater difficulty of Faith then this Seed of bondage in us, to
judge of God by our selves. We muse as we use. If we have an enemy, we
cannot forget his wrongs, we meet him not without indignation: and therefore
so we think of GOD also to us, and the rather, because he has so much
vantage over us.

But, oh poor wretch! Is this the way to get out of his displeasure, to
nourish iealouzy against his love? Is it not rather oil to the flame? pull
down thy traitors heart, hate not him whom thou have hurt, put on an holy,
and childlike opinion of him, who when he needed not, yet purpozed, sent,
received this satisfaction for thee, and therefore cannot lie in offering it to
thee.

Say thus, LORD, thy sweet offer, naked bosom, cords of love, Passions of
sick love, sometime to allure, sometime to contest, command, vrge^ threaten,
and beseech, turning thee into all forms of persuasion, to win my soul; all
these convince me of thy well meaning toward me! If my own enmity to my
enemy, and the slander of Satan that thou enuiest my good, do assault me
never so much, and my own traiterous heart conspire with them, yet this thy
gracious offer in thy Gospel, shall bear down all. Read Esaias 55.9. For my
ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your thoughts, but as far
above them, as Heaven above the Earth.

Add this: All the understanding of man cannot comprehend the love of this
offer, no more then the eye of a needle can the great Camel: and shall I go
about to lessen it?

Surely, if this should be a great stay to my heart, that the Minister of God
has offered me this grace, and dares seal it upon earth to my poor soul,
shall not the offer of God himself, 1 Samuel 15.16.
the strength of Israel that cannot lie, much more sway with me! Oh Lord,
captiuate all my hatred of spirit, and base treachery against thee.

Its reported of a certain Merchant of London (in the Story of England) that
he made much of a poor Cobbler that dwelt by him, a cankred Papist, and did as
good as maintain him; yet this Traitor went about to betray him to death: This
Merchant having escaped his hands, yet out of his love, used all means to be
friends with him again, and used him as before: all this would not do, his
heart was so villainous, he would shun the way of him, and not look at him.
It fell so out at length, that he met him in such a narrow lane, as he could
not balke him, but must needs talk with him. The good Merchant takes him to
him, and told him, he was glad he had met him, and he wondered what he meant so
to decline from him! What said he, do you think me your enemy? If I were,
could I not crush ye with a word speaking? Alas, I am not offended with you,
if you be not with me, for all your treachery, but forgive and forget it. The
words of this man so pierced the Cobblers heart, that it brake instantly, and
he falling down upon his knees, and with bitter reares confessed his
villainy, and repenting of it, told him, This love should for ever bind him
unto him, and so he continued.

This base Papist, is the heart of every child of old Adam: this royal
Merchant is the Lord: this narrow lane is the straight of conscience beset with
sin and curse: this kind behavior is this offer of Grace: Let us not be
worse to it, then a cankred Papist: but break our hearts, and melt into
tears, and with Saul to David, say, Where shall a man find such love, 1 Samuel
24.19.
as to spare his enemy, when he had him in his hand, and to be content to cut
off the lap of a Garment, when he might have cut my throat? Break thy heart
in the bosom of this love!

Q Is there any more uses of it?

A. Touching the maine use of faith, I shall finish the Esaias 27.3. Anger is not
in me. I^ I were angry, What should dry stubble do? But I am reconciled: I
cannot now be angry with a poor soul: I have taken order to answer my Justice
by my Son, and in so doing, I meant no more to be angry. If I were, it was
for a time to humble an hard heart: but then with everlasting mercy I will
compass thee. I have touched this already before. Only mark this, that all
that is in a promise, or an offer, is little enough to settle a poor soul
being in her fears. Therefore be able to say, A promise is no empty thing: it
proceeds from a GOD satisfied: therefore, If I perish by believing, be it so,
I will perish.

Q What is the most proper adiunct of the Church of Christ?

A. Communion of Saints or members of this mystical body of Christ, which is
nothing else, but the due enter course and holy fellowship, reciprocally
between member and member, for the good of the whole. Read Ephesians. 4. verse. 12,
13. Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3.

Q How many things are we to consider in this Communion of members in the
Church?

A. Two things first, due qualifying of the persons that are to communicate.
Secondly, due exercise of Communion among them that are so qualified. Both
intimated in that text, Psalm. 133.1. They must be brethren: And these Brethren
must dwell even together.

Q. Wherein stands this Qualification?

A. Generally in this, that they be Brethren. No sooner is a man a believer
and a new Creature, borne to GOD, but he is also a brother, or she a sister of
those that are bredde: both Relations go together.

So then, first thou must be a member of this body, a citizen of this
Jerusalem, a son and daughter of the Almighty, and a sister of the Church, a
free denizon of this corporation: or else thou art not so much as generally
qualified. Touching the grounds of this, I will not here prevent my self, for
I shall handle the point of faith and the New creature in their places: only
here I say, in these this qualification consists: No bastard, no Gibeonite, no
stranger, no blemished one may enter the Temple of this Communion.

Secondly, and more specially, that they have the true spirit of Brethren, of
members: by which the former is manifested to be true. For all that are truly
borne children, and legitimate, have the true spirit of such: and also of
brethren: this Spirit of Communion therefore is the trial of sound ones from
Countetfeits.

Q. Show then some marks of this Spirit of Communion?

A. As the Philosophers say, There is a soul of the world which holds together
the parts: so much more, there is a Spirit of Communion which unites the
members of it. As the parts of the body of man would loosen and fall asunder,
if there were not instruments of sinews, of muscles, of ligaments aptly
joining them: so here. This Spirit of Communion then is the same with the
Spirit of union: though in a several consideration, he that is one with God
that begat, 1. Ioh. 5.1.
is one with them that are begotten: and the one issues from the other.

But to the point; this Spirit of Communion, may be discovered in these two
particulars.

First, In the spirit of preserving her self in her estate and integrity.

Secondly, In the spirit of Furniture for the several operations, whereby
Communion may be supported.

Q. What is the former of these, viz. Preserving of Communion?

A. Its a qualification, whereby it is with the members of this mystical body,
as it is with all other bodies, either Natural, or politic: it has an
instinct given unto it to preserve her self in her estate, from dissolution
and ruin. No body has so close and near a Sympathy to it self as this:
nothing need teach any living member in the body, to preserve it self and the
body in which it subsists: instinct does it alone. So here: for the opening
whereof, consider these few things.

First, This spirit of Selfe-preseruation in the Church, is the spirit of
Separation of different or contrary parts which threaten ruin to her. Metals
melted will go together and unite their substance, but sever the dross, which
is of another nature from incorporating with them. Psalm. 15.

The Citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem is brought in by his loathing quality:
he loathes Swearers, liars, forswearers, usurers, and so of the rest: the scope
is, a true member of Communion, discernes a non-member, a Neuter, and loathes to
intermixe or unite with them: As Peter told Simon Magus, Act. 8.21.
Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this body.

They may thrust in themselves into fellowship undiscerned, but so far as
they are known, the Spirit of Communion segregates them from her self. No
Colliers trade is so noisome to a Fullers, as the malignant properties of non
members, is yrkesome to this body of Communion. Yea the LORD has appointed it
to be so in the very external Communion of his Church, in the ordinance of
it: that spots of Assemblyes. Goats and Swine be avoided: much more then in
spiritual Communion. 2. Cor. 6.14, 15.
No Communion between Christ and Belial, light and darkness. If thou see a man
in whom the Spirit of wisdom dwells not, one of another corporation, of a dead,
rotten, false, carnal, sensual spirit; Lo, he is not for thee. See 2 Timothy
3.5. There must be no Marriage between Israel and Ashdod: no inwardnes
b^tween them and those that abhor Sacraments, Gospel, Pro. 25.23
Ministry and ordinances. As the North wind is to the rain, and the face of
the Prince to a flattering Ziba: so is the Spirit of this Communion to all her
opposites: I say no, to their persons, but their properties, abiding such.

Secondly, this Preserving Spirit, is also Aggregatiue of like parts to her
self, for the filling up and strengthening of Communion: She is still aiming
at the bodies increase: and therefore as the waters of the sea win upon the
banks: so does this spirit of Communion seek out and enlarge her borders.
She is like to Dan, whose border was too narrow: she gains still, as a
conquering army has town after town falling to it: so this Spirit both in
the Ministry of it, and in the other members, endeavor after thee winning of
more and more, to become her Brethren, her citizens, her friends: no body has
such a faculty at this for the strengthening of her self, for number, for
assistance, both in gifts and graces, as this has. Our Lord Jesus the head of
this Communion, spent his life in gathering members to this body. Peter
gathered 3000 at once: and each member of it does, or ought to become all in all
to gain some: The Angels rejoice in it: the blessed Saints do long for the
perfect collection of all the members into one: and there is no truly borne
son of God, but seeks to get as many as he can out of the world, into this
fellowship, mourning to see what an huge body the malignant Church is to the
militant.

Thi^dly, this Spirit is a Preventing, and wary Spirit to de^^ate whatsoever
attempts might be made against her Communion, either by opposite persons or
properties: for persons,

First, she does with very quick sight epsy, and iealously

The eylidde is not so tender over the eye, last any hurt should befall it, as
this Spirit is of them that plot against the welfare of her Communion. See Esaias
63.18, 19. and 64.11, 12. where the Prophet in the name of the Church presses
the Lord against them long before.

And so I say. Secondly, of all contrary properties

Q. What is the second, to wit, the furniture of Communion?

A. It is that Spirit which furnishes the Church with all such gifts as serve
to maintain Communion.

Q. What are they?

A. Many.

The first and mother grace of all, is Love: 1 Cor. 13.2, 3, 4. Romans 13.10.
and all the graces besides this, draw their original from her: she being
given for the nonce to nourish the rest, and to sustain communion. Its nothing
else save a beam of that love of God to the soul, which does reflect it self
back to the Lord himself, and being unable to reach him, lights upon his
Saints that excel in virtue, Psalm. 16.2. Its that which Saint John so
magnifies, telling us, John 5.1. He that loves him that begat, loves him that
is begotten. Its that band of perfection, Col. 3.14. that holds in all the
duties of Communion, as the corner stone does the sides of the wall.

And it arises from the sight of that Image of Gods grace, which shines in his
people: which rauisheth each other to behold, and knitteth each to other in the
sense thereof, as betokening the excellency of that fountain whence it comes.
1 Samuel 18.1. Ionathans heart was not more knit to David, then the Saints each
to other. It is the soul and life of Communion: it is given for the use of the
Saints: who could never endure all things, hope all things, suffer, do, and
turn their hand to the works of this fellowship, except this instinct of love
caused them to go to work. But love makes all sweet.

Q. What is the second?

A. Sociablenesse, a compound of three cords not easily broken. viz.
Amiablenesse, Humbleness, and Self-denial.

Col. 3.15.
Amiablenesse is that holy suauity of Spirit, which opposes tartness,
austerity, sowrenesse and sullenness: whereby men are like ragged vnhewne
stones, unmeet to couch in this holy building. Contrariwise, amiablenesse is a
gentle and alluring facility of spirit, which both puts forth it self to all
courteous and gentle behavior, and also draws affection and delight from
others.

Tit. 3.3.
Many are so hateful and hating, so dogged, churilsh and harsh in their temper,
that they are indisposed for society: more fit to be Monks or Ancorits then
Christians, through their Timon-like disposition. But amiablenesse is that
grace, that both acts and prouokes all loving offices of Communion.

Phil. 2.3.
Humbleness is a grace which opposes pride, a vice excommunicate from true
fellowship of Saints: causing men to think themselves, their parts, their
persons too good for Communion.

Romans 12.16
Humility thinks so meanly of it self, that it reioyces, it may be compted
worthy to be a door keeper in this house of Communion: and is glad it may be
admitted unto it. Its discerned by these two marks, Peaceablenesse and
Equalnes: both principal pillars in this frame.

Phil. 2.3.
The former resisting Contentiousnesse, singularity of opinion, Schism and
faction, prejudice, surmisings, censoriousnesse, uncharitableness and the like.

Romans 13.13. and 11.3
The latter abhors all disdain, partiality, and want of indifferency in this
Communion. We say of friendship, Either it meets with like, or makes like.
Those vnequalnesses of wealth, age, parts, education, and birth, learning, wit,
experience, superiority, greatness, do vanish in this Communion: for it makes
all alike, (not in civil respect) but in point of membership.

If it find equality, it sanctifies it: as between Husband and Wife, Children,
Friends, Men of like quality, Calling, State, Gifts, Magistrates, Ministers,
Tradesmen, cutting the sinews of envy, and planting a most even likeness of
mind, of Spirit, and harmony betwixt them.

But if not, yet as the roundnes of the earth reduces al uneven parts to one
figure, so this, all incongruities, dislikes, partialities, if not to an exact,
yet to a competent equalness and proportion.

The third grace of Sociablenesse is Selfedeniall: Which Paul calls, A mynding
and seeking of the things of others, as well as our own. See these texts,
Phil. 2.5. 1 Cor. 10.33. Phil. 2.4. Let (says he) the same mind be in you that
was in Christ, who if he had sought himself, he had left us in our ruin and
misery: but he, Romans 15.3. pleased not himself, but as it is written, etc.

The contrary to this, is self and selfeloue, the bane of Communion, when men
seek their own esteem, their own credit, ends, profit and praise: and if they
fail hereof, they little look how the public welfare goes forward. We know a
private Wealth is contrary to a Commonwealth: So is Selfeloue to Communion. So
that where this threefold cord is knit, there is a great qualification of the
soul to Communion.

Q. What is the third grace?

A. Tenderness and compassion. Col. 3.12.13.
A grace very essential to this communion of Saints. And it concerns the
stronger members toward the weaker, Gal. 6.1. If any be prevented by error,
ignorance, Satan, sudden temptation, let him that is stronger, set him in joint
again, (so the Word is) and restore him in the spirit of meekenes. It cannot
be, but offenses, pritches, tetches, distastes will fall out among Christians:
but tenderness will hand^e these matters, as the Chirurgian^ hand will handle
the broken or spreynt joint, till it have settled it.

This is contrary to that rough and stiff spirit, which cannot interpret,
forbear or long-suffer: but would have all brought to their own level and
scantling: and rather then they w^ll yee^d to the infirmities, errors, and
mistakes of others, they will overthrow Communion. Who (says Paul, 2 Cor.
11.29.) is weak, and I burn not? I am all in all to win some. If I cannot
eat^ flesh, but I must offend my brother, I will not eat it while I live. This
is a rare grace in our age, wherein each one is a man of his own bottom, and
condemues all, who be not of his own frame.

Tender conscience is now called Singularity: as if it ever had been so in the
Church, that in all cases of difference, there could be established one
consent: Nay, its strange to see how custom and prejudice have hardened men
from all tenderness and compassion.

Q. Are there any more graces of Communion?

A. There is no one grace of the Spirit, but makes much for Communion: Phil.
2.2, 3, 4. Col. 3 12. Romans 12.9.
as judicious wisdom, to discern things that differ; stayednesse, to ponder
things without rashness and precipice: sincerity and singleness of heart,
against all false brotherhood: like mindedness, order, and constancy, in
holding out in a good cause: candor and ingenuity of heart: fidelity, and
trustiness: teacheablenesse, thankfulness, cheerfulness, and the rest of
this kind: providence also and forecast. But these I leave to the discretion of
the Reader, to conceive of by those three maine graces beforenamed.

Q. I partly see what you mean by this first General, viz. Qualification:
proceed now to the second. Wherein stands the Exercise of Communion?

A. In three chief things.

First* Graces.

Secondly, Means or Ordinances.

Thirdly, Services or duties: of all which I will add a word or two, and so
come to the use.

Q. What is the Exercize of Communion in Graces?

A. As the commodity to be sold is, so is the market. Look of what account
wares are, in the traffic of men, such are the graces of the Spirit in the
Communion of Saints. See 1 Cor. 1, 4, 6, 7. and 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. They are the
chief commodity that the members of this body trade for.

As earthly men are some Merchants of Pearls, or o^ Gold, or of Silks and
Veluets, or of Spices, etc. So these are Merchants of Graces: and if they raise
to themselves an estate in these, in Precious Faith, in Lively hope, in
Patience, Thankfulness, etc. they count themselves to have made the best of
all markets.

And as the greater the trading is among men, and the more the return, the
richer is the Merchant: so here, the more plentiful the Merchants, and the
commodities to be sold are, the richer are the traders therein.

Q. How may the soul trade for Grace? What are the Rules to be observed
therein?

A. First, each member in this staple of Communion, must get the gift of
exchange. He must not bear the mind to be for himself only, but must
maintain a due intercourse, and exchange of Grace for grace. Look what the
Lord Jesus our head is to all the body, that the members by deriuation are to
be to each other. Read John 1.17. Be sure then first, that thou bring in thy
stock into this bank; remembering that all the members of communion have the
same stock of sanctification, given them to trade withal: they are furnished
with Talents, more or less for this increase, and advantage by other. Read
Luke 19.13. and Matthew. 25.15. Also Ephe. 4.13. Hence it is that they are all
said to partake of one Spirit: and 1 Ioh. 3.3. Every one believer has this
hope: as if no grace ought to be a stranger to any member in this body, for the
kind thereof. Now then having this stock, each must afford grace to other (so
Paul speaks Ephesians. 4.29.) as one does present his ware in the market to
another. And this is to be free of Gods market: to be holy chapmen and
customers therein. As in the Proverbs chap. 1.14. those lewd ones say, Come,
cast in thy lot among us, let us have one purse: so is it here. And this Peter
calls the Dispensation of the manifold graces of God, See his 1. Ep. 4.10.
Paul to Philemon, verse 20. calls the Having joy of him, and refreshing his
bowels in the Lord. Get then this treasure into thee first, (as the trader gets
himself silver, which answers all things) and then, bury not thy talent, but
exchange, and trade, buy and sell, afford good penny worths, live by the gain
of all gracious examples, speeches, behauiours, conuersings in this Communion.
Our Lord Jesus his speech was, It is better to give, then receive.

Grace was put into thee for use, even the good of the body? therefore conceal
it not, share with the Grace of Communion, and out of the treasure of thy good
heart, bring forth good things.

Q. What other Rule do you give for this?

A. Secondly, humility is another excellent mean to exercise Communion in
graces. See Romans 12.10, 2 Cor. 12, 5, 6. Romans 12.16. Which is, To prefer
others graces before our own: and to think no otherwise, nor desire, others
should think of us otherwise, then as we are: condescending to them of mean
degree. Proud ones get little, and do little in the communion of Saints. They
get little:

First, because every one thinks them to be such as need not prayer, need not
counsel, example: their great show make men less tender of them; but a good
man desires, his wants should rather draw forth the help of others, then his
gifts seem to need none.

Secondly, the proud man disdaynes to spy grace in any, save in some eminent
paternes, and men of note, for learning, wit or parts. But humbleness spies
grace even through the cloud of mean estate, learning, parts: it looks
narrowly, and spies oftentimes great grace in a mean man, for attire, for
carriage, and f^^hion.

The Spirit of Grace carries the eye of the humble to the treasure where it
lies, lie it never so close and low. Again, humble ones are both fitter to
commun^cate and to receive. The former, because they think they can fall no
lower nor lose any great credit, for they have no great thing to lose.

Hence it is, that when selfeloue will chuze to have no prayer at all, then to
forfeit her repute: humbleness will trust God with her self, and pray. The
latter, because being empty, they are hungry: and the hungry are gla^ of any
thing. Eagles catch no Flies: but mean ones stoop to mean things.

They are truly servants of the Servants of God. Not that an humble man denies
the grace of God: but because he conceaues, that either he is indeed the
meanest of others in grace: or else that his better graces dwell not so well as
other men's: because darkened with more corruptions then other men's smaller.

The humble Christian is in love with the Graces of others, and out of love
with himself. He enuies not, slights not others: he sees the uncomely parts
often more graced then the comely: and beholds a pearl, (as of patience, wise
speech, cheerfulness, mercy, love,) even in the dunghill of the meanest
outside.

She knows her own vileness, and wonders if any thing can come from such a
one: but others she knows not, and therefore what she sees uncomely, she hides,
but believes that excellency in them which she sees not.

Q. What else is required?

A. Thirdly, coveting of each others graces. 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet the things
that are most excellent. Especially those wherein others excel us most.
Appetite after the graces of communion, is the instinct of Gods Spirit, for the
growth of graces. Many dwell much upon any gift they have, to improove it: but
they see not where the hedge is lowest, to amend it.

Coveting then is, to esteem the good for that which is precious in them, and
to seek it earnestly, Pro. 19.22. That which is desirable in a man, is his
goodness. As Abraham said to the King of Sodom, Genesis 14.21. Give me the
souls, take thou the prey: so the hungry heart couets communion for graces:
other things she seeks in other places, riches and pleasure, and the like:
but Grace she seeks where the Spirit of Grace lies. Men that hunt the Bezor,
seek not her flesh, but that which is precious in her, the stone which is so
cordial.

Base respects are nothing to the Saints, in comparison of this Jewel. And
this they seek couetously, as Paul, Phil. 3. If by any means I might attain,
etc. And indeed its the only mean to procure it; for who, knowing the price
of grace, will help them to it, who are indifferent whether they have it or
not?

The Lord Jesus, when he saw the poor woman would not give him over, till
she had her desire, powered out all his treasure upon her, Matthew 15.28. And
so, importunity is a maine help to communion in graces.

Q. What is the last mean to attain grace?

A. A gift to extract it out of such as have it in them. Solomon says, Pro.
20.6. There is wisdom in the heart of the Wise; and a man of understanding
will get it out. There must be a deep bucket to diue into a deep well, to fetch
out the water of it. The skillful Chemist or Apothecary knows what Oil, what
Salt, what Q^intessence lies in the Minerals, Spices or Herbs: and applies his
Art to extract and purchase them. That Shunamite rested not in the staff: which
Gohazi had: she would have the skill of the Prophet.

So does each Christian: applies himself to extract the gift of another; as
Elisha, 2 King. 4.30.34. Laid eyes to eyes, and face to face of the child whom
he restored. Some excel in this more then others, Delila lay at Samson, till
he had told her his whole heart. So should thou that seek the grace of
others.

with, As If thou would learn what patience in sickness and pain is, or, how
thou might dye well, ask others, How would you do in this case, make mine
your own?

Secondly, observe wisely what falls from the godly in their communion and
converse: ouersee not their words, behauiours, affections, zeal, scopes. Watch
the^ narrowly as Benhadads men did Ahabs. Yea, observe the special seasons
wherein such grace may be gained, and redeem them either in public, or
private, ordinarily or extraordinarily; Special opportunities afford special
enlargements.

Thirdly, let faith be the chief Extractor. Believe the graces of the body to
be given for thy use, not only in the ordinances, but even in private
converse. All things are yours, 1. Cor. ^.21.
says Paul: meaning all Graces in all the members: its a great help of
profiting, whenas we believe all the Graces of others are ours, allotted us by
privilege from Christ, whose we are.

Fourthly, Rest not only in the outward object, but pierce Cherub into the
Mercy-seate. The Spirit of faith, 1. Pet. 1.12.
humblenes, hope in a Christian, is a differing thing from prayer or Speech: in
the family the wisdom, meeknes of a woman appears rather in the frame and
spirit of her course and constant walking, then in her words or outside. Pro.
18.4. The treasure of the wise is in their hearts. Beg of the Lord skill in
this mystery: till thou can say, I thank God I discern in such a sick man
the spirit of patience susteyning him: in another that prays, the Spirit of
humbleness and feeling: in a third of Sobirety, love, Compassion, an heart
above the Earth, etc. Fifthly, Be wise to choose thy object. Each man excels
not in each grace or gift. And when we meet not with that we look, for we
think meanly of me^ as Naaman did, being crossed by Elisha. 2. King. 5.12.
But the Graces of God are to be marked as they be most eminent: as in Moses,
his mickenes: in Phinees, zeal^: in Abraham faith. Romans 12.4


The eye looks not at the foot to reach a thing, but at the hand: nor at the
hand to go, but at the foot. Acknowledge this peculiarnesse and profit by it.

Fifthly, Although thou extract not at the first, what thou desire, yet wayt
still to see more: But if thou get that thou seek, bless God: and be
satisfied and thankful: as Paul, I have enough, I am full, I have received the
fruit of your love, a sweet savor, Phil. 4. And look what we freely receive,
that freely beteame to others, that the Graces of the Spirit may never lie dead
in the banque of Communion: but still run fresh, and be of use for the good
of the body. Yea use thy meanest gifts to do good, Mat. 15.37. Job 8.7.
and thy loves shall increase in the breaking, and thy small beginnings shall
prove great. By these and the like directions, conceive of this first point.

Q. Proceed to the second Communion in means. What is that?

A. It is such an exercise of Communion, as whereby the Church of Christ does
edify her self in and by the ordinance of GOD, Ephesians. 4.13.

Q. How do these ordinances of GOD edify the Church?

A. Two ways; first, as they are Ties and bands of Communion: secondly, as
they are active instruments and helps to beget and nourish it.

Q. How are the ordinances of God Ties and Bands?

A. In that they are appointed by GOD to be the sinnewes and cords of union
(not only of the Church to God himself) but of the members each to other.
Without the which the members would scatter, and be dissolved. Hence Psalm. 122.
Jerusalem is called a compacted City knit together by the Assemblyes, by the
Sacrifices, by the Thrones of Judgment Read it. So Paul Ephesians. 4.5. One God,
one Baptism, one faith: noting that the Churches mutual interest in the
Doctrine and Sacraments, does knit her in one Communion. Thus its said, that
the Church continued and claue together (after the Ascension) in the use of the
ordinances, Act. 2.46. and 4.32.
the Sacrament especially of the Supper.

Experience teaches, that the fellowship of the word, prayer and the like, is
the life, strength, blood and marrow of Communion. Hence it is that they are
called the Banners, Ensigns, Standards of Christ, and the Ministers the
Bearers thereof. For as Soldiers flock to the Standard and Ensign; so do
these Doves of Christ Fly to these windows, and the youth of his womb, to
these Assemblies, Psalm. 110.2 Hence Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread we
break, and the Wine we drink, are they not our Communion with the body of
Christ? meaning, that as they knit us to him, so do they knit us each to
other. Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.2. The Saints partake like precious Faith.
We are said, Heb. 12.22. to be come to Mount Zion, and the Assemblies of just
men. Why? save that hereby we might be strengthened in the same Communion.

We see that the Common ties of nature, education, and place, do much tie men
together: To have had one father, to have lain in one womb, to have dwelt in
one town, to have fed at one board, to have been brought up in one family, or
Nursery, are bands of fellowship: how much more all these Spiritual ties in
one? In particular, how dare we come to the Supper of Christ without love?
Why? because it is (as it is called) a Sacrament of Communion; a tie and band
of Gods people, into a more close and firm league of amity, then else they
could enjoy. So also the decency, order, beauty of the ordinances of hearing,
of prayer, of fasting (especially in the purity thereof) what singular helps
are they to Communion! Yea, the members of the Triumphant Church, the Angels
themselves are tied to the Militant by the ordinances, 1 Pet. 1.12.

When the faithful members of Christ behold with what holy Claspes and Taches,
(not of silver or brass) the Lord has fastened the parts of his Tabernacle
together: when they behold each in other, the Reverence, the Zeal, the Fear,
the Joy, and all the gracious dispositions with which they meet God in Hearing,
Praying, Receiving: how must they needs he united in near affection, and
love? Not to speak of the holy Censures, which God has ordained to curb the
unruly, and to confirm the godly in their station, to make the one to fear,
and the other to obey: So that there is no Jesuit or profane person does more
abuse, and defile these ordinances to treason and lewd ends, then the Saints
do embrace them, to strengthen themselves in this Communion. As Nehemia once
said, Shall such a one as I flee? Nehem. 6.11. So do the faithful, Shall such
as we, who enjoy such Ordinances, and have such a Charter of Privileges,
quarrel, contend, go to Law, iangle and live at variance? Shall we that are
to hear one truth of God, and receive one Sacrament, lie, cog, wrong, hurt
each other? or dare we come into the presence of God in these Ordinances, if we
walk inordinately in our course?

Q. How are these Ordinances begetters and nourishers of Communion?

A. There is none of them but concurres heerto in a special manner.

First, as for the Word preached, how many thousands did one Sermon of Peter
gain to this Communion? And it no less preserves and holds the faithful
therein: For either it finds them staggering in this Communion, and then it
restores them, or weak, and then it strengthens them, or sad and heavy, and
then it encourages and comforts them: or ignorant, and then it enlightens them:
or unruly, and then it admonishes them: or standing, and then it stablishes
them. So th^^ it does all offices of communion.

Censures duly administered.

Sacrament of the Supper, How active an instrument is it, to reconcile them
that are at ods, and to unite them more who are brethren? It makes them dwell
together more sweetly and lovingly.

Prayer is another: what office is there which it has not done in the Church?
what was the mean of converting Saul? What delivered Peter out of Herod's
prison? Act. 12.6.

Fasting joined with it, what good thing has it not been? a key to (open the
Treasure of Heaven, and to) bring upon the bodies and souls of the faithful,
Plenty in famine, Victory in war, Protection in dangers, Ease in distress:
Witness the examples of Ezra, Ester and others? Ezra 8.23. Ester 4.16.

And to end, The Conuersing of the people of God in Holy conference, how does
it revive and cheer their souls, when they are filled with heaviness and
sorrow, and to seek of instruction and strength in the ways of God? Heb.
10.25.

Q. I see your meaning in both these, viz. Graces and Ordinances: conclude now,
and show what is the third, viz. Communion in Services?

A. Its such an exercise of Communion, as wherein the members of the Church, by
mutual duties and services performed, do edify themselves in the body.

Q. Of how many sorts are these?

A. Some concern the bodies of men, other their souls.

Q. What duty concerns the bodies of men? Are bodies also the objects of
Communion?

A. Yea, doubtless if the dying bodies, yea dead carcasses of Paul (supposed
to be so) Act. 14.19. and Stephen, Act. 8.2. were assisted, and enterred with
solemn lamentation: much more the living. Besides, we communicate not one with
other, as the Angels by Communion of Spirits, but by the mediation of our
bodies. Not to urge that, viz. The Bodies, as well as the Souls of the
faithful, are redeemed to the liberty of this Communion.

Q. Are only the bodies of the faithful the objects of Communion?

A. No. There is an holy ouerflow of Communion of Saints, not only extending
to themselves, but even reaching beyond the Sphere of Spiritual Communion, to
those that be without: and that both strangers and home-dwellers, yet with
caution. For we see that many will give to strangers whom they never saw,
double to that which they will allow to known poor.

And this is the disease of wretched people, not only in point of mercy to
poor, but even respect and reverence to others. A stranger unknown shall find
double respect above them we know.

For why? as they said of our Savior, We know him whence he is. So that it is
a great argument with base people for honor: that they know not him whom they
esteem. A sign of an Idolike, not religious regard.

But secondly, and especially to the poor that live with us. No doubt, that
good Samaritane who took out two pence, for the releef of a Jew, would have
given six for one of his own poor, Luke 10.35. And although there be not
grace in all, yea in few such, yet herein the common band of Creation mooues
pity toward the miserable, especially in case of straight and extremity. The
dew of Zion refreshes Hermon: Psalm. 133.3. and the mercy of Spiritual
Communion extends beyond the good, even to heap hot coals of fire upon the
bad.

Q. But what service of Communion concerns the bodies of the poor members of
Christ?

A. The service of mercy and compassion. Sometime in the infancy of the Church,
it has been above ability, Act. 4.34, 35, 36, 37. When the goods of some were
sold, and the Church had all things in common: And afterward we see the Church
had very special care of her poor, appointing Officers for the purpose, that
is Deacons, Act. 6. yea Paul made it one of his peculiar Services, that the
poor might be relieved, both at home and abroad, especially Jerusalem. See 1
Cor. 16.2. Romans 15.25. Not to cite those infinite Scriptures which press this
duty, and that not by law and compulsion, but voluntarily: and that not in a
slight measure, but according to each giuers ability, and receauers necessity,
2 Cor. 8.12, 13.14. It was one of David's prayers, That there might be no
complaining in our streets. Psalm. 144.14. The streets of the Church should not
swarm with beggars: but provision should be made for a supply: and such an
enormity must be duly prevented in the Church: Not only when the states of
Christians are sunk, but even before, when they are in sinking: in which
season one shilling will go further then ten after.

Thus Dorcas not in one kind, Act. 9.39.
but in many was helpful to the Bodies of the Saints: clothing their
nakedness, feeding their hunger, etc. So Matthew 35. Our Savior reaches it to
visiting them in prison, releeuing them in their sufferings, especially for
Christ. Infinite it were to name the particulars.

Q. And is there no other service of Communion, to the Bodies of these members,
save only in case of poverty?

A. Yes verily: even to the bodies and outward man of all sorts in this
Communion, for the attaining of the chief ends of Spiritual fellowship, the
more easily. Of this nature, are frequent conuersings of the Saints together,
the more liberal use of the Creatures, and the like.

Those Nutmegs and Rases of Ginger and bowed groats, and gilt pence, which the
imprisoned Martyrs sent out of prison here and there, shall rise up in
Judgment against the unkind degenerate age we live in, in this behalf.

Q. What services concern the Souls of the faithful?

A. Briefly (besides all that I have said before) the Spiritual Services of
Holy example, sauory instruction, admonition, reproof, correction of errors,
exhortation and quickening to holiness, comfort in heaviness, sickness and
distress, and in each Spiritual respect, wherein member may be useful to
member, Job 4.2, 3, 4. Job 20.2, 3. Of which seeing, I spoke before in the
point of ordinances, I repeat nothing. Only know that, Serviceableness in
this kind is not only to be exercised in the ordinances, but apart, even in a
private Communion.

Objections I know, there are many, which a self loving heart may allege
against these:

First, That this work is meeter for the Minister, then the people.

Secondly, That knowledge is now rise among men, what need therefore such ado?

Thirdly, Men care not for our reproves, admonitions, they will not hear us.

Fourthly, We have no leisure for such service, from our own business.

Fifthly, We must not be buzy-bodies.

Sixthly, We are not gifted for it.

1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor. 8.1.
I answer to the first. All the Lords people are a Royal Priesthood.

To the second, knowledge puffs up, love edifies.

To the third, let us not kill our brother, because he^ is wilful: if we do
our duty, we have saved our own soul: it is the little practice of Reproof
and Admonition, which make them so unwelcome.

To the fourth, we have leisure enough to buy and sell our neighbor; but not
to serve him in love.

To the fifth, he that forbids buzy bodinesse, commands us not to be slothful
in Gods buzinesse, Romans 12.11.

To the sixth I say, He that is willing and loving, has commonly skill enough:
and yet it is no plea to excuse one fault by a worse: For God requires that all
his be qualified with wisdom and skill to speak, and to know their places,
observe the best opportunities for his ends, as well as for our own matters.

And thus I have shadowed out this doctrine of Communion. And ere (I come to
the use of the whole Article) this I would say: Oh, how is it to be lamented
now a days, that (as he said, Rome could scarce be found in Rome) so scarce a
shadow of Communion is to be seen among Professors. As for Communion in
graces, it is gone and not mist: no more appearing among common Christians,
then an acre or two of land in a Map of a Country. As for the ties of
ordinances, how few are there whom the Sacred band thereof ties to the services
of Communion? and as for duties: let us but mark what the love of people in
their Congregations is toward the heads of Communion: I mean such Ministers
as have spent themselves for their souls: and by that Scantling, judge what
other Communion there is among themselves.

The fifth Article.
Question. What is the fifth Article?

A. It is this: That the Lord offering Christ to the soul, does not offer him
nakedly and barely, but furnished with all the benefits of his satisfaction. So
that in this point, we are to consider what the parcels of those good things
are, which the Lord reaches to his Church in the gift of his Son.

If a Prince come under a subjects roof, he comes not empty and bare, but
with all his bounty, and leaves the marks of his presence behind him. So
here, The Father offering Christ, would not have us think him to be a dry and
bare gift, but a rich Cabinet of all choice Jewels of good things, that so it
might be stored and enriched by him. This is that which the Apostle in Ephesians.
1.3. urges, Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all blessings in
Heavenly places. And Saint Peter, Epist. 2. chap. 1.3. His Heavenly power
having supplied us with all things, tending to life and godliness.

Q. But yet say somewhat in particular above these and first: are all those
benefits of one sort?

A. No. For though all are the water that flows from this welspring, yet for
order sake, we shall do well to help our conceit thereof with a distinction
to avoid confuzion.

Some of these Benefits of Christ are concurrent with our first ingrafting with
him, and accompany our first conversion: and these I call benefits concerning a
believer, in respect of that condition and estate of Grace whereto he is
called, and in which he is settled. And these concern this Article to handle.

Other are consequent upon this condition, as royalties and privileges
following upon it, and stand not so much in the general calling of a Believer,
as in special belonging to it: whether inward graces, or outward blessings,
according to the several promises in, and by which God conueies them.

And I may well say, The former sort do contain the full Right and Title of a
Believer, to Christ himself: the latter, the possession of those good things
which issue from him, through the whole life, and the diverse occasions thereof,
of which in three Parts.

Q. Name then those of the former sort, that belong to the being or estate of a
believer?

A. The Holy Ghost in Scripture does mention them, according to the several
circumstances of our misery: as that brought us into an estate of guilt,
bondage, and enmity with God, so this brings us by justification, to a contrary
estate of peace by Redemption to an estate of liberty, by reconciliation to
amity with God, and so of the rest.

All in substance are one recovery of an happy estate: only they differ in
these respects. Now for the naming of them, the Holy Ghost does it sometimes
more briefly: sometimes more fully, briefly in 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. Morefully in the 1. of
the Ephesians. from the 3. to the 17. verse: read it over, and we shall be informed
of them.

Q How many things consider we in this Article of the benefits of Christ?

A. Three.

First, the Difference.

S^condly, the Order.

Thirdly, the Nature and use of them to our selves.

As touching the first, there is a fourefold difference to be noted of them.

First, that some of them are beforetime, others in time.

For justification, reconciliation and the rest, presuppose Christ already
theirs and issue immediately from him, but Election is before Christ himself,
and presupposes nothing but the first cause of Gods good pleasure and will.
And yet its true, that in Christ we enjoy all: only with difference, becau^^
we are not elected for Christ, but we are adopted and reconciled for him.

Election being that act of God from all eternity, whereby foreseeing the ruin
of man, he purposed out of his free will to choose some of those fallen ones,
to mercy and salvation.

So that we see its one of the benefits of the believer in Christ, yet not for
Christ's sake, but the Fathers, who gave Christ himself to this end, that he
might be a foundation of that whereof himself was a first cause.

The second difference is, in respect of the benefits that follow Christ. In
which respect, Vocation differs from all the

The third difference is, between those benefits of Christ, which concern us
in this life, and those that reach to a better. And the difference is great.
The former being such as relieve the necessity of our present condition, in
which we are imperfectly conformed to Christ in his estate of Humility, and
beset with sin, Satan and enemies: of this nature are, our Justification,
reconcialiation, adopption and the like: which all shall cease (as faith, hope
and patience shall) in respect of the evils they do here conflict with:
although, out of these relations the good of them shall abide, as Sonship,
liberty, amity and the like. But faith in these benefits shall cease, because
all conflict with evil shall cease, evil, I say, both of sin and punishment.

Now for those that concern the life to come in a perfect conformity to our
Head, they are of another nature, and belong to that image of GOD renewed in us
in righteousness and holiness, which abide for ever, begun here in grace, and
perfected in glory, These are in themselves the principal, and faith (howeuer
here its all in all) yet serves only to settle this image upon us, and having
brought us thereto, shall cease.

The fourth, and last difference is, between the benefit it self which shall
abide for ever: and that will appear, if we consider the difference between
the state of an equal image of God to that which Adam lost, and that which
Christ has purchased above it as an overplus. If he had only purchased unto
us, the Image of God, together with immortality, he had made us as good as we
were created, though we had lived on Earth.

But because he being no creature, but GOD, took our flesh into himself, that
we might be as he is, and where he is; therefore he has cast in this
overplus unto us, that in stead of an Earthly Paradise with old Adam, we shall
enjoy Heavenly mansions with CHRIST in the presence of God, and there have his
Image and our immortality perfected. But this note, whatsoever difference there
be; in this all agree, that they are the work of the spirit of Christ settling
all his benefits upon the believer.

Q. You have spoken of the first. Proceed to the second.

A. The second is the order of them. Wherein although I see men to differ: yet
I will avoid quarrels, and for the good of the Reader, speak my opinion. Thus
then I conceive, the first in order is vocation (or regeneration as it
concerns the way and mean of begetting a soul to God) the second is Union.
The third is Justification, the fourth is Reconciliation, the fifth is Adoption,
the sixth is Redemption, the seventh is Regeneration (as it concerns the
creation of Gods Image in a soul already borne and brought home to God) the
eyghth ^s ^anctificat^^n, imm^^^^^ely issuing from it, (containing the
mortifying and quckening work of the spirit (of which more in the third part)
and the last is Glorification.

Q Let us proceed to the opening of their several natures and uses breefly, so
far as serves for our purpose.

A. It were endless to wade into all: only to show the realnesse of them and
the use of them to the soul, that it may see how richly Christ is offered to
the soul, I will touch every one of them.

The first of them is Vocation. See texts Esaias 55.5. Romans 8 30.1. Cor. 1.2.

Now this calling is a work of the Spirit, issuing from election, whereby whom
the Lord has chozen to be his, he brings to know it. And that by the voice and
call of the outward word and inward spirit, cry^ng to their souls thus, Come
out of her, my people, and return to me Come out from thy former corrupt
estate of sin, subjection to Satan, curse, misery lewd customs, error of the
wicked, hell, and returre to that blessedness which thou have lost. So then,
calling is that whole workmanship of GOD, whereby he pulles the soul from a
bad estate to a good: be it longer in working or shorter, darker or cleerer
easier or harder: its the drawing of it from darkness to light. Act. 16.18. That
from whence its drawn, is an unregenerate estate. That whereto, is faith.
Between these, thee whole work of God is calling.

Q. Can you not breefly sum up the parts of it?

A. Yes, it may be conceived to stand in these two parts. Either the preparing
work of calling, or the finishing.

The former is that, by which the Lord finding the heart incapable of a
promise, brings it and prepares it to be such an one as may see it self
capable, and under condition of believing, such an one as may believe. For, as
for the opinion of such as imagne that GOD breeds faith all at once, without
preparing the heart, they overthrow that grace (in respect of a souls trial
of her self, and in respect of Gods Glory) which they would seem to magnify.
And they strengthen the hand of sinful men in their error, thinking there is no
difference between men; al may believe in Christ. This by the way.

The latter is that by which the Lord does finish the work of faith and power:
which is the Condition of the Gospel, without which no man can partake any of
the privileges following. Note.
For it succeeds the condition of the Law: and in stead of Do this faith,
Believe this and live. Note well these terms: Preparation is the condition of
faith, and faith the condition of the covenant.

Q. What are those preparatiues?

A. Partly legal, partly Evangelical: in a word, when the Spirit of God by
both, leaves such an impression in a troubled soul under the spirit of bondage
(of which in part) that it comes (by the sight of the Gospel) to so much hope,
as works the heart to mourning and brokennes, to desire of mercy, to esteem
it, and to be nothing in its own eyes in comparison of it: together with
diligent vnweariednes till it have obtained it. All which are the preuentions
and assistance of the spirit of calling, drawing the soul home to God, by the
steps and degrees that the soul is capable of.

Q. And what is the finishing work?

A. That wherein Calling is perfected, and wherein true conversion of the
soul, begetting of it, and bringing of it home to God (for all these are the
same) does consist. For when the soul thus prepared, sees, that the promise
belongs to her, and she may and must believe it: then the spirit stampes this
gift of faith upon the soul, to receive and tak it to her self from the
promise.

Q. Pass by the use of this now, because we shall come to it in the last
Article, and proceed to the second.

A. The second is Union. Which is the first benefit (in order I mean, for else
all are together in respect of the souls title and right to Christ) and this
oppozeth the cutting off of the sinner from GOD, and all influence and
Communion with his grace: and by faith so brings the soul unto God, that its
united, made one, and incorporated again into him by the flesh of Christ
united to his Godhead, (as Article. 2.) And its the work of the Spirit of
Christ, making the Lord and the soul one spirit, and causing the soul to
partake, by virtue thereof, all that power of this, both in privileges and
graces, which follow. And therefore I set it in the forefront of the rest: for
its sure, the soul can no more receive ought from God, till it be one with
him by Christ, then Christ could merit any thing for us, till the Deity and
flesh were really united: and no more then the body and soul can impart or
receive to or fro, till they be one. See texts, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. Ioh. 17. often.

In all which its evident, that till we be one with God in Christ, we are
without him in the world: the Lord abhorring all relations that want union.

But if once united, then he is in us, we in him, Ephesians. 2.2. John. 1^. vlt.
he dwells in us, we in him, as an inhabitant in his house, and the soul in
the body, he is one with us, he is married to us, Hosc. 2. Ephesians. 5. and we are
his spouse, and therefore hence iss^^th ^ll virtue, vigor an^ power into us,
that is meet for our support, either earthly or spiritual, till our union be
perfected in glory. To this that belongs, that is said, we are ingrafted into
him, as a scien into a stock, which fetches all her nourishment thence: As
the two Seals of Baptism and the Supper do tipifie: there being no
possibility of the Communion of the latter, without the union of the first.

Q. Proceed to the third Benefit?

A. The third is Justification, which is the second benefit of the poor
believer, opposite to the estate of her guilt and punishment by sin: by which
the soul stands in a full and perfect pardon of sin, quietness and peace
toward God, through his discharging her from all guilt and punishment: and
esteeming her as fully cleared and acquitted therefrom, as if she had never
offended. See texts, Romans 8.30. Romans 5.18.

Q. Why say you, fully and perfectly? can we be perfect in this life?

A. No, but for special cause, to difference the benefit of Justification from
Sanctification: the one being, Christ made ours wholly (for we cannot else stand
before God, except perfect by our selves, or another) the other in part, our
Sanctification being in this life imperfect. But of this in second Article, see
more.

Q Seeing we aim only at a view of the Article and cannot discourse about
every thing, go to the fourth, and so we will conclude all, with the uses
afterward together.

A. The fourth is Reconciliation, which is oppozed to our estate of enmity, and
brings us into amity and favor with God, as Ephesians. 1.5. Paul calls it our
acceptance and belouednesse with God, and it follows our forgiveness and
absolution: for then we return to our former esteem, and beauty in the eyes
of God, our flesh returning as the flesh of a child: and we stand before the
Lord as fauourits, finding access to him, going in and out before him, all
former treachery being forgotten. And this adds to the other, Princes often
pardon their Subjects, as David did Absalom, and grant them their lives, but
because they suspect them, they suffer them no more to see their face: but the
Lord having as great power to purge the heart, as to pardon the offender,
admits every justified one to be his friend, and to find favor in his sight,
clothing him with the robe of righteousness, Hos. 14.2. and calling her
beloved which was not beloved.

Q. What is the fifth Benefit?

A. Adoption, which is a work of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. following the former, and
is contrary to that taint of our blood, and bastardy which sin brought upon
us. Adam was the Son of God, Luke 3 vlt. by fall he lost it, and became a
bastard, stripped himself of his birthright, of his royalties, of the dignity of
a Son, of the Lordship over the Creation, and of the inheritance of immortal
life: and so brought all his seed into the same Praemunire, or rather Outlawry.
Now Adoption is the enfranchisment of the soul into her former estate of
Sonneship again being delivered from the spirit of bondage, Gal. 4.6. for as a
man takes one, not his own child to be his child, changing the name into his
own, and so settling upon him the dignity and liuelihood of one descended from
his loins: so does the Lord here: he restores a sinner to his blood, and to
his former right of Sonship, his dominion over the creatures, and coheireship
with Christ the Son and Lord of all.

It is the fruit of the former. For having received us to favor, he does as a
Prince (reconciled to a traiterous Son) he restores him to the right and
inheritance of his crown, and so the Lord not restores only to an old, but
settles the inheritance of a Saint upon him, Ephe. 1.5. See also Gal. 4.5. Romans
8.15. a far better then Adam lost, Ephesians. 1.20. Romans 5.15.

Q What is the sixth Benefit?

A. Redemption, and its a work of the Spirit, opposite to the estate of
thraldom and servitude unto sin, and by it to fear of conscience, wrath,
death and judgment, Satan and his infernal crew: for it buys out and sets
the soul in a new and sure state of liberty, free to righteousness, and to
serve him all our days without bondage, being delivered from the fear of all
enemies, Ghostly and bodily. From hence issues an heart enlarged to God, and so
fearing and serving him, Romans 7.6. Col. 3.14.
as fearing nothing else, nor yet serving in the old letter: delivered from the
ordinances of Moses, the traditions of men, the bonds imposed upon conscience
unjustly.

Hence issues also a right to the Protection of God, and his Holy Hand over us,
and ours against the treachery and violence of open or secret enemies, begun in
this life, and ending at the resurrection, the day of our full redemption, when
we shall fully enoy the fruit of that conquest of Christ, who overcame all
enemies, Devil, men, sin* death and the grave, never any more to be
assaulted. Hence also much more issues the duty of Service to God, and
renouncing of our own, abhorring our own selves, not speaking, doing,
thinking our own words, 1. Cor. 6.20.
work, thoughts, but the Lords, because we are not our own, but bought with
a price, that all should be at the Lords command. So that in two things, viz.
Deliverance from enemies, and Restoring us to the place of servants, this
Redemption consists. See texts, Ephesians. 1.7. Ephesians. 4.30. 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 7.25.

Q. What is the seventh benefit?

A. Regeneration, as it concerns the purging of our corrupt nature from the
Image of old Adam, and a renewing of it, according to the Image of him who
created us in all light of mind, and holiness of heart. And this is opposite to
the former privileges, which consist in the imputation of faith, and are wholly
without us: B^t this is the work of the Spirit of Christ, 2. Pet. 1.3.
wrought in all whom he has begotten to God, whereby also he puts into them
the nature and properties of God, 2 Pet. 1.2. and changes them from bad to
good. This is called in Scripture the new man, Colos. 3.10. the new creature,
1. Cor. 5.17. the Renouation of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5, 6. the workmanship of
God made to good works, Ephesians. 2.10 the R^nuing of the Mind, and the spirit of
it, Ephesians. 4.24. Romans 12.2. of the which in the third part of the Catechism we
shall entreat. Here only we point at the benefits in their distinct natures.

Q. What is the eighth benefit?

A. Sanctification, not much differing from the other, save only as the
replenishing of a vessel with new precious liquor, differs from the clensing
of it from the old lust and vnsauorinesse, and sweetening of it, that it may be
capable of better. See text^, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. Romans 8.30. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. 1. Cor.
3.30. Ezech. 37.28. In which we see it to be the work of the Holy Ghost in all
believers, making them partakers in each part, mind, soul and body, of his
holiness.

It consists in 2 things: the first, the killing power of the Cross of
Christ. The second; the quickening power of his resurrection: both sealed up in
the baptism of the Spirit, whereby we are ingrafted and implanted into the
similitude of them both. The former is usually called Mortification, which is
the work of the Spirit, 1. Job. 1.7
applying the second effect of the death of Christ, to the soul. For having in
Justification applied the condemning power of this death, and thereby taken
away the guilt, and accusation of sin: now it adds the second, which is the
disabling power thereof, and the vanquishing thereof: both these are the
effects of his cross, upon which he both took away the guilt, and dominion of
sin. We know, that if the Law have once passed sentence upon a malefactor, it
will easily send him to execution. This killing power therefore is not only a
turning of the heart from sin, but a making sure work with it, that it
return no more, than he whose head is cut off can do any more hurt.

The latter, is called V^uification, or that power of CHRIST that quicking
spirit, 1. Cor. 15.45. whereby the Holy Gospel applies the power of the
Resurrection to the soul: not only giving it a bare life of Grace, but a
lively life thereof, quickening up the edge, the spirit of the inner man to the
power of godliness, and to the life of GOD, in all the powers of the soul, in
sincerity, according to her measure. See texts for these. For the former, See
Romans 6.7, 8. Gal. 5.24. Gal. 6.14. Col. 3, 5. For the latter, Romans 6.6, 7.
Ephesians. 2.1. 1 Cor. 5.6, 7.

Q. What is the last benefit?

A. Glorification of the whole man after the Resurrection, in Heaven. Which is
that overplus of Christ's purchase, and exceeds Adams happiness, Ephesians. 1.14*
consisting in the partaking of that purchased possession of Glory and
Immortality, not of Paradise upon earth, but in the presence of GOD. This is
that benefit which answers the perfection of Adam, though far above it: for
it shall be a filling up of the soul with the perfect Image of God in light
and Holiness: and that by sight of the Glorified sense, beholding God as he is,
and wholly transformed by the Mirror of his Majesty to Glory, so far as our
soul and body are capable of to the uttermost.

And this Benefit is the fulness of the former: It is the execution of the
election of God, for we were chozen to Glory. Its the perfection of our
imperfect union in this life. Its the end of our calling, for we are called to
honor and immortality. Its the fulness of our Adoption: for we have only here
the right, but there the inheritance of sons. Its also our final Redemption
and Sanctification, because there all tears shall be wiped away, and death
shall be no more, and we shall do the will of God as the Angels, and be
sanctified throughout in body, 1. Cor. 2.9 1. Ioh. 3.2.
soul, and spirit without spot or blemish, and so live eternally. See
Scripture for it, Romans 8.30. Romans 6. vlt. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. Mat. 25. vlt. Col.
3, 3, 4.

Q. You have somewhat resolved me about the Doctrine of this Article: now
conclude with the use.

A. The use is either particular touching every of these, or general, of them
all together.

For the former I must be short: (for I am in a sea of matter) Let it be use of
Examination, whether Christ be ours or no.

And first try it thus, whether this rich treasure of He is one ^f ten thousand.

Can we make a song of our Beloved, of his Head, Cant.
his Eyes, Locks, Neck, Body, Feet? and is he more beautiful to us, then
all beloueds else? Surely else we were never truly married to him, except for
his sake, even our fathers house was despised. When Eliezer came to Rebecca,
Genesis 24.53.
to fetch her to be Isaacs wife, he discoursed of his wealth, cattle, Silver
and Jewels and for the purpose, brought out his Gold, bracelets and ornaments
which Isaac sent her. But what came of it? did she slight the offer? No: but
went with thee messenger immediately. If Gods Spokes-men, in the bringing forth
these benefits of Christ, have won us thereby to go with them, it is well.

Secondly, seeing there is no man but will be ready to say 1. Sam. 18.25.
A CHRIST without ^ dowry, is no husband. All men say, Christ is theirs: but
they remember not how God has made him ours, 1. Cor. 1.30. our wisdom,
righteousness, and the rest. If we can show our marriage Ring beset with all
these Jewels, we may be believed? Surely if ever God turned our face from Egypt
to Canaan, called us by his voice, out of the world to himself, if ever be
made us one with himself, and our souls the Temples for himself to dwell and
delight in: the fruits of our vocation and union will discover it. Try them
then in the fear of God. If we be in Christ, we are justified. Where is then
that change of our fear and bondage into peace? where is that deciding
witness of his blood, Heb. 12.13 14. Romans 8.34
crying better thing then that of Abel? where is that courage that said, If
God justify, who shall condemn? that boldness of a debtor discharged by his
Surety, that can say, I know the hardest, I shall not perish, I dare look my
creditor in the face?

Again, if we be in Christ, we are reconciled. Where is joy and welfare then
of heart? Can a favorite go in and out before his Prince, without gladness of
heart? Is it not well with him that he lives under the favor of the King? How
should thou be accepted and beloved of God, and be so sad, and as a stranger
to this joy? why then are thy garments so dark? And why are thy goings in and
out, thy duties, thy prayers so few, thy beholding of his face so seldom, thy
faith so little set on work for daily pardon, thy hand so shrunk up in taking
this golden Scepter by the end, when yet thou know the favor thou have, will
bear thee out? Moreover, thou say, Thou art an adopted Son of God in Christ.
Why? Tit.
Are al things thine as thou art Christ's, and Christ Gods? Can thou say, All
things are pure to thee? Is the wife in thy bosom, thy children, cattle,
servants, moouables, house and land, thine? Has the Lord of all given them in
love to thee as his Son or daughter? Job.
Can thou visit thine habitation with joy? Dare thou hope for Heaven as
thine inheritance? Can thou pray with the spirit of a son that looks to be
supplied, saying, I am thine, save me? has the Spirit of Christ made thee to
call Abba, and to cry with groans not to be vttred? Then thy boasting is not in
vain. Try thy self both in these and the rest.

Thou say, thou art redeemed: but prove it also, for if it be so, then that
bondage of thine to sin, and the lust thereof, and that bondage by sin, that
keeps thee from believing, is taken away in some measure. Thy tongue is none of
thy own, thy eyes, ears, feet, members are bought with a price, and the Lords
yoke is sweet to thee, And as thou a^t this redeemed one, so is he thy
Redeemer, thy protector, thy defense, so that the floods of waters shall not
come near thy soul, he will deliver thee in six troubles, and in seven, and
his love shall be thy banner, and his buckler thy Covert, so that neither
Sin, devil, nor gates of Hell shall prevail against thee. The like I might
say of the rest. But I shall have occasion to touch them in their due place.
Only I say, Except Christ with his benefits be thine, deceive not thy self,
for he is not thine: he and the spirit of these benefits go together, and he
who has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his.

Q. What is the other use of this, which you call General?

A. Manifold: and first, Inst ction to all Chr^^ (...), to ponder wisely this
Article of the difference, order and nature of these benefits. It would help
much to the vnderanding of the Scriptures with light and profit. But those that
think all time lost which is thus bestowed, needs prove very confuzed in
their iudgeme^^s: read the word (especially Paul's Epistles) hear Sermons,
very forgetfully and fruitlesly although I discourage none, yet I reprove
those who refuze the help which God offers them.

Secondly, its for exhortation that we cease not to adore Adam knew, not only
in the grace of perseverance; but in the gif^ of eternal life in his heavenly
presence. This is one of the causes why the Che^ubins pryed into the
Mercy-seate in the Holy of holyes, as Pet^r Epis. 1. Chap. 1. opens it of the
desire of the Angels to see this mystery.

It was once sa^d by a captive, after he saw what preferment he came to, I had
perished, if I had not perished. Adams happiness was as a perishing in
comparison of CHRIST. Paul never speaks of it without wondering. Not as the
gift of Creation was, so was the gift of Redemption: for the former was
immortal life in the garden: this is eternal life through Jesus Christ, as
Romans 6. vlt. Therefore with Paul, let us wonder and magnify the depth of this
love, as 1 Timothy 1.17. so let us say, Now to the King Immortal, Invisible, the
only Wise God, be Praise for ever. And, Blessed be God for this unspeakable
gift. When men take occasion by the ruin of an house, to set up a better, its
for their own ends: but this for our happiness, we fare the better for it.
Oh, Lord, what is man that thou so remembrest him, to unite thy Son to his
flesh, that thou might lift him up with thy self, to Glory? See Heb. 1. Thou
have made him little inferior, (and in this above) the Angels.

Thirdly, it is exceeding consolation to all believers. For why? The benefits
which they receive all at once by faith, are a Nemo scit, of price and plenty.
All we have here said, does argue, that God in Christ is above all we can
ask or conceive.

For who thinks Christ to amount to such a sum at his first believing? Yet
the Lord gives him all at once to a believer. As he that buys a rich Lordship
at a low rate, does not on the sudden equal his bargain in his thoughts, till
afterward he come to retaile the parcels, buildings, lands, and royalties
pertaining to it. But when he sees he has bought the Lordship, and all
belonging to it, he reioyces in his purchase. So should we little repent us
of our bargain, or think of selling it away, if we could duly meditate of
the ingredients: but we take small pains therein, and so it grows stale with
us. To omit other points, by one enlarge all, thus.

When the Lord calls a lost sinner by the t^ouble of his conscience to come ^o
Christ, and in s^cking, he finds him: does it enter into him to consider what
a Christ he has got? Alas no, he aims at this, that he may get forgiveness of
sin, and peace with God only. He considers not what enemies, what co^ba^^,
dang^rs, and crosses ^e may meet with, by Satan's malice, the crookedness of
his own spirit, the enmity of men.

But when he meets these, and sees that All the promises in God are Yea, and
Amen.: that Christ has also redeemed his soul out of all adversity as well as
the horror of his conscience, and that even in troubles of ill marriage,
sickness, poverty, imprisonment, pursuit of men, his Redeemer will save him;
oh how precious is the comfort of it unto his soul? How much more then sweet
is Christ in all his benefits?

Oh, that our life might be taken up in the view of these particulars?
unfolding of this fardell? and knowing of our wealth? If that of the heathen be
true, That Husbandmen were the happiest men if they knew it? how much more
Christians and believers? Bless God that has not only verified that promise
in Christ which we first sought for, but more then ever we desired.

As the Queen of Sheba told Solomon. The one half of that I find, was not
reported: and yet a greater then Solomon is here. Let our whole life be filled
with the meditation, thanks and improouement of this our purchase. And so much
of this fifth Article.

The sixth Article.
Question. NOw proceed to the sixth Article of this second part? what is it?

A. This, that the subject containing all, or upon which as a Treasury, the
Lord bestows all these good things, Christ and all his benefits, is the Church
of God: I say, the true Church of Christ, is the equal and only object o^
them all.

Q. Before we proceed further, open some terms which will occur in the
discourse following, viz. What is a Church constituted or vnconstituted? What
is the Church Visible or Invisible? What is a malignant, corrupt and false
Church, and what a true? What is a Church Militant or Triumphant?

A. First, we call that a Church constituted, which is so gathered together by
the Word and professing of the same truth, that it does further enjoy the free,
peaceable and settled use, and administration of all essentials to salvation,
the Word, Sacraments, and outward Assemblies, established by Christian
authority: as blessed be God, this Church does in which we live. And contrary
to this is that Church, which consists only in toleration and conniuence
doubtful and unsettled.

A Church Visible, is an assembly of such worshippers of God, as enjoying the
liberty of the ordinances, do partake them, visibly, audibly, and sensibly to
the eye and observation of man: so that visiblenesse does not look so much at
constitution, as at externalnesse of worship: a constituted Church must needs
be visible, but not contra.

The Church Invisible, is that Communalty or fellowship of the Elect of GOD,
(when or wheresoever throughout the World, in all ages and times,) as, being
called to GOD, and given to CHRIST, become his Mystical body, and are built up
into one habitation by the Spirit.

She is called Invisible, not as if she consisted of such members as may not be
seen and bodily conuersed with: seeing that they do (usually) reside in the
Church Visible, worshipping God with others externally: but because that by
which she subsists, is an Invisible grace of the spirit, not sensible to the
eye of man, but known to God alone, and to others only by the judgment of
Charity, more or less. So that the next two terms of Militant and Triumphant,
are only specials of this general head Invisible.

The Militant Church being that part of the Invisible, which here upon earth
walks and warreth with, and for God, against all his and her enemies,
according to that vow and oath she took in her baptism, or pressed money,
wherein she couenanted to be Gods faithful soldier against World, Devil,
or Flesh, and therefore she is that Brood of Travelers mentioned in Psalm. 84
and Psalm. 24. that through Baca go to Jerusalem.

The Church Triumphant is that Invisible, which having cast off her harne is
after the Victory obtained, abides in soul with God, and triumphs there over
all conquered enemies. Both these (although in diverse state) are the same
Church, as shall appear, when both shall receive their bodies after the
Resurrection, and make one Spouse of Christ, wherein is neither spot nor
wrinkle.

Now lastly, the Church corrupt or malignant is that special kind of a Church
Visible, which, although it retains Baptism and some such truths as are of
the essence, yet has degenerated in the most of her tenets from the truth of
the Gospel, and therefore howsoever, her Baptism cannot simply be denied, yet
for her essential corruptions in most points of the foundation, especially her
malignity against the true Church, is to be for ever separated from by that
Church, which still retains the purity of doctrine, and integrity of life.
And what this Church is, all may conceive, to wit, That under the Papacy.

Q. I understand you: Now say which of these is that which is the equal and
only subject of Christ and his Benefits?

A. The Church invisible, of which we say in the Creed, I believe the Holy
Catholic Church. Only with this difference, that although the whole Church
enjoy all: yet because the Triumphant differs from the Militant in the
fullness, and possession, the one by sense, the other under the assurance of
Faith and Hope, therefore here we especially aim at the militant, as it
contains the whole army of the Soldiers, the body of his members.

For as particular soldiers make a rank, and many ranks or companies a
legion, and many legions an army: so here. And as many particular visible
congregations, make up the body of the whole visible: so many particular
invisible members and companies make the whole invisible body of the Church
Militant.

Yet note, the soul of this body so imparteth it self to all, that yet each
member partakes his part in these benefits. See texts, Heb. 12.16. Ephesians. 4.15. 1
Cor. 1.30.

Q. Explain your self more fully. For ye seem hereby to prejudice the
visible Church. What? Has not she then any prerogative in this behalf?

A. Yes, every way, far be it from us to conceive such a gross error. I may
say as Paul, Romans 9.4. Hers is the Law, the Adoption, the Glory, the
Commandments, the Worship, the Promises. Nay, from her womb came forth this
Invisible company, and at her breasts they sucked: and besides, secretly in her
bosom still do lie the rest of the elect, as yet ungathered, yet in due time
to be brought to this Fold.

We ascribe as much honor to a Church constituted, as can be, and in some sort
say of her, She is the pillar of truth, in point of holding forth all the
named privileges: howbeit in this respect of the spiritual participation of
the benefits of Christ, we may not say that as she is only visible, she can be
called the subject hereof.

We grant, its one of the greatest blessings in the world, to be partakers of
such a blessing, as a visible Church, and Blessed is that people whose God is
the Lord. Howbeit, to say that the Scriptures which speak of these Benefits,
do directly aim at the visible Church, as when he says, The Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against her. That she is the pillar of truth: That Christ is
made to her Righteousness, Sanctification, etc. is very dangerous. For neither
to her properly, nor necessarily do such promises belong.

First, not properly, because spiritual things cannot be partaken, but by
spiritual receiving and instruments: but that which gives the name to
visible, is only external administration: the spiritual efficacy of Word and
Sacraments, concerns the elect only.

The Visible Church (be it never so perfect) being that of which those parables
do speak: when the Kingdom of Heaven (not the World) is compared to a field
of grain, and of tares or weeds: to the net that had good fish, or the elect:
and hypocrites, that is, reffuse trash: that heap which had good wheat and yet
more chafe. It is true that in the Lords account the ordinances are given to
the elect primarily, and to the rest for their sake: but in respect of the
outward Polity of a Visible Church, the dispensation concerns both equally.

Secondly, I add, not necessarily: for the Church Militant had lain hid for a
long time together, as in the times of persecution, and confusion, when she was
pursued so hard either by Pagans or the malignant Church, that she could not
enjoy so much as the Scriptures in their own tongue, much less the
ordinances, save by steal^h. As the Lord tells Elia 1 King 19.18. I have
reserved 7000. to my self that have not bowed the knee to Baal: and Obadia hid
the Prophets from Ahab and Iezabel, by fifties in a cave.

All stories record what a Catalogue of witnesses the Lord has had by those
Martyrs, Confessors and Believers, since the primitive times, till now: and how
God not only still had this Number (when visibil^ty failed) but used them to
support the truth by blood or banishment, when all pure visibility failed, as
by those Worthies in the days of Queen Mary.

Was not that the Church of God, of which we read, Heb. 11.35 36, 37? Yet not
visible: for they were tortured, had trial of cruel mockings, scourgings, b
nds and imprisonment, sawne, slain with the S^ord, wandered in sheeps skins and
Goats skins, destitute and afflicted. Of whom the world was not worthy. And
the Apostle Romans 9.27. says, Though Israel were as the sand of the Sea, yet a
remnant only shall be saved. Not all of Israel are Gods Israel. He is not a
Jew, who is of the letter, but of the Spirit, whose praise is of God, not of
man.

I conclude: Although it be the greatest blessing here to the Church of
Christ, that she enjoy her visible ordinances with peace and constitution: yet
in this respect she is not the Depositary of these spiritual benefits, but in
respect of her unvisible frame by vocation and union.

Q. I conceive well what Church you mean* now prove that this Church is this
Subject of these benefits.

A. The Scriptures do prove it, in all these Titles, Praises and promises
belonging to her. She is called in the Scripture. Christ, the body of Christ,
his love, dove, fair one, spouse, and Beloved, without spot or wrinkle, the
Daughter of God, Sister of Christ, Temple or habitation of the Spirit,
especially in Heb. 12.15, 16. The City of God, the Innumerable company of
Angels, the general Assembly, and Church of the first borne which are enrolled
in Heaven. She is styled, The Peculiar of God, the Cabinet of his rich Jewels,
the praise of the Earth, all glorious within. Her promises are precious. There
he appointed life and blessing for ever, Psalm. 133.3. She has all light and
defense here, and in Heaven the Lamb himself shall be her Sun and glory:
She shall be led into all truth, Her says shall not fail. Her enemies
shall like the dust of her feet, and come and worship before her, she shall
inherit the Earth, prevail against the gates of Her enemies, so far is it
off, that the gates of Hell can prevail against her, with a 1000 more. All
which show the truth of this, that as Christ was the Fathers Treasure of
wisdom and grace, so the Church in him her head: for look what is his, is
hers, as in 2 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ gods.
Yea the promises made to Christ himself, are applied to her. Compare Esaias.
49.8. with that in 2. Cor. 6.2.

Q Now it is time to proceed to the use: what is it?

A. Very plentiful.

First, its confutation of the usurped and pretended title of the Pseudo
catholic Popish Church, who claim to themselves this privilege to be the
Treasury of all the benefits of Christ. Theirs (they say) are the Scriptures;
the Word, the Sacraments, the ordination of Ministers; all the glory is theirs:
they are the Ancient, General, Apostolical Church: al succession of Bishops,
al miracles, Counsels theirs: the world is beholding to them for the truths
custody, and they have prospered when all other Churches have perished. But Oh
ye usurpers, stay a while, and consider whether it be granted ye to be a Church
at all! If it be, yet sure a corrupt, malignant one. For what common visible
administrations do abide with you? what truth have ye not defiled? especially
the maine one, of the Satisfaction of Christ, and free justification of a
sinner? The Scriptures ye have locked up in a strange tongue. The doctrine ye
have marred by your traditions: the Ministry of Reconciliation ye turn into a
preaching of fables, or railing against Protestants: the Sacraments ye have
partly corrupted, as Baptism, partly abandoned, as the Supper (by your Mass
Sacrifice) and partly oppressed with an heap of your own. If any Visiblenes be
among you, its visible worship of bread, of a Rood, of a Virgin above GOD
himself, of God in the shape of an old man, of Saints more then God himself.
Your visible Idolatries, crueltyes and bloodshed of Saints, your visible
Stews, your visible adulteries, blasphemies, and vices argue ye the successors
rather of those Priests, Pharisees and Sadduces in Christ's time, then of Christ
and his Apostles. Therefore as Peter (whose chair ye claim falsely) said to
Simon Magus, so we to you in point of the Treasury of Christ's benefits, Ye have
no part or fellowship in these things; And that Treasury of Saints merits ye
dream of, the Church of God knows not, but says, We have not enough to
sell, lest we should have too little for our selves; Gods treasure is not
wanting in necessaryes, yet not superfluous. Therefore ye are a malignant
Church, and that whereof the Scripture speaks, Come out of her, my people, and
her sins, lest ye taste of her plagues.

Ye are the subject of the Plagues of God, not the benefits of Christ, and the
Lord will shortly power out his last vial upon the Throne, till ye sperish by
the breath of his mouth: till both the branch and rush, head and tail of ye be
destroyed.

Church, his face waxed pale. But O ye enemies, wax ye pale at the name of
this Church of Christ, tremble, I say and vanish: for this Name shall one day
make ye to be, as Mica. 7.17. Ye shall lick the dust like a Serpent, and move
out of your holes like worms of the earth, they shall be afraid because of
thee. And 10. She shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said, Where is
your God? she shall be tred under feet, as mire in the streets. Little cause
have ye to rejoice over her, for when she is fallen, she shall rise, and her
rising shall be your destruction.



Strive to be of that number of which ye heard, Heb. 12. and do not rest till
ye be come to that Church, which consist of the Spirits of just men, of Jesus
the Mediator of the covenant, and the blood of sprinkling that speaks better
things then that of Abel. Bless God for those visible helps, which ye enjoy
of the Word and Sacraments: but remember that in these, the Lord conueyeth the
benefits of Christ, which none knows, but the soul that has them, Revel.
2.17.

Beware lest the contempt of these visible and audible ordinance; one day so
vex ye, that ye wish ye had neither seen, nor heard them. Your condition is
best or worst: best, if ye believe these promises, and cleave to these
prerogatives, If they bring ye to the hope of Christ for a better life: but
else most miserable. See and apply that, 1 Cor. 15.19. I say, take heed least
even that ye have be not quite removed, light and candlesticks, Gospel and al,
for your Laodicean fulness. Empty your souls of their glut, lest the Lord
streighten his Spirit and take away the power of his truths. Remember, these
outward privileges serve to settle the invisible upon ye. Boast not of the
Temple, the Temple: that is holy; but see that it hallow you also: and that the
Word preached, and the seals of Grace added to it, do imprint upon you the
benefits of union with Christ, justification from sin, adoption of sons,
redemption from slavery to Satan, your lusts and the error of the wicked.

These benefits none save the elect can partake. And consider, ye may be long
under the one, and yet be led away from the other, by the corrupt manners of
the time, the error of the wicked, and custom of sin, and slights of the
Devil.

Take heed that the coldness of the age, and abundance of iniquity, cause ye
not to fail of that invisible grace, which the Gospel offers ye: but know,
that one privilege conueies another. Stop not the wels of salvation, play not
the hypocrites, to whom these streams of the oil and butter of the ordinances
of Christ never flow unto, through your unbelief, Job 20.57. But if ye obtain
vocation and union by them, then blessed are your eyes, for they have seen,
and ears, for they have heard the things which concern your peace, which
others never saw: and yet are happier in not seeing, then ye in seeing and not
believing.

Fourthly, consolation to the true Church of Christ, for her

If but of one of them, much more of all. Let this doctrine urge that in the
former Article. Let each member of this Church, praise God for her portion
fallen into so good a ground. Wish not that it had fallen otherwise any way, no
not to be a Treasurer of a Prince without it.

Let those precious names, praises and promises uphold thee in all times of
reproach and disdain by such as know thee not. If they knew thy treasure, ten
men would take thee by the skirt, Zach. 8. vlt. and ten women would come to
thee, to bear their name. Although thou art black and have lain among the
pots, yet thou art comely in Gods eye, his dove, sister, darling: and although
thy jewels are sullyed a little with the aspersions of enemies, yet when God
shall make them up, Mal. 3. they shall cast their luster, and then shall it
appear who are precious, when they are separated from the vile.

Hold therefore thy right, and sell not thy birthright for whatsoever the
Devil would offer thee, to cozen thee of it. Redemption is thine, therefore
liberty; stand fast in it: Reconciliation thine, therefore amity and favor:
justification thine, therefore peace: Adoption thine, therefore access to God
in prayer: and so of the rest: hold these as thy life, and part with none of
them, except Christ himself the purchaser of them by his blood, be of no
price with thee: nor let time cause them to wax stale, but each day let these
be more precious, as being effects and proofs of thy calling and union.

Paul, Romans 10.18. That the root holds thee, not thou it.

The body holds the members, the vine, the branches, not they them. Be not
highminded, but humble thy self and be lesser then the meanest of the
members. Let the Spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets, and not
swell above them: and the like I say of the other members.

The Lord has bestowed life and blessing upon his Church for ever, Psalm. 133.
vlt. not upon thee in several: thy grace is a members grace, as the blood of a
finger and the sense thereof, and the Spirit thereof, is from the heart, liver,
and brain carried to the body, and thence derived to each part. Read that Ephesians.
4.16. its from the whole body fitly joined by that which every joint supplyeth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part. Humbly
therefore be glad to receive thy part, see thy wants, supply them by the body,
and disdain not the grace of the meanest: for if thou abide in the body, its
thine, and thy supply.

As no member has all the gifts of the rest: so it has the supply of all, if
it abide in the body. Let it cause thy soul to be knit to the least members
for the grace of it; let the whole body (compounded of all) be glorious in
thine eye, and say as Hushai once did, 2 Samuel 16.18. He whom the King and his
people shall chuze, shall be my delight also.

Behold the Graces of GOD in her: get discerning of them, for she is all
glorious within, and her outside may deceive thee. Where faith, hope,
holiness, the spirit of union, adoption are, let the persons of such be
precious, and their name as an ointment powered out.

Look not at their Wealth, Gold, Rings, and Inheritances: but let him that is
a Saint and Beloved of God, excelling in virtue, be to thee as to David, Psalm.
16.2. Yea trade with her for her graces, and jewels. Let our prayers be for
her, and her protection: let us be joyful in her welfare, and sad for her
sorrow: and let us cast our lot into her lap, to fare as she fares. Yea let her
outward peace and prosperity be dear to us.

Consider it is not for nothing, that so many promises are made to her, even
for outward beauty, and blessings. See Esaias 55.12. and 43.1. and 35.7. and many
more, therefore let us not rest till the day of her prosperity come. Yea let us
bless the days which we now see, wherein the Lord begins to turn the wheels
over his enemies, and to plead his Churches cause against them in many other
Countries who have long lain under Popish yoke and tyranny.

Say we of our private griefs, in comparison and respect hereof, as that good
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19.30. said to David, touching the division of his lands,
(which yet he had lost by that Ziba treacherously) Nay, let him tak^ all,
since my Lord the King is returned in peace.

And far be it from us to dismay and afflict her by our separation, and
forsaking of her Assemblies (as the manner of some is, who daily run into the
confusion of their own devices) and let us confess, that if ever we either
were truly bred, it was in her womb, or if nourished, it was at her breasts:
Let us not now call her harlot (for her love) nor her children and the
generation of her womb, the sons of the rebellions woman: but, even in our
far distance from her, (as some have by their late godly protestation
professed) let us say, and let them say, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my
fingers forget to play. And thus much for this sixth Article.

The seventh Article.
Question. What is the seventh and last Article of this second part?

A. The use of the whole Part, which is, that we believe this delivery to be
our own. At the end of the fifth Article, I referd my Reader to this last
Article, for the urging of it.

Partly, to avoid the length thereof, but especially because I would ground it
upon the whole Part, as concerning it equally; For as in the former, I showed
the whole use of it to be drawn from each Article, so I do here say, That
whosoever has been convinced by that of his sin, and been kindly pinched
and pricked thereby by each of those Articles: so, John. 16 9
every such soul be now also convinced of Righteousness, and believe himself
to be the party to whom this delyuerance of Christ belongs, by each of these
five Articles premised.

Q. What is it to believe this?

A. It is the work of the Spirit of God, by virtue of which, a soul under the
condition of faith, does cast it self and rely upon the offer of God, for
pardon of sin and for eternal life.

Q. I see some things in your answer to be difficult: as especially the two
latter: for, as I freely grant faith to be the gift God wrought by his Spirit,
so I would feign know what you mean by those two latter, viz. The condition of
faith, and the relying of the Some upon the offer of God. Expliaine these.

A. I will endeavor it. And for the former (as before in the point of Vocation,
I showed what I mean by the Condition of faith:) so briefly I answer, it is
such a Qualification, as God requires of one who may believe the promise of
reconciliation to belong to him.

True it is, if we look at the power of God, he could in a moment set a man
in state of grace out of the state of corruption: but in this we must look at
his will revealed, and what is most agreeable to the spirit of Bondage.

The Lord knows, it is no easy thing to beat a man out of himself, when the
sense of his burden lies upon him: therefore he so prepares him, that he shall
not deny but that he means him well, even when he deserves least. And surely
it ought not to seem so strange a point, if we weigh the Scriptures, which
never speak in any other language. We read in Zach. 12.10. and 13.1. that when
the Lord would set open a fountain to his Church for sin and transgression, he
first put into them the Spirit of grace, and compassions or Supplications,
causing them to see him whom they had pierced, and mourn bitterly.

If we see the fulfilling hereof in the Gospel, we shall find that this
Spirit of mourning went before faith as a preparatiue: Read Act. 2.37. when
those murderers of CHRIST heard that he was the Lord of life, who offered life
unto them by Peter: they were pricked in their heart, saying, Men and Brethren,
etc. Now the Apostle answers, Repent and believe. Read these several
conditions of faith, Mat. 5. Blessed are they who thirst: they who are poor in
spirit, they that mourn: for theirs is the kingdom, they shall be satisfied;
and Mat. 11.30. Come to me all that are laden, and I will ease you. What think
we? are not these conditions of a thing as yet wanting? to wit, of being
comforted, eased and satisfied?

The like I may say of that, Ezekiel. 36. touching Seeking God: I will do this
for them, (pardon them) yet I will be sought for it by them. So that its
plain, that the Lord meaning to bring the soul to believe, prepares it first.

Q. What is it which works these preparations? is it any other thing in the
world then that which works faith?

A. No doubtless. The Spirit of grace accompanying the offer of GOD in the
Gospel, does work both in the soul: howbeit by degrees, the former at the
first, and the latter after: and that according to the measures of enlightening
and persuasion which the soul is capable of.

As we see in deep Melancholy and Sorrow, that which at the first seems
harsh and cannot be endured: yet by degrees the Spirit is glad to embrace, In
the morning, we see there is more light coming from the S^nne, then that
which follows the rising of it: for it sends more and more light, before it
rize. So here. The offer of Christ to the soul, and the goodness o^ the offrer,
does imprint in the soul some steps and prints of it, in a more remote degree;
as to see a possibility of mercy to stay the soul from faynting: when yet it
is far from resting in it. And as the Spirit adds more light and savor of
it, so it works the heart to the making more toward it, (if some bar of
Satan, or corruption let not) as by mourning for that sin which offended such
a good GOD, although yet I apply not this goodness: and so by desiring it to be
my portion, and seeing all other things to be dross to it: and so of the rest.

The sum is, the Lord by these means enlarges the heart more and more to
think, that mercy to belong to her, which she feels to be daily presented in
more orient colors, and to be the offer of him, that needed not to offer it,
and whereof she feels more and more need: so that as the purpose of God
appears more clearly to it, so the timorous soul makes nearer and nearer to
it, till it come to rely it self at last upon it. And who feels not the
experience of this in himself, that as light increases, so the soul is bolder
to venture, and feels eft one step, eft another to be wrought, of hope, stay,
good affections of sorrow, of desire, when yet she dare not judge such a Jewel
as mercy to be her portion.

And to end this, what our sense may conclude in the scattering of darkness, by
degrees in the air upon the approach of light, although till the Sun rise,
the day is not perfect: the like may be said here in the wanzing of fears
more and more, by the approach of the promise, when yet the day star of
righteousness is not risen.

Q. But I observe, that many doubt of this for sundry causes: first they
object, Nothing can please GOD without faith: now its sure Godly sorrow and
desire please God: and therefore what need we seek a further way, when Faith
may be said to contain them all? How answer you this?

A. I say this, It pleases God that these steps toward Faith, be wrought in
the soul, though I deny that they (form^lly p^ease God as acts proceeding
therefrom.

For there are three acts of the Spirit in them that hear.

The first, a mere common work which hypocrites may have.

The second, a gracious saving work, as faith proper to the Elect.

The third, I take to be a middle work, which as it is not grace formally, so
neither is it a common work: but such a work of the Spirit, as stands in
order to faith, certainly following: and this is good, in respect of that it
produces, to with Grace it self, which shall not be hindered, but perfited in
due time. And of this sort are these preparations.

Now to make these the work of Faith, is inconvenient: for although a soul to
be converted, has a seed of Grace, remotely cast in by the Spirit, which
shall be perfected: yet how absurd were it to say, That a man has that which
he mournes for the want of, or which he desires to have, I say, in that
respect, in which he mournes and desires it? otherwise I do not doubt, but
where there is true Faith, there may be a mourning after more.

It is objected, Faith may be and not discerned.

I answer, For a time it may, and in some degree or temptation holding under,
but not in an habited and settled manner of absence.

Q. What say you to the second doubt? This opinion seems to cross a truth,
That conversion is wrought in an instant?

A. I deny it not by this assertion: for as it is in the womb, that there are
some preparations natural in the fruit, to make it meet for the soul, to
enter with the quickening power of it, and yet that only is the being of the
reasonable creature: so these steps wrought in the soul before faith, are not
faith, but the conversion of the soul to God, is in the only act of faith, in
which the work of calling is perfected and not before.

Q. Dispatch the rest; The third doubt is, that the work of the Law, is
preparatiue enough for the Gospel.

A. So it is, for the doctrine of the Gospel to be offered to it. But note by
the way, how this objection grants a legal preparation; Why not others also?

But briefly I answer, That it is false: for the Law serves not to break the
heart, or open and melt it, although it do batter and subdue the fierceness
of it in general: now the Scripture urges other preparation, and humiliation
unto Faith.

For it is as impossible to mould the broken gobbets of a vessel into a new
one without melting, as the heart under legal terror into a believing one,
without some dispositions of the Gospel.

Q. But the last doubt is greatest: that this Doctrine favors Popish
preparation, to our own conversion: teaching to attain to grace by somewhat
within our selves.

A. This has a color in it, and nothing else. For who ever ascribed these to
any thing in us? Do we not acknowledge that the free offer of grace does make
the heart sensible, tender and capable of grace, as well as stamp the heart
with it by faith?

Both come from the Gospel, and so does all belonging to reconciliation: the
warp and the woof of the cloth, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning to prevent
and hold on, and the finishing of it, come from thence. Only one thing I add.
It is true that many hearers do make it a tedious way to themselves, through
their own error.

For they think that the Gospel urges these Conditions of Faith, as works
of our own predisposing our selves, and so aim at them, that they bringing
them to God, might take the ware for laying down the price.

And so, when they feel their Selfe-louing affections move them to mourn, to
desire, to pray, to deny some sins, and occasions, they think Faith is not
far off: and thereupon (for the time) none are so hopeful as they.

But when they feel their hearts never the freer or quieter hereby, but old
slavery to abide still, they are at a plunge, and so wanze away like shadows.

But these men must consider, the Lord offers not grace upon such carnal
terms. That which the soul should look at in her preparation, is not any of
her own welfare and ends by believing, as thinking thereby to stop many
fears, or to get some advantage to an easy Religion: but the glory of GOD
simply, in the entertayning of his rich grace: which she ought to set up above
her own Salvation.

I say then, that which God aims at in offering mercy, is the magnifying of his
attributes of Mercy, Justice, Wisdom and the rest, which he will have more
to appear in man's Redemption, then they could in Adam^ integrity.

He will have the eternal doors open themselves, as he says, Psalm. 24.
vlt. not that our own end, forgiveness, and happiness, but the King of
glory might inter in. Even as he ordained our Lord Jesus not to obey and suffer
for any ends of his own: but merely the Fathers, to whom he was subject: as
we see in Romans 15.3.

And therefore he would have him lose all glory, and empty himself, that he
might fulfill the ends of him that sent him, Phil. 2.4, 5. If the Lord required
this of his own Son, what shall he do to us, who stand bound to it?

And the Apostle never speaks of the mystery of the Gospel in any of his
Epistles, as in that of Ephesians. 2.7. 1 Timothy 1.11. Coloss. 1.5. and others: but
he presses this, that the Lord aimed at the manifesting of the riches of his
glorious grace, and of all his attributes, in the saving of a sinner.

So that when this end of God (as much beyond our ends, as the sun is above the
earth) is once seen into, it carries the heart more from it own, then Saul's
father, when he turned the care for the Asses, into the care for his son.

And as Mariners take all the thought how they may row their maine Ship, but as
for the small Boats they tie them to that, to follow the motion thereof alone:
so, if we could see what the stream of God were in CHRIST, and the offer of
Salvation, it would quite drive us out of our selves and selfeloues, and tie
them to his ship to follow it: that if the Lord having his glory from us, we
may also under him obtain salvation, we may be glad: and ascribe the glory of
his holy way and device of Christ's pardon and salvation to him alone, as 1 Cor.
1.30. that he who boasts, might boast of the Lord.

Oh, how would this drown all selfeloue in his stream? and how should our
mournings be after him, and our desires for him, and our affections toward him,
preferring him to our own salvation as Paul did Isreal's? The ignorance of this
has brought in a base and degenerate endeavor in most men, to seek faith, and
so keeps them always in their extremities. But I forbear.

Q. Can you say any more to prove this, that so ye may add a little touching
the things wherein this preparation stands?

A. It is said by Esaias 40.3, 4. and Luke 4.3. that John Baptist was sent in all
austerity to prepare the people to humiliation, sorrow, and selfedeniall: as
that charge implies, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven (meaning forgiveness)
is at hand. Which repenting was not a conversion to God before remission came:
but a preparing of the soul by godly sorrow and sensiblenesse of sin, to
prize mercy approaching. As those words following do witness, Every valley
shall be filled, and each hill cast down, every crooked thing made straight, and
so forth, which signifies nothing else, but a preparing of an untoward heart
by humiliation, to believe the Gospel. Like to which is that, Plow up your
fallow grounds, and sow not among thorns.

But to leave proofs, that I aim at in a few words, is to bring to my
Auditors view in two or three lines, the sum of many Sermons, touching the
manner of this Evangelical preparation.

And thus conceive it: that where the Lord will work kindly, he will so
present the glory of his grace to the soul in distress, that whereas before
it was under confused despair, now it shall see a creuis of light, and an hope
(a far off) of a possible deliverance.

Which hope shall melt and dissolve the heart into a Spirit of mourning and
breaking of heart, not so much for fear of Hell, as for the Lord himself. See
it in Iona 3. compare ver. 9. with ver. 6.7, 8. when hope once began to spring
up secretly, Who can tell whether God will repent him of his fierce anger, that
we perish not? Lo, they melt into tears of blood within them, they fast, put
on sackcloth on themselves and their beasts, and make a ruefull spectacle.

So does the soul here leave taking thought for it self, and take thought
for the Lord, saying, Oh, woeful man that I am, whom the Lord should be found
of, when I sought him not? who had care of my happiness, when I cared neither
for him nor my self? Oh, now the soul sees strange sights, which was blind
before.

Now it sees patience in the Lords offer, and says, Romans 2.3. If thou had
taken me in my riot, uncleanness, raking up heaps to my self, hypocrisy,
security, ciuility, and pitched me into hell in my impenitency, thou had
been just, and I had my mends in my own hands.

Besides this, it sees bounty in God all the long time of ignorance, and
wonders that the Lord should endure such a wretch (so stole in sin old and
new) to tread upon his ^arth, breathe in his air, feed upon his creatures,
enjoy marriage, protection, health, credit, success and the like, being
blessings only for them who have Christ the Lord of all, whom I have not: But
that to all these, he should add the chief mercy, Christ and his good things
(which the world lying in evil knows not) yea pin them upon her sleeue,
heaping offer upon offer, seconding one with another, and waiting till the dew
of the night had wet his locks. Oh, it makes him astonished! Whence came those
clockings of thine, Lord, those knocks at the door of my conscience? those
suites of thine to be let in? those importunities, allurements, persuasions and
cords to draw me out of my old course? Nay more, that Spirit of thy grace to
drive them home, to present them really to me, and convince me of thy
faithfulness! Oh, these do even power out the heart into sorrow, which was dead
and shut up before! When the Lord is instant, and deals as if the soul should
be the gainer! Oh it makes it confess, that the violation of such grace by
contempt, is the most fearful wickedness in the world. This is to lament after
the Lord, and to see him whom he has pierced.

Q. Proceed to another.

A. The soul rests not here, but breaks out into desire that it might live
to glorify this grace, and partake of it, that it might magnify it before all
the world, and give witness to it against all despizers of it. Oh, this way of
God in Christ is amiable to the soul, and it wishes that not only her head
were a fountein of tears, but the heart also of zeal, love, and desire after
it, and the praising of God for it, 1. Tim. 1.16, 17. Oh happy man, if I might
ever taste so much of it as might make songs of their deliverance! And this
desire breaks out into longing, hungring after this righteousness; no hunted
Heart so braying after waters, as this after salvation, and to see into the
riches of this mystery! And as the hungry belly sits not still, but deuizes all
art and ways, yea breaks stone walls to fill it self: so this soul faynting
after a deferred mercy, is restless, neglects no means, hearing, Sacraments
conference, questions, meditation, and rusheth through armies of
discouragements, reproaches, wrongs and losses, for the getting of these waters
of Bethlem, that it might power them out in sacrifice of thanks to the Glory of
Gods grace. Zach. 12.1^
Especially it vtters it self in supplications and requests to God, that he
would accomplish her warfare, and put all her tears in his bottell against the
day of salvation come, and till he hear and answer in his accepted time.
Thus we see, it dallyes not; but plies GODS season.

Q. Add one or two more.

A. The soul sets an high price upon this salvation, and recompts the seuerals
of it, that it may see the invaluablenesse of this Pearl, Mat. 12.44. having
spyed the Pearl, withdrawes it self, hides it, ponders the worth of it,
viewes the particulars of it, as one would do of a purchase, and by so musing
of it, sets the whole man a fire with it in the esteem and value thereof. Oh!
that the LORD of grace should impart himself in his secret of mercy to such a
one as I? that he might glorify this work above all the Creation! I see, it
is his chief object, that out of a ruin he might set up the Throne of his
Glory in the souls of his Elect, and be magnified for it by them and in their
salvation! Oh, shall not this raise up my affections, I say not above my money,
Pleasures, Marriage, Ease, Hopes, and Paradise below, but even my own private
salvation! Poor soul, if God had not sought himself in thee, what had become
of thee? He saved thee for his Name, and shall not that name of his be set up
and shrined in thine heart (above all Idols) which brought and laid such a
treasure in thy lap, and would choose thy salvation to be his Masterpiece, in
which he would make himself admired in those that believe both hee^e and at
his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. refuzing to be glorified in his own wisdom,
except thou also might be saved? Oh! the sense of this, and the benefits
which the soul enioyes in Christ the means thereof, rauisheth the heart with
the price of it, and causes it to count of all things here as dross, Phil. 3.
that one day it may partake the happiness of it, when all hypocrites shall
gnash their teeth, for forsaking such an offer.

Q. Conclude with the last: for these may serve to give a taste of the rest?

A. It lastly empties the soul of her self. Even as the Queen of Sheba
beholding the Glory and wisdom of Solomon, had no spirit left in her, but was
ashamed of her own siilinesse: and as Peter, Luke. 5. beholding the glorious
power of Christ, in bringing so many fishes into his net, when he could catch
nothing, was amazed. So does the Lord in this case.

He causes that lothnes and resistance of that proud heart that sauors no
grace or faith, to quail and fail utterly, takes away that corrupt self and
selfeloue which is offended at his grace. And as the Word of the Prophet
bidding Naaman wash and be clean, being once digested, drove him out of his
humors and distempers: so the brightness of this grace offered to the soul, does
devour the opposition thereof. Especially it turns away the soul from her
own ends in seeking salvation: she dares not now ascribe to her own duties,
hearings, prayers, affections, preparation, but casts them into the Sea, that
life may be preserved. She feels the great ends of GODS Glory to work all
these in her: but no way as works commending her to GOD: but as sparkles of
that Spirit of Grace, which by these steps draws her home to GOD, because he
will save her.

And therefore in all these, she is humbled in her self and naked, as one that
is no better then she was in point of desert: though in the way of salvation
much nearer. And therefore she says with the Church. Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall
not save me: I will not ride upon horses, but with thee the fatherles shall
find mercy. And herein she differs from all proud hypocrites, who wanting
this fire upon their herth, are feign to rest upon the deeds, and compass
themselves with their own sparkles, though they lie down in sorrow, Esaias,
50.11. Nay its certain, a prepared heart is so far from the boasting of a
Pharise, in his attempts, that rather he is as Peter, toiled and weary of
himself, so far from sacrificing to his nets, that he looks upon them with
abhorring, and says, Lord, depart from me a sinful man.

And by this little I desire my Auditors to think of the rest: I do not
affirm that GOD does always proceed alike with all for matter of order,
sensiblenes, manner, or measure. In some he works more at the first then in
others, some he sooner calls then others, in some one of these is more clear
then in others, as in Lydia and Zacheus: and commonly as the degrees of
corruption have been, so are the degrees of humblin;g and as the obedience to
means has been longer (without breaking out) so the measure of Terror is
lesser: The Lord is a most free agent, and tied to none: we speak only of such
preparations as experience shows to be most ordinary among hearers.

Q. Add somewhat breefly for use hereof, ere we come to the latter branch of
faith, that so confuzion may be avoided.

A. The uses are these.

terror to all that dream their estate to be good, when yet they lie in their
sins whole men: they think Christ is offered them barely, Be reconciled to God:
be they what they will be.

And in this they are the more strengthened by the opinion of such Divines as
dislike these preparations. I confess then indeed, this is a bad fruit of it,
and yet the best that I have found to come from it.

But to pass by them: to these I say, Beware lest ye play the despizers of
grace so long (by turning it to wantonness) while the LORD leaves ye to
vanish and perish in your own error and evils.

Secondly, to all such as remain blind and dead-hearted blocks in the midst of
this grace of the Gospel: They see no light, nor feel any warmth therefrom:
but still are cold snakes, and are neither affected with good nor evil:
neither hope, sorrow, desire or estimation of this pearl will fasten on them.

At the hearsay of a bargain, at the noise of their pleasures, and at their
jigs and tales they can laugh: but here, neither will good day mend, nor bad
pair them. Where is the hope of your faith, where no dram of the condition of
it is wrought?

Consider, at death, ye shall hear God saying thus, Lo, the things which your
hearts loved, ye have: and if my grace and offer had been as precious as a
base pot of beer, as a game at cards, as a long lock at your ears, ye had
also had that. But now your knocking at my door is too late, who heard not my
knockings at yours.

Thirdly, all dallyers with the season of this grace, and putters off this rich
offer of God, pind on their sleeue: thinking that they might have God tied to
them, and because they have tasted of his grace, with the tip of their tongue,
therefore they may have it at their command: whereas having once despized it,
they grow further and further from it daily.

They should have learned that the condition of faith is the preparation to
faith: dally with the one, and forgo the other. Also all hypocrites that rest
in some appearance of these preparations, not wrought in them by the Spirit of
grace, but from their own principles: which appears in this, that if they be
reproved, they cannot endure it, dare not enter into the trial of their
mournings, desires, and prove them to come from the Spirit of grace, but love
their own ease, better then the rules of God, and while their own pangs last,
who but they? but when their own sparkles be out, then full of sorrow.

No constancy, playnnesse, felfedeniall can be found in them: grace is nothing
worth of it self, except some mixture of their own concu re with it. A sign
that they have felt little sweetness in it, and therefore are far from
believing it.

Oh, lose not your labor, lay not out your money for no bread: choose not to go
a mile with God for nothing, rather then two for salvation: let Gods glory be
above your selves, and lose not all for a false heart, but take his counsel,
that said, 2 John 8. Lose not the things ye have swet for, till ye have got a
full reward, even Faith to save your souls.

Secondly and lastly, exhortation to poor souls, whom God has truly brought
under the condition of faith, to bless him for that handsell.

I say, first to acknowledge it great mercy, although they have many doubts,
and fears, and distempers to hinder them, and the Devil to come between cup
and lip, that they might not drink of this cup of salvation. Oh remember, its
mercy to be brought within these Suburbs of Heaven: If ye desire, say not, Its
nothing.

It was wont to be the answer of a discontented woman, who had enough; when
she was asked how she fared, to answer, We have nothing, etc. This whining
heart is in us, and hinders us from much good. Be thankful for any thing,
especially a pledge of faith: nay, be humble and say, Lord, what ever is not
Hell, is from mercy.

I will rather comfort my self, that the Lord means me the fullness of this
earnest: rather then grudge that presently I have not my will, and so wax
weary of waiting.

And secondly, should expel slavish fear from them, because the Lord has
given them a condition of faith. Beware ye do not abuse it.

Pledges are well kept by honest men, not spoiled. Do not tempt God by your
distrust: nor suffer the good preparations of the Spirit to dye or wanze,
through boldness, looseness, worldliness, pleasures lest God make them as
bitter to ye, as Samsons dallyings with his harlot. If ye belong to God, he
will save ye: but it shall be through the fire, and with some smart, ere the
Devil and your conscience have done wi^h ye.

It is in this case as with them that play at Slyde-groat: the silver at first
may be easily discerned by the stamp, but by that time they have used it at
the pleasure a while, is so defaced ye that know not what to make of it.

Make conscience of keeping Gods pledges, safe and entire. And to conclude, let
these conditions already wrought, be encouragements to attend the LORD for
Faith it self.

When a Manoa told his Wife, they must dye, because they had seen GOD: she
rather argued contrarily, that if GOD would slay them, he would never have
told them of a son: for how could this and that stand together?

Nay wait upon God, and press upon him by prayer, to perform his promise upon
this condition. Elisha being to forgo his Master, asked him that his spirit
might be doubled upon him: Elia told him it was hard to grant: howbeit if he
saw him at their parting, he should. Now what did Elisha? did he start from
him? Could any thing divide him? No, he would be sure to keep the condition of
the grant: and so did. For seeing Elia to ascend, he cried, My father, my
father, the Horsemen of Israel and the Chariots thereof: and so in taking up
the cloak of his Master, he received his Spirit doubled. Oh, that this
wisdom were in us?

Rather the sin of our hearers is, after they have spent a great part of
their life, in getting the condition, they are so far from heartening
themselves to believe that God will perfect the work of faith with power, that
they are ready to float between these two, the Condition, and the Performance.

If they be urged to believe, they fly to the condition, saying yea, if I had
the condition, but I am far from mourning, etc. If they be urged to the
condition, then they answer, yea, if I could believe: as if these were works of
our own, not the Lords, rather the one contrary to the other, then agreeable.

I end therefore with this caveat, Let not the Devil deceive thee about thy
condition, and then hold what thou have, and let nothing so beguile thee as to
deny Gods grace: and so doing, plead with the Lord humbly, that he would not
frustrate thy hope, of which he has given thee such a pledge, and in his best
season he will assuredly answer thee.

Q. Now come to the latter branch. What is it, to cast the soul upon a
promise, or to believe?

A. It is the last work of the Calling Spirit of GOD, whereby an humbled sinner
does cast himself upon this Word of God, Be reconciled, come and drink, come
and I will ease you (or the like offer, will charge or promise of God) for
pardon and life. This point is of all others the chief, and therefore I choze
to refer it to this place, as the use of all that has been spoken jointly
considered: for we know, a fiuefold cord is not easily broken, and yet no one
twist thereof might well be spared.

Five diverse grounds have been handled in this second part.

First, God the Father our enemy has cut off his plea, and found out our
deliverance.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus accordingly has satisfied the justice of God, that
mercy might have free course by the procuring of a righteousness.

Thirdly, God the Father accepts this for a poor sinner as if he in person
had satisfied, and therefore offers it to the soul most unfeignedly, without
hook or crook.

Fourthly, He offers him not nakedly, but with all

Fifthly, He offers him to each poor member of his

Q. How many things are required to this consideration?

A. Two in general. The one to gage the promise and offer of God, as a mariner
would sound the depth of the Sea, lest his ship should be on ground; to see
whether it be able to bear the weight of the soul or no, and answer all her
distempers and fears fully. The second, if it appear that it is able to
sustain it, then to rely and cast it self upon it confidently, for her own
pardon and salvation.

Q. How shall the soul rightly gage the depth and strength of the offer and
promise, which it cannot reach?

A. Although the mariner cannot himself by his own fadom touch the bottom of
the Sea, yet by his line and plummet he can sound it as well, as if he could
reach it with his hand, and so fasten his Anchor upon it: so here the plummet
and cable of the Word, wherein this strength and depth lies, will help us to
find it out so far as may serve our turn. The hand of faith touches the
depth of mercy contained in the offer, by the direction of the Spirit in the
Word, which tells us what is contained therein.

Q How many things are contained in it?

A. Many things: of which by the way I gave a touch in Article three, but here
I will open further. Look thither, and see what I said of the freedom and
Simplicity of the offer. Now add more touching the nature of the Word of
promise, which is Gods expression of the offer at the full. Three things then
the soul must look at, to bottom it self upon the promise of Reconciliation
and deliverance. First, The wisdom of the Lord. Secondly, The strength.
Thirdly, The faythfulnes: all which as sure grounds the Lord has hidden in the
promise of mercy to a poor sinner, that is under the condition.

Q. What is the first the wisdom of GOD in the promise?

A. I may say of it, as the Holy Ghost said of Solomon, when he called for a
Sword to cut the Child. All Israel saw that God has put the spirit of
wisdom into him to do justice. So, God has showed all wisdom in the
promise, to settle the soul. And that in two respects: first, of himself:
secondly, of us: In respect of himself, because in revealing his heart of love
to the soul only heerby, and no other way, he teaches us, that he who is God
only wise, 1 Timothy 1.17. could in the depth of his counsel find out no other
way so wise and sufficient as this, to ground the soul in sure peace toward
him: Christ and the promise in him, was that which seemed the wisest of all
ways, in the thought of God, especially to us under the Gospel. See Heb. 1.1.
After sundry ways the Lord spoke to our Fathers in dark times, as dreams,
Vrim, visions: but now by his Son and Word, the engraven form, etc. Note how
this course is called the best, and wisest, and holdingest of all, as having
more in it then all the rest. Oh! we would think in our shallownes, that one
from the dead, Angels or revelations were better. But wisdom it self has
pitched upon this way (all things considred) as the wisest of (...)*

Secondly, in respect of us: For it is such way as call^^ us to faith: a
promise having relation to believing it, without which it cannot profit us. Now,
if it be without us how w^^e a way is it to quash and dampe our base spirit of
Self-conceit and self endeavor, and to abase our pride, that he who boasts,
might boast in the Lord? So that the promise is like the Map which a wise man
showed once to a fool that boasted of his Lands, bidding him to point out his
Lands in the Map: which being narrow, he could not do. And so went away
ashamed. Note then for this, first, we all would be compted wise: many in
these days chuze to be compted rather dishonest then unwise. Well, let us then
be wise for our selves, and wise to salvation in ch^zing this way of a promise
to ground our souls upon. We see not the Lord: but if this be a wiser way then
that, think there is somewhat in it more then at first might seem, and fasten
upon it.

Q What is the second bottom in a promise?

A. The Strength of God: Read. 1. Sam. 15. The strength of Israel cannot lie:
meaning, in his Word. So then in the Word of GOD is his strength also, enough
to bear up the poor soul in believing. Heb. 1.3. He bears up all (the
weight of the world) by the Word of his power: how much more the weight of a
weak soul? See Esaias. 27.5. Anger is not in me, there is a word. What
follows? Or take hold of my strength and make peace. q.d. If I be reconciled,
there is strength enough in that for a sinner to take hold of: either this or
nothing. Read 2 Cor. 1.20. for all the promises of God in him are Yea and Amen:
that is, sure and strong; but mark how? In him: the words that I speak, are,
Spirit and life. But wherein is this strength? Surely in the forenamed grounds
of this second part: Christ's Satisfaction, the Fathers acceptance, are those
pillars of ^^rength to a promise. Without which it would not avail to go to a
promise. Weigh seriously that noted text, 2. Cor. 5.20, 21.

The Ministers of God in his Name offer and seal up in the Word and Sacraments
that word, Be reconciled to God. What says the soul to this? I dare not, God
is a consuming fire. True, says Paul, but anger is not in him. Why? Because He
has made (and accepted) him that knew no sin, to be sin, that we might be
the righteousness of God in him: he that said, In him he is well pleased. Shall
a poor soul be then as Noah's dove upon the waters? Why say ye to my soul,
Fly to the Mountains, Psalm. 11.1. if God be his strong hold? If thou be under
the condition of the promise, he is no less in his promise. Take a
similitude. A man lies in prison for debt of a hundred pound: A friend comes to
him, and bids him come out: he answers, I cannot, I lie here for the debt: but
being urged, he considers that its not for nothing he is so pressed by his
friend, the^e is some Surety has paid his debt: and then there appears a
strength unto him, and laying hold on it, he comes out. Read that in Romans 3.25.
God has set him forth to be a propitiation: that he might be just in
justifying him who is of the faith of Jesus. What says the poor sinner to
this! O! but it is just with GOD to punish sin wheresoever. Nay having made
and accepted him the propitiation for a broken soul, it is even just to pardon
him.

It was mercy to grant such propitiation: but having so done, it is also
justice to pardon: even as it is not just to take one debt twice. Therefore
David pleades, Pardon me according to thy Righteousness: Christ having turned
just wrath into just mercy. To conclude this, note yet a second strength in the
promise: for the poor soul still cauils. But this is to a believer, I believe
not.

I answer, but the promise (by the power of the Spirit of our Advocate) is able
to do that which it requires: its not a killing letter as the Law, Do this
and live: but a quickening one, Believe and live: it gives that it commands:
the soul being under a promise, is under the Authority of him that bids her be
reconciled. It is as with Naaman, 2. Kings. 5.15. Wash and be clean: So he
washed, and lo, his flesh came as a childs. Act. 2. that Cripple that beheld
John and Peter, being bidden to arise, felt strength and streightnes to come
into his lims; how? in the Name of Jesus. Ver. 12. This Name of Jesus is much
more in the promise of Reconciliation. Mark then: If the strength of a promise
be such, say not, It is nothing, but take hold of it.

Q What is the third bottom in a promise?

A. The faithfulness and vndeceauable unchangeableness of it: this is a strong
bottom. 1. Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful speech, and worthy all acceptance,
Christ came, etc. Read that sweet place, Esaias. 55.3. The sure mercies of David,
and the opening of it, Hebr. 17.18. Surely blessing, I will bless thee.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of his promise the
immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable
things, (Covenant and oath, in which it was impossible for GOD to lie, we
might have strong consolation. Why? Because they are as two Cities of Refuge to
a poor distressed fearful soul (in the pursuit of Satan and conscience to
those auengers) lay hold upon.

Mark then, if the LORD descend so low to a poor sinner, as to answer all
doubts, by adding an Oath and a seal of his Sacrament, and a pledge of his
Minsters faythfulnes, to assure the simplicity of his meaningg then doubtless,
it must be his honor to perform it, and he that believes it not, must
needs make him a liar, Ioh. 3.33. as he that believes, sets his seal to the
Word that it is true. Numb. 22.19. It came from a wretch, yet by Gods Spirit.
God is not a man, that he should lie. Oh! then bottom thy soul upon this
faythfulnes. Read Esaias. 54.9. Having made his covenant of mercy with the
Church, he adds, This is as the waters of Noa unto me, for as I have sworn
that they shall no more destory; so, I will be wroth no more with thee: with
everlasting kindness I will show mercy upon thee. And again, If my Covenant
with the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, shall fail, then shall my Covenant
fail with thee. We rest upon the promise of a man that never failed us: much
more his oath, Heb. 6.16. An oath is among men a confirmation and end of all
strife. Oh! beware then of struggling against Gods promise, because it carries
the force of an oath with it? Let me exemplify it by a text, 1 Kings 1.22. The
Prophet Nathan, and Bathsheba go to David, and press him, Did not my Lord the
King say, Solomon shall surely reign after me? How is it then, that Adonijah
reigns? What did David? He rowzing his weak body up, swears, As the Lord
lives, who has delivered my soul out of all adversity, as I have said, so I
will perform it this day: Solomon my Son shall not reign. Was not David as
good as his word? and durst any hinder or cross it? No, it ended the strife,
and scared away all the traitors. Oh! beware then, that thou cross not the
Lord in his promise, to make him a liar.

Q. These are strong grounds. How should the soul rely on them? Are there any
directions for this?

A. Faith should in these respects do these things.









And lastly, she ought to plead the promise, and improoue it

Q. These are sweet duties. What is the first of them?

A. To ponder a promise. Pondering is, when a man lifts any thing to esteem
what weight it bears: so ought faith to do with the promise: And that in
these three kinds.

First, to mark it. Men give no heed to Gods promises: they lie hid in the
Word, and are made no otherwise of then as other common passages. It is long
before an hearer remember one of forty, till some cross drive them in as with
an hammer: and then perhaps he remembers some one. A fearful sin: read Esaias
8.8. Ahaz slighted the promise of GOD: the Prophet tells him, Is it not enough
for ye to slight a Prophet, but God in a Prophet, not marking what he
promises? Lo, I will therefore make a promise to my Church, and it shall be
marked, A Virgin shall conceive a Son, etc. Lo, the cause of unbelief in
many, is their giddiness, they are so full of froth, that holy promises are as
a vain thing to them, as the Law was a vain thing in Hse, 8.12. And the Word
to them in James: Do the Scriptures speak in vain? noting the wildness of
the heart, and how the fool having seen this glass, forgets the Lords face?
Oh! the giddiness of mind, even the wild-goose chase of the most of us, in
hearing promises. But beware, Heb. 2.1. that ye set such a mark upon a promise
and offer of God, that it may be the fairest flower in the garden of God, in
your eyes.

The eye of the soul must guide the heart in believing. Set a star upon the
margin of a special promise. Buy that book that culs out promises of note in
this kind. Even as every spoonefull put into a full vessel runs over,
though the vessel be sound: so here, look therefore that your vessels be
empty also, if ye would mark the promise: lest GOD be speaking in your cast,
and ye be not aware.

I speak to you of my own Congregation, not without cause: lest the precious
promises ye have heard, leake out, and this of Reconciliation in Christ, and
the offer of it.

The second is, Musing of a promise: chewing upon the Mary, She pondred the
Angels words in her heart. So did they, Iona. 3.9. Oh! if God turn from his
anger, we shall not perish, but live in his sight. This is the taking of Gods
persuasions, and allurements and benefits offered us in the promise, into our
consideration as the Merchant, Math. 12.44. he went aside and hid the pearl;
nourishing the gain of mercy, pardon, heaven, as a child would hold a sweet
thing under the palate. It is the putting of Gods cords and rags under our
armeholes, that the Spirit may draw us out of our dungeon, with ease. Oh! this
is a riddle to men. Many will mark for the time present, who can not be
brought further: but stick at the birth, and have no strength to bring forth.
The common answer is, Oh! we cannot meditate. No, for the devil knows, if ye
could do so, ye might meet the Lord, to settle you upon the promise.

Let them whom this concerns, weigh it well: lest they lay heaps upon heaps,
and dye of thirst. Rid your souls of other scurffe: get matter of promises
about ye, separate your selves, Prou. 18.2. for this is a part of Gods
worship, and cannot be done in the works of our calling, the throng of other
business. The Lord bless this to us!

Jonathan and David did, 1 Samuel 20.41. So did David make the promise his
Counceller, and companion, Ps. 119.24. And so should we do. As if a man that
has a suit, or a crazy body, will power out all into the bosom of a Surgeon,
or Doctor of Physic: he will hide nothing, but tell them his whole heart. Oh!
we boast that the Minister of God knows least of our mind. But if we deal
so with Gods promises, we are like to fare worse. Oh how seldom are our doubts
and fears powered into the bosom of this companion! How would it stay us, and
speak to our hearts! In the fear of God let not the offer and promise of God
be strangers to us.

Q. What is the second work of the soul?

A. To be convinced of whatsoever has been said of the wisdom, strength
and truth of God in offering and promising pardon to a sinner. See Ioh. 16.9.
The Gospel shall convince the heart of righteousness. This follows the former.

Due weighing, will cause the soul to see the whole heart and meaning of God
in a promise, and to be under the authority and evidence thereof. Else no
believing. Heb. 11.1 faith is called an evidence and demonstration: as light at
midday conuinces the eye of it self. So here: the soul must see God nakedly
in his promise; as in a mirror, see 2 Cor. 3. last. Ver. As the virgin is
convinced, that her husband is the man above all other, laid out for her. As
its said of Laban, Genesis 24.57. when he saw how matters stood between the
servants message and Rebeccas affection, said, We can say neither more nor
less against it: for this thing is of the Lord.

This grace is the work of the Spirit, making the soul to begin to think,
Surely I am the party whom GOD means: for I have the condition wrought, and I
see he is plain, and has no subtilty, but is as he seems: hence a secret
insinuation of heart arizes, I may be the soul^ whom GOD will pardon: for whom
should he mean, but such a one as I? Open it a little by the like.

At the Assizes when prisoners are examined by the Judge, the evidences are
called forth to declare against the^ for th^ft or murder: now when they are
sworn and witnessed, the Judge tells them, they are but dead men. Why? The
Judge saw them not rob or kill? No; but he lies under the conviction of the
evidence, saying, If these men will swear thus, I believe it, So when the
soul sees the bottomes of the promise of GOD to be sound, it waxes convinced
of the truth, and answers, Lord, I cannot see why thou should travail with
me thus, to bring me under the condition, and reveal thy promise with such
evidence, but I must needs be convinced. Surely thou have done thus, because
thou meanest to pardon and save me. I am (Lord) unable to gainsay, thou have
persuaded me to believe.

Q. What is the third work?

A. It is the cleaving of the soul to the Promise, against all her fears,
doubts, cauils. For mark, when it is convinced of clear truth, the scales of
darkness fall from her eyes. When Naaman had weighed the Prophets promise of
clensing, his cauils vanished: no more speech of Abana and Pharfar. So Thomas
being convinced by Christ's hands and sides. The soul is set between vanity
and mercy, Iona 2.8. if mercy prevail, then lying vanities cease. Then the
soul looks off from her former doubts, and beholdes the Temple out of the
belly of the Whale: It then begins to set close to the promise: As if a man
that grafts a sien in a stock, should find some clay stone to get between the
one and the other, to keep the sap away, and make it warp from the stock: and
pulling it out, lets the sien come close home to it. Hence it is, that a
convinced heart comes forth and says, I cut off my carnal reason, I see no
savor in it, I cut of my bold presumption, I renounce my slavish fear, I
abhor my base mixtures of self and duties, virtues and preparatiues of my
own: I abandon all my former proppes of nature, art, experience, Religion
which kept me from mercy; and I cut al knots in sunder which I cannot unloose,
and let all my tackling fall into the Sea, and commit my soul to thy promise,
through rocks, waves and shelues, that if I perish, I may perish: only I will
for ever cling to thy promise, do with me as thou will: if I be deceived, thou
have deceived me.

Thus the soul being convinced, claspes to GOD, and affiances it self to
him, as the Iuy to the Oak, so that break the one, and break the other.

As the wife forsakes all, and cleaues to her husband.

And this affiance causes that sweet consent and naked obedience to the Word,
according to the Word and the extent thereof: whereof read Esaias. 1.19, If ye
consent and obey, ye shall eat of the good things, etc. Consent looking at a
promise, and clozing with it as the seal with the wax, and it with the seal,
concurring therewith and being carried in the stream of it, against the
motion of her own rebelling heart, as being overcome, and yielding up her
weapons: As Rebecca convinced that the marriage was from God, being called to
speak, answered, I will go to Ishac.

And so follows obedience, which has a respect to a command of God, nakedly
considered in the promise of God: As Abraham simply looked at the charge of
killing Isac, in the mere power of God: Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.
and so to the promise also of Isac, not beholding Saras womb. See these two
examples Luke 5. of Peter, and Luke 6. of the Centurion I have fished all
night, yet at thy Word, Lord, I will let down. And, Say the word, Lord, and I
believe. Luc. 7.7*
So the poor soul says, LORD, in my self I see little why I should think
thy Word to concern me; but seeing thou will have it so, I come in, and kiss
the Son, submit to believe, and put my self under the authority of thy
promise.

Q. What is the last act of the soul about a promise?

A. The last differs not from the former, save in degree, and it is the
cleaving to a promise, when there is strong vnlikelyhood presented to the
soul: either from the Lords leaving it to her self, or in temptation, or in
deep sense of unworthiness, fear, etc. Then she labors to cling to the
promise by pleading it secretly: as we see in that rare example of the Woman
of Canaan, who was content to be put off by silence, denial, yea taunts: and
although she was called a Dog, yet she held close to the Word, that Christ
was the Son of David: A true Dog, and happy in this, that she would not be
beaten off.

Therefore our Savior said, She was of great faith. Like to which was that of
Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.9. when those enemies beset him and the City: he gat
unto God in the promise made to Solomon in 1. King. 8.17. Oh Lord, Thou saydst,
If when our enemies besiege us round about, we come and pray in this place,
thou will look down and have mercy: Oh Lord, look now, here they are: our
eyes are upon thee. By which plea of an old promise, (yet as fresh as at first)
he prevailed. Let us do so in our streights, with the promise of free
reconciliation.

Q. Well, what use make ye of (...) Doctrine?

A. Manifold.

First, confutation of those desperate enemies of a promise, the Papists. They
say, to cleave to a promise by faith with cleaving to it for salvation, is a
Doctrine of presumption. But we answer, that as their Doctrine of justification
is the true Doctrine of presumption of their own works: so their Doctrine of
faith, is a mere Idol, and fancy.

They add, we must have revelations, before we come to Assurance. We answer
it is true, for although we abhor their fantastical ones, yet we grant,
Revelation of a promise is the true object of faith. And because (as in all
other so in this point, they cross themselves) I will convince them by their
own words. In the point of Transubstantiation they being put hard to it,
answer thus (I will translate their words) In their adored Sacrament of the
Altar, it is meet that the edge of all carnal reason be blunted, and that the
wisdom of the flesh being banished, we hold our selves close to the Word.
Their meaning is, Hoc est corpus meum. But oh ye hypocrites! Is the word so
precious unto ye (yea a word which no body grants ye to be Gods, but by
imposture it becomes your own) that ye bid us look all reason in the Word:
and when we teach the Word must be of like use in all doubts of conscience and
Religion, do ye then eat your own speeches? What knot can hold a Pro^eus?

Secondly, instruction to all that have believed the promise Hob. 13.8. is
yesterday and to day, and the fame in the order of his grace for ever.
Otherwise the sodering with the Lord shall cause ye much sorrow: and yet you
must come back this way when all is done.

Thirdly, let this be admonition to all poor souls or others

The first, among other lets, let these be avoided: first, take heed of resting
in devout complaints of the want of faith. For although there is an holy
complaining of Gods people, as we see Esaias. 63.15. where the Church laments her
hard heart in the Lords bosom, asking Where are thy bowels, etc? yet, sure it
is: the common trade of complaynts come from a corrupt heart, of ease, loath to
be informed and searched to the quick. Good complaynts made in season, to such
as can ease us, from the depth of a broken heart, is a great friend to faith:
but counterfeict complaynts are the greatest lets thereof. Therefore in stead
of our compaints, let us do as Ester did at Mordecai his request. Mourn (says
he) and spare not, but rest not there, in any conditions of faith. Rest not in
the handmayd, but go to the Lord and his promise to end the question. And so
did Ester, Ester. 4.16. and 5^
she complained of her weakness, but rested not in that, but went to the King,
saying, If I perish, I perish: and so found the Golden Scepter held out to her.

The second let is, Take heed of Sloth and ease: when the Lord has brought
thee within sight of his promise, consult not with sloth which slayes the
soul: but look up to the Lord for assisting grace to hold on the use of
means, and so to finish his work. Thus Gedion, having begun to pursue Zeba
and Zalmunna, would not stop his course, nor the work of GOD by revenging
them of Succoth and Penuel, Judge. 8 7.
but first dispatched one thing, and then returned to the other. Most wise in
this was Eliezer, when the question was about his stay for Rebecca ten days.
No (says he) seeing the Lord has prospered me, Genesis 24.56.
hinder me not: And so preue^ting danger of delay, carried her away with him
instantly. So the merchant in the purchase of the pearl. If in any good thing,
then above all, in this, dallying is dangerous.

The Apostle 2. Cor. 6.2. having pressed the receiving of the offer, dwells upon
this: for he says, This is the accepted time, and day of Salvation. It is the
devils Maygame, to see men make shipwreck in the Haven. Do not by a lazy
heart with the Lord, Act. 24.25
as Felix did with Paul speaking of the judgment day, put him to another time
which never came. Few there be, but have their season from God: take heed of
dallying with it, lest God deny it: or an heart, when thou perhaps would have
thy heart never so open. Our nature is to seek grace most, when its most out
of season. But that is Gods season to deny. Mat. 25.9. Pro. 1.28.


Q. Are there any more lets in this use of admonition?

A. Yea, the third is overmuch filling of our hands with the delights of this
earth: as lawful liberties, pleasures, wealth, credit, Farms, Oxen, Wife,
posterity. These are as the Sea-eatings of the banks down and destroying all.
See Luke 14.18, It is as if a man a drowning should hold his gold so fast, that
he cannot take hold of a pole to save his life: or as if ones hand coud not
receive a pearl, being full of nut-shels. Come to fasten upon the promise
empty-headed, hearted, and handed. Oh that the devil did not bleare men's eyes
with this, under the color of lawfulness! What, although ye might win the
world, if ye lose your souls? They may be lost as well by winning it in an
excess of liberty, as against conscience. If ye have shot the gulf, take heed
ye be not drowned in a shallow! Observe thy self, and thou shall find, that
when thou go from an eager pursuit of thy beloved vanities (for so are
liberties, if abuzed) as all the wotd is unsavory, so especially the promise of
Reconciliation. If thou will savor that well, let all other, Phil. 3.18.
even the best blessings be as dross to it.

Q. What else?

A. Especially take heed lest a worse thing, Heb. 12.15.
even a root of bitterness spring not up to defile thee. Go not to the
doctrine of Reconciliation with a surfeit of any privy lust, which thou would
not gladly know and forgo for the promise: For this will so defile thee, that
whatsoever comes in the way thereof will be defiled. Read Ioh. 3.19. in the
end, They hated light, because their works were evil: they would not be rid
of them. Nothing marres Gods bargain so much, as the presage that it will cut
off our lusts. You that read this, in Gods fear weigh it. In my poor
experience I have seen this evil, that many professors, some by a peevish
spiteful preiudicate heart (to be won by no means) others by the pride in
gifts, selfeloue, others, their unclean dallyings, looseness in company,
others, and the most, by the thorn of couetuousnesse have choked most fair
hopes of faith: but these have kept the heart in warping, One such gourd to the
pottage, one such dead fly in the ointment, marres all. The devil can with one
lust chase away ten graces. So it is when the heart is inclined to be vain in
talk, curious in toys and fashions: but above all, when it is surfeited with
hollownesse, and uses it self to speak or do as Balaam did, Number. 23. who
would bear himself out to make conscience, but in al^, a rotten heart
followed him to his ruin.

This bitter root is discerned two-waies. First, when its naturallest of all
vices: as we know, Twichgrasse, and May-weede will ouergrow the soil that is
given to it.

Secondly, the often return of the same sin after the seeming him, whom the
unclean spirit cast out once, returned to, with seven times more strength, and
look up to God against it.

Q. Is there any more?

A. The last (at the least which I will touch) is unwillingness to submit to
Gods way of believing. I discourage none, but warn only. Men look, God
should wayt upon us, and fill us with goodness, while we are idle: if our
hearts can be in frame and as we would, God shall have our good word, but we
are loath to be too far down. But learn to know the Lords way, and yield
humbly to it, in use of means: and be not our own caruers. Those that sail
upon the Sea, are up in the clouds, and down in the depths suddenly.

Get an heart to trade with the Lord according to his way. And as it is
fearful to be always dead and not care, so to be always up in our zeal and
spirit, is no mark of goodness. Submit (with an innocent heart) to be led as
the Lord will have thee, coveting the best measure, but resting in Gods
measure* Jonathan and his Armor-bearer in that, 1 Sa. 14.13 crept up the hill
to the Philistines against the Rock, and yet because he had a watchword from
God, was cheerful. And as Peter was ready to be at Christ's command, Luke 5. to
let down his net against his own experience: so let us be in God his work
and way, although tediously, rather then in our way of affections, not knowing
our own spirit. It is a blessed thing to trade for faith, although with small
success: yea when we cannot compass a promise, yet set our mark upon it,
and say, It is precious, it shall have my weak heart and endeavor, till God
give me my desire. Yea, although thy measure prove small, and thou prayest and
hear and gettest little, yet make much of that little and be thankful.

The Lord deals out to the poor soul, as once a wise friend dealt with an
acquaintance of his: he sent her three tokens, a brass farthing, a
mil-six-pence, and a piece of Gold: bidding the Messenger first to give her the
farthing: if she took it well, then the sixpence also, and after that he sent
her the gold. As Paul 2 Cor. 12. was content to pray for any grace, and the
woman of Canaan was glad she might be as a dog to pick up crumbes. Thus much
for the third use of admonition.

The last is, Exhortation to all under the condition of a Cor. 6.1. Receive not
this offer in vain. Let all that has been said of the ground of a Word from
God, and the duties of cleaving to it, be laid to heart. Let us not use a Word
of God as a vain thing. The Word is a precious treasure of Christ, and has
all his strength and authority in it: account it so then, resign up thy
Crown, and cast it at the feet of the promise. Popish Emperors have left all
their Glory, and laid their Scepters down at the feet of an Idol, as weary of
the world. Oh that God would tire us, and urge us to resign up all our souls
to his promise! We see not the Lord indeed nor hear him not speak: but we
have a sure word of promise, in which we shall be wise, if we attend to it, as
a light in a dark place. It has all Gods power in it, it is as gold purged,
it has all authority, and resembles his person. As a grave Preacher once
said, Thy Word, O Lord, is Holy and pure as thine own Majesty! Oh yield our
impure hearts to it.

If a man come into the Presence Chamber of a King, and see him not there, what
will he do? Surely he will bow to the Chair of Estate. Why? Because it
represents the King. Think thou that any chair of Estate can so hold out
the Glory of a King, as does the promise show forth the grace of GOD in Christ?
Kiss the Son in his promise then. But thou will say, Oh, it is hard to honor a
promise and God therein. Well then, Tim 3. vlt Esaias. 57.19.
go to God in prayer and bow thy knees, and beg of him to reveal this mystery
of Godliness and Christ unto thee, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and so the Disciples, Lord
increase our faith. It is the gift of God: he creates it as the fruit of the
lips. Most Heavenly is that phrase of David, Psalm. 119.49. Thy promise, in
which thou have caused me to put my trust. It is the Lord that must cause the
heart to put her trust in the promise. I know (Lord) the condition of faith,
the excellency of thy Word, and all those bottoms of it. I am urged to ponder
thy Word, to cleave to it, to consent and obey. But (Lord) I am still the same,
it will never be done for me, except thou draw me: else (Lord) I shall be as
Agrippa (almost persuaded, and thy cords will break in the drawing: therefore
fulfill thy promise, thou that offrest the promise, cause me to do all these,
and cause me to enter Covenant with thee for pardon and life. Oh look to this!
Moralize not with the Lord in other things: this the one thing necessary: if
this be, the rest will follow. Faith will purge the Conscience, change the
heart, order the conversation in three, if bred in the second. Else the further
the worse: ill digestion is not mended by the veins; rotten says cannot be
mended by a show of duties. Remember, the issue of Christ's enquiry will be for
says Luk, 18.8. Those that have it, the Lord will be admired in them in that
day. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. and woe be to them that want it. Better to be a drunkard, a
thief (though very damnable) then to want faith, to give God the lie, and to
sin against the Remedy. M^se upon the first words of Ioh. 3.19. and upon Ioh.
3, vlt and Mark. vlt. Nothing but condemna^ion is to such: and that the worst.
So in 2. Cor. 4.4. If our Gospel be hid; its to them that perish. And as thou
would stand vnconuinced, not only before the woman of Canaan, and the
Centurion, Mat. 15. Luk 6. (w^o being but strangers, yet are wondered at for
faith) but even before Turks and Pagans who never had the means, so tremble
at it, that such should condemn thee: and above all things labor to rely upon
the promis^ for pardon and lif, ere thou go from hence and be seen no more.
The Lo^d persuade us all to it, Gen 9.26 And ^his be said of this last Article
in the practice whereof I have b^e e la^g^, beca^s^ it is the maine Branch of
p^acticall Cate^^isme, and the chief scope of t e whole Book.

The end of the second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF THE CATECHISM.
The Text, EPHESIANS. 4.20, 21, 22.24. 20 If you heard him, and have bin taught by
him, as the truth is in Jesus.

21 That ye put off as concerning the former conversation the old man which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:

22 And that ye put on the New man which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness.

24 Wherefore putting away lying, speak the truth, etc.


Q. WHat is the connection of this Text?

A. From the 17. verse the Apostle enters into this point, viz. to urge the
Ephesians to a renewed course, according to that grace they had received from
God. The argument stands in a comparison between their carriage in their
former ignorance, and that which the grace of God in Christ had taught them
since, that is, that conversation which ye walked in before your calling, was
very suitable to the estate ye lived in: for, as then ye were vain, blind,
darkened, hardened in heart, and past feeling in conscience; so your course was
profane, estranged from the life of God, and given over to all lasciviousness
and uncleanness, even with greediness, as they who never had enough of their
lusts. But since ye came to the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, ye have heard
and learned a new lesson, since the truth of Gods love and mercy shined in yo,
ye came to believe your selves pardoned, reconciled and restored to the favor
of God again. Walk therefore as forgiven ones, and let this grace renew and
reform your lives.

But ye will object (says Paul) what is pardon of sins, to a changed and
renewed course? Surely (says he) ^hey are very agreeable each to other, If ye
have been taught the truth as it is in Jesus. If ye have been iang^ers only of
faith, and deceived your selves with a bare shadow of Jesus. I wonder not if
ye ask this question: But if ye have sat at Jesus his feet as true
disciples of his, then ye cannot but know, that Pardon and Reconciliation in
Jesus, is renouation of heart and change of conversation for Jesus sake: Even
that ye put off the old man, and put on the new, is the truth of Jesus, and
when he forgave ye, his true and plain meaning was that you should change
your manors and walk in another frame then ye did before ye knew Jesus.

Q. I well conceive ye. Now what does the text it self contain, and what are
the parts thereof?

Second thing in the description is the distribution of this general into his
parts: where first note the order, he begins with the Negative part, and then
adds the affirmative: Then the substance, first, That ye put off concerning,
etc. There is the purging out of the old man: Secondly, that ye put on the
new, the former in v. 22. the later in 24. The third is in the 25.

Q. Open now the phrases of the Apostle in order.

of it urged in verse. 23. thus whereas perhaps ye Epesians are of mind, that
it is sufficient for ye to have believed in Jesus to salvation, and as for other
fruits ye need take no thought how your life be ordered: I tell ye no, the Lord
looks that ye be also renewed; and say not, that it will come of it self: no,
let it be your care: Be ye renewed, look ye to it, it is weighty, it will cost
much pains, for although it is Gods work in you, yet you may shrewdly resist
it by an idle loose heart: but do you yield up your selves in all meekness of
spirit to this creating work of the Spirit; be you molded to it and fashioned,
not to old lusts, or this present world, but to the renewing of the holy spirit
ye have the Spirit of God in ye, but stir up that grace of it which ye have
received, let it not lie dead, but accommodate your selves in all selfe-denial
to this work, that faith may break out in renewing.

Secondly, We have the work it self, Renouation: that is the Secondly, this
renewed work is a new Creation. It Is Gods work, its after God, none but he
can create: for creation is a producing of something out of nothing: God
creates this new man out of nothing. The new creature consists of no power out
of his own matter, but is merely made of nothing, out of Gods matter and
stuff. Ioh. 3.6. That which is borne of the Flesh is Flesh, that which is
borne of the Spirit is Spirit, Ioh. 1.13. This creature is not of blood or the
will of flesh, nor of the will of man; but of God. Thirdly, It is created
according to Gods Image: mark this, a believer in Christ, must not only be
begotten to God by reconciliation, but must have also his Image stamped upon
him, and be like him; as he has borne the image of the old man, so he must
also of the new: as he believes for his own salvation, so he must be
conformed to Christ for the honor and glory of him that has forgiven him As
the wax takes the print of the seal, so does the believer

The last is, the Subject wherein these are: That is the Spirit of the mind. It
is not denied by Paul, but the body and the soul, and all the powers thereof
are sanctified and renewed also as, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. but by this phrase he
imports, That the true seat of renouation is the inner man, or the spirit of
the mind; that is, the best and chief part of the soul, the best part of the
mind that which is the eye and guide of the soul, and the best of the will,
that to the bent and purpose of the heart this: Spirit is as the Prince in his
Privy Chamber: if he command, all obey; if the Spirit once be renewed, all the
inferiors bow. This is the sense of the general implication.

Q. Proceed to the order, and to the parts.

A. The order is, that first the Apostle vrges the negative of putting off. To
show that the Spirit of God never planteth holiness till he have purged out
uncleanness for who commits sweet liquor into a foul vessel? and what
communion is there between corruption and pureness? Secondly, he adds, And
put on, etc: noting that the Lord accepts not of a naked absence of evil,
except there be also the presence of gracious properties.

Q. What means he by the putting off the old man?

A. By putting off, laying aside, purging, casting out, he means forsaking,
hating, renouncing and bidding farewell to lusts. Not much differing from the
former part of Sanctification: standing in mortifying and crucifying of sin.
By the old man, he means old Adams corrupt properties, as blindness, vanity
(which here is named instead of all the rest) profaneness, vnrighteosnesse,
etc. These he would not have put off as we do our apparel over night to be
put on again in the morning, but as our old rotten rags we cast upon the
dunghill.

Q. And what means he by putting on the new?

A. The same which else where Romans 13. vlt. and in other places, he calls
Read that verse.
putting on of the Lord Jesus, that as we are clad, adorned and warmed with
our apparel, so Christ should be our clothing not of body but of spirit,
days and nights, and continually. Putting on here signifying application in
the closest manor of Christ to the soul, in his reneuing power. By the new
man, he means the Lord Jesus in his nature and qualities, of all grace and
goodness as before I named. So that this is a putting on of a better apparel
then cloth of gold and therefore admitting a better putting on, that is never
to be put off again?

Q. What is the third part of the Text?

A. The fruit of both: For these are within, this dress and attire is
spiritual: but the Lord will have his new Creature not only all glorious
within, but also without: All outward clouts and rags cast off; he names lying,
as one that is as manifest and common a work of the flesh as any, but means
all: and he will have the outward attire of virtue also to be put upon the
conversation, he names truth (which as it is a Girdle to gird all other
garments close to us, so its one outward badge of goodness, Psalm. 15. See
Ephesians. 6.
) but by this grace of the tongue he means all other; of the body, senses,
life and conversation. And this of a taste of the Text: the rest in the
Articles.

The Article of the third part.
Q. What is the scope of this third part?

A. To show, that whosoever truly believes the pardon of his sin, must also
give up himself to God in all holy obedience both in the frame of his spirit,
and in his outward conversation.

Q. What is the first Article of this third part?

A. That who so is begotten to God by the gift of faith, has also the image of
God begotten in him by the spirit: or more briefly, that he who is in Christ is
a new creature: Read these texts for it, 2 Cor. 5:17: other texts shall occur
in the particulars following: see Ephe. 2:10.

Q. How many ways does the Scripture express this?

A: In sundry: all tending to the same end, which are well to be noted for
better conceiving of the Scripture: For as we see sundry writers use diverse
terms, and call this third part of the Catechism, The doctrine of
Thankfulness, or of Obedience to the Commandem^nt, or the like, so the holy
Ghost uses diverse terms: And all may be referred to these heads; for either
they look at the maine Principle of the Spirit of Sanctification; as when the
terms of Renouation, New man, New Creature, Regeneration, New birth, are
used: or at the operation of this principle; as when the terms of Repenting,
casting off the old man, putting on new, purging, forsaking, denying
unrighteousness or lusts, are used; and so of mortifying our lusts, or rising
up to holiness, etc. are used: or else at some actual inward virtues, as love
fear, obedience, subjection, and the like: or at some outward performances, as
walking with God in all his Commandments, or departing from iniquity, or
abhorring evil, or cleaving to good, ceasing to sin, learning to do well,
or the like: these all, although in phrase differing, yet in sense are all one;
and they import this, That the Lord requires of all believers in Christ, that
their hearts be renewed, that they purge themselves, finish their
Sanctification, fear him for his mercy, walk with God, order their
conversation aright; all is one thing, get one and get all; but the holy Ghost
does includ all in that golden sentence, He that is in Christ, is a new
creature.

Q. How many things are to be considered for the better conceiving of this
maine point?

A. It is indeed the maine of this whole part; and the things are especially
these four; first, the Author of this Regeneration or new Creature, the holy
Ghost: secondly, the inward instrument of this author, and that is Faith:
thirdly, The subject in which this regeneration is wrought, The whole man.
Fourthly, the parts; these will prove the chief: For as for the other which
are taken for granted, we need not to dwell much upon them, to wit, the seed
whereof we are begotten, which is the Lord Jesus: the immediate instrumen used
to beget, the word of God: the seal by which the Spirit assures and conveis
this regeneration, Babtisme. Only let us take a Scripture for each: for the
first, 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are we who is made, etc. that is of Christ, Christ
in his holy nature, holy obedience, and sufferings and resurrection, is the
matter of our sanctification. For the second, see Iam. 1.16. Of the word of
truth he begat us, etc. that is, by the Gospel preached; the ear receives
the seed of the word to beget us. For the third, See Mat 3.11. Where our
Savior is said, to baptize with the holy Ghost and fire: noting that baptism
is the seal of this work. And so Romans 6. The Apostle tells us that by Baptism
we are ingrafted into the similitude of his death and resurrection, which is
nothing else but our sanctification.

Q. Well then, let the former four heads be a little opened: yet before those,
answer one objection that troubles me: you seem to imply that a believer and a
new creature are two things? I had thought that seeing faith begets us to God
by reconciliation, therefore it and a new creature differ not?

A. Briefly I answer, that it is true, belief of the promise is Gods creation
likewise. Esaias 57.18. But this proves not that this article is needless. For
(as shall appear in the second of these points) regeneration is either a
begetting us to God, and making us his, or else a begetting God in us, and
these two differ, as life diff^rs from the exercise of it. To use a similitude,
the child truly quickened in the womb has the life of a reasonable creature,
because he has the soul put into him: yet he is not said to be borne as soon
as he lives; for he must be perfected in the womb, and brought forth, and so
is a child of the world; he lived before the life of the womb, but now he
lives another life, in the light, feeds, sleeps, cries, suckes the
breasts: So is it here; Faith gives the generation and life to the soul, at
the first quickening; but the birth is not obtained fully, till it be brought
forth as a new Creature by Renovation: then it is declared to have the true
life of God, when his image of holiness declares it.

Q. Well, the Similitude may serve: let us now come to the three heads and
first what is the Author of this creation?

A. The holy Ghost. As almost all the Scripture proves: Two places may serve:
1. Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, purged, and sanctified hy the spirit of our
God. So Titus 3.5.6. He saved us by washing of Regeneration and the renewing of
the holy Ghost. Co^ 2.12.
And the reason is plain. For even as it was in the union of Christ our head,
with our flesh, the holy Ghost most miraculously did concur with the matter
of conception, and did unite it to God, so that one person was made of two
natures, and by this means the Deity infused into the humanity, the most
excellent pureness of God, and the quallities of light and holiness: so, this
being for us, lo, the same spirit takes the same matter of the Lord Jesus his
nature and properties, and unites the one and infuses the other into the souls
of his people by the work of the Gospel. Not that we made Christ (as some
dream) but united wholly to his person, and thence partake the influences of
his graces, wisdom and righteousness, etc both in the habit of renouation,
and in all the holy properties of humbleness, patience, love, fear, zeal,
etc. As 2. Peter 1.3. most sweetly says, His divine power ministering all
things fit for life and godliness, and making us partakers of the divine
nature and gifts of the Spirit. And look how it was in the old Law, that the
next kinsman to the deceased was both to redeem his lost inheritance (if
embezeled) and then to raise up seed to him, Ruth. 4.5.
as unto the first borne: even so in the Gospel, the Spirit of God does not
only recover unto us our lost title and inheritance of Gods favor by
forgiveness of our sins: but also raise up an holy seed unto God, by
begetting in us his Image again: so that not only he becomes our
righteousness of iustificarion, but sanctification also.

Moreover, it is clear by this, that the Spirit of God, concurres with the
offer of Christ unto the soul, according as it lies, and never seperates the
things which God puts together Now (as I noted in Part 2. Artic. 4. the Lord
offers his Christ wholly and at once: not only adoption and reconcilation to
bring us into favor, but also sanctification, to make vt the workmanship of
God. Yea, and in truth, the Spirit looks at this chiefly. For although in this
life faith to justify a sinner is the maine gift because it gives us the right
of grace and heaven, and holds it for us: yet that which faith arms at is the
renewing of the Image of God in us. Only because we lost it by sin, therefore
faith in the first place brings and knits us to God in pardon: but the
perfection of it, is that our lost image in Adam might be restored. Now
therefore the Spirit does come and unite them both together in the soul at
once, because Christ is not, nor cannot be divided, either we have him not
all, or else we enjoy him wholly and at once as he is offered in the word.

Q. I would feign know what works the Spirit does for the soul in this new
creation of nature, and infusion of qualitiess?

A. He does two things. First, persuades. Secondly, seals.

For the first, he draws the soul to be willing to take all Christ at he is
offered, and to reject no part of him: and succoureth the poor soul in her
application of the offer and covenant of grace. He presents to the souls
view the meaning of God, to keep back nothing of his Christ: but he will
have him wholly eaten as a passover, no bone broken, no part left. Though
perhaps the soul see not the extent of Christ at one view yet the Spirit
attends the offer of God in the Word* and ceazeth the soul with that gift
which God gives. As if a man being to give his servant a bone, does not only
reach him a ring (which the servant thinks enough) but a ring with a rich
pearl of price set in it: The pearl is above the hope of the receiver, yet
because it is not above the Giuers love, both are taken at once. So here the
Spirit shows the soul what God beteemes, wholly: tells it there is nothing too
much, she shall have use of all for one use or other, and therefore let none
be refused. And this i^ does by the tennor of Gods charter and covenant in the
Word; See that noted place; Who is made of the Father all the 4: Wisdom,
Sanctification, etc. Mark, the Lord offers not only righteousness to accept,
but sanctification for image. Take all therefore.

Secondly, the Spirit seals these to the soul. See Mat. 3.11. The Lord Jesus
shall baptize with the holy Ghost and fire. What is that? the very divine gifts
of Christ, which as fire do purge and cleanse our dross, Col. 2.12.
and bring forth our metal as pure and clean. So in Romans 6.4.5. he tells us
we put on Christ in baptism, and that not only to cover our nakedness, but
to warm us, with holiness. We are not only partakers of the satisfaction of
Christ to forgive us: but of his death to mortify us, and of his life to
quicken us, in both to give us his image. And by baptism we are said to be
ingrafted into the similitude of his death and resurrection. This baptism of
the Spirit seals up the substance of the covenant to al purposes, as a seal
to a writing confirms the writing in all points. Now mark the tenor of the
covenant: not only to pardon our sins, and to remember our sins no more:
but to wash us with pure water, to write his Law in our hearts and inward
parts to cause us to walk in his ways, and to put his fear into our souls,
that we never depart from him any more. And from this spirit of Renewing,
proceeds the infusion of all divine graces, issuing from his holy nature, as
love, compassion, meekness, fear, confidence, doing and suffering for Christ
and betokening our conformity.

Q. I rest in your answer touching the first of these three now proceed to the
second what is the inward instrument on the souls part to apprehend this
Creation?

A. Faith saving and effectual. As appears in those texts Act. 26.8. To give
them an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in me. Note the
phrase. Justification is much ascribed to faith, As Act. 13.38. Romans 5.1. Romans
3.25. but here sanctification also. So Act. 15. Having purified their hearts
by faith. 1. Pet. 1.22
And Saint Peter, Having purified your hearts by faith to the obedience of the
Gospel, Yea, the Apostle Paul, Ephesians; 1.13. seems to make faith to be the
instrument of the spirit, sealing the soul. After ye had believed ye were
sealed by the spirit of promise: faith attending the Spirit in believing the
promise it self, does further attend also the seal of it and applies both to
the soul. The reason is because although the seal is above a word, yet it is
by a word and with it, and not else.

Q But here it a great scruple how faith should be the apprehender of both
these at once, viz, forgiveness of sin and renewing of the soul. For who
sees not how wide a difference there is between receiving a thing without us,
as imputation of righteousness; and a thing really inherent in our natures, as
the image of God and renouation.

A. I grant the point needs due consideration: yet as the Lord shall guide
me, I will endeavor to answer it. And seeing the truth hereof is as clear in
the Scripture as any one, therefore the manner thereof will the better be found
out. To this end, note that faith being the instrument of the spirit, in both
the acts of regeneration (I mean reconciling and renewing) does of necessity
attend the work of the spirit in both. If then it be true which I said, that
the spirit reads a lecture of the Covenant to the Soul, according to the
whole purpose thereof; then needs must faith do likewise, even follow the
direction of the spirit in applying them equally to her self; for faith is as
the eye of the handmaid to the Mistres; that is, do that which the spirit
suggesteth, and takes all which the Lord offers her: even the Lord Jesus at
once, and wholly. If the spirit say: take Christ both for pardon and
sanctification: lo, it takes him for both together; of the former there is no
doubt. Let us see for the latter. Ephesians. 1.18. the Apostle prays that the eyes
of the minds being enlightened (by faith) they might ver. 19, 20. see the
exceeding powerful and mighty work of the Lord Jesus in them that believe,
that is, wha^ he can do by the power of his death and resurrection. So in
Ephesians. 3. end: he prays that they might have Christ dwell in their hearts by faith
that so they might comprehend his length and depth: that is, take him as he is
to the soul, and have the knowledge of him that passes all knowledge, being
filled with his fullness.

So that faith takes the Lord Jesus in his fullness, that she might be
complete in him, both for mercy and sanctification. So if we look Ioh. 17.
vlt. As thou O Father art in me, and I in thee: so thy love may be in them,
and I in them. Mark, Christ is not only offered to the elect to be for them in
pardon, but to be in them to dwell, to rule, to command, to exercise power
ouercorruption and for government, to be as a soul in the body to act, guide
and bear sway in them, as the branches in the vine, out of which they wither:
so that the promise offers Christ both for union of reconciliation, and also
Communion and influence of grace. In both which she takes him, for he is not
divided, a pearl is little worth being broken. Now then look how the hand of
the Prophet was upon the Kings in shoo^ing so is the hand of the Spirit upon
the soul in believing; and as the hand of the writer upon the learner to frame
it his way, so is the spirit upon faiths hand. And as the wax takes all the
who^e print of the seal, so does faith of the promise by the hand of the
spirit. So that although its certain that nothing is more unlike than the
things themselves which faith applies, (in the manner of apllication) the one
taking a grace only imputed, and resting only in the act of God, casting
forgiveness upon the soul without any addition of inherent goodness to it:
the other, taking Christ as infused and dwelling in the powers of the soul:
yet this puts no difference upon the apprehension of faith: seeing with one
hand and one act, both the Lord offers them, the Spirit ioynes them, the soul
believes them. The spirit is that which does order these two benefits, and
settles them upon the soul and in the soul: but faith with one hand and act
does receive them, according to the several use and service, as the spirit
pleases to apply them. It pleases the law to conveigh a Copyhold by Court
roll, and a free hold by other conveyance of writing, seal, delivery and
possession: but the same hand takes the copy, and receaues the livery and
season. So here.

Q. What does faith in the application of this Gift of Reneuation or the new
creature?

A. Two things: It works the heart to be renewed by an argumentation. See 2.
Cor. 5.14. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, etc.
Mark, faith judges the matter aright, and passes a sound verduict upon it. If
Christ have so loved us, how should our souls earne toward him in all
conformity to his blessed nature, faith is in this as in all other respects, a
deep Logician, she argues for God strongly, she brings evidence unanswerable
for him: that as a she carries about her the mark of a divine cause, being
the most Divine work of God, that ever he did since the Creation, above all
the gifts of Adam, and aiming at a better end: so she carries also strong
reason to move the soul to be like to her workman, and to resemble his holy
nature. The word (constreine: us) signifies such an hemming in, as of the beast
in a Pound or Pinfold; that is, put into it, and c^nnot get out by any evasion;
so does faith control the heart, that it cannot wind out; must needs yield to
be as he who has imputed his righteousness to forgive her that is righteous
and holy.

The very savor and instinct of faith tends to holiness: she serves to
abandon nature, and to set up holiness in the soul. As she settles an imputed
holiness to justify, from Christ; so she cannot rest, till she her self
partake it within. Such things as are always lying among sweets, cannot choose
but resemble and savor thereof: Faith comes from the divine breath of God, and
is his gift; therefore cannot degenerate: but as rivers flow from the sea, and
run thither, so does faith come from God, and returns to him, she sins not
till she have so pleaded for God, that she have drawn the heart to savor him
in his holiness. And secondly, by infusion. She is the Tunnel of the spirit,
to convey the renewing of the holy Ghost into the soul. As the hand of the
workman is that lively cause of cutting the ^imber but yet the saw or axe is
the tool which this handworks by: So here. Take a similitude. A man buys a
precious root of a rare flower (that grows in few gardens) and gives it into
the hand of the Gardner to set it in his garden. The gardener thrusts the root
an pitches it into the earth, gives it good mouldes, waters and keeps it
charily. Even so here, The spirit of sanctification is the purchaser of this
root, but it plants and pitches it into the soil of the Soul by this hand of
faith: and there it nourishes and cherishes till the root bring forth a flower
suitable to the nature of it. Faith* I say, ingrafts this precious sign of the
righteous holy nature, life, death and resurrection into the soul, or rather
(if ye will) the twig of the soul into the stock or soil of the Lord Jesus
his holiness: and ^here it gathers strength till it produce fruit suitable.

Such corn as we sow we reap: if we set a carnation we look the flowers
shall be suitable, if we set an apple into a stock we look for no crab;
even so, this plant of love brings forth love again, and this root of
holiness, a fruit like it self. That of Ephesians, 3.16. is for this point. That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Faith is the entertainer of Christ in
this his holin^sse. So then as in the former point faith savors the truth in
Jesus, and tells the soul that Jesus comes into thither to sanctify in for God
as well as to save it from hell: so here it is the instrument of the spirit of
Jesus to apply and to implant this root of his in the soul: it applies the
Covenant as well in the promise of renewing it, as of forgiving it; and it
embraces and claspes hold upon the Lord her righteousness: and till she have
done both, she dares not say, Thou art my God, and I am thy child: yea, as the
holy Ghost is that fire wherewith the new Creature is baptized, (when it comes
to believe the Coeunant) so faith is that hand which applies the soul to this
fire, to be purged thereby, and that instrument of the Spirit, whereby he
refines the sons of Levi in the Ministry of the Word, as Malachi speaks.

Q. What is the third thing to be noted?

A. The subject wherein this new Creature is planted: and that is the whole
man. Read for this, 1 These. 5.23. In body, soul, spirit; meaning whateuer is
in man. We mean not a renewing of the Substance of either, as if a Renewed
soul should be another soul or body, but the same in point of the qualities,
or service of both. Its corruption which is purged out, and its grace is
planted in. The scurffe and poison of each faculty is cast out, mortified, and
consumed; its a new property is put in: ignorance, rebellion, pride, impatience
is taken away, and knowledge, subjection, humility, and long-suffering put in:
And this subject is the whole man. Each part and power of body and soul is
renewed, and if not all, none at all. The Spirit of Renouation is an entire
workman, and purges all, graceth all; the mind with light, the heart with
heat, the conscience with sound reflection and witness, the will with free
choice and consent to holiness, the members with serviceablenesse to the soul
in all her designs.

Q. Speak a little of the particulars: What is renewing of the understanding,
and the powers thereof?

A, Understanding not only is corrupted in the light thereof, but also in the
prerogative of it. It was set up as a rule and directive of the inferior soul,
will, affections; but it has lost this bieth-right now, and is become the
vassal of the will, and concupiscence: therefore the renewing of it is, partly
a purging of it from the corruption and penalties thereof; and chiefly a
restitution of it to her integrity of light and sovereignty. See Ephesians. 5.8.
Light in the Lord.

Q. What is the renewing of the will?

A. The Will being depraved in point of her loyalty and obedience to the mind,
and now having cast off the yoke, and become rebellious; the renewing of it is,
both the purging of it from the sin, and penalties of it, and a restoring of
it to her integrity of subjection, to the verduit of the understanding;
choosing, refusing, or suspending accordingly.

Q. What is the renewing of Conscience? See, 1 Pet. 1.22.

A. Sin has depraved the Conscience in point of reflection, so that it cannot
present any goodness of being or action to the soul with delight and
contentment; but is waxen defiled, and either accusing, or erroneous and
perverted: therefore the renewing of it is, both a cleansing of it from her
contagion, and a restoring of her to her integrity of faithful accusing for
evil, and excusing for good: See Tit. 1.15. by contraries.

Q. What is the renewing of the body?

A. The senses and members having lost their serviceablenesse, to present
object duly to the soul, and to execute faithfully the purposes thereof: the
renewing of both is, a restoring them to such integrity, as that the senses do
duly offer to the soul, the objects of sense; and the members become faithful
weapons of right^ousnesse: See Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal
bodies, etc.

Q. But what part is especially the Subject of Renewing?

A. Howsoever the holy Ghost, does renew all, yet the immediate and chief
subject of her residence is the Spirit of man. There are (as I said) sundry
faculties in the soul, but the spirit is the most inward, and immediate
actiuity of it, and it stands in the directive gift of the understanding, by
which it fore-sees and devises for the whole man: as also in the free choice,
bent, savor and delight of the heart. So then, the frame, stream and bent of
the soul is the spirit of it, See Ephesians. 4.23. Romans 12.2. Romans 7. vlt.
and that wherein this renewing or new creature stands. As it is in the old man,
so in the new: it is not a few thoughts or affections which make a man bad: but
the very frame and bent of all the thoughts and affections whereupon as upon
wheels the whole man is carried. And as a son having the lively picture of his
father to behold, would not set it up in a stable or outhouse, but in his best
room. So the spirit of Christ sets up the Image of God not in the eyes, or
ears, or tongue which have no power to work upon the soul, but in the Privy
Chamber of the spiuit where the King lodges.

Q. And what is the fourth thing in this Renewing,

A. The parts of it negative, and affirmative: the former a destroying of the
old frame, the latter a setting up of the new; which are the exercises of the
inward graces of renouation. Both of them issuing from the Cross and Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ: And thence it is that in the named place,
Paul ascribes mortification to the death; vivification to the resurrection of
Christ. Not that they are to be sundred, for both serve for each, and each for
both: but as both cannot stand together, but one in the destruction of the
other: so, he would teach us, that the death and rising of Christ are no
fables, nor stories, but things of exceeding merit. Both for satisfaction and
for efficacy or power.

When the Lord Jesus suffered his precious soul to part with his body, he
gave that death a power to divide sin and the life thereof: and when by his
Godhead he resumed his body, he gave it also a power to put life of grace
into the soul The death and life of Christ are a mystery of godliness, as
Paul in the 1. Tim. 3. end, tells us; when Christ laid down his life for the
expiation of sin, withal he entered into a most deadly fiend with sin whch
would have robbed him of his life for ever: and when he took his life again
by his Godhead, he also conveyed an efficacy of a quickening spirit to raise up
all believers to a renewed life of holiness, and by his spirit, bestows both
upon them. So that he who can bring sin to the Cross and grave of Christ by
faith, shall kill the life of it: and he that can apply his soul to the Lord
Jesus risen, shall find it no empty, but an effectual mean to quicken him to
holiness. And these both, all true believers do: as they have borne the image
of the first, so must they do of the second Adam: the first was a living
soul, but the second a quickening spirit.

Q. Now at length proceed to the use: and because the opening of the Art^cle
is practical of it self, be the briefer.

A. First, if all believers be new creatures, such as never Cor. 4.4. Mark.
16.16. Reu. 21.8. therefore small cause have ye to boast. If all that be happy
by believing must be holy by renewing, how unhappy ones are all unholy ones?
Therefore let it be terror to al such as carry the old man written in their
foreheads with great letters, so that all that run may read it, they
proclaim the sin of Sodom in open profannesse, or in secret vnreformednesse:
they have been drunken, breakers of Sabboths, Athiests in their families, and
so they will be still: Oh woeful wretch! will thou be as thou have been? thou
have been an old wretch, an old fornicator, wrathful wretch, subtle,
contentious, worldly made the Gospella cover of thy rotten heart: will thou be
so still? Then I know thou art cursed, for thou were cursed, and thou will be
as thou have been. Therefore hear what the truth says, if thou be no other
then ever thou were, thou were never good: and if thou will be so still, be
so, thy penalty shall be as thou chusest, let him that is filthy be so still,
he that is profane let him be so still, and he that will not come out of hell
let him keep there still: No wrong is done to him that is willing to be so.
But know this, that if God have concealed the up to an hard heart, it is one
step further off from God, then before, it will be hard for an heart that
cannot repent, to be better then it will be. Ere God create the new man in thee,
thou shall not only not nill, but both will and covet it, and yet thou may
will it to late when it shall be denied.

Secondly, All reuolters to the old man, and returners to their own vomit and
mire, when they seemed to have the unclean spirit cast out, and to escape the
pollution of the world through lust, but still they carry about them the old
man, still that lies down and rises up and walks with them although song
hidden, and at length (as a crusted sore) breaks out odiousely: Oh be scared
by this! If old men never so much as in show renewed are cursed, what are they
who having taken the livery of the new man are now the second time waxen worse
then ever: and the old man has watched his time to recover his possession and
waxes seven times stronger then before? Oh the latter end of sueh is far
worse then the beginning?

Thirdly, terror to all hypocrites who still mask over the old man with a new
cover of Christ but put not off the old. The Apostle speaks of men, 1. Cor.
15.19. whose hope in Christ is here: not hope only here in their wealth and
lusts, but in Christ: and he tells them of all other they are most miserable.
They are willing to have Christ to save them, and to varnish over their rotten
post, to keep them from the note of base and profane ones: but if they be
pinched with this, that believers must be new men: the old cheating, and
cunning deceit, wrath, revenge, worldliness must also be cast off: oh then
then they winch as a galled jade, and it seems as an uncouth thought. Lately I
knew a man who upon the change of his estate by marriage, was so pensive, that
no man could heal his mela^choly: so it is with these, to hear of such a new
creature and change as should turn all inside outward, and rid them of their
old Adam all at once, they are sullen and sick upon it, it is as the going of
a Cammell through the eye of a needle. Jesus they know, and the Doctrine of
Jesus, but not as the truth is in Jesus: they will take no notice of such an
instinct as to be new ones, because believing ones. But oh ye wretches, even
this truth of Jesus which your hollow hearts cannot brook, shall judge ye and
sentence ye; such new Creatures, such Jesus; your Jesus is an Idol, because
he is no truth in Jesus, no new creature in Jesus to put off the old man, and
put on the new. Lastly, all profane ones who think themselves in very good
case, if they can carry their lusts and beloved corruptions closely, and bleare
the eye of the world, thinking they have forsaken them. Sleidan reports of a
Duke in Germany, who lived in an unclean eourse with one of his wi^es
Gentle-women: which the Duchess perceiving and oppozing, he devises this
shift, to send her to a Castle, and there to give it out after a while, that
she was sick, hiring some to visit her, and at length that she was dead: a
painted Image is laid forth, entombed, carried to Church, the bell rung funeral
Sermon made, dole given to the poor, the Image buried, but the harlot still
living, and the lust of the Duke unmortified brake out worse then ever. This is
the new creature of the profane sort; strongly to conceal the old. Like
whereto is this, to think our lusts are mortified because by some violent
cause, fear, penalty, or inward terrors, they are restained.

Secondly, it is use of instruction to all new creatures to wonder Mary Magdalen
Luke 6. her eyes, tears, hair, lips and ointments, even so near as his own
sacred body, and become one with her that was an harlot, and abused all these
to abomination. Oh! how justly might he have for ever left us to our selves,
and sworn that no sacrifice should blot out our sin, nor would he ever take
the service of a persecutor to be a preacher? Oh those very powers of wit and
those affections of love and joy which we have so abused, we should wonder
that God will purge the fretting leprosy out of them so far as to be honored
by them? which yet we cannot deny but he has, except we should lie against the
grace of the new creature.

Thirdly, it should admonish all to take heed how they meddle

If the Lord will have others beware how they deface created? Oh! what a check
should it be, that any leaven in so much as a mouse-hole (to allude to that
Jewish curiosity) should be found in us? Remember that charge of Paul, Purge
out the old leaven therefore: 1. Cor. 6.
and let us serve the Lord in the sincerity of a new Creature: old things are
passed away, all things become new: new Adam, new covenant, new Paradise; new
Ministry, new Creation: new Lord, new Law, and all new. Shall they who are thus
renewed, suffer that vnrenued part to get head and to darken and defile the
new? that even in them old base dregs should be observed to deface the Image
of God? But more of this in the latter Article.

Q. Proceed to the use of the second branch?

A. If faith be the instrument of this Creation, we here do confute the
conceit of them that imagine faith to be a branch of Sanctification.
Sanctification is so far from being the genus or totum of faith, that it
differs from it the wide sky. Faith is a grace that adds no inherency to the
soul, but only serves to receive a foreign imputed righteousness of
another: sanctification receives an infuzed righteousness in to the soul,
faith receives a righteousness of perfection to stand in the sight of God:
sanctification, a righteousness in part and imperfect. Can then an inherent
holiness be the cause of an imputed? or can an imperfect holiness be the
cause or genus of a perfect? But I must not dwell; and I see this error is
lately at large confuted. Only this, faith and a new Creature being parts of
Regeneration and of the Totum of a converted one: so long as they be dividing
members they are rather things of a contrary nature, then effects and causes
of each other. See what I said of their difference in the beginning of this
Article.

Secondly, we learn here what course Gods people must by faith, he by faith
must be our sustentation: go to the Promise in thy falls, take hold of the
strength of Christ in them, and compass not thy self with thy own sparkles,
thinking to recover thy self by thy own heat; but abhorring thy self, go to
a promise, and there behold and apply Christ thy righteousness to pardon thy
falls, to accept thee in weakness, to repair thy strength, and then h^e will
be thy righteousness; also of holiness, to enlarge thy grace, and (by the
addition of sweetness and love) to uphold ^hee in thy course more and more.
Thou have not received Christ thy new Creature to create somewhat in thy self,
but to fetch from his fountain, grace for grace daily: Jesus Christ yesterday,
to day, and the same for ever.

Q. What use do ye make of the third branch?

A: Very special: And it should first teach us a discerning use, between all
hypocrites and truly renewed ones. The one may set up the Image of Christ in
some of the powers of his soul; as in his understanding, wit, memory, in his
tongue, ears, senses, and outward members: but the renewed Creature sets him up
in his Spirit. This of all other things searches a false heart; whatsoever part
of him seems to have some image of God, sure it is, it is not in his spirit.
In spite of him, his thoughts, purposes and affections, are void of him. The
stream, the frame, the bent of his soul warps from him and goes another way.
The most subtle hypocrite can but come to this, to delude himself by the
strength of knowledge, and some dammings of the stream of his corruption: but
as for the turning of it by a strong^r, to a contrary motion, that can he not
attain to: there is no dissembling of a new Creature. Once a Philosopher in
30. years made an iron frame of a man to speak; but as one said of him, Oh
fine scull without brains! so here may be said, Oh fair outside without a
principle of life and spirit! Let us consider this; although an hypocrite may
grow to this, to delude himself, and make himself not to see his defiled
principle, yet he can never purge it out, while he is so. For the Image of God
is set up only in some out-roome, and when his lust comes in place, there is
no routing for this; this must yield to his base ease, pride, lust, which are
set up in his inner man, and bear sway. And secondly, the hypocrites image of
God is only a counterfeit of it: its no free principle acting him from within;
so long as some torrents and violent pangs are up in his passions, so long as
he is under some stream of powerful preaching, or deep fears, or sudden
humors of affection, he seems somebody: but when these are past, he is like
himself, as dead as ever. I may compare him to David's old body, in which there
was no heat left; they sought out Abishag to keep heat on him, but more then
he had from her, he had not, and therefore he dyed instantly notwithstanding
her: So is it here. So long as the five is within the water it hold it; but no
sooner out, but all is empty: when the Word is gone, and violent causes, he
wanzeth, and discovers those corrupt evils of uncleanness and profaneness,
which the word suppressed. But with the new Creature its otherwise: he is borne
of God, and sins not with consent: when outward props fail, lo all fails
not, he mournes for the want of old helps, but in this want he abounds with
the comfort of the inner man, and the principle of grace which is immortal,
and whose being is of God.

Secondly, its use of consolation to a believer: the Lord esteems Romans 7. Not
I, but sin in me. I serve God in my spirit, ver. ult. As a man calls a
dunghill precious, for a pearl in it: and as a man would call wine mixed with
water, wine; and corn full of weeds, corn, because of the better part. So
here; the spirit and bent of the heart denominates a Christian with God.

Thirdly, Its use of examination for all that would be sure of thy soul go
with him and to him as the rivers to the sea. Thy plotting, thy diuising,
fore-casting and whole wisdom shall serve for him, how his honor, service,
Sabbaths and himself may be set up where thou have to do. The Spirit of a
Drunkard or Mizer will not so plod about the pots or money as thine for God. Thy
tongue, ears and all will be for him. Thou may step out of the way, but
still thy bent will be to serve him and speak for him in thy spirit. If memory
or great words fail, thy spirit will be for him as that poor man was for
Christ Ioh. 9. read the allusion. Again the savor of thy heart will be in and
for him. The bent of the soul commonly goes where it delights, and to that
which is precious to it, try thy self by this. What has got thy heart? Where
is thy treasure? If Christ in a new creature be it, lo, the very instinct and
joy of thy heart will be to him, other things shall be unsavory, thou shall
stink in the nostrils of an old man, and he in thine. And secondly, try thy
self by this. The spirit of the soul is the chief part of it, there is the
whole stream. If the new creature be set up there, God is served withal the
might, the male, not the female, all the courage and strength: Pro 23.26.
no cost is too great: The whole cost of all thy powers, members, gifts,
authority, credit, wealth, experience shall run in the stream of holiness.
No vnbeteeming one can be a new Creature for he is free borne. The mind we
say is the man. If that be for God, all the inferior faculties will side with
him as Iezabels Eunuchs with Iehu: as the lesser wheels of the perpetual
motion did the first moving Master wheel. That engine when it was seen in the
Court was not so admirable as this.

Q. Conclude the Article with the use of the fourth branch?

Peter calls it, The washing not of water, but the Answer of the soul by the
resurrection of Christ, telling us, we are washed by the Spirit of our God,
and ingrafted into the likeness of his death and Resurrection by it, surely we
should make other use of it then we do. And the doctrine of the Couneant would
sink the deeplier into us by it; if we could use it as the instrument to put
on the Lord, the holy Ghost and fire. But touching the woeful contempt of
Sacraments, I shall elsewhere treat if God will. Let this be sufficient for
this Article.

The second Article.
Q. PRoceed now to the second Article.

A. The second is, That the Lord requires that this new creature thus framed in
the soul, break forth into the whole course and conversation. That is, that
holiness be exercised and set on work in the course of our life, which
sometimes in the Scripture is called the ordering of our conversation aright.
See Psalm. 50. vlt. Genesis 5.24.
sometimes our walking with God Genesis 17.1. Luke 1.6. sometimes, our giving up
of our bodies as sacrifices to God, Romans 12. so also our living righteously,
holily and soberly in this present life: sometime, our serving him in fear all
our days; sometimes, the having of a good conscience, Act. 25.1. and lastly,
Iam. 3.13.
the holding out of a good conversation. See Matthew. 5.16. So 1 Pet. 3.2. that
seeing the good conversation, etc. Read also Ephesians. 5.8. 2. Pet. 3.11. What
manner of conversation, etc.

Q. What mean you by this word? only, our open carriage in the view of the
world?

A. No: but the round or wheel of our whole life within or without toward God
or man. As appears by that in Heb. 13.5. let the course be without
covetousness: by which he does not only condemn open oppression, or usury,
but the wheel of the thoughts, affections, and endeauours of covetousness.

Q. How many things are to be considered in the opening hereof?

A. Two things, first, the Circumstances; secondly, the Substance of this
conversation.

Q. How many circumstances belong to it?

A. Some concern the persons who must lead this conversation: some the
conversation it self.

Q. What are the former?

A. That this conversation binds all sorts equally to the good behavior
without prescription, or exception, and that in men's several estates,
conditions, relations. Estates, as in prosperity or adversity: Job 1. Thou
speak like a foolish woman! Shall we serve God, for good and not for evil?
Conditions, as in each trade or calling, each common respect, of sex, age;
each condition of degree, inferior, superior; each sex, whereto add all
other regards, as time, place, public or private occasions and accidents be
falling, as either alone, or with others, at home, abroad, and the like.
Lastly, relations, as Masters, servants, parents, children, husbands, wives,
Magistrates, Subjects, our selves, or strangers within our roofes, and so of
the like. A maine and great enclozure, at once cutting off the infinite
objections and cauills arising from such personal respects. Some would exempt
themselves by their greatness, as our common speech imports; they are very
good folks for so noble or so rich, or in such place. Why? thy place puts upon
thee so much the greater service. Others pretend their meannesse, as if the
Lord ouersaw them, as motes in the Sun: so many poor servants in great houses
think that the Sabbath and religion is for their Masters, as for them they
shall be passed by. So some ignorant people allege this new learning is for
Scholars: and so young ones excuse themselves by their greenenesse, old ones
by their feebleness, etc. But as this nett of obedience is strong enough for
Lions: so the mashes of it are small enough for flies.

Q. What are the latter?

A. Three: Order, Proportion, and Beauty.

Q. What is the order of good conversation?

A. That the chief and maine services of God be preferred before the meaner
in time, and in privilege. In time thus, that first religious course be
attended, then worldly. If a man should paint the body of a man and set his
heels upward, how disguised were it? So for us to go and moile our selves all
day long, and then at night with a dead heart, and a drouzie spirit to fall to
prayer; oh how woeful? This is out of order, and a setting of cart before the
horse: since that should have been first done, and the belly attended after.
Mat. 6.32. first seek the kingdom. Secondly, order of honor. That is, when
two services met which cannot both be done at once, that the lesser give place
to the greater. (Except necessity or mercy do hinder) which is no breach of
duty, but an omission only for the time, and a return unto it in season: And
in this point a good conscience is the best interpreter.

Q. What is proportion?

A. When there is a sutablenesse between duty and duty. In the members of the
body, when some one for the part exceedes the proportion of that part, or of
the other parts, there is a disguizement: As when the head is bigger then an
head should be, or bigger then other parts which should exceed it: for example,
when men in their zeal exceed the rules of wisdom, and are too hot and eager;
or when they are exceeding zealous for religion and the Sabbath, but extreme
cold and remiss in point of justice and righteousness, and keeping touch with
men. Secondly, when there is no sutablenesse of harmony: as in the body, if one
member be comely, another deformed; ^he face comely, the back crooked, it is a
blemish. So here: when there is good behavior between couples abroad, but
great odds at home: when men have very good gifts to speak, but very bad to
practice, none better in compassion to the poor, none worse in matters of
conscience toward God in their calling, marriage, or use of liberty. Abner was
a very good Captain to Saul: but an adulterer: Ioab to David, but a murderer.
So the Proverb runs, he is no man's foe save his own: but love must begin
at home and issue to others.

Q. What is Beauty of conversation.

A. As in the body beauty and amiablenesse arises from the good temper and fit
coherence of parts: so in conversation, beauty is that grace, which arises
from the giving to each qutie, her due respect; not only doing it, but looking
how, as Romans 12. the Apostle tells us, let him that gives, do it in simplicity,
he that rules with diligence, he that shows mercy, with cheerfulness;
Eccles. 8.1.
wisdom makes the face to shine. It is not the bare doing, but the due
tempering of it with the right quallity, that sweetens it. And where this due
manner is generally observed, it makes the whole conversation, beautiful and
sauory: yea, sets a luster upon it. These three may serve for a taste of the
rest.

Q. Now come to the substance of Conversation: To what heads may they be
referred?

A. To these three, especially: Either those graces which do qualify a good
conversation. Or those subject things wherein conversation consists; or the
object which conversation looks at.

Q. What are these graces of conversation?

A. Some are general qualifications of grace, concerning every part of
conversation one and another: others, are special gifts of the spirit,
severally belonging thereto: as the actions of life requires. Q. What are the
general?

A. To give a taste of all by some of the chief; they are either graces of
quality or quantity: the former, serving to the due manner, the latter, the due
measure of holy conversation. And of the former sort are these (I speak of some
of the chief: 1. Wisdom, 2. Simplicity, 3. Sincerity, 4. Integrity, 5.
Faithfulness, of I do which a word for opening of their natures, remembering
that not here write treatises, but only a view of things (at largehandled in
the ministry.) Q. What is Wisdom?

A. A grace of the soul, whereby it draws the sanctified knowledge of the
mind, to the particular use of her conversation, as occasion is offered. Col.
3.16. And it is a determing of generals to specialls, both of actions, and
circumstances, according to Christian rules, of which see Phil. 4.6. Finally,
brethren, whatsoever is pure, good, of good report, etc. Also its a grace
teaching him that has it to keep a decorum in religions and outward
conversation: as knowing what his person and condition will bear or refuse.
Lastly, how to carry himself in the use of things indifferent without excess
or defect: and how to use Christian policy with simplicity and pureness of
conscience.

Q. What is Simplicity?

A. It is a grace of a renewed soul, looking at truths in the naked nature,
apprehending and judging of them without all mixture or corruption of fleshly
conceit and wisdom: and accordingly desirous to be informed of them as they
are, and to love, embrace and ensue them accordingly, neither looking at the
right hand or left: I fear that as Satan tempted Eve, so he tempt and lead you
from the simplicity of the Gospel.

Q. What is Sincerity or Uprightness?

A. It is a grace of the Soul looking at the actions of Conversation, in
respect of their right and true ends: and therefore as it oppozeth al
hypocrisy, which is to do good with a squint look and mixture of our own ends
of credit, gain, ease or content: so it does good with a pure aim at Gods
glory, the honest discharge of duty, and the good of others: so as a man may
have good conscience in all things. See 1. Cor. 1.12. and Act. 26.1, Job 1. he
abhorred to be an hireling. This is called perfection, viz. of parts not
degrees.

Q. What is faithfulness?

A It properly respects the due manner of conversation, that it be holy and
approouing what is accepted, howbeit properly it has a respect to opposition:
For as we say of a good and faithful servant, we dare trust him with untold
gold, meaning, although we see them not: so this grace is such an honesty, as
puts God in security not to revolt from him or warp notwithstanding baytes to
allure, or terrors to discourage, or dangers to defer, either by threats,
error of the wicked, collapsed times, or provocations from our own false
hearts, Reu. 2.13. and Reu. 3.8. Thou have kept my word and not denied. Mat.
25. Well done good and faithful servant. It Is also taken for sincerity. Act.
16.15.

Q. What is integrity? and what grace of the soul is it?

A. An equal and whole uprightness of it toward all the Commandments of
God, without partiality or taking exception, Psalm. 119.6. When I have respect
unto thy commandments. It is contrary to that halting of spirit with God, and
patchery of a false heart, whereby it affords God a maimed sacrifice: in some
duties forward that come on the right side, but such as find not favor in our
eyes, rejecting them.

Q. What are the Graces of quantity or measure?

A. They may be referred to two: Prosperity and Constancy.

Q. What is Prosperity?

A. A grace of the soul compounded of many; in a word, the welfare of a soul
in respect of degrees and measures of grace. And it has three parts: first,
Rootednesse: secondly, Fruitfulness: thirdly, Growth. Rootednesse of the
soul, is a grace contrary to staggering and slightness; whereby it is both
grounded well in knowledge for direction of life, and settled in grace for full
purpose and resolution of obedience. See that of 1 Cor. 15. ult. unmovable. So
elsewhere, the word of stablishing and setlednesse in the grace of the Gospel
is used. Also 11.23. That with full purpose of heart they would cleave to the
Lord. Secondly, Fruitfulness is a grace issuing from rootednesse; whereby the
soul is abundant in the work of God, and full of the fruits of weldoing. The
contrary is barrenness and emptiness, when the soul scants the Lord in his
due, as if he were an hard Master. The effect of it is to avoid
unprofitablenesse in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 1.8. Read for this
grace 1 Cor. 15. ult. The third is, the fruit of both, to wit, Groth and
increase: For as we see it to be in trees, when they are once well fastened in
the earth and rooted, we look they should bear fruit; and then that in so
bearing, they wax and grow, in height and breadth and fruit, so is it here.
Groth is a grace of the soul, by which it increases by due steps and degrees,
to that fullness of the measure of Christ, according to the proportion of the
part, Ephe. 4.15: Pet. ult. Luke 8.8. And it commonly is the effect of the
means of grace, blessed to the believing soul, as 1 Pet. 2.2. Now then of
these three stands Prosperity: which is the spiritual gladness and laughter
of the thriving soul, 3 John 2. Thy soul prospers; that is, apparently is
fat and well liking in goodness (as those three children, Dan. 1. and as we
say, the corn and hops laugh upon the ground and poles that bear them.) And
it is a grace of the soul rooted, fruitful and growing, whereby it bears
mark in the sight of all, Act. 15.23.
that it goes well with i^ to Godward, and is cheerful, full of health,
vigor, and contentment, saying thus, What I am, I would be, and wish no better.

Q. What is Continuance?

A. A grace of measure in the soul, whereby it gives not in, nor is faint or
weary in weldoing: and its contrary to staggering, sloth and ease. It has two
branches: the first is, firmness and resolution in the truth, Col. 4:12. The
other respects the course or wheel of conversation: and it is either a going
on and on from duty to duty with strength and purpose, Psalm. 119.57. and
long-breathednesse ( Psalm. 84, 7. and Heb. 12.1. Run the race with patience set
before thee, taking always in good part thick and thin, and not fainting in
affliction and troubles.) Or else it is small Perseverance, the fruit of the
former: for by a continuing in well-doing, Romans 2.7. and accounting each day a
piece of our journey home, at length we attain the end of our hope, and the
issue of our faith and combat. This grace has the honor of all the rest; not
because the rest are inferior to it, but because it has the lot above all the
rest, to stand next to the door of salvation, and to let in the soul thither:
See Mat. 24.13, 14. Revel. 2.10. And thus much of the Graces qualifying good
conversation generally.

Q. What are the particulars that immediately help conversation?

A. All the sanctifying graces of the spirit of God, according to the peculiar
use they have in conversation; as some are more proper for one use, some for
another, and all for some or other. Thus faith is a grace for the just to live
by to God in the world; hope is a grace to bear up in streights; patience, in
an affliction; thankfulness, in blessings; moderation, in lawful liberties;
innocence and righteousness in the common life of men; love generally helps
all: and in a word, each grace does more or less serve for the enabling of the
soul to a well a bearing of it self toward God, man, or self. Of these I
speak no more; only I would add one thing, That graces of the spirit serve
not only to take up the residence within, and no more, but mightily to
strengthen the soul to all spiritual or external conversation: see that Col.
1.11. Strengthened by the might of his power unto all long-suffring with
joyfulnesse, and well pleasing, etc. Hence it is, that Ephesians. 6. Paul reckons up
special graces of the spirit, as the complete harneis of a Christian. I will
open this by a similitude: I told ye, that Conversation is like a wheel. Note
then; As in a Wheel there be three parts, the nave, the spokes, and the round:
so here; the nave is compared to the spirit of regeneration, or the new
creature (of which in Article 1.) the spokes are these graces I have named,
issuing from the nave, and fastened to the round: for as these staves do unite
the strength of the nave to the round, and carry the strength thereof to each
part of the wheel, which else would break and split in sunder: so these
graces of the spirit of Christ are the staff of our life, and the very support
of our conversation, and wheel of our course. As for example; Take away
knowledge from the use of our liberties; faith, from the Sacraments or Word;
love, from visiting the sick; mercy, from alms, where shall these parts of
conversation become?

And thus much of this first part of the substance of conversation, in graces.

Q. What is the second part of the substance hereof?

A. It is the consideration of the Subject who is to lead this conversation;
that is, the regenerate person. Now look what the several instruments are by
which a Christian does and must ordinarily converse, those are the subject in
which it stands, and therefore had need to be accordingly qualified.

Q. What are they, and how many?

A. Three: Thoughts, Affections, and Actions.

Q. What are the Thoughts, and what rules are there for the frame of their
conversation?

A. Thoughts are the first movers in the soul, and from them issues either
good or bad life: see Pro. 4.23. so our Savior, That which defiles a man comes
from within, as evil thoughts, Mat. 15.19. They are the master-wheele. If a
man be envious and malicious, Psalm. 36.4.
his thoughts devise mischief upon his bed: if the course be covetous, the
thoughts first set them on fire; they pierce them through with cares, 1 Timothy
6.10. So in the rest. Therefore (it being granted that we speak of the new
Creature, who has purified already his soul to obedience) let these rules
serve to frame: his commonwealth of thoughts aright. First, let our continual
care be to keep the through-fare of the soul free from them, as by pardon of
them, Acts 8.22. so by purging of them daily from that vanity, profaneness,
disorder, endlesnesse, and other sins thereof, which makes the conversation
vain, 1 Pet. 1.18. Ephesians. 4.24. put off the old man of deceitful lusts.
Secondly, Iere 4.14. Mica. 6.5.
labor to season thy imagination and the doors of thy senses, eyes and ears
with holy meditations of God, his Church, his Will and Promises, Psalm. 1.2. In
the Law of God he meditates day and night. Psalm. 19. ult. Let the words of my
mouth, and the thoughts of my heart, be always acceptable. Thirdly, watch over
these thoughts as men do for thieves; and ask whence they come, and whither
they will, ere they pass; yea, keep the whole prison the streighter for the
sake of thy thoughts, because if the ringleaders break loose all the rest
follow them: Pro. 4.23. And the door of the thoughts had need be kept as well
as the tongue, Psalm. 141.3. yea, and keep in holy thoughts that they go not
out as fast as they come in, Eze. 46.9. So fourthly, attend seriously upon holy
objects to fix the imagination upon good things, Esaias 26.3. which is the way
to beat off the swarm of these flies. Above all, look to the maine work of
Renewing, and let all thy springs be in the Lord, Psalm. 87.7. even the root of
thy whole conversation, which is the spring of thy thoughts; and this will
cause the branches and streams to be holy, and cause thee to dwell upon
meditation and to be heavenly minded.

Q. How is the wheel of Affections to be guided?

A. The Affections are the wheels of the soul indeed, an^ upon them the soul
is either hurried to evil, or led to good Little do most men think how they
are carried by these their passions, by each object: Sometime by love, by joy,
by hope on the right hand; otherwhiles by fear, by sorrow, by anger, pity or
the like: rare is that man who venters not upon the sea of conversation with
the broken bark of Affections; It may be said of them as of that ancient,
Where they do well, none better; where ill, none worse. Heathens were faint to
abandon them quite (the Stoics I mean) for the pudder they found by them, and
to deny all affection; and so put out their eyes, and cut off their hands and
feet for fear of offending them. But the Scriptures afford more grace than
so, therefore first weigh well, how hardly the best escape the violence of
them. Note how David disguizeth himself suddenly in swearing Nabals death upon
his defeat 1. Sam. 25.13. Ioh. 18.10.
how soon Malchus his ear is smitten off by Peter in his passion: how soon
fire from heaven is sent for by the disconten^ed disciples Luk 9.54. So also
David's rashness to Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.5. which he must needs blush for. So by
the beholding of Bathsheba how soon was a fire kindled, but long in quenching?
How suddenly, Josh. 7. did the babilonish garment fire the heart of Achan? The
news of Absoloms death, pierce and disguise David? 2 King. 5.20.
Not to speak of Gehazi his sudden following Naaman, Felix his hope of a bribe
from Paul, the disciples excess of sorrow upon a word speaking by Christ, that
foolish pity of Ahab upon the men of Benhadads errand, the extreme fear of
the women upon the Angels words, All these Clouds of witnesses, show the
vnbridlednes, of the passions: and therefore should prepare us with
earnestness to prevent them. Secondly, yet note, how affections are as soon
up in arms if the heart be well seasoned and stablished with grace. How soon
was Peter moved with holy fear upon the draught of fishes? Luke 5.8. How
easily was the poor blind man rayzed up in the depth of love to the Lord
Jesus? how soon was sorrow wrought in the hearts of three thousand murderers
at once by Peter's preaching? how presently was compassion moved in Peter and
John toward the cripple, Act. 3.4. how quickly was zeal stirred up in Phineas
against Zimri and Cosbi? Numb. 25.11. and so may be said of the rest. Thirdly,
therefore, let us nourish the fire of the holy Ghost kindled in us in our first
regeneration, and apply it daily to the shaming, purging out, and consuming of
these lusts. Gal. 5.24. Bring them (as the heifer in sacrifice) to the horns
of the altar, and bind them thereto, that they break not loose. And call upon
the Lord for his spirit that the arrows of the Almighty may be in us, and the
power of Christ's death might be as venom to give these lusts the deadly blow
and bane, and to drink up the sin of these affections in us! Let it seriously
smite our hearts, and let our affections take revenge upon us, forth Corruption
of our affections. Let us not excuse our selves for our nature, for that
defends a lesser sin by a greater: for what can be more woeful, then when
sin by custom has hardened us to a nature? Remember we how hideous effects
these wild beasts have wrought in our lives? I say, our wealth, our inordinate
love, our mirth, our sorrow, fear, and indignation? How might David with
sorrow have recorded his distemper against innocent. Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
19.29. Hezekiah his great joy and iollity in the coming of those Ambassadors,
Esaias 39.2. and the truth is the greatest woe and repentance which ever betided
us in our life may well be fathered upon our passions? Some bringing themselves
by them to needles suits of Law, pursuits of enemies, loss of their estates,
fines, imprisonments, a brand of reproach among men as not to be lived with:
and if not so, yet a continual bondage of spirit, and unfitness to any good,
either to calling, prayer, bearing of our crosses, or family and marriage
duties, and all by our inordinate passions? Fourthly let us apply the merit and
look at the example of the Lord Jesus in all the whole conversation of his
affections! how holy was his zeal against those defilers of the Temple? Mat.
21.12,
his love to that young man's forwardness? Mat. 23.13
hatred of those hipocrites the Scribes and Pharisees? sorrow for our sins in
the garden? cheerfulness in converse withal sorts to win theme weeping for
Lazarus? pity to the poor widows dead only son? Luke 7.13. Oh! the savor
of his example, and merit of his affections, who as he abhorred all stupor of
heart, so never faulted in the euennes, temper, measure, of them either in the
defect or excess, should ravish us, and excite us (if true members) to
purchase the like? we should even conceive holy heat of spirit before these
rods. Fifthly, when we have got these good affections, learn we to take a due
mark of the right objects of our affections and that will shame us, when by
loosing or mistaking our right mark we do fasten them basely and indirectly.
Our anger is to good to be set upon carnal revenge, it will serve to be
employed about Gods dishonor Ephesians. 4.26. our love is too good for base lusts,
money, and pleasures, Psa. 118.1.
it is made for the Lord and for his Saints Psalm. 16.2. Our hope of a vain
Paradise here, is better set upon heaven, 1 Cor. 15.19. and so might I say of
our sorrow, that it best befits sin, our own, and the times. If we would
thus direct our affections, they would start back when other objects lay
claim to them. Lastly, let our maine direction be, to get our souls settled
in peace, in the sweet assurance of our Reconciliation with God, and that we
know the worst that can befall us, that no sin, sorrow or en^my can deprive
us of that crown: and this peace will calm us and rule our spirits that
neither fear nor hope shall much unsettle us, but we shall possess our souls
in patience, in the midst of all distempers: As a wicked heart casts up mire
and dirt like the Sea: so the affections of the godly are calm and quiet, and
the wheel of the Conversation goes on in a most well ordered manner. And so
much for these.

Q. What rules give you for the third, of actions?

A. Herein we can give no particular rules: because they are infinite: but
bring the general rules to particular and incident occasions. Therefore, for
the ordering of this conversation, let those four usual golden rules direct
us that we (as near as we can) look to first, our grounds; secondly, to the
due manner: Thirdly, the true measure: fourthly, the right ends of our actions.
Touching which the less may serve because they trench upon some former rules.

Q. Touching the first, what is it to be grounded?

A. To be sure, we have a word to show for our warrant, either in doing, or not
doing, or suspending: for although the action may prove bad in the form which
is good in the nature of it, yet that which is bad in the ground and nature,
cannot be possibly well done. For, without knowledge the heart is naught: Pro.
19.2. 2 Pet. 1.19.
Now the word will pass censure upon it either directly or by consequent: and
therefore we must attend to this light, especially in dark places. And if we
cannot inform our selves alone through ignorance we must make it a book case,
and advise by all means with other, for truth lies deep sometimes. This is a
maine ground: and is exceedingly transgressed. I will not here insist upon them
as go against light, (because the godly abhor it, while they are themselves)
but even of them, many sorts fail. 1. Some will do many things upon custom and
taking your grounds for granted when yet they have none. These are to be
informed, that they may know themselves to do well as well as do that which is
good without thank. 2. Others do many things in the twilight, hit they miss
they: not upon assured ground not considering, that as well that which is done
without faith is sin, as that which is against it. 3. Many take up grounds
only in their generality and fail in the particular determining of the
general, to their occasion, and so sometime exceed sometime limit the word,
whereas they should go according to the word closely in the extent of it. Thus
many limit the 2. commandment, to gross idolatry of Pagans and securely go on
in your own idolatry and will worship; as the Papists. Others take their own
prejudice, devotion, good meanings to be good grounds, as blind people. And
lastly, others corrupt the ground by false glosses; and these sundry ways. 1.
By adulterating the word, both of rule and example in scripture, and making it
sound as they list. This is to crook the rule and then work by it: thus those
Pharisees. 2. By corrupt error of men's traditions, as in 1 Pet. 1.18. received
from the father, alleging Vox populi, vox Dei: but it is not a common cry can
ground an action. 2. By Satan's cunning and dice-play, as he dealt with Eve: ye
shall not dye. Genesis 3.4. Thirdly, the imposture of our own hearts, easily
believing it lawful, which we eagerly desire, and so bribing the judgment to
give in a false verduict to deceive us: as the messenger that went for Micaia,
1 King. 22. and as a bribed judge will force a good jury to bring in a false
answer, that he may sin by preuiledge. Lastly, and especially through the
neighborhood that good has with evil oft-times, who would not commend the
pity of him that refused to smite the Prophet? 1 King. 20.36. or the fact of
the good midwiues that saved the women of Israel, Exodus 1.19. and who would
not (at first) discommend the Levites for slaying their brethren? Exodus 32. But
we must do no good, that evil may come of it; and where God discharges the
conscience from a Law, there is no transgression; as in the borrowing and
robbing the jewels of the Egiptians appears. Therefore, let us cleave to our
grounds: abhor all doubtful, general, erroneous ones: take pains to
discern between the colors of good and evil, and beware we be not lead by
the error of wicked, as 1 Pet. 3. end, and Ephesians. 4.14.

Q. What is the right manor of actions?

A. So necessary is this rule, that it reaches to all our actions: yea, the
most indifferent in her nature, and such as we are not tied to, but are
arbitrary, yet when they are done, are to be done in a right manner, or else we
sin. And this manner of doing, requires two things: First, that they be done
in the estate of well pleasing. Secondly, well pleasingly: for the former, it
is an assurance that the person pleases God Heb. 11.4. for the latter, it is a
cleaving to the quality of performance that it be pure. To the pure al things
are pure in their lawfullnesse, yet even pure things must be done purely also,
as I noted before in the Beauty of Conversation: each action having in it a
peculiar quality to commend it, as there I noted in diverse instances. And
therefore next to knowledge, the eye of the soul must call for this true
manor, that withal closeness, entirenesse, humbleness, faith, wisdom,
love, cheerfulness, resolution, it may perform that which is good. But I
repeat nothing.

Q. What is the due measure of Actions?

A. That the Lord be served with the best of us; within, by the best bent of
our souls; without, by the best extent of our abilities; and that we keep no
false measure within us. Our course is to deal with God, as buyers and sellers
do each with other; buy by one measure, and sell by another. So we, when we
trade with God, are content he should sell to us by the largest bushel,
heaped, thrust, and running over; but we repay to him by a cut, scanty one. But
as we do, or would fare at Gods hand, so should we measure out unto him: and
in all that we do to him, or for him, call forth the best of our spirit, and
bent of heart, all our courage and might; and also enlarge our actions to the
greatest extent we can in number, and in degree; that our goodness may be as
diffusiue and exemplary (as without hypocrisy) and within, within our compass
may be. But I have spoken of these two before: of the one in the Subject, of
Regeneration; of the other in the grace of Measure: Look back to them.

Q. What is the true end of all good actions?

A. It is one of the maine of all the rest. For as the end, and scope of a
thing gives it the being: so a child of God, is more properly obedient in his
end, then in any: he may fail through ignorance, or weak carriage, or
measure, but in this is his glory; That the desire of his soul is toward the
Lord: and that he may approve himself to have had an upright aim at the
Lords ends: the glory of his name, good of his brethren, and peace of his own
heart; whatsoever else he fails in, in preaching, in prayer, in mercy and
compassion, in Sabboths, in example, yet that in this he is void of guile. See
Paul's boasting 1 Cor. 1.12. we have had our Conversation in sincerity, etc.
This was Abimeleck's praise (for the moral of it) that he had done it with a
pure intent. It is that God looks at Psalm. 51.6. It was David's rejoicing that
he walked in the perfect way, Psalm. 101.2. and Asa his praise, that in all his
distempers, he still held upright in heart. Oh, this a d^fficult work! As
hucksters deal with their milk, honey, and wares, they mix them with wax,
water and trash, for the vantage, so does our heart seldom any action but some
dreg, and dead fly of our own aims and ends is ready to defile it Beware
therefore, and let a true end* steer all the actions of our life. But of this
before in the grace of uprightness.

Q. Proceed to the third branch of the substance of conversation, concerning
the object thereof: what is it?

A. It is two fold: either our Spiritual Conversation with God himself: or
our Conversation with man in our common life.

Q. What is our conversation with God?

A. Godly conversation (as Peter calls it) is that communion which a renewed
soul has with God: or in a word, it is the souls enjoying of God (so far
as here may be) and it is either inward, or outward:

Q. What is inward conversation? how manifold?

A. It is twofold, either the life of faith, or the exercise of the Graces of
the spirit within the soul.

Q. What is the life of faith?

A. The souls enjoying of God, Christ our Sanctification, by all his promises
concerning life and godliness. And a faith at the first drawing near to God,
did cleave to him in Christ by a promise for reconciliation (as in Article 6.
of the second part) so it proceeds, and improoues Christ her sanctification
for all needs and uses of this present life. For (as Paul says) if being
enemies we were reconciled to him by his death: much more by his resurrection
we shall partake his life. And again, If he have not denied us his own Son,
how much more shall he not with him, deny us any thing. Now says
understanding whole Christ in sanctification to be made hers, 1 Cor. 1.30. does
draw (as a man would draw lines from a Center to the circumference on each
side) so particular promises of upholding the weak soul in each condition:
that so she might say in all, Now live I, yet not I, but Christ in me; And the
life I live, I live by faith in the Son of God, and again, The just man lives
by faith: not (as some inuert it) The just by faith shall live.

Q. What promises does faith live by in Christ?

A. To speak of all were endless: for a draughts sake, I refer them to
four heads. First, estates. Secondly, means Thirdly, duties. Fourthly,
graces: which may serve for the rest. The sum is, Jesus Christ is the life of
the soul throughout and as before and without Christ, the soul lived a
natural, and common life, of self, world, pleasures, vanities, so she now
lives the life of Christ in all those four. And she is thus said to put on
Christ: that as a man in his apparel does all the works of this daily life,
so does the soul all her works in Christ: Christ in her, prays, preaches,
prospers, suffers and in a word does all her works in her, as Esaias 26.

Q. What is the life of faith in estates, and first in Prosperity?

A. The cleaving of the soul to God in the promise of his Al-sufficiency. Genesis
17.1. and 1 Cor. 3. end. Al things are yours, and ye Christ's. Its the Lord
Jesus our head who being Lord of all, made himself no body, that we might have
right to all promises. Faith then cleaues to this promise. First, That if God
has made us a feast in the mountains, much more he will in the valleys,
Esaias 25. And look what blessing so ever he see good, it is mine, life, good
days, good marriage, children, family, health, success, recovery, credit,
wealth, it is mine. A child of God believes no temporal promise otherwise than
a spiritual: both purchased by Christ alike, although if he see them unfit, I
am to believe a supply otherwise as good or better: but else faith cleaues to a
temporal in the full right to Christ without ifs or ands, as well as the
other. And not only so, but serves Gods providence for them with holy
confidence, setting the Lord above his own labors, in the secret blessing of
a promise: going to work without indirect courses, without sin or sorrow:
believing that whatsoever his portion be, more or less, it is his, given him by
his father, and therefore best, and any other should be worse: and to conclude,
accounting the commonest blessing to be no common love to him, but vouchsafed
in kindness to his servant; and therefore not snared thereby and nailed to the
earth, but raised up rather as by wings to the giver, to serve the Lord with a
good and cheerful heart for all his blessings.

Q. What is the life of faith in the estate of adversity?

A. It is the cleaving of the soul to God in the promise of his protection and
redemption: 1 Cor. 1.30. The poor soul says with David on his deathbed, The
Lord lives who has delivered my soul out of all adversity; sword of Saul,
pursuit, enemies in battle, and now will deliver me in death. And how? first,
as it was with Christ, that no trouble, nor yet one hour sooner befell him
than God preordained: so shall a poor soul believe that no enemy shall hurt,
or afflict in any kind, then, or until the Lord see meet; but as he, so thou
shall pass through all: so also, 2. If any do assault thee, sickness,
poverty, suits, prison, malicious enemies, thou shall say with Christ, This is
their hour, they are come in season, they are meet: read 1 Pet. 1.6. they are
no accidents, they are the allottings of my Father for special good. 3. When
they do lie upon thee, yet the Lord shall be thy light in darkness, and
shall be thy defense, and cover thy head in the day of battle: See Micah 2.7.
Psalm. 84. end: he shall make thy bed in sickness, and walk with thee in the
Furnace: he shall be thy peace of heart, thy strength to endure; he shall
purge thee by them, and bring thee out as gold out of the Furnace. So that thou
shall say, Perhaps the Lord shall do me good for this cross this day, make me
better than if I had not had it: It is good for me that I was afflicted. And
after a tolerable passage (read Ier. 29.6, 7.) he shall deliver me out of all,
one way or other: so that the spirit of glory, and the conquest of Christ rests
upon me, and by his promise. Ioh. 16. vlt. I have overcome the world, I shall
take good courage and say Micah 7.8. I shall rise when I am fallen: and
afterward I shall with the Lord Jesus be out of the gunshot of all afflictions:
yea, as the estate of a believer is through his whole life, so shall it be
comfortablest at death, and the last day shall be his best; a rest from all
labors.

Q. What is the life of faith in means using?

A. It is the cleaving unto God by the promise, for the power and blessing of
and upon all his ordinance; which point seeing it will fall into Article 4. use
3. therefore thence fetch direction.

Q. What is the life of faith in duties?

A. Its the cleaving of the soul to God by a promise for strength to give us
the grace to do what he commands: of which also seeing I treat, in Article
3. use 4 there look.

Q. What is the life of faith in Graces?

A. It Is the souls cleaving to God in the promise, and in the grace of the
Lord Jesus, for a supply of grace convenient for it self, both for number and
measure. Ioh. 1.17. from his fountain we receive grace for grace, like for
like, so many for so many. In the strength of this promise, a poor barren
soul comes to the Lord, and hearing what treasure is in Christ, and for whom,
comes with confidence and pleades for it self; Oh Lord as empty a wretch as I
am of mercy, of compassion, of righteousness, of love, of patience, thou have
put all into the nature of Christ Emanuel: though I am pestred with a peevish
froward, proud, worldly spirit, yet thou have said, where sin has abounded,
grace abounded much more: thou delightest to honor thy Sons grace in purging
such sinful ones from their cursed qualities: thou will have thy grace pointed
at. Oh! who would have ever have looked to see such a proud wretch, humble, so
worldly an one, heavenly minded? Nay; the Lord can use those weapons of sin,
to be weapons of righteousness, choler to turn zeal for God, prodigality to
turn bounty to the poor members of Christ. I see where the Lord creates the
new creature, he also creates the graces thereof: where he marryes, he gives
the marriage Ring beset with all Jewels of faithfulness, humbleness, and the
like. Why then should a poor member pine away for want, when the head is full?
and full for his members? Oh! I see all things are mine in Christ, all means,
duties, yea, and graces mine* Did thou not say so Lord? and causedst me to
trust thee for it? that out of thy Fountain I should have for both number
those that are most wanting, and for measure, that which may strengthen a
feeble heart? Even as Haman hearing, what should be done to a favorite,
answered, he means me, whom else? so the poor soul here: The Lord has
renewed me, and whom should he bestow Graces upon to beautify sooner?

Q. Go forward to the second branch of our Communion with God, wherein does it
consist?

A. In the exercise of the graces of his spirit. For look how Merchants and
Chapmen have the policy and traffike for wares and money, so the godly have
their commerce with the Lord for grace. Read Phillip. 3.19. But our
conversation is in heaven. And this stands in these three things: First, in the
increase of their graces: for the experience of the sweet gain and price of
grace which they have often gotten from God does whet their desire to covet more
of them, and to be better acquainted with the Lord in them. As Moses could not
be content till he had seen God in his glory. This is one effect of our
Saviors prayer, that they may be one with us, and that thou would keep them
from evil and from the world: so the faithful trade with God for more faith,
union, hope, love, patience, and when they can get in with the Lord for any
addition of these, they think themselves in the suburbs of heaven. Secondly,
In the rejoicing in the groth and increase they have had. No mizer does so often
visit his bags, as these joy in their treasure. The less they see of these
jewels in the world, the more they prize them and flesh their hearts with them:
as the Apostle says, The God of peace fill ye with all joy by believing. And
again, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Thirdly, and especially
their trading is in heaven by that precious hope which is an earnest-penny of
their inheritance: and therefore they never think of it, but it glads their
hearts. This is that heaven upon earth, and the treasure which their hearts are
set upon, which in a sort makes them also to be heavenly minded: makes them use
these things as if not; and despile the image of these vanities: yea makes
their crosses, slight in comparison, while they look not upon things
temporal, but eternal. And by this their trading, although they be absent
from the Lord, yet are they in a sort present, and lay hold of immortal life
to make their condition below the more tolerable. And so much of the
conversation with God.

Q. What is the outward converse of the soul with God?

A. It is that holy correspondency which it holds with God in outward services.

Q. What are those?

A. Some are ordinary, some are occasional. The ordinary are many: I will give
a taste of a few: and they are, an ordinary and daily walking with God in
religious duties, for the increase of Communion. It is not the wheel of duties
doing which can support the soul; it must be a due keeping of quarter with
the Lord, and a survey of her estate toward God, which must do that. Of this
sort are these. First, A satisfying of the soul with the Lords image at our
awaking with a saluting of his promise for renewed pardon and grace: Psalm. 17.
vlt. for Jesus Christ is yesterday and to day and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8.
not changing. Secondly, a seeking of his face as often in the day as may be for
renewed humiliation and for keeping the heart open daily, for pardon of renewed
sins, grace to purge and season the soul: thanks for renewed compassions:
Thirdly, a reviving of covenant with him for closer purpose, and bent of heart
toward him. Act. 11.23. Fourthly, a daily recording of Gods peculiar
administrations and providence to us, in patience, blessings, deliverances,
special redresses of our decays in soul and body, and what use we have made
of them. Fifthly, a finishing of each day so, as we viewing it over, may be
humbled or comforted, and so lie down in peace. Q. What is the occasional?

A. The service of the time, Act. 13.36. by which we rest not only in our
ordinary serving God: but reach our souls to the condition of the times we
live in accordingly carrying our selves, either in affliction of soul, or
thanksgiving as occasion requires.

Q. Conclude the Article with the latter branch: what is our conversation with
men in common life?

A. The same which the Psalmist 50. vlt. calls, the ordering of conversation
aright. And it is a wise accommodation of a Christian to the several passages
that befall us unavoidably in this our common course of life. In the which
although there be a world of evil committed; this being the element of
worldlings, and the stage whereon the Devil acts his parts: yet even in
these common matters the Lord teaches his people to carry themselves, as men
of another world.

Q. But how shall rules be given touching this part of conversation, it being
so infinite?

A. By culling out some of the chief passages of the rest and giving a brief
view of their due ordering: we shall the easilier guess at the rest.

Q. Name some of them, show of what nature they are, and what ordering they
must have?

A. Such as these, Marriage, Company, liberties, solitariness, earthly
business, calling, family government, and the tongue, or common talk. Which
although they be out of the bounds of Gods worship, yet are so to be
conuersed in, as remembering the name of God may be blasphemed therein whout
especial caution, even as in the use of oaths and vows.

Q. Seeing diverse treatises ar extant about them, and they have been handled in
the Ministry by sundry occasions, give only a brief view of the ordering
thereof?

A. Generally touching all, note this, that God abhorres all common profane
vsages of the world in these things: and will have his people ca^ry about them
the cognizance of new Creatures and holy ones, that they may not make religion
odious by their corrupt behavior and making use each of other therein for
their own ends: but that the graces of God may break out and shine in the
order of this part of conversation, to the glory of our profession. Then
particularly, there is required a stayed, settled spirit, not vain, light
frothy and inconstant, so that each occasion accidentally offering it self
should unsettle us, and put us out of our course of life: as sometimes sudden
ill news drive us into melancholy and frowardness: success in our affairs
carry us into endless lightness, and iollity: shrewd turns in family work
us to disguizement and impatience. We see how it is with some disordered men,
tha^ for a week or fortnight together they will ply their callings, but if
company draw them to the Alehouse, they will spend whole days and nights in a
quite contrary course. Such baseness the Lord abhorres: and will have all to
set their souls in order to an holy soberness and equalness of heart, wisely
framed to entertain the changeable passages of life; which the well-ordered
Spirit, neither in the excess or defect, but as the object, requires.

Q. And what special directions are there? and first for the married condition?

A. That they loath to make it a common thing for the use each of other, and
profaning the Ordinance: but first, improuing it chiefly for God, and the
mutual good of their souls: Worshipping God together, making him umpire of
all their differences, pouring out their hearts into his bosom by humiliation,
prayer, and thanksgiving: Nourishing matrimonial love as a sacred knot; and
to that end, observing each others graces for the strengthening thereof.
Cutting off all iarres in the beginning, and yet not agreeing together for base
ends, but for holy. Tendering the weaknesses of the weaker sex, concealing
her defects, and yielding subjection to the head for conscience.

If these rules and the like were observed, how might the order of this one
part set an order in all other parts of our course? whereas the disorder of
this wheel, causes all other to be distempered; children unruly, servants
ungoverned, and all out of frame? And when once things are grown to extremity,
then they wish they had never met; as indeed the truth is, miserable is that
marriage which the bond of necessity holds together.

Q. What rules are there for men's Calling?

A, The Calling being so great a wheel of Conversation, (for where we worship
God one hour, we ply our Callings a great many,) had need to be well ordered:
First, Beware of picking quarrels with your Callings; change not Callings at
your pleasure, (though I deny not some cases may fall out to compel a change,)
but cling to thy Calling to keep thee from noisome lusts, ease, sloth, and
lewd company; which nothing but a Calling will prevent: As that Martyr blessed
God for honest wedlock, so do thou for an honest Calling: Secondly, Use it
not for the base ends of gain, money, and the like, (for Gentlemen have as
much need of Callings as poor men,) but to serve providence, to mortify thy
lusts, and prepare thee for the duties of worship; knowing that else thou
would vanish in religious duties, and be wearisome to thy self. Thirdly,
Let an order be set in thy Calling, that it hinder not Religion in Family;
neither let Religion hinder thy calling; but both know and keep their bounds.
Fourthly, Neglect not thy Calling suddenly, to attend upon needless pleasures,
trauells, companies, and so leave thy family in a distemper, without either
provision or government: but in stead of these, abide diligently in the
Calling, in which God has set thee, without weariness.

Q. What is the rule of trading man with man?

A. That men seek the good of a Commonwealth, not a private. The proverb is,
Every one for himself: and in this age, self-love has corrupted mutual
commerce exceedingly; so that if men may gain, they care not how, by what
shifts, deceits, breaches of promises, running away with other men's goods,
borrowing much, paying nothing, trading with other men's stocks, and so proving
bankerupts, to raise some estate to themselves by other men's detrement. And
this is so general a sore, that no man knows how to remidy it, though few are
free from the pressure of it.

Q. What is the rule of conversation in common life?

A. The answer of that good woman to the Prophet, is excellent, 2 King. 4.14. I
live among my people: meaning humbly, courteously, loving and beloved, use
fully and peaceably.

First, in our neighborhood we are to practice innocence and harmelesnesse:
as Prou. 3.29. meaning that a neighbor looks for good measure, and to live
without annoyance. Also to maintain evil offices of lending and borrowing
necessaries; yea 'money to the poor, except they be unfaithful (in which
case they must be urged to pledges) to show mutual intercourse of love in
meeting, moderate feasting and rejoicing in the welfare of each other, to avoid
strangeness, and increase amity: avoiding stateliness, lowering, discurtesies,
and wrongs to each other in common cases of each other grounds, fences,
cattle, and commodities. Again, usefulness in counselling, visiting,
releeuing such as are in danger of ouerdripping enemies: especially comforting
them in spiritual complaints:

2 In townes-matters, not aiming at overruling others, treading our inferiors
under-feet, saving our own purses and over-burdening others, but carrying
equal minds, and doing as we would be done to: not pragmaticall and
busybodies in matters not concerning us; but attending our own, and keeping
our bounds. Not praters and janglers of needless affairs, not curious,
inquisitive, censorious, and the like.

3 In Arbitratorships, not stickling for parties, but for a peaceable agreement
upon equal condition between them, and settling firm agreement upon the
wisest and safest terms, and so of the rest.

Q. What rules give ye for liberties?

A. There are many sorts of liberties, as travelings from our own homes,
companionship with such as please us, recreations and pastimes, feastings, and
the like: all which are lawful in their kind; yet must be watched unto lest
too much precious time, cost, and heart be spent upon them: always keeping
from the uttermost of our liberty, and putting knife to our throat. Prou. 23.2.
if we be given to our appetite: not pouring out our spirit into them, and
loosing our selves in them, but gathering up either our souls to a more
cheerful return to intermitted duties. Remembering that Satan will the rather
seek to circumuent us in the use of lawful, because we dare not rush in
unlawful liberties.

Q. Draw to an end of the rest?

A. Touching the family, we are to set it in order, not when we dye only, but
much more in our life. And for mixed families; first this I say, that they
cannot choose but find much pudder and confusion both in matters of God, and
their own: God is the God of order, not confusion: if therefore it can be, let
mixtures of familes be avoided, as prejudicial to peace, thrist, accord, and
especially goodness: For if single families are so hardly ordered, how shall
mixed, whose heads or members differ, and are loath each to stoop to one
government? Such shall be sure to find trouble in the flesh: therefore where
weighty cause requires it, let the best order be settled by consent to avoid
confusion, as it shall the better if all will stand to one bar, and be ruled.

Next, for the Governors of families (especially greater) let them not think
it enough to set up a scroll upon their screen, touching the Laws of their
houses, and so pass on: but withal, let themselves be the life of order
themselves, Prou, 27.23. and Prou. 31.27. looking over their flocks within
doors, and not only for provision of body, but survey of the several ways
of Children and servants. God himself is the father from whom Ephesians. 3.14. all
families are called: and he will take account of our Baylywick in this kind.
If Ministers cannot guide their own families, how much less Gods Church? Let
order of family flow from well ordered hearts of our own: neither too remesse
as Eli 1 Samuel 2.23.24. nor yet harsh, imperious and tyrannous, Ephesians. 6.9. but
even framed for this very thing, as Paul, 2 Cor. 5.5. with temper of gifts to
govern, soberness, gravity, pureness and tenderness: Be not as Tygres in
the hot pursuit of your own earthly business, letting Gods go at large, both
on Sabbaths and otherwise: nourish no evil in your hearts that might break
out in example: for what child or inferior can honor them that carry loose
hearts to God, and set him not up in the family? Let God rule your children and
servants, and wives, and set up his throne in their Conscience, and then a
twyned thread will draw more than a cable. Above all, with David, purge out all
the bane of drunkenness, lying, unfaithfulness, unseasonable riot, and the
like: and let thy eye be fixed chiefly upon the righteous, and encourage them
that they may be the guides to the rest. Use not to dally out the season of
duty in families, which procures commonnesse and formality. Catechize,
admonish, reward and censure, and hold up order by these means.

Touching inferiors, be wholly for the good of the whole family, not your own
ends: Children down right in subjection, and not insolent, spenders and
claymers of their parents wealth as theirs, for the support of their vices and
lusts: but under authority with all love and well deserving; seeing they can
have but al after the decease of Parents, and the whilst their due education:
As for servants, I have elsewhere spoken at large, let this suffice that they
show all good faithfulness and respect, as those upon whom the well or ill
fare of the family depends, and the more they are betrusted, the more trusty:
for few families do ruinate, wherein bad servants have not one principal hand.

Q. One word more of the tongue, and so end?

A. It Is a great wheel also of Conversation. As great wheels in fireworks
set the lesser on fire, so does the tongue the whole course of mortality, Iam
3.6. and it is set on fire by hell without grace. But even where there is grace,
how little seen in this kind? and yet our religion is in vain without it, as
Iam. 1.26. It Is the chief Agent and chapman of conversation, and by it
conversation vtters it self. But how? what scolding and brawlings in family?
what multitude of them in buying and selling? what iangling up and down the
streets by gadding gossips of unstayed minds? what poison foames from the
heart by the vent of a lying, cruel, malicious, taunting, backbiting,
prattling, vain and unruly tongue? And while the ear is the receiver, this
thief will never change his trade. Truly, as once at sea, an owner of a ship
cried cried out when his ship was tossed and in danger, Oh, save my ship! one
answered, If it be yours, why do ye not rule it? so we may say, our tongues
are ours for title, but their own for government, we have no keep of them.

If occasion be given to speak of a good thing, none so still: if of our own,
never have done, as the Poet spoke of those Fiddlers, that either could not be
got to it, or could make no end. Let this shame us Christians, that not only
natures fences of teeth and lips, but the Lord Jesus his blood, and his word
should not be able to rule this little, but unruly member. Get us a well stayed
heart and balanced with grace, and this will keep in our tongues, first, from
excess; and then good matter, good heart, and good occasions will set them on
work for good, for God, for our brethren: As the tongue has set all on fire
often times and made all men beshrew us; so the same being seasoned by the grace
of Christ, may be the Creator of fruit of the lips which is peace: and both
glorify God, and edify man: all conversion of the soul, and all building up
in Grace, being the effect of this member sanctified. Thus much for the
opening of this second Article.

Q. Now briefly add some general use: because the opening of this
Conversation is use of it self?

A. First, let it warm all weak and fearful ones, who being under the
condition of grace, yet through melancholy, faith, what can come from ye to
please God? Oh! to you, to you only belong the promise: it must be God indeed
who must work it; but why do ye deny that it is yours; how deeply do ye
dishonor God, and deprive him of his glory? Oh! remember there is a great
conversation of service required of ye: the art of obedience is long, the life
is short! Beg of God that ye may be roused out of the den of ease or
sullenness, or fear, and say, Lord hasten and finish the work of faith with
power! I shall be shent else, and benighted, the day will fail me, and I
shall be dead, before I come to any proof of grace and the new creature.

This I urge the rather because I see how many please themselves in this estate
of the suburbs, and shame not to say, if I might ever have learn to believe,
I would care for no more! would ye not? me thinks you should tremble to see
such a world of work, a whole conversation to walk in, and yet you still to
begin; who shall do Gods work, if you sit still? ye will say perhaps if we
could believe we should not perish? Is that all? Is Gods glory less to you,
than your own salvation? Cast off your ease! And take heed least ye be faint
to crowde in at heaven gate with much ado, when others go in at a wide door!
when their hearts shall tell you faith was wanting to purge your heart, your
tongues, lives: still you walked in many unreformed courses for lack of the
power of faith; will this be a welcome thought on the deathbed? I remember
what the Lord said to Elia, 1* King. 19.13,
when he was fled from Iezabel, What do thou here Elia in this cave? Up and
eat, for thou have a long journey? so I say to thee. Up and eat, take and
believe the promise: Purge thy heart, renew thy soul, enter into an holy
conversation; begin quickly, be thankful for thy deliverance and consider
here is plenty of work for thee, here is a course of service toward God,
toward man: here be affections, thoughts and actions to be governed, the
very view of this journey might dismay one that wants feet and hands. Oh! that
this among other motives might rouse thee up. I tell thee, were thy faith like
Abraham's, here were work enough to do for thee: how stands thy heart to it?
If there be any desire of Gods honor in the, to leave some mark of faith
behind thee, and to dye with peace in the conscience of thy holy endeavor of
well-pleasing, bestirre thy self and set, on up, and be doing and the Lord
shall be with the willing.

Secondly, it should be terror to all hypocrites and time-seruers, By your
fruits ye shall know them? Do men gather Grapes of thorns, or Figs of
thistles? can a rush grow without mire? Can a man vnrenued in his course, still
an old man, walk with God in an holy conversation? And who so walks in a
rotten one, can he be a new creature. Oh! if ye be such new creatures, if ye
have slain the Agag of old Adam, What mean the bleating of the sheep, and
lowing of the oxen? how is it, that your tongues, your marriages, families,
liberties, companies have shaken off Gods yoke? where is your inward or outward
conversation with God? either in the life of faith, or of communion and duty
where is your integrity and sincerity? Oh! that ye would no longer cast dung
into the face of God, and cease to blaspheme him before profane ones! Psa.
50.20.
Why take ye the Word of God into your mouths and ears hating to be reformed?
Why does this generation swarm so in these days of powerless profession?
having a form of godliness, but hating to be reformed? This easy religion of
yours shall one day scare ye, ye shall wish your portion might fall into the lot
of Sodom and Gomorra, and such as never knew God! Hell shall be seven times
more hot for ye then others, and when ye shall cry, Have not we preached and
professed thy Name? the Lord shall answer, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. Consider this ye that forget God! think that ye see the Lion of the
tribe of Judah rending hypocrites in pieces with more fierceness than Publicans;
and then conclude with David, He that prayseth me glorifies me. To him that
orders his Conversation aright, thou will show the salvation God. Who would not
then see this saluatirn? thou in the mean season walk in this conversation.

the yoke of God is easy, and his burden is light.

Cast off thy own mixtures, do not pullbacke thy shoulder, desire no more
ease then others of Gods people have felt. Its Gods way, the way that Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, David, Peter, Paul walked; the way which Jesus Christ himself
has chalked out; if it be tedious, it is so to thy old man, to whom thou art
no debtor: thou art redeemed from him, and his old conversation; thy thoughts,
affections, members, tongue, feet, fences are not thine own (except thou be
the old man's still) but his: that thou might now serve in the newness of the
spirit, not the oldnesse of the letter. Therefore, be not thine own: take some
time, go into thy closet and parlee with thy soul, whose am I? if old Adams
still, the Lord requires no such cost at my hands as this: no man can yield to
this conversation that is not renewed: I were a fool to bereave my self of my
lusts and liberties, if I be no new creature. But am I one? truly, then I must
walk in all this conversation, uprightly and entirely, though never so weakly:
Lord, Iam. 3.13. read it.
let it find favor in mine eyes; let it not seem tedious; thou can make it
easy and sweet: let me trust thee; but to divide the things and remove those
bounds which thou have joined and pitched, and no good man, none but an
hypocrite durst ever separate; Lord let me not do it.

Lastly, Let it provoke each good heart to seek to excel in be more vile;
trust God for credit, and parts, and employments, and content of life, and
cleave to the conscience of conversation. And if it be hard in such a world to
hold out this power of religion: beg first of the Lord, that he would direct
thee; diminish not, Ier. 19.13. Ps. 119.133
nor add to his rule; but deny thy self, say, Lord, the work is great, it is
not in man to order his way: do thou, O Lord, order it for me. All thy
Disciples are regulars and no seculars (although no Papists) and therefore let
not me walk as a Masterlesse person, but by rule. Shall Jesuits teach their
novices such exact obedience, and cannot the Lord teach it thee? yes, if thou will sit at his feet and learn.

If all that I have said will ravish thy heart with this frame of God, and make
thee cry out with the Queen of Sheba, beholding the order of Salomons
household and conversation; 1 Lin. 10, 4, 5, 6.
Oh! how happy are those thy servants who daily stand before thy face to see
thy wisdom? Oh! but a greater than Solomon is here, and an order of far
greater buty? Oh that it could beat thee out of concelt with the disorder of
thy old course, in which thou never foundest peace but confused; and let it
urge thee in thy utter inability hereunto, Pfal. 119. Psa. 143.5.
to go to God with David, and pray, Direct me, Oh Lord, in the paths of thy
Testimonies! Lead me into the good way, and let thy good Spirit conduct me
into the land of righteousness; send forth thy light and truth: show me the
view and order of this conversation, make it sweet to my mouth as honey, and
let thy Angel of the Covenant go before and guide me by the Pillar of fire and
Cloud to the 42. pitching places of this way to Canaan! leave me not to my own
wisdom, but guide me by thy counsel, till thou receive me to glory! Lord
enable me to do what thou biddest, and bid me do what thou will! Give me to
draw from thy fountain for all these uses of conversation. The Well is deep,
but thy Bucket is able to fetch out this water: Let me derive it from the Lord
Jesus his example, and draw grace for grace from thence: And not only set me
in this conversation but hold me in it: and let experience make me say, it is
best, and I am never happy when I am out. Till it become my meat and drink on
earth to do thy will as in heaven. And so much for this second Article.

The third Article.
Q. VVWhat is the third Article?

A. That the eternal platform after which this Conversation of the next
Creature is to be framed is only the law of God in the ten Commandments.
See 1 Timothy 1.5. the end of the Law is Love. What end means he? surely not the
end of the Laws begetting power (for Christ does that) but of the directing
power of it. Thus Saint James calls it a Royal Law, Iam. 2.8. as being the
Scepter whereby Christ our King rules us. And he terms it a Glass of
liberty: meaning to all believers, in that it shows forth the will of God
fully in the point of moral obedience, as a glass represents the face. So the
Psalmist, Ps. 19. Thy Law is perfect, gives light to blind eyes; by it thy
servant is forewarned, etc. and Ps. 119. Thy word is a light and lantern to my
feet and steps. And thy Commandments are to me instead of Counselors. And
of this part of the Word is that of Peter meant, The sure Word of Prophets,
shining in dark place.

Q. How comes this direction to be put into the word? and how comes it to be
conveyed unto the soul?

A. To the former I answer, the Lord God has breathed into it this light and
direction: himself put it into it, no creature being able in so few words as
ten. Dut. 10.4. to contriue so perfect a view of all duty: and having out of
the depth of his wisdom so do, God spoke these words, although delivered by
the Ministry of Angels in point of attendance and terror, Heb. 1.7. He makes
his Ministers a flame of fire) he himself, as the Lord of the Creature,
uttered them. And both devised and uttered this Law for this especial and last
end, to be a direction unto his Church.

For the latter I say, That as in the Law he took order, that not only the
Priests and Levites at Jerusalem in the Temple, but in the Tribes should read
it each Sabbath, Act. 13.27. and expound it, Ezra 8.4. so still he requires
that the Ministers of the Gospel do dispense and open it to the people in the
special parts and scopes thereof, for a pattern of life. For although such
common notions of dim light remain in a corrupt nature as may serve to
condemn the contemners, yet, no such as might lead on to godliness and
salvation clearly, that is a mystery and must be unfolded. And further, the
Lord has added the ministry of the Spirit to the voice of man, to write this
Law in the soul: he has promised it, Ier. 1.33. and does daily perform it:
so that to the believer his Law is not a commanded one (as to all) but a
commanding one, in their spirit and conscience.

Q. But this seems contrary to the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. for he affirms the Law
was not given to the righteous, but to the disobedient, etc.

A. This is answered by the same place, verse 5. as in the first question I
said: the sun is, It is not given to the righteous, as to the ungodly: for
the righteous need it not so, howbeit it is given to the godly also for another
end, Gal. 3.19.
even to direct them. For the Law in Gods purpose served for two ends: The for
transgressions: to convince the wicked, to scare them out of their
self-conceit, and to drive them to Christ: The other, to guide such as are
come to Christ, how to lie under his Government: This latter, the Lord looked
at more mainely, for his elect sake, that they should not be left to
themselves. But the former, also he intended to the drawing of them out of
their ignorance. For as we see, that the Law was given in all terror, and not
as a messenger of good things: so the Lord taught thereby that it ought to
speak sadly as a minister of death to the ungodly; and so it did in some sort
with such as were saved among the Jews: the Ministry of it convinced them of
an impossibility of performance of it, and sent them to the blessed seed who
should bring in righteousness, and break the Serpents head: and to such, this
Law ceased to be a killing letter, and began to be a Cirection to life. In
which sense we here treat of it, as in the first part of the Catechism of the
former.

Q. But what needs this Law-direction? Do we not by this, teach people to
serve in the old letter, and destroy that Law of liberty in Christ, which ought
to be set up, and restore the covenant which ought to be abolished?

A. To answer both: first, the Lord has not given his Church to Christ, nor
given them any such liberty in Christ, as to devise a way to themselves,
feuerall (either for measure or number, or matter of obedience) from his own
way: neither will trust man with any such, no nor give the least hint to man's
corrupt inventions. But that Law of obedience which he first himself devised,
he meant it for those that should believe, both before, at, and after the
coming of Christ: and meant not to alter it. How Christ rules by it ^e shall
hear anon: but he rules by no other. And its worth our noting that the first
Sermons he ever preached, Mat. 5. and 6 and 7. he urges nothing more than
this. Think ye I am come to destroy the law? No, but to fulfill it, and to
settle it.

For the second point, I say, that it must be explayned; what it is to serve in
the letter: and secondly, what it is to restore that which is worn out. To
serve in the letter then, is to be mistaken in the scope of the Law, Do this
and live: to think that the Law gives life to the obeyers of the letter of it,
and to think a man may of himself obey it, and be saved by it; whereas the
Law imports no such thing, but vrges an obedience exactly, Gal. 3.21. ^atter
part.
which is impossible: now to serve thus, is to serve like a slave, without
reward. Thus do not we affirm the Law to be served: Secondly, to restore a
Law to be abolished, is to maintain this error that by the Law of Moses a man
may be justified and needs no other: and to oppose it to Christ in the point
of being so justified. This do not we in affirming the Law to be our
direction; for we affirm that a man is first justified by Christ only,
abolishing the Law in that point wholly. Therefore this cavil is falsely cast
upon us.

Q. Explane this better: for you seem herein to confound the two covenants, Do
this, and live: and, Believe this and live: do you not so?

A. God forbid: for the opening of which, it will be fit in a word to show in
what respect these two covenants are opposite and in what, not: The old
covenant is contrary to the new only in the point of living, by doing or
believing, and being justified by doing or believing. Whosoever will be
justified by doing, destroys justification by believing, as both those old
heretical Pharisees and now Papists affirm. As the Apostle in Romans 11.6.
urges, If of works no more of grace, for so works were no more works: if of
grace, not of works, Gal. 5.4.
for then grace were no more grace? In this respect then the Law of doing and
the Law of faith are irreconciliable, and as contrary as to be saved by ones
self is contrary to being saved by another: and in this respect does Paul so
oppose these, vilifying the Law and exalting the Gospel: calling the one an
old letter, the other the Spirit, the one wanzing and to be abolished; the
other to be settled by the others ruin. Else the Apostles phrases cannot be
approved: for he only confutes the error of the Jew that took that Covenant
of works to import a possibility for nature to do it. Gal. 3.21. former part.
Gal. 3.24.


But the old covenant is not contrary to the new in point of direction to
obedience; neither is the law contrary to the promises, but subordinate rather;
for as the Law first served to prepare a way to Christ, so having once trodden
the Law under Christ, feet (in that supposed strength thereof to justify a
sinner) it is safe to affirm, do this under the Lord Jesus, do this in faith,
and live: not that works are causes of, but the way unto life, even that life
which faith has procured and Christ purchased: as one well said* No causes of
a kingdom, but the way of reigning. And thus the Law falling into the stream
of Christ, is not or opposite unto him, but in order of direction to a believer
how he may walk unto sa^uation

Q. Yet one doubt more appears, for this opinion Christ is made a lawgiuer?

A. True, but with a distinction. Not as if he by dying should merit to us a
way of justifying our selves by the form of the old covenant, Do this and
live: (which some Divines have affirmed (and they are lately well confuted) for
this were but a nice trick to establish Jewish and popish justification: but he
is our Lawgiver by directing us to life by this Law, having first justified us
by his grace.

Q. But seeing the Law was a yoke not to be borne, and an impossible Master to
obey as Act. 15.10. is spoken: how can it be made a direction for us?

A. Jesus Christ has taken away that yoke, and so put it upon us: the same
Law, yet altered much in the property thereof, and that sundry ways: and so
made it no yoke of the Law, but a yoke of his own, sweet and easy and light;
and which he tells us we may well bear, being rid of the other, as Mat.
11.29, 30.

Q. Show that: wherein stands this ease?

A. He has purchased it for us as our Priest, King and Prophet

Q. How as your Priest?

A. Sundry ways. First, by discharging us from the yoke of superfluous
ceremonies of the old ceremonial and judicial Law. Col. 2.14. Blotting out the
handwriting of ordinances, which was contrary to us. In this we got a great
quittance of the Law, The more wrong do they unto us who restore this burden
(as the papists) and think they do us a good turn, destroying Christ's ease:
who has rid us of all beggarly Rudiments, Gal. 4.9. and Col. 2.17. so that we
are dead with Christ from them. Col. 2.20. Secondly, he has freed us from the
rigor of morrall Laws, as that one of the Sabbaths excessive observation; but
especially the whole burden of the morrall Law, Gal. 3.13. that immoderate
impost of doing all according to the full matter, manor and measure, so that
now the Law is quallified, and is only required of us as the obedience of
faith, and accounted unto us as full as if we could wholly fulfill it. By which
means these commandments are not burdensome, 1 Ioh. 5.3. But thirdly and
especially, he has rid us from that woeful penalty of curse (more heavy then
all, Gal. 3.13.) even eternal death of soul and body, which throughout our
life enthralled us to bondage, Heb. 2.15. and that by his blood and
satisfaction for us, Gal. 4.5. Fourthly, he has removed that vnwelcomenesse
of our persons, whereby all that came from us was irksome to God, and made both
us and our service accepted, Ephesians. 1.6. yea, and that even our wants and
infirmities, Revel. 1.6. even Priests to offer up acceptible sacrifices.
Lastly, he does still by his intercession still procure acceptance still for
us, that no time or age may make the Father weary of us.

Q. What has he done for us as a King?

A. First, he strengthens and stablisheth all those ties and bands of
obedience due to himself from us: that the more freed we are from bondage, the
more we may be tied to the liberty of this royal law of his: setting up his
throne in the soul more fully thereby, upon better prerogative: before it was
justly urged, but weakly, because the strength of Creation was lost and gone:
as Romans 8.3. That which by the Law was impossible through weakness of flesh.
etc. But now being recovered upon terms o^ easiness and delight, he may
more equally and duly require it, without excuse. And by this the Law is the
more established in us, To. 3.31. Do we then by faith frustrate the Law? nay,
rather we establish it. For as the Lord requires obedience of his Creature,
upon the planting of his image in it: so, by this restoring it from her ruin
and curse, he much more settles the same upon the believer; faith (to say the
truth) being the grace that conformes the soul to this image in the utmost
intent of God: which when she has perfectly done, she shall be of no more
use. To this end pertaines that, Roman. 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law, for
righteousness, to all that believe. Meaning, that the Law is satisfied in her
scope of perfect obedience by Christ: seeing faith in him has obtained a full
acceptance of obedience, as if it were legally perfect.

Secondly, he does by his Kingdom infuze strength into us to obey the Law:
enclines our wits thereunto, and makes it to us actually as Christ found it to
himself, and has made it to us, even perfect freedom: yea, meat and drink:
Ier. 31.33. Eze. 36.27.
according to that, Ierem. 31. I will write my Law in their hearts, and cause
them to walk in my Statutes: that is, put strength of mine own into them, to
agree with my Rule, and stoop to my Scepter. Kings command their people, but
serve themselves upon their strength; cannot put any into them: but Christ is
served by his own.

Q. What has he done for us as our Prophet?

A. His Prophecy comes yet nearer to the matter in hand; for although all
that I have said be to be supposed, ere the Law can direct us; yet the actual
work of direction issues from his Prophecy: And first by a Declaring, and
secondly by a Revealing Work. The Declaring work is a witnessing to the soul
that he is the true Lord and Comman-of his People, Esaias 55.4. that he rules his
law as by his scepter, that all his Preisthood and merit ends in his kingdom
and obedience, that it is his honor that all knees bow to him, and that they
kiss the Son; that he is the object of it through whom the Father is
honored: that true Liberty stands not in having our will, but in putting on
this yoke; and who so does otherwise, deceives himself.

But secondly, by his Revealing work: by this he directs the soul, and sets
the steps of it, (as Luke 1.79) in peace: by this he uses the tenor of his Law
to be a lively finger to point out duty for every occasion, and to frame the
soul to draw his Law to every need and use in the life, according to that, 1
Ioh. 2 20.27. Ye have an unction from the Holy one, who tells you all things:
And in Esaias 30.21. Their ears shall hear a voice behind them, saying; This
is the way, walk in it. This is a Revealing with direction; by which the soul
sees the use of Christ in every Commandment, and is led on by him as her Guide
thereby, as if an Oracle should speak from heaven, Esaias 55. A Leader and
Commander to his people, verse. 4. And thus a Christian may see how the
Commandments of the Moral Law are the directions of Christ, and how he is the
Lawgiver of the soul in them all; and till this be conceived, it is no
wonder if we account them as a strange thing, Hos. 8.12. But by this means,
familiar.

Q. I conceive now, how Christ has made his Law a direction to godly life; now
come to the directions themselves, what are they?

A. They concern either God himself in the 1. Table; as his inward worship of
fear, confidence, and setting him up to be our God alone in the first: Or, our
outward reasonable service, and worship of him in pure manner in the second:
Or, our faithful abearing our selves in all holiness; in such actions of
common life as are not immediate worship in the third: (for I refer oaths
and vows to the second, which I desire wise Readers to think of,) or the set
day of our Worship, upon one day of seven (since the eighth day was turned into
Gods day, or the Christian Sabbath) and that in the fourth. Or else our
neighbor and our selves in the other six: Subjection to all Superiority in the
fifth: Maintaining his precious life (as being better than all that follow) in
the sixth: Of his Chastity in the seventh: His Estate in the eighth. His Name
in the ninth: The tenth forbidding not only that Concupiscence which reaches
to the detriment of our neighbor, but under that, (as most sensible to us) all
that wicked propension and bent of nature (before actual sin) whereby
originally we are prone to all vn^ustice, and impiety, and intemperance.
Concerning which, as having said enough in the second Ar^icle of Conversation,
and it being no part of my purpose to repeat what has been written by so many
learned and faithful Writers: I omit to say any more, only contenting my self
to lay downsome brief rules how the Law is to be conceived, the Minister of
Christ for righteousness; and so to conclude the Article with brief uses.

Q Mention then some of these Rules.

A. First, that all the Laws of Christ must be understood to be of another
manner of force and authority than the Laws of men, even the greatest: for
they are limited with exceptions in all kinds, and do but reach to the
outward man, and penalties thereof. But these do reach to the conscience, and
they bind the inner man: God, whom we have to do with, seeing the soul (in
her utmost retiredness) as a thing naked, Heb. 4.13. and his word being pure
as himself, and piercing between the joints and marrow, Heb. 4.12. and
therefore there he sets up his Throne, and there is no evasion from him.

Secondly, Let us know that his Commands are not idle things and arbitrary,
which we may obey at our courtesy; or if not, yet God is as a weak King for
whom his Subjects are too strong, as Ioab and Abis^ai for David; but real
Laws from an authority that both knows offenders, and can punish them; yea,
which accurseth all transgressors, and will not hold them guiltless, Heb. 12.
ult. a consuming fire, as the manner of his uttering them, Exodus 20. in
earthquakes and thunder showed; and therefore be we afraid to provoke him: and
yet he is a God able to gratify his obedient ones, in ample manner, even to a
thousand generations: and its not to be neglected that both kind of sanctions
are expressed in so short a view.

Thirdly, observe, that the commands of the second Table are the edicts of the
same God whose the first are, Iam. 12.11. and therefore in which the Lord takes
himself as much either honored or not as the first: which I speak lest any
should cavil and think that 1 Samuel 2.25. (If man sin against man, a man may
judge; but if against the Lord, who shall entreat) to be meant of moral
offenses. No, but only of common discurtesies and offenses, or breaches which
are in men's power to release. For even those sins of Eli's Sons were
against women: and yet he tells them, the Lord took them as against himself.
So that although men be the object of the second Table, yet not the last, into
which the morrall offense is carried; and therefore it is not in man to release
any more of it then his own damage, the rest the Lord only can remit: as the
sin is of equal guilt, so the forgiver must be of equal power.

Fourthly, the Law must be always understood according to the scope, even as
every other part of the Word, as promises and threats. We must not rest in the
bare letter, and so destrow the life and spirit of the Law. How shoud ten words
include all our conversation, except the letter of the Law be enlarged to the
meaning of the Lawgiver? The Law then rests in the true intent of it:
Therefore, as for all Pharisaicall, licentious, or profane wretches; who do
limit this Law, and acknowledge no more then serves for their purposes,
chopping and changing (as Papists, who leave out the second Commandment quite,
and make up ten by making two of the last) let us abhor it. Let us abhor both
their enlarging of duties beyond the Law, and where God has made no sins,
there making sins: and where he makes no Laws, making them to bind the
Conscience, urging them more severely than faith and repentance. Oh! it is most
intolerable! And so their shortning of them, and cutting them off by the
middle, making reach no further then the notorious evils of them: But let this
be our rule, that look what God aims at under the grossest, let us also aim
at, and both abhor each appearance of evil as well as the most odious, and
cleaving to good in the least as well as the greatest. He that breaks the
least, Matthew. 5.19. shall be the least in heaven; and is guilty of the
greatest. If the scope of the second Commandment be (next to the worship it
self) to provide for the purity of it, any will worship should be to us as an
Idol: and all rebellion, as witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23.

Fifthly, we must conceive the commandments as importing no patcht or peeced
obedience to one or a few charges, but an entire and whole one: as the
coagmentation of the Laws of both Tables does import. Let us always conceive
the scope of the Law to require integrity; and all partial service to be a
forfeit to the whole Law: and be far from all such hipocrits and Ciuilians,
of whom the one colors his unrighteousness by his pretensed devotion (which
men cannot control) the other, their impiety and prophannes of their hearts,
by the outward ciuility in some of the Commandments of the second Table: both
in truth breaking both.

Sixthly, the Laws of the former Table are generally to be preferred to the
duties of the second: yet with an exception, that we conceive it upon equal
terms: thus, that the commands of the first rank in the former table have
precedence over the second, not each branch of the former above the second in
their first rank. It is generally more excellent that God have his due then
man: not particularly, the neglect or contempt of a Sermon is a fouler sin than
the murder of a man.

Seventhly, Understand the commandments to require at our hands the utmost of
our wit, devise and courage to serve God: that if we be beaten off in one kind,
yet we desist not, till we see that we be denied altogether. Else, to take any
occasion of peril, (perhaps supposed only) to neglect duty, is, to discharge
our selves of service, ere God does.

Eighthly, Let us observe, the Commandments of God never cross each other: if
any such case occur, as wherein one cannot stand with the other, let us know
the one must always yield to the other: as, if the child be set about his
fathers lawful business, he may not at the same time neglect his calling,
though to a religious end, as to hear the word, etc. except the parent release
him: the prerogative of the first Table above the second, notwithstanding.

Lastly, Let us note this, that duties of necessity and mercy which cannot be
otherwise done, are to be preferred to duties of piety, at that season: as the
Physician to attend the patient, or to help the Ox out of the ditch, rather
than worship God first, and suffer these to despair the whilst: Obedience in
such cases is better than sacrifice: and the omission of a duty is no contempt
with God. But I cease to mention any more, seeing it is less to my purpose.

Q. Conclude then the Article with some uses?

A. First, it strongly confutes all enemies to the Law of God, either old
Athiesticall Antinomists, or late Libertines and carnal hipocrites. It Is no
wonder that they are so rife in these days of looseness; for even our Savior
did touch upon such, Mat. the 5.17. and the Apostle writes few Epistles, but he
meets with such turners of the grace of God into wantonness, men of corrupt
minds: and Peter writes that many abused the Epistles of Paul to their own
destruction, 2. Epist. 3.16. It is no wonder if thieves might have their will,
would suffer no watches to be kept: or deformed women loath or break al true
Glasses. Let us so much the rather abhor them, as odious enemies to God, and
under pretext of the Law of liberty wal^e as lawless libertines, and overthrow
the Law of Conversation.

Secondly, let us consider how dangerous a thing it is to worship God according
to our own fancies and inventions: The Lord we see will not trust his own
Family of Believers with prescribing of Laws to themselves under color of
that faithfulness. It was a good speech of old, They are the best Laws which
give least power to the Judge. God will have no Judge to be his Chancellor, to
make or interpret, or change Laws, he knows our boldness and Sacrilege in
this kind. Nay, he knows that curiosity of our brains, which being weary of
his Laws, devise new, and love their own better than his: and so in time
iustle out the Lords with our own. And as we can open our mouths against
Papists in this kind, so let us hate them in the root, and cast out of our
selves all such self and self-love as under a color of reteyning Gods Laws,
yet seek a breadth of our own in his narrow, and make his Laws our own,
through our bad mixtures. This is the sin of hipocrites and time-seruers; let
us (if we ignorant) study this Law of God duly, and when we see his will
(which is as the decrees of Medes and Persians) let us not descant upon it, and
nibble at as a fish at the bate, being fearful of the hook: striving by the
rottenness of our deceived heart to bring Gods Laws to the bent of our own
bows, and corrupt them in the simplicity of them. There is little odds
between the carnal will worship of them that thrust upon the Lord, their own:
and the spiritual will worship of them that take away from him, his. Thus did
Balaam, Number. 22.12. whom the Lord at first told plainly he should not go with
Balacks servants: but that answer not pleasing him, lo, how he goes between
bark and tr^e: causing them to stay a night longer, verse. 19. What was this
but to make the Lords charge a nose of wax? was it possible the Law of
righteousness could stoop to a law of covetousness? Beware we of this
hypocrisy, least while we dally with God, when we know it, the Lord suffer us
to dash out our own light and lay offenses in our way, and leave us to our
selves, that as he when he would needs go with them, and fetch enchantments
from place to place, yet being dazeled and besotted with his own lust, should
not know himself to be an hipocrite nor be capable of conviction; what is more
terrible then to hear such an hipocrite make himself believe, that if Balack
would give him an house full of gold, he would not go one inch from this
charge? or when he smote, and answered his dumb Ass (in the depth of his
lethargy) yet to say, If thou be displeased I will return? See verse. 29.34. As
we would avoid such a plague, so let us beware of such hypocrisy.

Thirdly, if the Law be the director of our Conversation: let thy Scepter is a
Scepter of righteousness, Heb. 1.8. I desire no obedience over or under,
against or beside thy Laws; I count that no sin which thou never forbaddest,
nor duty which thou never requiredst: but esteem thy sacred will my rule of
righteousness. It is one maine piece of the trade of an honest heart to search
out the Laws of the Lord Jesus, that it might obey. Many teachable hearts who
would feign obey, yet fail in knowledge; and many that have knowledge, fail
in a good heart: the latter is worst, yet makes not the former excusable. The
Jews in the point of the Law were so curious that they knew how many words
were in Moses his books. They wrote these ten words upon parchment
phylacteries (that is preservatives) and pind them to their sleeves, fringes
and frontlets, in reverence. If they did so (who for the most part little
gained thereby, but sinned, with their parchments about them) what should we
do whom the Lord Jesus has made them easy yokes unto, and a light burden? If
they did so, who yet in their so doing, looked for an erroneous justification
by them, and were but mere slaves, loosing their rewards, what should our
zeal be, who know our selves to be free from this bondage, and to obey with
assurance of heaven? Oh! let us not be worse then good common-wealths-men! we
shall see (perhaps) in a great town, some one among forty households buy the
Statutes of the land, and verse them well over, and be able to tell their
neighbors what is law and what not; and these are counted men of good use
among ignorant ones? But how would God esteem us for good subjects if these
Laws of his kingdom were well conned? if (as we teach our children to say
them, so) we our selves understood them. If the Lord would so honor his royal
Law, that he would have the King himself who made laws to their subjects, yet
to be learners of his Laws: and not to suffer his to depart from them in the
government of others: how far greater cause have mean persons to carry it
with them into each part of their own conversation, and to rise up, walk into
the trade of their life, lie down with it? It is reported by Master Fox of one
Crow, a seaman, that being in shipwrake, and having cast all his tacklings
and wares, and five pounds of money into the sea, he kept his new Testament
about his neck, so swimming upon his broken mast, and after four days (all
his company being drowned) yet he was at length by passengers discovered and
taken up all frozen, numbed and steruen; but yet his book he held close to
him. If we in the shipwraks of this world, would keep our souls from wrack,
what course should we take? Surely keep this law to us close, and not suffer
it to depart from us: loose money, wares, ship and all, ere we forgo that,
least we loose our conscience, and disorder our conversation. And in all our
doubtful cases, whither vows, oaths, marriages, dealings with men,
intercourse with God or any difficulty, go to the Law and testimony, Esa. 8.20.
for resolution? If our own skill serve not to find out the will of God, then
let us go to the Priest whose lips should preserve knowledge, and by that rule
proceed? Many will do so, but either they desire to misinforme the Minister
that they may pervert the judgment; or else first vow and then enquire, Pro.
20.25. both which are odious. But let us for ever count the Law as an Oracle
from heaven, being glad that the Lord has found out a way to cast the wavering
scale, and to direct our conversation.

Fourthly, and lastly (because before in the second Article, in them hereunto
in each part of their course, to God, men, themselves; in solitariness,
company, calling, in Sabbaths, subjection to superiors, and common life. Say
thus, Lord, these duties are above me, I can do nothing to purpose; Enable me
to do as thou biddest, and bid what thou will: else the number and weight of
them will tire and clogge me. Thou have eased me, oh Lord, of the burden of
Moses; but still (even in my liberty from Christ) I carry old Adams burden
about me: therefore write these thy Laws in my heart, I beseech thee. If all
that thus speak at Church when the Law is read, praid in faith, how happy were
they? Say thus, and plead, Is it not thy promise Lord? where is it then? where
is the Lord God of Elia? where is an humble heart? where is meekness, love the
distressed, service of the time, providence without covetousness, bounty
without wasting, wisdom without subtilty, simplicity without foolishness,
virtue without extremities? Lord fetch life for me from the fountain of
duties; from him who never failed in duties, never did any without knowledge,
never faulted either in overdoing or under-doing, neither in the pureness of
manner, nor fullness of measure, nor uprightness of aim; who fulfilled all
righteousness, and obeyed upon earth better then Angels or Saints in heaven:
look upon me in my loggish uncheerefull spirit, in my crazie limbs, lame
joints, feeble hands, nay rusty tools: and reviue my heart within, and scour
up my weapons without, That I may delight in the Law in my inner man; and that
I may run thy commandments with cheerfulness. And this also for this third
Article may be sufficient.

The fourth Article.
Q. What is the fourth Article of this third part?

A. That the most wise and loving God foreseeing how manifold and large a
Conversation of duties his Church is to walk in, has sutably ordained helps
and means for her better upholding and growth therein, till she be perfect in
her measure. Read 1 Pet. 1.3. Ephesians. 4.11. Mat. ult: ult. Ioh. 14.26. 1 Cor.
12.4, 5, 6, 7. In which Scriptures we have all the order of this provision of
God, and that in four degrees.

First, In our outward ordinances themselves, as preaching, receiving
Sacraments, etc. Secondly, the instruments or lively Organes serving to
minister therein, as Pastors, Teachers, Ministers of the Gospel. Thirdly,
gifts and administrations vouchsafed unto them for the better dispensing and
officiating those services. Fourthly, the Spirit of God to assist and enable
them to all these performances. So that the Lord is no hard Master to his
people and Church, but tendereth it most fatherly, and is not wanting thereto
in any furniture, which any one member thereof needs for the building of her
up in grace. The Lord is not as Pharaoh, who tyrannously exacted the same tale
of his Brick when the Israelites wanted Straw, as when they had. But rather
deals with us as with his people in their passage from Egypt to Canaan, as he
would bring them by the way of the Wilderness far about and difficult: so he
stuck close to them in their travel. He brought them by his Angel of the
Covenant both into that desert through the Red Sea, as it were their baptism
of imitation: thence he led them as sheep Esa. 63.11. by Moses and Aaron his
guides: he went with his two Pillars (as it were Law and Gospel) before them
day and night: he prepared each place of their pitching a new upon their former
remove, in 42. of their periods (which resembles the going out and in by his
Spirit with his Church) he gave them his Manna from Heaven, and rock gushing
forth miraculously with waters (as his two Sacraments now to us, for so Paul
expounds them) he did in a word spread them a Table (in the Wilderness) of
Quales a great depth about the host (noting the choice dainties of his Table)
and by sundry miraculous courses annexed to his other directions, as
deliverances, crosses, patience (suitable to his ways of government to us) he
did convey them at length into the land of promise. So does he now in
spiritual manner: so that it is not for nothing that Paul does so punctually
apply them, and our Savior touches upon them; See 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Ioh.
6.31. And great cause, for he is the Alpha and Omega, the beginner and
perfecter of our Sanctification. Heb. 12.2. Phil. 2.13. 1 Cor. 6.1.

Q. Is God tied to these absolutely?

A. It is not for us to meddle with his secrets, Deuteronomy. 29.29. revealed things
are for us: what he can do by an extraordinary power, where these helps are
denied, we leave to himself; but in ordinary course we say, that the Lord does
tie himself to his own way of working, that so we know where to have him:
and he does in like sort tie us (in the matter of our calling and building up)
to these means, that we might not vanish in other ways or devises of our
own. And we shall note it, that in some texts the holy Ghost does purposely
join these with the spirit it self, when he speaks of the necessity of
salvation. As in John 3. Except a man be borne again of water, and the spirit,
he cannot enter. And Mark 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved: not excluding all unbaptized ones, nor including water equally with the
spirit, but to awe our spirits to an holy seeking God in and by them, and
deterring of us from contempt, when they may be had.

Q. Does he exclude all other ways to walk by?

A. Not all other ways of profiting; but all other ways of revealing himself.

Q. What other ways does he exclude?

A. All ways of man's devising, whereof Popery is full at this day, by Masses,
Images, Crucifixes, other base and carnal devotions of our own fancy and
spirit, as Anabaptists and sectaries do invent, both Ministers, doctrines,
dreams and Revelations of their own.

Q. What other ways of profiting does he admit?

A. Any secret administrations by his works of providence may be blessed to
the elect, as Gods patience, benefits, crosses, examples, preventions and
intimations to our conscience; but how? with, and under the word, not else:
except they attend and follow the ordinances, there is no wisdom in them,
Esaias 8. because he has made no promise unto them. They are but as Witches
whisperings under the earth, and have no lively voice without the Word; they
are sanctified by a Word, or no way, and so they may be coadjutors to the Word,
and help forward the work: we see little good done till God afflict, yet
crosses are not causes but effects.

Q. But of what nature are they now; are they as those ancient reuealings of
God to his Church in the manner thereof? Or if not, then why?

A. They do wholly differ from them: I mean from those immediate reuealings
of God to the old Fathers and Church, as by the Priests Vrim or Ephod,
Prophets, dreams, visions, fire from heaven, Cloud filling Temple, sacrifices,
or the like miraculous courses, Heb. 1.1.2. Now the Lord only speaks by his
Son: and that by no such immediate way, but mediate only. He auoideth any
courses which tend to any visible, audible, or sensible presenc^, sight, or
voice of God himself, nay abhorres so much as resemblances of shapes which now
are common in Popery, a^ by the shape of an old man, a Rood or a Dove: and now
h^e only treates with his Church at a distance and absence, even as if a
Prince should make love to a Lady, not by any presence or going to her (face to
face) but by spokesmen or Ambassadors: and so win her love, or by love
letters, tokens, and his picture sent to her.

Q. But is not this course to our Detriment?

A. No: for as the way is more obscure to the eye, so is it more open to the
soul by the ministry of the spirit of God. For as those former dealings of
God, although they were fit to convince the senses of ignorant and blind ones,
yet were but weak in the concurrence of the spirit (as appears by that
infinite sottishness and infidelity of such as had them) so now the Lord does
supply the darkness of these by the powerful presence of his grace, as the
phrase imports, Heb. 1.2. But now by his son, that is, there is more of the
Lords revealing in these, then was in all theirs at the best.

Q. What store has he given us of these?

A. He is neither abounding in superfluous ones for a pomp and Popish state,
nor yet yet wanting in necessary ones, as appears by this; he has not given
us any more ways then Covenant and seal: and no more of the former then which
might call us to Christ (as the Law and Gospel) and hold us in him, nor more
seals than two, one CHRIST to be seed and food: none but ordinary for common
and extraordinary for special use: and in a word, as he is spary in clogging,
so yet plentiful in providing variety for us, because he knows we need as
well in private as in public: and being soon weary of either, we had need
of variety to keep us occupied with delight, without weariness.

Q. Are all these equal in excellency?

A. No as the Lord has planted such a light in the Sun as gives light to all
inferior Planets: so has he given to the Ministry of the Word an eminency
above the rest: so that therefrom (as the begetter of faith and grace) does
issue all ability and strength to other ord^nances. The Moon may help a
traveler when the Sun is absent, yet she has but a borrowed light
therefrom. So have other ordinances of the Sacraments, prayer, conference, and
the like, their foyson from the Word preached, which I speak not to diminish
the rest: for all have their special use, and each of them with the word are
above it only: the Sacraments in their sealing property, and private duties in
their, peculi^r familiarity although if comparison be made, the Word preached
has the pre-eminence, Romans 10.14. See Numh. 29. where the chief ordi^ances
are urged.

Q. What uses serve these for?

A. As I said, for the builning up and preparing the soul for every good
work, and the perfecting of sanctification in the fear of the Lord, 1 Cor.
6.1.

Q. I would hear them named and distinguished?

A. It is not the purpose of this view to make common places of any thing:
which as many others have excellently performed, the seven treatises
especially; so to omit them, I desire my reading Auditors to reuiew those
several Scriptures upon which all these have been at large handled: as the
Doctrine of fasting upon Mat. 6.6. of public thanksgiving, upon Lament. 3 23.
of hearing aright, upon Esaias 55.3. of the Sacraments, upon 1 Pet. 3.21. (by the
way) and largely upon 1 Cor. 11.28 of experience upon Lament. 3.27. of
watchfulnes Mat. 24 42. And so of Communion and assembling, Psa. 133. and Heb.
10.25. To give even a little of these Sermons would fill the book which is now
much fuller than I meant, yet for the desire of your good, somewhat of five or
six of the chief, their nature and use in the helping to godliness. And
first to distinguish them: They are either private or public, and both these
sorts are equally, either ordinary or extraordinary. Being we with the latter,
and they are, either fasting or thanksgiving.

Q. What is Fasting?

A. A solemn ordinance of God, attended with rest and abstinence, wherein the
Church lawfully assembled to hear and pray, does power out her soul in
selfe-affliction and supplication with importunity for the turning away of some
great present or imminent sin and danger.

Q. And what is Thank^giuing?

A. A sollemne ordinance of God, wherein the Church lawfully assembled, powers
out her self in praises and thanks for some rare blessings and deliverances.
And let this also be understood of private in both extraordinary kinds, terms
being observed.

Q. And what are the public ordinary?

A. The Word read and preached with prayer and the administration of Baptism
and the Supper.

Q. What are the private ordinary?

A. Prayer, family duties, reading the word, meditation, conference and the
like.

Q. What is the Word preached?

A. It is a public eminent ordinance, wherein the Minister lawfully deputed,
does distinctly and soundly read the Word give the sense, ground the Doctrine,
and conuincingly apply it by instruction, reproof, confutation and exhortation.

Q. What is the Sacrament of Baptism?

A. The former Sacrament of the New Testament wherein by due application of
water to the infant all Christ is sealed up to the soul for regeneration.

Q. What is the Sacrament of the Supper?

A. The second in order, in which by due giving and receiving of bread and
wine, the Lord Jesus is wholly given and taken by the believing soul to be
nourished to eternal life.

Q. What is private Payer?

A. A lifting up of the heart to God in the name Jesus Christ in confession and
supplication for the pardon of sin, the granting of all good things, and
acknowledging of mercies already received.

Q. What is Meditation?

A. A serious reviving of these truths we have heard, or the administrations of
God toward us or others, that both mind and heart being seasoned with the
savor thereof, we may be furthered thereby to duty.

Q. What is Conference?

A. A wise and loving laying together by two or more of such things as concern
the glory of God and our spiritual edifying for mutual information and
quickening: I aim in these descriptions rather at the good then the humor and
conceit of my reader, and that by way of digression: and by these let the rest
be aimed at.

Q. Now that which you most aim at, being to show how all these make for the
groth of the soul in godliness: let me hear you treat of it in particular?

A. I will give a view of some of the chief, and so hasten to end, with use.

First, for that of hearing the Word, be sure thou have true right to the
blessing of it: This Article of the means belongs only to the new creature,
to further him in his course: else the word cannot build thee, except first it
have begot thee. See 1 Pet. 2.3. If ye have tasted how gracious the Lord is,
then come to the Word to grow by it; Else it will poison thee, if thou be
impure, nothing is pure. Ephesians. 4 22.23.. If ye have known the truth, as it is
in Jesus, then come and put off, etc.

Secondly, prize and covet it. Prize it, as that word which has been the seed
of immortality and glory unto thee. It will be no hard work to prize it, if
thou have found it so (in the former) unto thee. For this experience will send
thee to the Word with all reverence and esteem, saying, where shall I find
such treasure as here? It is my life and the food thereof: no Market can afford
that ware that the Word offers if thy heart be not lost in profits and
pleasures, froth and ease, but prizeth above all things the grace of an holy
conversation, surely that word will be precious that directs to it. This made
David think himself in a store house and treasury, when he came to the Word,
because it served to order all his matters. Now if it be precious, it will be
couet^d, hungered after, attended with all heed, yea snatched with violence, as
precious things are, 1 Pet. 2.2. Covet and eagerly tugge at the Word, as the
child at breast. Sleep not, wander not, gaze not, but attend the Gates and
Posts of Wisdom and Understanding, if thou look they should preserve thee.

Thirdly, come from an holy course and practice when thou come to hear:
Come not from thine own course of wrath, world, self: purge these first, 1
Pet. 2.1. and so come. Repent of all old sins, of heauing thy triflings and
dallyings with the Word, thy base mixtures, and come from a good course, and so
the Word shall send thee back to it with more strength and grace than thou
came. Who is he that eats the sauoriest meal? The idle and sluggish one?
No, the strong laborer, toyled and worn with work he feeds hard, and goes to
his work better then he came from it. To him that has shall be given.

Fourthly, deny thy self, and thy own wisdom, partialities, preiudices of
man, of gifts, of ordinances; if the Lord will have the Minister forget all his
one for Gods ends, and for evidence of conviction: how much more thou? Oh! come
without thy self, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; Incline mine
ear to hear and to be meek, teachable, simple, (as the babe) Esaias 55.4. and
remember, if the Lord have given thee all to be thine, Cephas, Paul, Apollo, do
not thou say only one is thine: Set the Lord above man, gifts, and thy own
depth: be a fool that thou may be wise.

Fifthly, believe God: 1. See and ponder Mic. 2.7. the end.
That in his Word this direction to be life is to be found, search the
Scriptures, Job. 6. for therein ye look to have eternal life: let nothing come
between thee and it: and lot upon it as thy portion, for thy use, against thy
lets: Secondly, That he can guide his Word peculiarly to do thee good, and
speak to thy soul, though thou be but one of many hearers. The Lord Jesus
that great Steward of Gods provisions has given in charge to his steward, Luke
12.42. to give thee thy demensum, whether weak or strong, milk or meat,
correction and instruction, for crosses, or blessings: be thy need what it
will, he will find out for every member of his household. Thirdly, mix the
word with faith, believe it, obey it, fear it, see God true in it in all his
promises, charges and threats: and stand ready to catch that part of it which
is thine, as the tradesman stands ready with his mould to catch the molten
metal to frame his vessel: look not at omens wants, but bring thy own,
that when any thing falls from God, thou may catch it up for thy use. Be
humble and tremble at it, Esaias 28.7. and 66.5. weaned from the breasts. Strive
not so to catch at shadows, to bring away al, each pretty speech, that thou
forget to car^y away thy own due, which is ever the best part of the Sermon
for thee. As he said to his sons, I leave you my Kingdom, but look to find
it to you as you are to it, so I say come to the Word with your wants, and mix
it with faith, and it shall be so unto you.

Lastly, depart from hearing as well apaid, well fed: keep your charge, loose
it not in the air of the world, carry it with you into each part of the world,
but let nothing (rob ye of it: and so, musing of it after, applying it to
occasions which are many) and going to it again, with reuiewing that is past,
wait still for more, take forth a new lesson daily, have an ear to hear where
God has a tongue to speak, loose not one under another 2 Ioh. 8. and so
sanctify all with prayer and I see not, but (in spite of Satan) the hearing of
the Word may especially help thee on to an holy course.

Q. Give also some direction about the Sacraments?

A. The former of them is Baptism. To omit all other, take these few notes
about it.

First, as it should teach all that bring their infants to dedicate their
Children to God by prayer, when they bring them to this sceale: so especially
let all others (that solemnly attend the Sacrament there) recall to mind, how
the Lord has been aforehand with them in like sort, even hanging his badge
upon them when they were cut off and knew it not; let them now being hearers of
the Covenant, fetch from it the sealing power of it, to assure their souls
that the Lord means them well: believing that in this Lauer, the Lord Jesus
was conveyed to them not one for a matriculation into visible Communion, but
for effectual Calling them to be the sons and daughters of the Almighty: Let
it by faith carry their fearful weak hearts into the assurance of Gods
Covenant (that pardon and adoption is theirs, union and ingrafting is theirs)
and into the Baptism of the holy Ghost and fire, which is the new Creature,
and the grace thereof.

And secondly, Let them hold the Lord sure to them in this Covenant, by this
seal, as a Corporation would hold their liberties by the King^ Broad Seal.
And when the Devil fills thee with doubts about thy Conversion, the condition
of faith, the believing in the promise, strength to a godly life; fly to thy
Baptism, as thy uttermost assurance; and say, If the Lord were found of an
Infant that could not seek him, and gave me h^^ seal that he would save me,
what will he do now I seek him faithfully? Can he now turn from me, who
first sought me? No, except I despise his cognizance, and run from him. When
thou look upon his Rayne-bow in the Clouds, thou fear no flood any more;
but Baptism is better, 1 Pet. 3.18. it is God's Ark, which by water, saues thee
from perishing by the waters of Gods wrath: rest thy soul in an holy quiet and
secure right and title to all which the Lord gives his Church in Christ, (of
which part 2. Artic. 5.) Remember that the Spirit by faith does as really dip
and drench thy soul with his pure water, Ezekiel. 35.25. to rinse away thy guilt,
blemish, and c^rse of sin, and to quicken thee up to the life of the new
creature in righteousness; as by his Ministers hand he dips thee into, and
t^kes thee out of the water. Know that Gods Ordinances are no vain things: as
Saint James of the word, so I say of this Seal, Does the Scripture speak in
vain? So, does Baptism seal in vain? No; they are Tunnels (by faith) to
power into the soul regeneration.

Touching Infants, what God is able to bless Baptism unto, in them, I say
not: this I say, that as Baptism does them no good by faith, so yet it settles
upon the elect ones, the reals of Christ, Adoption and Holiness, and the fruit
of Election, though neither only (seeing they may dye before it; nor
necessarily, for they may enjoy it after,) but yet really, to so many as, or
when as it seems good to the Lord of it, to use it to that end: And let us
believe that the poorer this Jorden is, in respect of that Popish Ahana and
Pharfar; and the stronger shall be the spirit of God in it, to cause thy flesh
to return as a little childs, that thou may be clean. Mark then, if one
great stop in a Christians conversation stands in distrust about the truth of
his estate in both parts of Gods Covenant, how can that which secureth the
heart of it choose, but be a singular help to faith and godliness.

Q. How is the Supper such an help?

A. Thus; First, the soul knowing that God does sustain her by the same
whereby he begat her, does, upon this Baptism received, with holy confidence
go to the Lord for her due nourishment by, and in him: Saying thus, Oh Lord I
am thine, save me, Psalm. 119.94. Of thee I am, who art made unto me, not only
Righteousness, but Sanctification, with growth and increase in it: I come
therefore to plead my right in all humility. If I had never come to birth, or
to the light, I had so bin at an end; but seeing thou have not denied me the
life of a child of thine, do not leave me to shift, but Lord bring me up at
thy cost, and let me have my portion from thy Table, and my daily bread from
thy hand. And as a good Parent thinks it little to keep the life of his
child, that it sterue not; but he allows all things for comfort, as well as
need, (if he be able) that it may live, and prosper, and grow up and be like
in him, and enjoy what he has to give it when the due time is come; so, O
Lord, deal thou, (much more) with thy servant in Grace, till Glory. My
Baptism I already enjoy in the death and life of Christ, to make methine; O
Lord, let also his Blood, Grace, and Spirit, run in the veins of my soul, to
strengthen me in the inner man with all long-suffering, and well-pleasing, and
ioyfulnesse; all grace of thy new Creature, let it be mine. As thou art in the
Father, so let me be thine; as thou art Gods, let me be Christ's; dwell thou
in me, and let me dwell in thee by thy Spirit, and grow vprighter, stronger,
and holier while I have a day to live. Let thy Sacrament of the Supper nourish
me also to eternal life.

Secondly, Prepare thy soul to this feast, of the mountains, Esaias 25. as often
as thou come, (which must be often, 1 Cor. 11.29, 30.) and come not without
thy feast Apparel. And let this be one Rule unto thee, Do not catch up this
Robe on the sudden; but wear it daily between Sacrament and Sacrament. Thy
father is a King, who can beteeme and maintain thee to wear thy best clothes
each day of the week, and make thy Friday better than the poor man's holiday.
That faith in the Lord Jesus thou walk, or would come with to the Supper,
live by it daily: Christ is the same in the promise, and the Seal. That
Repentance thou walk with to the Sacrament, practice it daily: better is a
Soldier taken out of a Garrison, than new pressed. That broken heart thou
would feign have in the searching and lamenting of thy sins, nourish
daily: he that in a great frost would keep the ye thin, must keep it broken
every day: So thou, thy soule-issues, lest thine heart harden. That desire thou
have after Christ Sacramental, or would nourish in the promise daily,
hunger and thirst each hour after him; else it will not be with thy soul as
with thy body, that many hungry meals will make the next a glutton; but rather
thy emptiness will make thee senseless of it. If thou would not think it
a burden to do thus, Oh how sweet should preparation to the Supper be to
thee, which now is tedious.

Thirdly, Being thus come to the Supper, set thy faith on work; say thus, I
know no Devil in hell can sever Jesus Emanuell, my meat and drink, from these
Elements; but his Word has united them for ever. Why, oh my soul, has the
Lord care of Bread and Wine? Or is it, that by Sacramental union with them (as
sensible) he might unite himself with me spiritually and really in this Seal
of his; that my impatient, worldly, dead, distrustful heart might be purged,
and I filled with the Lord Jesus my Food and Restauratiue in all graces of
Regeneration, and that in a full festival manner. Lord, if I by unbelief do
not, no diuill can divorce thy Christ Sacramental from me.

Fourthly, Seeing him there thine, take him, eat and drink him, and enjoy him;
let thy soul apply him to thee for that thou lackest, and he serves; that
is, to supply thy wants where the hedge is lowest with thee, to pare off thy
superfluous part, to fill up and supply thy decays and voydnesse; I mean such
gifts or graces as concern thee either in thy particular calling, or in thy
general: beware thou do not streighten this feast, bring not thy own brown
bread in thy pocket, scant not his bounty, but take it as he offers it; by so
much the more meet for him to give, by how much more thou unworthy. And how
much this feast seems in thy eye to come short of Popish Masse-Christ, (for
they give him to God, and take none of him from God,) by so much the more let
it be to thee a spiritual Banquet of all refined Wines, and fat things; and if
thou can feed with the Saints, thou needst care for Papists, whom if thou
did sup with, they would rob thee of thy drink, which were to choke thee
with thy meat.

Fifthly, Lest thou should stagger about thy right and part herein, remember
the end of the Sacrament is to rid thee of this fear. For why? it is Gods
seal to the Covenant of his Grace, to make thee his Son and Daughter, and to
sanctify thee: its his uttermost security for any outward one; nay, its his
Instrument of conveying the greatest measure of his Spirit unto thee: Distrust
him not in his chief evidence. As a man when he has sealed up, delivered his
writings, and given up the possession of all to thee, can do no more; so, this
is Gods uttermost evidence, whereby he has made Jesus thy Sanctification, and
grouth in it, as sure as heaven can make it.

Sixthly, Having so received it, live by him, depart as one well satisfied,
enlarge him both for number and measure of grouth to all parts of thy life, all
estates, graces, duties: And in the strength of this Cake and Water, 1 King.
19.6, 7. go to thy journey, even 40 days, till thou come to the Horeb of
heaven; hold this thy comfort by prayer and watching, and till thou come to a
new bait, live upon this, and from one to another, till thou grow to thy
measure. And so doing, who can deny the Supper to be a chief help to
goodness?

Q. May the like be said of the rest, either public, or private; as reading,
singing of Psalms, conference, prayer, meditation? if yea, then show how, and
first of prayer.

A. For Prayer, (in a word to touch it, and gather one or two ears out of an
harvest of matter) let me be conceived to speak of it in each kind, (saving due
respects) for breuity sake: First then, Retain this heavenly ordinance of God
in that due esteem which the Lord has graced it with; for all ends both of
humiliation and supplication. The Lord and thy soul (by experience) do know
it to be the key of all the coffers o^ God, and that High Priests living way,
made by the blood of Christ, whereby thou have access daily, yesterday, to
day, and ever, (the oftener the welcomer) to the holy of Holies, to the seat of
Mercy. Maintain and hold this right and Title of thine. Think not that this
Spirit of Grace and Supplication is spent, though thou see not God so clearly
in it for all ends, as thou desire; yet give it not over: thy sin has
bound thee in cheynes, but Prayer is not bound; rather it binds the Lord by
promise to thee. The ear of God is not heavy, that he should not hear: He
is not as a man, that he should be distracted by multitude of praying
Suppliants at once? a thousand to him are as one, and one as a thousand. Beware
of Atheism in this kind.

Secondly, Go in the Lord Jesus by a promise, having thy wants in a
readiness, and thy faith on wing: let not thy course in praying issue from a
formal platform (though I judge not any man for reading a prayer) but a
lively feeling, and humble pinching of soul for thy Necessities.

Thirdly, shake off all extremities of a corrupt heart, by faith, which must
hold thine eye fixed upon thy Mediator (by his Spirit upholding thy faintness,
and groaning within thee) against all thy presumptions, commonnesse, dullness,
deadness, coldness, and beseech the Lord to stir thee up to pray as he
shall suggest unto thee, by the present occasion (well digested) either for the
Church, others, or thy self. Tie thy self to no punctualnesse; but (as the
holy men in Scriptures have done) so let confession sometimes go before, or
follow prayer; and either of both, thanksgiving. Come not to the Lord with
either an heart moyling and lowering with discontent, without faith; or bold and
ventrous without humiliation; but let both have their due weight. If thou
would be heavenly in prayer, first abase thy self as a worm, dust and
ashes, yea (as Master Bradford) hell and the sinke-hole, before the Lord who is
heaven and holiness: if the Lord have any special draught for thy net, he
will put thee out of conceit with thy own Art, and thy self, as Peter was
when he had toiled all night, and caught nothing. Emptiness is the only
raiser of our minds in prayer: Oh! how hard is it to get? and then secondly, by
faith, be quickened to wait for (...) ^nswer; these two will fill thee with
heavenly affections, and rid thee of thine own inventions, manner, and ends.

Fourthly, Add these meet qualities of Prayer; viz. fervent importunity, as
one whom God cannot be rid of, till thou speed: and frequency, as having sped
well already. If in prayer thou find little stirring, know it is not because
Prayer is not Gods Ordinance, but he would try whether form, and the work
done, be not above spirit and faith in thee: if they be not, persist and go
against the edge of thy own deadness, resting in that measure gladly which
the Lord sees best; for in this case thou will pray oftnest, as 2 Cor. 12.10.

Fifthly, (and above all) come not to pray with any tainted known sin: I say
not only gross, but even secret and close, through a lazy heart loath to cast
them off; or a loose heart, loving them better than the things thou prayest
for; lest the Lord justly leave thee to be wearisome to him and thy self. Cast
out thy wrath, and earth, and disdain, and censures, and uncharitableness;
yea, let thy praying awe thee against them ere thou pray, that it may arm thee
when thou have done. Til prayer become thy familiar friend, and bring thee into
acquaintance with God, for a supply of wants, pardon of daily sins, help for
all duties of conversation. And so looking up to thine Advocate for a covering
of thy weakness, this duty shall be a special help to godliness unto thee.
Touching the Lords Prayer, I send my Reader to the special Treatises thereof.

Q. Add somewhat of meditation, and leave the rest.

A. Touching this Ordinance, I may call it the highway to all good
conversation: yea, I may say, it is as the smoke of the sacrifice, in which the
Angel, Judge. 13.20. went up to heaven in: I set it not above prayer, but
magnify it, to set an edge upon people, who will not know it. And surely, if
that be an help to God, which both takes away lets, and both in the act and
effects of it, is so admirable, judge what an help meditation is. Tell me
then, first, what are the chief lets to grace (in them who (otherwise) want
not knowledge;) Surely, either giddiness of mind, or vnsavourinesse of spirit:
The former like a sieve out of the water, loses all it gets, suffers nothing,
either truths heard, or works seen, to abide long in the heart. But
Meditation settles them in the Spirit, that they leake not out, Heb. 2.1. Thus
the life of a thousand Sermons of mercies and occasions is preserved. In stead
of the latter, it seasons the heart with the sap, the life, the savor of good
things. They are not heaps upon heaps, leaving us a thirst, but we drink of
them, digest them, and make our souls merry with them: Even as an envious man
so long chewes the cud of his malice in his bed, till he have het his heart,
and devised revenge; so is meditation a real grace (on the contrary) and
whetteth upon the promises and works of God, till it be fired with the love of
them.

Again, it makes the meaning, view, scope, and order both of particular
doctrines, and the whole frame of Religion to become our own.

And lastly, we come hereby to the ease of practice; the fruit hereof,
Experience; so that if once we have found crosses to do us good, we fear not
when new ones approach: if we have felt the gain of a Sabbath, we get a
delight therein: in a word, whatsoever is easy, it becomes sweet: and
therefore if this be worth somewhat to find the yoke of God easy, and his
burden light, (as to say the truth, it is the vpshot of goodness) well may
we then say, Meditation is a divine help to a good course. Oh! how its to be
lamented that men know it not? they get no matter to chew upon: they separate
not themselves to it, (thinking they may meditate while they ^e at work) they
do not curb their wild and wandering hearts from other objects, and so this
piece of Gods Worship is irksome unto them. Thus much for a taste of some of
the private.

Q. But are the extraordinary helps so too?

A. There need be the less question of that, because as their nature is more
solemn, so is their use, if they be attended accordingly. And first that of
Fasting. Of which I say this, that if we esteem that receipt above all which
does cure a disease, that no other medicine could, then surely fasting deserves
account. Our Savior tells us, This kind of Devils goes not out, Mar. 9.29.
save by fasting and prayer; that is, all the ordinances of God are effectual,
but this above all, for this end. Wherefore (briefly) whither we bring the
Churches, or our own cases, either sins or sorrows before the Lord to be
done away.

Let us first, arm our selves to the chief work, which is soule-affliction.
Let us consider, if we were pined with necessity of abstinence from meat and
drink for any time, what a fearful anguish would it bring us unto? and is
not (think we) sin that deserves it of more afflicting vexing nature? Oh!
if we could prevail with God to feel this sting in kind, how sweet should a
fast be? and how saplesse is it, when we can scarce in a whole day feel one
dart of sin or wrath to pierce us? Let us aim at it then, and much more that
sin do humble us then any sorrow whatsoever. Let us first Mic. 7.9. bear
the indignation of the Lord for our sin; and for the ^est, let God alone to
plead our cause: for what should it help us to be rid of all other enemies,
while our own pride, self-love, hypocrisy vainglory, worldliness, and
hardness of heart still glow at our hearts? Therefore as poor Vriah was faint
to be set in the forefront before his fellows: so let us set these before all
enemies; that if any dart, any strength from heaven be sent us, these may have
the first handsell thereof; for the strength of all our sorrows and enemies
lies in our weakness: therefore let us so lie under the affliction and
confusion of these, that the Lord may bow his heart to be afflicted in all our
sorrows: and then he will soon bow the heavens and melt our calamities away:
although they seem as mountains yet they shall flow down at his presence. Esa.
64.1. yet let us not only do thus: remember that fasting is also a Sabbath of
reconciliation: therefore let the Lord Jesus his Redemption be looked at by
faith, and keep us from base bondage and the fear of hipocrites. Let us
believe that upon one cross he both satisfied for our sins, and conquered
all enemies: and therefore in his merit let us confidently approach to the
throne of grace for pardon of the one, and deliverance from the other.

Secondly, apply ourselves to all the supports of a fast, which the Lord has
granted to keep us from deadness and weariness, the Word I mean fitted to
our occasions, and the like, yet as serving to the maine of humiliation and
confidence. Adore we the Lord in his own strong way and our utter nothing. Let
us bless him, that we be freed from those Popish dumb Pageants (who beside
the outward abstinence) want all furniture of fasters.

Thirdly, consider that the Scripture in no one thing affords us greater
consolation and hope than in this: for there is scarce one example of a fast,
which wants the experience of good success, yea extraordinary like it self,
as in Esters, Nehemiahs and Ezraes Israel's against Benjamin, the Churches, Act
12. does appear. Nay let our own experience hearten us: when ever did we meet
a new without proof of some blessing upon the former public humiliation?

Fourthly, and considering it must be no small grace, either of mourning or
faith which must prevail against those holds either without or within which we
pray against; let us know that our locks had need be well grown (with
Sampsons) for such a purpose. Therefore let none dare to compass this Altar
with vnpreparednesse of heart. And so, looking to the Lord Jesus for covering
us, and accepting us, let us desire some sign of mercy, and consuming of our
Sacrifice, that we depart with comfort and hope to have God to set his fiat to
our suites. And so shall we find fasting a special help to grace.

Q. Conclude with Thanksgiving: is that an help alse?

A. Yea verily, if first, we come full of the matter of our thanks, (for so
are all the thanksgiuings of this kind (which the Holy Ghost records) Moses
and Miriams, Judge. 5. Exodus 15.
Deborahs, David's, and the rest. And therefore to carry a living memorial and
catalogue of the chief public ones (of which a reverend Writer of our Church
has deserved well) and so the like brief of our own, were most needful.
Remember the great providence of settling the Gospel and banishing Popery, and
since that, the strange miraculous deliverances not once or twice from foreign
enemies, home judgments; In secret record our own: our first calling, since
that, our many staggers and reuolts: his renewed mercies by occasion, in our
changes of estate, in our streights in deep desertions, when we could no more
sustain our selves, then if we had hung in the air; how he has ever been our
portion when friends have forsaken us unthankfully, and will be so still: our
blessings above many gifts of mind, condition and calling, graces of soul,
how God kept us from forsaking his Covenant in our deepest temptations of Satan
and enemies.

Secondly, Be enlarged accordingly with due simpathy both for the Church and
thy self, rejoicing with her with and for whom thou have often mourned, and
preferring her peace to thy chief joy. Affection is the fire to the Sacrifice,
and know that Psalm. 50. ult. he that prayseth God honoreth him: and the ascent
of praises shall be the descent of blessings, and happy is he who may maintain
this intercourse with God for the enlarging of him to more grace. And so much
of the whole doctrine of the means.

Q. Is there any use to be made hereof?

A. Yes, and first seeing the chain of these holy helps is so precious and
profitable to a godly life; first, we confute all break the linkes thereof;
and vnsauorily make comparisons that between one and other, to the overthrow
of all. Some between preaching and prayer: some between Word and Sacraments,
as the Papists do. How is the Sacrament of the Altar magnifyed with them? and
how are all other vilified thereby? whereas we do hold that they have a sweet
harmony, and neither without other to be set up: yea, we are to confess, that
each of them with the other, is better than other; neither sundred from other,
Covenant from Seal, Seal from it, private from public, are profitable. Let
each one have his precedence, and his praise: How should any be wanted, when
no one has the peculiar use of the other, and yet all will supply each others
defect. Let the solemness of the public, the familiarity of the private, and
the need of all, affect us with exceeding thankfulness; especially for our
liberty in the use thereof, which Popery had debarred us of in each kind by a
strange tongue of Scripture, a Sacrifice for a Sacrament; yea, a confusion of
many for a few. And secondly, all such as carry away the honor from the
Ordainer, to the Ordinance, by fearful sacrilege; ascribing to the bare words
of Scriptures, (as the Gospel of Saint John) a coniuring power to exorcize
Devils, and to the mere opus operatum of Sacraments (the mass especially) as
great power as to Christ; putting the pix-bread into dead men's mouths: thus
falling in love with the means, and renouncing faith to set up God above them;
whereby the true power of all Religion is turned into a mere Idol; God justly
blasting that which opposes his glory.

Secondly, how precious and adored should the Wisdom of our God be, in
appointing so many, and neither more of these, nor less than the need of his
Church required: neither pampering nor steruing them, but nourishing them: Oh,
I say, how should these lift us up to God? As once an holy man riding by the
Meddowes in the Spring, seeing and smelling such variety of flowers, said, Oh
sweet Creatures; but how sweet then is your Creator? If this footstool, be
so set forth, what is his Throne? So let us say, Oh sweet Ordinances, oh
beautiful Assemblies, oh useful varieties, but then how sweet is your
Ordainer! Could we thus meditate hereof (for even the works of God deserve it,
how much more these?) how should that harmony which rises out of them, ravish
us? What compound of odours, what consort of Music should be like them? Who
should keep us from them? or what luster of a Princes Treasure and Wardrobe,
or sight of exquisit beauties should draw from us those words which David upon
this Meditation uttered, Psalm. 84.1. Oh how amiable are thy Tab^rnacles? If we
be held from them, how should our souls mourn for them, till the Lord gather
us to them, Zephan. 3.18. and how should our spirits and flesh both together,
long for them, desiring the Lord to restore them to us with more power, and us
to them with more thanks than ever. Nay, how ought this wisdom of God to teach
us holy wisedeme to discern and make use of each flower in this garden of
Ordinances? How lamentable is it, that to this day most of us are so blind in
this point? Who sees the use which the Law serves for apart from the Gospel;
to be as a needle to draw the thread after it: Who blesses God for the several
power of the Word, converting and building up the soul? Who perceiues the
difference of Baptism the Seed, and the Supper the food of the Church; or
makes use of both in their diverse temptations? Who knows (with the Be) how
to fly to each of these flowers for the virtue of every one? Who goes to
singing of Psalms when he is merry; or to pray, when afflicted; or to fasting
in his streights, or against such Devils as no other will expel? Oh how were
this wisdom to be desired, that seeing these manifold graces, we might in
nothing be wanting? So we sing or read, we do the work, and all salues serve
for one sore: we see not but reading may convert as well as preaching, and so
any thing be walking, what care we? Not to speak of those phantasticke
spirits, who forsaking Gods Ordinances, blessed by his month, run into their
own corners to compass themselves with the sparks of their own fancies and
revelations: Let such know, there is no wisdom in them, Esaias 8.

Thirdly, let this be exhortation to all believers: first, to use; secondly,
to live by faith in the use of the means. First, Phil. 3.11. we may attain
our desire: not knowing in what box our chief health consists, let not one
eclipse and stain the other: affect not private to exclude public; honor not
public, to weaken the esteem of private; extraordinary, to despise ordinary;
or ordinary to exclude them. These are the usual humors of men: if they take a
toy in their head, no other Ordinances shall be in price, save such as they
list. Let not the difficulty of meditation of hasting dismay thee from it; but
be afraid that any one of Gods Ordinances should be a stranger to thee. Reject
none, as thou would be sorry to want the use of any: the contempt of any,
will accurse all; because the charge equally concerns all. And for the neglect
of the public, (which is a common sin with most) to hunker at home, when the
Word or Sacrament might be enjoyed: I say, it is an ill mark of a thriuing
Christian: Grace is as fire, it must have fuel, else it vanishes. No means,
no grace: little use of them, little grace; great use of them (as before
qualified) great grace. I will speak boldly, The Lord (in this case) sells
grace for labor, to an honest heart. If thy conversation be so poor, and thou
so barren in the use of all means, standing up to the chinne: what would
thou prove, if thou should quite neglect them? Even stink where thou go.
Set not any Ordinance above God; but tempt not God in refusing, or scant using
of any: Look not to grow alone without Word and Sacraments.

And lastly (to remember my promise in the point of the life of faith in the
second Article,) let this teach us to live by faith in the use of his
Ordinances: I have already urged it in every of the particulars almost,
Fasting, Hearing, Sacraments, etc. This in general I add, Therefore the Lord
has not trusted us with outward shows and glory of the world, but with mean
and foolish Ordinances to the eye of man; that our senses might not pore upon
the face of things, but diue into the substance, and fly above them, to him
that made them, and filled them with Spirit and Life, that we might suck it
out by a promise. As once an old man being asked if he grew in goodness,
said, Yea doubtless, I believe it to be so, for God has said it: So, let the
Ordinances be no object of our sense, but of faith: and let us say, Lord, I
believe thy Word can help me to bear my crosses, thy Sacraments will leave
me better than I came to them; strengthen me in the inner man, not because I
feel it as I would, but because thou have said it. Therefore by faith, let us
cry out as the Church in the Canticles, Arise, O North Wind, and blow upon
these flowers and spices, that they may come into my nostrils; Else thou may
be in the midst of the Garden, and savor nothing: only that breath which put
in this smell into them, can draw it forth again and let it in to thee, that
so thou may say, The word which others heard as the sound of many waters,
has been the savor of life to me, to breed me to a lively hope. Not the
words uttered, not the bare Elements, but the promise belonging to both, is the
object of my soul: He that says, I will be in the midst of two or three,
Mat. 18.20. and Mica 2.7. My Spirit is not straightened, but my Word is good to
them that walk uprightly: The Word is pure as the Lord himself; yea, piercing
the soul, etc. is still able to make good his promise: And so I may say of all
promises made to the Sacraments, My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is
drink indeed; and so of the rest: therefore I conclude the whole Article thus;
All these public and private helps serve to further and ripen a believer in
an holy conversation; all and every one of them. But if I be asked, Do thou
find each part of thy Conversation to be helped, and thy self bettered by
each of them; Answer thus, I am poor in grace, and dead-hearted, but yet for
all that, I believe it to be so, for God has said it. And this for the fourth
Article, and his branches be spoken.

The fifth Article.
Q. What is the fifth Article of this third part?

A. That the New Creatures whole life within and without is beset with manifold
lets and encombrances which do threaten to set him back and hinder him in the
course of Christianity. See Texts, Heb. 12.1. Cast off every weight and clogge.
1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Ioh. 2.16. As it was with Christ, after his baptism and
annoynting, instantly Satan set upon him, Mat. 4.1. So here, formerly we have
set forth the Church of Christ as his Spouse in all her abiliments and costly
Bride-attire, that she may be amiable in her Bridegroomes eye: we have
described her by all the Jewels which Christ has sent her as Love tokens, by
all her outward Ordinances, and all her inward privileges on the right hand,
and the left, within and without, to bring her to heaven: now we change her
habit, and bring her in with the mourning weed of her Widdow-hood, and in her
Soldiers or Travelers habit, with her Trewell in one hand, the Sword in her
other; as the bed of sweet violets beset with nettles; the Lillies and Roses,
with thorns. The best part we have seen (or shall in Article 6) now we must
behold her at her worst, that we may know it beforehand, and if we will be
new creatures, then resolve upon it; the next news will be lets, enemies,
shreud turns, and yet the Rose is the Rose still for all these. And as it was
with the Israelites, the rebellion of their spirit made a journey of forty
days, to be of forty years; The Lord would not carry them to that good land
with ease, through the Philistims land, but the Wilderness, full of wild
beasts, hunger, thirst, toil and travel: So is it here, our vnrenued part
causes much woe to us, and fills our life with sorrow; which though our good God
means to do us good by at length, and to make us partakers of his
righteousness, and more than Conquerours; yet the whilst, a yoke will be a
yoke and pinch, and lets will be lets, and the devil like to himself: there
is no remedy of it; the remedy is in our being armed against them; and the
members of the Militant Church.

Q. But may not this seem to trench upon the Providence of our God, and the
merit of Christ? might not he even here quit us of all these, and set us in a
state of freedom?

A. We say not that in all these he leaves us as Orfans; no, he diets us,
physics us, and exercises his graces in us, and at length will deal by us as
by Job, Job 14.18.
whom indeed he was content Satan should smite, but his aim was to make his
last days better than his best. This Sunshine of crosses, and army of lets
and enemies may sullie her face, and eclipse her beauty, but never divorce her
from her husband: temptations and afflictions are lets, but they are not the
loss of Gods favor, grace or heaven, but make for our victory and Gods glory,
2 Thessal 1.6.

And for the objection, I answer, The Lord cannot be dishonored in the way
of his own honor. As for us, we are not capable of any other state here. For
first, our abode here in an earthly Paradise is turned by the bounty of God to
an heavenly abode with God: and therefore we are not to expect our journey
should be like our home: and our seafaring as our haven. Besides what
derogation were this to our head? that he, Act. 1. must suffer first and so
enter into his glory, and we his members, put off our harness? surely if he
(while he was here) was burdened with all our sins and sorrows, enemies and
opposition; till his death (only by this way, Phil. 2. he was exalted far
above all Angels) why should we here as pilgrims, look for better measure? It
suffiseth that our full redemption in heaven shall pay for all.

Q. Are all these lets equally threatening hurt to us?

A. No, for the chief of all these are our own lets within us: we carry about
us our own bane of souls, as in our bodies, of death. The lets without us are
nothing to those within us: that corruption of our own, is the fuel to all
other fire, both the Devils and the Worlds: but for this; they could not come
at us, as our Savior said, The Prince of this World comes, but he has found
nothing in me. We shall find them all to be lets and that great: howbeit
the chief enemy is from within us.

Q. Of how many sorts are these lets?

A. Of three sorts, and they are: Sin, Satan, and the World.

Q. In how many respects is sin a let unto us.

A. Two ways, either in respect of it self, or in respect of the penalties
thereof.

Q. How in it self?

A. Either in respect of our native corruption, or of our actual lusts within,
and actual evils without.

Q. How is our sin in it self a let?

A. First, in our corrupt unrenewed nature abiding still. That is a woeful
clogge and back-byas retarding our motion to heaven and slowing of our race,
Heb. 12.1. read it. Also a most tedious contrariety in us and perpetual enemy,
Gal. 5.17. lusts against the spirit, as a continual dropping. In the former
respect I might liken it to that unnatural setting of the Sun ten degrees
back: in the second, to that Peninna, 1 Samuel 1.7. which vexed Hanna day by
day, and vpbrayded her as her enemy, or those daughters of Heth to Rebecca,
that were eye fores that she could never be quiet for them, her life was made
wearisome to her. Moreover, this causes a most bitter mixture, with the good
graces of the Spirit darkening, blemishing them, yea defiling them: as Solomon,
Eccles. 10.1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to stink: so
this causes grace to be unsavory. One pang of pride how does it distaste much
grace, how much more then that spirit in us which lusts to no other. Iam.
4.3.4. And to conclude, as the furnace sends out infinite sparkles: so does
this corruption minister fuel to all our course: what woeful deadness,
distemper, distaste, weariness, loggishnesse does it bring upon our course? how
does it cast wildfire into the thoughts and affections, and the spirit of a
man; so that this sin is not only a let and away, but a let in the nature of
a principle.

Q. How else?

A. In respect of our inward actual lusts and passions; which as Saint James
says, fight in our members, Iam. 4. but as Peter adds, sight against our
souls? These, whither ye look upon Saint John's description, 1 Epist. 2.16.
The lust of the heart, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, (meaning the
world of lust within us, concupiscence after profit, intemperance by pleasures,
sensuality by glory of the world) or whither Saviors, Matthew. 15 19. or Paul's,
Gal. 5.19. making an induction of particulars, pride, ease, couetuousnesse, an
evil eye, malice and revenge, uncleanness, etc. I say these lusts do snib
and kill the groth of goodness in the soul, and ouerdrip the grace of God as
a sour shadow and the bows of a Walnut tree do keep under some tender
plant: or as the blasting of the East wind, the blossoms,

Q. How thirdly?

A. In the actual breakings out in open offenses and excesses: for first, how
do such wast and devour the conscience? how do they defile the soul as
nasty creatures do their litter? what horror, what woe, repentance, complaints
do they cause? yea besides vexations and troubles here, what streights do
they bring a man unto, by snaring him that being once deluded, a man is as
Sampson hampered with his mistress, unable to get out of her fingers?

Q. How does sin let and annoy by her penalties?

A. She brings God against her both by spiritual disertions and outward
crosses: both being stinging things to grace and to our nature. For the first,
when our will has driven God away from us (as from Sampson) or covered his
face from us, that we walk not with that peace, joy and cheer we did before;
areas a bone out of joint, or a man lost in a wood, all woe and wan in our
spirit, yea, perhaps besotted all the while, as David was a whole years space,
what a let is this? And so when this also changes all our course of comfort
into heaviness, brings God against us in our bodies estates, posterity,
successes, as David after his adultery: or takes away spirit from our selves
that our counsel is turned into foolishness, and we bring sorrow upon our
selves; or justly arm men and enemies to make our lives wearisome to us: how
just is i^ that God should encomber us thus, to show what an heavy burden it is
to his Majesty.

Q. And what is the second let of a Believer from godliness?

A. That arch old enemy Satan: who although he could not do us hurr but by our
sin, yet by that tunnell lets in a woeful deal of his own into us, worse
then our own, enflaming and exasperating sin in us by the adding of his own
malice to our sin, as more waters make the flood greater.

Q. Many think we do Satan wrong herein, and think all our hurt is from our
selves: what think you of it?

A. I say they are very charitable and just toward him that will not be so
harmless to them: they allege Iam. 1. Let no man say when he is tempted,
etc. but there tempting is not so ascribed to our concupiscence that it is
denied of Satan, but only removed from God. I grant indeed we are Devils to
our selves: but to deny also Satan to be one too, were pride and security, yea
a spirit of Satan in us, to ly against the Scriptures which tell us, he was a
liar from the beginning, and so abides; and it is his element to be so, can be
no otherwise, yea should not be, except malicious, besides those texts, 2 Cor.
11.3. Least as he beguiled Eve, etc. and 1 Pet. 3.8. Your adversary the Devil
as a roaring Lion, etc. and Job 1.7. From compassing the earth and walking in
it: with a hundred more.

Q. But this may seem to dishonor God?

A. No; neither in point of justice, nor providence. Not the first, for it is
just with God that sin should practice it self till that be out of measure
sinful, and so Satan deceive, and sinners be deceived, for the mutual
misery. Nor the latter, for the most holy God well knows out of this deadly
poison of the bad wills of Satan and men, to work forth his own will to his
glory: but without leave, he can do nothing.

Q. But how should Satan tempt us?

A. Either by an external way of persuading by the object of evil very aptly
fitted and suited to our spirit (the frame whereof he knows by our carriage) or
else by an insinuation of his subtle and spiritual wicked self into the
spirits of man either the spirits of senses, or fancies (as the temptations
lie) and so to the reasonable part. Even as the plague savor, enters into the
natural and vital spirits to destroy nature. Howsoever it be, so it is: let
us rather learn to resist him, then to question a thing out of question.

Q. But if the Devil tempt and sin tempt too, how shall we know a difference?

A. There is use I grant of this for some causes, especially for stay to the
minds of such as are foully tempted, yet I could desire that many who ask this
question, would rather strive against the thing it self, then descant about the
cause. And first I say temptation may well and commonly is mixed of both Satan
and corruption. But for answer briefly thus. In five different properties I
would discern these two. First, by the grosenesse. Secondly, the
irkesomenesse. Thirdly, the pertinacy and length. Fourthly, the impetuousnesse
and violence of them: Fifthly, The insultation. The temptations from our selves
do not commonly resemble these.

First, By grossness, I mean foulness and odious measure of sinfulness in
the temptation. Corrupt nature is not so foully wicked as Satan; therefore
temptations of this rank, as to Atheism, to deny the Scriptures, not to rest
in lusts natural, but to proceed to foul, unnatural, and outrageous, has
more of Satan than corruption.

Secondly, By the irkesomenesse, I mean when temptations lie quite out of the
tract and course of our ordinary inclinations and bents; as when a man
exceedingly addicted to be chaste, or liberal, or confident in God, shall be
buffeted with irksome obi^cts of uncleanness, or of baseness, or of distrust
of providence, whereof no reason appears out of particular nature. These
savor of Satan; as when Paul, 2 Cor. 12. always well occupied, finds an
irksome prick in the flesh, to be unapt to any good, praying or preaching,
(for so I think God cured and pre^ented pride by eclipsing gifts and spirit.)

The third is pertinacy and length. Corruption is more finite, and sooner
weary, than Satan who is more boundless and full: therefore as the property of
a Fly is to light upon a galled plat, as often as it is beaten off; so the Devil
(that god of Flies) does importunely, and vnweariedly tire and dog the soul
with his temptations, hoping to do that by tediousness which he cannot by
malice: So that to be never rid of a temptation is a third mark of Satan.

Fourthly, The violence of them; that is, when he so fires his darts, that they
come impetuously as a whirlwind, so sudden and boisterous, that there is no
time to resist; but they come as if they were unanswerable, and the soul must
yield, no remedy. Corruption, commonly, is more leisurely, and more graduall,
abhorring violence and hidiousnesse, as we in some that have in their heat
ravished Children, and others who devour themselves.

Fifthly, The insulting and fury of temptation which follows the fourth; that
it comes with a trampling of the soul under feet with a disdain, as past all
resistance. If these marks be in our temptations, we may by the messengers
knocking, guess the Masters feet not to be far behind. Oh what should such
a point teach but this, what we are, if God leave us? how cursed a spirit, and
sky of evil we carry within us? and therefore as to be comforted that they are
not wholly our own; so yet to beg of the Lord, mercy to stop the rage of our
enemy, who if he be let alone, is cruelty it self.

Q. Well, come to the temptations themselves; how many things consider we in
them?

A. These two: The properties of the Tempter, and the substance of the
Temptations.

Q. What are these properties?

A. These; First, Malice ever sets him on work against the body and soul of
the Creature. Secondly, Vigilance and attention always do assist his
Temptations. Thirdly, Mischief and woe is ever in the end thereof, to pull the
soul from union and Communion with God. Fourthly, the Method and manner of his
tempting, which is to be weighed according to the parties tempted. If weak
and unable to resist, he treads down the low hedge, never troubling himself
further needlessly. And thus he is himself a Lion; as Act. 16 27. the Iaylor
being under terror, easily surprised, and as if the prisoners fled (for so he
thought) would have desperately stabd himself. The Devil behind him, tells
him, As good so as be executed; but by this he would have prevented his
conversion. But if he find other objects, and strength of grace to resist
sin as sin, he goes another way to work, to wit, by devices and cunning,
as Ephesians. 4.14. -- As, first, to anticipate the counsel of the heart in
preventing sin, by the suddenness of iniection. Thus, Mat. 4. in the
twinkling of an eye he had darted in his glorious bait of honor into our
Savior. Secondly, to assault judgment and conscience both at once, in
blinding the one, and in binding the other: Thus he blinded Eve in that speech,
God knows that your eyes shall be open, and ye made as Gods. What was this,
save to make obedience base, and sin sweet? that is, In obeying, ye shall but
serve the envy of an enemy. And your eating were to make ye better. So he did
bleare David's eye in Mephibosheths case, knowing that else he had never
prevailed: by Ziba, therefore, he presenting him as a Traitor, makes David say,
Why tellest thou me of thy matters, 2 Samuel 19.

Secondly, by his binding the will in point of her resistance; and that by the
excessive sweet of the bait. Thus to David in Bathsheba: Oh! Who would think a
woman so goodly, so alluring, to be dangerous? A companion so fine spoken and
complementall, to be so sinful! This bears all down. Sampson went to see
her who was precious in his eyes, that bleared him. Thirdly, by putting on the
person of one unsuspected; as sometime pursuers of a man will praise him to get
others to betray him: and Ia^l to deceive Sisera, brought him Cream in a
lordly dish. And thus he becomes an Angel of light, as holy as a Preacher.
Thus he tempts Christ to leap down, and to make stones bread, out of a godly
end (forsooth) that Gods power might be glorified in a miracle. Thus he tempts
good men, you are well known to keep good conscience, to do such or such a
thing for so good an end; oh, who will see it? Avoid Devil, God needs not my
sin to honor himself; I sin too much vnavoydably, I need not add sin
to sin.

Q. But when he knows he cannot finally prevail, it seems foolish for him to
tempt?

A. Yea: If his wisdom were from above; but it is earthly, sensual and
divellish: Therefore he goes against the edge of his wisdom, even as his
instruments do, defiling themselves in the things they know. If ever he knew
any, he knew our Savior to be out of gunshot; yet out of his fullness of
malice, he assaulted him bitterly. If he cannot keep the people of God from
heaven, yet let it avail as it may, he will see if he can make them halt to
heaven. And yet I may add, that he hopes well to get many to himself, who as
yet some far enough off; his hopes are impudent, Mat. 12.44. he says, I
will return, and bring seven spirits worse, etc. He knows not but he may do
so with any; but to be sure, he will not fail to try.

Q. Proceed to the temptations themselves?

A. These concern the godly (for of the other I speak not here, but in the
first part,) since that these are Temptors both to themselves and to others;
and they are ruled by the Prince of the air, who rules in all the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. and leads them as the Ox to the slaughter, out of their
fat pastures, and according to his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. Therefore, (to return)
these concern them either in the point of their calling to be the Lords; or in
point of their estate being called.

Q. In how many respects about their first Calling?

A. Either in Gods preventing call, or his assisting, or his perfecting.
Touching his preventing, thus: No sooner does he see any sinner make toward
the voice of God, to look into his old course, or hearken after a new; but
presently he sets upon them even in their entrance. First, By presenting old
sins, with all their circumstances, order of them, number, haynousnesse,
continuance, long contempt, etc. to dismay them from possibiltty of conversion.
If they answer him, they had more need to seek mercy, he tells them, Its too
late, God will not take the leauings, they should have given him their best
strength, courage, time, etc. Or, he assaults them with their weakness of
capacity, or memory, gifts, or parts, that they shall never compass such great
things; Learned Wise men are too little for them. Or he discourages them with
their husbands ill will, the loss of fathers love, and land; the worlds
disdain, the reproach of their old companions, yea, perhaps, brethren and
kindred: Or, that the things they must forgo both in liberties and lusts, are
more than they can bear: that they shall never endure the trouble of
Repentance, and change of heart, or at least they will be of another mind when
charge and trouble comes, and shall never persevere to the end. But, O Satan,
avaunt: The Lord has prevented me, and drawn me out of darkness: shall he
suffer me to perish in light? No; as thy first assaults, so his grace will be
most eager in my entrance to hold me out of thy claws, and from reuolting.

Q. How tempts he in the Assisting grace?

A. Especially in the first works of the Law (which some refer to the
former,) he corrupts the mind and spirit both in the enlightening part, and
the terrifying. The former he abuses to multiply the fearful view of sin:
The latter, to make terror intolerable. He tempts to be weary of this
Discipline; tells them, some good people never had terror; that it will spoil
their natures, (and so it will,) that they were best to put it by, for
Mellancholly, and these Preachers will kill them: let them be merry, and sport
themselves with pleasures, with ease and liberty, and then their senses will be
fresher, themselves fitter for good. Now they are but dulled, and the Preacher
will cast down ten, ere comfort one; and therefore leave off with small
trouble rather than great: and, terror is not repentance neither, it can do no
good, but kill. And when many are thus snared, they destroy themselves by
violence, despairing of any help. But if they grow to some hope by the
Gospel, (and not to make their hell another heaven,) then he tempts them
about the condition of the Promise, either for kind or measure, that they
never saw that sweetness in Christ which should break their hearts: they never
mourned enough, nor hungered, nor took pains aright, nor prized the Promise;
or if they did, yet for necessity, or else out of self-love? alas! they have
despised the Gospel it self, and can grace save them that have hardened
themselves as well against it, as the Law? besides, they see others called home
long since, themselves behind; they are so vile, hardened, unworthy, cannot
pray, meditate, and therefore, God may do much, but they are daily worse
rather than better; and so in the rest: it is not condition can save them, but
faith.

Q. And how in the work of Beleening?

A. Here he labors to hold them under, especially by their irksome bondage.
Oh, says he, Faith is only of the Elect, and thou art none: it is the free
gift of God, and he may deny it as well as grant it: Many have come to the
birth, and have dyed so; and to believe, is a greater thing than to talk of.
Sometimes he makes it less than it is, to puff up the heart with
presumption: Or, he hides the virtuous savor and strength of the Promise, the
Simplicity, the Faithfulness of the Promiser, and the offer. He tells them,
if they believe, they must be changed, (which is hardest of all) yea, rather
than fail, he will seek to pull down the whole frame of God over their
head: fill them with temptations about the truth of the Scriptures, as if they
were but fables, and Ministers preached their own fancies: He poisons them
with melancholicke distempers and fears, asks them how they know this word
which they so cleave to, is the Word or not, puts worse temptations into them;
namely, whether there be any God or no. And (most usually) keeps them, between
the doubt of the Condition, and the doubt of the Promise, to be at
uncertainties. But, oh poor soul, how shall thou know thy Election save by
believing? or what is that freedom of God, save his bounty to the miserable,
and who are worthy ( Revel. 3.4.) save those who are made so? Look back to
that I have written in Part 2. Article the last, and God stay thee.

Q. Proceed to his temptations of them that are called?

A. These concern them either in point of their faith (and as touching the
former, he tempts two ways: either about the being, or the life of faith;)
or else secondly, their obedience.

Q. How about the being?

A. Thus: he takes advantage of the weak settling at the first, and by that
vnrenewednesse of nature, which opposes this spiritual grace, he seeks to
overthrow them in the holding of their confidence. He knows this is their
only prop and therefore sometime by showing them how poor their fruits are,
or how small their humblings were, or what self-love is mixed with their
faith, or how deadly and dully they walk, or that they cannot appropriate
Christ in each part of his merit, or by the like: he concludes their faith is
but temporary and no faith of the elect. And at such a bay he holds some for
lack of knowledge, that they yield, and are ready upon the least Sermons
touch, or observing of other men's confidence (for many are too confident) or
upon the occasion of any means to be used, or duty to be done, or cross
suffered, or the urging of any privilege of a believer, to start and say, yea,
if I had faith! But I have none. Poor Creature, if thou ever had it, thou
yet have it: and therefore hold that thou have got, 2 Job. 8.

Q. How about the life of faith?

A. Exceedingly. For in truth, this proves the other. He therefore knowing
what advantages he has in this by either that natural ease, sloth and aweknes
to enlarge the truth of one promise to all: and partly that willing want of
Christians in this point, who choose rather to soder with God in duties, then
obey him in nourishing their faith daily: he does very much prevail: and by
the small life seeks to destroy the being of faith: If thou had but faith
as a grain of mustard seed, thou might remove mountains: But alas, what
faith have thou, who can not bear the such a slight cross, a pette fillip
of the finger, an ill word for thy prosession, the loss of a little matter,
Cow, or horse? Nay, many that want, can bear more than thou. If thou liuedst
by faith either in states, means, graces, or duties, thou would be
otherwise then thou art? not so soon unsettled: not so little growing, not so
defective in the measure of grace, in uprightness, integrity, etc. But iet the
reader read of this, in the second Article of the life of faith. Take from
Satan his chief weapon, thy careless neglect, and the Lord shall stick to
thee in point of weakness.

Q. How does he assault in point of obedience?

A. Either he tempts them about it, or against it.

Q. How tempts he them about it?

A. Thus: he buffets them in their comfort therein. For whereas it is Gods will
that he that walks uprightly, should walk safely and sweetly; lo, Satan
separates the end from the means. An hipocrite seperates the means from the
end; looking for peace where there is no uprightness. But here the stratagem
of the Devil contrary; and therefore, either he hides that from his eye, which
should be his maine comfort in all failings: or else takes vantage by that
which should be his humiliation, to be his utter discouragement. And indeed,
he is rightly himself in this: for as in the former point he belyes God to the
soul, as if he could not support it for ever by his promise in the life of
faith, as Heb. 13.8. so here he belyes the soul to it self and holds it in
bondage. And although he cannot rob it of the truth of grace, yet he robs it of
the comfort thereof, choosing to play at any game, rather than sit out. For the
former of these, what is the joy of a dear servant of God in his poor
obedience, duties, Sabbaths, but that of Hezekiah, O Lord thou know I have
been upright! This the Devil hides away from the soul as the point of comfort
by it, as if it were little worth for lack of measure. And then, whereas the
want of measure, integrity, fruitfulness and constancy should only humble
them, lo, it deiects them: Oh (say they) what good do I, what serve I for? a
very clod of the earth; what wife, husband, friend, neighbor or stranger fares
the better for me? None live so as I? so barren! Oh, put case it be true, it
should abase thee, but seeing there is uprightness, it should not dismay thee.
And look what the poor Christian does most note by himself to be amiss,
that Satan takes for granted, to do the soul most hurt by; Lo, these sins
thou confessest, therefore of thy own mouth God may condemn thee. No, woeful
enemy, for he that confesses and forsakes them all, and would be as fruitful
as he is honest, as wise as he is upright, shall not be cast off. Oh! the
woeful bordage that Satan holds under many a sad heart, though sincere, by
melancholy and fear.

Q. And how does he tempt against obedience?

A. Sundry ways he labors to bring the soul under sin, to renounce a good
course, to be slack, remiss, loose, common, profane, unprofitable, even by
consent, And this is his most natural temptation. For, as he is exceedingly
wicked; so, its little to him that comfort be stopped, except the conscience be
wasted; now that he knows sin against knowledge will do: and hereby bring
God against a man also. As Balaam, Numb. 31.16. seeing Sorcery could not curse
Israel, sought to lay blocks of sin before them, that God might curse them:
Oh! What a May Game was it (think we) for him to see David foiled by Adultery,
Noah by drunkenness, Lot by incest, Hezekia by pride, Peter by revolt? How
does such success put hopes into him, to keep and practice his Trade upon the
best? Therefore here he uses all means to bring his purposes to pass. He
takes vantage of each thing: First, He marks his season and time, when the
heart is most at ease, (as Absalom noted Amnon) lying most open, and being
garnisht, which, perhaps, another time would have been armed, jealous, and
fearful. Thus David in Bathsheba: He concurres not only with the corruption
of the heart, as before; but secondly, with the constitution and complexion of
the spirit of nature in a man: Is he propense to lust, to uncleanness, to
iouialnesse, to ambition? Oh (says he) he is mine! I will tempt him with meet
baits. Thirdly, He watches the accommodation of occasions; as when excess of
cheerfulness, or of sadness, of praises or disgraces, of welfare and
success, or defeat, or the like; and when the spirits are open, then is his
opportunity to work the heart to wanton speech, to riot, to wrath and
discontent, to swelling pride, to ostentation of gifts, to the making away of a
man's self, and the like. Fourthly, He will make use of their best Graces and
Privileges: all men know you well enough to be one that make conscience, you
may do such or such a thing, and no man suspect ye; therefore be not so nice
in trifles, defeat an Orphan, oppress the fatherless, falsify the trust
reposed in ye, etc. Fifthly, Sometime of secrecy of time and place: who shall
ever find it out: who is here (twenty mile from neighbors) to discover thee?
Sixthly, By fine colors of pretensed meanings; as, Ananias and Sapphira meant
well to the Church, why might they not mean well to themselves? So, by color
of justice, my pains have been such and such in business for others, why may
not I pay my self so and so, they being never the wiser; and, perhaps, never
the worse, as the case may stand? As once a wretch spoke of money given him for
the poor, Who is poorer than my self? Seventhly, By their falls, to drive
them to sin for somewhat, rather than to be punished for a little, over
shoes, over knees: So, by comparing themselves with worse than themselves, to
be bold and presumptuous in liberty-taking: By the often shunning of sinful
occasions, to venture beyond their calling, and so be snared. Nay, by truths of
God, both in examples of the Saints falls, why may not thou do so and
repent? and in rules, that the best men have their infirmities, and therefore
why should I be free? Infinite is this field (let the rest of the sheaues be
brought to these bands:) but if he can so dazzle the heart till he have snared
us, he will be content we shall afterward see in what pickle we are, get out
how we can? These for a taste, although I might say that his oppressing the
soul being thus fallen, that it might not rise again; withholding the sight
of mercy, increasing either stupor of conscience, our slavery of distrust, and
so wheeling off the soul till death, is worse than the former. But I cease.

Q. What is the third let? can the world let us also?

A. Yea, most dangerously; and that by defiling the minds, the wills, and
courses of men, both in doctrine and manners. See, Ephesians. 4, 14. Romans 12.2. 1
Ioh. 2.16. And again, 1 Ioh. 5.19. lies in evil, as in the sequel shall
appear.

Q. But how can this be? show it plainly..

A. It both contains in it all evil, and sets it forth, and is it self
set on fire by the Devil, who is the Chap-man of it, to set the gloss upon
them, and to vend the wares of it. For the first of which; see that in John,
All that is in world is the lust of heart, lust of the eye, pride of life. He
speaks of these, not only as the appetites of bad men, but as worldly
objects. This Ware then being the worlds Merchandise and Staple, no wonder if
she defile. For the second, She is careful not only to keep in her
Warehouse, but to lay forth upon the open stall, and set out to sale these
Wares in the most busy manner that can be: No Market or Fare, no company or
meeting, no family, or place of resort, but sauouring these commodities; eyes
gazing, feet walking, hands reaching after, tongues iangling, members of body,
and powers of soul attending and acting this Merchandise: and therefore Saint
John says, The world lies in evil: saped in the Conversation of it. For the
third, The Devil, the god of this world, and Lord of this Staple, and
Commonwealth, to whose bank and Exchequer all this Custom and Tribute goes,
(I mean hell) is not wanting both to suppress all means which might mar
this Market of mischief; and is at hand to unite, to acquaint, to accomodate
these wares to all Customers (as their mind most stands to one more than
other) that the buyers are as forward as sellers, and ware as plentiful as
either; and he wants no skill, nor policy, nor art to put off his wares, that
they lie not upon his hand so, but he may live richly upon his revenue.
Therefore no question but the world is a woeful let.

Q. Wherein stands this, and how manifold is it?

A. The whole world of evil may be called either the dead world, or the
living. I call it not dead, as if there were no persuasion in it, but to
distinguish it in the manner of persuading.

Q. What mean you by the former?

A. Not only that the world is dead in sins; but this, that the world,
though she does not actually speak out, yet her very guize does defile and
delude, and that in two particulars: first, Examples: secondly Errors.

Q. How by her Examples?

A. In these respects; 1. By imitation of them: 2. By exchanging them: 3. By
the stream of them.

Touching the first; As in Droues the former oven or sheep lead all the rest;
so sensiblenesse leads on sinners by each others examples. No way to defile and
scatter sin so easily as this; rules would not so soon do it. We are very
apt by the eye or ear to follow bad, because it goes with the hair. Inward
lust tickles; but examples do much more perfect sin: Exodus 22.2. Follow not a
multitude (or the great ones) to sin. When Ministers, Magistrates, Learned
ones, ancient ones, and the greater part of these be ringleaders; people,
subjects, simple, young, easily follow. Hence that phrase, Romans 12.2. Be not
fashioned according to this world. The world has a fashioning quality in it,
and one Ape will follow another: Man is sociable: and as those that live in
Cities, learn more than poor people in a Village; so, sin committed in the
view of many, taints more than concealed, or private. As we know a thing
conveyed by a Pageant, or a song sinkes deepliest; so here. That which men
catch up in Alehouses, Play Houses, Fayres, meetings has a pecullar fitness
to enter. The parents example says nothing, but speaks most strongly.

Q. How does the world defile by exchange?

A. When no sooner one has lickt up a bad example, but presently he retales
it, and gains thereby. As it is in Fame, it increases by passage; so with the
sin of the world; Men think they must add somewhat of their own, to the
ripening and making up of it. If the Father teach the child to swear, he
will teach his to forswear: If one teach theft, another will teach sacrilege:
So it comes to pass, that sin abounds, and is grown out of measure sinful;
each man putting off his own art, skill, and experience to the common stock.

Its our nature, if we have a seed, to sow it, and see the proof of it: and
if a stock of money, to put it into bank. Every one sowes this Darnell and
Cockle; and sin having had long time to practice, is grown rich, plentiful,
selfe-supporting, able to defend her self by all tricks, invention,
aequiuocation and devices. As he said of a decaying world, we are dwarfes, and
our children will be Gnats; so I of the increasing, we are strong men, and
the next will be giants. We commit it, they will be hardened and naturalized
into a custom of it; defend, extenuate and maintain it.

Q. How does it hurt by the stream of it?

A. By the violence and irresistibleness thereof: For sin in the two former,
will soon amount to a torrent or stream of universality; so that none almost
will be found to resist: and then as the necessity of an armed thief is upon
a naked Traveler, so is the stream to particular persons.

As the Sodomits said to Lot, Shall this man rule over us: so says the stream
of sin, Who shall control us? What, are they wiser than the world? When that
which is evil is done by privilege, then its come to a stream. As in
National vices; drunkenness in Germany, pride and state in Spain,
v^cleannesse in Italy, etc. Thus we see this piece of the dead world has yet
an obiectiue life in it self.

Q. What is the second part of this dead world, the error of the wicked?

A. It is that which in one word the Apostle elegantly and pithily, Ephesians. 4.14.
calls the Diceplay of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lead aside
to deceive. Read it, and mark it. And it stands in the Art of the world in men
deceiving. And you may judge it by these five branches of it. Error, first of
tradition; secondly, of scandale; thirdly, in base and blind custom; fourthly,
conceit; fifthly, cosenage.

Q. What are these? explain them?

A. The first is of tradition, which is when sin preuailes by succession from
man to man: Thus the errors of popery: and old ones new minted, pleading
antiquity. Read 1 Pet. 1.18. he tells them they lived in sins taught and
obtaining, by the tradition of their fathers, from age to age. As it is reported
of that heathen King when he was brought to Baptism, shrunk from it, asking,
whether more of his predecessors or fewer had been babtised: and hearing that
fewer had been, refused it, saying, I will do as most have done. Men love to
err with a current of interpreters, then to speak true with one* So those
Samaritans: compare 2 King. 17. last, with Ioh. 4.

Q. What is scandale?

A. When the world, glad to riuet her self in evil, deludes her self with
the offenses of hipocrites; and by their scandals lays blocks in men's way,
that they might stumble at the truth. See Matthew. 18 7. Woe to the world because
of offenses: (both given and taken) God justly suffers damnable hipocrites to
play their parts, both to detect them and to snare the profane: Thus Paul 2 Timothy 3.13. The wicked shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived. Love, (say men) what this great preacher, or professor is become? and
even of this stamp are they all: neither barrel better herring. By this
error, thousands are quite overthrown.

Q. What is Custom?

A. It is that error which deceiues by prescription of long use. Thus divorces
prevailed to be laws among the Jews being lawless things; because Moses had
permitted them: and so at this day, Customs of Games, Dancings, Fayres upon
the Sabbaths, Wakes, and drunken feasts, with a hundred such upon such and such
days are swallowed without any scruple. Custom growing another nature: every
Preacher. Magistrate, and Law pulling them up, saving those that try. That old
Canon of the Greek Council still being in force, Let old Customs prevail.
Good ones are pulled up as a tender new set plant; bad ones, as old Oaks.

Q. What is conceit and opinion?

A. Error against goodness, by prejudice: See Act. ult. We know that this Sect
is every where ill spoken of. This is the worlds leaven in the three peckes of
meal of men's persuasion, till all be leauenned. Thus wicked men to confirm
themselves in evil, take up base, triuiall conceits and errors against the
way, the servants and Ordinances of Christ, which being once given out, prove
irreuocable: See Matthew. cap. 28.12. The Priests gave large money to the
Soldiers to give it out that Christ was stolen away: and this prevailed long
after against the Resurrection. So men speak of the godly, Tush, do ye
believe them? I warrant ye they can break their promises, be as hard, and
covetous as others. This new learning never did good; we lived better ere it
came: there was better housekeeping, love among neighbors: your greatest
Professors shutting their doors, and living in some corner of London to spend
all upon new fashions, or else to hoard up for their Children. And so they
speak of the good Ministry; they do but drive men out of their wits: they are
factious and turbulent. And in old times, the world reported of the faithful,
that they met in the night, and after their devotions, put out their lights,
and fell to uncleanness.

Q. What is Cosenage?

A. That Trade, of which mainly that Text treats, Ephesians. 4:18. whereby false
Teachers, schismatiks and Heretics blanched their conceits: wresting their
wits to abuse the Scriptures, to set false Colors upon their opinions. And so
the subtle and cunning devices which drunkards, and the like, set upon their
sin, calling them, good fellowship, or the like. So, the che^ting chapman
has his glosing protestations, colors, and tricks: that harlot Iezabel abused
fasting to cover her murder: the Strumpet in the Proverbs says, she has
paid her vows: when that woman came with her circumstances to David, he asked,
Is not the hand of Ioab here? so may we say, If the father of lies and tricks
were not in this world of cogging and cosenage, how could it deceive so as it
does?

Q. Proceed to the next branch of the living worlds defilements: wherein do
they consist?

A. Partly in words, partly in deeds. The former are the open corrupt Counsels
of sinners, or their secret insinuations. Of the former, see Pro. 7.18. the
harlot tempts her paramour, Come, let us take our fill: my husband is far off.
And the t^eefe Prou. 1.13. Cast thy lot in with us, we will have one purse. But
more close ones are such whisperers as the Apostle calls privy corrupters of
minds, whose words fret like a cankar 2 Timothy 2.17. Thus some do whisper in
secret against Magistracy and good Ministers, and others against government of
parents, entising their children, servants, yea wives from their loyalty. So
do wicked preachers scatter their false tenants, or principles of prophannesse
to taint men's judgments or manners. Thus young nouices are beaten off from
their zeal and hearing: I would scorn (says one) to be tied to their girdles.

Q. What are the deeds of the living world?

A. All their wicked, malicious, cruel intents, threats and pursuits of the
godly to quash them, and to uphold their own Kingdom. As those Scribes and
Pharisees had a Law to crucify Christ, though they made it for the nonce: And
Daniel, 6. those enemies of his. This trade were infinite to rip up Popish
machauillian plots and devises to dismay, to suppress and destroy all purity
of Doctrine and power of religion. Witness their inquisition, prisons,
censures, and torments, both lying in wait for the precious souls and bodies
of men: and sacrificing them to their God Maazzim wherein they do whatsoever
the Devil their father has taught them with absurd, unreasonable, and
implicable hearts to the Truth. And thus I have gone over this whole Doctrine
of the Lets in the three parts thereof.

Q. What now is the use hereof?

A. Large and plentiful, I will but touch the heads; and Paul, Romans 7. O
miserable man! Why? this body of death, and world of sin creates a world of
sorrow in us; of annoiances, fears, doubts, strength of lusts, little groth,
errors of wicked, deadly feud of Satan, melancholy, crosses, bad times,
poverty, bootlesse wrongs, hardness of heart, harshnesse to the yoke of
Christ; an unbroken, carnal, pusillanimous, froward, impure heart: Are not
these sorrow our belly full, to us, at the best? If God alayed them not with
inward supports, who should endure them? Oh! so it must be, yet let us mourn
under our bondage: Such as are led into captivity, are no merry folk; witness
they who hung their harpes on the Willowes, and were so full of anguish, that
they could not sing: How should thou, Psalm. 137.2
poor soul, in a strange land?

Secondly, let yet this comfort them for the present, that it is They are as
God will have them, it is their Pilgrimage, their Baca, their warfare, the Lord
will work them triumph out of these battles and combats: he will purge them,
and conform them to his dear son by them; and even the sin and penalties
they here endure, yet are conforming and moulding things to make their
victories sweeter. It is not well with them (they may say) but it shall be;
they see it a far off: if this were a life of perfection, if any of the
faithful were exempt from the like, 1 Ioh. 1.8. Pro 24.16 Esaias 64.6. 2 Cor.
12.9
then this were cause of all, and only mourning. But here the best of our
perfection, is the sight of our imperfection: we are as well on it, as our
head: while he was here in this strange land, he could neither be rid of our
sins, nor of infirmities, or enemies, but afterward he knew no more. Very
gladly, therefore, will I be glad even of my desertions, and tentations: to me
its a sure sign of consolation; to them, of confusion, and that of God; I only
wait my time to be perfectly redeemed.

Paul did: Romans 7. Who shall deliver me? Be not so well apaid in this smalnesse
of thy grace and measure (because it must be so) that thou should be willing
to have it so no, let it make thee longue, and stretch out thy neck a far off,
after thy Redemption; and when thy knocking off draws near, lift up thine
head. Here is thy pilgrimage: when shall I come to my fathers house? how long,
Lord, holy and true, how long? Lie under the Altar, and cry till God answer
thee. Count them happyest that are gone before, and put off their harness. Oh
when shall I follow well after, and overtake dear husband, wife, and friend
that have got the start of me? Lord, here is not the place I look for; here an
handsell and earnest; but, Lord, even my very faith and hope (which are my best
graces in travel, are but releefes of misery for a season, even these should
here cause me to cry out for the Christ of a better life; saying with Paul, If
our hope were here in Christ only, of all other I were worst: Faith, and Hope,
and Patience, and Hearings, and Sacraments shall cease, if then therewith sin
and sorrow cease not, what is my best, but misery? but as long as I have Christ
for hereafter, I care not; he will pay for all: If here to be a little eased
of my fears, be such a benefit, what is it to be quite rid of them? If here
to be guided by faith, what there to need none? If here to hope for a good end,
what there to enjoy the thing hoped? If here to live a barren, poor, sad life,
patience mixed with impatience, knowledge with error, faith with infidelity;
what there to have the use of them taken away, and Christ made mine wholly,
fully, all love without defect, joy without mixture, peace without disturbance,
Christ in his kind, blessedness and perfection? he was not given me to be some
grace, and more sin; but all grace, and no sin: then I shall not see him
through this grate of my prison, but with open face, as he is, and as he sees
me. Oh Lord, this coast of the present world, so dimmeth and darkens that coast
of heaven, that I cannot behold it: Turn thy loue-tokens, oh Lord, once at
length into presence and fruition, and show me thy glory.

Q. What other uses are there?

A. Exhortation, and that in general; first, to resist all these

Q. Begin then first with the first annoyance or let, which is our own
corruption; how is that to be resisted?

A. I will mention three ways: 1. The spiritual combat ere sin be brought into
act: 2. Watchfulness against outward occasions and temptations: 3. Wisdom
after we are fallen:

Q. What is the duty of the Combat?

A. It is the exercise of that holy Principle of the Spirit of the new
Creature, which perpetually fights against the flesh in the regenerate. Let
this be perpetually maintained, and the hand of Faith, or of Christ, rather
be continually iogged by us, for the lively quickening grace thereof, to
resist our inward selfe-temptations: Gal. 5.17. The Spirit lusts against the
Flesh; and ye cannot be as ye would. There is in the New Creature a renewing
throughout in every part, yet not throughout in all. As in a dead Palsy, all
one side dead, yet the other wholly alive. How does the living part fight
against the dead? If a man should have a dead carcass bound to his back till
he dyed, were it not an heavy plague? would it not be irksome? So this body of
death to the living part of the new Creature. Oh, mourn and groan it out: The
Physicians say, Every deep sigh spends a drop of blood. Oh that thy groans
might consume this blood? I likened it before to Peninna, I Sam. 1. Let Hanna
then be to Peninna, as she (to be sure) will be to her, She will not see
the least look of Elkana toward her, the least loue-token, not one nights
lodging, not one cast of favor, but she will pine at it, vpbraid her for it,
vex at, and grudge her the least drop. Oh! Let Hanna do so to her: Let her,
all that she can, get into her husbands heart, and the more she is envyed,
the more let her cling to him, that his love may support her against her enemy:
let him be to her above all her fears. Oh, if this were, how happy were we?

It Is said of Rebecca, that she was weary of her life for Esaw's wives (as I
noted) and wished them out of doors. Let us be like her; and say, Oh Lord,
these base dogging thoughts of sin which breed ill affections, and threaten
to break forth daily into action, how noisome are they? When Rebecca felt a
struggling, she asked the cause of the Lord; and he answered, Wonder not, there
be two nations in thee, a cursed, and a blessed one; one whom I have hated,
another loved: it must be thus, wait thy time, pray for a good travel, the
whilst thou must bear this strife within thee. So do thou; do not only
bear it, but maintain it also. Say to the Lord, I can never shun evil, but
I am the more tempted to it: never ensue goodness, but I am driven from it:
Lord, why is it thus? Oh quicken up that love, that Image of thy
righteousness, that seed of God, that inner man of the Spirit, which may
present thee so to my soul, that thy sweetness and love may cause the Image
of old lust to be despised, and decay daily more and more: Create in my soul
that holy nature of thine which may for ever abhor, foil and conquer this
flesh, and the opposition of it in me: Thou, oh Lord, art as holy, as sin is
wicked. Oh Lord show it, and the prevailing nature of it; let it burn upon the
Altar of my soul, against the Altar of corruption: Oh that I could find but
one day of many, that I were mine own, and free to righteousness, rid of my
cumber and clog! That I could feel those secret motions and instincts of sin
in me, rebelling against thee, tickling me, snaring, and leading me captive,
being as sensible and wake to mark and discover them, and nip them in the
neck, as they are to annoy me.

Q. What is the second duty of watching?

A. Continually to observe and prevent occasions offered, when we cannot foil
inward motions. Cut off her provision, and sterue sin. As men deal with fields
of weeds which they cannot root up, they hook them, and so kill them by often
cutting off their tops: so do thou with occasions, objects, counsel,
provocation to thy wrath, revenge, covetousness: maintain a sound desire to
abhor them, that they never enter thy trenches. The welcomming of objects is
as casting of oil into the fire. As Job for his sons, so be thou for thy
self. Sacrifice daily for mercy of prevention, removing of vanities which
might annoy thee, especially natural ones; or if offered, yet for grace to
defy them, and go to work by a promise. Jealousy and fear are blessed from
heaven to preserve thee: as the eyelids are made moveable and winking, by
nature, to keep out any mote or annoyance. If this watching heart against
objects were kept, and no roguish stragler suffered to pass without stop and
examination whence and whither, how sweet should our course be?

Q. What is the third duty of wisdom?

A. Not to be kept in bondage by Satan in point of our recovery out of our
falls, if we be slipped into any; but speedily to gather up our selves, ere we
be hardened; Ier. 8.4. Shall a man fall, and not arise? Be not sullen as the
laden jade in the slow, that will not stir to get out. If Satan get thee at
this bay, he has his hearts wish. But rather go back, wound thy soul for
thy revolt, seek to the Lord for staying of thee; if thou have been bold with
the Lord, recall thy self, let thine heart smite thee, and say, I will do so
no more, Job 40.4. and so lay hold upon the Promise, repent, and do thy former
works; be zealous and amend. Do not soder up thy breaches with a dead heart,
weighing good actions against bad, which will harden thee: but return to him
whom thou have sinned against: Ephesians. 5.29. If thou have been angry and sinned,
add ^ot drunkenness to thirst; wrath and malice and revenge, to thy passion,
but ere the Sun go down, go to God for mercy and put it to an end, that
the next Sun rise find thee not hardened.

Q. Proceed to the second next: what course is to be taken against the other
two enemies, Satan and the World?

A. Briefly to put them together: besides what I have said already, put on the
complete armor of proof appointed there by the Lord in this case, and keep
it close to thee, wear it and walk in it as the Armor of a child of light,
as the harness of the militant Church and each member of Christ, blessed by
him to that purpose. They be not as Pope holy swords, or armor blessed by a
sinful wretch to no purpose: but blessed by God, and they shall be so. They
be no charmed weapons, but strong in God to cast down holds and forts of
strong enemies. First, therefore let me give thee some general counsel and
then a few particulars, about the pieces of the armor. For the general, these
two: first, get wisdom to discover and discern his temptations. Then
secondly, Cor. 2 11. you know his devices, as if a man warned were armed. To
say the truth, it is a great thing to be warned. Get wisdom then: discern
him in his properties, discern him in his first onsets in thy first calling,
begin this act betimes for it is long: and be assured he will not so let thee
pass, but be the more eager against thee in thy faith, thy comfort, thy
obedience. He will set wife, husband, children, thy betters, thy equals in array
against thee. Know him ere he come himself by his messenger: and think not it
will be answer sufficient that thou knewst nothing. Ask poison if it will not
hurt, because unknown? or an enemy if he will turn from thy Castle, because he
has surptiz'd it ere thou were aware. Was it not supposed thou should have
known? Let the Lord say of thee, Thou know his devices. And so know them,
as being of a different kind and nature, not all alike. Some temptations are
not like to be durable, because so hideous; as to Atheism, against the
Scriptures, to blaspheme and deny God and providence. These will wanze. Here
learn two things: First, Take heed lest being rid of these, thou be secure of
the next; know these forerun others. And secondly, know, that seeing these
being merely, or mostly Satan's, and not thine, thou ought to dispatch them
as fast as they come, by abhorring them, and being abased by them, but not
dismayed by their hidiousnesse. Then again, there are temptations on the left
hand, and on the right hand; both may not be taken for alike. For temptations
on the right hand to sensual evils, admit not that parley, nor plodding upon
in thy mind, which some others do, the thought whereof is fearful. But
rather, the more they are thought of, the more they share a man. Do as the
Prophet to Iehoram, Answer roughly. 2 Kin. 6.32
Like to the breaches of two brethren; which, the more ripped up, the more they
exulcerate: And so I might say of many more. Let the conclusion be, Learn
wisely to judge of temptations, devils, or worlds; and let thy long
acquaintance with his method, make thee skillful; praying for the spirit of
discerning, and confessing how much thou art mis-matched. Secondly, be armed
accordingly, Solomon says well, Prove. 1.17. In vain is the net laid for that
which has wing; for the Bird mounts up above the snare. Its said of the sons
of Iehonadab, the son of Rechab, Ier. 35.7, 8. that when the Prophet set pots
of wine before them, the^ were tied by their fathers vow, upon his blessing,
that they should drink none. This is the tie of God, even our Cou^nant and
oath, in, and since Baptism, that we would cleave to (...) as his faithful
soldiers against all enemies. Shall a man s^c^^^ly engage his children, and
shall not our Covenant tie us? Sh^^ (...) dare to be loose to God? or rather
when the devils cups are before us; shall we not say, I am tied to God in
Covenant? how dare I be loose, and run away from my colors? oh to be armed is
all in all: David armed was able to bear down a Shimei; unarmed, not able to
bear Mephibosheth, much less Nabal. Let us know, it is not the greatness or
smalnesse of the temptation, but our armor against it, which preserues us;
shall God give us armor and we not use it? Shall it hang up a rusting by us,
and we pierced with darts to death for want of it? They say of great Soldiers,
they are shot-free. The Lords armed ones are all so, while armed: else as other
men. Therefore let this teach us not to commit our selves to this world naked
and unarmed: under hope of shot freedom. Charles the 5. taking his horse to
rush into the maine battle, was requested to forbear; but he answered, an
Emperor was never shot through with a bullet. This confidence has an armed
soldier of Christ, never was believer shot to death by a devil or a wicked
world. To discover these enemies is good but to stand in our daily armor, and
to be strong in the Lord, to quite us like men, 1 Cor. 16.13. is a better
grace. It is not our vain weapon of selfe-confidence, learning, experience,
wit or parts: no not our great resolutions, our deep vows against oaths,
uncleanness, or the like, will save us: or that we scorn the Devil as the
slave of God. What shall it boot us to scorn him as a slave of God, when he is
our tyrant? Therefore neither fear him slauishly nor scorn him profanely but
be armed, wisely and constantly, and watch to it with prayer, and the Lord
shall be with thy endeavor, and teach thy hands to fight and prevail.

Ephesians. 6. from 14. verse to the 18.
Q. But in a word, how should the parts of the Armor be used?

A. If once truly put on, they shall be used the more easily. The most blessed
part of thy Armor is faith, which puts on all the rest: and does (as the
shield) not only defend thee but all thy armor also. It is that grace which
carries a poor soul into the field with like courage to David, when he said,
1 Samuel 17. Who is this dog that defieth the host of Israel? This day shall God
enclose thee in mine hand. It argues thus: first, by experience, if ever Satan
or world could have foiled me, it had been in my onset, my fresh water
soldier: but even then the Lord kept me: against a Bear and a Lion, and shall
he keep me, to destroy me? I have been kept from him in my first call to God,
and shall I not now much more being armed. I am the Lords: he will cover my
head in the day of battle. Again it disputes for God against her own weakness,
by proof of continual assistance: I see, indeed, stronger than I have been
foiled, but the Lord can bring a weak nouice through, as well as a strong man;
the Battle is the Lords: Race is not with the swift, nor the Battle with the
strong: But he that fights as well with few and weak, as strong and many,
gives victory as he pleases. And as when we see a weak wearish old man of 80
years, we wonder so weak an one should so hold out, when thousands of
stronger, dye in their strength: so here; yet believe that so it may be, and he
that in all our brunts and streights has kept us, and as the fiery dart has
been cast at us, has latcht it for us, and (to show what he can do for a
poor wretch) has brought me through so many pikes of Devil or world already,
can he not do so still? Thus faith, in temptation by devil, malice of
instruments, is more than a Conqueror: not to shun temptations, but not to be
consumed even in the burning. And Faith claspes here to a merit of Christ her
Captain, by a word or promise: I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not: the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: I have overcome the world,
be of good courage, and the like. These faith cleaues to, and puts all her
strength upon them. The Lord Jesus has disarmed this strong Giant, triumphed
over him on the Cross, and led him, and all his, captivity captive; and they
fight against me but with the dregs of courage and policy, since he overcame
them.

Secondly, they keep on the helmet of hope on their head, as a woman would do
her hat in a wet journey: They look at that final redemption and victory which
is set before them when their harness are off: and this holds up their faith,
which else by one or other temptation would be foiled, Heb. 12.2. as Christ,
who for the hope set before him, endured the shame: so these endure the heat of
this battle, knowing it shall one day joy them to have been so occupied, and
the end shall pay for all.

Thirdly, the peace of conscience treads down all, as Sampson trod down his
enemies, horse and foot, Judge. 15.8. For why? this peace of God rules their
hearts and minds: they are tempted strongly, but they will not lose their
peace, and buy repentance at so deree a rate. Their precious peace they will
not change for any devils or worlds pleasure. If they should lose it to win the
world, what should it profit them? Shall I ( Judge. 9.) forsake my fatness and
sweetness to exalt my self? God forbid. The false mother cared not for
cutting the child, but the true mother trembled at it: So, the true child of
God cries, save my peace, whatsoever I forgo.

Fourthly, The breast plate of righteousness next their heart, as a Corslet of
proof preserues them: Lord, thou know righteousness and obedience, innocence
toward thee and men has always bin deerer to me then goods ill gotten, then
all spoils, all pleasures of sin for a season, all baits of men, or terrors
and threats: They have lighted upon my breast plate, and been dashed. And,
through thy mercy, by whatsoever darts Satan beguile me, I hope these shall
not, while I can keep my integrity. As good Job Job 27.5.
said to his enemies, My righteousness shall ye never take from me.

Fifthly, Their Girdle of truth and sincerity; not of tongue only, but of
soul, not looking with Balaam, at base ends, but truly at the honor of God,
whose love I can prove, because he vpholds me in my integrity.

Sixthly, the Sword of the Spirit, the Armoury of God his Word, that offensive
weapon by which the soul is able not only to save her self, but to crush and
foil her adversary: the Lord having put into his Word, that authority which
no Devil can resist; especially, when it is wisely, sparily, and seasonably
used; not to dally with Satan, but to brush him off, as the Butchers flap beats
off, and crushes the flies. As we see in those apt Scriptures, which Mat. 4.
our Savior used; and by using, blessed to us: when we shall (according to our
temptations) by faith, retort Satan with them. And thus I have given a short
taste of a thousand which might have been added, beseeching the Lord to bless
them, and the whole doctrine of this Article which here I conclude.

The sixth Article.
Q. What is the sixth Article of this third part?

A. That as the lets and discouragements of the children of God in this their
militant condition, are many on the left hand by their enemies: so on the right
hand, on Gods part, there are many privileges and favors allowed them, whereby
their condition is made both comfortable and honorable: And that, both to draw
on many to be of Gods household, when they see what gains and vayles belong to
his service; as also to encourage such as are already admitted members of it:
and besides, to compel such as care not to join themselves to them (because
of some hard conditions to the flesh) when they see their Privileges, to
acknowledge their state to be above their own, and to pine and consume for
the wilful debarring themselves of such happiness. As then we see it to be
in the Companies of Royal Cities, and their several Trades and mysteries: and
in the Corporations of great Towns, they have certain immunities and
royalties which others want in common towns; yea, such as those want, who
though they dwell by them, yet are no free men: so here it fares; The Company
and great Family or Corporation of the Lord Jesus, his body, I mean the
Church, once truly gathered into one mystical fellowship by calling, and the
work of the spirit, has many honors and prerogatives annexed unto it, which
not only they want which are heathens, but also even they who are visible
members of the Church in point ordinances and outward worship. See for this 1
Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods,
Heb. 12.15, 16. But ye are come to mount Zion, to the City of the living God,
etc. read it at large. 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, an holy
nation, etc. Psalm. 73.23. Thou shall guide me by thy grace, and shall receive
me to glory. Psa. 84.21. The Lord God will give grace and glory: no good thing
shall he withold. 2 Pet. 1.3. His Divine grace has given us all things
pertaining to life and godliness.

Q. Why, these seem no other then were spoken of in Part 2. Article 4. in the
Benefits of Christ?

A. Yes: for although both sorts are benefits from one Fountain, yet the
difference is this; of those former we consist and are. 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him
are we, who is made to us, etc. But by these we do not properly consist, but
we are much the better for them, and the one concerns our being, as
Reconciliation, Adoption: the other our wel-being; as, That Gods Angels are our
Ministers and Guardians: all things befall us for the best, with a thousand
such more. It is one thing to be a man; another, the Lord of Creatures.

Q. But are they not the same with the means?

A. No doubtless: The means although they are rich bequests of the Church,
and (in respect of strangers) privileges also; yet they are no such
prerogatives in themselves (save in their efficacy to the elect) but are given
to all as ordinances, either for begetting or building up: and therefore
concern them who are as yet uncalled, by the right of Baptism. But these
belong to the Believer only.

Q. What differ they from Commandments? for many of them are things which God
requires of us: as, to grow in grace, to abstain and keep themselves from
open offenses, etc.

A. True: yet the things being the same, the respect is diverse; they are not
privileges properly, as commanded: but as they are allowances from God to
enable and qualify the soul to perform the things which God commands.

Q In what does their nature consist?

A. In these two: First, in their price and worth: Secondly, in their
peculiarity: If we sever either for other, we destroy a privilege. For the
former:

First Their price is in this: The least of them cost the blood of the Lord
Jesus, and flow from his sides: their nature is excellent, gracious and
glorious; their use is suitable, for they attend the welfare of the best
creature in the world; and the instrument of obtaining them, is no less than
that whereby Justification is gotten: Lastly, they are the Legacies of the last
Will and Testament of Christ, sealed with his death, and pledges of his
presence, till we enjoy himself; serving to conduct us homeward in a
tolerable manner, as many bayting places to refresh us, till we come thither.

Secondly, they are peculiar things as well as precious: so, ours, that no
others portion besides us; we know peculiarnesse does greatly beautify a
precious thing. As then these belong to the whole Body of Christ, to one as
another, and to each member from the whole body: so no other but she can enjoy
it: A stranger shall not enter into her joy. For as the Lord does at the first
make his Church a peculiar garden, of a mere thicket and queach of bushes, a
dunghill, a wilderness in which there is no delight: as if a man should take
such an unshapen place, and build himself a sumptuous Palace with Gardens and
Orchards, and dwellings of pleasure and fruit: so having once done so, and set
his delight thereon, he pitches there, and delights to take it up as his
habitation, Psalm. 132.13. Hence those phrases which the holy Ghost, Mark. 4.10.
To you it is given, not to others, Ioh. 17 9. I pray not for the world, 1 Pet.
2.7. A peculier people, Exodus 19.5.
Deuteronomy. 7.6. You shall be my peculiar ones, though all the World is mine. They
are called his jewels and precious ones, Malach. 3.17.

Q. In how many kinds do these preuiledges benefit the Church of Christ?

A. In two. For as all peculiars and liberties do either concern either some
indemnity and freedom from annoyance, or some right and title to benefits: so
does the whole body of privileges either concern her riddance from the
burdens which lie upon others: (as, to find no blessing to be theirs but to
answer for them:) or an enlargement to those good things which others cannot
come by: as to be kept from evil, in streights, etc.

Q. Distinguish them into their several heads and sorts?

A. Generally, first, they belong to the believer either first, here, or
secondly, hereafter. Here, either in life, or at death. In this life, we enjoy
privileges, either accompanying conversion or following it. Those that
accompany our conversion are righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost,
To. 14.17.

Q. What are the consequent privileges hereupon?

A. Either they concern our persons or our estates. Our persons (or the
persons of ours, for God so esteems them) thus. That God it ours and theirs in
covenant and will be so for ever, Esaias 54, This is to me as the waters of Noa,
etc. He will be our God reconciled (yesterday to day and for ever, Heb. 13.8.)
and our God all-sufficient, so that in nothing we need to take thought, for
he takes thought for us, Philip. 4.6. and 1 Peter 5.7. So also, No good thing
shall be wanting, light or defense, grace or glory, Psalm 84. All things
shall work together for our good, Romans 8.28. All things are ours inright, 1
Cor. 3. and in right use, Titus 1.15. His Angels are Ministering Spirits for our
watch and good, Matthew. 4. Hebr. 1. No evil, danger, Devil, enemy shall hurt
us, Psalm. 92. We are dear and precious to him in life and death, and he
preserues his Saints, Psa. 97.10.
Psalm. 116.15. and we shall walk safely under his protection all the day,
Deuteronomy. 33. That we are always before him, and go in and out with him, Psalm.
73.22. He will bring us well through, and give us Glory. Psalm. 73.23. And as
for ours, he will show mercy to thousands of them that love him, Exodus 20. and
will not take his Word from our Seed, and our seeds seed for ever, Esaias 59.21.

Q. What privileges concern our estates?

A. They are temporal, or spiritual. To both in common this does belong, that
God will do for us in both, above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. and
supply abundantly all our wants: he will supply our bodily wants, poverty,
infirmities, wits and senses; as our sight and hearing, or such decays: and
our spiritual, as want of knowledge, faith, patience much more of Sabbaths,
ordinances, good helps of conference, etc. And besides in neither estate will
he require any more of us then according to our abilities, Mat. 25.15. not
according to what we want, but that we have. If we be poor, and cannot do
what we would: if we be weak in grace, and faith, he looks at our talents
and no further, so we be faithful in that little, Mat. 25.

Q. What are the privileges of our temporal estate?

A. Our temporal reaches to our estate of the world, and it concerns either
blessings or crosses: touching blessings, first, that whatsoever is meet for
body, for meat, drink, apparel, health, life, good days, success, welfare,
good marriage, credit and the like, shall be given us, Psalm. 84.11. Psalm. 37.4.
We need not fear it. Luke 12.22. Why take ye care what to put on? Secondly,
that our labors shall be blessed, and we shall eat of the fruit of them.
Psalm. 128.2. Thirdly, be it more or less it shall be enough and we content
with it as our portion best of all, Phil. 4. 1 Timothy 6.6. with contentment and
sufficiency (for so is the word) Fourthly, a little of the righteous is better,
and shall go further then a great deal of the wicked, Prou. 15.16. Fifthly,
all they have, they have it from a running fountain, and with the good will of
him that dwelt in the bush, Deuteronomy. 33.16. Sixthly, that we have it without sin,
(an ill conscience in getting, keeping, forgoing, Pro. 10.12:
or ill dependence) and without sorrow, that is carking, distrust, or
baseness. Prou. 7. that he will suffer the Lions to want then us, or ours to
beg our bread: he will neither fail or forsake us, Psalm. 37.35. Heh. 13.5.

Q. What are our privileges in Afflictions? Psalm 34.8.


A. First, that no more, no other, no sooner can befall then the Lord has cut
out for us, Ioh. 8.20. Hour was not come, Ioh. 8.59. he passed through them
all. Secondly, He fitteth our yokes for us as we for our cattle, great and
small. Bear the yoke, take up our cross, Lam. 3. Mat. 16. Thirdly, the
extremity of a cross shall never pinch us: the straight, shall not annoy us,
Psalm. 32.6. floods of great waters, etc. Fourthly, we shall escape many that
the wicked pull upon themselves, Psalm. 32 8. Fifthly, These that must be, we
shall be vpholden in them? Mica. 7.8. He shall show me light in darkness,
and he shall cover my head in battle, Psalm. 140.7. Sixthly, they shall be
sent in love, so that they shall not be the enuenomed arrows of the Almighty
in our flesh but the corrections of a father, Heb. 12.9 and that of Solomon, 1
Chronic. 22.10. The seventh, when they have done their errand they shall
return, and we be delivered, Mica 7.8.9 10. Lastly, we shall be more then
conquerors, Romans 8.37. and partake full redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

Q. What are our spiritual privileges?

A. Some concern God, some our selves. Touching God this: All his
administrations shall profit us, he will discover himself in them to us: in
the way of his government of the Age and times we live in: in his blessings
upon his own, and judgments upon his enemies: his patience and carriage
toward our selves in our whole courses: the sundry changes of this world, the
manners of men, the ends of men, the examples of men, good, bad; mortality and
the vanity of things; our own experience: the administrations of God in all
shall teach and profit us. See for this Psa. 25. All the ways of God to his,
etc.

Q. Touching our own spiritual estate, what privileges do we enjoy?

A. They belong to our spiritual estate, either in point of our faith, or of
our obedience. Touching our faith: First, That the just shall not only be
forgiven by faith; but also live by faith: as Habac. 3. Heb. 10.38. Secondly,
They shall grow from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. Thirdly, their faith shall
never totally or finally fail them. Luke 22.32. the gates of hell shall never
prevail against it: with many more.

Q. What privileges concern obedience?

A. Some negative, some positive. The negative, such as these; No lets,
enemies, devil, sin, or world shall pull us from God, or pluck us from our
steadfastness, 2 Pet. ult. The positive, are made to the whole course of it, or
the particular parts. To the whole, such as these, God that begun his work
shall finish it for us, Philip. 1.6. We shall be upholden in our whole course
graciously, Psalm 41.11, 12. By this I know thou love me, that thou
upholdest me in my integrity. And that he will guide us by grace till he
receive us to glory. That we shall I persevere to the end, Revel. 2.10. And
such other.

Q. And what are the particular parts of our course, and what are their
privileges?

A. Either the course of worship, or of conversation. Touching the former,
either they may be referred to the means of obedience, or the duties of it.
Concerning which I have spoken in the second Article, in the point of (life of
faith) and in a word this is all, That the means are theirs, all blessed to
them for the helping of them home in peace. And the Lord who has enjoined them
duties, will give them strength to perform them, and make them easy, Mat.
11.30.

Q. What are the privileges of Conversation?

A. Either they concern common life, or conditions of men therein. Common
life, or marriage, liberties, company, solitariness, or the like manifold
entercourses: Conditions of men, as their callings in which God has set them,
their places of government or subjection, magistracy or ministry: their
relations in family or otherwise, parents, masters, etc. To all which Gods
people have peculiar promises, that God will furnish all them with gifts, whom
he calls to any function: That he will cause a voice behind them to say, This
is the way, walk in it. And according to the changes and conditions of life
which hereafter shall befall, Esaias 30.
the Lord will pick out meet grace, and be the same God to them in all.

Q What are the privileges of the Saints in death?

A. That they are precious in death to the Lord: Psalm. 116. that death nor any
thing shall separate them from Gods love, Romans 8, vlt. That a good life shall
bring a good death. That they shall dye in peace, Psalm. 38.37. That the day of
death is better then the day of life, Eccles. 7.1. That it is sanctified,
(together with the grave) to be a step to glory, and the putting on of
incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.

Q. What is the last privilege?

A. The greatest of all, that eternal fruition of God, and all that he has
prepared for his elect, in his own presence: things which neither eye has
seen, ear heard, or ever entered into the heart of man to conceive. See Esa.
30.26. For if they could, they could not be as they are. And to end these all,
from the first to the last, are the privileges of Believers, not in their
properties only, but peculiarnesse also: for to speak of all at once, The
wicked shall be nothing so, Psalm. 1.

Q. Conclude the Article with the use thereof.

A. First, it conuinceth and reproves many. Conuinceth first, all such
profane ones, as cannot endure to hear there should be any admitting of
difference between Professors of the Gospel, one or other. They are of
Korah's mind, Numb. 16.3. All the congregation of God is holy. What? are not
all of us baptized, and believers? Has not Christ broken down the wall of
Separation? These Preachers which tell men what evidences there are of true
faith, and what marks of false faith, how a man may prove his calling, hope of
Heaven and the like (say they) take too much upon them! Beware, Oh ye
cauillers, lest ye perish in this contradiction! Jude Ver. 11. if the Earth
swallow ye not, beware Hell do not! Humble rather your selves, and confess
that you pull down Gods foundations! Ye destroy an whole Article of the
Catechism by this your cavil. What place is there for privileges, if all be
alike? Indeed faith purifying the heart, takes away all difference, Act. 15.
but till then, what difference is greater then to have hope and none? 1 Thessalonians.
5. to swear and to fear on oath? when the Psalmist, Psalm. 1. says, The
wicked are not so, of whom speaks he? Only of Pagans? And when our Savior
speaks of the fish and the trash, of the wheat and the tares, speaks he of
the world, or the Kingdom? Secondly, this conuinceth all hypocrites who mutter
that God puts no difference between good and badde in the matter of rewards.
Esaias. 58. Mal. 3. Mat. 24. they are brought in, taxing GOD for an hard Master:
they fasted, but God regarded not: they were zealous, but it was bootlesse.

But, Oh ye hypocrites! Where is the fault? Are Gods ways unequal, or yours?
Has he not showed us his large Charter of Privileges bestowed upon his
Church? Beware: When God makes up his Jewels, it shall appear wether he have a
discerning eye, and to your cost ye shall then know it.

London or of Westminister, or the like, (which shall perish (but of Heaven.
Rest not in your outward privileges of hearing, of common faith, of the
Sacraments: know it, herein God puts not the chief difference. Get the
privilege of these privileges, the marrow of this bone, The understanding of
the mystery of Christ, and your part in that which the world knows not, nor
shall it ever be taken from you. What is it for a Countryman at London to
hear the Charter of any Corporatio^ read in his ears? Is he not dead to it?
Has he any part in it? No, no, his hope is in his plow and toyling trade at
home. Till the Son has set you free, ye are not free indeed: ye have no part
or fellowship in this buzines? Ioh. 8.36.
Only faith and the New Creature, and none else can claim it: neither of
which either the profane or the hypocrite can approach unto: Turn your
cauillings at those who put a difference: and your murmurings at God, for
putting so little difference into an unfeigned desire of atteyning this
difference: forget your trade and seek such an estate of faith, as neither you
(as ye are) nor the boldest cauiller or hypocrite can ever reach unto.

To this end (in Gods fear) let the view of this honor of all his Saints,
Psalm. 149.9. set your teeth on edge after a part (a childs part, a free
denizons part) in them: Do but think of them, and what ye have bereft your
selves of so long: and yet at length might enjoy* if ye would lay in cordially
for them: as glorious things as are spoken of the Church, you may have a part
in them cheaper then Lysias had of Roman liberty; it cost him a great sum,
you need part with nothing, but that which is not worth the paring of your
nails, but ye might be so borne, Act. 22.28. Behold and wonder! Is it nothing
to be in Christ? To be free indeed? Tell me, can you (or ever durst you) come
to the Throne of grace with boldness? are the blessings of wife, children, land
or money your own? Do ye not fear lest ye dye beggars in all your abundance?
Is it not a dry ditch? Oh, come (for these and twenty better reasons) and seek
this difference. Then shall ye turn your mutterings into marueylings at this
rich Charter of the Saints, and say, ye never heard of the one half of that
ye enjoy: and the Image of your old Paradise shall be despized. I assure you,
else the day shall come, that in the day of your sorrow ye shall worship at the
feet of them whom ye despise, and beholding their privileges, ye shall bite
your very toungs for anguish, that ye never regarded them till it was too late.



Open not the door of Gods privileges for dogs to enter in at. Be so far
from sowing of pillowes under peoples elbowes, and smoothing them in their
sin: that when any promise comes to hand, ye tremble to urge it in general
without putting difference.

Affect not the applause of people* by plausible applying of promses: let none
come and hear ye preach a promise, but they may have one touch given them or
other, whether it belong to them or not. If they dare run away with it
smoothly, yet dare not you to suffer them: although your gift lie rather this
way then in a searching kind, yet put your selves out of it for Gods sake, and
for the precious souls sake of them whom else ye shall destroy. Remember that
sweet promise, If thou shall separate to me the precious from the vile, then
thou shall be as my mouth Jeremy 15.19. Ezekiel. 22.26. and forfet not such a
blessing through ease, or flattery. I speak this, because I know, the people
loves to take all as spoken to them without question, to cover their sloth and
sinful course, and they will not willingly hear any that Preach otherwise.

Moses between Aaron and Hur) that the poor soul might be propped up on
both sides against the enemies of a good conversation. Let no pains seem too
great: 1 Cor. 1.7. having such precious promises, let us purge our selves of al
filthiness. As Paul spoke of one, so I say of all these, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Comfort
your selves and one another by these privileges. If the most common blessing
become peculiar to you through Christ, what shall the best become?

How should that hope of glory after your toil and travail ended, encourage
you; when the glory of the Moon shall be as the glory of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun ten times greater? and the Saints shall worship from Sabbath to
Sabbath to all eternity! Oh! count all your troubles tolerable in the hope
heerof, and deceive all the world in their opinion of your misery! Let this
hope make ye as far above the miseryes of this life, as your treasure is
above the earth.

But especially let not death be unwelcome: as that old man said, Thus long
have I served God: and it yrketh me not to dye: for I have had a good Master.
Secondly, let it hearten us to our work, to see what good vayles we have,
better then all the wages of an hireling. Privileges are commonly held by
Service: and we see how the guilt of soul Treasons, or riot, and misdemeanor
does forfeict the liberties of Cities and companies. Honors are best mayntaind
by loyalty, by labor and diligence. Its hard to renew a Charter once lost by
Rebellion. Therefore hold our selves close to our holy conversation and walking
with God, by such Privileges. Its a great matter that we have them under Gods
seal: but when we see, that they do concerns us alone, how should this cheer
us? Let all the brave spirits of the world, and all the favorites of Princes,
at death hold up their heads, as a believer may under one of all these
promises, and we will embrace his choice! But the Spirit of this Treasure and
these privileges, the joy, peace and welfare of a Christian can hardly be
counterfeited: a stranger shall not get into his joy. Thus much also of this
Article.

The seventh and last Article of the third part.
Question. What is this last Article?

A. The use of the whole part in general. Even the very text of the Apostle
may comprehend it, Ephesians. 4.23. If ye have learned the truth, as it is in Jesus,
put off the old man, and put on the new: As we have felt Jesus in the truth of
his Reconciliation, so let us put on the same Lord Jesus in the truth of
Renouation: for the one intimates the other. Show thy self to understand how
the spirit, by faith, breeds Repentance in the heart and life. As the poor
child having the mothers cost about it, dainty fare, money in purse, fine
clothes, carries them to show in every corner of the house: so let us warmed
and adorned with the Lord Jesus our righteousness, 2. Cor. 2.14
utter his love, and show forth the savor of it in all our course.

Let us abhor the thought of such a Jesus, as will keep within our bosoms
and lie still: no; his love will burn within us, and we shall not be able to
smother it: It will give us the spirit of David, 1 Kin. 1.30
who cried, As the Lord lives, who has delivered my soul from all adversity,
Solomon shall reign: signifying, that this love of Gods redemption and
deliverance was kept as the perpetual sacrifice burning upon the Alter of his
heart, always ready at his call, to set him about every good duty with
resolution. He speaks as a Giant refreshed with wine, ^. Cor. 5.14
as if this love of Christ compelled him, and was as strong as the spirits of
wine, to encourage him to his service: when he would do any thing to purpose,
he calls for this Spirit of Gods love that delivered him. Let this Spirit carry
us to preach, to meditate, to deny our selves, to be patient, to bear our
crosses, to dye in peace.

If any duty more then common offer it self, let this main motive be drawn
forth, and be as the necessity of an armed man, Ephe. 3.16
That the Lord has delivered us from all adversity. Then we put on the Lord
Jesus, when his love is put into and upon our souls, to enlarge and widen them
to go through our conversation with holy resolution! His length, and depth, and
breadth and height must enlarge us to the length or continuance of a sweet
course to the depth and hardness of the most difficult duties, to the height
and pitch of the most heavenly affections, the breadth and measure of the most
plentiful and fruitful obedience, that is, to whatsoever is godliness: Not
our pangs, not our good affections, not all encouragements, blessings, or
examples, no not all means, ordinances and performances (without which this)
will do it: As that good Latymer, to some that asked him, why one that preached
his Sermon, did not preach it as he did: answered, He had his Fiddle and
stick, but wanted his rozen: so undoubtedly will it be here: when we go to
work without this love of the Lord Jesus warming us as an inward principle of
life and motion, we may think we have harped upon the right string, and admire
our selves, but the true stroke of the music, the relish and savor of the
work, will be to seek, and all return upon us with fulsome distaste, in
respect either of Gods account, or our own content. Still that of poor Isaac
will be wanting, Lo, here my Father, is the Altar, and the wood ready: Genesis
22.7
But where is the Sacrifice? Let all I have spoken, end in this, All true sight
of sin, sense of mercy, ends in the life of faith in obedience. Go over the
second Article of conversation in thy thoughts: get a view of it, and conclude.

It must be no small love must drive such a course, no little stock that will
carry such a trade currently: and the cause why the wheel of conversation
cracks and breaks in so many parts, why it drives on so heavily, and is so
unequal in her motion, is this: it wants her spokes to join her to the Nave:
such a wheel we know as wants her staves, must needs split: and the wheel of
that conversation that is full of loding, and duties, being yet vnsupported
with these staves of love from the Naue of the Lord Jesus his deliverance and
redemption, must of necessity crack in sunder. The Lord Jesus (we read)
commended two persons admirably, Luke 7.9. and Luke 7.47. the one, that
Centurion, of whom he said, I have not found such faith in Israel. The other
was Mary, out of whom he had cast seven devils, and said, She loved much,
because much was forgiven her. Let both be joined together: if we get such
faith as is rare to find, let us bewray it by such love as is so too: and both
will carry us forth to this third part of the Catechism, such a conversation
also which is rare to find, such as no Pharise or hypocrite shall be ever
able to reach, because he never felt or tasted how good the Lord Jesus is. How
should Simon kiss, anoint, wipe the feet of Jesus, without his forgiveness?
He had little to forgive, and therefore little love: he made a dinner to
Christ in courtesy, but kissed him not nor anointed him. Look up to God now,
and see in what this whole view of the Catechism stands. Surely by the way of
sin, and the Law to carry thee to faith in the Lord Jesus, The scope of this
Treatise weigh well. 1 Timothy 3. vlt.
that the truth of Jesus may lead thee to an holy conversation: this is Christ
Jesus, the mystery of Godliness: to feel such persuasion of vndecaying
sweetness, and such presence of this persuasion of love, as might tell thy
dearest lusts, Romans 6.21. What fruit have I had of ye? yea, make thee stink
before them (as he said of David) that thou might be Christ's servant for
ever: and that he might pray, read, meditate, hear, do, suffer, obey in
thee: in his strength, walk in all holy conversation. Endeavor it then: and
the more thou have toyled with thine own hands and skill, and caught nothing:
the more fall down in the deep experience of thy utter nothing: those nets of
thine own which thou have sacrificed so long unto, lay them by, and see the
vanity of them: saying, Lord, depart from me a sinful wretch. Cast thou out
(Lord) on the right side of the Shi^* Thou that have all the fish in the lake
at command to b^ing them together: all duties, the whole work of Conversation,
to go through with ease and delight, O Lord Jesus, do thou all my works in me!
Esaias. 26.12.

Secondly, to this end, be admonished not to rest only 2 Timothy 1.14.
how far the abilities of the regenerate reach, in point of concurrence with
the Grace of the Spirit: I dare not think that the Spirit puts the reyne out
of his own hand, and sway into ours, or that he is ever tied to work in us
(he may desert us for a time to abase us) much less that our principle is
active from us, (as our selves.) Its enough that he, as our active principle,
must work the will and the deed in us, and do all for us: and that he has
betrusted us with such an isntrumental ability and influence from himself, as
is endued with fitnes to this Holy conversation: and more then so, has given
us the hand of faith to iogge his arm continually to assist us: binding
himself by promise, till we give him over, not so forsake us in his
assistance: if we will plead our liberty (Oh, happy they that can!) he will not
be wanting to us: If when we sought him not, he found us: and finding, Esaias
65.1.
reconciled us to himself by his death; how much more shall he by his life
save us, and give us the hand to help us over this great hill of conversation,
that so we reap the fruit of holiness, eternal life! Oh, let us put forth our
souls to this work: It is the workman that must make the Saw to cut, Romans
5.9* 10 Romans 6.22.
by framing it to such a power, and cut with it when he has done. Both are
his: iron cannot make it self sharp alone, and being sharp, cannot cut
alone, nor apply it self to the wood or stone: so here: yet remember, he that
has put an isntrumental power into ours soul to obey, has also created the
life of faith in us to stir this arm of the Spirit, to draw this Saw over
our wood and stone, that we may (...) perform obedience. Oh that any, who
ever sought the Lord for faith, should hang it up till it rust, and never set
it on work by prayer, self denial, and diligence! Let us not be of the mind
of them, who think themselves safe if once they have faith: they doubt not but
she will set her self on work, whether we be sleeping or waking.

No, no: he that will not save thee for thy obedience, will yet save thee by
it: and he that does neither of both for thee, will yet do neither without
thee: but he will so bow thy soul to a sweet liberty of love and delight to
obey; and to such a confidence in his promise, to be enabled: yea such a
persuasion within thy self to encourage, that being moved and acted, thou
shall act and work together with his grace, thy own salvation. Be not wanting
then to such a principle of life and motion in thee.

Numb. 9.19. who attended the watch of the Lord day and night: ready upon the
least wauing of the Cloud or fire from the Tabernacle, to remove: and upon the
first rest hereof, to stand still. As the Apostle never thinks himself to
have pressed a duty well, when he vrges to pray, or read, or hear, or be
armed, except he add this too, Watch thereto, Ephesians. 6.18. 1. Pet. 5.8. 1. Cor.
16.13. So say, I Obey and watch to it, walk with GOD in this wheel of thy
course, and watch to it: be aware of each turn of the wheel, each duty,
occasion, liberty, service: else it will be in vain to know it, if thy loins
be not girt, and thy lamp always burning to it. If GOD have once purged thy
foul heart, and seasoned it for thee, keep it so: he did it not with much
adoo, that thou should undo it all at once, by thy ease and sloth, world,
pleasures, weariness and the like. Let the wise Virgins take heed of nodding
in this night of the age we live it. Let them watch to their work: let them
see how they grow downward in rooting and setlednesse, upward in
fruitfulness, skill, ease and experience, resolution and full purpose of heart
to cleave to God. And by so doing, we shall watch to the coming also of our
Lord Jesus, to translate us from this our poor walking with him, to be with
him: and to be rid of all our clogs which hinder us from so doing: and go from
this our doing Gods will as it is in heaven; to do it in Heaven. Never was
greater cause for us to long for this coming then in these times, wherein not
only we are let by Satan and the world from our duties, I mean the service
of the time, and the grace of our conversation! Oh how well shall it be the,
when not only Goats and Sheep shall for ever be parted, but the sad carriage
and strangeness of sheep to sheep be both forgiven and removed! where
Luther and Zuinglius, (as one said) where Cranmer and Hooper, where Ridley and
Sande^s shall accord for ever in perfect amity? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Amen.

Give God the praise.
FINIS.
LONDON. Printed by I. N. for SAMVEL MAN, dwelling at the sign of the Swanne,
in Paul's Churchyard. 1632.


