Imprimatur

THO. WYKES.
Martij 18. 1639.
Satyrae seriae: OR, The Secrets of things; written in Moral and Politic
Observations.

Vtilius libri scribuntur ad incrementum literarum, and literae frequentius
habentur ad augmentum librorum.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks, for Abel Roper, and are to be sold at his shop at
the black spread Eagle over aginst St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1640.

TO THE READER.
SOME advise to put ones Thoughts into Words, lest they prove ungrateful and
smother their owner: Others to put a Man's Words into Writing, lest they pass
for what they are not: So that like unto those I have unfolded my thoughts, to
see what complexion they are of in the open light; since nothing is more
prejudicial to a discreet value of things, than to see them at half and
counterfeit shadows. I have not delivered them with insinuations, or advantages
of Art, for Essaies are but the Images of affairs, which being quickened with
the life and vigor of profit or pleasure, may add motion to your liking: and
these are only Speeches, the representation of men's thoughts, and therefore may
challenge an easier access unto them, being of their own nature insinuating,
and returning into Men's bosoms, whence they came.

Farewell.
The Heads of the chiefest things contained in this Book.
1 OF Ceremonies and civil Complements. 2 Of multiplicity of books. 3 Of
Fortune. 4 Of the wisdom of speech. 5 Of trust and distrust. 6 Of Jests. 7 Of
Love. 8 Of Contemplation and Action. 9 Of Deceits and errors. 10 Of Content.
11 Of Friendship. 12 Of Silence. 13 Of Questions. 14 Of Life. 15 Of Sciences.
16 Of Dangers. 17 Of precepts of Policy.
Satyrae seriae: OR, The Secrets of things; written in Moral and Politic
Discourses.
1 Of Ceremonies and civil Complements.
ONE says wisely, that Ceremonies are but the translation of Virtue into the
known Tongue, the distinctions and full points, without which they could not be
understood: If we be so careful in the set forms of Speech and Language, why
not in Action and Gesture? the one speaks to the eye, the other to the ear:
They are but Transitory Hyeroglyphicks; and not to use them, bespeaks neglect
to others, when themselves are best expressed by a seeming neglect. It is the
mind that is capable of a decent carriage, which if you first make expert,
they will be better expressed to the life, than only by an apish imitation of
corporal action. To use them too much toward inferiors, is popularity: to
use them toward equals, is civility and love: toward superiors, they become
reverence and companions of their honor; for bowed heads, bare caps,
ceremonies and respects do make honor so desirable; and the weakest look no
farther than to these outward accidents; never thinking that true bravery and
honor conststs in Honerante, non honorato, not only in formality of worship,
but a mental reverence to their virtue, which is the most worthy part of
dignity. Though of themselves they be light and vain, yet they have that
command in the respects of men, by reason of that which they use to signify;
that some whose minds are below the performance of nobler virtues, do seek
reputation by comeliness of going: it is good to have a commanded carriage, and
not to let the errors of the mind be discovered by the negligence of looks:
it appears by the truth of the old Adage, that they are significative, and not
only Mutes: Nil interest habere ostium apertum, vultum clausum.

2 Of the Multiplicity of Books.
THe most Books add rather bulk to the body of Learning, than spirit and
quickness of inventions, as a soul answerable, which by diffusion weakens and
makes slow the course of knowledge.

In Books, the relations of affairs are framed in the mold of the
understanding, by way of expression, which makes those things that are writ
have a shape and appearance of a more perfection than those things which are
done. They endeavor to be either Delian diverse of Questions, or to have the
ilumination of an Interpreter or the name of an exact Methodist: and for the
variety of them and their adulatory Dedications, I may say of them as of our
Farthings, the impression makes them go the curranter, though the matter
debaseth them: books are only freed from the power of Oblivion, which is the
occasion the Poets did promise to themselves an immortality of name; esteeming
all other things as subject to the inconstancy of affair and period of time.

Pectoris exceptis ingeniijque bonis. Which is the meaning of that Fable of
theirs, how that in the end of the thread of every man's life there is a
certain coin affixt, upon which is writ the name of the dead party; which as
soon as the Sister has cut, she throws them into the River Lethe; but about
the River there flies a great company of Birds, which do carry the coin a
little way in their beaks, and afterward carelessely let them fall again: but
amongst those Birds there are found some Swans, which if they light with a
Coin upon ones name on it, they presently carry it to the Temple, devoting it
to perpetuity: Books are the Coins on which men's names are writ; those of an
ordinary flight, they endure for a time, but presently are forgot; but if there
be one who can sing well, they are carried on the wings of true Fame, and as
Swans leave the sweetest notes to posterity. Books are the best Counselors,
the best Companions, and the best heirs of a man's knowledge; they be the
Monuments wherein lie hid the sacred relics of Knowledge and Wisdom; and
the reason, why the multiplicity of Books yields not advancement to learning
is, because they are but as rivolets, drawn as it were from the Fountain of
some Author, and conveied by the secret passages of men's understandings and
fancies, return to it again; keeping still the same level with the
Wellspring, which denies a further rise. It is a good rule in Natural
Philosophy, Interitus rei arcetur per reductionem ejus ad principia, which is a
good rule also in the course of Learning; for commonly for prevention of
corruption in Letters, there needs the reducing of the understanding to the
first Original: and sometimes if they begin not again the sent will grow
cold: To write in that in which there is no beaten path, is most honorable;
for he that leads has this advantage above others, (says learned Hooker) if
others follow him, he has the glory of it: if not, he has the excuse of
prejudice.

3. Of Fortune.
I Will not speak of the actions of men, as they are the children of Divine
providence: Nor will I ascribe an Apotheosis to Fortune; but will only view
the power and activity of man's reason, in the nimble apprehension and taking
hold of occasions, to see how far outward Circumstances do conduce to the
making of a man's own Fortune. It was the saying of a great one, that however
he knew that rule, that quisque fortunae suae faber, yet the most in number
were those, who spoiled their own fortunes. It is an Art which most men's
invention have flowed into; and yet is still capable of renovation, as it were,
by the incertainty of affairs so curiously involved by mutual relation, which
is Tacitus his observation of a too superstious Constancy in that Emperor to
his old way, in which once he proved fortunate, idem manebat, and idem
dicebat: So that some through an imbecility of mind, not knowing to make a
departure from the gravity of their usual pace, do oftentime, with that
Spaniard in the story, undergo the lash of Fortune: Qui respicit adventos non
seminat, says Solomon; so that there is required a judicious observancy of
time, as well as a prudent making of occasions. He that would be a Master in
the Art, must discern his Elogium, who was said to be adeo versatilis ingenij,
ut quocunque loco viveret; fortunam sibi fabricare visus est. There are some of
that temper; the pulse of whose affection still beats after the motion of
honor, who had rather be not good than not great; and therefore will cast about
the mist of deceit, to blind the eye of your apprehension, and by corrupt
counsels endeavor to rise from the clouds of disgrace, to see the sun of
honor; but apparent rari. Others will bring all their Elogies of their worth
upon the stage of honor, where they would gladly display themselves; they will
cry after Fortune, and court her, like a peevish Mistress, into disdain of
them, till at last they prove but swollen bubles, which the least wind of
adversity makes them evapourate into their own element. Honor is virtues
reward, and is no more than the reflexive beams of the sun of virtue, and
gives only to good wills in a larger extent to exercise themselves in, as an
open field; and therefore it must be used as in the open region of the
Commonwealth, not in the enclosures of ones own particular ends and respects:
He must study well the nature of the present times, who would be an
instrument of state; for otherwise his understanding may prove an unfit match
for service of Majesty; impar congressus Vlysi. He must know himself as well
as the times, and others as well as himself: Qui sapit innumeris moribus aptus
orit; and as Tully says proprium hoc esse prudentiae statuit, conciliare sibi
animos hominum, and ad usus suos adjungere. To prostitute a man's time too much
to the fleshy thoughts of Fortune, tastes of the stomach of the Israelite: and
surely those thoughts spent on riches, will devour those which should be for
the Temple: whence comes those corrupt axioms, Prosperu^ and felix scelus
virtus vocatur. Aesope says wittily, multa novit vulpes, sed nuum magnum
felis; which is no more than the certainty of a friend for ones fortune, and
honesty for ones self: its like the Sun which gives a great light; whereas the
Stars, though more in number, do not all shine so bright, sapiens
dominabitur astris. It is no small part of policy to distinguish of fortune and
occasion, its easier to see the one than retain the other: facilius for tunam
reperias, quam retineas: Riches are sometimes virtues ornament, sometimes vices
punishment; and surely it has a diverse operation, according to the difference
of the materials it meets withal; The prosperity of fools shall slay them;
Limus nt hic durescit, etc. Some in the making of their own fortunes, are well
studied in men, but know not the nature of businesses, nor worth of favors:
others only wise by rule; and maxims of particular government look not into
the nature and quality of their competitors, and those whom they have to deal
with: so that betwixt these two observations of extremes, one might extract an
exact pattern: take some of both, and it will prove a good composition; as
well some of the knowledge of persons, as excellency of art of policy.

4 Of Wisdom of Speech.
SPeech (says Scaliger) being but a Sarment of Nature, covers either the
soldier as with Arms for necessity; or as a Gown the Senator for profit; or
as a more dainty garment the curious Citizen for pleasure: it consociateth the
remotest regions of men's hearts, by the participation of one another thoughts:
and therefore I can call Discourse by no apter title, than to be the vehicula
cogitationum, and therefore they should still run even with the wheels of
their thoughts. These were the ancient decrees of truth, they counted it an
happiness of the understanding to be enlightened with it, a weight of labor to
search it, but the glory of humane nature to speak it. Ante omnia mi fili
custodi cor tuum, thoughts are but the children of the heart, as speech is of
the thoughts; the prudency of whose direction is of excellent use, view it
either in the glass of Divinity or Policy: and even in the building up of the
fabric of a man's own fortune, there is no small wisdom in polishing and
framing the materials of ordinary talk: Every speech acquaints us either with
the matter which we ask, or the mind of the speaker which he delivers: the
perfection of the art of speech to others, consists in a volubility of
application, and as one says, if a man would come to an excellency of it, if
he were to speak with a hundred persons, he should vary his style to each:
which Art Alexander seems well to have known: whilst he animates his
Soldiers, some with the hope of Wealth, incenst the ambitious with the heat of
Honor, provoked the malicious, with the remembrance of the former grudges
betwixt the two Nations: Thus speeches which have an edge, enter sooner the
affections; than dull and slow expression. It would not be unusefull to have
the knowledge of the several forms of speech; of sudden questions, of
suspended answers, and a great variety of others, in which they think* no
small policy consists: together with the apprehension of the colors of praise
and dispraise of vice and virtue: but in the use of these a man should have
rather a largeness of understanding, to turn themselves in with dexterity,
than to be tied to the straightness of a few rules of remembrance. To have
wisdom grounded in the heart, and no too much in the tongue, becomes policy:
Loquendum ut vulgus, sentiendum ut sapientes. Words ought to become the person
who uses them: which Tacitus intimates, speaking of Augustus: Augusto
profluens and quae principe^ deceret, fuit oration. Seneca notes also a danger,
when words are not quickened with the life of reasons; but are only uttered
with a kind of plausibility of the speaker. Nocet illis eloquentia quibus
amorem facit sui, non orationis: imitatio^ of others, however useful, yet is
servile; because it should come from the fluency of a happy imitation: but this
is rather to be referred to the characters of style and oratory, than to a
serious observation: Eloquence makes for the credit of the matter; but to speak
agreeably to whom you direct your speech, shows more of the wisdom of the
person: Those who have the style of eloquence, do rather use the applause of it
for pardon of faults, than for suffrage to virtues merits. Thus to know the
parts of speech, is not only the part of a good Grammarian, but a Polique.

5 Of Trust and Distrust.
IT cannot be denied but that the safest rule to trust to, not to be deceived,
is to to distrust. A Religious suspicion is a good antidote against the poison
of Vice, which still the devil instills into us with a deceitful pleasure,
putting an imposture upon their understanding. Our Saviors prophecy of the
latter times enjoins this Caution: Cum venerit filius hominis, non inveniet
fidem super terram. There is a distrust commanded to Doctrines, to Men, to
Times: and however we be all from one common lump of the earth, that we might
seem to keep a greater distance from men, than the common Relation of Nature
does require, he who said love one another, which is Charities Rule, the same
bids us join the innocence of the Dove with the wisdom of the Serpent; which
is Prudence Rule. It is a digressio^ from the ordinary Law of Charity, to
entertertaine suspicions, which only fly in the night of a man's ignorance.
It Is the style of Policy to distrust, where by probability of appearance it may
give security. To let every thing receive a man's own additions; which are
formed in the weak model of a doubtful fancy, distracts judgment; and
though men that are most sensible of their own imperfections, will soonest
expect deficiencies from others: yet it is safe to think there is somewhat
lies hid, which he does not apprehend; for it collects the understanding,
admits not of any thing without due examination; for many through want of
venting the ecstasies of their breasts, have turned, dyed with the palenesse of
envy, which have put the whole frame of their composition out of joint* and we
may well decline from the trust to others, when it is not always safe to trust:
our selves. The heart of man is deceitful, which like a Magic glass,
represents the forms of things which are not: Therefore first proceed from a
knowledge and caution to your self, to that of others; so it may prove a
wholesome exorcisme, lest you might swell too great in self esteem: the
flatterer composeth the model of your own desires, your self being the
Archetype: therefore first let them be viewed in reasons light, and the others
as things imperfectly mixed, are obscured: Palle scunt phoebo radios jaculante
cometae. Machiavell does well to acquaint the world with the common practice of
men: for it induces vigilance to fair seeming actions and gestures pretending
to amity, which are nothing but the alimenta socordiae: For you shall have a
man give you the smoothness of his countenance to be taken hold of; whilst he
studies evasion by the sliperinesse of his fancy. A fairer look than ordinary
toward the Spaniard, puts him into a present suspicion of his own safety. In
friendship it is a good rule odi tanquam amaturus, and ama tanquam oditurus.
Insinuations of amity are dangerous symptoms of a perfidious disposition. It
is an ordinary custom for one man to build his fortunes out of the ruins of
another: we see the manner of Natures production of things, how commonly the
corruption of one thing, is the generation of another: and how many have
generated their own fortunes, for taxing the corruptions of other men: And
ever note, that where there is too great a facility of believing, there is also
a willingness of deceiving: and although belief carries with it a color of
innocence, yet distrust still carries strength off safety. Tutius peccat qui
diffidit, innocentius qui credit.

6 Jests.
IT is the best composition of speech to use gravity of matter, and reserve a
liberty of style: which is no more than to turn aside from the ordinary ways
of expressions to certain pleasant walks made for the recreation of the mind.
Jests in the wiser sort of men, serves as ornament; in the weaker they be but
levity; if you use them concerning persons, the truest nature of a Jest, is to
want truth, for they should have somewhat of the invention: but if they taste of
malignity, and begin to fly on the wings of insolency, they draw too nigh
the nature of Libells. Therefore the State, and those heavenly bodies of
Majesty, admits not the presence of humane audacity: Nemo ad Deorum conviviu^
admittitur, nisi ad ludibrium: too much use of them in serious affairs,
relishes of the spirit of vanity: for Jests never penetrate farther than the
superficies of the matter; which as one notes is the properplace of a Jest.
They may come to the esteem of light bodies, which ever swim on the top, but
never with solidity goes to the depth of knowledge. They should never look
toward the Temple, for then the Jesuit meets with him in his Epigram, Tu
cave sed fiat ni io^^s iste focus: they ought not to pass over greatness of
business with a slight of the mind; but they enjoy their use, when they
mollify sharpness of words, with sweetness of conceit: they are good
companions in discourse, and are most facetious, when attended with a happy
concurrance of circumstances. It is a Poetical virtue, and where this kind of
ingenuity lights in men of more solid professions, it is a happy conjunction;
for the one makes him useful, the other delightful: they must be used like
Physic; you must not accustom others ears with them too much: for they lose
their operation, by reason of the too much familiarity they have with the
hearers.

But touching these kind of elegancies, I shall use the words of the learned
Verulam, who says, That of all the excellencies of the gifts of the Mind, as
to repeat after another a great number of names at once reciting: to write
many Verses ex tempore of a Theme: to be quick in Satyricall similitudes: or
ready to turn Jest into Earnest, or Earnest into Jest: these and the like I
esteem no more than the agility of a Dancer of the Ropes, or a Pantomime: for
they are the like things: the one abuses the strength of the body, the other of
the mind.

7 Of Love.
THere is no precept commands that application over a man, as the power of
Love; It draws the affections by a kind of sweetness; whereas rules do it by
distortion. Sometimes its like Circes wand, sometimes like Mercuries Caduceus:
sometimes it corrupts, sometimes it makes chaste: beauty commonly as it is
either found or apprehended, is the object of that fancy, which still proves
like a Gorgon, which while men admire, it makes them blind in the eyes of the
understanding; which causes one to extol the virtues of the party loved so
far above truth. Virtue it self is fair, (which made him say) that if it
could be seen, it would stir up a great many lovers of it: Virtus nil aliud
nisi internaforma, forma externa virtus. It is the strongest of the passions,
and often found in the weakest minds; whose breasts not fortified by the
strength of Counsels; such amorous conceits have the easier access to. Every
soul is imprinted with the character of this desire, which being turned from
the love of the Creatures to piety, it becomes divinity: it makes all things
seem pleasant: and therefore it is the advice of a great one, not to be
without some strong affection: for sine proposito vita languida est: Glances
and gestures do often procure affection, whether it be by strengthening the
imagination or not I know not: it is most fervent when most opposed: nor is it
without a Mystery in Nature the secret attracting of affections betwixt
particulars, without any knowledge or apprehension of their conditions; for
there are certain virtues which want a name, which is the cause some hardly
can give a reason of their love.

It is prevalent, sometimes in the wisest men, which shows it has a proximity
with good.

Saepe latet vitium proximitate boni. Youth is most subject to those
inclinations, which shows that it is for the most part the Child of Vanity;
whilst he is steeped in his affections, it becomes like a Dew which falls in
the morning of his Youth, scarce got out of the night of his ignorance; and is
expelled by the rising of the Sun of his Knowledge.

Young men are amoumorous, middle-age affectionate, old men doting.

8 Of Action, Meditation, and Contemplation.
THere is as much difference betwixt meditation, and Action in civil
knowledge, as is betwixt Dreams and things really performed: the one has the
apprehension of a thing by the view of the understanding, the other the
knowledge of the particulars by the guide of experience. And although God and
Angels must be only spectactors, yet a nigh conjunction of Action and
Meditation has ever been esteemed as a thing full fraught with virtues: for
as Action would cease if it received not nourishment by Meditation; so
Meditation, if not put in practice, would lose its virtue toward man. The
public commands the best of every man's thoughts: even as in nature, Quod est
conservativum formae majoris, id activitate potentius. Yet certainly they have
all felt the influence of heavenly joy in the quiet repose of their own
thoughts. Observation is the companion of meditation, as experience is of
action: in the framing of a man's own fortune, actions do most conduce: the
worth of which is expressed by our Savior: opera sequuntur eos. Those who wholly
dedicate themselves to be their own readers, must know they are not at all
times politic: and those who meddle in multiplicity of action, will find
they are sometimes not wise: but the praise of Contemplation, I leave as a
subject to some Friar, and will view the virtues of both: Public actions are
commonly uncertain, which do put on several countenances, according to the
variety of occasions: the Notions which we may get of men's thoughts are most
credible: for commonly we are most prone to think of that which we are
naturally inclined to. Natural Pallats do disgust the meditation of the
Scriptures, till they be fed at Christ's Table, they be sharpened for these
heavenly joys: the corrupt opinion of Politics have cast no little darkness
on the glory of letters, esteeming them but as the Patrons of idleness, and
that they do reduce a man's mind from greatness of works, to smalnesse of
speculation: when as every thought is an internal act of reason, and first
settles the mind with the knowledge of its duty, before it put it forward to
execute; for otherwise they may exercise their errous as well as virtues. In
civil conversation it is commonly said, that actionem esse cum stultis;
lectionem cum sapientibus: Meditations in civil matters do too much abstract
the mind, when it is a good Rule; Minus pecuniae, minus fidei, minus
prudentiae in mundo, quam homines cogitent: The best rules in Prudence:
consists in the apprehension of the smallest affairs; and yet makes up the
body of one of the greatest knowledges. The best instances give the securest
information, as Aristotle affirms, Optima cujus que rei natura in portionibus
ejus minimis observatur. Meditations in envious men are to be feared: Pallidos
timeo, rubicundos amo: in religious men it is capable of divinity; in politic
men, it is generative of Counsels. Actions are like precedence of place, most
honorable when they lead: Things that have been once done, though they have
more difficulty, yet they have less praise: in the one you must not be too
stupid, in the other not too pragmaticall. Meditations are like parents, which
do generate: Post varios usus meditando extunderet arts. Actions are like
children which do perpetuate; ut non solum fuisse videantur, sed vixisse.

9 Of Errors and Deceits.
ERrors be the cunning Artists of Vice, as Deceit is of Errors. Cunning men are
most dangerous; when they seem most wise, Serpens putredo magis contagiosa,
quam matura: they take no more of virtue than serves for their turn; and
desires only an opinion of honesty, to procure him other men's faith, a chief
instrument for him to work by: those whose minds are not capable of virtuous
intentions, they divert to sinister and by ways, to cozen the simplicity of
other men's belief: thus true and solid wisdom often degenerates into poor
slights of the mind, while they wrap all their actions in deceit, the better
to carry them invisible: so that they are grown to that subtilty of the Art,
that as one wittily says, Qui indissimulanter omnia agit, aeque decepit; nam
plurimi aut non capiunt, aut non credunt: so that it is become a hard matter
not to deceive: the greatest advantage of deceit is other men's imperfections:
they practice them in words, in gestures; in the composing of which, they are
so curious, that if you should look into the realty of their actions, they
would prove but a poor labyrinth of vanity: which having found out by the even
thread of truth, and having unfolded them, you will find them to be but a
poor rabble of deceit: Qui fraudum minutijs negotiorum frangunt soliditatem. You
never heard of any man of more than ordinary worth, but whose wisdoms were
made of the same stuff as the Soldiers credit was: e tela crassiore, and not
admirable for its fine thinness: To use them to others, is the way to make
them take the like liberty in the use of them to you again: so that you will
hinder your self so much of the knowledge of the certainty of their intentions.

There are three Characters noted of deceit in the Scriptures: Devita
prophanas vocum novitates, and oppositiones falsi nominis scientiae; ineptas
and aniles fabulas devita. Nemo vos decipiat in sublimitate sermonu^. Cunning
men soonest deceive, when not known; therefore I may well change the Poets
Verse.

Politici est virtus maxima nosse dolos. 10 Of Content.
Our endeavors in the pursuit of this, resembles the Sun, which gives us
light into the knowledge of these terrestrial bodies; but again obscures
those Stars and the heavenly globe: so we still dive into the practices and
works of men on earth, while we never think of the glorified bodies of the
Saints in heaven: it is a mystery in nature, that all men do desire some stay
or pole upon which the rest of their thoughts may be turned: and how happily a
man may make this Religion, I appeal to the joy it affords: a general view of
the understanding of the whole world, and all that dwell upon it, makes much
for the nature of Content. This was Solomon's prospect, when he looked upon all
the works of his hands, he pronounced them to be vanity and vexation of
spirit: Men (according to the divine Aphorism) are borne to trouble, as
sparks fly upwards: and thus we may best obscure the false light of worldly
delights with the sun of true wisdom and knowledge. The place of content,
is the content of the place you are in: the highest feet of honor, may be
below the true sense of it: for ambition is like a Fever, which ever seeks to
heal and perfect it self by changing of place, when it is not the local
person, but the mind that is capable of serenity. It is an axiom in the
Physics: Quod corpus non ponderare nisi extra locum suum: The stone weighs not
till it it be lifted off from the body to which it tends: no more does the
soul feel the weight of labor and care, while it has its conversation in
heaven (its proper place) from whence originally it came.

Folly is joy to him who is destitute of understanding; but a man of
understanding walks uprightly. There is nothing so much breeds greatness of
Spirit, as to know the smalnesse of the worth of things: for those men who are
only intent upon the petty things of the world, do sacrifice themselves to
the inconstancy of Fortune, by reason the object of their desires is so capable
of vicissitudes; and do for feit their content: but remove a little these
Elysiums, the joys of Humane fancy, and those several motions of desires
which may seem to arise even from the variety of our composure: and be
ravished a little with a delectare o anima mea in Deo: The sweetness of which
music drownes all the lesser sounds of worldly delights: it settles all the
distempers of the soul, and makes it smooth with a constant equality toward
humane dangers. Thus, you may invert the order of humane delights, while the
Worldling is taken with the riches of Gods mercies; while we here build up the
admirable Fabric of our salvation, wherein Christ is the chief corner stone.
Here you may have your Gardens for meditation, and hence translate to your own
breasts the flowers of Virtue, which may make it flourish as a paradise to it
self: Here you may enjoy the prospect of the Worlds Vanities, beneath the high
pitch of thy sublimer soul: where to be conscious of well-doing, is the
perfection of Humane felicity.

11 Of Friendships.
FRiendships are entertained for credit, for affection, for necessity: the
chief use of them for credit is with great men: for affection with persons of
moderate estate: for necessity with poor men. However men put on fair forms
of friendship, yet parity was a thing much celebrated by the Ancients: rich men
will be more cautious, because they have somewhat to lose; men of like fortunes
will commonly stick closer to you: poor men will be ever suspicious of your
love toward them. They are a remedy against solitude: if they be entered with
good men, they restore the perfection of man; if with bad they corrupt it:
crafty men abuse them, simple men know them not, wise men use them. One alone
makes not a parradise; so let them be few but virtuous. For it is a thing
wherein a man does interpret himself, Nam qui amicitias arct as copulat novas
necessitudines sibi imponit: In the making of a man's own fortune he is
fittest; Qui sapit innumeris moribus. All the caution touching bad men, shall
be like the learning of Sophismes, the better to avoid them: keeping of
company has still a kind of assimilation, as the Physicia^s speak, though it
happe^s through diverse distempers of the mind: some desires you through malice
to defame you; others through corruption of manners to make you bad, some
through cunning to have you feed their sins, which themselves are not able
to maintain. In dealing with these men you must imitate that musical troop
of deceiving the sense: ut cum jam adesse videatur, placide elabetur, because
friends love not to have contempt cast upon their ways: good men enjoy,
cunning men interpret, malicious avoyde, scoffers neglect: these offer
themselves to my pen, as they are commonly used in civil conversation. The
knowledge of all persons reaches but to this, to teach men to play their cards
the better, and to perform business with more dexterity and readiness.

6 Of Silence.
A Man had need to be very well verst in the parts of speech, that needs not
the help of this Mute. To forbear to speak truth or piety, through too
superstitious reverence to the goddess of Silence, were to make a man liable
to his Paradox who told one who was silent, Si prudens sis, stultus es, si
stultus prudens. Liberty of speech shows freedom of mind, and yields a man
information by others answers. Silence is the virtue of a friend, for men love
commonly to lay the things of most value in the surest place; which is the
reason the secret man's bosom does participate of so many Counsels: He who
offends through Speech, offe^ds rashly, who through silence safely. Wisdom
rests in the heart of him that has understanding: but that which is amongst
fools shall be made known. It has a strange kind of virtue in it: and in the
Pythagorean School was thought to breed knowledge, like those who in dreams
receive influences: In matters of consequence qui silet est firmus; For Fame is
like a river which gather strength by going. In some cases a thing not spoke
does express more, than if it had been spoke, says Sophocles. Silence often
shows a depth, though they say the Current stream is most clear. Men very
politic are noted by Tacitus to use a kind of freeness in opening of
themselves. Caesar publicly professed that he had rather be first in a poor
Cottage than second at Rome; but he knew them to be his friends to direct them,
not his competitors to awake them. It is a kind of darkness, for it makes you
walk in obscurity, and rather to be guest at then known. In discourse it is
good to hear men first; for silence has the same effect with authority, it
procures a kind of respect to your words: Meritis si forte virum quem
conspexere silent. Commonly they are well tuned, but gives the pleasantness of
the music inwardly to themselves: and are as a shut book, which if you open
and read, you may find much good discourse therein. It nourishes Meditation,
and is no more than that which Seneca expresses, Sapiens semper in se
reconditur, but in case of devotion you must still use it, ut eo sis melior,
non occultior.

13 Of Questions.
SOme men do rather employ their inventions in raising of questions; then
their judgments in determining them: the one makes learning fruitful of
disputes, the other of works. Asking of questions proceeds commonly from some
prenotion of that which he does ask, which occasioned that opinion in Plato,
to think that all knowledge was but only remembrance: Qui aliquid quaerit,
generali quadam notione comprehendit, aliter qui fieri potest, ut illud quod
fuerat inventum agnoscas. It is a great part of learning not to teach only
what to assert, or affirm, but prudently to ask. Men that are very froward in
asking, do often use the same liberty in telling: Like Vessels which want a
bottom, they receive most, because they vent most: in cunning men they are
dangerous, for Questions in them are like Beggars gifts, sua munera mittit in
hamo, which are only to draw somewhat back again by way of answer, to betray
you. Sudden Questions do often procure the truest relation of matters, which
on considiration they do begin to color: they must be warily raised in
religion, for in it we have still more respect to the author of divinity, than
the matter: and as delight in humane Learning is inferior to that which is
divine, so faults committed in divine knowledge are more dangerous than those
in humane. The ancients did raise them with a jealousy, which is Gods
attribute; not with the spirit of contention, which is the Devils: In the life
of Christ it is observed that his humility did conquer all the vain practices
of men; so in religion, which is the Christians life, humbleness of spirit
does often go beyond the subtilety of humane understanding: for a man may let
his soul slip away, and yet dispute of the highest points of divinity: and
therefore it is safer with some of the Saints to sit at Christ's feet with
humility in meditation of his passion, than in the Chair of subtle
controversy.

14 Of Life.
MEn desire Life, as Children do the light: and as the love in the one is
increased by the sight of glorious trifles, so is that in the other. The desire
of humane honors, the glory of splendid miseries, the comforts of friends, and
all the passions which we attract in the course of our life, by too much
familiarity with them, do make it so desirable. The consideration of life as
it is a passage and journey is good and wholesome; but the fear of the brevity
of it, tastes of a weak and vain spirit: there is some mixture of vanity in
the contemplatio^s of them, who would make the space of a whole life but a
preparation for the pains of death; when we know it should be spent after the
comforts of a better life; in hoc quod mortem prospicimus, fallimur; quicquid
enim retr^ est, mors est. And we follow a better Oracle, who has told us that
Death has lost his sting, which might sharpen our fears. The Satyrist speaks
not only like a good Poet, but a good Morallist: Quid Turpius esset, quam
propter vitam, vivendi perdere causam: while we desire to advance our lives,
we neglect the performance of those duties for which it was given us. The
Ethnicks did terminate the desires of life in the happiness of it: great men
often slight it in others, abuse it in themselves. Nero preferred Seneca's
livings before his life, though he had formerly been his schoolmaster.
Virtues perfect life, innocence restores it, vices debase it: the passions
contemn it: prosperity shows the riches of life, adversity the wealth of the
mind: hunc volo, laudari qui sine morte potest. The true esteem of the worth
of life, raises a man to the highest pitch of Heroical valor. This made John
the Duke of Saxony, being condemned to dye, esteem no more of his life than a
game at Chesse came to. This made Sir Thomas Moore (while he jested with the
Barber about the Controversy between his head and the King) esteem so little
of his life; I mean not the bare dissolution of his frame into their several
elements; but in a true consideration of life, and her several stages, we may
safely repose our thoughts in Solomon's Parable: una generatio migrat, and
altera venit, sed terra manet in aeternum veluti the atrum in quo haec fabula
pregitur: it is the best conjunction to be an old man in wisdom, and a child
in innocence. Life commonly gives not that fame to men of excellency of parts,
as Death which is the life of Fame, which rises out of her ashes; except some
turn a lover of men, and devote themselves to the Commonwealth: then laudem
mors alijs quam tibi vita dedit.

15 Of Sciences.
SInce Learning is the perfecter of Humane reason; its happy when it self is
perfected by reason of experience: Theology is the safest star to direct our
course in the ways of the intellectual world, in which, as in other parts of
the greater world, you shall meet with some places barren, some for use, others
for delight: some Sciences are fruitless of works, others useful in
direction, others pleasant in speculatio^. They should not be altogether
Virgins, but should sometime bring forth and be generative; and as they be the
improvement of humane reason, so its reason men should endeavor to improve
them; multi pertransibunt, and augebitur scientia, was the prophecy of the last
and worst times. To have Sciences still run after the style of Master and
Scholar, is Pedanticall, to have them labor for production of works, is
Philosophical. Disputes rise from the search into the understanding, works
from the scrutiny into nature; wherefore says Heraclitus, Let men seek the
truth of things in the greater World, not in their own little Worlds. Elenches
(the idols of men's brains) are come to that sinnesse of slight, as Seneca
seems well to express them, whiles he compares them to the tricks of Juglers;
which we know not after what manner they be done; but we know sure enough that
it is not so, as it seems to us to be. Rational studies do still sharpen the
understanding for the orderly capacity and methodicall apprehension of any
matter. Moral Philosophy guides the affections, Logic the understanding,
Policy the Commonwealth; Astrology is conjecturall; Mathematics certain,
Metaphysics sublime: Poetry rises from the strength of a Natural wit,
Rhetoric from a dainty mind; Natural Philosophy from deep Caves and
Mineralls, says a learned one: History springs from times, matters, persons.
Knowledge and learning without experience, is like the statue of Polyphemus,
which wants an eye: And therefore men who are wholly immersed in their own
thoughts are less nimble for taking hold of occasions. To go always by the
straightnes of rule, does not so well agree with the cross lines of fortune,
which requires a fashioning head: so that little learning falling into men of
strength of capacity, nimblenesse of apprehension, ability of judgment, will
produce greater effects than a continued study in an unexperienced man.
Knowledge of Sciences, brings forth such works, which according to the parts
of the receiver prove the Nobler. Cunning men, it makes them able to deceive:
the judicious it makes them apply themselves to nobler ends and intentions: in
Stoical natures they breed a neglect of things. Grave studies make a man
learned, ingenious studies praised, religious happy; and sometimes the foolish
studies most fortunate.

16 Of Dangers.
ELegant was his observation of the gazing Philosopher, how that if he had
looked down, he might have seen the stars in the water; but looking up he
could not see the water in the stars: and commonly inspection into low
matters, discover the knowledge of those things, which by the contemplation of
themselves might expose us to danger; melior est oculi visio, quam animi
progressio. Dangers have somewhat of the nature of the Cocatrice; and as the
one is begot of prodigious mixture, so is the other of disparity of
circumstances; whom if you chance to observe first the fear of danger is past;
but if he penetrate you first, he endangers your safety. Some are more quick
on the present to avoid the blow, than of foresight to prevent it; security is
the Mother of them, so that they have the quality of an enemy, Dolus an virtus
quis in host, they often deceive as well as overcome: to whom they seem
light, they soonest light into them: Changes and periods of Co^mon-wealths, in
some sort exceed the reach of humane Prudence: which as the Kingdom of heaven
comes not by observation, but reaches to an high act of Providence. The
avoiding of danger, altogether wants not danger; for sometimes Physic, which
is given against the violency of one diseasese, enclines the body to a worse,
and are so much the more hurtful, by how much the more secret. Dangers do
show prudence, safety temperance. Some do vainly affect a kind of glory in
running into them: but he that loves danger shall perish therein. They are well
considered in private, but are ill feared in action; for then nil terribile
nisi ipse timor. Its wisdom to oversee them, valor to overcome them,
desperateness to run into them.

17 Of Precepts of Policy.
THe extent of this discourse, is as large as the actions of men themselves:
and Speeches in this kind being but the children of observation, have the
liveliest representation of action, when experienced men write them. Therefore
I will borrow some from that King, whose heart was said to be like the sands of
the Sea; and will set them without order, to show that they are still capable
of additions.

The turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools
shall destroy them.
THis Parable describes the greatness of the misery of the weaker sort, and
the weakness of the greater sort: the one whose mind being not truly settled
in the apprehension of themselves and others; nor his thoughts poyzed with the
weight of judgment, turns from the performance of his duty to crooked
intentions, and slights of the mind, and cunning, which sacrifices him to the
tyranny of misfortune, and not seasoned with divine Precepts, loses his rest
and content, and in the end proves miserable, when Solomon says, Prudens
advertit ad gressus suos, stultus divertit ad dolos. The other who consider not
any thing after the rules of wisdom; but whose thoughts being below the
ordinary things of fortune: a more prosperous aspect of good fortune puffes him
up, and breeds an inequality in his mind, not knowing that every thing has its
worth from its use, but thinking them to have their glory from others esteem.
Go into their order, Qui magnam felicitatem concoquere non possunt: and
through a weakness of understanding sinkes under the burden of his felicity.

Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before
thee.
THis Parable taxes a vain curiosity in men, who not caring to go on with a
caution to their own ways, but turns to observation of others speeches,
rather caring what men might say, then what they ought to do; according to
that of Solomon, cunctis sermonibus ne accommodes aure^ tuam, etc. He who
applies himself to the inspection of others manners and customs, rather than
the government of his own, has not well studied this precept. And again, he
who looks not straight before him, with an insight into the present state of
things, but does by a wandering of the mind anticipate the joys of future
comfort. It does obscure and dull the true apprehension of the present, and
makes men's minds uncertain, rather led by the hope of that which shall be,
than content with the fruition of that which is. In another place he says,
Wisdom is before him that has understanding: but the eyes of the fool are
in the ends of the earth. And again, Better is the sight of the eye than the
wandering of the mind: the one shows setlednes in judgment, the other
diversions of a weak mind. Thus do all those who fly on the Wings of Humane
desires, who do interpret the meaning of that Fable; while they either come
too nigh the Sun of Honor, are melted with the heat of ambition; or else
flying over the Ocean of humane affairs, do meet with Clouds and Mists of
disgrace, which do make slow their motion toward their intended desires.

Reprove not the scorner, least he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee.
WE are taught, not to throw the precious Pearl of Wisdom before men of
Swinish Condition.

Give Council to a Scoffer, and he will corrupt thy wholesome advice by the
infection of his poisonous breath; and what is spoke against their ways, they
only think them to proceed out of an honest simplicicity, and an ignorance
of their course. Therefore says Solomon, Stultus non accipit verba prudentiae
nisi ea dixeris quae sunt in cord ejus. A man of understanding shall attain
unto wise Counsels, for he knows that they do but use the privilege of
friendship, who do but rebuke them; and besides he is conscious that Mortal
condition, how virtuous soever, is capable of error; according to that of the
Comaedian Homo sum a me nil alienum expecta.

Wise men lay up knowledge, but the mouth of fools is mere destruction.
IN this is reprehended the Futile Loquacity of of those who have not so much
knowledge as to conceal their ignorance; but by untimely discourse do forfeit
the opinion of their wisdom, who lets the stock of their knowledge run
into the Channel of watery discourse, before their breasts, the fountain, be
full. The other husbands well his talk, and to that end lays up the fruit of
knowledge, and ut sapiens semper in se reconditur: Wisdom rests in the
heart of him that has understanding, but that which is amongst fools shall
be made known.

The ways of a fool are right in his own eyes: but he that harkeneth unto
Council is wise.
HE that does not acknowledge that he is weak, is but weak in knowledge. A
man had need view himself often in the glass of Divinity, to see what Habits
and forms his soul wears; not in the flattering glass of his own thoughts:
neither must he too much trust to his own heart; for he is wise that knows
the deceitfulnes thereof. The opinion of being virtuous, is reckoned amongst the
causes of vice: its a safer rule for one to say, I Will avoid this, because
judgment tells me it is naught, than to say, I love and follow this, because I
affect and think it good: for the receite of wisdom and instruction will
give subtilty to the simple, to the wise man knowledge and discretion.

A fools wrath is presently known: but a prudent man covers shame.
THere is no passion so soon betrayeth the secrets of the heart as anger, and
none discovers this passion so much as the heart of a fool. The Poet calls it
a torture, to tyrannize a man to confession: ubi vino tortus and ira: By these
two we come to see a man's nakedness; they betray the tower of reason to the
fury of the assaulting passions. Here is the difference betwixt patience, which
is the covering of a man's shame; and anger which is the discovering of his
folly: the one upon every occasion grows loud with insolency, the other upon
every occasion draws the curtain of Prudence before him, which is Silence, to
make him walk unseene.

There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing: there is that makes
himself poor, yet has great riches.
THere are some, who are not of an ordinary composition of understanding, can
enjoy the riches of Content in the midst of an honest poverty. It is the
faculty of the imagination that can turn it self, and make every thing
appear to it self, as it will it self, says Antoninus. It is not the
outward things, but the mind which is capable of Content: non est beatus nisi
qui beatum se esse putat. The other, whose riches are larger than the extent of
their knowledge, loses the use of them, by an unruly desire of having more,
when as David says, Man walks in a vain shadow, he heapeth up riches and
knows not who shall gather them: a desire of Wealth still shows the
poorness of a man's mind: (or thus) there are some who vainly glories in the
opinion of being held rich, advancing in Fame that, which he really finds the
want of; others who through a narrowness of understanding, would be thought to
have nothing, because they will reserve a power of having more.

The back-slider in heart shall be filled with their own ways, and a good man
shall be satisfied from himself.
THere can arise no greater grief, or anxiety of Spirit, then from the
following the desires of the heart. This Solomon pronounces as a curse against
those that hating knowledge, did not choose the fear of the Lord, therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own ways, and be filled with their own
devices. There is difference betwixt the prospect, which was Solomon's, who
pronounced all the works of his hands to be vanity and vexation of spirit: And
when God beheld all that was done; Lo it was very good. Wise men, whose
breasts are sacred Treasuries of good counsel, though they meet with
obliquity and crossenesse in business, yet they can presently descend into
themselves, and there find special preservatives and good precepts against
the distasters of outward loss.

The simple believe every word; but the prudent does look well to his going.
THere is still a privation of Judgment, where there is a too great facility
of believing. Our Savior warns us of the deficiency of Faith: Cum venerit
filius hominis non inveniet sidem super terram: Distrust is the chief Antidote
against the poison of deceit. It is a Character of Wisdom: The prudent man
is ever suspicious to his own credulity, caring rather that he should do
what he ought, than to hear others talk of what he ought not to do.

The heart of him that has Understanding seeks knowledge, but the mouth of
fools feeds on foolishness.
ALL men's minds either feed on their own virtues, or the detraction of
another vice; for in all knowledge which is but the food of the mind: there is
a kind of assimilation: they who have drunk a more full draught of wisdom,
do still desire to preserve it by the same nourishment, by which it first
took Life: the other like a prodigal child feeds not clean, but amongst his
base lusts, and pleasures which prove but Husks, which may provoke the
appetite, but cannot fill it.

Excellent speech becomes not a fool; much less do lying lips a Prince.
IN the wisdom of Speech, there is to be observed a decorum, what words
should fit the Speaker. Great words become not a servant, nor wise the fool. A
Prince should use Majesty of Speech, befitting the state of his person; and
truth of speech befitting the divinity of his Commission: the one in way of his
person, as Tacitus notes: Augusto profluens and que principem decerit fuit
oration: For the variety of his words, the Scripture teaches him an heavenly
attribute, Dij sicut eritis.

It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he is gone, then he
boasts.
THis shows the ordinary deceit, and the formulaies of buying; when many
times that which men praise is not good, nor that ill which men disprayse:
therefore it will be useful to observe in common Language, to see how many
colors you can reprehend in them.

An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning, but the end thereof
shall not be blessed.
THis reprehends the immature access to abundancy of wealth: qui festinat ad
divitias non erit insons; its true many have made a shorter cut to riches,
having some knowledge, and not too much honesty: who though they may keep a
great noise in men's mouths, yet a prosperous success scarce favors them:
illis vix gaudet tertius haeres: and besides Solomon tells us, that they take
Wings like the Eagle and fly away: quae ad breve durant, brevi parantur.

A goodname is to be chosen rather than great riches.
A Good name is the best heir of a man's virtues: No men bonum est instar
unguenti fragrantis: praise in life time is virtues spur; in death it is his
ornament; nemo lauds contemnit, nisi qui prius laudanda facere desuevit.

Repair thy work without, and make it sit for thy self in the field, and
afterward build thine house.
IN the framing of a man's own fortune, he must have a special care to fashion
the materials of his speech, and intentions in private and solitary
meditations, before he come to the actio^ of performance, or the building of
the Fabric. If you do not first cast your purpose in the mold of prudence
and wisdom; your actions will be cast on the unconstancy of Fortune, if you
conceive not honest intentions, and noble ends, you are but Theomachi, you do
build a Babel or things of confusion, quae tolluntur in altum ut lapsu graviore
ruant: If the Archetype be not good which is in the understanding, the
imitation of it will hardly prove capable of perpetuity. Action without
forecast; speech without consideration, controversies in the Pulpit, are like
stones hewn in the Temple, which are there only made fit, whereas they should
build up.

For men to search their own glory, is not glory.
LEt another praise thee, and not thy own mouth; a stranger and not thy own
lips. Poor men often dig in the richest Mines, and search the precious vein
of that glorious mettle, when it belongs to the owners. Men who are poor in
worth and virtue may talk of the honored ways of Fame and Credit, which they
do not owe: for they belong to virtue and godliness. It was said to be the
cause of Iugurths glory, plurimum faciendo and nihil de seipso loquendo; by
which means he grew greater than envy, and fruitful in acts of worth.

Da'mihi neque paupertatem, nec divitias.
THis determines a grave question in Moral Philosophy, whether it were a great
happiness to enjoy wealth, or to contemn it: this cuts out a fair course
betwixt the deformity of foul extremes; and yields a good cooling-card for the
hot game of ambition: to desire that state only wherein we might best serve
God: There ought to be a limitation of the care of getting wealth: our Savior
teaches it, Primum quaerite regnum Dei, etc. The Ethnicks tells us, Primo
quaere animi bona, and caetera vel aderunt, vel non oberunt. The kingdom of
Christ was not of this world; (therefore says one) if this were his Kingdom,
he would not let the evil be amongst the good; nor the lascivious with the
chaste: surely he had no such thing in this world which we call greatness. They
say nullu^ magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae; but it may be very well
verified of great fortunes, and with the Satyrist, Raro fortuna sensus communis
in illa; and the same gave occasion to Solomon, after he had repeated a
catalogue of his pleasures, and works of magnanimity, to note that in the midst
of all these, that still his wisdom remained with him, to show the difficulty
of the conjunction of wealth and wisdom.

Of making many books there is no end.
THis is caution, which extends it self as well to the reading, as writing of
Books: a multiplicity in either, is both distraction and trouble; for as in
reading it is a great part of a scholar, to know what he ought to read,
sitting and suiting with the knowledge of that which he desires: so in writing
its a great care to be had in the choice of the subject, that it be fited to
the strength of his own ability: Quid valiant humeri quid non, says the Poet:
Most books that are writ, do rather increase learning in the bulk and bigness,
than in virtue and spirit. It is no small distemper in the labors of the
learned, when they turn the ends of their labors for estimation, which
destroieth the estimation of their labors, when they rather taste of the
spirit of vanity, then are undertaken, through a desire of the information of
others. They choose a subject rather to vant their own wit, then those whereby
they may advance piety: which is that which Solomon adds as a corolary to his
discourse, and a perfection to all humane actions: for if they look not
toward the Temple or some profit of man, me thinks Sir Walter Raleigh has
well pronounced them fools in print.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. line penul. read honorante. P. 14. L. 16. read deserve for discern.
P. 16. L. 12. del. in. P. 27. L. 2. for imitation read imagination: and L.
ultim. read Politic. P. 28. L. 4. del. to. P. 75. L. 12. read forward for
froward.


