A True Report of Sir Anthony Shierlies Journey ouerland to VENICE, from thence
by sea to ANTIOCH, ALEPPO, and Babylon, and so to Casbine in Persia: his
entertainmnt there by the great Sophie: his Oration: his Letters of Credence to
the Christian Princes: and the Priuiledg obtained of the great Sophie, for the
quiet passage and trafique of all Christian Merchants, throughout his whole
Dominions.

LONDON, Printed by R, B. for I. I. 1600.

A brief and true Report of S. Anthony Shierlie his journey into Persia,
reported by two Gentlemen who have followed him in the same the whole time of
his travail, and are lately sent by him with Lette^s into England. September
1600.
FIrst, Sir Anthony Shirley departing from England, landed at Vlishing, and so
went to Colleme, from thence to Frankeford, then to Nuremberg, and so to
Augustus: Thence taking his Journey over the Alps, he arrived at Venice, where
he staide two Months, and from thence (after honorable Entertainment by the
State and Duke of Venice) he took shiping and crossing the straightes passed
the gulf of Zante, so came to Candie, then to Rodes, and so along the coast
of Cipres to Antioch where he landed, and in five days space marched to Aleppo
and staide there six weeks: From thence he passed with a Caruan to Beer in
Arabia. There he and his company made Boats, and therein passed down the
River of Euphrates unto Arabia, where he presented the King with a very rich
gift or present. Thence he departed toward Babylon, staide there six
weeks, and at last met with a Caruan bound for Persia, in company whereof, he
passed the deserts of Same^ay, being all sandy and very painful to pass,
and are two Months trauail from thence to Casbine in Persia: At which place he
met with the great Sophie, by whom he was most honorably received and
entertained.

For before his ariuall (understanding of his coming) he sent Horses Leagues
for him and his Company to travail unto Casbine, the imperial city of
Persia, where findeing him on horseback (as the manner is) he offered to have
kissed his foot, but the great Sophie refused it, putting his hand between Sir
Anthony Shirleys Mouth and his Foot. Then did his Majesty presently appoint a
very fair and lardge house fit for him and his Company to abide and rest
themselves in, and daily sent all manner of Diet unto him (limmiting him a
short time wherein his pleasure was to give him Audience) at which time Sir
Anthony resorting unto the Court, made his Oration in Italian, as follows.

The true Coppie of Sir ANTHONY SHIRLIES Oration to the Sophie, as follows.
I Am so assuredly free from any just imputation, that I will not draw into
suspicion so noble a cause (as this of my coming with circumstances,) which
though they bear the name, yet are in substance nothing but uncertain Excuses
that betoken a fault: whereas truth seeks no starting-holes, but as a
Pilgrim (who follows the motion of his affections) is come from far, to
yield and pay unto virtue his Zeal and Devotion, and to none other end, if it
may please your Majesty to accept the consecration of his poor Carcas unto
you, which my mind has carried hither to be made an Offering or hanging vow in
the Temple of your most singular virtues, being brought to this point by the
Extremity of my desires, with expenses of much time, and not without great
peril: which though it be no Present in any degree of worth estimable to such
a Prince: it may please your Majesty to remember, that the pitch of an Eagles
flight, does far surmount the fluttering of a Fly, and that common base
Minds are not Capable of such Noble Thoughts, as might raise themselves with
the true seeking of thiese your most rare and worthy parts, which have drawn
me to your Presence: whereof I have heard men speak with wonder, and now they
give me cause to think my self most happy. And therefore I humbly beseech
your Majesty, when you have read the History of the inward thoughts of my
mind, you will vouchsafe to judge hereof, not as of conceiptes hanging of the
threedes of flattering terms: but that you will be pleased to understand
through the concience of your own virtues, that words of never so great
magnificence, are but the least part of so high and excellent deserte, and
that the less I am able to display their dignity with my speeches: the more
will I with my Blood make proof of my zeal toward them, if at any time I
may be made worthy to be Commanded by your Majesty.

I am a Soldier whose profession is clean contrary to words, which shall
sooner fail me, then my courage to greater effect. If the present be
acceptable to your Majesty, I shall esteem it as a most singular good hap
unto me: but much more, if it shall be employed. For it would be but a very
idle end and conclusion of so long a travail, full of so many perrills, if it
were knit up with words only, and a very poor and slender harvest of so
fervent Affection, if it should bring forth only Buddes or Blossoms, and no
sound Fruit: and finally too meek a Subject for your Majesty's most excelent
virtues, if my devotion and obseruances were not sealed with my Blood, the
which I do humble and freely offer at your Majesty's feet, to be shed and
spent, at the least sign and token of your Majesty's pleasure.

SInce which time, Sir Anthony Shirley has received all the familliar and
kind Entertainment at the great Sophies hands, that could possibly be
devised.

It happened within a small time after that Sir Anthony Shirley came thither, the
Turk sent a very Principal Basha to the great Sophie upon an Imbassage,
after whose coming, the great Sophie dined one day publikelie: where he
feasted both the Basha, and Sir Anthony and his Company also, placing them on
his right hand, and the Basha, and his train on the left.

The great Sophie has dealt very graciously and liberally with Sir Anthony
Shierlie during all the time of his being there: for the King intending a
journey from B^ssan unto Hastfam, required Sir Anthony to go with him, at
which time the great Sophie sent him this gift following, (Viz.) Forty Horse
well furnished, whereof four Saddles were Plate of Gold, set with precious
Stones, and two of Silver. Fifteen Cammels, and as many Mults for his
Carriages. Three most fair Tents. Eighteen Carpets curiously wrought with
Gold. 16000. Pistolets withal, Commanding his Messenger to tell Sir Anthony,
that the great Sophie would not have him to accept them as a Present, but as
things necessary for his Journey, (being but for eight days,) and ever since
he has bestowed many great guiftes upon him.

Sir Anthony Shirlie is now at Prage, being sent by the Sophie, upon an
imbassage to the Emperor, and diverse other Christian Princes.

The Coppie of Sir Anthony Shirlies letters of Credence from the great Sophie,
to the Christian Princes.
^he king
THere is come unto me in this good time, a principal Gentleman (Sir Anthony
Shierlie) of his own free will out of Europe into thiese parts: and al you
Princes yt believe in Jesus Christ, Know you, that he has made Friendship
between you and me, which desire we had also heretofore granted, but there
was none that came to make the way, and to remove the veil that was between us
and you, but only this Gentleman, who as he came of his own free will, so
also upon his Desire, I have sent with him a chief man of mine. The
Entertainment which that Principal Gentleman has had with me, is, that
daily whilst he has bin in thiese parts we have eaten together of one dysh,
and drunk of one Cup, like two Breethren.

Therefore, when this Gentleman comes unto you Christian Princes, you shall
Credit him in whatsoever you shall demand, or he shall say, as mine own
Person, and when this Gentleman shall have passed the Sea, and is entered into
the Country of the great king of Muscouie, (with whom we are in friendship as
Breethren) all his Governors both great and small, shall accompany him, and
use him with all favor, unto Moses: and because there is great Love between
you, the king of Mosco and me, that we are like two Breethren, I have sent
this Gentleman through your Country, and desire you to favor his passage
without any hindrance.

The Coppie of the free Privileges obned by Sir Anthony Shierlie, of the great
Sophie, for all Christians to trade and trafique into Persia.
I the king
OUR absolute Commandment, will, and pleasure is, that our Cuntries and
Dominions shall be from this day open to all Christian People, and to their
Religion: and in such sort, that none of ours, of any Condition shall presume to
give them any evil word. And because of the Amity now joined, with the Princes
that profess Christ: I do give this Pattent for all Christian Merchants, to
repair and trafique, in, and through our Dominions, without disturbances or
molestations of any Duke, Prince, Governor or Captain, or any of whatsoever
Office, or quality of ours: but that all Merchandise that they shall bring,
shall be so privileged, that none of any Dignity or Authority, shall have
Power to look unto it: neither to make inquisition after, or stay for any use
or person, the value of one Asper. Neither shall our religeous men, of
whatsoever sort they be, dare disturb them, or speak in matters of their
Faith. Neither shall any of our Justices have power over their persons or
goods, for any cause or act whatsoever.

If by chance, a Merchant shall die, none shall touch any thing that belongs
unto him: but if the Marchante have a Companion, he shall have power to take
possession of those goods. But if (by any occasion) he be alone, only with
his servants: The Governor, or whomsoever shall be required by him in his
sickness, shall be answearable for all such goods unto any of his Nation, which
shall come to require them. But if he die suddenly, and have neither Companion
nor servant, nor time, to reco^mende to any, what he would have done: Then the
Governor of that place, shall send the goods to the next Merchant of his
Nation, which shall be abiding in any parts of our Dominions.

And those within our kingdoms and Provinces, having power over our Tolles and
Customs, shall receive nothing, nor dare to speak for any receipt from any
christian Merchant.

And if any such Christian shall give Credit to any of our subjects (of any
Condition whatsoever) he shall by this Pattent of ours, have authority to
require any Caddie or Governor to do him Justice, and there-vpon at the
instant of his demand, shall cause him to be satisfied.

Neither shall any Governor, or Justice of what quality soever he be, dare
take any Reward of him, which shall be to his expense: for our Will and
pleasure is, that they shall be used in all our Dominions to their own full
content, and that our Kingdoms and Cuntries shall be free unto them.

That none shall presume to ask them for what ocasion they are here.

And although it has bin a continual and unchangeable use in our Dominions
every year, to renew all Pattents: This Pattent notwithstanding shall be of
full Effect and force for ever without any Renewing, for me and my successors,
not to be changed.

FINIS.

