Four PARADOXES

Of Art, Of Law, Of War, Of Service.
By T. S.

Cupias quodcunque necesse est. At London Printed for Thomas Bushel.

1602.

To the most Honorable, and more virtuous Lady, the Lady Helena, Marquess of
Northampton.
MAdam, your friends send you Iewelles, your tenants, the fruit of their store,
and your servants many good wishes, all of them, in their kind, being
testimonies of their loves and duties: I that am too poor, to present you
with the two former; and too ambitious, to supply my wants with the latter,
have presumed, in an other manner to express my humility, sending you, not
the riches of my exterior fortunes, but the fruit and issue of my brain, in
the begetting whereof, I wasted much precious time. Your Honor, in accepting
it, shall express more true bounty, then I, in writing, can express duty,
though it be all the scope I level at. The Lord have you in his protection,
and send you many happy New-yeeres.

Your duetifull and devoted Servant, Thomas Scott.

Nor base intrusion, nor the hope of Gain,
Nor Adulation, nor Vaineglorious pride,
Nor the idle fancy of a fuming brain,
Nor any ill affected cause beside.
Begat these Lines; but true respective Love,
Which all good meanings, to one end does move.
Nor think these Rimes skum'd from the froth of wit,
Nor loosely bound; but written with advise,
When my sad soul, did in true judgment sit,
About the invention of some rare devise.
When contemplation filled my flowing brain,
And serious study did my sense restrain.
Even then I wrote these Lines, which shall bewray,
The faithful meaning of my constant soul,
Which Time, nor obuious Chance shall wear away,
Nor Fate convert, nor Sovereignty control.
For this is all the certainty I find,
No power can alter a resolved mind.
Arts irritamenta malorum.
FArewell uncertain Art, whose deepest skill
Begetts dissentions, and ambiguous strife,
When (like a windy bladder) thou do fill,
The brain with groundles hopes, and shades of life.
When thou do set the word, against the word,
And woundst our judgment with Opinions sword.
When thou maintain'st all errors, under show
Of plucking error up: and do enable
The subtle soul to prove all truth untrue,
And lies the truth; even God himself a fable.
Even God, whom every pore-blinde soul can see,
Thou proouest with seeming reason not to be.
Full well thou show thy Author from what spring,
Thy seven Hydrean heads proceeded first,
When our first father Paradises King,
For thee was then deposed, and then accursed.
Accursed thou author of all sin, all evil,
Knowledge, thou fruit of lust, child of the devil.
Thou now instruct'st my mild and gentle Muse,
To rail against thine owneiniquitie,
And against the manifold unjust abuse,
Wherewith thou armest foul impiety.
To Epicurian folly, actions evil,
Proouing thy self as subtle as the devil.
Thou lend'st the guilefull Orator his skill,
To plead against innocence, and to defend
The guilty cause; thou turn'st the upright will,
To favor falsehood, and do backward bend.
The most resolved judgment, arming fools
With dangerous weapons and sharp edged tools.
Thou keep the thoughts of man in endless dout,
Under a show of teaching mysteries,
And lead'st the gazing scholar round about,
By Paradise of fools, to all miseries.
Thou teach circles in a blotted scroule,
The whilst we loose both body, wit, and soul.
Thou maintain'st Atheism and Heresy,
Against our faith, our hope, and holy writ:
Impugning the most certain veretie,
With shameless bouldnes and contentious wit.
Religion is a scarre-crow in thy eye,
Not band of zeal, but worldly policy.
Thou do entice the inconstant wavering mind,
To lewd forbidden practices; corrupting
The purity of youth whom thou do find,
Most tractable to good, still interrupting
Virtue in all her courses foul abuse,
Which take away, and take away thy use.
Thou art like gold, gotten with care and thought,
Then brought to bribe the Judge against the truth,
Or like a sword with all our substance bought,
To kill a friend: O thing of woe and ruth!
Who with this gold the oppressed does defend?
Or who does use this sword to save his friend?
The art like the fire with which for glory sake,
The villane burnt the Temple of Diana,
Or like the tawny weed which gallants take,
In pride, and fetch as far as rich Guiana.
Thy end is infamy, thy fruit is smoke,
With which the greedy taker thou do choke.
The art a Camelion, changing to the hue,
That Is interposd, as object to thy eye;
For truth to say, in true men, thou art true,
In evil men, full of damned subtlety.
The Be sucks honny from thee: but the Toade,
With doubled force his poisoned bulk does load
For when a careless villain sold to sin,
And dedicated wholly to the diuill;
Thy power, and knowledge of thy power does win
He therewith seeks to approve and stablish evil.
Persuading both himself, and others too,
That what he does, al wisemen ought to do.
From hence my resolution grows, that I
Neglecting Art will view the naked truth;
Whence my clear soul with an impartial eye
May best discern the errors of my youth.
"Truth can defend it self; we show most wit
"And learning, in defending things unfit.
Grammar instructs us to misconster things,
Logic to wrangle, Rethoricke to flatter;
Arithmitick to tell our gould, not sins,
Geometry, to measure every matter
Except our lives: Then Poetry to lie,
And Music teaches us all villainy.
Thus like seven deadly sins these arts agree
Against the truth, till knowledge of more skill,
Transport us quite beyond all honestee,
Abusing wit, and overthrowing will.
Contemning council, and deriding faith,
Still contradicting what the Gospel says.
O Art! not much unlike the fowlers glass,
Wherein the silly soul delights to look
For novelties; until the net does pass
Above her head and she unawares be took.
Thou common Curtizan, thou Bawd to sin
Painted without, but leporous within.
The art a companion for all company,
A Garment made for every man to wear;
A Goulden coffer, wherein dirt does lie,
A Hackny horse, all sorts of men to bear.
What art thou not? faith thou art naught at all,
For he that knows thee best knows naught at all.
Then farewell nothing something seeming Art,
I do disclaim thy knowledge, and thy use;
Nor shall thou in these Lines have any part,
Nor ever soil my minds true native Muse.
Farewell Lucifrian Art I will go find
Some better thing to please my troubled mind.
Finis.
Ars ommis a naturali simplicitati recedit, ita dolo affinis est. Cic.
Juris iniuria.
What thing is that so huge? so richly clad?
So borne on great men's shoulders? kneeld unto?
So grave in countenance? so sober sad?
To which so many Potentates do bow?
And with submission yield themselves and lands,
Into her powerful and imperious hands.
She Is holy, for Divinity attends her,
She has her Chaplains, and she goes to church:
She Is well beloved, for every mah defends her,
She Is rich, for see how fast she gold does lurch.
She Is great, for she keeps house in Rufus hall,
And makes all men down at her feet to fall.
See see, what troops of people hourly post,
To pay her tribute, all the streets are full,
Of her base bondmen, who with care and cost,
Enrich her servants, and themselves do gull.
Sure I will be her follower out of dout,
I may find clients amongst such a rout.
I love her, for she helps to end debate,
Desciding quarrels, and expounding doubts:
She Is not too proud, for often she leaves her state,
To question and confer with country louts.
She is impartial, for she takes of all,
And plagues a public sin in general.
All this is good, I like her yet: yet better,
For she reuengeth blood, maintains peace,
She sets at one the Creditor and Debtor,
Making apparent injuries surcease.
She does all right, she recompenceth wrong,
She helps the weak, she weakeneth the strong.
Besides, how many grave and civil grooms
Does she maintain, in wealth, in peace, in ease,
Giving them several Liueries, several Rooms,
And all that may theit daintiest senses please.
Some run about, some speak, and others judge,
Some write, some read, and every one do drudge.
But see, all is marde, a pooreman does complain,
Of open wrong, done by a treacherous slave:
The poor man's cause she gladly would maintain^
But see, the villain shall the sentence have.
Her Officers, new-brib'd, do stop her ear,
And will not suffer her the cause to hear.
So sits she like the virtuous Emperor,
Old Galba, whom all men approved just,
But that about him, unjust Officers
Abused his geratnes, to their private lust.
Their wickedness was counted his: his good,
Was counted theirs, so valulesse he stood.
Such does she seem, good in hirselfe, and kind,
But that bad Officers abuse their trust,
And too and fro her mighty power do wind,
For greedy lucre, and gold-getting lust.
The honest man often begges, or worser, starues,
But he gains most, that most from virtue swarues.
Better it were far for the Commonwealth,
Her self were wicked, and her servants true,
Then for her officers to live by stealth,
Under the color, to give all their due.
So have I seen the Lion part his pray
And from the weaker beast bear all away.
So have I seen a pair of catch-poule thieves,
Lead a poor wretch to Luds unlucky gate,
Like greedy bandogs hanging at his sleeves,
Without remorse, or feeling of his state:
So have I seen a villain hangman be,
To many other honester then he.
This warranted great Alexanders theft,
When he did al men wrong, through force, not right
But this the waker Pirate helpelesse left,
Because he robbed but few for want of might.
O fie for shame, when that which should rule all,
Is grown the Lord of misse-rule in the hall.
O Law! thou cobweb, wherein little flies
Are daily caught, whilst greater break away:
Thou dear Experience, which so many bies,
With loss of time, wealth, friends, and long delay.
Thou endless Laborinth of care and sorrow,
Near hand to day, and far remoou'd to morrow.
Thou sweet revenge of crauen-harted hindes,
Who never relish loved society,
Nor harbor kindness in their currish minds,
But harbarous beastly inciuility.
Thou nurse of discord, instrument of hatred,
Whose power with vice has all the earth or'e-skattred.
Why should we not be good, without thy aid?
And fear thy force less than deserved blame?
Shall man forbear to sin, being afraid
Of punishment? not of reproach and shame?
So Children learn their lessons, kept from meat,
So Asses mend their paces, being beat.
But man should bear a free unforced spirit,
Incapable of servile fear and awe,
The guilty soul does punishment demerrit,
Because he is not to himself a Law.
Let men, like men, love Virtue and embrace her,
Let men, like men, hate Vice, the souls defacer.
In old time, Justice was pourtrayed blind,
To signify her strait impartial doom.
And in her hand she held a scale, to find,
By weight, which case did most remove the Loome.
She still is blind, and deaf, yet feels apace,
Her scales now weyes her fees, and not the case.
The farewell Law, thou power to make or mar,
I dare not trust my self for doing wrong:
Few rich do clearly stand before the bar,
For Bribes have ruled, do rule, and will rule long.
Farewell both Art and Law, I will go find,
Some better thing, to please my troubled mind.
Finis.
Very iuris germanaeque iustitiae solidam and expressam imaginem nullam
tenemus, vmbra and imaginibus vtimur.
Bellum perniciosissimum
NOw War presents it self, O glorious war!
I do admire thee, and adore thy skill:
Thou art in earth another hopeful star,
The chief profession of the wit and will,
In thee Religion thriues, Goodness does flourish,
For thou do Vice correct, and Virtue nourish.
Thou breakst the slender twist of childish Art,
Scorning the curb of Apish policies:
Thou Law, and all Corruption do subuart,
Ore throwing querkes, and verbal fallacies.
Thou rootst up every evil which does increase
Within the idle reign of drowsy Peace.
Thou exerci'st the Body and the Mind,
Which in the time of rest did bring forth weeds;
Because it could no good employment find,
Nor answer fruitful harvest of bad Seeds.
Thou make the man esteemed more then his gold,
Though Peace does that in far more reckning hold.
Thou teach Patience how to endure
The skorching heat; and liuer-freezing cold;
To fast, and watch, and pray, thou do inure
The sturdy soldier, that is in sin grown bold.
Thou do temptations and affections slay,
And mortifies our Bodies every day.
But ah! too soon thy cause of praises cease,
And fresh present-ments of thy cruel deeds
Makes men prefer an unjust prouling peace
Before a just War that destruction feeds.
Which helps the brother to destroy the brother
And makes one friend to rise against an other.
Thou have no mercy nor no justice in thee,
To pity, or to punnish any creature;
Nor tears, nor prayers, gifts, nor vows can win thee
To favor any sex, or any feature.
Thou art chief executioner unto Death,
And like a prodigal, consum'st much breath.
O why should men in envy, pride, and hate,
In swollen Ambition, lust and Couetise,
Usurp the bloody rule of Death and Fate;
Becoming one an others destinies?
Is there not sea enough for every Swanne?
And land enough to bury every Man?
Why should our ships so iustle in the deep,
As though the waters were not large and wide?
Or our huge armies so unkindly sleep,
Their bloody weapons in a christians side?
Why should I travel into skorching Spain,
To meet my Death, when I may here be slain?
Fie that the private hate, or love of any,
Should make me be a murderer of Men:
And one Man's will should overthrow a many,
Such as himself perhaps far worthier then.
For oftentimes we see it falls out true,
We kill our friend for him we never knew.
O bloody War, to the unexperien'st sweet,
That robst, and spoilst, and butcherest every sex,
That tramplest all things with vpheaued feet,
And quiet states with civil broils do vex.
That say, al things are just thou do with might,
But to th'unable, there remains no right.
That like a wilful woman run'st astray,
In causeles Enmity and deadly Fude,
Having for thy directer all the way,
That many headed beast, the Multitude.
Who without all respect of wrong or right
Will do as others do, or flee or fight.
That art the Instrument of stern revenge,
Fore-plotted in the subtle skonce of Hate,
And seru'st the spreading wings of youth to senge,
A pretty drug to purge a gowty state.
That swollen with poisoned surfets, like to burst,
Voydes up those Humors to prevent the worst.
But as our private Doctors physic learned,
Kill more diseased Persons then they cure,
Yet hinke they justly have their wages earned;
Teaching their patient torment to endure.
Or as Cyriurians do more hurt then good,
When with small ill, they let out much pure blood.
So these sword Paracelsians get such power,
That often they stroy when they should cure the state,
And with confusion all things do devour;
Making well-peopled kingdoms desolate.
Much like a sprite raisd up by arts deep skill,
Which does much hurt against the Bookemans will.
Even as we see in marches and in fennes,
The careful husband thinking to destroy
The fruitles sedge (wherein the adder dens,)
Set's fire upon some part, with which to toy
The Northern wind begins, and burns down,
Spite of all help the next abutting town.
So War once set aflote, adds strength to strength,
And where it was pretended to confound,
The foes of Virtue, it proceeds at length;
Virtue, the state, and states-mans self to wound.
And like a mastiue hearted to a Bear,
Turns back, and does his masters bowels tear.
O you deep master Politicians,
Convert your stratagems against the Turk,
And like to careful state-phisitians
Against him apply this wit-begotten work.
Lest Christian Kingdoms, grown too weak with purging
Yield, being not able to withstand his urging.
Let those that take delight in doing harm,
And savage minded joy in shedding blood;
With iron walls their guilty bodies arm,
And do all things but only that that is good.
For my part, I am yet resolved to find,
Some better thing to please my trobled mind.
Finis.
Non solum aduentus belli, sed metus ipse affert calamitatem. Cic: prole ge
Manil.
Omnis est misera seruitus.
But stay: O rest thee Muse, and rest thee Mind,
I now have found the jewel which I sought,
Whose only good is in it self confind,
The sanctuary of the hopeful thought.
The port of safety, and the happy Life,
Free from malicious broils, and tedious strife.
Who list to draw himself from public throng,
And to converse with men of more regard;
Or fears the weighty power of others wrong,
Or seeks himself from envious tongues to ward.
Or couets quiet, or eschues debate,
Or loves content, or fears leane-visag'd Hate.
Let him repair to Court, and in the Court,
(Like Iuie) clean unto some great man's side,
Whose able strength his weakness may support,
And with his spreading arms, and shadow wide,
Protect and patronize his feeble youth,
And yield him needeful sap to increase his growth.
So may he live secure, free from the fear
Of public malice, or close-creeping Hate,
And never dread the Sun or Wind should sear
His verdant moisture and exalted state.
For still her Lord protects him with his bows,
So he grows up, even as his patron grows.
O happy man, whose fortune to is to find,
This rare-ly-hare of Bowntie in the great:
Which sooner happens to the illiterate hind,
Then him whose brain the learned Sisters heat,
Because the man that is only great in show,
Dreads other men his ignorance should know.
This makes the child of fortune to reveal
His thoughts to drudging bores, and shallow fools:
But all his consultations to conceal,
From those that are not enemies to schools.
For ignorance, like every other sin,
Loves still to live unknown, and blind within.
The honest servant seeks to amend his Lord,
And grieus to hear his wants themselves should speak,
But the base slave, does fearfully afford,
A jearing flattery with countenance bleake
To every word; and therefore is regarded,
When Truth is with suspect and hate rewarded.
Base flattery, and double diligence,
That thrusts their fingers into every place,
That carries tales, and gives intelligence,
Of all that may their fellows faith disgrace.
These are employed, these come and go at pleasure,
Have what they ask, and ask without all measure.
He that can these, shall thrive, and may in time,
Purchase large Lordships with ill gotten wealth,
And may from Yeomanry to worship clime,
( Ill fare that Gentry so purloynd with stealth.)
But other never may expect to rise,
For to their deeds he turns his Argus eyes.
And does persuade his Lord, that his whole care,
Is like a trusty Servant, for the best,
His younger son the better for it shall fare,
For at his death all shall to him be left.
The credulous Lord believes his smoth conclusion,
Until too late he proves it an illusion.
But when the trusty servant stands aloof,
Fore-warning these events with modesty:
Exampling this with many likely proofs,
Of others craft, and close hypocrisy.
He is suspected of deceit, his drift
Thought a detractors fauour-fauning shift.
Fond youth, who dedicates thy precious hours,
To do him service that neglects thy meritt:
And priseth less the minds unvalued powers,
Then his, who only does rude strength inheritt.
Fond youth that bind'st thy self to be a slave,
To him whose love thy service cannot have.
O why should I aim all my thoughts to please
One like my self; or to subject my soul
Unto the vnrespectiue rule of these
That only know how others to control.
So Asses suffer, Asses spur and ride them,
So camels kneeld, whilst bondme^ do bestride them.
But man that is freeborne, not borne a beast,
Should freely bear himself, and freely love;
Where reason does induce him: or at least
Where Sympathy of liking equal move.
So I could love, and fear, obey, and serve
Him, that I see does see what I deserve.
For what auailes it me to know so much,
If other will no notice take thereof,
Or cannot well discern me to be such,
As I do know my self, and yet will scoff
At that they understand not, and suppose,
"Not smelling, there is no sweetness in a rose?
What boots it me to clime the starry Tower,
And fetch from thence all sectets that remain,
Within that everlasting blissful Bower,
If I had none to tell them to again.
The soul would glut hirselfe with heaven I know,
If she might not her joys to others show.
It is a crown unto a gentle breast,
T'imparte the pleasure of his flowing mind,
(Whose spritely motion never takes rest,)
To one whose bosom he does open find.
So wise Promethius stealing heavenly fire,
In stones, the soul of knowledge did inspire.
O how I (least in knowledge, and in Art,)
Admire and love an understanding spirit,
And share with him my poor divided heart,
Wishing his fortunes equal to his merit.
But since in service few of these I find,
Service dislikes my male-contented mind.
Cum omnis est misera seruitus, tum vero intolerabile est seruire impure,
impudico, effe^^nato, insulso.
The resolution.
THen this my resolution is; I know,
All worldly things displease and vex the mind,
Yet something I must do, for here below
Our time to some employment Fate does bind.
I Will be a fool (for knowledge is accursed)
Chance makes that best, which Nature framed worst.
I am resolved to be a fool; to hate
All learning, all things else that do not please,
Great men of clouts; whose fortune raised state,
For some ill part she crowns with wealth and ease.
So I (like Fortune) ignorant and blind,
Some good fools Frotune by desert may find.
Art, Law, War, Service, I Will embrace for need,
To serve my wants, or to defend my right:
For otherwise I purpose not to bleed,
Or waste my life by day, my wit by night.
But since my soul can nothing certain find,
I am resolved to have a wavering mind.
Finis.
Errando disco.

