L. A. SENECA THE PHILOSOPHER, HIS BOOK OF CONSOLATION to MARCIA.

Translated into an English POEM.

LONDON. Printed by E. P. for HENRY SEILE, and are to besold at the Tygres head
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE READER.
REader, to offer thee a piece of Seneca Englished, when the whole is
Indenniz'd here, and almost every where else, might seem ridiculous; but if
his Copious Brevity, and Powerful Facility, two eminencies peculiar to Seneca,
be lost, or at the best, but faintly expressed in those several Translations,
(as perhaps not to be reached by any Prose but his own) it may be worth an
hours pains to see the same in a new way, more pathetically rendered to the
life; which in the opinion of Judicious men, thou will find in this Poem,
provided thou do not mar it in the reading.

PHILOPHRASTES.

TO THE NOBLE LOVER OF all Virtues, and Fautor of all Goodness, the
Illustrious and truly Religious, JOHN Earl of Bridgewater, Viscount Brackly,
Baron of Elsmere, Knight of the Bath, Lord President of Wales, and one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THe worthiest Subjects (as the Sages say)
Be those who be their Countries joyful stay
Which Gods due glory, next their Princes Fame
And these three marks do make their best blessed aim;
How well's your worth approved to God and Man,
Our Church, our King, our Kingdoms witness can,
How well your life does hit this triple white,
Whose Goodness, Gravenesse, Greatness, all delight
May that bright name shine uneclipsed here
Whom all his Country justly holds most dear;
Whom Heaven has stellified for's Piety,
Whom his great King loves for's loyalty.
O may this threefold twist be nere untwin'd,
Long may Learning of you a sure friend find.
May Honors Pinnace Fames swollen sails admit,
Tackled with merit, Piloted with wit.
That as you God, God may you ever honor,
The while you fight under Faiths sacred Banner.
That as you grace your King, your King may grace you,
Your God, your King, your Country may embrace you,
With humble heart and voice thus says, thus prays,
Who in devout admiring rest always.
Most devoted to your Virtues. RC:

L. A. SENECA OF CONSOLATION TO MARCIA.
Cap. 1
But that I knew thee Marcia to be,
As from their faults, from Women's weakness free;
And that thy manners argue thou were sent,
To reinforce some ancient president,
I nothing had against thy grief attempted,
Since from the like, even men are not exempted.
Nor could I hope the time now so unfit,
The fault so great, and thou the Judge of it,
That any reason could thy will importune,
To be appeased, and to forgive thy fortune;
But thy known courage, and the large extent
Of thy tried virtues, made me confident.
It Is manifest how in thy Fathers case,
Thou shew'dst thy self, who in thy love had place,
As ample as thy Children then alive,
Save that thou would not he should them survive,
And yet that is doubtful too, great piety
Against things fit, reserves a liberty:
Thy Fathers death, as much as in thee lay,
Thou hinderd'st, when thou saw no other way,
For him t'escape the shameful servitude,
Which through Sejanus hate had soon ensude,
Thou favour'dst not his purpose, but content
To yield thy self, and privately lament;
Swallow'dst thy groans, yet never had the art,
In cheerful looks to hide a woeful heart:
And this thou did, when through the wretched times,
'Twas goodness to forbear unnatural crimes;
But when an alteration made truth seem
Somewhat more safe, thou did indeed redeem
Thy Sire from death, by publishing the wit,
Which valiantly with his own blood he writ:
Well may thou therefore thy great merits boast,
For Romes Records, whereof most part were lost:
Posterity that to his endless glory,
May freely read an uncorrupted story,
Shall render thanks, which he shall likewise give,
For that through thee his memory shall live,
And flourish here, whilst any of our heirs
Shall be desirous to revolve the affairs
Of their forefathers, or shall seek t'inherit
The knowledge of a perfect Roman spirit.
Whilst any shall require to know a man,
Free in thought, word, and action, who even then,
When all men's necks so slavishly did bear
Sejanus yoke, was wholly void of fear.
It had been damage to the public weal,
To Have suffered wilful envy to conceal.
A work with two such eminencies fraught,
Both Eloquence and free revealed thought.
He Is read, and in men's hands and hearts abides,
Where boldly he times menacings derides:
But those vile miscreants of whom there needs
No memory, but for their damned deeds,
Shall nere obtain of any tongue to be
Hereafter named, though to their infamy.
These acts of thine forbad me to look back
Upon thy Sex, to weigh what that might lack;
Or to respect thy looks, where grief does rest,
And is thereof, as at the first, possessed:
Behold how plainly I intend to deal,
That do not on thy passions closely steal,
But have revived old woes, would thou be sure
This may be healed, thou have seen as great a cure.
Let others then deceitful medicines borrow,
I am resolved to skirmish with thy sorrow,
And if thou wilt hear me speak, to make thee know
How to dry up those tears, that now more flow
From custom then from reason, which I meant,
And gladly would perform with thy consent,
But if thou shall in wilfulness persist,
I Will do it perforce though thou thy self resist,
Although thou have determined to embrace,
And hug thy sorrow in thy dead sons place.
But what good can there from our labor rise?
All means have been assayed, thy friends, allies,
And others whose authority might threat
Thy disobedience, have been known t'intreat,
For Learnings cause, and for thy fathers sake,
Yet none could profit longer than they spoke.
Yea time it self, Natures best remedy,
That heales all woes, has lost his force in thee.
Three years are now expired, and yet at length,
Thy grief decays no jot, but gathers strength:
Custom has so prevailed, that now it is grown,
To make thee think it shame to cease thy moan:
For as all vices entering our breast
Take root, if they at first be not suppressed;
So this and such like wilful discontent,
Raging against it self, finds nourishment
In its own bane, sorrow that knows no measure,
Becomes the wretched creatures deadly pleasure.
I therefore could have wished, I had begun
This cure betimes, it had been easily done;
A wound yet green, the Surgeon may be bold
To sear it and to search it, but grown old,
And to an ulcer bred, he must be feign
To do it with more advice and greater pain;
I cannot, as I might have done at first,
Heal up thy grief with ease, it must be burst.
Cap. 2
I Know that such as to advise intend,
Begin with Precepts, with Examples end,
I must invert this order, for there is need,
That diversely with diverse we proceed;
Reason prevails with some, others must hear
Of famous persons, that their minds may rear,
To things of splendor, therefore I Will produce
Two maine examples proper for our use,
And both of thine own Sex and of this age;
The first's of one that unto sorrows rage,
Exposed her self; the second's of another,
Who in a greater loss did wisely smother
Her passions, not permitting them to sway,
But soon reduced her thoughts into the way.
These were no meaner pers'nages in life,
Then great Augustus sister and his wife;
Both lost their sons young and of fair renown,
Equal in hope to have worn the imperial Crown:
Octavia lost Marcellus, Caesar's joy,
Whom as a help he had begun t'imploy
In state affairs, he was a Youth of rare
Conceit and Judgment, and past all compare,
Weighing his years and fortunes for his gift,
Of continence and well-beseeming thrift:
Patient of toil, to no delights betrayed,
Able to bear what ere his Uncle laid,
(Or as I may so say without the guilt
Of flattery) upon his shoulders built,
Whose choife was not with partial conceit,
For sure he was a base for any weight.
So deeply did the Mother apprehend
This Princes death, that she would never lend
An ear to any comfort, but was all
Her life time such as at his Funeral;
Grief did enthrall her thoughts, which I Will not say
She durst not, but refused to disobey;
Accounting it a second deprivation,
To cease from her resolved lamentation,
No picture ever of her dearest Son
Would she behold, but his remembrance shun,
Envy'ng all Mothers, and was most offended
With Livia, to whom she saw descended,
The happiness she looked to have called her own,
Her whole desire was still to be alone,
Flying the light, and minding not the lays
That were composed in Marcellus praise.
And careless of all public rites, would hate
The too much glory of his Brothers state,
Whereof toth end she might her self deprive,
She seemed then to be interred alive.
Nor could her Daughters bringing to her sight,
Their Children daily, change her mournful plight,
Who deemed her self, to their reproach bereft,
Although she saw them all in safety left.
Cap. 3
SO one after this was Livia's patience tried,
By the like fatal blow, for Drusus died,
A famous Captain then, and like to be
Inheritor of Caesar's dignity;
Who with successful fortune did invade
The heart of Germany, and there displayed
The Roman Ensigns, where the Roman name
Was hardly known, so freely was his fame
Acknowledged by his very enemies,
That they admired his daring enterprise,
And in his sickness mutual greetings sent,
Scarce wishing that was most expedient:
And at his death caused for his Countries sake,
Came people from all quarters to partake
Of Funeral Duties, who in great remorse,
Did Triumph-like to Rome conduct the Coarse.
His Mother, as each tender Parent wishes,
Had not the means to enjoy his latest kisses;
But waiting on the Body many a mile,
Was as she went by every flaming pile,
So often put in mind of her dead Son,
Yet she when once the obsequies were done,
Him and her sorrow buried in one Grave,
And wept no more than decency might crave,
Or then became great Caesar's Majesty,
And therefore ceased not to magnify
The Acts of Drusus, wheresoere she came,
And willingly to speak and hear his name.
Whereas none could make mention of the other,
But it begat new sorrow in the Mother.
Choose then by which Example thou wilt be led,
If by the first, esteem thy self but dead;
All Children will avoid thee, and thy sight
As ominous, all Mothers will affright;
No solace will seem fit, thou wilt hate the Sun,
And curse thy years that will no faster run,
And which is worst, and most against thy mind,
Known in the better part, the world may find,
And by thy carriage plainly will descry,
Thou would no longer live, yet can not dye.
But if this famous Queen thou wilt imitate,
Thou shall not dwell in woe, nor macerate
Thy self with cares, it is madness to increase
Our own regret and hinder our own peace;
That temper which in thee has erst been known,
Thou Wilt keep, for modesty in grief is shown;
And even the Youth himself worthy of rest,
By glad remembrance thou will make more blessed.
Cap. 4
I Will not by more powerful presidents,
Attempt to make thee bear humane events,
Inhumanely, to dry a Mothers eyes,
Upon the day of her sons obsequies;
I Will put the case, the question is we see,
Whether that grief should great or endless be;
I make no doubt but thou do most approve
Livia's example, whom thou well did love.
She calls thee to her counsels, who at first,
When sorrows raging fury was at worst,
Was willing for her comfort to confer,
With Learned Areus the Philosopher,
Which she confessed afforded much relief,
More than the Roman people, whom her grief,
Would have dejected, more than Caesar's state
Which tears of friends ought not to aggravate,
Crazed already with that fatal blow,
More than Tiberius, whose deserts did show,
That in that great and general distress,
She was in nothing but in number less.
Thus Areus began (as I suppose)
And with his due observer thus did close:
Unto this day (for what I ere could see)
Who still have kept thy Husband company,
And not your public businesses alone,
But even your private consultations known:
Thou have endeavored (Livia) to commit
Nothing that justly might be thought unfit,
And not in great things only, but in small,
Thou Have taken care, to do no act at all,
That the bold censurer of Princes, Fame,
Should need to give thee pardon for the same;
And sure I think that no one thing does grace,
Such as are set in high and public place,
More, than to give free pardon unto many,
And yet themselves not ask the same of any:
Wherefore observe herein thy wonted guise,
Do naught thou would wish undone, or otherwise.
Cap. 5
NExt I entreat thee that thou would not be,
Harsh to those friends that come to visit thee,
Who as thou see are doubtful what to do,
Whether to speak of Drusus, yea or no,
Least silence should deprive him of his due,
Or mention of him, grief in thee renew.
We when we meet, his memory retain,
But before thee in silence deep remain.
Thus want thou great contentment, thy Sons praise,
Which doubtless thou would with thy hazard raise,
If so thou might to all eternity,
Wherefore permit, or rather call to thee,
Such as are willing to repeat his Name,
And open thou thine ears to hear the same,
And do not think it irksome, like to those,
That all advice part of their ill suppose.
Thou Have hitherto the other part intended,
And in the worst thy fortune apprehended;
Not looking on the pleasures of thy Son,
His life, his love, his studies well begun.
Thy thought insists on death, the last of things,
Whereto, as that were not enough it brings
All that it can collect, as if thereby,
Thou would be famous for thy misery.
Cap. 6
Think with thy self that courage is not shown,
In actions of prosperity alone,
Nor can we well discern a Pilots skill,
When winds blow fair, or when the Seas are still;
It is adversity that must express
A constancy of mind, and not success.
Stoop not therefore, but bear thy self upright,
And though at first the noise may thee affright,
Endure whatever fortune has designed,
She Is nere o're-matcht but by an equal mind.
He showed her then her Son that did survive,
And all her dead Sons Children yet alive.
Behold thine own case Marcia; Areus came
To comfort thee, though in another name:
And that I may not flatter thee, admit
Thy loss so great, that none can equal it;
If tears can Fate o're-come, let us all consent
To spend the day in mournful languishment;
Let anguish all night long deny us rest,
And let our hands assault our wounded breast,
Let fury seize our face, and let all kind
Of cruelty be used that grief can find:
But if no sorrow can the dead recall,
If fate be ever fixed, not moved at all,
And Death what once it gets, does still retain,
Let passions cease as altogether vain;
And let us be wise, not suffering our sense,
To be transported with this violence:
It is a shame to see a Pilot quit
His necessary charge, and to remit
His floating ship unto the Tempests rage,
Not daring in the storm himself t'ingage;
Whereas he praise deserves that holds the helm,
And ship-wrackt, strives till Seas him overwhelme.
Cap. 9
BUt it is natural, when dear friends dye,
To mourn I yield, if done with modesty;
And not then only, but when urgent reason
Requires their absence from us for a season;
The firmest thoughts at parting will relent,
And with a kind of grief the same resent:
But now opinion has suggested more
Then Nature ere required of us before;
Behold the passions of bruit beasts, how strong
And violent they are, yet last not long.
The Cow but for a time is heard to low,
And Mares to neigh, and wander to and fro,
Wild Beasts pursuing the vast Woods about
The footsteps of their young, to find them out,
Do often review their spoiled Dens in rage,
But in short time their wrath does quite assuage.
Birds haunt their empty nests in doleful plight,
Yet soon appeased, resume their wonted flight.
No creature so bewailes his young ones loss,
As man, who even nourishes his cross,
Lamenting not according to the ill
He feels, but according to his will.
And that it may appear thus to inthrall
Our selves to grief, not to be natural;
First, Women are more subject to such passions
Than men, the wild and barbarous Nations
More than the civil, th'ignorant and rude
More than such as with learning are endu'd,
Whilst Nature holds the selfsame force in all,
That which is various is not natural:
Fire burns all people at all times alike
Both men and women, irons force does strike,
And cut all bodies of like mixture, why?
Nature can never change her property.
Want, loss of Children grievously affect
This, or that man, whilst some the same neglect:
As custom and opinion make them seem,
More or less terrible, so men them deem.
Cap. 8
YEa further what is natural abides,
But time consumes all sadness, and provides
A remedy by sorrow-healing age,
Against the most perverse unbridled rage.
Thy grief continues great, grown hard of late,
Not furious as at first, but obstinate;
Yet that by slow degrees an end shall find,
All business will at present ease thy mind.
Now thou do watch that naught might thee relieve,
But whether thou command'st thy self to grieve,
Or whether only thou permit'st the same,
Is that which more or less augments thy blame.
How much more would it to thine honor tend,
Rather to give, than to receive an end?
Rather to quit thy sorrow, than to stay,
Until against thy will it we are away.
Cap. 9
WHence comes it then, if not from Natures will,
That we so grievously bewail our ill?
The reason is, we never do present
Mischances to our thoughts before the event,
And as it were exempted from such crosses,
No warning take by others frequent losses.
How many Funerals pass by our door?
Yet we on death think not a jot the more.
While others Children go unto the grave,
We think what honors, riches, ours shall have.
How many rich men have we seen grow poor,
Yet think of no decay of our own store?
Needs must we therefore tumble to the ground,
What strikes us unawares does most confound:
Mishaps fall lightly on us, when our care
Foreseeing them has taught us to prepare.
But would thou know thy danger, that the Dart
That wounds another, might have pierced thy heart?
As one unarmed approaching near a wall,
Whence shot and stones in great abundance fall,
Expect a wound, and when the Arrows fly
Before thee and behind thee, boldly cry,
Fortune I am prepared, and though I see
Thou hitst another, yet thou aim'dst at me.
Who is there, that his own has looked upon,
As a thing perishing and quickly gone?
Who is there, that beforehand was content
To think of want, of death, or banishment?
Or who is he, that having been advised
What may befall, has not the same despised,
And wished it on his foe, or on the head
Of him perhaps that so admonished:
But stricken once, will then cry out alas,
I never thought it would have come to pass;
As if one could be safe against what may,
And does to many happen every day.
It is a Verse that Publius Name advances,
That may to all that unto one man chances.
One has his Children lost, thine slain may be,
This man's condemned, thine innocence not free.
This error does our misery procure,
Enduring what we thought not to endure:
Whereas the foresight of a future blow,
Does mitigate the force of present woe.
Cap. 10
THese goods of fortune that about us shine,
As Children, Honors, Riches, and a fine
And noble Wife, fair Palaces, and store
Of Suitors, that attend us at our door,
With all things else that are from fortune sent,
Are ornaments not given us, but lent,
Our Scene therewith is for the time adorned,
Then to the owners back they are returned:
Some stay a day, some more, few to the end,
We cannot boast them ours, what others lend;
The use is ours during the owners will,
What Is borrowed for uncertain time must still
Be ready without strife to be repaid,
No debtor should his creditor upbray'd,
We must our Parents then so love, and those
Who by the Law of Nature we suppose
Will outlive us, as of their lives increase,
We had no promise of the shortest lease:
And all these humane things must so receive,
As at the instant we the same should leave:
Let Us not defer, but take our present pleasure
Of Parents, Children, and of worldly treasure,
For Death's at hand, and nothings in our power,
To hold (a day were too much time) an hour,
There is a sudden change of all delight,
Our life is not a passage but a flight.
Know then if thou beway lest thy Sons death,
The fault was in the time that gave him breath,
'Twas then decreed, on those conditions he
Came forth thy womb, and first was given thee.
Into her Kingdom Fortune all men brings,
To suffer worthy and unworthy things,
When they all kind of misery endure,
Some feel the fire for punishment or cure,
To some she makes the Sea become their graves,
And having struggled with the raging waves,
She does not drive them to the shore at last,
But into some Sea Monsters belly cast,
Others with sickness wasted she does hold,
Long between life and death, and uncontrol'd,
Using her wretched vassals at her pleasure,
In punishments and favors keeps no measure.
What need we then the parts of life lament,
When as the whole in misery is spent;
New unexpected mischiefs on us seize,
Before that we old sorrows can appease,
Thou therefore must thy passions still inure,
To Endure those things that thou can least endure:
And equally thy constant thoughts divide
'Twixt present ill, and that which may betide.
Cap. 11
WHence then proceeds this strange oblivion
Of thine and all the worlds condition?
Thou mortal art, and mortals have brought forth;
How could thou hope, a body framed of earth
Subject to chance, to sickness and to pain,
Could solid, and eternal things contain.
Thy Sonne's departed, hastened to that end,
To which all those that now survive him bend:
Even all those troops that wrangle at the bar,
That fill the Theaters, that prostrate are
In Temples, death at sundry times does strike,
The honored and despised she makes like.
Apollo's Oracle thou must fulfill,
Know thine own self it is the chiefest skill.
What Is man? a vessel broken with a knock,
Notable to endure a common shock:
By nature weak, on others aid depending,
And in his chiefest strength himself defending
Against a Savage Beast, becomes her prey,
His body is composed of mire and clay,
Though nere so neat, and comely to behold,
Impatient of toil, of heat, or cold,
Whom very ease and rest consumes, and whom
The sustenance he takes does overcome,
Dying as well with surfeit as with want,
Whose soul suspicious of her guard can scant
Be wooed to stay, but often leapes out for fear,
When as a sudden noise does strike the ear.
Why do we wonder at the death of one?
When as the same can be escapt by none:
There needs no great ado, the smell, the taste,
Watching, and weariness, man's life does waste;
Humors and meats that do maintain his breath,
Become at length the causes of his death,
Where ere he goes, his weakness he may find,
In change of Air, of Water, and of Wind
Not used unto, in every thing appears
The frailty of his life begun in tears.
And yet what Tumults does this vile wretch move?
What thoughts he harbors in him, far above
His seely reach, and how does he devise
To Childrens Children perpetuities:
And while he is busi'd in his vain pretense,
Death unexpected comes and takes him hence,
And that which we call age, is at the most
The course of some few years, that swiftly post.
Cap. 12
TEll me (O Marcia) if at least there be
A reason of the grief which troubles thee,
Whether the same thy damage do respect,
Or most on thy deceased son reflect;
Is it that thou no pleasure yet have gained,
Or that thou might, if he had still remained?
If It be confessed none hitherto to have had,
Thy loss then doubtless is not half so bad.
Men have those things more willingly forsaken,
Wherein they have but little pleasure taken.
But if thou say thou had joy in him before,
Give thanks for that, grudge not to have had no more.
His very education was gains,
Sufficient for all thy care and pains,
Unless thou't say that those which nourish whelps
And little Birds, with all such flattering helps
Of diverse minds, do in the touch, or sight,
Or fawning of mute creatures take delight,
And that our childrens education,
Is not sufficient fruit thereof alone.
Then though his labor, diligence, and wit
Did not redound unto thy benefit,
Yet certainly some fruit from hence does grow,
To Have had him once, and to have loved him so.
But he might have increa'st in years, and worth,
It Is better yet than not to have brought him forth,
For were it in our choice, whether that we
Would not at all or not long happy be,
We should desire, rather than none, t'accept
A benefit that could not long be kept:
Doubtless thou would not wish to have had a Son,
Whose ill conditions and lewd courses run,
Would have but made him bear the empty name,
Rather than thine that so adorned the same.
A young man quickly wise, and soon devout,
A husband, and a father soon, and out
Of knowledge of his worth, soon made a Priest,
And in all good things else as quickly blessed.
No great felicity can long remain,
Men may perhaps a Common good retain,
The Gods, who length of days to him denied,
With ages full perfection that supplied.
Nor can thou say, that thou alone by Fate
Art thus designed to be unfortunate;
Look round about, and thou shall easily find
In every place examples of this kind;
Captains, and Princes, yea as Poets write,
The Gods themselves are not exempted quite;
Which they the rather would have us believe,
That we with such partakers less might grieve.
Look round I say, and see if thou can spy
A house afflicted with such misery,
That doth-not find a kind of ease, to know
Another plunged in a greater woe.
Though I of thee have no such ill conceit
To think that others woes should thine abate,
To hear of many mourners is at best
But envious comfort to a mournful breast,
Yet some I will repeat, not to the intent
To show that this to man is incident,
For that were folly, but to show how some
By bearing, have afflictions overcome.
And herein Lucius Sylla shall be first,
Who lost his Son, which did not slack his thirst
Of vengeance to his foes, nor any way
His fury to the Citizens allay;
But after his great loss as fully bore
The Surname Happy, as he did before,
And on men's ruins building his success,
Their hatred his despised, and scorned no less
The very env^e of the Gods, whose crime
It was that Sylla to that height did clime.
Yet here I will not censure but let pass
As yet a thing uniudg'd what Sylla was,
Although his foes confess to his renown
He both took up Arms well, and laid them down:
I only prove the same not ill to be,
That may concur with great felicity.
And therefore let not Greece too much admire
Her Xenophon, who at the holy fire
And as he was about his Sacrifice,
Of his Sons death received sure advise,
Who only bidding then the music cease,
And taking from his head the Crown, made peace
With all his rising passions instantly,
And so accomplished the solemnity.
Cap. 13
OUr own high Priest Puluillus did the same,
To whom the tidings of his Sons death came,
Even in the midst of that most solemn state,
When he the Capitol did consecrate,
Whereof he took no notice, but went on,
Chanting the Hymn of Consecration,
And without sign of grief devoutly prayed
To Jupiter the Commonwealth to aid.
Could thou conceive that sorrow like to abide,
Which he at first assault so well did hide?
He worthy was to be so highly employed,
And worthy of the Priesthood he enjoyed,
Who in a constant zeal did not forbear
To serve the Gods, yea when they angry were:
Yet coming home he mourned, and tears let fall,
And having done the rites of Funeral,
Unto the Capitol again returned,
With cheerful looks as though he had not mourned.
Paulus Emilius, when he captive led
King Perseus in such Triumph, buried
The Sons that wholly he relied upon,
When all the rest were in adoption;
What they were whom he kept thou may suppose,
When Scipio himself was one of those
Were given away, it was no small regret,
To see him in his empty Chariot set:
Yet he discoursed, and thankt the Gods that gave
Him his desire, who oftentimes would crave,
That if perchance they should some ill pretend
After so great a Victory to send,
It rather might upon himself redound,
Than any way the Commonwealth to wound.
How bravely did he bear that stroke of Fate,
Who did his Childrens deaths congratulate:
No stranger chance could any man betide,
He lost his comforts and his helps beside;
Yet notwithstanding Perseus never had
The happiness, to see Emilius sad.
Cap. 14
WHat should I need to urge a multitude
Of presidents, by fortune so pursude?
As if it were not harder far to name
Them, upon whom misfortunes never came.
Survey the Consulls, Lucius Bibulus
And Caius Caesar have been dealt with thus;
Two colleagues that were enemies professed,
Yet both by Fortune equally oppressed.
Lucius a man for honesty commended
Rather than valor, had two Sons that ended
Their lives at once, and that which to be borne
Was worse than death, they both were made a scorn
To an Egyptian Soldier who them slew,
Yet he, who all that year himfelfe withdrew
To shun his fellows envy, did for all
The news of such a double Funeral
Come forth the next day, and with cheerful face
Performed the public duties of his place:
He might bewail one day his two sons fate,
That did a year lament the Consulate.
Caesar, when he all Britanie ore-ran
With arms not bounded by the Ocean,
Heard of his Daughters death, whereon he knew
A public damage was most like t'ensue,
For he on Pompey quickly cast his eyes
His Son in Law, who would have no man rise
Beside himself, although so near of kin,
That he might look to have his share therein;
Yet Caesar that high charge performed again.
Within three days, and did his grief restrain,
As soon as he, the glory of our Rome,
Was wont all other things to overcome.
Cap. 15
WHat should I other Caesar's deaths rehearse,
Against whom the fates the rather have bin fierce,
To give the world a wholesome document,
Since they, who from the race of Gods were sent
To propagate the same, could not command
Their own, though others lives were in their hand.
Divine Augustus having been deprived
Of Children and of Nephews too, revived
Th'extinguisht name of Caesar, with a Son
Received into it by adoption:
Yet he endured it constantly, as one
That had his future interest fore-knowne,
And by his own example would maintain,
That no man should against the Gods complain.
Tiberius lost both him that he begat,
And him that he adopted, yet thereat
Unmoved, he over the Corpse of his dead Son,
Pronounced the Funeral Oration,
Where but a veil as then was requisite,
Did hide the Body from the High Priests sight,
And though the people round about him wept,
Yet he his countenance unclouded kept;
Letting Sejanus that stood next him know,
How easily he could any friend forgo.
Thou see how all these famous men have fared,
Whom Fate for no respect of worth has spared,
Which like a tempest with impetuous blast,
Flies round the World and all things down does cast,
And ask but any man the reason why,
The answer is, that all are borne to dye.
Cap. 16
YEt here perchance thou wilt tell me, I forget
I comfort now a woman, since I set
Before thee men's examples, but let none
Imagine Nature has less favor shown
To women, or their virtues more restrained,
In whom like power to goodness is contained:
And who, believe me, can through custom bear
Of grief, and labor, equally their share.
Where speak I this (good Gods) but in that place
Where Brutus and Lucretia the race
Of Tyrants did expel? for as we know
That we our liberty to Brutus owe,
So we for Brutus are to Lucrece bound,
By whom so great a benefit we found.
Where speak I? but where Claelia the force
Of foe and flood contemning, rid her Horse
Through Tiber, for which bold attempt each Pen
Ranks her amongst the valiantest of men:
Whose Statue fixed in the sacred street,
Where frequently the Roman people meet,
Our young men in their Coaches does upbraid,
When they on horseback there behold a Maid.
But if examples thou desir'st to have
Of women, that their Childrens deaths with brave
And constant minds have borne, we may find store,
And need not beg the same from door to door.
One family had two Cornelia's,
The first the Daughter of great Scipio was,
The Gracchi^s Mother, who twelve Children bore,
And all again did back to Fate restore:
Often of them Rome little notice took,
And therefore she their loss might easily brook,
But Titus, and his Brother Caius, then
If not accounted good, yet famous men,
She both saw slain, and for a grave at last,
Beheld their bodies into Tiber cast;
Telling all those that thought her in distress,
And seemed to pity her unhappiness,
That she unhappy never could be thought,
That had into the world the Gracchi brought.
The other saw her Livius Drusus dead,
A young man of great hope, that followed
The Gracchi's steps, who having then propounded
Some controverted Laws, to death was wounded
In his own house, the actor never known,
Yet she with the same mind that he had shown
In stout defense of those his Laws, endured
The unrevenged murder so procured.
Now Marcia thou may reconciled be
To Fortune, if that she no worse by thee
Than by the house of Scipio has done,
And spared no more the Caesar's than thy Son.
This life does various accidents produce,
And grants peace to none, nor scarce a truce.
Thou had four Children Marcia, Shots that fall
Amongst a thick troop, hardly can miss all;
And therefore it were more strange that thou so many,
Should long enjoy without the loss of any.
But thou perhaps do Fortune most accuse,
In that she did not only take but choose;
It can by no means be accounted wrong,
To share with death, to whom they all belong,
Two daughters with their children are alive,
Nor yet did fortune utterly deprive
Thee of that Son that thou do so deplore,
(Having forgotten him that dyed before,)
For he two daughters also left behind
That should bring him, not sorrow to thy mind,
Which thou great pleasures, or great pains may make,
Accordingly as thou the same shall take.
The husbandman, when any trees he finds
Torn by the roots, or split with sudden winds,
Some grafts thereof does instantly replant,
And with advantage soon supply's their want,
For time, whom all these humane things obey,
Is swift as well in growth as in decay:
Place thou those daughters in Metellius stead,
And let two joys be from one sorrow bred.
It is the nature of all mortals, most
To Covet what they utterly have lost,
And with such earnestnes the same to effect,
As what they present have, they quite neglect.
Behold how fortune has to thee extended
Her favor, though she seemed to be offended,
Who does, beside those daughters that yet live,
The comfort of so many Nephews give.
Cap. 17
COnsider likewise Marcia, that if all
According unto merit should befall,
No evil ever good-men should betide,
But now both good and bad alike divide.
And though it grievous be, to have him dye,
On whom his parents might so much rely,
Yet it is humane, thou and all mankind
Art certainly to all these things designed,
To suffer loss, to dye, to hope, to fear,
To grieve and to be grieved, to appear
Desirous, and yet fearful to depart,
And not to know in what estate thou art.
If any man beforehand should propound
To one that were for Syracusa bound
The good and evil that from thence arise,
And thus, before he went, should him advise:
These rare things shall thou find, first thou shall see
That Island severed from Italy,
By such a narrow sea, as by consent
Of all, is thought to have been the continent,
Through which the sea with sudden breach did flow,
And ever since the land divided so.
Then thou by known Charybdis gulf must sail,
Which while the winds forbear their southern gale,
Continues calm, but otherwise has power
The greatest vessels wholly to devour:
Next shall thou see the clear and famous spring
Of Arethusa, whereof Poets sing,
Which either there begins, or passage makes
Beneath the Sea, and not thereof partakes:
And then thou shall the safest harbor gain
That nature ere did make or art obtain
For ships to ride in, where it shall be shown,
Where all the power of Athens was o'rethrowne,
And where were many thousand captives shut
In one vast prison out of maine rocks cut.
Thou shall arrive at Syracuse at length,
A city of large circuit and great strength.
Where winter is so temperat, that no day,
Without some sunshine ere does pass away:
But when thou have found all this, thou shall be sure
A hot contagious summer to endure,
That with diseases will the land annoy,
And that mild winters Benefit destroy:
There shall thou Dionysius behold
Who having law and equity controld,
The County's freedom under foot does tread,
And though he have divinest Plato read,
Yet to the height of Tyranny aspires,
And after a base exile life desires.
Some he will burn, and some to death will scourge,
Others when no occasion him does urge
He will behead, and overgrowne with vice
He male and female will to lust entice,
And amongst those brutish sins that men should loath,
He Will active be at once and passive both.
Thou Have heard what may invite, what may deter,
And therefore with thy serious thoughts confer,
Whether thou will resolve to go or stay:
If after all this warning any say,
He will adventure, let him bear the blame
That undertook advisedly the same.
Thus nature does to every one declare,
If thou bring'st children, know, some may be fair,
Some foul, and some, if that thou many have,
Their country may betray as well as save.
Despair not but thy children may attain
To so great worth, as may men's tongues restrain
From obloquy, yet likewise think they may
Be such as will a curse upon thee lay.
I see no cause but thee they should outlive,
Yet be prepared them unto death to give
In childhood, youth, or age, for there appears
Small difference here in concerning years,
Since parents seldom go but with moist-eyes
To any of their childrens obsequies.
When thou have all these things before thee laid,
Thou no way can the heavenly powers upbraid,
If thou will then bring children, for behold
How they beforehand did the truth unfold.
Cap. 18
With this example therefore we may well
The lives of men and women parallel,
As thou, intending Syracuse to view,
Have understood what thereon will ensue,
So now imagine that before thy birth,
I come to tell what thou shall find on earth.
Here nature thee into a city brings
Common to gods and men, where in all things
Contained are, by laws eternal tide,
Where the celestial bodies do abide,
In their unwearied courfe: there shall thine eyes
Behold the stars in their varieties,
And see with admiration one great light
That fills the world, dividing day and night
By daily motion, by whose annual race,
Winter and Summer have their equal space.
Then shall thou see the Move succeed the other,
Who by encounters borrowes from her brother
Her dimmer light, which sometimes not appearing,
And sometimes with full face the sad earth cheering,
Is, in increasing and decreases strange,
And every day from what she was does change.
Then shall thou see five planets that all bend
Their courses severally, and do contend
With heavens swift motion, these control the fates
Of private people, and of public states,
Which subject are to good or bad effects
According to their different aspects.
Then shall thou see the clouds, the rain, and wonder
At oblique lightnings, and heaven-piercing thunder;
And when thine eyes are filled with that fight,
Behold the earth affords new delight,
Smooth boundless plains, and high snow-headed mountains,
The falls of rivers, and clear streaming fountains,
Floods from one source that run both East and west,
And tottring woods with their own beight oppressed.
Thick forests fraught with beasts, and birds that fly,
And warble forth their differing harmony:
Then shall thou see the diverse scituations
Of cities, and of far disjoined nations,
Whereof some for security retire
Into the mountains, some the plains desire,
Others delight near rivers to remain,
And some to dwell in Fens do not disdain.
Then shall thou see the plowman till the land,
Preparing harvest with industrious hand,
Trees fructify alone, brooks gently slide
Along the moddowes, in their flowery pride,
Havens and creeks that all beholders please,
And scattered Islands giving names to Seas.
What should I tell of precious stones, of gold,
That swiftest torrents in their sands infold?
Of fires in midst of land and sea that shine,
And of the Ocean whose large arms intwine
The spacious earth, which that in three parts cuts,
And so a bar betwixt the nations puts:
Which rages often with an unbridled will
Within whose waters, that are seldom still,
Huge monsters live, that all belief exceed,
Some are so great and heavy that they need
The art of others, some so lightly float,
Their course is swifter then the swiftest boat,
And some such floods of water from them fling
As oftentimes do ships in danger bring.
Where thou shall see adventrous fleets prepared
To find out lands whereof few ever heard,
There being nothing now left unattempted
By humane boldness, nor art thou exempted,
But shall thy self herein have much to do
As a spectator, and an actor too:
Thou Arts shall learn and teach, some liberal,
Mechanique some, some Philosophical
To perfect life, but having all this found,
Know, that this city likewise will abound
With pestilent diseases, that will foul,
And quite destroy the body and the soul,
Wars, rapines, poysonings hasting so our ends,
Ship-wracks, ill air, and loss of dearest friends,
Death and the same, as much uncertain, when,
As whether easy or with torments, then
Bethink thy self if thou on life wilt venture,
For here thou must go out that there do enter.
Thou Wilt choose to live, why not? can I suppose
Thou seek that whereof thou art loath to lose
Any one part: live therefore as is fit,
And bear thy loss as one prepared for it.
But here perhaps it will be objected thus,
That none before hand has consulted us,
Our parents, who the worlds condition knew,
Consulted were and thence our covenant grew.
Cap. 19
But to return to consolations now,
First let us see what is to be done, then how:
We commonly with sorrow much are moved
Upon the loss of those we dearly loved,
And yet we find that we can easily bear
The absence of our friends, which comes near?
To death it self, because we are thereby
Deprived of their help and company:
Opinion then our sorrow does beget,
And we our selves a rate upon it set,
This remedy we have, let us but conceive
That they as absent only took their leave,
And since we all must follow, it is no more
But to suppose that they are gone before.
Yet this perchance our grief does much augment
That children are for our protection sent,
But shall I tell, what strange to thee may seem,
That childlesse folks are now in most esteem,
And fruitfullnesse that usually has fav'd
Old age from ruin, is so much depraved,
That many their own children strive to hate,
And seek the means to become desolate.
But as for thee, thy damage not so much
As thy affection makes thy sorrow such,
For he unworthy comfort is to have
That parts with a child as with a slave,
Or that does think of any thing beside,
The very person of his Son that died.
Why does thy passion then remain so strong,
Because he is dead, or that he lived not long?
If that the reason be, because he is dead,
Then sure thou should have ever sorrowed;
For thou did ever know he was to dye:
Three or four lines omitted, repugnant to the rest, impugning the immortality
of the soul.

And therefore think what he has gained thereby,
Since his enthralled bondage now does cease,
And he abides in eternal peace,
Where no vain fear of poverty affrights him,
Nor vainer hope of getting wealth delights him,
And where no provocations of lust
Do him into unlawful pleasures thrust:
Who neither envies any others good,
Or any way by envy is with-stood,
Whose ears hear no revilings, and whose eyes
Behold no manner of calamities:
Who does no more depend upon events
That hourly alter from their first intents,
But has obtained a place of that defense,
That fraud nor force can ever drive him thence.
Cap. 20
HOw little do men know their miseries
That do not death as natures best gift prise:
Whether that she felicity include,
Or the calamity that them pursued
Does drive away, or whether she do end
The irksome troubles that old age attend,
Or that the same the flower of youth does crop,
In the chief prime of his expected hope,
Or whether tender childhood she recall,
Ere that into a worse condition fall:
She is the end of all, the help of many,
The wish of some, not meriting from any
More then from these, to whom without request
She with the soonest has her self addressed.
She free's the slave in spite of his stern lord,
Shakes off his chains, and of her own accord
Releaseth prisoners that committed stand,
By cruel tyrants under strickt command.
She teaches them that are in banishment
(Whose thoughts and eyes are on their country bent)
Not to be troubled, how, when they are dead
Or in what place they shall be buried.
She when blind fortune has divided ill
Her gifts, 'tweene those that had by natures will
An equal right, does them again restore
To that equality they had before.
She it is that could never yet obey,
That takes all sense of poverty away,
She it is Marcia whom thy father sought,
That makes it not a punishment be thought
To have been borne, but helps us in despite
Of fortunes threats, to keep our minds upright.
Death is our refuge, though we tortured be
In several kinds, she us at length shall free:
Some their heads down ward are to gibbets tied,
And some with stretched out arms are crucified,
Where every member sundry engines rent,
And some have stak's thrust through their fundament,
Yet death's their cure: here enemies invade,
There friends insult, yet death at length brings aid,
It is not hard to serve, when at one step
We weary grown may into freedom leap:
Against the injury of life we have
A sure and common benefit, a grave.
Think but what good a timely death has brought,
And how much ill a longer life has wrought.
Had Pompey this great Empire's strength and pride,
At Naples of his burning-feaver died,
He then the Prince of Rome had sure been styled,
Whereas his glorious hopes were all beguiled
By the addition of a little time,
And he thrown swifter down, then he could climb.
He saw his legions lie before him dead,
Whose vanguard by grave Senators was led,
That did escape, to testify to all
The too long life of him their General:
His sacred body he did then submit
To base Egyptians that betrayed it,
Though had he lived, it would have been a grief,
To think how he was forced to seek relief,
That Pompey through the world surnamed the great,
Of any King should life or aid entreat.
Had Tully died when he escaped the slaughter
Designed by Catiline, or with his daughter
Had left the world, he had great honor won,
And had not seen so many mischiefs done,
Swords sheathed in mutual bowels, and their goods
By murd'rers shared, who therefore sought their bloods:
Nor been so much unhappy to behold
The Consulary spoils at outcries fold,
When as our state no insolence debarred,
But unto thieves and traitors gave reward,
Encouraging all sorts of lewd designs,
The Senate having many Catilines.
If Cato, when from Cyprus he did bring
To Rome the wealth of that deceased King.
Had with the same, intended for the pay
Of a dire civil war, been cast away,
This honor had accompanied his end,
That none in Cato's presence durst offend,
Whereas a little tract of time compelled
Him, that Romes freedom with his own upheld,
To fly from Caesar and to Pompey cleave,
And at the length himself of life bereave.
An early death no damage then has sent
Upon thy son, but rather did prevent
The cares that to a longer life belong,
And therefore do not think de died too young.
For if the life of the most aged man
Considered be, what is it but a span?
As in an Inn he lodges in the world,
And in a moment out again is hurled;
So swiftly posts our life, and if the story
Thou do but read of cities that most glory
In their antiquity, it will appear,
That nothing can be old accounted here.
All humane things are frail, and have no right
To any part of that vast infinite.
We say the earth, men, cities, rivers, seas,
Whose larger circuit comprehends all these,
Are but a point compared with all the rest,
Our life, of no part of a poynt's possessed
Compared with time, the world exceeding far,
Whose revolutions thereby measured are.
Why should our minds then on that thing be bent,
Which brought unto the uttermost extent
Is little more then nothing? therefore he
Lives long enough that can contented be:
For though thy life a hundred years should last,
Yet that compared with all the time that is past
And is to come, would in effect amount
No more then to the shortest in account.
He dyed not too soon that lived the time.
Appointed, though he dyed in his prime:
Men live not all alike nor beasts, for some
Grow weary, when to fourteen years they come,
And that which is their last, is man's first age,
We all of us have our prefixed stage,
Which we by no endeavor can exceed,
Nor should we grudge at what is so decreed:
He had what was allotted him, no chance
His life could ere diminish, or advance,
We all are in this error, to conceive
That we this world are never like to leave
But in old crooked age, when as we know
We may as well in youth or childhood go.
Our birth is toward death the first degree,
And what we live beyond is given free:
Fate ply's her work, and to delude our sense,
Makes death steal on us under life's pretense,
For childhood does our infancy surprise,
And youth or childhood, then age quickly hyes,
And such as seem increases, if well weighed,
Are damages that secretly invade.
Cap. 21
BUt thou complainest Marcia that thy Son
Attained not the years he might have done,
Yet know not whether the same were fit,
Or whether that were not a benefit:
For no man is in such assured estate
But may in time become unfortunate,
So frail are worldly things, and we may boast
Least of that part of life that pleases most:
And therefore death that brings certain rest,
Is ever to be wished for of the best,
Because we plainly see that in this vast
Confusion, nothing's sure but what is past.
Who could assure thee that the beauteous frame
Of thy sons body, though he kept the same
With modesty safe-guarded from the eyes,
Of a lewd city filled with luxuries,
Should likewise from diseases be secure,
And to old age unblemished endure?
Cap. 22
Think on the spots wherewith the soul is stained,
How some great wits have not to age retained
The ways of virtue in their youth begun,
But have into degenerate courses run:
How luxury, which men should ever hate
So much the more because it comes late,
Does oftentimes the hope of youth deface,
And gluttony intruding in the place
Of temperance well begun, so makes men swerve,
That they in age the belly only serve,
When as their chiefest care is but to think
Continually what they shall eat and drink.
Add likewise ruins both of sword and fire,
Ship-wracks, diseases that strange cures require,
Where corrosives pierce live men's bones and marrow,
And Surgeons hands their very intralles harrow,
Who many times some secret pain to ease,
Give remedies as bad as the disease:
Then after these, consider banishment,
For sure thy Son was not more innocent
Then was Rutilius; or a prison, he
Then Socrates could hardly wiser be;
Or voluntary death; he could not raise
His virtues above holy Catoes praise.
All which consdered duly, in regard
That death must in the end be life's reward,
Thou may conclude that nature deals best
With those to whom she soonest gives rest:
For life so wretched is, that it would scant
Accepted be but of the ignorant.
And therefore as its best not to be borne,
So next to that is quickly to return;
Think on the time wherein Sejanus gave
To Satrius his mercenary slave,
Thy fathers goods, whose free speech him offended,
Saying, He was not put, but had ascended
Upon our necks, and when it did appear
That he his statue did intend to rear
In Pompeys Theater, that had of late
Been burnt and now rebuilt with no less state,
Cremutius crying out against it, said,
The Theater then truly perished.
For what man could behold Sejanus sit
On Pompey's ashes, and not storm at it,
Or see the most unworthy soldier crowned
With honor of a Captain so renowned?
Yet there his image with th'inscription stood,
And those fierce dogs nourish't with humane blood,
That being gentle unto him alone,
Their fury to all others might be shown,
At Cordus suddenly began to bay,
That he to live must now Sejanus pray,
Or of his daughter must to dye crave leave,
Inexorable both: he to deceive
His daughter did resolve, and with intent
His plot to hide, he used a bath, and went
Into his chamber with pretense to eat.
Then sending forth his servants threw some meat
Out at the window, to make show thereby
As if he there had supped privately:
He fasted so the next day and the third,
Whereby a mortal weakness he incurred:
Then thee embracing thus his mind revealed,
My dearest daughter, I have naught concealed
In all my life from thee, save this alone,
I now a journey toward death am gone,
And have by this time gotten half the way:
Thou me, nor may, nor can, revoke or stay.
This said, he caused the windows to be shut,
And from that time himself in darkness put:
This fact divulged through Rome, had great applause,
Because the prey was snatched from th'wolfes jaws,
But his accusers by Sejanus sent,
To the tribunal of the Consulls went,
Craving that Cordus might be yet withheld
From doing what themselves had him compeld,
So loath were they who hungerly did gape
That in this manner he should them escape:
There grew a doubt whether they might by law
A man accused from such an act withdraw,
Whilst this was in dispute on every side,
Cordus at home releast himself and died.
Seeft thou not Marcia, what unlook't for woe
In such recourses of ill times do flow?
Thou griev'st that fate did one to dye constrain,
And yet another scarce could leave obtain.
Cap. 23
But beside this, that future things are still
Doubtful, and never certain but to ill,
The passage is more easy, when the soul
Is speedily dismissed from her foul
Abode, for she does then contract less slime,
And to her station may more lightly clime.
Great spirits cannot willingly reside
Long in the body, nor those straights abide,
But to break through, and mount aloft, desire,
And to their first original aspire.
And therefore learned Plato says well,
A wise man's mind on death does ever dwell,
Does wish, does will, and thereto in effect
In all his actions has his whole respect.
When such grave virtue Marcia thou did view
In thy young Son, and how he did subdue
All his affections, given to no vice,
In midst of wealth abhorring avarice,
How honor without pride he did possess,
And recreations without wantonness,
Could thou conceive that he could long remain?
What ere at highest is, goes back again;
Virtue grown perfect vanishes away;
And fruits that ripen soon, do soon decay,
Fire that burns clear, is soon extinguished,
That lasts more that with gross matter fed
Burns with a thick smoke, for it best subsisteth
With nourishment whose quality resists:
So wit, that is most delicate and pure,
Is ever found a short time to endure;
For dissolution follows apace,
When as for future growth there is no place.
Fabian reports a monstrous thing in nature,
Of a child seen in Rome of a man's stature,
But it soon died, as wisemen did presage,
His stature had so gained on his age.
Decay does still maturity attend,
And things when growth is spent, draw near their end.
Cap. 24
COunt thy Sons virtues then, and not his years,
Though he to have lived long enough appears,
Who fourteen years was under Tutors bred,
And by thy counsel ever governed;
Who though he had a household of his own,
Unwilling was to have thee live alone,
And being fit the wars to undertake,
The same refused wholly for thy sake;
For think how small a time they are enjoyed,
That often are in foreign parts employed;
How mothers usually that time lament,
No less then death which in the wars is spent;
And then believe he lived as long as others
That always have been absent from their mothers.
He thus remaining in thy house and sight,
To order there his studies took delight,
Gaining a wit by precepts daily read,
That would his grandfathers have equalled,
Had it not been with-stood by bash fulness,
That great worth often in silence does suppress:
A youth of rare aspect, who amongst so many
Men-tempting women, gave no hope to any,
But when the lust of some durst him assault,
Would blush and think his comeliness a fault.
This holiness of manners was the cause
That he, though very young, with great applause
Was made a Priest, by means his mother used,
Though notwithstanding he had been refused,
Had not his own true worth their judgments led,
Then do not thou conceive him to be dead,
But that his virtues make him so remain,
That thou for him shall never grieve again:
For all, that can be now, thou have endured,
The rest is free from chance, of joy assured.
And if thy Son thou will but rightly prise,
Then know his image only buried lies,
And that not very like, whilst he, now eased
Of all the burdens that him so displeased,
Is rendered to himself, for flesh, and skin,
And all the rest that we are wrapped in,
Are nothing but the fetters of the soul,
And such as do her faculties control,
Which she opposing ever strives to be
In endless bliss, from all dark errors free;
And therefore it is but folly to repair
Unto his Sepulcher, where ashes are,
And bones, and that which troubled him, no more
Parts of thy Son, then were the clothes, he wore:
For he went hence entire, staying a while
Above us to be purged from the vile
Contracted dregs of nature, mounted then
And was received amongst those happy men,
The Scipio's, and the Cato's, with the rest
That life contemned and now in death are blessed.
Thy father there ( O Marcia, though that place
Makes all of kin) his Grandchild does embrace,
And there instructs the new enlightened youth
Not by conjecture, but assured truth
In all the courses of the stars near hand,
And makes him all those secrets understand:
And as a stranger joyeth to find one
That in a city where he is not known,
Will take the pains to lead him up and down,
And show him all the pleasures of the town,
So glad was he, when he did first arrive
(Being of heavenly things inquisitive)
Of this well known interpreter, that so,
He likewise might be showed the things below,
For it is a pleasure to th'infranch is'd mind
To view from heaven what it has left behind.
Frame all thy actions then as they were done
In sight both of thy father and thy Son,
Who are not now, as when from hence they went,
But every way become more excellent,
And be ashamed of these trivial things,
To grieve for them, whose change such honor brings,
Who left the world to fix themselves on high,
And there to dwell in endless liberty,
Where neither Seas, nor hills, nor danger bars
Their intercourse, whose ways are mixed with stars.
Cap. 26
THink therefore now that from that heavenly Tower
Thy father speaks, who had with thee like power
That thou had with thy Son, not in that strain
Wherein he did of civil wars complain,
Wherein the banishers themselves he sent,
With shame into eternal banishment,
But with a far more elevated wit,
As he does now in greater glory sit.
Why Daughter does thy grief remain so long?
Why do thou so continue in the wrong?
To think thy Son ill dealt with? who withdrew
Himself to his forefathers when he grew
Weary of life, do thou not know what blasts
Of trouble fortune upon all things casts?
How she her favor only does confer
On those that have conversed least with her?
Will thou that I those famous Kings repeat,
Whose happiness would have been found complete,
Had timely death, whereof none ere repented,
The evils of their future lives prevented?
Or Roman captains, who could nothing lack,
Had some few years of life been given back?
Or those great men that of their own accord
Exposed their necks unto the soldiers sword?
Thy father and thy grandfather behold
He murdered was, I showing with how bold
A mind I writ, did rather then to lie
At others mercy, choose to fast and dye.
Why is he in our house so much bewailed,
Whom death in so great measure has availed?
We dwell together in a glorious light,
And see you compast with a dismal night,
Where all your best things base and sordid are,
And may not with the least of ours compare.
What should I say? here are no battles fought
By land or sea, no mischiefs done or thought?
Our Courts are not with clamours filled, our days
Perpetual are, our hearts, our lives, our ways
Open, and nothing hid within our breast,
But all events to us are manifest.
I when I lived, took pleasure to compose
The story of one age, and but of those
That in a corner of the world did dwell,
We the succession of all times can tell,
And do the rise and falls of kingdoms view,
The ruins of great cities with the new
And uncontrolled courses of the Seas,
For know, that if it may thy sorrow ease,
To understand the truth of common fate,
That nothing shall continue in the state
That now it is, time all things shall devour,
And not with men alone, of Fortunes power,
(The smallest part alas!) shall pastime make,
But the whole world shall of the same partake.
Here it shall hills suppress, there rocks enforce,
And supp up Seas, and change the usual course
Of rivers, and dissolving all commerce,
The race of man shall utterly disperse:
Causing elsewhere the trembling earth to cleave,
And greedily whole cities to receive
Into her bowels, belching out from thence
Damps that will breed a general pestilence.
Then shall it both with inundations drown
And with strange fires all mortal things burn down:
And when the world that is to be renewed,
Shall thus dissolve, there shall be deadly feud
Between the stars that with such order shine
Which shall their fires to that vast fire resign.
We also being blessed souls that claim
Aeternity, when God shall please to frame
The world anew, must therein have our share,
And shall to our first elements repair.
And therefore, Marcia happy is thy Son,
That know's all this as't were already done.
FINIS.
Imprimatur

SA. BAKER, Episcopo Londinensi a sacris.


