TWO SERMONS PREACHED BY Master HENRY SMITH: with a Prayer for the morning
thereunto adjoined.

And published by a more perfect Copy then heretofore.

book, hourglass, skull with wings, and globe I (...) to die I die to live



AT LONDON, Printed for William Leake, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Holy Ghost. 1610.

The Contents.
1 The sinners conversion. 2. The sinners confession. 3. A Prayer for the
Morning.
THE SINNERS Conversion.
The Text.
Luke 29. verses 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 1 Now when Jesus entered and passed through
Jericho,

2 Behold there was a man named Zaccheus, which was the chief receiver of the
tribute, and he was rich.

3 And he sought to see Jesus, who he should be, and could not for the prease,
because he was of a low stature.

4 Wherefore he ran before, and climbed up into a wild Fig Tree that he
might see him, for he should come that way.

5 And when Jesus came to the place, be looked up, and saw him, and said unto
him, Zaccheus, come down at once: for to day I must abide at thine house.


IN the end of the Chapter before going, we may see how Christ healed a man,
blind in his bodily sight, namely, Bartimeus, whereby he shows himself to
be the Physician of the body: Here we shall see how he cured one blind in
mind, namely, Zaccheus, whereby he shows himself to be Ephe. 5. 23.
the Physician of the soul, and therefore the Savior of the whole man.

In speaking of Zaccheus and his conversion, we will observe four
circumstances: First, the place where he was called, which was Jericho,
secondly, the person that was called, Zaccheus the Publican. Thirdly, by whom
and how he was called, by the voice of Christ. And lastly, the effect and
fruit of his calling, his good confession.

The first circumstance.
First therefore for the place where he was converted, it appears to be
Jericho, a city not far distant from Jerusalem. It was sometime a notable
City, till it was Iosu. 6.
subverted and ruinated by the Lords Champion Josua. 1. Reg. 16. 34.
It was builded again in the days of Ahab, by Hiel the Bethelite, and
remains at this day with the rest of that holy Land, under the Turkish
Empire. Unto this Jericho, the Lord of heaven and earth vouchsafes to come in
the likeness of a servant. And as Joshua compassed Jericho seven times minding
to destroy it, so Christ the true Joshua, resorted oftentimes to Jericho,
minding to save it. But as in the destruction of Jericho, Joshua spared none but
Rahab the harlot: so Jesus in his journey to Jericho converted none but
Zaccheus the Publican. When Joshua had conquered and raced Jericho, he sowed
salt in it to make it barren, and cursed him that should attempt to build it
up: yet in this barren soil Christ has his spiritual haiuest, and in this
cursed City he has a holy Temple, a blessed building. Samaria that wicked
city, affords many that believe in Christ. John 4. 39. And out of Galile,
from whence they thought no good thing might come, John 1. verse 46. Christ
called diverse of his Apostles; and even in Jericho Ioh. 7. 52.
this cursed City, Christ has a rich man that is to be saved. In every place
Christ has his chosen. There is neither Jew nor Gentile, Barbarian nor
Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all in all, to all that call upon him,
Romans 10. 12.

The second circumstance.
Now follows the description of Zaccheus, which is most plainly and fully set
forth unto us. The holy ghost speaking of Zaccheus and his conversion, comes
in with an Ecce, Behold, as if it were a wonder that Zaccheus should be
converted: Zaccheus was a Gentile, a Publican, and a rich man, and therefore
behold a miracle, as if in the conversion of Zaccheus, these three should be
converted at once.

Zaccheus was a Gentile; a marvel to see a Gentile become a Jew, that is, to
believe in Christ. He was a Matthew. 19. 28.
principal Publican; a strange thing to see a chief customer to give over his
office: and he was rich also; a rare matter to see a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God: and therefore behold a miracle, as if at this day the Turk,
Pope, and the King of Spain, were at once Romans 2. 28.
persuaded to forsake their idolatry and superstition. Christ going to
Jerusalem, conuerteth a Gentile, to signify the calling of the Gentiles: he
conuerteth a publican, to show that notorious sinners may hope to be saved, if
they repent and amend, as Zaccheus did. He conuerteth a rich man, to show that
al rich men are not excluded from the kingdom of heaven.

He was called Zaccheus before his conversion, but he was never truly called
Zaccheus till Christ called him so. His name signifying, simple, pure, honest;
but his life was subtle, impure, and most detestable. Thus many are called by
honest names, whose deeds be wray their dishonest natures, and vices
oftentimes are shrouded in the habits of virtue, like Aesopes Ass, masking in
the Lions skin, till his long ears detect his folly, or like the Crow that
is decked in others plumes, till every bird do pluck his feather. Zaccheus by
his profession was a Publican, and therefore much detested of the Jews: for
Publicans were Roman officers, appointed to gather and receive public custom
or tribute of the Jews, who were at that time in subjection to the Romans.
And amongst these Officers, Zaccheus was the chief, and (as it seems)
Ouerseer of the rest that were in Jericho, and therefore in chief hatred among
the Jews, as one that chiefly favored the Romans tyranny, and served to
abridge their country liberty, which ought not to be subject to any Nation.

Besides, he contemned the ceremonies of the Jews, and regarded not their
religion, nor lived after their law, and therefore with the rest of the heathen
Publicans, was excommunicate out of their synagogue, Matthew. cha. 18.

Thus was he hated for his profession, because he was a Publican, and for his
religion, because he was a heathen. Yet was he beloved for his wealth, for rich
men have many friends, Prou. 14. 20. And though they do never so wickedly,
yet have they some to take their parts. If they speak never so proudly, yet are
there some to praise their saying, Eccle. 13. 23. 24.

Zaccheus was a Publican, and therefore rich: for Publicans must needs be
rich, and usurers will be wealthy. But rich Publicans make poor Princes, and
wealthy usurers make many beggars. In every province there were many Publicans,
and therefore much poor people in every place: for where there be many
caterpillets, the fruit is soon consumed; and where there be many
extortioners, beggars must needs abound.

By the Law of God, there might be no beggars in Israel, but when so many
Publicans were suffered to receive Deuteronomy. 15.
tribute of the Jews contrary to Gods law, no marvel though so many sat and
begged, contrary to Gods law, Luke 18. John 9. Acts 3. By the law of God,
there ought to be no beggars among Christians, Psalm. 32. 25. But when so many
usurers are tolerated in a christian commonwealth, contrary to the Law of
Christ, Luke 6. 35. no marvel though we have so many beggars, contrary to the
mind of Christ. The poor Leu. 35. 36. 37. Mark 14. 7.
(says Christ) ye shall have always with you, but when you will, you may do
them good: and we shall be sure to have the poor amongst us always, but we
must make such good provision for them, that they be not feign to beg Psalm. 3 7.
their bred.

Thus was Zaccheus rich to himself, for he was a Publican, but he was rich
toward God also, for he had a desire to see Christ. Almighty God, who is rich
in mercy, Ephe. 2. has so inspired his heart with the desire of heavenly
riches, that whereas before his whole delight was in seeking of worldly wealth,
now his greatest care is to seek for heavenly treasure. He now forgets
what his profession is, and begins to be of a new profession: and he whose
heart was wholly set upon earthly profit, is now like old Simeon, most
desirous to see his Savior. The Tetrarch Herod desired to see Christ, and
despised him when he saw him, Luke 23. 8. 11. but Zaccheus the publican desired
to see Christ, and rejoiced when he saw him, like Abraham that desired to see
the day of Christ, John 8 56. And therefore of the servant of Satan, Zaccheus
is now become the child of Abraham, which rejoiced to see the day of Christ.
Happy were his eyes that saw so blessed a sight, for many Luke 10.
Prophets and righteous men have desired to see and to hear those things that
Zaccheus both saw and heard, and could not see nor hear the same. If Jacob
thought himself happy, if that he might but see his son Joseph Genesis 45.
before his death, then surely thrice happy Zaccheus, whose hap it was, not
only to see (as Jacob did) but to rejoice (as Mary did) in Christ his Savior.

As Zaccheus was desirous to see Christ in earth, so I would have the rich men
of our time, desirous to see Christ in heaven. For although with the eyes of
our body we cannot see christ as Zaccheus did, yet with the eyes of our faith
we may behold him as Stephen did, Acts 7. But if our faith be so weak sighted
that we cannot see Christ, yet let us have a desire to hear christ in his word,
whereby our faith may be increased, for faith comes by Romans 10. 1. Reg. 10.
hearing the word of God. And as the Queen of the South desired to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, so let us be desirous to hear the wisdom of Christ our
Savior.

King Solomon left some Books in writing, wherein is seen some part of his
wisdom; and Christ our king, John 20. 31.
has left unto us his most sacred word, as it were a taste of his wisdom,
sufficient matter for our salvation, this is that heavenly food, Mat. 4. 4.
whereby our souls are fed unto eternal life, let us therefore labor for that
heavenly food: and as the Israelites were careful to gather Manna to sustain
their bodies, so let us be as careful to hear the word to feed our souls.
The people in the Exodus 19.
time of Christ, John 6. 24. took great pains to follow Christ both by land
and sea, and many now adays (I confess) are very forward to follow his
faithful Ministers, but as they followed Christ so fast to fill their bellies,
so these frequent Sermons for fashion to serve the time.

Zaccheus is desirous to see Christ, a godly care, but yet he could not obtain
his purpose: a thing common; for Ioh. 6. 26.
every one that has any good motion, has always some hinderance to cross
the same; and Zaccheus has a double impediment to hinder his honest
enterprise: The prease of the people, and his little stature. Whereof the
former, that is, the multitude, is always wont to Two impediments.
be an enemy to those that would come to Christ. This hindered the blind man
from receiving his sight, Luke 18. for the people rebuked him that he should
hold his peace, till Christ called him and opened his eyes. This hindered them
that brought the man sick of the Paulsie, Mar. 2. for they could not come at
Christ for the prease, till they uncovered the roof of the house, and let down
the bed wherein the sick of the Paulsie lay.

This hindered the healing of the deaf and dumb, Mar. 7. till Christ took
him aside out of the multitude, and cured him. This hindered the raising of the
Rulers daughter, Matthew. 9. till Christ had thrust out the Minstrells and the
multitude, and then restored the maid to life. Finally, this hindered Zaccheus
here from coming unto Christ, till Christ vouchsafed to call him to himself.
Thus always a multitude that is prone to evil, does withdraw and hinder us
from approaching unto Christ: and therefore we must not follow a multitude to
do evil, nor decline after many, to overthrow the truth. Exodus 23.

The second impediment that hinders Zaccheus from seeing Christ, is his
little stature. He was so low of stature, that he could not see Christ above
the multitude: but Christ was above the multitude, and therefore could see
Zaccheus though he were so low of stature. For God looks not on the
countenance, nor on the height of 2. Sam. 16. 7. 1. Sam. 16. 12.
man's stature, but the Lord beholds the heart, and preferred little David
before Eliab his eldest brother, because he finds in him a better heart to
serve the Lord. And Zaccheus in his little body, has a heart and mind
prepared to seek and see the Lord. Zaccheus was so low, that he could not see
Christ: but many amongst us are so high that they will not see Christ. The
common people in time of Christ were so desirous to follow Christ, that neither
lamenesse nor blindness, nor sickness, could stay them from coming to him; but
the common people in our time, are more ready to follow their sport and
pastime, then to come to the church to hear of Christ. And as for our rich
men, who sees not that they will make great haste to see a commodity, but will
searce come out of doors to hear a Sermon?

They come to Church as Nichodemus came to Christ, John 3. 2.
by night, as if they were ashamed to come to Church: but they run after
profit, to get riches, as Gehezi ran 2. King. 5.
after Naaman the Syrian to get a bribe.

Thus has Zaccheus two lets that he could not see Christ, the one in the
people, the other in himself: and we have many lets to withdraw us from
Christ, some are external, and without us, as the inticements of the world,
and some are internal and within us, as the lusts of our own flesh. The
prease of the people hinders Esaias 59. 2.
Zaccheus from seeing Christ in his humility, and the multitude of our sins
do press us down, that we cannot see Christ in glory. Zaccheus was a man of
little stature, and that hindered him from seeing Christ in earth; and we are
men of little faith, and that is the cause we cannot behold Christ in heaven.

Though Zaccheus was a man of little stature, yet it appears that he was not
a man of little wit. For when he could not come to the sight of Christ for the
multitude, he had the wit to run before, and to climb up into a tree to
obtain his purpose. And for the most part it falls out, that men of low
stature, are men of high conceit, and the shortest bodies, have the sharpest
wits, God so providing, that the defects of their bodies might be supplied
with the gifts of their mind. Now Zaccheus that before was loath to move his
foot from the custom house, for losing his profit, begins to run after Christ
for fear of a greater loss, like Eliza that left his plowing, and ran after
Elias to follow his new vocation. But Zaccheus does not only run, but also
climb up into a tree to see Christ: A strange thing that Zaccheus a rich man,
and a chief customer, should behave 1. Reg 19.
himself so childishly in the sight of so great a multitude; but the desire he
had to see Christ, made him forget himself: and to commit such things as were
not fitting for his state and credit. So they that will follow Romans 12. 2.
Christ, must make account to do many things contrary to the fashion of the
world, and their own liking. If Christ himself were content to leave the
glory which he had with his Father to come down to us, shall not we be
content to leave the reputation which we have with men to go up to him?

But alas, where is there any almost that prefers not the fruition of this
earthly prison, before the possession of that heavenly mansion? and had rather
hazard the hope which they have of eternal glory, then leese the present
enjoying of their fading pleasure.

The ambitious man hunteth after honor, and will not leese an inch of his
estimation. The covetous man John 12. 6.
seeks after profit, and counts (like Judas,) all lost that comes not to his
bags. And the voluptuous man bestows his time in pleasure, and thinks that
his chief felicity. Thus every man makes his heaven of that wherein he most
delights, and is content to take great pains to accomplish his fond desires.
But here Zaccheus is of an other mind; for being a public officer, he
climbes into a tree, which stood not with his gravity, and being a rich man,
he runs to see Christ, which was not for his worldly profit; yea he takes great
pains to see Christ, not respecting his case or pleasure.

Thus must we be affected if we desire to come to Christ, that neither
honors, nor preferments, nor profit, nor pleasure, nor kindred, nor friends,
be able to hold us back: We must be ready, not only to run, but also to
climb (if need require) as Zaccheus did: that is, to take some pain and
travail to have a sight of Christ.

The Queen of the South undertook a great and Mat. 3. 22. Luke 14. 29. 1.
King. 10.
tedious journey to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but we are loath to take any
pain to hear one that is greater then Solomon.

The people in David's time brought so much treasure, and so many gifts to the
building of Gods Temple, that the Priests were feign to bid them cease: but a
1. Chro. 29. 9.
great part of the people in our time, are so sparing of their pains and cost,
that they think that very time misspent which is employed in the service of
God; and that money ill bestowed, which is given to the maintenance of his
Ministers.

When Zaccheus could not see Christ for the multitude he climbes into a tree,
that grows in the way where he was to pass, that from a tree he might behold
him, which was to suffer on a tree for man's salvation. So when we cannot draw
near to Christ, by reason of our sins that press us down, we will climb
up by a lively faith, which is the tree of life, that grows in the way to
eternal life, that so, with the eyes of our faith, we may behold him that
died for our sins upon a tree.

It was a wild Fig tree that Zaccheus climbed, but not like that unfruitful
one which our Savior cursed: for this bare most precious fruit, even such as
Mat. 21. 1
Christ himself vouchsafed to pluck. A happy tree that bare such precious
fruit as Zaccheus was; but thrice happy Zaccheus, that so happily climbed on
that happy tree.

This tree grew in the way that Christ was to pass, for else Zaccheus might
have climbed to no purpose: So if we desire to find Christ, we must seek him
in the way where he has promised to show himself unto us, that is, in his
holy Temple; where his word is duly preached, and his Sacraments reverently
administered, for where Mat. 19. 20.
two or three are gathered together, he has promised to be present amongst
them.

The third Circumstance.
When Christ came to the place, he locked up and saw Zaccheus.

As Zaccheus ran before Christ, so Christ followed after to see Zaccheus.
Satan for his part went about like 1. Pet. 5. 8. John 10. Luke 11. 21.
a roaring Lion, seeking to devour him; but Christ for his part goes about
like a good shepherd, minding to save him. And although Satan a strong armed
man had taken some possession in the heart of Zaccheus, yet Christ a stronger
then he comes unarmed, and takes from him his harness wherein he trusted,
and rescueth the spoil.

Christ comes to the place where Zaccheus was, because otherwise it had bin
impossible for Zaccheus to come to his presence: for unless the Lord vouchsafe
to come unto us, we cannot attain to the presence of God. As no man might
have any access to king Assuerus except he stretched out his golden scepter:
so no Hester 4.
man may come to Christ, unless he be called by the golden scepter of his
sacred word.

Christ looked up and saw Zaccheus, before Zaccheus could look down to behold
him. Thus does the Lord prevent us with his mercy, whom he might cast off in
his justice: and if he perceive in us a willing mind to come unto him, he is
content to come first unto us. And like that good father, Luke 15. to behold us
while we are yet a great way off, and to have compassion on us.

When Jobs three friends that came to visit him in his Job. 2. 12.
great calamity lift up their eyes a far off, they knew not Job, because he
was so sore afflicted. But Christ who is the mirour of true friendship, cannot
so soon forget his friends, howsoever they be disguised. He knows his own
sheep wheresoever he sees them, Ioh. 10. whether they be under the Fig Tree,
as Nathaniel was, or upon the Figgetree, as Zaccheus was, he has respect unto
them. And if they have a desire to seek they shall be sure to find, Math. 7.
And if they labor and are heavy laden, he will refresh them, Math. 11. Christ
is now come to the place where Zaccheus is to be called; and as Abraham, Genesis
22. lift up his eyes and saw in the bush a ram that was to be sactificed, so
Christ lifting up his eyes, saw in the tree. Zaccheus the sinner that was to be
converted. And now begins the conversion of Zaccheus, for now Christ begins
to speak unto him.

Zaccheus desired only to see Christ, but now Christ calls him by name, and
offers his own self unto him. This was more then Zaccheus expected, and yet
no more than Christ vouchsafes, namely, to give more John 1. Luke 5. 1. Kin.
3. 12. 13 Genesis 28. 20.
then is desired. The sick of the palsy that asked health, obtained also
forgiveness of sins. Solomon desired wisdom, and the Lord gave him
wisdom, and abundance of wealth beside. Jacob asked but meat and clothing,
and God made him a great rich man. And Zaccheus desired only to have a sight of
Christ, and was so happy as to entertain him into his house.

Thus the Lord that is rich in mercy to all that call upon him, uses
oftentimes to give more then we ask: and he that is always found of them
that seek him Romans 10. 12. Ephesians. 2. 4. Ior. 29.
with their whole heart, is found also sometime of Gentiles that knew not God,
Esaias, 65. 1. Let us therefore that were sometimes sinners of the Gentiles,
seek the Lord as Zaccheus did, while he may be found, and call upon him while
he is nigh. He will be found of them that seek him heartily, and is nigh to
all them that call upon Romans 10. 20. Esaias. 55.
him faithfully, Psalm. 145. 18.

Zaccheus, come down at once. Now Christ begins to call Zaccheus from the
tree to be converted, as God called Adam from among the trees of the garden to
be cursed, Genesis 3. Before, Zaccheus was too low, and therefore was feign to
climb, but now he is too high, and therefore he must come down. And we (for
the most part) are either too high, or too low, too hot, or too cold, too
quick, or too slothful in the Lords business. Sometime we flock together to
hear a Sermon, like the people, Luke 5. that pressed upon Christ to hear the
word, and anon we run to see some pleasant pastime, like the Act. 17.
Athenians, whose ears always itched to hear some news.

Who make more show of conscience and religion, then they that show themselves
most irreligious and unconscionable? Who seemed more confident and virtuous in
Math. 26.
Christ his cause then Peter? and not long after, who more traitorous and faint
hearted?

Many can say with Peter, that they will not stick to die before they will
deny Christ; but when it comes to the trial, they are ready to abjure Christ
and his religion before they will hazard either life or living.

He that will come to Christ, must come at once, without delay, for delays
(specially in the matter of our salvation) are most dangerous, and repentance
may not be deferred. We must make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, nor put
off from day to day. lest the wrath of the Lord Eccles. 5. 7.
break forth suddenly, and we be destroyed in our security, and perish in
the time of vengeance. When the Lord is minded to do us good, he will have us
come quickly, like Joseph, Genesis 45. 9. that in the time of famine would have
his father Jacob to come down quickly unto him, to soiourne in Egypt, where
there was some plenty of food.

As the children of this world are very nimble to work wickedness, so the
children of light should be as nimble to follow goodness. Judas was nimble to
betray Christ, John 13. 27. and the bad debtors, Luke 16. could sit down
quickly to mis-reckon their creditor: so let us come quickly to hear of
Christ, that Christ may accept of us quickly; let us be nimble to make our
account before, that we do not (like the foolish builder) come short of our
reckoning. Luke 14. 28.


But why must Zaccheus come down so hastily? Even to entertain Christ into
his house: For to day (says Christ) I must abide with thee. This was joyful
news to little Zaccheus. Not long before, he wanted means to see Christ, but
now he has opportunity to entertain him into his house.

There was more humanity in Christ then in Zaccheus: for if Christ had not
bidden himself to dinner, he had not bin bidde^ for Zaccheus: So if Christ do
not offer himself Mat. 35. 40.
unto us in his afflicted members, he may go long enough before we will offer
him any entertainment. As often as the poor craves any relief at our hands,
let us imagine that Christ asks something of us: but as Zaccheus must
entertain him presently without delay, so let us be ready to help them
presently, because they stand in need of present help. And as he must receive
Christ into his house; so we must make account to receive his needy members
into our houses. And as the unjust steward Luke 6.
procures himself friends with his masters goods, so let us make the poor to
be our friends, by our benificence and bounty toward them, that so receiving
them, (when they have need) into our earthly houses, they may receive us when
we stand in greatest need, into everlasting habitations.

They that were invited to the marriage, Matthew. 22, refused to come; but Christ
is content to come to Zaccheus house before he was invited. Wherein also he
shows his great humility, in coming before he was requested, as they be
wrayed their great arrogance, in refusing to come being solemnly bidden. It
was a part of great humility, that he that was most free from sin, would
vouchsafe to come into a sinners house: but it was a sign of great humility,
that he would be wray his great necessity, and seek for succor at a sinners
hand.

Alas poor humble Savior, who though thou be Lord of heaven and earth, as
thou art the son of God, yet as thou art the son of man, have not whereon
to lay thy head. Matthew. 8.

How justly did thy prophet Jeremy wonder at thy Ier. 14.
humble poverty, saying; O thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the
time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the Land, or as one that passes
by to tarry for a night? The Son of God vouchsafes to come, and that
unrequested to a sinful man's house; a special favor: but he di^d^^^eth not to
make his necessity known unto him; O strange humility! Here therefore
appears the singular humanity and great humility of Christ to sinful men:
he offers himself to betheir guest, if he find the^ willing to intertain him
for their guest, And Zaccheus no doubt was willing to entertain him, for
although Christ heard not the voice, yet he heard the affection of Zaccheus
inuiting him to dinner.

As therefore Zaccheus was willing to receive Christ into his house, so let us
be ready to receive him into our hearts. For as Christ said to Zaccheus, This
day I must abide at thy house: so he says to every one of us. This day I must
abide in your hearts. Wherefore as the prophet David Psalm. 24.
says, Open your gates that the King of glory may come in: so I say unto you,
Open your hearts, that the word of God may enter in. This day the word of God
may abide in your hearts, for this day the word is preached unto you; and who
knows whether he shall live to hear it the next Sabbath: To day therefore
if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as did the Israelites,
lest if you harden Psalm. 95.
your hearts, his voice be heard no more amongst you.

This day you may gather this heavenly Manna, as the Israelites might gather
their Manna six days together, Exodus 16.
but to morrow (perhaps) and six days after, you may not gather it, as on the
seventh day Manna might not be found.

The Lord grant that you may gather sufficient food for the sustentation of
your souls, that as Elias the Prophet iournied in the strength of the meat
that the Angel brought him, even unto Horeb the mount of God: so you in the
strength of this spiritual meat which here 1. Reg. 19.
I bring you, may be able to pass through the dangerous ways of this
troublesome world, unto Gods holy Mountain, the haven of all happiness:
whither he bring us, that has dearly bought us with his precious blood, even
Christ Jesus the righteous: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three
persons and one God, be given all glory and majesty, world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE SINNERS Confession.
Pro. 28. verse, 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper; but he that
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.


The Text.
Luke 19. verses 6. 7. 8. 9. 6 Then he came down hastily, and received him
joyfully.

7 And when all they saw it, they murmured saying, that he was gone to lodge
with a sinful man.

8 And Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord: Behold Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor: and if I have taken from any by forged
cauilation, I restore him fourfold.

9 Then Jesus said unto him, This day salvation come unto this house, for
as much as he is also become the son of Abraham.


YOu heard the last Sabbath, how Zaccheus the Publican was called to be a
Christian: now you shall hear the fruit of his conversion. No sooner had Christ
called him from the tree, but that he came down hastily, and received him
joyfully.

This was the fruit which it had in the heart of Zaccheus, namely obedience to
the voice of Christ: a fruit more precious and acceptable unto God, than the
most pleasant fruits which Eden yielded; and a sacrifice more sweet and
acceptable unto him, than all the sacrifices which the Law required. This is the
sacrifice wherewith the Lord is pleased, even when his voice is obeyed, 1. Sam.
16 22. The voice of the Lord is a glorious voice, and mighty in operation,
dividing the flames of fire, and shaking the Psalm. 29.
cedar trees. So the voice of Christ is a glorious voice, his voice is mighty
in operation, dividing the soul and the Heb. 4. 12.
spirit, and shaking Zaccheus from the wild fig tree, whereinto he had
climbed.

The same God to whose command the winds, the sea, the devils, and death it
self obey, here commands Matthew. 8.
Zaccheus to come down at once, and he comes down hastily to receive him
into his house, and he receives him joyfully. As Zaccheus could not come at
Christ till he was called, so no man can come to Christ John 6. 44.
except the Father draw him: And as Zaccheus could not choose but come, when he
was called by the voice of Christ, so when any man is called effectually by the
preaching of the Gospel, he cannot choose but come to Christ: for where there
is an effectual calling, there is grace given also to obey the same, Romans 8.
30. The Lord is feign sometime to call us often, because we know not the voice
of him that calls us, as he called Samuel three times before he answered;
because at that time Samuel knew not the Lord, 1. Sam. 3. 7. But as soon as he
understood that it was the Lord that spoke unto him, he replied presently,
Speak on Lord, for thy servant hears. So when the Lord calls any man
effectually by the preaching of his word, all the parts and powers of his body
do yield their obedience, the care listeneth, the tongue confesses, the heart
believes, the head deuiseth, the hand performs, the foot runs, the eye
directs, and all concur To do thy will O God, P. salme. 40. 7.

Such and so effectual is the voice of Christ in the hearts of his chosen,
that it makes Saul of a bloody persecutor to become Paul a painful Preacher:
it causes Acts 9. Math. 4.
Peter of a silly Fisherman, to become a catcher of men: and Zaccheus here of a
vile Publican, to become a zealous Christian. And such also is the nature of
the word preached, wheresoever it pleases the Lord to give success and
increase thereto, that it is able to transform the minds of men, to beget
faith in the hearts of Jnfidels, 1. Cor. 3. 7.
and (in a word) to save such as are ordained to eternal life. Acts 13. This
is the power of the word of God, even to cause a consenting to the truth
thereof; and this is the property of the children of God, to yield all
obedience Romans 1.
to the word of God. As soon as Christ calls Zaccheus, he comes down
presently, like the light in the creation, that was made as soon as God said,
Let there be light. Here therefore of Zaccheus that obeyed the voice of
Christ, let us learn obedience to the voice of Christ: sor as Christ bids
Zaccheus to come down, because he was too high: so he says to every one of
us, Come down, because we are too high minded. But with us the voice of Christ
is not so effectual as it was with Zaccheus: for he was content to come down
at the first bidding: but we must be often bidden, to beware of pride and
ambition, and yet we will still be climbing. There are few so high that are
content with their calling, but as Haman was always aspiring till he came to
the gallows, Hest 7.
so many amongst us are always climbing till they catch a fall.

Again, as Christ said to Zaccheus, To day I must abide at thy house: So
Christ says to us, To day my poor afflicted members should receive some
succor at your hands. But as the Priest and the Leuite, Luke 10. passed by the
wounded man leaving him half dead, so we (for the most part) pass by our
needy brethren, leaving them vnreliued. Thus are we every way disobedient to
the voice of Christ. He teaches us to be humble as he himself is, Matthew. 11.
29. and we wax proud and insolent as Satan is. He wills us to be merciful,
as our heavenly Father is, Luke 6. 36. and we are cruel and unmerciful, as
the rich Glutton was, Luke 16. This is the cause why the earth deceives and
renders not her fruit, Esaias 24. 5. This is the cause why the sword deuoureth
abroad, and the pestilence destroys at home, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. Leuit. 26. 24. 25.
and in a word, this is the cause of all the mischiefs and calamities that are
threatened, even because we are obstinate and rebellious against the Lord, we
are undutiful and disobedient to the voice of Christ, that calls us so
lovingly to come unto him, Math. 11. 28.

Zaccheus was called but once, and he comes quickly: but we are called
oftentimes, and almost every day, and that by the voice of Christ himself, For
he that hears you (says Christ) Luke. 10. 16. hears me: and yet we
cannot find the way to Christ. The word of God, which is the lantern unto our
feet, and the light unto our paths, Psalm. 119. has been plainly and
plentifully preached amongst us these many years, and yet many amongst us have
not yet learned to come to Christ. Zaccheus comes quickly when Christ calls
him, let us therefore learn of Zaccheus to come quickly when Christ calls
us. We must be quick in the Lords business, for God cannot abide loyterers
standing all the day idle, Mat. 20. and as he loves a cheerful giver, 2. Cor.
9. 7. so he likes a cheerful follower.

It follows therefore that Zaccheus received him cheerfully. Still Zaccheus
is a receiver: before he was a receiver of custom, now he is a receiver of
Christ. Zaccheus received Christ two ways: first into his heart, when he
desired to see him: and then into his house when he gave him hospitality. Many
received Christ to house, but not into their hearts, and therefore received him
grudgingly: but Zaccheus received Christ first into his heart, and then into
his house; and therefore received him joyfully. Of Zaccheus his ioyfulnesse, we
must learn to be joyful when we do any thing for the cause of Christ: we must
be glad to harbor Christ in his members, as Zaccheus was glad to harbor
Christ himself. As before in coming down from the tree, Zaccheus showed his
obedience: so here in receiving Christ into his house, he shows the love
that he bare unto him. If Zaccheus had not loved Christ, he might have sent him
to some common Inn: But Zaccheus is content to receive Christ in his own
house; yea he rejoices to have gotten so good a guest; like Abraham, Genesis 18.
that used to sit at the door of his tent, and rejoiced to entertain
strangers that went by the way: and therefore, though Zaccheus were a Gentile
borne, yet herein he shows himself the child of Abraham, because he does the
works of Abraham, Ioh 8. ver. 39. So did Abraham, and so we must do, if we
will show our selves to be the children of Abraham.

When Abraham thought only to have entertained Abraham. Genesis 18. 3.
men, he receives the Angels in the shape and likeness of men: and when
Zaccheus thought to entertain the son of man, he receives the son of God
himself. Let us therefore (as the Apostle wills us.) Hebr. 13. 2. be
mindful to entertain strangers, for as much as thereby Lot. Genesis 19. 3.
some have received Angels into their houses unawares; and why should we not
hope to entertain the like, or better guests, if we be given to hospitality,
as those godly Fathers were? For as the Angels came to them in the likeness of
men: so Christ himself comes to us in the likeness of a poor man, of a lame
man, and of a blind man: and when he comes, he comes hungry, or thirsty, or
naked, or harbourlesse, or sick, or imprisoned: and happy are they that feed,
or cloth, or harbor or visit him, when he comes thus afflicted, When
Abraham entertained the Angels, he was not only busy himself, but his wife,
and all his household were careful to make provision for them; so when Zaccheus
received Christ into his house, his whole family (no doubt) were no less
willing and careful to entertain Christ, then their Master was: and therefore
not only to Zaccheus, but even to his whole house salvation is promised,
because the whole family rejoiced at Christ his coming. Let rich men learn of
Zaccheus to entertain Christ in his needy members, and let rich men's servants
learn of Zaccheus family, to show themselves merciful, like their merciful
masters, that they may receive the reward of mercy and hospitality at the last
day. Come ye blessed, for I was harbourlesse, and ye took me in. Generally, as
Zaccheus gladly received Christ: so let every one that is able, be glad to
distribute to the necessity Math. 25.
of the poor Saints: if we have much, let us give plentifully: if we have
little let us give gladly of that little: if we be not able to give a penny,
yet happily we may afford a morsel of bread: if not that, yet there is none
so needy, that cannot give a cup of cold water, and even so small a gift shall
not lose his just reward, Matthew. 10. 41. Zaccheus received Christ into his
heart, but many amongst us are ready to drive Christ out, and to receive Satan
instead of him: Zaccheus received Christ into his house, but there are many
rich men amongst us, that like Dives, Luke 16. will not afford poor Lazarus
the crummes that fall from their table: but as the damsel, Acts 12. opened
not the door for joy when she heard Peter's voice; so by contrary, these men
for very grief shut their gates, when they perceive a beggar there Finally,
Zaccheus was joyful when he entertained Christ, but many amongst us are
sorrowful when they should relieve the poor, like churlish Nabal, 1. Samuel
25. that reviled David, when he should have relieved him.

So long as Job prospered, he kept a worthy and a worshipful house, he
suffered not the stranger to lie in thee streets, but opened his door to the
Trauailer that went by the way, Job. 31, 32. But now many Gentlemen of the
country are content to suffer the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, not
only to lie but even to starve and die in the streets with hunger and cold,
and never receive them to house or harbor, nor afford them any relief or
succor. But as the voice of Abels blood did cry from the earth to God for
vengeance against Genesis 4. 10.
his brothers cruelty: so the voice of the poor and their piteous cries, shall
enter into the ears of the Lord, and their guiltles blood (which is powered
forth in every place without all compassion) shall pull down hasty and sudden
vengeance from heaven upon the heads of those unmerciful cormorants, unless
while this time of mercy lasts, they show mercy to their distressed
neighbors.

Thus you have heard how Zaccheus behaved himself in entertaining of Christ:
now you shall see the behavior of the Pharisees in disdaining at Christ. When
all they saw it, they murmured saying, that he was gone in to lodge with a
sinful man. Before, they hated Zaccheus for his vices, because he was
covetous: now they envy him for his virtues, because he was given to
hospitality. For the wicked will always have something to find fault with in
the children of God, like the sons of Jacob, Genesis 37. that hated their
brother Joseph because of his dreams: and like Saul that unhappy King, that
envied David for his happy victories, 1. Sam. 18. 29. Thus the wicked when they
cannot charge the godly with any grievous crime, they begin to grudge at
their well doing: and therefore not only Zaccheus is hated for receiving of
Christ, but Christ is hated also for being his guest: When they could not
accuse Christ for sin, they accuse him for companying with sinners: For they
must still be accusing some or other, for one thing or other, like their father
the devil, that both by name, Revel. 12. 10. and by nature, Job. 16. 7. is a
continual accuser of the brethren. It had been the duty of the Pharisees to
have received Christ, and made much of him as Zaccheus did: but they are so far
off from entertaining him themselves, that it greeueth them to see Zaccheus
give him entertainment. And surely, such is the perverse nature of the wicked,
that they will neither receive the grace of God when it is offered them, nor
willingly suffer any other to embrace the same: like the wicked Jews Acts, 13.
50. that would neither believe the doctrine which Paul preached, nor could
abide that the Gentiles should be brought to the faith of Christ. The high
Priests thought themselves too high, to have poor humble Christ amongst them:
The Scribes and the Pharisees, in their own conceit, were too good, too wise,
and too holy to receive him into their company and not content to sequester and
estrange themselves from Christ, they disdained also that he should be
conversant with Publicans and sinners, as though he were not worthy to be
conversant amongst them.

If it were the office of Christ to convert sinners, why should the Pharisees
be offended at him, if he were sometimes Mat. 9. 13.
conversant with sinners to work their connersion. If Christ were a Physician
to cure the sickness of the soul, that is, to save the people from their
sins, why Mat. 9. 13.
should the pharisees murmr at him for keeping of company with Zaccheus, that
was sick in soul? for as it is expedient for the Physician to visit his
patients for their better recovery, so it was convenient Christ should visit
sinners for their speedier conversion. But as the Physician that resorteth unto
sick persons, is not straitway infected; so the souls Physician that
conuerseth with sinners, is not thereby polluted. And therefore, as Christ
performed his office though the Pharisees murmured, so let the ministers of God
learn by this example, to perform their duties, though the wicked be
offended. It was the office of Christ to call sinners to repentance, yea, he
came to call Pharisie sinners as well as Publican sinners if the pharisees would
have confessed themselves Luke 18.
to be sinners, as the Publicans did; but because they stood so much upon their
own righteousness, and despised others, therefore Christ denounces so many
woes against them, and prefers the penitent Publican that Matthew. 23.
trusted in the Lords mercy, before the proud Pharisie that trusted in his own
merits.

Though Paul was a Pharisie, and the son of a pharisie, yet he shameth not
to confess himself one of the Acts 23. 6.
chief sinners that Christ came to save. So if the Pharisees that murmured at
Zaccheus would have been saved, they should have confessed themselves chief
sinners as Paul did. They should not have accused Christ for 1. Tim. 1. 15.
keeping company with sinners, but they should have accused themselves for not
keeping company with Christ. The just man (says Solomon, Pro. 18.) is the
first accuser of himself; but the Pharisees are so far from accusing
themselves that they began to accuse Zaccheus and Christ together. Thus the
pharisees of our time that make religion a cloak to cover their corrupt
dealing, have this property to think other men to be heinous sinners, and
themselves only to be righteous: in so much as they will not stick to speak
like that proud people that was wont to say, Depart from me, for I am holier
then thou: and like the presumptuous pharisie, Luke 18. I thank God I am not as
others are, extortioners, usurers, adulterers, dru^kards, or such like. I
sanctify the Sabbath, which other men profane: I frequent sermons, which they
neglect: J reverence the name of God, which they blaspheme: I pay tith, which
others withhold: and fast oftentimes, which they do seldom, or never. These
were the speeches of the Pharisees, Mat. 15. 7. Luke 11. 44.
that lived in the time of Christ, whom he so often calls hypocrites: and
these are the speeches of the hypopocrits of our age, that seem to live after
the straightest Luke 11. 1. Act. 26. 5. Mat. 23. 25. 27
sect of our religion. Acts. 26. They wash the outside of the cup and of the
platter; that is, they justify themselves, and seem marvelous holy in the
sight of men, which can discern by the outward appearance only: but unto God
that sees and searches the secrets of the hearts and reins, they appear like
painted toombes, full of dead men's bones, and all filthiness: that is, they
have their inward parts full of ravening, and all kind of wickedness.
Wherefore, as Christ said to his Disciples, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom
of heaven: Mat. 5. 20.
So J say unto you, that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
these pharisaicall hypocrites, ye cannot be saved.

These holy pharisees did use to call the publicans, not usurers, nor
extortioners, as they themselves were; but by the general name of sinners, as
though they themselves were free from sin. Thus the Papists at this day do
use to call the most sincere professors of the Gospel, not Lutherans,
Caluinists, Zwinglians, or Protestants, as they were wont to call them: but now
they term us heretics, a name more odious then any other; whereas in the
mean season, they themselves are of all others the greatest heretics. So the
Atheists of our time, when they cannot accuse the godly that are amongst us, of
usury, or briberie, or extortion, or drunkenness, or any such notorious
sin, they call them hypocrites, which is the sum of all: when as in very
truth they themselves do best deserve that name: but it makes no matter what
they call us, neither are we to be moved at their despightfull speeches: for
as the bitter taunts of these murmuring pharisees, could not hinder Zaccheus in
his conversion, so the slanders of these godless men, must not discourage the
servants of God from their good profession. The Pharisees did Zaccheus great
wrong for calling him sinner, when he had repented of his sin: and the
Atheists at this day do greatly wrong the true professors, in calling them
hypocrites, which have truly repented of their former sins, and endeavor by
all good means to lead a godly life. Therefore as Zaccheus preferred his
souls health before all their murmuring: so it behooves us to look to our
souls salvation, notwithstanding all the reproaches and slanders that are
devised against us. And as the Pharisees might call Zaccheus sinner, but could
not hinder his conversion: so the malicious worldlings may take away our goods,
our good names, yea, and our lives also, but cannot deprive us of our salvation.

Wherefore, as our Savior said to his Apostles, Fear not them that can kill
the body, and then can do no more: so I Math. 10.
say unto you, Fear not the frowns of the wicked, for they are not able to
hurt your better part: seek not to gain the favor of the world, for the
whole world is not able to save a soul, but fear to offend him that is able
to destroy both body and soul in hell, and seek to please him that is able to
save them both in heaven for ever.

Now follows an other fruit of Zaccheus conversion: namely his good
confession: for, as he believed with his heart unto righteousness, so he
confessed with Romans 10. 10.
the mouth unto salvation. When Zaccheus was mocked of the Pharisees, it
seems that he should stoop down for shame: but when he was thus reproved
and reviled by them, the Scripture says, that he stood up in sign of
gladness. As the Apostles went away rejoicing that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke Acts 5.
for the name of Christ: so Zaccheus the Publican went forth reioicing, that
he was reproched for the cause of Christ. Before, Zaccheus was a Publican, and
therefore stood in sin very dangerously, like the house that is builded upon
the sand, ready to be ouerturned with every tempest: but now Zaccheus is become
a true christian, Luke 6. 46.
and therefore stands in righteousness very safely; like the house that is built
upon a rock, free from any danger of falling.

Behold Lord, the half of my goods, etc. There are two parts of this
confession. The first is his gift to the poor: The second is the restitution
of his unjust gotten goods. Before, Zaccheus was an oppressor of the poor, now
he is a great benefactor to the poor: before, he was an encrocher upon other
men's goods; now he is a distributer of his own goods: before, he was a
receiver and a taker, 1. Tim. 6. Matthew. 13.
now he is a restorer and a giver: neither does he give sparingly, but he
gives liberally, laying up a good foundation against the time to come.

Now has Zaccheus found that precious pearl, and for joy thereof, he is
content, not to sell, but to give all that he has to enjoy the same. When the
rich Ruler (in the former chapter) was willed to sell all that he had, and to
give it to the poor, he went away very sorrowful, for Luke 18.
he was very rich: but Zaccheus perhaps as rich as he, is content, of his own
accord, and unbidden, to bestow half his goods upon the poor, and that with a
cheerful mind. If Zaccheus had given only the third part of his goods, no
doubt but Christ would have accepted it, for he accepted the widows farthing,
because it was given with a willing mind: but if he had given all Luke 21.
his goods to feed the poor, as the Pharisees gave their alms, to be seen
of men: yea, or his body to be burned, as some Romans have done, to get renown,
it should have been to no purpose, because it was done to a wrong 1. Cor. 13.
end.

Now, as Zaccheus was rich in the goods of his life, so was he rich in faith
also: neither was it an idle or dead says that Zaccheus had, but it was a
fruitful and lively Gal. 5. 6.
faith, a faith that works and labors by love, such as is required at the
hands of Christians. Saint James says, Show me thy faith by thy works. And
here Zaccheus does show his faith by his works. Before, he was exercised in
ungodly works, which are the fruits of infidelity: but now he is exercised in
the works of mercy, which are the fruits of a lively faith. Zaccheus is very
liberal in releeuing the poor, but he is liberal of that which is his own:
so there are many now a days that are very liberal, but it is of that which
is none of theirs; for as Nahab and Abihu offered strange fire unto the Lord, so
these men offer strange goods unto the Lord, There are some amongst us, that
think to make amends Leuit. 10.
for their unjust dealing, by giving part of that to some good uses, which they
have gotten by bad means; if they have gotten a pound by usury and oppression,
they are content perhaps to give a penny to relieve the poor. But as it was
not lawful for the Israelites to bring the price of the hire of an harlot into
the house of the Lord, so it is not lawful for us to apply the gain of our
ill gotten goods to the service of God. Deuteronomy. 23.


The half of my goods I give, etc. Zaccheus says not, I have given as an
vpbraider of God: or, I will give, as a delayer, that means to give away his
goods after his death, when he can keep them no longer: but he says, I give,
to signify, that his will is his deed, and that he means not to take any
days of payment for the matter. For as before he ran apace to see Christ,
and came down hastily to entertain Christ in his own person; so does he here
give quickly to relieve Christ in his needy members. This is Zaccheus last will
and Testament that he makes before his death and sees the same proved and
performed before his eyes. If therefore we desire to do any good to any of our
poor brethren, let us learn of Zaccheus to do it quickly while we are alive,
for time will prevent us, and death will prevent us, I know there would be many
that would be willing to give some part of their goods to the poor before
their death, as Zaccheus did: but that they know not what need themselves may
have thereof before they die; and therefore for the most part they will hardly
forsake or leave their goods, till their goods forsake and leave them. But
herein they show themselves to doubt of Gods providence, and as it were to
distrust of his payment, who has promised to repay whatsoever is given unto
the poor, as it were lent unto himself, and that not secretly, though they
did their alms never so secretly: but the Lord will reward them openly, as our
Savior speaks, Matt. 6. The wise preacher, Eccl. 11. Pro. 19. 17.
wills us to cast our bread upon the waters; that is, to be liberal to the
poor, whose watery eyes bewray their great necessity: or (as others expound
it,) to hazard and adventure some of our goods upon our needy brethren, as
Merchants do adventure their goods upon the seas: for although they may seem
to be in great peril and danger of perishing in the waters, yet commonly it
falls out, that by the blessing of God they return with greater profit. So
albeit, the relief that is bestowed upon our distressed neighbors, may seem
to be lost; yet as the wise man says, after a time we shall find it again: and
as the precious oil descended from Aarons beard to the skirts of his
clothing, so certainly the oil of mercy and charity which we pour into the
wounds of Psalm. 13 3.
our distressed brethren, shall descend into our own souls; and as the
widows oil was increased in the Luke 10. 1. King. 17.
cruse, because she relieved the Lords Prophet, so shall this precious oil
bestowed upon the poor, be returned upon our heads in great measure. Thus is
Zaccheus liberal as you see: for he gives a way half his goods, but he gives
it not to the rich, that might give to him again, but he gives it to the poor
that cannot requite him: to teach us upon whom we should bestow our alms. As
God that is rich in mercy, gives all things unto us that cannot requite him:
so the rich men of this world (if they have any spark of mercy in them) should
give unto the poor that cannot requite them. But amongst us in every place
almost, it is far otherwise: for if any thing be to be given, not they that
are poorest and stand in greatest need, but they that can make best friends are
best preferred. Thus Dives is still enriched, and Lazarus is still rejected. If
we send to a great man, we send an ox for a present, but if we send to a
poor Luke 16.
man, we send a crust for an alms. Therefore as Christ Math. 12.
said to the Jews, that the Ninevites should rise in Judgment against them,
because they repented at Jonas preaching: so it may be said unto us, that
Zaccheus shall rise in judgment against us, and condemn us: for he showed
great mercy upon the poor, but we are void of all compassion.

Thus you have heard the first part of Zaccheus confession, wherein you see his
liberality to the poor. Now you shall hear the second part of his confession,
wherein he promises restitution of his unjust gotten goods. Before, Zaccheus
gave to the poor the half of that which was his own: now he restores that
which is none of his, to the right owners. And because he had detained their
goods so long, to their great loss and hinderance, therefore he does not only
restore the principal, which he had taken from them, but he allows them
their costs and damages they had sustained. As Ioram King of Israel caused to
be restored to the 2. King. 8.
Shunamite her house and land, and all the fruits and profits of the same,
which were wrongfully kept from her seven years together: so Zaccheus the
customer restores to those that he had oppressed, their goods which he had
gotten from them, by fradulent dealing, with all the fruits and profits that
might come thereof: during the time of his unjust profession. So liberal was
Zaccheus to the poor, that he gave them half his goods: and so little got
Zaccheus by his usury and oppression, that for every penny he restored four.
If the usurers and extortioners of our time would restore fourefold for that
they have wrongfully gotten. I fear me they would have but a small half to
give to the poor, and but a little left to help themselves. There was no law
to compel Zaccheus to make such restitution, except he will confess himself
to be a thief, because he was an usurer, and then the law of God requires
such restitution. And surely Zaccheus seems after a sort to confess his
theft, because he promises fourfold restitution. If a man had stolen a
sheep, the law of God requires that he should restore four sheep for one:
and the ancient Romans had this law, that usurers Exodus 22. 1. 2. Sam. 12.
should forfeit four times so much as they took for usury. If the same law
were now to use against our theeuish usurers, as it was sometime among them, we
should not have such complaining of the poor both in prisons and streets. But
if these great thieves (I mean our biting usurers) that rob and spoil without
ceasing when they have no need, might find no more favor then those petty
thieves which rob and steal sometime, when they are driven thereto by extreme
necessity, then surely the Commonwealth would soon be disburdened of that
pestilent brood of caterpillars wherewith it is pestered. I wish them betimes
to look to their own estate, and with Zaccheus to forsake their damnable
trade. If they have lived hitherto by the gain of usury, let them now lament
their sin and call to God for mercy and forgiveness: let them make
restitution of that they have wrongfully taken, and grieve that they have so
long detained that which is none of theirs. For as no sin is pardoned without
repentance to God, so usury is not pardoned without repentance to God: and as
the sin of theft is not removed, before restitution be made to men (if the
party be able,) so the sin of usury (which is a secret theft,) is not
remitted, before restitution be made to those that are oppressed and spoiled by
this secret theft. Thus you have seen how Zaccheus that was once a hoorder of
his goods, as our rich men are is now a liberal disposer of his goods, as I
wish they were. He that lately was a Camel laden with riches, and therefore
unapt to go through a needles eye, has now like the Camel cast off his rich
lading, and therefore may enter in Mat. 19.
at the narrow gate. Some rich men would rather have lost their lives, then
forgone their goods, and for half Mat. 7.
that loss would have proved very pensive: but this was the ioyfullest news
that ever came to Zaccheus house, sweeter to him then all his gold and silver:
that whereas before, he was in the state of damnation, now salvation is
promised to him and his house: and where as before he was the servant of Satan,
now he is become the child of Abraham. Now Zaccheus house is become Gods house,
and Zaccheus himself is the son of Abraham; and therefore no cause why Christ
should not resort to Zaccheus house. As Christ said to the penitent thief,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: So he says here to the penitent
Publican, This day salvation is Luke 13.
come unto thy house, and this day thou art become the child of Abraham. Christ
loves not to be long in any man's debt: for as he says to Zaccheus, To day I
must abide at thy house: so he says to the same Zaccheus, To day and
henceforth for ever, thou and thy house must abide with me in heaven. Here is
a happy change in stead of a little worldly treasure, subject to loss by
thieves, and to spoil by rust and moths, to have all store of heavenly
treasure, which neither thieves can steal, nor canker can corrupt: in stead of
an earthly house, subject to fire and falling, Mat. 6.
to have a house given of GOD: not made with hands, but eternal in heaven, 2.
Cor. 5. 1. Who would not rather choose with Zaccheus to give half his goods to
the poor, that he may be an heir of salvation, and the Son of Abraham to rest
in his, Fathers bosom, than with Dives to keep all from the poor, and be
tormented in those eternal flames? That rich glutton that denied the crumbs
from his table, challenged Abraham for his father, but he was refused, because
he had not the faith nor works of Abraham: but Zaccheus, though by nature he
Luke 16.
were not the child of Abraham, yet by grace he is become the child of Abraham,
because he walked in the steps of that faithful Father. Abraham believed
before he was John 8. 39.
circumcised, so Zaccheus believed before he was circumcised. As Abraham left
his country and all that he had Romans 4. 12.
when God called him, so Zaccheus left his office and the most part of his
riches, when he was called by the Son of God: and as Abraham desired to see the
day of Christ, and saw it and rejoiced; so Zaccheus desired to see Christ, and
he saw Genesis 32. 1. Acts 7. 3.
him and rejoiced. Now is Zaccheus a gentile become the child of Abraham, and
not only he, but his whole house also is become the house of Abraham; for when
Zaccheus John 8. 56.
is converted, his whole house is converted. As the Master is, such are the
servants; if he be godly and religious, they prove godly and religious; if he
be an Atheist, they prove Atheists likewise. Therefore keep no company with
the wicked, for it is most, pernicious: but associate thy self with those that
fear the Lord, that thou also may learn to fear the Lord: who for his
mercy grant that we may with Zaccheus be desirous to see Christ, joyful to
receive Christ, liberal to relieve the members of Christ, and ready to make
amends when we have Psalm. 18.
wronged any of our brethren, that so with Zaccheus we may be heirs of
salvation, and the true sons of Abraham to reign with Christ in heaven for
ever, by the means and merits of him that died and rose again for us. To
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all glory,

Amen.
FINIS.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.
O Lord God our heavenly Father, we thy poor and wretched creatures, give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for our quiet and safe sleep, and for raising us
up from the same. We beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to prosper us this
day in our labor and travel, that it may be to the discharging of our duty in
our vocations, principally to thy glory; next to the profit of this Church and
Commonweal, and last of all, to the benefit and content of our Masters. Grant
dear Father, that we may cheerfully and conscionably do our business and
labors, not as men pleasers, but as serving thee our God, knowing thee to be
the chief M. of us, and that thou see and beholdest us with thy fatherly
eyes, who have promised reward to them that faithfully and truly walk in
their vocation, and threatened everlasting death and damnation to them that
deceitfully and wickedly do their works and labors. We beseech thee, O
heavenly Father to give us the strength of thy spirit, that godly and gladly we
may overcome our labors, and that the tediousnes of that itksome labor which
thou for our sins have powered upon al mankind, may seem to us more delectable
and sweet. Fulfill now O Lord, these our requests, for thy Son our Saviors
sake, in whose name we pray, as he himself has taught us. Our Father which,
etc.

FOUR SERMONS PREACHED BY MASTER Henry Smith.

And published by a more perfect Copy then here tofore.

I (...) to die I die to live

book, hourglass, skull with wings, and globe

AT LONDON, Printed for William Leake, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Holy Ghost. 1610.

To the right noble Lord, the Lord Edward Earl of Bedford, grace and peace
from the Lord.
AS the little Be gathers not honey for her self alone, but for others; so
right Honorable, I am bold to present your good Lordship with my Choice, my
Care, and the Issue. The first, your honorable self, and in this, as you are
the The Choice.
hope of the reviving of your undoubted noble Grand father and Father: so my
hearty well wishing (together with the prayers of all the godly) is, that what
the Almighty graced the^ with, in you may be redoubled. The second is, the
Fountain whence the first had his stream, and The Care.
being in me (as a member of the Church) what I wish to the same assured
assembly of Gods people, I leave to the alone determiner of all Controversies
whatsoever. The last I comme^d to the only direction of the Lord. Now as the
faithful disposer The Issue.
of Gods truth, was a man linked unto me in assured friendship whilst he
lived: so I having with care long fithence collected these his Sermons
together, do now with singleness of heart present the same to your Lordship,
and heerewith am pressed to perform all such duties to your honor, as God shall
enable me unto, both in prayer for your health, and increase of zeal to the
maintenance of his poor flock, which I hope is the only aim and end of all
your honorable purposes. Thus with all other graces, I most heartily desire
that Father of light to enrich you in this life, and after this to bless you
with immortality in that place of rest for ever.

Amen.
Your Lordships to command, W. S.

The Contents.
Two Sermons of the Song of Simeon. The third, of the calling of Jonah. The
fourth, of the rebellion of Jonah.
THE SWEET SONG OF OLD FATHER SIMEON, in two Sermons.
Luke 2. verse 29. 30, 31, 32. 29 Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, according to thy word.

30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

31 Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

32 A light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.


THis is the sweet song of old Father Simeon, wherein is set forth the joyful
and peaceable death of the righteous, after that they have embraced Christ
Jesus with heart and mind unfeignedly as he did, seeing their death is to be
the beginning of a better and more joyful and pleasant life then the former.

But before we proceed further in it, let us hear a little of that which went
before. The Evangelist says, verse 25.

And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon* this man was
just, and feared God, and waited for the consolation of Israel, and the holy
Ghost was upon him. And a revelation, etc. Simeon feared God. Religion may well
be called fear, for there is no Religion, where fear is wanting: for the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and this Prou ^. 7.
privilege has God given to those that fear him, that they need to fear
nothing else.

And waited for the consolation of Israel. Simeon also waited for the
consolation of Israel, until he had embraced in his arms him whom he so
long longed to see and feel. How many waiters be there in the world? yet few
wait as Simeon did: but some wait for honors, some for riches, some for
pleasures, some for ease, some for rewards, some for money, some for a dear
year, and some for a golden day, as they call it: but Simeon waited and
expected with many a long look, until he had seen and embraced Christ Jesus,
the light of the Gentiles, the glory of Israel; the salvation of all that with
a faithful and zealous affection and love do wait for his coming, to the
comsort of the afflicted, and to the terrifying of the wicked and ungodly,
which have not already waited, neither embraced him as Simeon did.

And waited for the consolation of Israel. Faith in all afflictions does lift
up her head, waiting in assured hope, beyond all hope, and seeing the clouds
scattered over her head, yet she is ever comfortable to her self, saying: anon
it will be calm: and although all the friends in the world do fail, yet it
never fails nor faints, but ever keeps promise in that which by the
verity of the spirit of God it assures, until her joy be fulfilled. All are
not Israelites that are born of Israel. Simeon Romans 9. 6.
was an Israelite indeed, for he waited for the Messiah from God with patience
and expectation: so the spirit of God dwells always with them which always
say, Thy will be done.

26 And a revelation was given him. If we wait as he did, the spirit will
assure us as it did him, that we shall see God before we die: and they that long
in faith to see the joys of heaven, the spirit assures and promises
faithfully unto them, that they shall see it.

27 And he came by the motion of the Spirit in to the Temple,

Simeon came into the Temple at this time by the providence of God. The
worldlings will call it chance, but Pro. 16. 13. Mat. 10. 39.
the Evangelist would not chop that in, because it is manifest, that al things
come to pass by the providence of God, without which there is nothing done. By
this providence Rebecca came forth to wait on her fathers cattle, Genesis 24. 14.
15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
when Abraham's servant prayed, and looked for her coming, that he might take
her for Isaac to marry withal. By this providence Saul was anointed king by
Samuel, 1. Sam 9. 20. and 10. 1.
when he had no such thought in his heart, but went about seeking for his
fathers asses that were lost.

And he came by the motion of the spirit. The devil led Christ unto the top of
an high mountain, that he might show him the glory of the world, which
deceives unstable minds: so would he do you, if you would be led by such a
guide: but I would not have you to mark the vain motions of such a spirit,
which leads to nothing but to vanity and pride: for after he has led you to
the top, and allured you by carnal pleasures as much as he can, if you then
fall down to worship Mammon, and embrace the world, the same spirit will
afterward lead you, nay rather cast you down from the top of all unto hell.
Therefore I beseech you, and heartily entreat you, that you would be the
servants of God, and servants of the spirit of God, to be led by it, to obey
it, and to do nothing contrary to his will that you can refrain, but all those
good things which you would were done by you, and go thither whither you would
come; for all would come to heaven, but all will not go to heaven. If you will
all hear, I will teach you all: yea, J will undertake this: hear and mark my
words, and you shall be led by the power of the spirit to our Lord Jesus
Christ. And I pray to the Lord that I may never preach to the condemnation of
any among you all; yea I wish that every one of you were more zealous and more
godly then my self. But to whom shall I compare you? even to the vagabond
Jews, of w^^^^ Luke m^ntioneth in the Acts, that they took upon them to
abjure evil spirits by the name of Jesus whom Paul preached, to whom the
Acts. 19. 1. 14. 15. 16
evil spirits answered, saying: Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are
ye? and those which had the evil spirits ran upon them and overcame them,
so that they sted out of that house naked and wounded: and thus the devil
prevailed against them at that time, because they sought to work with an
others instrument, and prevail with an others weapon. If they would have said,
In the name of Jesus whom we preach, they might have prevailed; but they
thought it sufficient that Paul preached him, though they never professed him.
And so we lean upon an others staff, and think to be saved, because God
saves others. We shall be dealt withal as were those vagabond Jews: for he
will answer: such I know, and such I know; but who are ye? Therefore it
behooves us all to pray unto the Lord, that he would furnish us with weapons
to encounter against all the evil motions of the spirit of Satan, that we may
overcome, and not be overcome and put to flight, like those vagabond Jews, but
that we may have oil always in our lamps burning, and always armed with
watchfulness against our enemies, lest Satan steal upon us unawares, in the
dark, and lead us to fulfill his lusts, and spoil us, and strip us, and leave
us stark naked.

27 And he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple, etc.

If we would think that his spirit does lead us into the Temple, we would
mark very diligently the motions thereof when we are there, whether it
speaks to us in our own souls by the mouth of the Minister of God, who is
the Minister, not of the letter, but of the spirit and grace of God.

28 And when the Parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him according
to the custom of the Law.

28 Then he took him in his arms.

Happy Simeon embracing Christ, but not happy that he embraced him with his
hands, but therefore happy, because he embraced him in heart. Happy are they
and blessed which see the things that ye see, and the ears Mat. 13 16.
that hear the things that ye hear, says Christ; but cursed are we, that
hearing and seeing do not repent: for we cannot be blessed by hearing and
seeing only, unless we hear and see with profit, so that we in heart embrace
Christ. But we will object, that we are Israelites, and are circumcised, and
have received the Sacrament of Christ's blood, that we might be his people, and
he our God: but this will not excuse us, nor make us seem any thing better in
the sight of God, but rather worse, if we have not ceased to embrace the world,
to embrace vanities, and Ephesians. 4. 20. 22. 23. 24.
have unfeignedly embraced the word of God, and also the Lord Jesus Christ. For
it is said, that Christ came amongst his own, and his own received him not:
but therefore John 1. 11.
accursed are so many of them as reject their own salvation, which being freely
offered unto them, will not stretch forth their hands to receive it: that is,
will not attend with their ears to hear it, or at least will not enlarge their
hearts to embrace it.

And praised. If Samuel had heard the first time that God called him, then God
needed not to call him the second or the third. Jf Peter had marked the crowing
of the Cock Luke 22.
at the first time, as he did at the third, the Cock needed not to crow
thrice.

Now therefore, when you hear the same sound again which you have heard
before, remember now that the Cock croweth the second time: for you know what
discommodity does come by negligence, and what commodity by attention: for if
you attend and follow, justice shall be swallowed up of mercy.

Simeon praised God. Simeon was thankful. Here is the example, but where be
they that follow it? If nine lepers be cleansed, yet but Luke 17.
one returns to give thanks, then one is all. Unthankfulness is the first
guest that sits at the table; for some will not stick to say, that they
never said grace since they were children: but if they had said, they never had
grace since they were children: but if they had said, they never had grace
since they were children, I would rather believe them. Do you not say, Give us
this day our daily bread? If you do, for shame say so no more, beg no more at
Gods hands, until you be more thankful for that you have received. Leu. 16.
16.
For behold, the heavens frown upon you for your sins, and the earth denies
her fruit, and is become barren, because of your unthankfulness.

And praised God, and said: etc. Here Simeon prayed and praised God, yet but in
few words, for God delights not in much babbling: he prayed not like the
Ethnicks, the Pharisees, or the Priests of Baal; but Simeon prayed with the
heart like Moses, and was heard.

And said. He joyfully praising God spoke, yea sweetly as it were sung it.
Though you sing all David's Psalms over, and have not David's spirit, it
profits nothing: and though David was heard when he sung them, yet you cannot
be heard. Therefore let us pray so, that our prayers may be heard. But we
cannot with the heart, and so that Pro. 28. 9.
we may be heard pray, if we turn away our ears from the word: for so doing,
whatsoever prayers we make, they are abominable. Therefore let us hear so,
that hearing we may profit by it. Let us not hear still so unprofitably as we
were wont to do: if we do, it shall be required at our hands. Do you think you
shall never be called to account of that which J have preached unto you, and
therefore as soon as ye are gone out of this place, al is shut up, and all is
forgotten; God is exempted from your minds? Our Savior Christ says, the word
I speak unto you shall judge you at the last day. Mary is commended Ioh. 12.
48. Luke 10. 41.
for that she heard our Savior very diligently, laying up his words in her
heart, and Jacob was wiser then al his children, in that he remembered the dream
of Joseph until he saw it fulfilled. Those that love the Lord with an unfeigned
love, do gladly hear his voice and become obedient. My sheep hear my voice,
says Christ: and they that love Ioh. 10. 17. 2. Sam. 6. 14. Genesis 21.
the Ark as David did, will dance about the Arc as David did, and that with
joy and gladness. Isaac was a good man, his name signified laughter, whereby was
showed what joy and laughter there should be about Christ Jesus, for he was
the figure, the truth was Christ himself. The Virgin sung when she knew that
she should bear Luke 2 46. Luke 2. 13. 14.
him, the Angels sung joyfully when he was borne, and Simeon sung when he was
brought into the Temple.

If Simeon had not longed, and so waited for the consolation, should he now
have had this joy and exultation? he could not have felt it, for as our desire
is, so is our joy. And surely therefore we receive not sound comfort, or feel
small joy by the preaching of the Gospel, because we with longing wait not for
it, we have no lively desire of it, we hunger and thirst not after it.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart. Simeon waiting for the consolation
of Israel, longing to see the Savior, was like the Heart panting for the water
brooks, til he had beheld his best beloved: but as soon as he had taken him
in his arms, whom his soul desired to see, he so thirsted for death, that he
thenceforth thought of, sought after, besought God for nothing, but to leave
this life, and hence to depart: for he forthwith singing, prayed: Now let
thou thy servant depart. But do you (say some) commend him herein? did he
well? May not any man desire death? may not the fastened ship in a strange land
desire to be loosed to hasten to his longed for port at home? may not a man
imprisoned amongst bitter enemies, desire to be set at liberty, to return to
his own country, in freedom to live amongst his sweet friends? Are we not
strangers here, and by unpeaceable most deadly enemies, our own flesh, the
world, and the devil, held prisoners in the chains of sin, and manifold
infirmities? and is not our home, heaven; and the Saints and Angels, our most
dear friends? No marvel then that Simeon here desires to be loosed, or let
depart. And Paul professes, Phil. 2. 23.
he desired to be dissolved or unloosed, as ships in a strange land fastened,
as strangers amongst cruel enemies imprisoned. They were unnatural if they
did not: it were unreasonable to require they should not: for we not only may
think it lawful, but must also acknowledge it, even a necessary duty to
desire death. For is there till then in us any perfect, yea any pure obedience
of God? Does not sin as long as this life lasts, dwell in our members? Is
there any passage to the perfect life, but by the first death? The fish which
is taken in the net out of the sea, strugleth to get in again: and Adam thrust
out of Paradise, would feign have been within again: how much more should we
be desirous to be settled in the true Paradise, in assurance never to be put
from thence? Therefore also it is not only our duty to desire death, but also
as soon as any clearly sees Christ, presently he desires to die. For though
his state be never so pleasant, though his life be most delightful, though
he excel in riches, and pleasures, and honors, and knowledge, and glory, and
sarre exceed all that ever were: yet at the sight of Christ he even rejoices
to forgo all, the love of the world falling away like the mantle of Elias when
he was rapt into heaven, and so cries with the Apostle, I desire to be
dissolved; that he may be with Crist. For Christ is light, and as soon as they
see him, they see also themselves and the worlds false happiness: his glory,
and their shame and filthiness, which makes them wish for death, that they
may cease to sin against God, and perfectly please him and enjoy true
happiness with him: for all sin is blood in their eyes, and all worldly
pleasures vanities.

But why then (say you) have Heman the Ezrachite, Psalm. 88. 15. 16. 17. and
Ezekiah that godly king, Esaias 38. 10. 12. 13. 14, and that man after Gods own
heart the sweet singer of Israel, David, Psalm 6. 4. and 30. 8. 9 so prayed,
and taught others to pray against death? Why? Because they all were, and would
have others to be in the fervent love of God, both to die, and to live Psalm. 6.
10. and 36. 10. and 88. 11. 12. 13. Esaias 38. 11. 12 Phil. 1. 23. 24.
desirous: to live, that they might amongst men uphold and further the true
worship of God, so to save their brethrens souls, and advance the glory of God
the more: to die, that they might perfectly obeying God, fully please him, and
freed from all evil, enjoying all good, with him most blessedly live. For not
only the Apostle Paul, but all these, and whosoever are grounded in the faith
of Christ, but especially all that have strong hope to advance the honor of
God, are in a strait, as the Apostle speaks, Philip. 1. 23. and crushed on
both sides, even with two contrary desires: to be with Christ, which is best of
all for themselves; and to continue amongst men, which is most needful for
them. So that this remains a manifest most necessary duty, and of all that
have truly, as Simeon, believed in Christ, performed: namely, thenceforth
still to desire death, though they also withal desired, life for others, death
for themselves.

Yet all that desire death perform not a duty: for the wicked often desire to
die, but not duly: for, though they wish sometimes for it, and be willing also
to abide it: yet do they not in heart desire it, because they think it not a
thing in the ordinance of God good, and that for them, but utterly hate it,
holding it an extreme evil. For they acknowledge as, the truth is, it will
deprive them of all there delights which here they desire, and they cannot but
at least fear, it will take from them all pleasure, and bring them to
easelesse, and yet endless pain and torments intolerable, and yet
unspeakable: For the sentence of the unchangeable God is already given.

The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake Reu. 21. 8.
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. And the just
Judge shall say to all woorkers of iniquity: Go ye accursed into hell fire
prepared for the devil and his Angels: hell fire, where the worm Mat. 9. 43.
44. 48.
never dies, and the fire never goes out. Whereupon, this the Prophet
avouches, There is no peace to the wicked, Esaias 57.
says my God. For in their strong hope they feel a stinging fear, their
greatest confidence is not without trembling of conscience. Therefore fearing
the event of death to be for them (as indeed it is) most horrible, they utterly
abhor it, they detest it extremely. How then (say some) should they seek
death so eagerly? How should they murder themselves so willingly? They do it
not altogether willingly, but wittingly; not freely, but forced with fear of
some supposed greater evil: The troubles of this world, the anguish of body,
the horror of mind, they are most impatient of, they cannot, they will not
endure them, and thereupon they sometimes prefer death before life, less
willing to live in vexation, then dying to try, whether they shall feel what
they fear, even deserved damnation: for they are never willing to die, but
unwilling to live often, and so work themselves endless woe, in hope of
supposed happiness, abhorring life, not truly desiring death. For how die
they, when they most voluntarily bereave themselves of life? not in love of
God, longing to please him, performing all service to him: but either in pain
of body, or else anguish of mind, either raging that they cannot satisfy
their lusts, or have lost outward things immoderatelie loved: for fearing, if
they die, deserved torments: if they live they shall either continue in felt
horror, or lose hoped for honor: either impatient of Gods rod, fretting
against him that they so heavily feel his fury, and cannot fiercely fulfill
their malicious minds, or freely feed on the rest of their fleshly lusts, or
impotent in their desire of some false fondly conceived good hoping, with
dreadful doubting, by death to better their state, they choose rather to
prove the truth of Gods threats, and of the terrors of their trembling minds,
then in life to remain any longer, rather abhorring life, then any way truly
desiring death. Therefore, in that Simeon duly desired death, that which we
heard of Simeon in the beginning is proved true, to wit, that he was just and
feared God.

For none but the truly religious, none but they that by faith are assured they
are before God righteous, can rightly desire death. For who would desire a
change but for the better? But all that are ignorant of God, all the
unfaithful, what knowledge soever they have, cannot be in better case dead,
then they are now in living, though most miserably pained: nay, they cannot be
without just fear when they forgo this life, to feel for ever the second
death. But the faithful having their consciences quiet, and also joyful in
Christ, free from the fear of that death they have deserved, and assured by
death to pass to that life which God to all faithful has promised, earnestly
wish to die in fervent love of God, and zeal of his glory, that so they may
cease from offending their good God, and never cease magnifying his mercy;
showing thereby that they are weary of the service and bondage of Satan and
sin, and assured after death to enjoy the true life, most fully glorifying
God, and most perfectly pleasing him for ever: and therefore also they desire
death, not shortning their life, but waiting his leisure and calling, thereby
glorifying God, as in their lives they have done, and sought to do.

For man was not borne at his own will, and therefore may not die at his own
pleasure. Therefore they beg it of God, referring themselves ever to his good
will, when, where, and how by death they shall glorify him, still desiring it,
but never wilfully procuring it.

If any object, that Sampson plucked the house on his own head, as well as on
the Philistines, we must understand, that Sampson was a figure of Christ; and
therefore as it were offering himself to God a sacrifice, first prayed, and then
glorified God at his death, more then al his life, in killing so many of Gods
enemies.

And because they wait the Lords leisure, they not only wilfully murder not
themselves, but are careful also lest foolishly unwittingly they hasten it.
For all they are guilty of their own blood, that either by foole-hardie, rash,
or unwise behauing, or with surfets, drunkenness, or any intemperat using of
themselves, shorten their life. Yea, though they tender their lives never so
dear, yet are they in the guilt, because they willingly use the means that
brings death.

Simeon had seen much in his many days, but when he saw Christ, he was
unwilling to live any longer to see more. His desire accomplished, his long
longing at length is satisfied, his fervent expectation with free joy now
fulfilled. It is enough, says Simeon, that I have seen my Savior: as Jacob
said, It is enough that my son Genesis 45. 18.
Joseph lives. How much more then should we be satisfied with this, and in
all thankfulness rest in it, that we have seen Christ; not as Simeon, in
weakness and baseness, but victorious, most glorious, over sin, death, and
hell triumphing, and are more assured then Jacob was, that he, not as Joseph
under Pharaoh in Egypt, lives, but in heaven with his Father in highest
majesty reigns Lord over all, having all power both in heaven and Ioh. 17.
14. 1. John 3. 3. Romans 8. 18.
earth? and moreover, where he is, thither shall we come and be like him, and
with him as fellow-heires reign in the kingdom of our Father for ever.

Simeon knew Christ as soon as he saw him, and embraced him as soon as he
knew him, and enjoyed him as soon as he embraced him: so some know the word of
God as soon as they hear it, and believe it as soon as they know it, and
feel the comfort of it as soon as they believe it. But others hear it as
though they heard it not, like deaf adders which stop their ears at the voice
of the charmer. So Pharao would not hear the voice of Moses, nor Baals Priests
the voice of Elias: and others Exodus 5. etc. 1. King. 18.
though they know it, yet will not believe it, as if God were untrue: so all
malicious wretches that preserre the pleasures of sin before the glory of
God: and others though they believe it, yet can they not either presently, or
when they will, feel the comfort of it, much less the joy which is offered by
it, namely, the heart oppressed, the desolate afflicted soul.

The seed is not cast all on a heap, but it is cast abroad: therefore where be
the fruits of the spirit that you have brought forth? For the spirit of God is
not like a dead potion in the stomach, which works not; neither can we have
this spirit in us, and feel it not. For if thou have it, it will lead thee as
it did longing Simeon (as we have hitherto seen) to the Temple, and when thou
art there it will lead thee to Christ, and when thou have received and
embraced him, it will possess thee with joy, and so with thankfulness and
godly care to keep him and to entertain him, and to be obedient unto him:
nay, also with a longing to be loosed hence, and evermore perfectly to please
him. Therefore beloved, judge your selves, that ye be not judged of the Lord.

Thy servant. The godly would not leave this privilege for all the riches in
the world, for that they are the servants of God, fellows to princes and
Angels, for we serve him whom David, Solomon, Ezechias, Josias served: yea, to
whom a thousand thousands, Dan. 7. 10. even innumerable Angels minister, Heb.
12. 22. even him who is most blessed for ever. Every serving man bears the
cognizance of his master upon his sleeue. What then will the Lord say, when he
comes and finds us marked with the badge of Satan? Surely he will say,
give unto Satan Exo. 12. 22. 23. Eze. 9. 4. 11. Re. 10. 7. 3. 5. 6
that which is Satan's. But all the houses of Israel are sprinkled with the
blood of the Lamb, and all mourners in Jerusalem are marked, and all the
chosen are sealed with the seal of the living God.

Well, was it said the poor receive the Gospel? The young men are more
forward in the truth, and more zealous then the aged, the son then his
father, the servant then his Master. Once the younger Brother stole away the
blessing from the elder, therefore the elder hated him even for his zeal. And
when was Jacob hated more then he is now? When was he so hated and persecuted
as he is now by Esau? Yet in the old time men were more zealous in their age,
then ever we hear of them to be in their youth, yea, they were zealous in the
Lords business.

Age hinders not Noah from building of the Arc when God commanded him: age
hindered not Simeon Genesis 5. 32. and 6. 22.
from rejoicing and mirth when he beheld and embraced the Lord Jesus Christ.
Then old Simeon embraced Christ, and he enjoyed him with hearty joy in zeal,
but now where is old Simeon? There be but few of them to be seen coming to
the Temple to receive Christ, but Dan. 1. 8. 1. Sam. 2. 3. 1. Ti. 4. 12. Phil.
10. Mat. 21. 15.
now young men receive him, young Simeons, young Daniels, young Samuels, young
Timothies, and young Onesimus, and the young infants begin to speak again.

The young have him, they are zealous, and J hope they will keep him, though
old men neglect him. Satan, thou have too much for nothing already.

In peace, etc. Christ brings peace with him, not the peace of the world but
that peace which passes all understanding, My peace I leave with you, John 14.
27. My peace remain with you, Psalm. 37. 37.
says he. Our peace is laid up in Christ, and all the peace we have, we have
by him, else it is not true peace. Simeon was just, and feared* God in his
life, and therefore he departed in peace: so mark the end of the just, and
follow their steps, and you shall then depart in peace, like the Lamb upon the
Cross.

Feign would Balaam die the death of the righteous, but Balaam must then live
the life of the righteous: therefore Nu. 23. 14.
all men look to this. Happy are they that depart in peace, who when Death
says fear, and the serpent says despair; they say by the spirit to the
flesh, crouch, and bid the Serpent fly, while Death opens the prison doors.

If the Papists would have men to depart in peace, they would never say, that
those which depart go to Purgatory: for so by their own saying, the worst
part is behind. For they affirm, that the pain thereof is far grieuouser
then any that in this life may be sustained. But again, some say, this
Purgatory is in the earth near to hell, and so it is too far from heaven to
be saved. Some do say, they are punished there by fire; and some say, by
water; and some say, by fire and water. Some lastly do say, that the good
Angels torment; and others say that the evil spirits do it. Jn this variety of
most uncomfortable opinions, how is it possible hence to depart in peace? But
we must understand it is a painted Sepulcher, made for the pampering of the
living, not for the punishing or purifying of them that be dead. For the locust
of Rome do live altogether by such Trentalles, and by such traditions, and
this is the profitablest dream that ever any of them dreamed: but it is
manifest by the Prou. 30. Eccle. 11. 3.
word of God, that where the tree falls there is lies and shall lie for
ever. Dives and Lazarus are dead; and where they are, thither shall we al go.
Satan has many sleights Luke 16. 22. 23.
to deceive us, of which this is one of the greatest, to bring us from the word
of God, to dreams and traditions, and things invented by the brains of
mortal men, which have not the spirit of God in them.

According to thy word. All the seed falls not into good ground, and
therefore, though I have showed you it is ungodly, as being not according to
the word, some think it but a small matter to say for the dead, Lord have
mercy upon them at least they think it as a venial sin if it be a sin.
But let us take heed how we make trifles of sins, for there is no dallying
with God, who is jealous as a consuming Heb. 12. 29.
fire, when his people make such small account of his words. Other demand,
whether it be not better to say. God be with them, than the devil be with
them; both which are naught and to be eschewed. And herein they ask this
question like a thief, who having robbed a man by the hie way, and being
taken with it, and demanded why he did such a villainy, says; Is it not better
to rob him than to kill him? as though he must needs do one of them: then
what a shameless answer is this? for it is manifest, that of two evils none
is to be chosen.

Some will say, it is a testimony of our good will. To such we must reply,
saying; so it is a testimony of your ignorance: and then after a little
conference they will grant, that indeed it does not profit them. Then we must
reply and say, God has made all things to profit us, and has commanded that
nothing be used unprofitably no not so much as a vain word speaking, saying;
Mat. 12. 36.
that for every idle word we must give account at the day of judgment. Then
they reply again, saying: Jf it do them no good, it does them no harm. But we
must answer, it were good to beware lest it do thy self harm.

Another sort will reply and say, I pray God I never do worse. But to such we
must answer; I pray God you may do better: and you should first know whether
you do not harm, before you do it. For indeed it must proceed of harm
being spoken in doubting without faith; for if you believed that they were laid
up in peace, whom you pray for, what need you pray for them at all? But it
shows an unbelieving heart, and we know that whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin, and the Lord will say of them, who has required these things at your
hands? Romans 1. 23.
You have wrought vanities. Now therefore you will not leave it because you
used it: then will you say also, we will not leave our lying, nor our swearing,
nor our cursing, because we have used it. It will grieve me if I hear you use
these speeches hereafter, having no reason nor proof of scripture to maintain
it by, or to be your warrant in it: therefore I charge you in the name of God,
that you use them not, but rather when you hear this, or any other sin
condemned, lay hands upon it, and see that you put it to death without delay,
according to the law of God.

According to thy word. When Satan has thus possessed us with this opinion
that in the service of God we may neglect the word of God, then profits and
pleasures guide us in our profession: but they that do so profess Religion
and godliness, can never have any comfort by it all their life. For their own
hearts accuse them for hypocrites, because they wait not for the consolation of
God, according to his word, and whatsoever is not done according to that word,
cannot be acceptable: and this word they care not for, neither have it in
estimation. When Adam sees his nakedness, the subtle serpent can deceive no
longer, but before he sees his nakedness, he is ever deceived, and led away
with the multitude into innumerable errors. Some say, they shall be saved by
good works, and some by the Popes pardon, others say by Purgatory, and these
will have a Mass sung for them as long as the world stands, and all for one
silly soul thinking to be saved by it. And yet see their blindness, for they
seem to think that their torment shall not cease as long as the world
stands; else why should they find and hire men to say Mass for them so long?
but these are the far morsels of Baals Priests, and for this cause is the
Popish Creed made very favorable to the Cleargy-Wel, say that Ignorance is the
mother of their devotion, for when the couetouines of the Priests and the
Ignorance of the people joined together, then they invented Purgatory, Masses,
Prayer for the dead, and then all their trinkets. For if they had not held our
Fathers in ignorance, keeping them from the word, they would never have been
Papists. But when they cast a mist before the eyes of men, then the blind fell
into the ditch, which does contain so many gross corruptions.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation. For, etc. Because the holy Ghost by
inspiration had dedeclared unto him that he should not die, till he had leene
Jesus Christ, therefore the same spirit led him to the Temple, and showed that
which it promised and having seen the same, he desired and wished to die, and
be released from this earthly prison, that he might ^iue with God. As id^e and
evil wishes are vain, because they are not according to faith, not grounded
upon the word of God, so though we ask as cunningly as Jacob, and as earnestly
as the sons of Zebede, yet if we ask Genesis 27. 17. 18 19. 20. etc. Mar. 10.
35. 37. Iam. 1. 7.
not in says according to knowledge, we cannot obtain. But we should ask so
that we may receive, that we may not return empty. Therefore the ground whereon
Simeon settled himself to wish for death, was, that he had received a promise
of God, that he should be delivered from this miserable life, when he had once
seen the light of the Gentiles, the Christ: and now he had seen his Savior,
and embraced the true Messiah, which was promised by the Father, figured by the
law, spoken of by the Prophets, foretold by the Fathers, and pointed at by John
Baptist. For thus he reasons; Now that I see thy salvation according to thy
word, and therefore the condition is now performed, let thy promise also be
fulfilled: Now let thy servant depart, etc. For mine eyes, etc.

Mine eyes have seen, etc. Then we see that Christ was no spirit, neither was
his body a fantastical body; for if he were a spirit, Simeon could not see
him, and if his body were a fantastical body, then could not he have embraced
him. Therefore we John 11. Luke 29. John 4. Luke 10. Luke 5.
see that the words of the Scripture are true, which says, that Christ was
perfect man in all things, sin only excepted. For he sometime wept, as at
the death of Lazarus, and like wise over Jerusalem. Sometime he thirsted, as at
the Well where the woman of Samaria disputed with him: and also sometime eat,
as at Marthaes house, as also among Publicans and sinners, and in every thing
showed himself to be perfect man.

Have seen etc. O Lord, says he, I desire now to be dissolved and free from
the bondage of sin, which so long has inhabited in my mortal body, for now he
is come, by whom thou have promised to free and set us at liberty, he is come
by whom thou have promised to break the Serpents head, and he is come that
will heal our infirmities, and give strength against sin and satan by faith
and peace toward God through love. And now, says he, I have embraced him,
and thankfully do receive him. I believe, and am persuaded that this is the
same Messiah, whom the Father promised, and the Prophets foretold, all Israel
longed and expected for, who is the light of the Gentiles, the glory of Israel,
and the God of the whole world. So they which love the truth of God, and wait
with desire to be filled with the knowledge thereof, such shall not die until
they have their hearts desire with contemplation thereof. Acts 10. Acts 8.
For as Peter was sent to Cornelius, and Philip to the Eunuch: so the Lord will
stir up such of his servants, as may be fit instruments to minister the same
unto us. Judas indeed died before the time, and lived not to see Christ
crucified, but the Disciples which loved Jesus, did see him die like an
undefiled innocent Lamb, and that to their exceeding joy and comfort, when
they understood how that he suffered death for love of them and for their
redemption. Now if Christ cannot hide him from such as hunger after him through
love, then what shall we say of our Fathers which lived in the time of
ignorance, that longed to see his light, although they had a mist cast before
their eyes? Surely, such died not till they saw Christ, and embraced him in
their hearts. And this is our judgment concerning them that died in the time
of Popery. And likewise as concerning the rest, which thought to be saved by
Purgatory and Masses after that they are dead, we say that they which sleep
without oil in their lamps they die ere they are aware of, and ere they wish
for it, like the Philistines which sent for Sampson to laugh and mock at him,
and to sport Judge. 16.
themselves, upon whom the house fell and destroyed them all: or the Egyptians,
which thought that the waters had made passage for them as well as for the
Israeliers, Ezod. 16.
both which died in and for their security because they were not watchful, nor
prepared against the Lord called them.

Have seen thy salvation. Seeing now he is come for whom Simeon longed, what
are the troubles that are past, and the sorrows that are come to an end? so
when we have our desires accomplished, feeling the sound comfort of the
Gospel, what should we? how may we think, either on the length of time wherein
we waited for them, or the tediousnes, or also grieuousnes of the troubles
whereby we have obtained them.

Have seen thy salvation. As Moses died on the mount where he saw the land of
Canaan: so the godly die in the sight of God, and in Deuteronomy. 34.
the contemplation of his glory, like Stephen, who at the very instant of his
death, saw the heuens open, and Christ Jesus sitting at the right hand of his
Father, and like Simeon Acts 7.
here, which desires to be loosed, and no doubt shortly died, viewing
joyfully and so thankfully beholding the Lord of life.

Beloved, you are not ignorant that the great day of the Lord is near at hand,
and therefore they that have not yet seen Christ, they that have not yet
embraced him, but still sleep without oil in their lamps, shall suddenly be
overtaken without the wedding garment, and shall be cast into eternal torment
for ever.

Have seen, etc. There be many sights of Christ, all go not up to the mount,
as Peter, James and John, all see not his face with Matthew. 17. Exodus 33. John
13. 2. Cor. 12. 2.
Moses, all sleep not in his lap with John, all are not taken up into heaven
like Paul, all embrace him not in their arms with Simeon. But as pleases God,
so he shows himself unto us, and all that love him, both see him and embrace
him.

To some he shows himself as in a glass, to some generally, Mat. 20.
to some particularly, some he calls early, and some he calls late, and
there is no hour in the day, wherein he calls not some to get labor in his
Vineyard. To some he shows himself by Angels, and to othersome by visions.
Abraham saw three Angels, Lot Genesis 18. Genesis 19. Judge. 13.
saw but two, Manoahs wife saw but one, and yet one was enough. It is said
that Abraham saw Christ his days; but we see him cleerer then Abraham, and
cleerer then John, if we believe in him as we should. Some see John 8.
Christ, and not his salvation, and some see his salvation, and do not embrace
it. We see Christ when we hear his word, and we embrace his salvation when we
believe it: they see him that hear him, they embrace him that follow him.
Here if they had heard me, I would have searched Jerusalem with lamps, to see
who sits in darkness. But how can they believe the word of God which hear
it not? how can they embrace Christ which know him not? and all through
ignorance, having not the means to see him, because their leaders are either
blind guides, sleepy watchmen, or hireling sheepheards. And surely it is a
woeful case, when shepherds go to task, and let their own sheep alone
summer and winter. They sheare them, but neither summer nor winter do they
feed them. How should those people under their charge see Christ and his
salvation, when they are so debarred of the wholesome food, and even starued to
death many thousands of their souls, because they have not the food that
nourishes the soul unto salvation? and how many be there that are as old as
Simeon, and yet have not embraced Christ Jesus? yea they know him not though
they see him, neither do they wait for his coming, because they have no desire
to embrace him, and therefore they defer that and put it off from their youth
to their middle age, from their middle age to their old age, from their old age
to death, and so they can have no leisure in all their life to embrace him. But
to such as do seek him, and wait for him with unfeigned diligence, we say as
the Angel said unto the woman at the sepulcher, fear John 20.
not, you seek the Lord Jesus. How is this world set to deceive us? We can
find leisure to do evil at any time, but we can find no leisure in all our
life long to do good, that we may at length enjoy the true salvation.

I have somewhat to say to you of this parish: A dainty was prepared for you,
and you let the strangers take it from you; you were required to a fast, and
you did feast your selves; you were required to come and pray unto the Lord,
and to humble your selves in his sight, that he may turn away his wrath from
you, and you let the Temple stand open, and empty, for your parts, and your
shoppes were as open and you were about your merchandise, forsaking God, and
seeking to win the unjust Mammon, and the vanities of the world.

Thy salvation. He came not by Angels, or by men, or by any other means, but
only from the alone and eternal God. He Matthew. 1.
calls him thy salvation, for his name was not given him by Joseph, nor by
Marie, but by the Angel of God, Luke 1. Luke 3. Luke 14. Mat. ^7. Math. 2.
signifying that he was come from heaven. The Father saw him when he was borne,
the spirit came upon him when he was baptized, the Angels ministered unto him
in the wilderness, his enemies subscribed unto him upon the Cross, the Virgin
travailed, the star walked, the Wisemen came out of far Countries to
worship him. Then is not this Jehovah the mighty God, whose birth is glorious,
whose life is famous, which death is meritorious? None can take upon him the
authority of God, but he, on whose shoulders the Lord lays it, being sent
of God, and from God. Then we see that our Savior is the true Savior sent
from God, for all creatures bear witness unto him, yea the very devils, with
all the evils spirits do obey his voice at whose name all knees Mark 1. Phil.
2.
shall bow. He came not to bring health, wealth, pleasures or profits, for the
which if he had, then multitudes of worldlings would have followed him; but he
came to bring salvation, righteousness, peace, truth, and life, Matt. 7.
therefore few care for him. He came to save sinners, not all sinners, not
every one that says Lord, Lord, Luke 5.
but he came to save penitent sinners, which turn unto God by their
repentance. Therefore he prays in John John 17.
for those only that were given unto him. So soon as the seed is sown, the
stones refuse it, or the Sun parcheth it, or the thorns choke it, and what
comfort has the Lilly among thorns? Therefore wisdom takes her unto her
wings, and whispereth saying, you shall seek Pro. 1.
me before I come, you shall seek me, but shall not find me, because ye have
refused me when I offered my self to you.

Christ is their salvation that believe in him, and make much of him, and
thankfully receive him. The godly he delivers from sin, but the wicked he
leaves bound in the chains of their iniquity, to be tormented of him which
had tempted them thereunto, whose will they always endeavored to fulfill, and
not the Lords; and he shows them a hand upon the wall writing writing their
condemnation, and another catching them by the hairy scalp Dan. 5.
which makes all their joints to tremble, and their hearts to despair, and he
says unto them; What do thou here without thy wedding garment? How dare
thou come to steal the childrens bread? The Spirit of Saul works Mat. 20. 1.
Sam. 16.
in him, in his bed, and every where, and he calls for the Harp of David to
comfort his heart which cannot be comforted. And this spirit says to Judas;
Thou have betrayed the Lord, and crucified him, therefore go Math. 27.
and hang thy self: for even at the preaching of salvation, the horror of
damnation, the mark of Caine sticks within thee whosoever beleeuest not in
Gods salvation. But the godly heart goes home, having embraced this Genesis 4.
salvation, chewing the cud, and rejoicing like the Apostles, which rejoiced in
that they were counted worthy to suffer for his names sake: and they say, O
what a good Acts 5. 4. 1.
banquet we have had this day! what delicious dainties has God feasted us
with! and so the Be goes laden to the hiue, and goes longer in the strength
thereof then 1. Reg. 17.
Elias did.

Thy salvation. The only Savior is here called salvation it self: for if he
were called a bare Savior only, then you might likely understand by some other
Savior; but here is he is called salvation it self, to show that there is no
other. For there be more Saviors, but no more saluations, as there be many
ways to death, and yet but one death. The brazen Serpent was a figure of
Christ, that they which are stung by sin, by fire, and by the Serpent which
Numb. 22. John 3.
beguiled Euah, may make speed, because there is no remedy but to come to
Christ.

The Papists have found out many saluations, they have found out a salvation by
Saints, a salvation by Angels, a salvation by masses, a salvation by merits, a
salvation by Idols, as though Christ had least to do in his own office, for
they have other saluations to flee unto: They will have it, but they will buy
it, and what will they give for it? Why, they will fast so many days, go so
far on pilgrimages, hire Priests to say so many Masses, build so many Abbeys,
and give so many sums of Money to the Monks and Friars. Therefore the
Scripture goes against them, and dishonours their shamelessness, who (like
Nimrod, that heaping stone upon stone, would have built up to heaven) heap
sin upon sin, and every Genesis 11.
hour, some one heresy or superstition grows up from this filthy root.

For what Papist dare say, that Simeon thought on any of these, or put
confidence in any other Savior, but only Gal 3. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 1. Genesis 42.
in him whom he embraced in his arms? For salvation is by the promise of God,
and all promises are in Christ. And though Jacob wanted bread, Joseph wanted
not money, therefore he gave them back again their money, and likewise he gave
them that corn that they would have bought with it. I would wish them
therefore to say as Joseph's brethren did, that they have their corn for
nothing, and their money too: let them I say be content and rejoice, to say,
that they have mercy for nothing, and their works too. For God cannot be won
by men's works, because they profit not him, but themselves.

There is no water can wash Naaman but Jordan, no water can wash the leprosy
of sin, but the blood of 2. Reg. 5.
the Lamb. By this the Israelites were saved when the destroyer passed by. By
this the Lord knows us to be Exodus 1^.
his people: and by this the devil knows us to be none of his. As it is
proper unto God to be called goodness, so is it proper unto Jesus Christ to be
called salvation. He is also called the way, the truth, and the life: for that
life John 14.
which we have, is but a spark and shadow of life, but he is the true and
eternal life.

Then seeing Christ is both our righteousness, salvation; and also the way,
the truth, and the life, to lead us thereunto: it is as possible for us
without Christ to be justified or glorified, as it is to be wise without
wisdom, righteous without righteousness, or saved without salvation. Therefore
let us not be ashamed to take our water from the fountain, seeing Christ is
the fountain of all wisdom, of all righteousness, of all truth, of all
knowledge, of all salvation, and briefly of all goodness: for there is no
other Arc to save us from the flood, no other ladder to ascend with into
heaven, no other Joseph to feed us in the famine, no other Moses to lead us
through the wilderness.

But as the river Siloa runs through all the land of Judea, and waters the
whole City of God: so Christ Ephesians. 4. 2. Cor. 15. Romans 5.
does show himself all in all, and all-sufficient in mercy to save and bless
all his Church with spiritual gifts. If Christ be salvation, what shall make
us despair? Shall Satan? No, for he has overcome Satan. Shall death? No,
for he has overcome death. Shall hell? No, for he has overcome hell. Shall
the Law? No, for he has fulfilled Esaias 63.
the Law. Shall wrath? No, for he has trodden the wine press of his Fathers
wrath. Therefore it was a sweet saying of one at his death: When mine iniquity
is greater then thy mercy, O God, then will I fear and despair.

Salvation is borne, therefore we were all in the state of condemnation before:
light is come, therefore we sat all in darkens before: glory is come,
therefore we were all laden with shame before: life is come, to show that we
were all dead in sin before. Life is come, and light and salvation: life to
the dead, light to the blind, and salvation to the damned. For Christ is called
salvation, to show that without him, we are all damned firebrarnds of hell,
heirs of condemnation, and forsaken of God. To him that is sick, it is easy
to be thankful when he is whole, but when he is whole, it is harder to be
thankful then to be sick. I would feign be disproued, that Niniuch might be
saved, though Jonah would not.

Thy salvation. This word salvation is a sweet word, yea the sweetest word in
all the scripture, and yet many despise this worthy jewel, because they know
not what it is worth, like the dawes, which would rather have a barley corn,
then a pearl or a jewel, because they know not the value thereof.

O Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him! O man, what is God that
thou art so unmindful of him! Psalm. 8.
If a friend had given us any thing, we would have thanked him heartily for it,
but to him that has given us all things, we will not give so much as thanks.
Now therefore let the rock gush out water again, and let our stony hearts
power forth streams of tears in unfeigned repentance. We have all called upon
you, but none regards us, as though God were as Baal, and as though Dives
felt no pain, nor Lazarus joy, but all were forgotten. Many times Christ
comes into the Temple, and there is scarce a Simeon to embrace him, the babe
is here, but where is Simeon?

If God had not loved us better then we loved our selves, we should have
perished long ere this, and yet we embrace not Christ as Simeon, who has saved
us from temporal and spiritual punishment. We are invited to a banquet, he
who calls us to it, is God. What is the banquet? Salvation. Who are the
guests? The Angels and the Saints. What is the fare? Joy, peace,
righteousness; this is the fare, and we inuit you every one: yet who will
come at our bidding? some for want of faith, some for want of love, some for
wnat of knowledge, have despised this holy banquet; yet unto this art thou
called still, O soul unworthy to be beloved.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON OF THE SONG OF old father Simeon.
Thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all the people, a
light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.
THy salvation. This word saluatiis a sweet word, and holds me to it like an
Adamant; for when J thought to proceed, this word said unto me, stay here,
teach this, and teach all, learn this, and learn all: for it is the pith of
all the mercies of God toward his children.

Christ is called salvation, because no man should despair, and because it is
impossible to be saved without him, for salvation is only in him. Christ can
do any thing but this, he cannot save him that will not repent. He is called
the salvation of God, because he came not from men, nor from Angels, nor by
chance, but from Luke 1. Luke 1. Matthew. 2. Luke. 2. Matthew. 2. Luke 3. Mark 1.
Luke 1. 15. John 11. Matthew. 27.
God himself, and therefore his Name was not given him after the manner of
men, which was, that every Father should name his own child, but so did not
Joseph, for the Angel had given him direction for his Name.

The Virgin, the Oracles, the Babes, the Sheepheards, the Staire, the Wisemen,
the voice of the Crier, the devils, the leapers, the sick, the dead, the
earthquake, the Sun, the Moon, and all the creatures do bear witness
unto the Son of God, which is our salvation. He is called the salvation of
God, because he is salvation according to Gods own mind. He came not to bring
ease and liberty, but he came to bring the spiritual sword, and condemnation to
all obstinate sinners, yet salvation to the penitent.

I showed you how many despised this jewel, because they know not what it is
worth, how few Simeons there be in the Temple, how few Nathaniels, how few men
that fear God: these plants grow not on every ground.

Who would be unthankful if he knew what the Lord gives and what he forgiues?
He gives the son for the bastard, the Lord for the servant, the righteous
for sinners, the innocent for the wicked, and the Almighty Lord, for the
sinful sons of men. Do you not marvel how you can offend this Lord
willingly, which has done so much for you? Here I reprove unthankfulness,
security and negligence, striving as it were to crucify Christ again, as the
wicked Jews did, who never prospered since the time that they said; His blood
be upon us, and upon our seed. They were not like Simeon, who as foone as he
saw him, embraced him, and rejoiced over him. There is no show of grace in
themwhich Mat. 27. 25.
show no liking of godliness, neither in themselves nor in others: for this is
the first part of our conversion, to love them that love God, and so they are
drawn to the Son. No man will build an Arc until the Genesis 7.
flood come, no man will seek for corn until the famine come, and scarce Lot
will be gone out of Sodom before the time of execution of Gods wrath do come
upon Gen 42. Genesis 19.
them.

We preach unto you, and call upon you, we have even wearied our selves among
you, we have reproved you for sin, and we must still reprove you until
you amend: now therefore, if there be any grace in you, if ye have any
knowledge, any fear of God in you, if you have any goodness in you, if you have
any leisure to be saved, turn back now from doing evil, come out of hell,
and pluck your limbs out of the clouches of the Serpent, for verily we have
not done so well in this city as the Ninevites did, for all the preaching and
teaching we have had. For, who has determined in his heart to amend his life?
Who has left his pride? Who has restored that which he has taken by
extortion, usury, and wrong? Surely they that have done thus are monsters, I
cannot see him, he walks invisible and cannot be found. The heavens trembled
at the death of Christ, the Sun did hide his face, the earth quaked, the
veil of the Temple Matt. 27. 45. 51. 52. 53.
rent in sunder, the dead bodies rose out of their graves, and all this was to
show that the Prince of the world suffered violence, and that the Lord of life
suffered death for the ransom of us, and of all whosoever throughout the world
do believe the gospel, and live in obedience thereof, and withal, that he
suffering for sinful and wretched man, was a conqueror over hell and all evil
and has overcome death. The Scribes were against him, the Pharisees were
against him, the Rulers band themselves against him, the Atheists against him,
and all the spiteful and envious Jews against him, whose birth was base,
whose life was contemptible, and whose death was ignominious, but God was with
him, and in him, by whose power he overcame them all, and so became the
salvation of God.

David being to encounter with Goliath, Saul took 1. Sam. 17.
and put on him his own harness, but he could not wear it, it was too heavy
for his little body, therefore he took nothing but a staff, and a few stones
in a scrippe, and so David slew the pride of the Philistines, and the fear of
Israel. And even thus the Lord set his son to fight with the Prince of this
world, not with swords and targets, bows and bills, but with the word and
spirit of God, with the which he has overcome, and through him we also have
the victory.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people, etc. He speaks this
to the end that the eyes of all mankind may be fixed upon him, as the eyes of
all Israel were fixed Number. 22.
upon the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, that when they be stinged with the
sting of that fiery serpent which deceived our forefathers, they may fly unto
him for help, lost they perish in their sin, and their blood be on their
own heads.

Which thou have prepared. He was prepared long ago, as it does most plainly
appear, for the virgin which bare him, the place of his birth, the poor
estate wherein he was, his miracles, his Apostles, his torments, his cross,
his death, his resurrection and ascension into heaven; all these were
foreshewed and foretold long before they came to pass. Therefore some said,
Who is this that is so often spoken of by John 11. Luke 8. Matthew. 27. John 10.
Mark 6.
the Prophets? Who is this that can do many miracles that the Scribes and
Pharisees cannot do? that can raise the dead, that can cease the winds, that
can calm the waters: at whose suffering the earth quaked, the Sun hid his
face, darkness came over all: and being dead, rose again by his own power,
and ascended into heaven in the sight of a great multitude? How can it be then
but it must be known before the face of all people, which was so manifest by
dreams, by visions, by oracles, by power; by authority, and every thing? For
there was nothing which had not a tongue to speak for God. Every thing was
prepared for him before he came to be revealed: he came not in the
beginning, nor in the ending: he came not in the ending, that we which come
after him might long for his second coming. He came not in the beginning,
because that such a Prince as he should have many banners and triumphs before
him. He came not in the beginning, because the eyes of faith should not be
dazeled in him, and lest they which should live in the latter times, should
forget him and his coming which was so long before, even as you forget that
which I have said as soon as you are gone hence. He came not in the
beginning, because if he had come before man had sinned, man would have
acknowledged no need of a Physician; but when man had sinned and had felt the
smart of sin: for when they were cast out of Paradise they ran unto Christ,
as the Israelites did to the Serpent. He came not in the beginning, but in the
perfect age of the world, to show that he brought with him perfection, perfect
joy, perfect peace, perfect wisdom, perfect righteousness, perfect justice,
perfect truth, signifying thereby, that not withstanding he came in the perfect
age thereof, yet he found all things imperfect. The Jews thought that he
should come like some great Prince, with pomp and glory, which was a carnal
conceit, for herein they were meruailously deceived, his father was but a
poor Carpenter, and his mother but a simple woman, and he a silly babe wrapped
in clouts. Then ought not we to reverence our Lord, and to praise his Name, for
that he became so humble for us most vile wretches that are worthy of nothing?
yet we see how cruelly they dealt with this blessed One, which came to save
them. Ignorance sat in the chair, deceit gave the sentence, and cruelty
executed him with the most painful and shameful death of the cross. O that
your eyes do not dazell, and your ears tingle, and your hearts marvel at
this dealing of theirs to our loving Savior, which came to save them that
would, and specially in that now you see, that he abased himself for our
sakes. even to the uttermost! O wonderful thing to think of? Jf you would
mark, J would make you in love with him before I have done with you, I say
unto all those that come hither to be edified, take your fill of pleasure,
enter into Paradise, lift up your eyes, stretch forth your hands, and eat your
fill of the tree of life, and the Lord will go home with you, embrace him and
kiss him entertain him well, and he will dwell with you for ever. But you
that come hither for fashion sake, either to see or to be seen, to find
fault with somewhat, or to make an hypocritical show of godliness where
there is none: I tell you, that comfort shall shake hands with you at the door:
mark it, and you shall see that my words are true. Show me what it is that is
better then salvation. I would have none of you to be damned if I might preuen
it, not so much as a piece of you to be given unto satan, therefore I would J
knew that stone that would kill Goliath, for I would strike it with my might
into his temples. If you will, you may be saved, and the Lord will one day put
those words into my mouth that will touch your hearts. Therefore now arise,
kiss and embrace the sweet babe Jesus, and then afterward frame your selves to
obey him, for then the Lord will knock at your hearts, and if you will let him
in, he will teach you all things. The Lord came not in the beginning, nor in
the ending, but he came in the middle age of the world, to show, that if it
will not learn now, it will never learn Psalm. 2.
to come unto God by repentance and amendment, that they may learn to kiss
the son lest he be angry, and so they perish in his wrath like Sodom. He
came in the middle age of the world to show that he was indifferent for the
world to give light and life unto all that return Acts 10.
unto him. For God respects no persons, but every man of what nation or
Country soever he be that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted
of him, and he will fufill their joys through Christ, yet not when we will,
but according to his own good pleasure and when he thinks good. Therefore
stay Helias, anon 1. King. 17. Exo. 14.
the Ravens will bring thee meat, and thou shall have enough. Anon Moses will
deliver Israel. So salvation is already prepared of God, and has been long
since with fullness of knowledge, and al excellent gifts, and he will give them
to us when he sees good. But we are like whining children, that will not
stay until their milk be cold, but would have it though they be scalded with
it: so we would have the knowledge of God and liberty before we know how to
use it. We would know the high mysteries and deep counsels of God, before we
know our selves; we would have the liberty of the Gospel, when we know no way
how to use it but in security. But the Lord, he will wisely give unto us as it
were our bellies full when he sees it good, and when he sees us ready for
it, who knows our hearts better then we our selves.

A light to be revealed to the Gentiles: and the glory of thy people Israel.
You have heard Simeon showing the cause why the son was sent from the Father,
why he became man, which reigned before in Paradise. What moved God to leave
his joy and his bliss, and suffer more then all the world could suffer
together? A great cause it is that would make a king leave his kingdom and fall
to beggerie. A great and wonderful cause it was, that made Jehovah to come
down from heaven to suffer misery upon the earth. Two other causes Simeon
shows why this Messiah came from heaven. The first, that he might enlighten
the Gentiles, which sat in darkness: and the second, that he might be the
glory of Israel, which gloried in their sacrifices, and in their ceremonies,
and so had no glory before he came, but were like the Moon when the Sun
does shine upon it, or like Rachel which despised Genesis 29.
Leah, and became barten. And they despised the Gentiles light; like that son
which was angry because Luke 15.
his lost brother came home again; or like those laborers which checked the
Lord of the vineyard, because Matthew. 20.
he gave unto the other laborers as much as he gave unto them. But the
Gentiles are like Leah, who being Gene. 29.
despised became fruitful. Simeon did rejoice in Christ, not only for that
he was the glory of Israel, but also for that he was the light of the
Gentiles. Shall the head be sorrowful because the hand is well? Nay rather the
hand should be glad, because the head is well, and the head because the hand
is well. The father should be glad because his son is stronger then himself,
the mother should be glad because her daughter is wiser then her self, the
brother should be glad, because his brother is richer then himself: the
mistress should rejoice, because her maid is a better huswife then her self.
But we envy our brethren and our neighbors, because they are better then we,
and because God has blessed them with temporal or spiritual things above us:
if we see that they have learning, then we envy them for their learning; if he
have more gifts, we envy him for his gifts, if he have more knowledge, we
envy him for his knowledge, if he have more zeal, we envy them for his zeal,
if he have more riches, we envy him for his riches, and how can we rejoice when
every bodies good is our evil and every bodies joy is our sorrow? But fix
your eyes upon Christ alone, and he will fulfill your joy, if you look not
back to Sodom like Lots wife: if you love joy and gladness; Christ is joy and
gladness: if you Genesis 19.
love comfort, why, Christ is the comforter of all that bear his cross: if
you love life, Christ is eternal life: if you love peace, Christ is peace: if
you love riches, Christ is full of heavenly riches, and full of liberality, to
bestow them upon all such as love God: so Christ is all in all unto the godly,
and they have more joy in Christ always and in all things then the richest,
and most glorious and sumptuous prince in the world; then Solomon himself had
in worldly riches, honors, pleasures, joy, ease or felicity. For the wicked
which put their trust in riches, and make them gods of gold and money, of ease
and pleasures, though they do all that they can to fulfill their lusts, and
take never so much pleasure, and be never so merry, yet they can have no true
joy, nor peace of conscience; for all the peace, the mirth, and sport they have
is but deceit, all false and indureable like the grass, Esa. 58. and. 57.
green in the morning, and withered ere night. But when the Lord does knock
at their hearts and strike them with a feeling of their horrible
transgressions, as no doubt he will, then they are all in a maze, and they can
have no joy, no peace, no rest; but they may say, in laughter my soul is
sorrowful, in ease my soul has trouble, in mirth moan, in riches poverty, in
glory shame, in life my soul is even dead, in plenty my soul wants all
things wherein it should rejoice, it is destitute of all comfort, Gene. 4.
and possessed with all slavish fears; like Caine, who being Lord of all the
earth, yet had no joy in it when God had once forsaken him. Likewise Saul when
God had forsaken him, he had no joy of his kingdom, nor of all his riches, and
then who had more joy, Saul the King, 1. Sam. 16.
or David the subjects? So then we see that perfect joy can be had in nothing
but in God, and in Jesus Christ. Wherefore as by the stream you may be led to
the fountain, even so let the joy and peace of this life serve to lead us to
God, which is perfect joy and peace, and there rest like the wise men which
were guided by the star, to come to the true son of grace, Jesus Christ,
when he was borne: and if we rest not in him when we have found him, there is
no rest for us, we shall be like the restless Dove, which fluttered about,
and found no rest any way, till she returned to the Arc: but we seem as
though we sought him and found him, when as we do but play the hypocrites.
Solomon says that the ways of the whore are prosperity and welfare, for she
ever puts on a vizard, that she might not be known to be so vile as she
is: so under the color of goodness evil is always lurking.

Therefore also is Christ called the light, because we should leave our
foolishness, seeing light is come, and that we should forsake all our lights
which are but darkness, and cleave unto his light, which is the true light
indeed.

A light to be revealed to the Gentles, etc. He came to lighten the Gentiles,
and they received him with thankfulness, of whom there was no hope of
goodness left. Who would suppose that the barren woman should become
fruitful, or the prodigal son return home again? It is like as if one
Owl should be converted to see light, or as if the stream would return into
the fountain, or as if an old man should become young again.

A light to be revealed to the Gentiles. To be revealed, not yet revealed, the
Jews must first reject him before the Gentiles receive him: and when the Jews
did oppress him, condemn him, and crucify him, then were his arms spread
unto the whole world. When the guests would not come, then he sends into
Luke 14. 23.
the high ways, to compel others that would not come willingly unto it.
Comfort is on foot, and that which will come, shall come, etc. The Queen of
Saba came from the uttermost part of the earth to hear Salomons wisdom, and
the wisemen came from the East to see Jesus Matthew. 12.
Christ: but we may say, the Lord was here in the Temple, and I was in my
shop, selling and buying, lying, deceiving, and swearing. Well, when he
comes back again, I will be better acquainted with him; and so we esteem not
of his presence in any reverent sort. The Shunamite said: Let us build a
chamber for the man of God: then we should build an house. Zaccheus 2. Reg. 4.
20. Luke 10.
climbed up into a tree to see our Savior, and the Lord seeing his diligence,
called him; Zaccheus, come down, for I will dine at thy house this day, and
that was a joyful day with Zaccheus, for then salvation came into his house,
and upon all his family: he gave the Lord a feast, and the Lord made him a
far better feast of peace, a feast of joy, a feast of heavenly things, and so
for his zeal and endeavor to see Christ bodily, he showed himself unto him
spiritually, even to his hearts desire.

To be revealed. Have an eye to the future tense, that which is not, shall 1.
Kin. 3. 12. 11 Iud. 13. and 15. and. 16. Luke 6. Acts 1. Acts 9. Math. 16. Acts
4. Acts 7. Acts. 7.
be. As for example, Solomon was wise, but he is foolish; Sampson was strong,
but he is weak; Judas was a Preacher, but he is a traitor; Paul was a
persecutor, but he is a Preacher; Peter was a denier of Christ, but now he is a
bold professor of Christ; Moises was learned in the wisdom of the Egyptians,
but now he is learned in the wisdom of God, by which the wisdom of the
Egyptians is made but mere foolishness in the sight of God. Others, as
heathen philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Cato, Crates, and such like, were
counted very wise men in the sight of the world, yea they wrote so many books
full of wisdom, and also adorned with notable sentences and witty sayings,
that one would think all wisdom were buried with them, so famous were they,
and so full of earthly understanding, teaching manners, counsels and policies:
yet for my part I have neither seen nor heard of any such, being wise in
worldly things, and without the wisdom of God, but that they have committed
some notorious foolishness in the sight of all men, like Achitophel, of whom
we read, that he was so wise a counselor, that his counsel was like as one
had asked 2. Sam. 16. 23 2. Sam. 17. 23.
counsel at the Oracle of God; and yet see the end of him, he hanged himself,
and all for the want of the knowledge of God. It had bin better therefore for
him to have had more wisdom and less wit. Crates, Aristotle, Plato, and
others of the wise Philosophers, have either poisoned, burned, or drowned
themselves: and so we see that the end of the worldly wisdom is mere 1.
Cor. 1. 20.
foolishness, and the foolish have more peace then the wise: for their
wisdom without the fear of God, does them no more good then the Arc did to
the Philistines, which did nothing but torment them, because 2. Sam. 5.
they knew not how to use it, and therefore irreverently abused it. For if your
wisdom consist in eloquence of words, in profunditie of wit, to gain
craftily, and spend warily, to invent laws, to expound riddles, and interpret
dreams, to tell fortunes, and prophecy of matters by learning: all your
wisdom is but vexation of the spirit; for all these without the fear of God,
do us no more good then their wit did these Philosophers, which
notwithstanding sat in darkness. And I am afraid though Christ brought light
unto the Gentiles, yet it may be said, that the Gentiles sit in darkness
still, saving a few Levites scattered upon the mountains, for whose sake
Sodom is spared. And because those had not the knowledge of God, therefore
they worshipped Mars and Cupid, Sun and Moon, beasts and serpents: 2. King.
17. 30. Iud. 16. 23. Act. 19. 33. 2 King. 19. 37 Exo. 32. 4. 6. 2. King. 1. 2.
1. King 22. 13. 1. King. 16. 32.
so the Philistines worshipped Dagon, the Ephesians worshipped Diana, the
Assirians Nesroch, the Jsraelites worshipped a calfe, Ahaziah worshpiped
Beelzebub, the Moabites worshipped Chamos, the Samaritanes did worship unto
Baal: so the truth to such seems falsehood, and error seems truth. As for
example, that the word should be made of nothing, that the Word became flesh
that God and man was joined together in one person, that one man may be
righteous in the righteousness of another; which is Christ, and that the dead
shall rise again: these seemed foolishnes unto the Gentiles, neither could
they believe them. No more can some Gentiles amongst us at this day, which are
but natural men, therefore they do not believe them, for when they professed
themselves to be wise, they became fools, says the holy Ghost. So then we see
now what Christ has done for us, Romans 1. 22.
he has bound that Serpent, which has sown all the tares, so that the devil
is feign for want of better lodging to enter into swine.

Heretofore, whereas one followed God, a thousand followed Baal; But now Kings
and Princes lift up their heads, desiring Christ to reign with them and in
them. Heretofore we made our selves like the wounded man, we were spoiled, we
were stripped naked, and we were bathed in our blood, being full of wounds; but
now Christ has furnished us, he has washed us, he has clothed us, and we
are now become true Israelites: us, which were the vile and wild Olives, he
has grafted upon the true Olive, and planted us in a fruitful soil. And what
cause can we show for this, but only mercy? For Deuteronomy. 31.
heretofore we were called foolish, but the Lord has made us wise according
to the wisdom of God in these days by his Spirit: but if ye deserve to be
called the foolish Nation again, then ye are most unhappy and most cursed. So
now we have heard, that the Lord does reveal his counsel unto his Prophets,
and how the glory of Israel is now revealed to be the light of the Gentiles.
And you have the cause why: because the Jews rejected their own salvation.
You have heard that the cause was only his mercy and his love, because mercy
cannot contain it self within Jerusalem.

A light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.
You have heard why Christ is called light, why he is called the light of the
Gentiles, why the Lord did change a curse into blessing, and why the Gentiles
did change darkness for light, and a thousand gods for one true God. Then the
Gentiles received more grace then they desired, for the Lord came uncalled unto
their houses, and made a feast unto them in their own houses. The light of the
Gentiles is our light, your light and my light: Christ is our grace, your
grace, and my grace: and Christ is our salvation, your salvation, and my
salvation. He came unto the Jews, and for the Jews, and yet his coming unto
the Gentiles, was better then to the Jews. He came into the world when the
world did abound in all wickedness, and saved us when we most deserved wrath.
Wonder at this you that wonder at nothing, that the Lord would come to bring
salvation, to redeem our lost souls even (as it were) against our wills: so
that now we would not be as we were for a thousand worlds.

The blindness of the Jews was, and is wonderful, who heard of their
reiection, and of our conversion, and yet understood it not, neither sought to
prevent Gods wrath in rejecting of them. Therefore the Rock, which should have
saved them, shiuered them in pieces, wherein was showed their wonderful
blockishnes, having it so often fore-tolde by their Prophets, figured in their
law, shadowed in their sacrifices, and read in their Churches from sabbath to
sabbath. Every thing that comes to pass in Churches, in Commonweals, in
Cities, in Countries, in Kingdoms, and in Provinces; these are all fore-tolde
in the Scriptures, and yet none do understand it, saving a few chosen ones whom
God loves: For, the coming of Antichrist, the overthrow of Kingdoms, the
darkness of popery, the light of the Gospel, the conversion of the Gentiles,
and the rejecting of the Jews: all these are set down in the Scriptures, and
yet we cannot understand it, though we hear it day by day, because we do
not give our minds to understanding.

Such hearers shall stand in a maze before the righteous and terrible throne of
God: the dead shall rise, the trumpe shall blow, and all the world shall be in
an vproare, and they shall stand quaking; when their hearing without profiting
shall be laid to their charge, and they shall say: O we have known no such
thing: but surely if the Jews could come out of hell, they would admonish us
to take better heed how we hear: for we hear as though we did not hear at
all, our minds are otherwise occupied. Now when we see any thing cometo pass
as it is foretold in the scriptures, then we must say as Christ said. This
prophecy is fulfilled; for all things that are written, are come to Scriptum
est, and factum est, that is, as sure as it is written, so surely does it come
to pass. It prophecieth nothing but that which truly is fulfilled in due
time, and the more often it speaks of a thing, the more certain, the more
excellent, and the more to be believed it is. Like a Jewel that is beset with
pearl, so is our calling adorned with Scriptures, for so does God tender our
calling, which is often in his mouth, and we so often in his remembrance, that
he speaks of us in every book throughout the whole Scriptures, like a
kind spouse whose love is in a strange country, and he delights himself
with thoughts and meditations of her: so he did long until the Gentiles were
come to him again, like the prodigal child, whose Father did long until he
had embraced him. When shall my prodigal son come home again, says he?
Luke. 15.
I will put my best garment on his back, and my gold ring on his finger, and
his fare shall be the daintiest morsel. And thus God longs for our
salvation, and he knocks at our doors; Is faith here? is love here? is
one called the fear of God in this place?

And as love makes lovers sometime to speak plainly and familiarly one to
another, sometime by dark speeches and riddles, sometime by letters, sometime
by dumb shows and signs, and sometime to hide themselves one from another:
So our God speaks sometime plainly to his Church, sometime darkely and
mystically, sometime he turns his face from his Church and dear spouse, as
though he would not speak unto her for love, as appears in the book of the
Canticles. Of the casting off of the Jews, and calling in of the Gentiles; the
first type or figure was Caine and Abel: Caine was the eldest son of Adam,
and Abel the younger, yet God loved Abel, and accepted his sacrifice; but God
rejected Caine for his wickedness, and he became a reprobate. Even so does
God, he rejects the Jews which were the eldest son, the true Olive, and
the natural^ seed, and Gods dear children if they had continued in obedience;
and he takes us being but the youngest son, the wild Olive, the seed of the
wicked, and makes us children by adoption unto him, only of his mercy without
any other cause.

The second example was Sem and Iaphet, both which Genesis 9. Genesis 5. 1. 2 9. 24
10. 21. and. 11. 10. Genesis 9. 27. John 10. 16.
were Noah's sons: Sem was the second son, and Iaphet the first, and of this
Iaphet came the Gentiles: of him said Noah; God persuade Iaphet that he may
dwell in the tents of Sem: that is, that they may be united together, as we see
it is is come to pass. Other sheep I have (says Christ) which are not of
this fold, them also will I bring, and they shall bear my voice, and there
shall be one sheepefold, and one shepherd.

The third type or figure was Ismael and Isaac, both the sons of Abraham:
Ismael was the eldest, Isaac the Genesis 21.
younger, yet Isaac was chosen of God, and enjoyed the promise, and Ismael his
eldest brother a mocker of Isaac was put away, the Lord was not with him.

The fourth type or figure was Jacob and Esau, both sons to Isaac: Esau was
the eldest brother, and Jacob the Genesis 25.
younger, yet God loved Jacob and hated Esau, because Esau contemned his
birthright and sold it to Jacob for a mess of pottage, and therefore Jacob
stole the blessing from him: so God blessed Jacob, but cursed Esau: wereby is
showed, that the Lord did for the contempt of the Jews, take away their
birthright and their blessing, and has given it unto us.

The fifth type or figure was Leah and Rachel, the two daughters of Laban: Leah
was the elder, but bleare or Genesis 29. 16.
squint-eyed: Rachel the younger, beautiful and fair. 17. Therefore Rachel was
beloved of Jacob, and Leah despised, 18. Yet Leah was first married. 23. And
also made fruitful, 31. but Rachel also war after married, 28. and more
beloved, 30 and having envied her sisters fruitfulnes, 30. 1. and repented, God
remembered her, and made her fruitful. So Christ first married the Jews, and
made them glorious; but when they despised their glory, he married with the
Gentiles, and they envying their happiness; of barren in all goodness, became
fruitful in true holiness.

The sixth figure was Manasses and Ephraim, the two sons of Joseph: Manasles
was the eldest, and Ephraim was the youngest. Both of them Joseph having brought
to Jacob his Father, that he might bless them, he took Manasses and put him
toward Jacobs right hand, that he might bless him first and more plentifully,
and he took Ephraim and put him toward Jacobs left hand. But Jacob stretched
out his right hand and laid it upon Ephraims head which was the younger, and
his left hand upon Manasses, directing his hands so of purpose, for Manasses
was the elder of them. Thus the Lord blessed us when there was no hope left for
us.

The seventh figure was Rahab a harlot in Jericho, who was a Gentile, yet her
heart was touched so, that she Ios. 2.
received and entertained the spies that Israel sent, and in time of danger hid
them, that they should take no harm: signifying thereby, that the Gentiles
should receive and embrace the Israelites and messengers of the Gospel, and
keep them as safely, and defend them as diligently as Rahab did the spies of
Israel.

The eight figure was Ruth a Moabite: of her Christ Ruth 4.
Jesus vouchsafed to come as concerning the flesh, to show that he came not
only of the Jews, and for the Jews, but also of and for the Gentiles, which
were the lost sheep, unhoped for, being strangers from the covenant.

The ninth figure was Sampson, who being a Jew, Judge. 14.
would needs marry with a Gentile; signifying that Christ Jesus would also
marry with the Gentiles, as he did with the Jews.

The tenth figure was Solomon who married Pharaos daughter, which was an
Egyptian and Gentile, signifying 1. Reg. 11.
thereby, that Christ would take him a spouse among the Gentiles to marry with
himself, as David in the Psalm. 45.
Psalms declares.

The eleventh figure was Naaman the Syrian, whose leprosy is turned upon
Gehezie, the leprosy of an heathen 2. Reg. 5.
and ignorant man turned upon an Israelite, and one that had the knowledge of
God, being the servant of a Prophet: signifying that our leprosy of sin and
ignorance should be turned from us upon the Jews, who had the knowledge of the
law of God, but esteemed it not, but were unthankful for it. Many like
examples there are in the new Testament. For like as the Cherubins, though
severed in sunder, yet looked one toward another, and both upon the
mercie-seate: so the old Testament and the new, look one toward another, and
yet point at one and the same thing.

The first type or figure in the new Testament, was the Wisemen, which were
the first fruits of the Gentiles, Mar. 2.
and came from the East, being guided by a statre: signifying that by the
guiding of the word and spirit of God, the Gentiles should come from all the
places of the world to embrace Christ Jesus with joy.

The second type or figure was Christ his going into Egypt, signifying thereby,
that he should go from the Jews to the Gentiles, because the Jews refused
him, through unbelief, abundance of wickedness, and want Math. 2.
of reformation: so we see that nothing can drive away Christ but sin.

The third type was Christ whipping the Jews out of the Temple, showing
thereby that the Jews should be Mat. 21. 12.
whipped or cast out of the spiritual Temple; and the Gentiles should occupy
it. This (beloved) belongs unto us, to whom the Lord so wonderfully has made
his light to shine.

The fourth figure is the parable of the Vineyard, that Mat. 21. 33.
was taken from them that possessed it, and given to them that should bring
forth the fruits thereof, and yield better increase unto the Lord of the
vineyard.

The fifth figure was the parable of the two sons that were bidden to go and
work in their fathers vineyard, Mat. 22. 28.
of whom the first said he would, and did not: the second said, he would not,
and did repent, and went to labor in the vineyard: the first signified the
Jews which made many vows, with such a show of godliness which was but
hypocrisy, whom the Lord rejected and cast off and said, that the Publicans
and sinners should stand in judgment to condemn the greatest of them.

The sixth figure was the feast that the Lord made unto Mat. 22. 2.
the disobedient guests, whom the Lord invited to his banquet, which was only
ordained for them, and who promised to come unto it, and yet refused and would
not come, but alleged slight excuses taken from their love of earthly and
transitory things above God. Therefore the Lord sent into the hie ways to call
and compel the Gentiles to come, which came, though some left their wedding
garments behind them.

The seventh type or figure was the vision of Peter in Joppa, when he was on
the top of the house, where he Act. 10.
saw the vessel come down that had in it all manner of four footed beasts of
the earth, and wild beasts, and fowls of the air, and creeping things,
where also the voice said unto him, Arise Peter, kill and eat: wherein the Lord
showed unto him, that he should count no man unclean, although the Gentiles
then were counted unclean, as were the unclean beasts set down in the law of
God, therefore when Peter was sent for, to Cornelius house, he said, Of a
truth I perceive that God has no respect of persons, but in every natto^ he
that fears God and works Verse. 34.
righteousness is accepted of him.

Many other examples of our calling, as the straied Luke 15. Luke 5.
sheep, the lost groat, the prodigal son, and Christ eating with Publicans
and sinners, which when we read we should cast our figure and say, Of whom is
this spoken? of the Gentiles? then is it of me, for I am a Gentile. But am I
converted? if I be not, then have I not fulfilled this prophecy: therefore let
us strive to do well, and to mortify and subdue sin which dwells in our
mortal bodies, for none but the valiant can enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Now all these prophecies are sulfilled, the blind see, the lame go, the
dumb speak, the deaf hear, the maimed work, the dead are quickened, the
leapers are cleansed, and the poor receive the Gospel. Therefore who will
despair and say, light is not revealed unto me, when as he sees it to be
revealed unto whole Nations? And so solemn is our calling, as that in so many
places of the scripture it is foretold, whereby we see how dearly the Lord
tendreth our salvation, like as a kind spouse which was longed for, while she
was in a strange country, for Christ longed for the Gentiles, till they came
home again unto him. Therefore let us now consider what he gives us, namely,
righteousness and salvation: first righteousness, then salvation: first
repentance, and then forgiveness of sins, the Sun of the Gospel, lest we
should see heaven in hell, and light in darkness, and joy in anguishes. Let us
not contemn our light, or grow careless of it: let us not build with one
hand, and overthrow with the other by profaneness, like those men which while
they surfetted at their gluttenous tables, called upon God for health. Christ
is not received with the left hand: if the Father offering a gift, do see the
Son stretch forth his left hand, he will withdraw his gift from him. I say,
let us not contemn our light as the Jews contemned their glory.

For what is light to him that will shut his eyes against is? What is this
light? It is such a glorious light, and Natth. 13.
such an excellent revelation, that great and mighty Kings have earnestly
desired to see, and Princes have laid down their crowns to reveal it. Let us
embrace this light, let us take and put on the wedding garment, and go to the
banquet, unto which a thousand messengers have invited us, and allege none
excuses: say not, I have married a wife, I have bought Oxen, I go to see a
Farm, etc. and Math. 12.
therefore I cannot come, neither will I come. Well, do so, if that ye will
needs: but remember that thou wast invited, and therefore the blessing shall
be given to another: and Esau shall weep for the blessing, but shall not Heb.
12.
have it.

But give me a reason I pray thee, why thou will be called the servant of God
which do not serve him, or the child of God, which do not love him; or the
disciple of Christ, which do not learn of him: yet his rain falls upon
all, just and unjust, and he gives thee all things for nothing: The Sun
does give his light for nothing, the dew does give his moisture for nothing,
the rivers does give their waters for nothing; and the earth does give her
fruit for nothing.

What shall we do then when the Sun shines? Romans 13. Ephesians. 5.
We must not do as we do in the dark, for then men ought to betake them to
their labor. Learn of the savage beasts who as soon as the day springs,
betake them to their travel, and every bird welcommeth it with many a sweet
song. Christ is light, and this light is come: therefore he that sees not now
is blind. Are not they then blind which yet see not that prayer for the dead
is vain, needless, and bootelesse? But thick darkness have a mighty light
to chase it away. So that he which begins to root out some error or
superstition, at the first shall have much ado, for custom and natural
corruption are the first causers of heresy, and shall cry against her in the
maintenance thereof: and withstanders of reformation shall say, Great is Diana
of Ephesus: and so for a long time they seem to wash the Ethiopian, or the
black Moore, the more they wash him the more they gall him, and yet he is an
Ethiopian still: but in the end the Arc stands, and Dagon falls down:
and truth triumphs over falsehood, having got the victory; and light chaseth
away darkness with the brightness thereof. Why 1. Sam. 5. 8
then does this darkness continue amongst us still? To him that asks, what
Scrpture have you against it? it is sufficient to answer, what Scripture have
you for it? For if the word command it not, God rejects it, and will say, who
has required these things at your hands? But what is this? for every idle word
you must give account, as our Savior Jesus Christ says, Matthew. 12. And
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. They ask, what, shall we
not say God be with them? Why should you? Why (say they) must we say nothing?
What if thou do not? What say thou, when thou mentionest the death of thy
first fathers, Adam, Seth, Enos, Enoch, Noah? Do thou less love these, not
praying for them, then thou do them for whom thou say, God be with them?
etc.

But thou have speeches enough to use, if thou will needs say somewhat, and
leave such superstitious and offensive sentences: if he be a good man, thou
may say, the Lord be thanked for his deliverance, or the like: but if he
be not, then thou may say, God grant we may do better then he has done,
and that by his fall we may learn to rise, from sin, or some such thing:
whatsoever he be, thou may say as David said of his child, giving a
reason why he would not pray for him any longer benig dead: Can I call him
back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me: or any
other words, so they be wise, and therefore not against the word. What then is
to be done? As Jacob said to his wives and children; Give me your idols that I
may bury them: so say I unto you; give me your superstitions that I may bury
them, that they may remain with you, or in you no longer, to the dishonor of
God, offending of your weak brethren, or to my grief. For I am jealous over
you, and because you are mine, and I am yours; O that my voice were as the
whitle-winde, to beat down, root out, and blow away all your superstitions,
that they may no longer reign amongst you: or rather, O that Christ which is
our light were come into us all, and shined so bright, that we were ashamed of
all our darkness: of all, not of mind only, but of will also, and of works,
that we no longer would walk in darkness, for few have the will to walk
according to the word, either in darkness or light: we can see to sin in the
dark as well as in the light, and do rather, because the light discovers
both the harlot and the thief, so they are afraid of the light; but assured
be we, where light is not, Christ is not: for Christ is light; and let none
be afraid to seek this light, which is so good, so excellent, and so
profitable for John 1.
us. For it does not only descrie it self, but all other things round about
it. Therefore if thou have this light, thy faith, thy fear, thy love will show
it self, and good things cannot now hide themselves, for he that is light
does delight to please God in the light. It is no marvel though a man stumble
in the dark, but he which stumbleth in the light is not very strong, because
he sees his way before him. Once we stumbled at every straw when we walked in
darkness, for then wrath had a fall, pride had a fall, lust had a fall,
drunkenness had a fall, penury had a fall, ignorance had a fall: or if you
will, pride rose, and we fell; lust rose, and we fell, etc.

Were Egypt as light as Goshen we should have Idolaters as joyful as true
worshippers; but there is palpable darkness, tedious, fearful, and of long
continuance in Egypt, clear light only in Goshen: therefore fly Egypt, but
if thou live in Aegipt, that is, walk in darkness, or commit wickedness,
though thou sin in the dark, the light will bewray thee, and thy conscience
will accuse thee, and condemn thee for it. Therefore now give over darkness,
and arm thee with light, for our life shines like the light, therefore now we
should be Israel, for Israel is revolted.

But many Scrouls may be written of our sins, and thus the Gentiles are as
Gentiles still. He that believes not the word, is an Infidel: he that
believes not God, is an Atheist: he that worshippeth any thing more then God,
is an Idolater: every man's conscience shall condemn himself. Yet men will
leave godliness for riches, but they will not leave riches for godliness.
What madness? Yea the Jews never served God at any time with such devotion as
many do now their gold and their riches: O intolerable wickedness? For many
there are that could be content never to die, but live ever here with their
riches and pleasurs.

And is not the godly more despited for his godliness, then the wicked for his
wickedness?

Are not the members of Christ more hated, and worse entertained by us, then
the limbs of satan? So dearly every one loves sin, and draws sin upon
sin, till their be a chain of many links and monsters therein drawn most
loathsome. And though we of our selves run swiftly to hell, yet the most drive
us, to make us hie faster: they come unto us, and say, your fathers loved us
well, and said unto us, if you will be fair, you shall be wise; if you will
be drunk, you shall be rich, etc. Yea every one points, and shweth us the
way that leads to destruction: and how few are the number of them that do
show us the way of virtue and golidnesse.

And thus we are even as froward as those Jews that strive who shall come
into hell first. Who did ever thank God that he was not borne an hundred
years ago, when ignorance spread over all, and all Egypt was smitten with
darkness? or that the Lord has nor left him to himself to become an Atheist,
or an Epicure, which lives without God in the world? We have all Gods gifts
offered us, but we have refused them. Christ brought light, but we had rather
he had brought darkness, for we love darkness more then light. The Angels, the
heavens, the word, the spirit, are light, and we that see it, are darkness,
for we cannot abide light, but are like an Owl that flies out of a bare field
from the light of the day, such a death is day unto us. Faith is flowne away,
truth is become a pilgrim, and every string is out of tune. He that should
weep and be sorrowful, laughes: and truth is brought to the ground, yea poor
truth is pesecuted to death: but sinners are stubble, and their sentence is,
Burn them.

How fine would be the way of virtue, if you would pare away the rubs that are
in it, if you would take away all occasions of sin, and give it gall to eat,
and when you have done so, set a crown of thorns upon the head thereof, and
when you have thus crowned it, make it carry the cross, and when it has
carried the cross, condemn it, and when you have condemned it, put it to
death, and when ye have put it to death, bury it; and when you have buried it
role a great stone upon the head of it, and set watchmen to keep it, even
fasting and prayer, that it may never arise again to reign any more; the
which the Lord for his mercy sake grant.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE CALLING OF JONAH.
JONAH 1. 1. 2. 1 The word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai, saying;

2 Arise and goto Niniuie, that great City, and cry against it, for their
wickedness is come up before me.


YOu have heard the sweet song of old father Simeon, like the pleasant song a
sweet bird before her death, setting forth the joy of the righteous that
embrace Christ Jesus. Before Christ Jesus vouchsafed to come to us, we would
not come unto him, but in all our doings we wrought our condemnation, and
through the innumerable heaps of our iuiquities, labored to drive him without
all hope of mercy from us. So we continued like flies, which flutter about the
candle till they have consumed themselves. When we had done as much as in us
lay to drive him away from us, then he saved us, and recompensed good for
evil unto us. So that if God had loved us no more then we loved our selves,
we might have perished in our sins, and our blood should have been upon our
own heads. Jf Christ be the light of the Gentiles, let us embrace him, and
every one walk as becomes the children of light: but many do shut their
eyes against it, lest they should see, and not only many smother their own
light, but the Sun says unto the Moon, shine not; and the Moon says unto
the stars be not bright. And many have smoothred their light so long, that the
dampe has put out the candle; and thus they labor to bring the darkness of
Egypt upon Goshen: so that their eyes have forgotten to see, and somany go
cut of the way, because they would not look upon the candle, and the devil
gives to every one that which he wishes, so it may be for his hurt. But who
can but pity, that with the same Manna which comes from heaven and feeds
many of life everlasting, so many are poisoned and find in it nothing but
favor of eternal death?

The Jews had no cause to envy our light, for he gave them glory: he was
poor, and yet he gave them riches: he was counted base, and yet he made
them honorable: he was contemned, and yet he made them beloved: they were
full of darkness, and he brought them light; but they contemned his light,
and so procured their own condemnation. And therefore now it is come to pass,
that they are become vagabonds upon the earth, and most contemned of all other
Nations, and every people have a dwelling, whereas since they prophesied evil
unto themselves, saying; His blood be upon us and our children, goodness has
put on the face of bashfulnesse amongst them.

Jf thou embrace Christ as Simeon did, the Christ is thy glory; but if thy
glory consist in beauty, which fades; in gay cloth, which wears; in wealth,
which wastes; or in gold, which rusteth; then Christ is not thy glory.

We have gone long with an old man, and now we have lost him, but we are loath
to part with him, he is such a good companion, nevertheless we hope to find
him again in Jonah.

We have gone but slowly with him, as with an old man that is not very swift
of foot; but now we must run with Jonah as with a Post, lest Niniuie be
destroyed.

The Prophecy of Jonah. J need not to show the authority of Prophets: but
concerning their sorts and differences, there are three sorts of Prophets. The
first were such, as called upon the name of the Lord in prayer for the people,
and received an answer from the Lord in the peoples behalf: of which sort 1.
Sam. 10. 9.
was Samuel, and these were called Seers. A second sort of Prophets were such
as God raised to expound the Law, and declare the will of God unto the people,
when the priest and such as should do so, were slack in their callings, of
which sort was Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obediah, and
the rest of the holy Prophets. A third sort were such as have been since
Christ, working such like effects, of which sort was the Prophet Agabus of whom
mention is made in the 11. of the Acts, and 28. verse.

Now in the second sort of these, was Jonah, whom God sent to declare his will
to his people, unto whom also the Lord did reveal the subersion of kingdoms,
the overthrow of Tribes, the captivity of Nations, the calamities that were to
come unto the sons of men for iniquity and rebellion against God.

As all wise men were not borne at once, nor lived together: so these holy
Prophets have not been at once, but were raised up by the Lord God, some here
some there, according to his pleasure, and as he saw the people stand in need
of them, by reason of the corruption of the times.

And furthermore, the Lord has not at any time revealed unto one of these, all
things that might be revealed, but as much as sufficient for them every one in
their times and places. Neither has any of them told as much of the will of
God as might be declared; nor fully expounded his Laws: but the Patriarchs
left some to the Prophets, and the Prophets left some to the Apostles, but they
have left none for us, but they have all set open the whole will of God unto
us, and every Prophet now brings only gold, myrthe and frankencense, like
the wise men that came to see our Lord.

There are three things that moved me to take this story in hand above all
others. First, because you know the story, and therefore can the better
conceive of the matter, as I go forward with it. Secondly, because it is
brief, and does contain a great deal in a little. Thirdly, because it is
most agreeable for the time and state of this sinful age wherein we live, and
therefore most cunenient for us. It is manifest that Jonah lined in a very
troublesome time, namely, in the time of Jeroboam the soune of Ioash King of
Israel, a wicked King, though not he that is called the Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin. For of this second Jeroboam, in whose time he prophesied, it
is written, 2. King. 14. 24. he departed not from any of the sins of Jeroboam
that made Israel to sin; which commends the holiness of Jonah, in that he in
the midst of the corruption wherewithal the people were overflowed, was
uncorrupted and unspotted, and called to be a Prophet amongst the people of
God. For he had prophesied in Israel before he was sent to Niniuie, as the word
also does argue; which lays open and magnifieth the great love of God, in
that he sent a Prophet 2. Reg. 14 25.
to admonish this ungodly people, when as he should have sent a thunderbolt
to terrify them, or rather utterly to destroy them; so that there mercy stepped
before judgment.

His name was Jonah, which signifies a Dove, which admonishes us, that as we
labor to be as wise as Serpents, so we should also desire that we might be as
simple as Doves. his fathers name was Amittai, which signifies truth. I would
that Truth were every Preachers father.

There are two special things contained in this History. Jonah, and the
Mariners in respect of the Ninevites, that he sent a Prophet to Niniuie, a
City of the Gentiles, which were strangers from the covenant, from the
promise, and strangers, from the common wealth of Israel, and converted them by
his preaching, and so spared them now.

In regard of Jonah, that being, for his disobedience in Tarish, when he was
sent to Niniuie, thrown into the sea, he prepared a great whale to swallow
him, and in his belly, even in the bottom of the Sea, where there was no hope
of life for him, preserved him: and after three days delivered him thence
safe, and then cast him not off, but continued him in his calling, and wrought
powerfully by him, both in the ship, converting the idolatrous Mariners, and in
Niniuie, humbling the King and the whole City.

And lastly, when he had most unworthily doubly murmured and justify himself
against God, he contented

The second thing is Ionahs fall, and rising again. His fall, first sinning,
both flying from God, and murmuring, and therein justifying himself: secondly,
sustaining his punishment, manifold and long fears, casting into the sea, and
continuing in the Whales belly three days, and afterward his reproof and
conviction. His rising, first repenting in the ship, in the belly of the Whale,
and being cast out of it. Then also faithfully discharging his duty, crying
against Niniuie courageously.

We have seen Jonah a far off, if we would we might see him nearer. He that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a prophets reward.
Therefore let us prepare our ears to hear, and receive the word of God
preached by the Ministers, and let us think that Jonah is come again to our
houses to preach, and whether it be 40. days, or 40. weeks, or 40. years,
they that live like Sodom, shall be punished like Sodom. But as our Savior
says to his disciples, Pray that your flight be Matthew. 24. 21.
not in winter, nor on the Sabbath: so say I unto you, pray that the Lords
coming be not on the week days, for if he come then, how should he find you?
Therefore J pray you learn at least now, and give good ear, that you may hear
sufficient for all the week.

The word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai, saying: Arise and go
to Niniuie, etc. Herein I observe, that Jonah went not before he was sent: for
going to preach unto the Gentiles, it was needful that he should have a
special calling and commission from the Lord himself: for it was unmeet to
cast the childrens bread unto the dogs, unless he had a special
commandment from God so to do.

None ought to take upon him the function of preaching in the Church, unless
they have their warrant or authority from Gods, as Aaron had. And although they
Heb. 5. 4.
have not their authority in that form and manner as Jonah had his, (namely,)
as it were by word of mouth, even from God himself, Arise and go to Niniuie:
yet they must have their warrant from him, else their calling is unlawful.

But now here is another authority crept into the Church, that makes so many
Idols, which have eyes and see not, tongues and speak not, ears and hear
not, and that is this, when one stalleth up another into Moises chair, not
having Moses rod, nor Moses spirit. But this gall will not hold spurring.
Further I observe, that as the word of the Lord came to Jonah: so the word of
the Pope came to his Priests, Jesuits, and Seminaries, but so and in such sort
many times, that they are drawn to ^borne while masses are said for them at
Rome.

The word of the Lord came unto Jonah, etc. That which came unto him was not
always with him, but so it was, that when the word of the Lord came unto any
of the Prophets, then they were well furnished with ability to teach, to
preach, to reprove, or to command whosoever the Lord would have so handled.
As by example: Nathan the Prophet did David the King, that he should build a
Temple, 2. Sam. 7. and 1. 2. Sam. 7. 1. Chron. 17.
Chron. 17. And a little after he came and bid him that he should not build it.
Where we see, that when he bid him build it, then the Spirit of the Lord came
not unto him to bid him so to do. And therefore the Spirit of God came unto
him the very same night, and bid him that he should go to David, and bid him
that he should not build it. For this is evident, that as God himself is
constant, so his Spirit and his word are constant, and therefore never says
and vnsaith one thing.

Again, the Prophet Elisha said, 2. King 4. that the Shunamites heart was
grieved, but the Lord had hid it 2. King. 4.
from him: and had not as then declared the same unto him: which does note unto
us, that the same word whereby the Lord has, and does reveal marvelous
things unto the Prophets, was not now upon him, neither is always upon any
Prophet, but according to the will of God it comes unto them, to reveal unto
them what he would have them to do, and when it pleases him.

Also Daniel said, that the Lord did not reneale the Kings dream unto him, for
any wisdom that he had Dan. 2. 30.
more then any living, but only for the Kings sake, and for the poor people
of Gods sake: and so you must think of us that are the Ministers of the
Gospel, that the Lord does not reveal his will unto us, for any wisdom or
worthiness that is in us, more then other men, but for your sakes, and that we
might reveal it to you. Therefore hear us even for this cause, because the
Lord has revealed unto us these things for your sakes and good.

From the calling we come to the charge.

Arise and go to Niniue that great, etc. God comes and finds us all
asleep, then he bids us arise; for they are not fit to convert others, which
are not yet converted themselves, according to that saying of Christ to Peter:
When thou art converted, strengthen Luke 22. 30.
thy brethren, teaching them by your experience.

Now adays men take upon them to reprove others for committing such things as
themselves have practiced, and do practice without amendment, notwithstanding
their diligence in teaching others their duty; they can teach all the doctrine
of Christ saving three syllables, that is, Fellow me. Therefore these are like
some Tailors which are very busy in decking and tricking up of others, but go
both bare and beggarly themselves. Yet they will not let us pluck out the more
that is in their eyes, until we have plucked out the beam which is in our
own eyes.

Go to Niniuie. Niniuie was the greatest and the antientest City in the land
of Assyria, and the name of it signified Beautiful, which name was given it,
rather for the greatness and beauty thereof,, then for the name of Ashur,
which, was the builder and first founder thereof, as we read in the book of
Genesis. It had a fair name, but foul deeds, like this City. Genesis 10. 12.


Goeto Niniuie, etc. God would not suffer any people to be untaught; therefore
he has written this name in great letters, easy to be read of all. The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows the work of his
hands. They have no speech nor language, without them is their Psalm. 19. 1. 2.
3.
voice heard. Their line is gone forth through all the earth, and their words
into the ends of the world. In them Romans 1. 19. 20.
is manifest for all what may be known of God. For his eternal power and God
head are seen by the creation of the world: but especially he teaches some
by his word also. Therefore he sent unto the old world Noah, Genesis 6. Genesis 19.
Act. 16. 6.
Lot to Sodom, Moises to Israel, and here Jonah to Niniuie. But when Paul
with Silas and Timothy had gone throughout Phrygia, and the region of Galatia,
they were forbidden of the Holy ghost to preach the word in Asia. Then came
they to Mysia, and sought to go into Bithynia, but the spirit suffered them
not.

Go to Niniuie. The Jews would not hear the wod of God by Jonah, and
therefore the Lord sent him to Niniuie. They that griue the spirit, quench the
spirit. Then goes the Prophet from Samaria to Niniuie. The word was in Samaria,
it went thence to Niniuie: the Gospel was at Ephesus, it is come into England:
it is gone out of the City, Reu. 2. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 10. 12.
but it may depart from England again. If any think that he stands, let him
take heed left he fall.

But the Prophet goes from Samaria to Niniuie, that was, both to shake off the
dust of his feet, to witness against them their obstinacy and hardness of
heart: and secondly, to let them see that the wicked Gentiles were more
righteous then they, in that they repented at the voice of one Prophet; yea and
that with one sermon: whereas themselves refused, and resisted all the holy and
worthy Prophets that God sent unto them. And thirdly, it may be to signify,
that the Jews for their contempt and negligence should be rejected: and the
Gentiles should be received into the favor of God, that they might be an holy
and sanctified people unto the Lord in their trouble.

That great City. Niniuie had fifteen hundred towers in it, as some do Ion 2.
4. 11.
write, and a hundred and twenty thousand little children (as it is noted in
the end of this story) therefore it may well be called a great City: but the
greater it was, the more ungodly it was. For as one man takes sickness of
another: so one man is infected by the wicked words and ill example of
another, and so taught to sin the more, till the measure of sin be full.

And cry against it, etc. First God bids him; Arise and shake off all
impediments, and then to go and call them to the battle, and now he bids him
cry out against them, and so terrify them. Every Prophet is a crier, as
appears where the Lord bids Esaias to lift up his voice like a trumpet.
Every Esaias 48. 1.
Prophet must both be plain and bold, and this many times makes the poor
servants of God to speak their minds as plain and bold, as if they sat in
judgment. John was a voice, a voice would not serve; he was Luke 3.
the voice of a crier, and yet he could not make all the crooked straight, nor
the rough plain.

And because all the Preachers of the Gospel should cry, that is, preach
zealously, in the second of the Acts it is written; The Holy ghost came down
in fire and tongues: but this fire is quenched, and the tongues are tied up, so
that they that should cry are stark dumb: but though they cannot speak, they
can see, they can see if a great benefice fall, though it be an hundred miles
off: and Pharaoh had more care of his sheep, then we have of our souls.

If Preachers were not deaf, they needed not to cry one to another; but such
is the dumbness of Preachers, and the deafenes of all sorts of hearers, that
there is great slownesse of followers, so that there is but little good done,
and but a few fruits gathered.

If ye were not deaf, we need not to cry, but because ye be dull of
hearing, therefore we cry with mouth, with heart, with hand, with foot, and
with all the powers of our bodies unto you, and yet how little do you regard
it? But are not ye commanded to hear as well as we to cry? Yet the cock
croweth when men are asleep, Mat. 36. 70. 72. 74. Prou. 28. 9.
yea the cock croweth, and still Peter yet denies his Master.

Before you cry unto the Lord, hear what the word cries unto you, and let not
your works cry for vengeance while your tongues cry for mercy.

When men hear the Preacher speak against pride, hypocrisy, covetousness,
or any other sin, then they look one upon another, as though it belonged
not unto them: but who can say his heart is clean?

And cry against it. Our sins buffet God on every side, as the Jews, buffeted
Christ, first on the right side, then on the left side, and never leave till
they have provoked him to cry against us. When God cries, then we should weep,
considering wherefore he cries: for there is nothing that can provoke the Lord
to cry but sin, and that he ever cries against. Do what you will, and say
what you will, and the Lord will not be offended with you, unless you sin:
but if you commit sin, he is just, and therefore will not leave til he has
by crying slain either you, or sin, that reigns in you. For as an angry
man ever pursues that which he hates, until he has destroyed it: so the
Lord crosses and follows us with his judgments, until he has slain that
which most deadly he hates, sin.

And cry against it, etc. Reproof is the necessariest office, yet is it least
regarded, yea most abhorred. For now we think if one reprove us, he hates
us. But the Lord says, Leuiticus 19. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine
heart, thou shall Le. 19. 17.
reprove him, and suffer him not to sin: noting thereby, that if we flatter
any in their sin, or see them sin, and not reprove them for it, it is a
manifest sign that we do it of hatred, how great love and good will soever
we pretend toward the^: seeing the matter tends to the hurt of their souls,
and the offense of God.

Yea, if a Preacher reprove sin, he is thought to do it of hatred, or of
some particular grudge: and to be too busy, too bitter, too sharp, too rough,
and therefore say, he should preach Gods love and mercy, for he is a Preacher
of the gospel, he tells us of, and threatens with the law, and so throws us
down too low, some to despair: as though we preached the law only, or
chiefly, and not the Gospel also continually, to them that loath and strive
against their sins, though they sin grievously. Others, as though they were
galled, will say, let him keep his text, or they will say, he is beside his
book: as though no text in Scripture reproved sin, and so of all doctrines,
the doctrine of reproof and reprehension of sin, is most contemned, and
least esteemed. But let a Preacher preach dark mysteries, or profane
speeches, or unprofitable fables, or frivolous questions, or curious
inventions, or odd conceits, or braine-sicke dreams, and any of these will be
more welcome unto them then reprehension, which is most profitable and
necessariest of all. Balaams Ass never spoke but once, and then he reproved.
Then if Balaams Ass reproved Balaam, how much more ought Balaam to reprove
Number. 22. 28.
Asses, or such as will be no otherwise then beasts in their behavior? But
persuade your selves beloved, which is most true, though we speak as if we
were angry with you, and threaten as if we would hurt you, and cry against you
as if we hated you, yet we love you in the dearest blood we have, and
therefore, though with persecution we preach the law to lead you to the
Gospel; we preach judgment, that you may find mercy; we preach hell to bring
you to heaven; whatsoever and how soever, we preach, we do all to fill your
hearts with joy in believing, and having made you fruitful in all good works,
present you without spot, nay glorious also, as a virgin most beautiful, to
the Lord of all grace and glory, Christ Jesus.

Hitherto we have heard of Jonah called, and charged to cry: but what should he
cry? Indeed it is not expressed in this place. But what then? Why then the
Papists may say, that he was charged to cry against them for neglecting their
traditions. Assuredly they may with as great truth and as much probability,
as they do gather John 16. 12. Ioh. 21. 25. Acts 1. 3. 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. Tim.
1. 13. and 22.
out of diverse places of the new Testament, that they ought to be observed. But
Jonah has not left it doubtful what he was to cry, for in the third chapter,
verse 2. the charge is repeated, and thus expressed: Go and proclaim against
it the proclamation which I speak unto thee. He was then to cry what God had
commanded him. O that none would cry but what God had commanded!

But what did God command him to cry? even that which he afterward cried: Yet
forty days, and Niniuie shall be ouerturned. Ouerturned? yea ancient Niniuie,
fair Niniuie, proud Niniuie must be destroyed. No man sits so high, but
destruction sits above him, and will fall on all that persist in their
defection. Justice would have come against them, before it cried against the^;
but God the most gracious would have them cried against, that they might cry
out, woe and alas for their sins, so preventing deserved and threatened
vengeance: for they hearing the cry of God, cried out themselves, and that in
great humbling to God, so God heard their cries, and took pity on them.

Isaiah was commanded to cry, and he cried: All slesh is grass, yea all the
glory thereof like the flower of the Isa. 40. 6. 7.
field. The grass withers, the flower fades when the spirit of Jehovah
blows on it. Surely the people is grass. John was commanded in the spirit
of Eliah to cry, and he cried, Prepare the way of Jehovah, make even in the
desert a path for our God. And Jonah was Esaias 40. Matthew. 3. 3. Ion. 1. 2. and
3. 2. Isa. 58. 1.
commanded to cry, and he cried: Yet forty days, and Niniuie shall be
overthrown. And all the Preachers of the gospel are commanded to cry, and
that aloude, not to spare, to lift up their voices like a trumpet, to show Gods
people their defections, and the house of Jacob their sins. And then also, if
they thereby be truly humbled, to proclaim unto them, their iniquity is
pardoned, they have received at the hand of Jehovah double for all their
sins. It is required of the disposers of Gods Isa. 40. 4. 1. Cor. 4. 4.
secrets, that they be found faithful. And woe to them that love the pleasures
of sin, more then the glory of God.

For their wickedness is come up before me. For, etc. We have heard the charge
it self given, heavy news, that a most beautiful City, a most rich City, a
most populous City, and a most ancient City, must be ouerturned, and that
within forty days; what is the cause? Their wickedness is come up before me:
as if he had said, Niniuie has followed her lusts, and forgotten the Law, to
satisfy her desires; she has notoriously despised her sovereign, defied all
wel-meaning, all good dealing: and this is known to the just Judge, and at his
bar she is arraigned, and her accusers stand crying at the bar for justice.
Therefore she may no longer be forborne, execution of justice must needs be
done: let her therefore prepare for death; and that she may Cry against her yet
forty days and Niniuie shall be ouerturned: for their wickedness is come up
before me.

When God sends criers unto a people, it is a most manifest sign that their
wickedness is come up before him, which does cause him thus to exclaim, thus to
cry out against them. And then if they will not repent whilst Gods criers
continue crying amongst them, the Lord of Hosts will rise up in arms against
them.

Their wickedness. Will you see the Niniuities sins in a scroll, that withal
you the daughters of Niniuie may see, that wealth and wickedness go together,
prosperity and security kiss each other? Niniuie (says Nahum) was like a
poole of waters, most populous, and full of all store, which to increase, Nah.
2. 8. 9.
it was wholly full of lying, deceit and fraud, full of 3. 1. and 2, 11. 12.
Zeph. 2. 15.
robbery, oppression, and all violence, a bloody City: whereby it increased
in wealth, they flourished in honor and glory, and therefore as Zephaniah has
it, was a rejoicing, a rioting City, sat securely, and proudly contemned
others, saying, I am, and none is besides me. Moreover, it was the Mistress of
witchcrafts, a most idolatrous city, yea sold people through her whoredoms,
Nah. 3. 4.
and Nations through her witchcrafts, and made other idolatrous like her self,
as 2. Kin. 16. 10.

Their wickedness is come up before me. Sin mounts up on hie, like the
tempter which led Christ unto the top of the pinnacle, to behold all the
pleasures of the world at once, and then because we have fallen down before the
god of this world, and tempted the God of heaven, whether he be just, or no;
therefore wrath speaks out of the fire, Now thou have taken thy pleasure, thou
must take also thy punishment.

A most heavy and grievous thing it is, if you knew what you are doing here,
and what your sins are doing at the bar of Gods just judgment. For even
now before you came hither, you were serving the devil in sin, but now it is
too late to speak of it, and where are they now? flesh and blood could not
stay them, nature could not stay them, pleasures could not stay them, riches
could not stay them, nor they could not stay themselves, but they are ascended
up before the face of the eternal God, to stand at his bar and cry for
vengeance to fall upon us, for committing such heinous sins against the
majesty of God.

An arrow is swift, the Sun is swifter, but sin is swiftest of all: for in
a moment it is committed on earth, it comes before God in heaven, and is
condemned to hell, for though Nimrod could not climb up to heaven, his sins
flew up to heaven: and though we stay below, our sins ascend high, like the
tower of Nimrod, but they fling us down to confusion, and we become Babel. For
when we sin we are as the shel-fish which the Eagle takes, and flies into
the air with, and then lets it fall upon the rocks, and so dasheth it in
pieces, and then deuoures it. For the wrath of God takes us up on hie, and
throws us down low upon the rocks of shame and contempt, and terror of
conscience: and so having crushed us, and bruised our very bones, consumes us
with double death, the grave devouring us, hell swallowing us.

Is come up before me. To them which ask, how our sins ascend and fly up
before God; J answer, God here speaks unto us after the manner of men, who
cannot see a thing before it be brought unto them, even where they are, and
before them. So that hereby is signified God had seen their wickedness.

We fast as before him, we pray as before him, we give alms as before him, and
we do every good thing as before him, because we do it freely, and as it
were, not caring who looks upon us. But we sin as behind him, because we hide
and cloak our sins, and commit them in secret, loath that men should spy
them: our conscience in such actions accusing us, and instantly telling us, we
are about that which we cannot justify. And we suppose that we sin behind
him, because we sin here below, saying with our selves in the consideration
of our blinded hearts, as Eliphaz accused Job to have said: Is not God in the
height of heaven? and see the Job 27. 12. 13 14
highness of the stars, how high are they? Therefore how should God know it?
Should he be able to see through the dark? The thick clouds are a covering
to him, that he may not see, and he walks up and down the round circle of
the heavens. But then chiefly we imagine that God beholds us not, when men
cannot see us: as if God could not know, what man cannot spy. But let us not
deceive our selves, for God sees not as man sees. Man can see but only
outward things committed in action, but God sees, and knows, and searches
the secrets of the heart, yea the secretest thoughts and imaginations of it.
Again, man can see but one thing at once, he cannot turn his right eye one
way, and left eye another: he cannot see before him and behind him with one
look: but God sees all things at all times. Though we sin as closely as we
can for fear of hatred, or shame of the world, or for any other respect, yet
God says, your sin is come up before me. For though we cover it, and hide
it, and color it, yea and as it were bury it as well as lies in us, yet all
is open unto him: therefore he says, your sin is come up before me.

For when we speak evil, he is all ears to hear us, and when we do evil,
he is all eyes to behold it: Therefore, O foolish man, do not think that God
seceth not which man sees not: for when he looks up, he sees all below also,
and when he looks down, he sees all above also. If he should not, much
wickedness should lie in darkness unrewarded, and men should not be terrified
from sin, but rather by the example of other allured to sin freely
secretly. For Ananias might have gained by his craft, if God had not seen his
heart, which Acts 5
men saw not: but God saw his distrustful, and dissembling, and corrupt heart,
therefore he lost his goods, and his life too.

If God had not seen that which men see not, Gehezi might have gained a bribe
for his labor, when he 2. King. 5.
ran after Naaman the Assyrian, and told him a lie for his profit. But God
seeing his fetches, which men saw not, turned his bribe to a leprosy, and so
made him a leaper for his labor. A fearful example for such as take bribes,
yet many care not what bribes they take, so men see it not.

The man that said, Be merry my soul, and take thy Luke 12.
pleasure for many years, might have done it, ahd not God seen him: but he
espied him falling to godless security, and threatened him, that night to
bereau him of his soul. Forget it not ye that abound in wealth, whose cup
runs over. If God had not seen Achan take up the piece of gold, he had kept
it to himself for his labor, and no man should have known where he Iosu. 7.
had it. But God seeing it (though closely done) rewarded him with shame in the
sight of all Israel. O Lord, what is man that thou so watchest him? Achan would
never have stole^ if he had known that God did see him. Gehezi durst never have
taken a bribe, if he had thought that God beheld his doings. Will thou steal,
the owner looking on thee? Will thou speak treason in the kings hearing?
neither would we lie, nor swear, nor steal, nor hurt, nor be profane at any
time, if we consider that the Lord sees us, and remembered that he watches us:
if we would do this, sin might go a beginning for want of service. Therefore
if you will mark but this part of my sermon, that God sees all, you would
refrain from those things secretly, that are to the offense of God, which you
for fear or shame will not do before men: and you would say even when your
hand is at it, I will not do it, because the Lord sees me. But as when we sin
though in secret, he is all eyes to see us, and when he sees it requisite to
make some example, to teach all, that when man cannot nor will not discover us,
he will show that he saw us; then he is all hand to punish and plague us, and
in the end, to root us out from all our pleasures: so when we repent, he is
all mercy and love; and when we amend our lives, and leave all our wicked
ways, to walk before him ever after in holiness, then he is all truth and
righteousness, to forgive us all our former wicked life, and to wash us from all
our uncleanness. Now therefore repent thee of all the evil that thou have done,
lament truly, run and hie thee as fast as ever thou can to the throne of
grace, prone whether thy repentance will not as boldly stand before God, and as
powerfully cry for pardon, as thy sins speedily came up before God, and
vehemently cried fhr punishment. No doubt the Angel that cried; Fallen is,
fallen is Babylon the great, Reu. 18. 2. though he cried vehemently with a loud
voice, cried not so audibly as thou shall hear the spirit of truth crying and
assuring thee thy sins are forgiven thee; the God of glory loves thee, sin
shall no longer reign in thee, no evil shall hurt thee, no good thing shall
be wanting to thee, all things shall work together to the best for thee. Romans
6. 14. Psalm. 91. 10. 34, 10. and 84, 11. Romans 8. 28. 2. Chro. 16. Psalm. 16. 11.
1. These. 5. 22. 2. These. 2. 10. Heb. 12. 14.
Will thou any more? he shall ever dwell with thee, in whose presence is the
fulness of joy, and at his right hand pleasure for evermore. Repent therefore,
but repent truly, loath all sin, gricue that thou have committed any, fly
every sin, yea whatsoever occasions of it, and all appearance of evil: but
love the truth also, and follow all holiness, and as much as in you is, have
peace with all men, and the God of peace will increase your peace in Christ
Jesus.

All which even this point that we speak of, viz. whatsoever we do, God sees
us, most sufficiently assures us of: for this so often repeated speech, Reu.
2. 2. 9. 13. and 3. 1. 8. 35. I know thy works; is spoken as to rouse the dead
Sardians, 3. 1. and to heat the lukewarm Laodiceans, 3. 15. so to commend the
faith, hope love, patience, etc. of the other Churches, and so to stablish, and
set them forward therein, knowing he is just, and a liberal rewarder of them
that seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

Their wickedness is come up before me. Sin once committed, casts no doubts
of coming presently before God: but the thoughts of the heart of the carnal
man thinking of the way to heaven, are the faint Spies that went to the land of
Cannan, which say, that journey is farther then you are able to go all your
life, the way is like a thicket, and the door like a needles eye: therefore it
is impossible for you to come thither. But when you send faith, hope, and love,
(those messengers of peace and truth) they will bring you word, saying, your
ruffes must be rufled, and your fardingales crushed, pride must be put off, and
other sins; and none shall be kept out of heaven, but such as love the world
better then heaven, or such as will take their sins with them; for they be
unseeming the fashion of that country: so that ere we come thither, we must
leave them; like the shadow when we go into the door, and we must shake
hands with them, and bid them farewell.

FINIS.
THE REBELLION OF JONAH.
3 But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and
went down to Iapho, and found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare
thereof that he might go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.
THe charge given to Jonah has hitherto bin spoken of, now it follows to be
showed, how it was by Jonah discharged. First Jonah rebelliously neglected it,
then being chastised, and so repenting, he faithfully discharged it. First
therefore let us consider his rebellion: afterward we shall see his correction.

But Jonah rose up to fly to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. We cannot
stand to speak of Tarshish, nor what it is to fly from God, but this shall be
our meditation: Jonah the Prophet was commanded to go to Niniuie, and there
to cry out against sin, to preach against pride, and all kind of ungodliness,
thereby to reclaim them, and stir them up, in laying open their sin, and
the punishment that banged over them, that they might speedily repent, and so
turn away from them the wrath of God thereby deserved. How beautiful should
have been the feet of him that should have brought so powerful a message, as
should have wrought such an happy effect? How blessed should Niniuie have been
when the Lord had vouchsafed them so great mercy? but still one fly or other
marres the whole box of ointment: As soon as he was commanded to go thither,
Satan stood in the gap, and enticed him to go to Tarshish, for he thought,
that if he could let Jonah from going Eccl. 10. 1.
to Niniuie, then first of all he should put a singular Prophet out of Gods
favor, and bring upon him some judgment, not only inward, as torment of
conscience, decay of gifts, or the like: but visible also, whereby the people
to whom he had preached, might think he was some false Prophet, as they are
ever ready to condemn for hated of God, whom they see grieously afflicted. And
so secondly the people should be hardened in their sins, and obstinately
condemn ever after, him, his like, and their preaching too. And thirdly, the
godliest, the most populous, and the wealthiest City in Assyria should be
destroyed, the good with the wicked, the young with the old, one with another,
all should unrepentant die in their sins, and so the very Angels in heaven
should mourn. So that he thought he should by stopping Jonah, every way gain
well by his labor.

Therefore he comes to Jonah, he flatters him, he tempts him, thus he begins
with him: It is good that men look before they leap, haste makes waste, words
are not always to betaken as they properly signify: one thing is often
spoken, and another meant: but think thou God means thou should go to
Niniuy? Why? does he regard idolaters, and his professed enemies, so that to
have them admonished of their ruin, he will bring shame upon his own people?
for the very going of a Prophet from Israel to preach to Niniuy, must needs
proclaim that there is more hope of most sinful Gentiles, then of natural
Israelites. And how could thou seem so to think of thine own Nation,
thine own brethren, thine own blood, the chosen of God? Or if thou do, shall
thou not thereby procure their utter hatred for ever, and make them to detest
both thy person, and whatsoever thy preaching, whatsoever thou have
heretofore, or heareafter shall teach them?

What? for thy faithful prophesying here among Gods people, will God,
think thou, recompense thee, thee whom he has made reverend, and to be
honored of Kings and Princes of Israel: recompense, I say, thee with shame and
contempt among heathens, yea, with a cruel death, or with a more miserable
life? For what other success may be hoped for at the Ninevites hands of such
a message by thee? For thou know they have all Jews in contempt: therefore
when thou shall come among them, and tell them not these few words only, and
in this form which God has spoken them in; for if thou so do, who will not
count thee rather a madman then Gods Prophet? But at large, that there is one
allseeing, most just, almighty, and everliving God, and no more? and so all
their gods are no gods but idols: and that they above all other have given his
glory to stocks and stones, worshipping them for gods, alluring and enforcing
others likewise to dishonor him: that they have abused his blessings most
unthankfully, most ungodly to all excess, and are most proud contemners of
their betters, and most notorious drunkards, gluttons, fornicators, adulterers,
thieves, oppressors, witches, murderers, and the like; and therefore have so
provoked him that is most merciful and patient, that he will without all pity
destroy man, woman, young and old, high and low amongst them; yea, their very
City also, and all that is therein, whereby they have been so wicked, and
that within forty days.

When, J say, thou being a Jew, shall tell them this, thus in despite revile
(for so they will take it) thus utterly condemn them and their gods: will not
the best of them mock and despise thee? will not the rest gnash their teeth at
thee, be ready to tear thee in pieces, put thee to exquisite torments,
condemn thee to some horrible death, or continue thee in intolerable pains,
in a most bitter life? No question. Think not therefore that thy good God, thy
most kind and tender father, will recompense thy faithfulness, with sending thee
so far to sustain such misery: It were impiety to think he willed it, it is
blasphemy, terrible blasphemy to think he comma^ds it: for it is to condemn
him of unkindness, for thou have showed fervent love; of untruth, for he has
promised it should go well with the just; of injustice, for godliness should
have the reward due only to wickedness. Yea he should seem contrary to
himself, to charge thee cruelly to murder thy self, which has commanded all
to kill none, if he should will thee to provoke that bloody city so. But the
very thing it self also argues, God meant nothing less then to commit thee
to such danger, or that thou should do to the proud Ninevites such a message.
For to what end should thou so cry against that City? to make them fly, and
so to free them from destruction? How sholdst thou then not be found a false
Prophet, and God a lier? What then? To bring them to repentance and then to
spare them? how should not God so again be found untrue, and thou his lying
messenger? what then? To convert them, and so to destroy them? what justice
were that? and how contrary to his promise to Solomon? 2. Sam. 7. 14. Therefore
it is manifest, God meant not thou should go and cry so against Niniuie, but
signified that thou were as good, for any good may be done here, to exclaim so
like a frantike man against Niniuie, as to preach in Samaria any longer now.
Men here are so hardened that they contemn all, part are so cloyed that they
loath all, the best part little esteem all that is preached: of none is the
word accounted precious, of none reverently heard: and therefore thou should
for a time, to make the word precious, and to sharpen men's affections toward
it, give over preaching here, and where thou will refresh thy self a while.
Now here thou may not be idle: at Tarshish thou may be quiet: thou
may at Taishish that famous City, among the strangers of many Countries,
hear many strange things, much delight thy self in the variety of their
manners, in the abundance of all things, with great pleasure live. No time so
fit as this to see the world. At Iapho thou can not want shipping thither.
Seem not to make small account of this kindness of God, defraud not thy self
of the granted good.

Thus Satan is ever crossing, tempting, enticing us when we are or should be
addressing our selves to do the will of our God. So was Moises, Jeremy,
Ezechiel, Exo. 3. 11. and. 4. 10. 13. Ier. 1 6. ^ze. 3. 14 15. Neh. 2. 19. 4. 2
8. 5. 5. 6. 6. 7. 10. Luke 22. 31. 32 Matthew 4. 1. L^k. 4. 2. ^. 13 1. Pet. 5. 8.
Nehemiah, Christ himself tempted, being about most notable works. What said
our Savior to Peter? Satan has desired to sift and winnow you as wheat. Who
are these whose peril satan so earnestly desires? Even Peter's, and James,
and John's. No marvel, for Christ himself, though acknowledged the Son of
God, was most fiercely assaulted of the tempter forty days, and then indeed
was left, but it was only for a season, Luke. 4. 13. Therefore never dream of
a truce with Satan, whosoever thou be, whatsoever thou art about to do. For
the enemy, the envious foe, the tempter, the false accuser goes about
continually seeking whom he may devour. Now his manner of tempting is, first
and most usually with flattering, but yet very often with most terrible
threatening. For whatsoever we do or feel, comes from one of these three
spirits, the spirit of satan, the Spirit of God, or our spirit. Now our own
spirit of it self is always occupied about worldly things, seeking delights
in pleasures, not disquiet by threats. The spirit of God is gentle, loving, and
meek, not forcing, nor threatening. Therefore Christ says, If any will follow
me let him deny himself and take up his cross daily, etc. Luke 19. 23.
And mark his spirit, he says not, you shall follow me, but you shall deny
your selves, and take up your cross, but if any will follow me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross: Let him. The same is to be seen in the
Canticles, Cantic. 5. 2.
where he says: Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. For
mine head is full of deaw, and my locks with the drops of the night. For 3.
when she opened not unto him, making most unmeet excuses, though he had most
lovingly prayed, and lively urged her to open, and she most unkindly, most
unworthily had denied, yet the went his way mildly without 2. 4. 6.
any threats. But the spirit of Satan takes an other course: For when by lying
and deceit he cannot allure to sin, he threatens most fearfully with sin,
grief, or loss of goods, solitarines and want of pleasure, and sometime by his
ministers, impes of his own likeness, he threatens death, and deadly
torments, whatsoever they may inflict upon any.

Christ says; If you will follow me. If you will: but he says, I will make ye
follow me, and do as I bid you, you shall have fire and faggot, scalding lead
and burning pitch; if you will not follow me, you shall, whether you will or
no: we will make you do as we command, says his eldest son Antichrist,
usurping authority over nations, and inflicting torments on the Saints. His
order of tempting is, first to make us doubt of the word of God: whether such
and such doctrine be true, such and such an action be commanded, such and such
a promise, such and such a threatening be certain. Then secondly he falls to
flat denying of it, this doctrine, these promises, these threatenings are false,
this thing is not commanded, this action is not condemned. And then comes he in
with his contradiction, contrary assertions, and countermands. For there is no
commandment of God, but the devil commands the contrary, and he is ever gain
saying that which Genesis 2. 17.
God says For our God says unto Adam, if you eat of the forbidden fruit, you
shall surely die: the devil came and he told them, first ti is not certain
you shall die: then, you shall not die; then thirdly, you shall be as gods,
knowing Genesis 3. 4. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
good from evil. God says, submit your selves one to another in brotherly
love: the devil says, first, you need not to abase your selves so much;
secondly, you should not yield to others: then thirdly, advance your selves,
and contemn others. God says, Love thy neighbor Mat. 22. 39.
as thy self: the devil says, first love little and ourwardly, then, love
none but thy self: then thirdly, hate thine enemies, envy thy betters,
disdain thine equals, despise thine inferiors. God says, Labor for that
food that perishes not: the devil says, first, care not much Ioh. 6. 27.
for it: then secondly, contemn it: then thirdly, stir not an inch for it.
God says, Forsake the world: the Devil says, first, neglect not the world;
then, love Romans 12. 2. 1. John 3. 18.
the world, then thirdly, give over your selves unto the world above all,
follow the world with all the lusts thereof.

Now, the means whereby the devil tempts, are arguments fetched, some from the
wit and reason of man, or from the customs of the world: some from the holy
Scriptures, either corrupted, or wrong applied: now in consideration of the
persons, then in regard of the thing it self, etc. In respect of the persons
to whom he should preach, and himself, Jonah is here tempted, and so thus
reasons with himself: I have long preached unto the Jews, which are the
chosen people of God, and seeing they will not hear me, it is in vain to
preach unto these Gentiles, which never heard of God or godliness, and therefore
will esteem my words the less.

Thus Jonah is loath to lose his labor, and puts in a doubt where he needs
not, because he considered not the great power of God in men's hearts. The
Ninevites are heathen people, and therefore (says Jonah) why should I venture
my self amongst them? For seeing my own countrymen kick against my words,
and cannot abide to hear the word which comes from the Lord to reprove
sin, then how much more shall I be despised these, and persecuted to death?
Thus flesh and blood stands staggering when it should do any good,
misdoubting troubles, jealous of his own ease: but when it goes about to do
any mischief, it never considers the danger, it weighteth not the following
woe: yet doing good, it is uncertain whether all will not according, or even
above our hope succeed; it is more likely we should be kept safe: but doing
evil, mischief most certainly is procured, not danger only, but loss of
the best things commonly, peace of conscience or spiritual graces, of some
blessings always, or at least not receipt of those things which much would
rejoice us. For sure this was a sore temptation, to bid a man (being in
reasonable good estate touching his body and life) that he should go and
preach unto a savage heathen people that never Deuteronomy. 6 4.
heard of preaching, and that this doctrine; that there is but one only true
God, to them who will serve a thousand, and cannot abide the contrary to be
spoken.

If a Preacher were commanded to go and preach at Rome gates, against
Antichrists jurisdiction and the idolatry that is so inordinately used in that
Sinagogue of uncleanness, seeing that is a matter for which they torment and
kill all that preach it sincerely: I fear it would hardly come to pass at
all, that this preacher would go from a reasonable quiet estate touching his
body, to venture his life among such cruel tyrants: I fear he would rather
content himself with his present ease, then commit himself to so likely
misery.

If I go to preach unto these infidels, saying, yet forty days and Niniuie
shall be destroyed, then (says Jonah) it may be, they will repent, and God will
have mercy upon them, so I shall be counted a false Prophet for my labor. And
thus we regard our credit more then the glory of God, in the obedience of his
will: and rather then we would receive any reproach by your doings (in the
sight of the world,) we rather choose to enter into no great action touching
the glory of God, and the good of the Church. In respect of the Israelites and
himself: If I leave mine own people, and preach unto the Gentiles (says
Jonah) I shall bring shame upon Israel before all people, because a Prophet is
gone from them for their obstinacy, choosing rather to preach unto
uncircumcised Gentiles then unto them, as if there were more hope of the
Gentiles then of them. So Jonah more fears the childrens disgrace then the
Fathers dishonor, and their despite, then his displeasure. Satan is too well
acquainted with man's nature, and so more cartainelie knows, then we wisely
consider, that all Adams sons are from labor easily brought to loiter: more
willingly from fear and pain, to security and pleasure: therefore seldom or
never does he in tempting omit this enticement; It will be for thy ease, for
thy delight, for thy security. Therefore he says to Jonah, not only the way
to Niniuie is long and dangerous, thy person and message odious, therefore thy
travel must needs be tedious, thy troubles grievous, etc. but also thy
passage to Tarshish is easy, thy security there sure, thy pleasures many, thy
delight great. Yea, with this he assaulted Christ himself, saying, when he
had showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them: All these
will I give thee, etc. And does thee not so also evermore persuade us, this
good; this gain, this glory, this pleasure, or this preferment shall thou get,
if thou thus and thus deal? if if you will leave the society, the exercises,
the profession, and the company of the children of God, and serve me, and
worship me: preferring your covetousness, your pride, your lust, before the
service of God: not being scrupulous to swear for your gain sometime, nor to
lie for your pleasure, nor to cosen for riches: then you shall not only be
free from the reproaches wherewith professors are overwhelmed and the contempt
wherein they are had, and the many heavy sighs that they are forced to fetch,
but you shall also grow rich soon, and so be well thought of, and had in
estimation, and by your wealth live in ease with all pleasure, procuring every
thing your at hearts desire.

Thus Jonah, which way soever he look, is tempted on every side: tempted to
sin, but not constrained: urged, but not compelled: for the devil has power
to entice to sin mightily, but not to enforce violently. Lo then comforts
against this cross. Our enemies power is in our Fathers hands: and our Savior
prays for us being most glorious in heaven, as he on earth 1. Co^r 10. 11.
Romans 8. 34. Luke 22. 32.
in humility prayed for his Apostles, that our faith fail us not. Bebold then
also encouragements to fight against his assaults: yet see a greater God has
given us: this privilege, this promise have we: Resist the Devil, and he shall
fly from you, Iam. 4. 7. God has given no promise to the devil, that if he
persuade he shall prevail, if he urge, we shall yield: what a shame is it to
us, that Satan is bolder in tempting, then we are in resisting? Is he not? O
that we could truly say, we are as wise, as watchful, as thoughtfull to
withstand Satan's assaults, as he is wily, vigilant, and more then diligent to
assault.

But what does Jonah, thus as we have heard by satan assaulted? resists he as
manfully as the Devil has set on him cunningly? Alas no, Jonah is no sooner
dissuaded to go to Niniuie, then he is persuaded it were great folly: he is as
soon resolved as he is enticed to go to Tarshish, thinking it a chief point
of wisdom to seek his own ease, his own pleasure, his own sweet delight.
One said, God spoke, and it was done. Surely the devil Genesis 1.
also but speaks, and it is done, for he is such an orator as no man can deny
him. For who can gain say him that counsels as a special friend, yea as a
most holy Angel? For he would seem to be not only careful, both to keep us
from danger, and the fear thereof, and to procure us all good: but also
jealous of Gods honor, fearful lest men should despise the word, and so
their own saluaton: therefore he made not only Gehezi to take a 2. King. 5.
22. 2. Tim. 4. 10. Mat. 26. 48. 70 Genesis 11. 8. Genesis 27. 13. 14. 18. Genesis 16. 43.
bribe, Demas to embrace the world, Judas to betray his Master, and Caine to
kill his brother, but Rebecca also to persuade Jacob, and Jacob to be bold by
lying to seek for the blessing: yea the Father of the faithful to commit
folly with Hagar, as here Jonah not to go to Niniuie, lest, forsooth, God
should not be true of his word: as if what to man seems unlikely, that were
with God impossible, and he could not be righteous, unless we show our selves
impious.

We have seen some causes why satan assaulting us, he straight ouercomes us:
would any see more? we have bin taught his power, malice, watchfulnes, and
wilines: we have most fit and sufficient armor ministered unto us: we have a
promise, that resisting him, we shall make him Ephesians. 6. 11. 14. 10. 16. Iam. 5.
7.
fly from us. Therefore surely we forget our enemy, or neglect the promise,
or take not to us the whole armor of God, specially we like not that
armor-bearer humility: submit your selves to God, and then resist he devil.
But moreover, we to our own certain peril and pain (so corrupt are we)
join with our enemy, more ready to do his will then Gods word. Hereof no
doubt foolish Balaam asked again and again, till God seeing him bent contrary
to that he had bin commanded, left him Number. 22. 8. 19. 21.
unto himself: and so Balaam went on in sin so long, till the very Ass
whereon he rode, was constrained to reprove him. But would you howsoever Satan
temmpts, not be turned by him out of the right way? howsoever he fights, not to
be foiled by him? would you have him soon to forsake you, speedily to fly
from you, that is, would you resist him? for when we begin valiantly to fight,
then forthwith he flies. Consider how shameful a thing it is, being every way
encouraged to fight, to show our selves most dastardly cowards: how
dishonorable to our captain Christ, to yield the victory to his deadly enemy:
how dangerous for our selves, knowing he is a most cruel tyrant, and most
inexorable, that most glories and specially takes pleasure in putting us to
the most bitter pain that possibly he can, and therefore having overcome us,
will for ever continue us in most intolerable torments. Yea, say thou,
these things considered would make us courageously to encounter with Satan,
and so soon to conquer him; but he comes often as a friend, as an Angel of
light: how shall I then descry him, that I may desie him and make him to fly?

How? here indeed is the hardness: for he is a notable hypocrite, the father of
hypocrisy. But thou must follow the counsel of Christ, Reu. 3. 18. Thou must
anoint thine eyes with the eye salve, that thou may see. Thou must be
fulfilled with the knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, and moreover watch Col. 1. 9. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
and be sober. And lastly, consider, first how thy spirit is affected: for our
own spirit (by nature evermore hard) if it be moved by the spirit of God, is
sad, soft, and flow: but if it be moved by the spirit of Satan is proud,
boisterous, and stout: then, whether that which thou art indeed moved to be
good or evil: if good, that is, agreeable to Gods word, then acknowledge it
comes from God, for all good motions are the work of the spirit of God,
howsoever they seem to proceed of our selves. But if it be evil, that is, not
agreeable with the word of God, then it is always either a lust of our corrupt
nature or a suggestion of Satan. Wherefore it is a sure way to say when we are
tempted to evil, this motion is of the devil, for even our corruption came of
his suggestion. For the spirit of man is always tossed between these two
contrary spirits, the spirit of God procuring our salvation, and the spirit of
satan seeking our condemnation. So that if any will get the victory of Satan,
he may not be without the spiritual sword, which is the word of God Ephesi. 6.
17. Yea, he must have the word of God dwell in him plenteously, Col. 3. 17. and
cry still, Open mine eyes, O Lord, Psalm. 119. 18 Give me understanding, 34.
and incline mine heart unto thy testimonies. 36 and beware that he submit
himself duly, and diligently watch.

Thus Jonah tempted, has consented to neglect his charge, and does he
forthwith repent? No, he prepares himself to his purposed journey. But Jonah
arose to fl^e unto Tarshish. As Jonah was no sooner tempted to go to Tarshish
but he yielded, so as soon as he had yielded, forthwith be to go. So Jonah
made himself a runaway and showed himself a disobedient seraunt to his God.
And in the mean while, Niniuie set on the score, and had no hoe with them in
working wickedness: but still filling the cuuppe of all abominations, ran
down to hell with as much force and speed as they could. So Niniuie is still
Niniuie, but Jonah is not like Jonah, for the Prophet is flying, and sin is
crying, and so al falls to confusion.

But Jonah arose up to fly unto Tarshish, etc. Jonah flies unto Tarshish
before he would go to Niniuie; and every one is like the son which said he
would not, before he went: and so sin is borne first, as Esau, was borne
before Jacob. Therefore if evil may compare with goodness in particular
actions, in all mankind Genesis 34. 25. 26
corrupt, evil may say he is the ancienter. But as soon as thou perceiuest
any evil cogitation or motion in thy self, be thou wroth with it, nip it in
the head, put it to death, and then the unclean spirit that has long been
strong, and with delight dwelt in thee, will soon Math. 8 31.
be weary of thy house, and say as the evil spirit said; Here is no dwelling
for us, let us go to yonder heard of swine.

But Jonah arose up to fly unto Tarshish, etc. Jonah was sent to Niniuie, but
he went toward Tarshish. And so it is always with us, we are ever doing that
we should not do. For either we do nothing, or that which we are not
commanded, or else otherwise then we are commanded. Sometime most rebelliously
we do that which we know the Lord straightly forbids. And as Jonah took
Tarshish for Niniuie, so we take the devil for an Angel, light for darkness,
etc. But Jonah rose up, etc. They that should preach at Niniuie, are flying to
Tarshish, and though he be like a drone, yet does he, even the Non-resident,
keep his beneficie fasting, feasting himself: but will thou keep it still?
go and preach at Niniuie as ye have been doubly commanded, or for shame leave
your priuledge and benefice: but they stand staggering, ashamed to keep it,
and loath to leave it. For the sweet morsels of Baals priests are pleasant unto
them, that they cannot find in their hearts to leave them, as long as they are
able to keep them. But no marvel that Jonah fled to Tarshish, when he should
go to Niniuie. For this is a stumbling vocation amongst men, yea rejected by
the children of this world which always kick against it: so that if you would
ask for a painful vocation, this is it; if for a thanklesse vocation, this
is it; if for a contemptible vocation, this it it: for reproouing, we are
reproved: blessing, we are cursed: preaching peace we make war: proclaming
liberty, we are imprisoned; do what we can, we are persecuted: and for our
work worthy of love, we receive of the most, hatred: of few yea very few, not
any more then a cold affection. Hereof it has come to pass that Moises and
Jeremy called, excused themselves; Ezekiel having received his charge, went in
bitterness and indignation of his Ex. 3. 11. 4. 10. 13. Ier. 1. 6. Eze. 3. 14.
3. 15 Exodus 5. 2^.
spirit, and seven days neglected his charge, as Jonah here does his: and
Moises, Eliah, and Jeremy, at length complained: and (which to the best men is
the greatest grief) it is as easy almost to wash a black Moore white, as to
convert a sinner, because Satan is ever crossing men doing 1. Kin. 19. 10. and
14. Ier. 20. 7.
the will of God, but specially hindering the course of right preaching. For the
Lord was not so earnest to stop the way of Balaam, lest he should commit
wickedness, as the devil is earnest to stop the way of every Jonah, lest he
fulfill righteousness, that is, cry against Niniuie, longing, and duly that is,
wisely, and earnestly laboring to convert Niniuie.

But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, etc.
The righteous fall, and now no less then a Prophet, yea such a Prophet as was
the figure of Christ. But who would have thought that such a Prophet should
fly from the Lord, yea and that when he should do him most service? who
counts that no wickedness now, that he ever thought and taught was
rebellion, while he was among the wicked? A fearful example: therefore let
him that thinks he stands, take he left he fall, for the way is slippery
wherein we are to walk. When thou remembrest the fall of the Prophets, then
consider that thou art much weaker then a Prophet, and therefore the easier to
be encountered and ouerthrown, and the likelier to have a most grievous fall,
except the Lord do mightily uphold thee, seeing such a one cannot stand in the
sight of his so mortal enemy, but by him receives so grievous a fall.
Secondly, if thou see Jonah fly, Moises murmr, David fall to adultery,
Solomon to Idolatry and Peter to forswear his Master, then may thou learn
not to trust to thine own strength, for it is weakness; not to thine own
wisdom, for it is sinful; but seek help Iam. 5. 5. Mark. 12. 20.
and crave strength at the hands of Almighty God, who gives to every one that
asks indifferently, and hitteth no man in the teeth; which does not bruise the
broken reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but does rather increase our zeal
then diminish it. Thirdly, judge wisely of the fall of Jonah, not rashly
condemning him for his fault: for although David joined murder with adultery,
yet he repented, and is the dear child of God.

And he found a ship going to Tarshish. Jonah was no sooner come to Iapho, but
he goes to the haven, or meets with Mariners, and presently understands of a
ship, not going to Niniuie, but to Tarshish. As soon as he set forward to
fly from God, Satan straightwaies prepared a ship, so that temptation and
doccasion of sin do always go together. Shall Judas lack money, or Jonah
stay for a ship? No (says Satan) by the mouth of his ministers; here Judas,
take thee money, and betray thy Master; and Jonah, here is a ship for thee: go
have thee away, and fly from the presence of the Lord. For the devil is
always a very serviceable and pleasant devil to such as fly from God: he can
find occasion at all times, and means, and instruments fit for that purpose.
If thou will fly from God, the devil will lend thee both spurs and a horse,
yea a post-horse, and that will carry you swiftly and lustily away, unto all
vanity and ungodly lusts. Therefore if any will ask what the devils
occupation is, it is to tempt, to entice by all means, to provoke to sin, and
then to provide us of the means to practice our purpose to commit (and as
James speaks) to bring forth sin.

And he paid the fare thereof. This money was cast into the Sea, it did him as
little good, as if he had utterly lost it: it had been good for him if he had
lost it, for it did him much harm. There are many that will spend and waste,
they care not how much upon cards and dice, and unlawful games, this money
also is cast into the Sea, for it does them much more harm then they know of
it, does them no good, it were good for them they had not a penny to lose. And
so men care not what they pay for vanities and braueries, the most part of
which is unprofitable, and rather hurtful then necessary for them, but only
for the vain use of the present time, and for some vain respect: this also is
cast into the Sea, and better should they be, if they had it not to lavish, and
to their own and many others hurt so to garnish themselves. Men care not what
they pay for their vanities, so it does please their mind for the present,
without consideration of the end and use thereof; but they will give little or
nothing to do good withal: so that Lazarus can get nothing, and David can get
no meat. Shall Luke 16. 21. 1. Sam. 23. 10. 11.
I take my bread and my wine, and the flesh which I have provided for my
shearers, and give them unto one, whom J know not, says churlish Nabal? We can
be content to give any thing, or do any thing to win the world thereby but we
will give nothing nor do nothing, thereby to win the kingdom of God.

We have heard Jonah confessing that he received a charge to go to Niniuie,
but he arose and fled toward Tarshish, and went down to Iapho, and found a
ship, going to Tarshish, and paid the fare thereof, and went down into it:
hereafter we shall hear, that being entered the ship, he went to sleep, and
slept soundly, and being wakened, he confessed not his sin, but suffered the
Mariners to devise to find out for whose cause they were to troubled, and at
length also the lots to be cast never confessing it until he was enforced to
it. What needed he to rehearse all this? had it not been enough to have
said, that he left his business undone, he was a sinner? No, for God would
have men to know the stubbornnes and disobedience of Jonah, in that this, thing
was not done upon the sudden, but upon deliberation, and in no short time, but
in some continuance, while he went from Samaria to Iapho: and thence was
departed, and had somewhile sailed. In which space he had leisure enough to
have repented, but did not. Jonah confessed his sin, that he should not once
have listened to satan's assaults or reasons of the flesh, and when he had
listened, he should not have liked them, and when he had liked them he should
not have consented to obey them, and when he had consented he should not have
put them in practice; he should not have fled toward Iapho; and when he was
come to Iapho, he should not have gone to the haven; and when he came to the
heaven, he should not have paid the fare; and when he had paid the fare, he
should not have entered the ship, and when he was entered the ship, he should
not have hoysed up the sails, and sailed, and gone to sleep. But this he did,
teaching that sin runs on wheels, as it were down a hill in a ll
post-hast, and never stays till it ariue even in hell. For Jonah thought
because he came safe to Iapho, therefore he might go to the heavens and
because he came well to the haven, therefore he might pay the fare; and because
he paid the fare in peace, therefore he might take shipping; and because he
entered the ship in safety, therefore he might hoyse up the sails to go, and
because he hoysed up the sails without danger, therefore he might go securely
to sleep, and safely to sail to Tarshish.

So sins follow one another like linkes of a chain, till the tempest of
destruction break it in sunder. So says the forlorn sinner, I have sworn,
and God did not punish me, therefore I will steal: I have stolen and God did
not punish me, therefore I will kill. I have killed and God did not punish me,
then why may I not do what I list? I may do this as well as I have done other
things heretofore. But if Jonah had considered with himself that God is the
Lord, who is all seeing and almighty, from whom nothing can be concealed, he
would never have taken his journey to Iapho, or when he came to Iapho, he
would not have paid the fare, or when he had paid the fare, he would not
have entered the ship, or when he was gone into the ship, he would not have
hoist the sails, but rather would have leapt out from that ship that should
carry him from his God, carrying him from his duty: but he forgets himself
thinking the creatures can hide him from the Creator, which Heb. 4. 13.
is an absurd thing to think, seeing nothing can be hid from him: neither
would any, I say, add drunkenness to thirst, or heap sin upon sin, or
suffer an evil thought to take place in him, if they consider that the just
Jehovah be held them in all their very thoughts. All those that pity Jonah, let
them pity themselves; for if we consider our own estate, we have as many, and
as soul sins in us, as there were in Jonah, yea in Niniuie Jonah confessed
his sin, that we might confess. He confessed it freely, he confessed it
fully, that he knew his masters will, but not only did it not, but also took
another course quite contrary to that which he was commanded: and that not in
purpose only, but in deed also; not for an hour, but a long time; not in
struggling with his weakness, but in a profound ungodly carelessness, (...) in
striving to ouer-master his conscience, accusing him for his wickedness. And
wherefore has he written it but to admonish us narrowly to look to our
selves, and manfully to fight that we may stand where he fell; and when we have
fallen, as freely and fully to confess it to God always, and to man also,
when wisdom commands.

FINIS.
At London Printed for William Leake, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Holy Ghost. 1610.


