THE MIRACVLOVS ORIGIN AND TRANSLATION OF THE CHVRCH OF OUR B. LADY OF LORETO.
illustration

THE church of Loreto was a chamber of the house of the B. Virgin nigh
Jerusalem in the city of Nazareth, in which she vvs borne and bred, and
saluted by the Angel, and therein conceived and brought up her son JESUS to
the age of xij years. This chamber, after the Ascension of our B. Savior,
was by the Apostles consecrated into a church in honor of our B. Lady; and S.
Luke made a picture to her likeness, extant therein to be seen at this very day.
It was frequented with great devotion by the people of the country vvher it
stood, whilst they were Catholics; but when, leaving the faith of Christ,
they follovved the sect of Mathomet, the Angels took it, and carrying it into
Sclauonia; placed it by a town called Flumen; where not being had in due
reverence, they again transported it over sea to a vvood in the territory of
Recanati, belonging to a noble woman: called Loreta, from whom it first took
the name of our B. Lady of Loreto; and thence again they carried it, by reason
of the many robberies committed, to a mountain of two brothers in the said
territory; and from thence finally, in respect of their disagreement about the
gifts and offerings, to the common high-vvay not far distant, where it now
remains, without foundation, famous for many signs, graces, and miracles;
vvherat the inhabitants of Recanati, who often came to see it, much wondering,
environed it with a strong and thick wall; yet could no mantel, whence it
came originally, til in the year M.CC.XC.VI. the B. Virgin appeared in sleep
to a holy devout man, to whom she revealed it, and he diuulged it to others
of authority in this Province, who determining forthwith to try the truth of
the vision, resolved to choose XVI. men of credit, who to that effect should
go all together to the city of Nazareth, as they did, carrying with them the
measure of this church; and comparing it there with the foundation yet
remnant, they found them wholy agreeable, and in a wall thereby engraven, that
it had stood there, and had left the place; which done, they presently
returning back, published the premises to be true; and from that time
forwards, it has been certainly Known, that this church was the chamber of
the B. V. to which Christians begun then, and have ever since had great
devotion, for that in it daily she has done and does many and many miracles.
One Friar Paul de Silua, an Ermit of great sanctity who lived in a cottage
nigh unto this church, vvhither daily he went to Matins, said, that for ten
years space, on the VIII. of September; two hours before day, he savv a
light descend from heaven upon it, which he said was the B. Virgin, who
there shevved herself on the feast of her Nativity. In confirmation of all
which, two virtuous men of the said city of Recanati diverse times declared
unto me Prefect of Terreman and Governor of the foresaid church, as
follovveth: The one called Paul Renalduci, avouched, that his grandfathers
grandfather, savv when the Angels brought it over sea, and placed it in the
forementioned vvood, and had often visited it there; The other, called Francis
Prior, in like sort affirmed, that his grandfather being C.XX. years old, had
also much frequented it in the same place; And for a further proof that it had
been there, he reported, that his ^randfathers grandfather had house nigh unto
it, vvherin he dwelled, and that in his time it was carried by the Angels from
thence to the mountain of the two brothers, where they placed it as abouesayd.

To the honor of the euer-glorious Virgin.
IN LORETO Per Francesco Serafini. M.DC.XXXV. Con licenza de Superiori.


