THE Pathway to please GOD.

Which way whomsoever walks, especially in the time of any worldly
affliction, shall be defended against all temptations.

Thy Word O Lord, is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths.

Printed by W. Iaggard.

The Pathway to please God.
A godly Prayer.
O Almighty God, and Heavenly father, direct our steps in thy word, and lead
us into the Path of thy commandments, for thou art the GOD of our salvation:
so, we love the habitation of thy house, and greatly do we delight in the
Company of such as fear thee: therefore will we worship and fall down and
kneel before thee, O Lord our ^aker, for we are the people of thy Pasture,
and the sheep of thy hands: O God hear us in the truth of thy salvation,
Amen.

Godly prayers to be said at all times.
For the morning.
O Heavenly* Father, I give thee most hearty thanks, land, and praise, for a
number of thy blessings bestowed upon me: and amongst the rest, this is not
the least, that thou have not only preserud me from my youth up hitherto from
mine enemies and adversaries in this world but for that also thou have defended
and kept me this night past, from all perils and dangers of the same, and have
given me q^^et rest and sleep, and have safely brought me to the beginning
of this day. I beseech thee of thy abundant mercy and kindness, so to direct and
govern me in this day, and ever with thy holy spirit, that all my thoughts,
words, and deeds may only be in thy service faith, fear, and love, to the
glory of thy holy Name, Amen

For mercy and grace.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, remember not my faults which deserve no favor at
thy hands, nor any part of these thy benefits: but mitigate thy anger, which I
have deserved. Bestow thy grace on me, and let thy holy Spirit evermore abide
with me, and so serve thee in holiness and righteousness of Life, to the honor
and glory of thy holy name, amen.

From all perils and dangers.
Only in thee, O merciful Lord, lies all power and might, to defend me from
all perrilles and dangers of this world, and in my self is all disabilitie to
do any thing which may please thee, so that I am altogether subject to the
World by the flesh, wherein I was created, and to all other things else, which
may draw me from thee, if thou in mercy do not defend me, that neither
satan, sin, hell, nor death have the dominion and upper hand of me. Endue my
heart, O Lord with the true understanding of thy holy word, that I may be
ready manfully to fight under the standart of thy dear son Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the holy ghost be praise now and for ever, Amen.

To withstand all temptations.
MAke me able O heavenly father, through thy power, to with stand all
temptations, whereby I may be drawn from thee, and ouer-throwe all those
thine enemies, who are too strong for me, and to whom through sin and flesh, I
am become thral. So shall I O Lord be able to live in the world, and yield
thee praise, world without end.

At our vp-rising.
O Lord GOD and heavenly Father. I humbly beseech thee, that this my vp-rising,
thou will vouchsafe to look upon me, and bless me so bountifuly with thy
grace that I may spend this day, and the rest of my life in thy Service, that
all my travails and endeavors may please thee, and that I do not in any thing
swerve or fall from thee, we most humbly beseech thee that thine eyes may
attend upon us, daily defend us in sorrow* succor us, cherrish, comfort, and
govern all our Counsels, studies and labors, in such wise, that we may so
spend this day, according to thy most blessed will, without hurting of our
neighbor, that we may diligently and warily avoid all things that should
displease thee, unto the praise of thy most holy name, through Christ our Lord,
Amen.

To the glorious and blessed Trinity.
Save me, O Father, my Creator, through thy power, O God the son have pity
upon me, and be thou mine advocate to entreat for me. O holy Ghost, I
humbly beseech thee to remain with me, and govern me. O blessed and glorious
trinity, three persons, and one GOD, strengthen me, and comfort me, and defend
me for ever more, amen.

Proverbs chap. 21
Wonderful are thy works O Lord God thine Omnipotency most marvelous, thy
wisdom most in searchable, thy power more then any Creature can comprehend.
There is (O Lord) no power in earth that may contend or strive against thee, or
is able to abide the lest stroke of thy mighty hand. If in thy power thou
Correct our Just deseruings: no wisdom, no Counsel, nor policy may
prevail against thee, O Lord. Therefore, O God, I am affraide of thy
displeasure and my soul does tremble to think upon my manifold sins and
iniquities: and contrariwise, mine assured hope, trust, and confidence in thee*
do thoroughly persuade me of thy goodness and mercy, and do (as it were)
convert that fear, which I have of thy displeasure, in respect of my sins,
into love, honor, and obedience of thee, in respect of all thy manifold
beneuolences, which I have received at thy most bountiful hands, thorough thy
dear son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

That we may forsake the world, and the vanities thereof.
LEt me not (O merciful Lord and heavenly Father) fall from thee to fall unto
the world, and the vanities thereof.

Let not thy Grace nor fear fall from me, least mine enemies catch me in
their snares. Let me not through the alurement of the world be drawn from
thee, and from the care of thee, lest I forget to love, honor and obey thee as
I ought. To the glory of thy most holy name, through thy dear son Jesus christ
our Lord, Amen.

A prayer to God for forgiveness of sins and offenses.
O Lord, of thine infinite Mercy, have compassion upon me. Lay not to my
charge, my former offenses, but to grant (as thou have hitherto vouchsafed) to
defend and proserue me through thy power, so likewise I humbly beseech thee (my
Lord and Redeemer) evermore hereafter to keep me safe in thy protection,
against all perils and dangers of this world.

For in thee (O loving father) is all my hope* in thee is my sure trust and
confidence, in thee alone rests all my comfort joy bliss, happiness, and
felicity of the world to come. So be it.

A prayer declaring the Omnipotent power of God, and the miserable estate of
man.
O God, whose mercy is most manifold, whose goodness is most excellent: whose
power is omnipotent, and whose favor is more then any Creature can deserve:
and contrariwise, man a manifold sinner, excelling al creatures in naughtines,
most weak and yet striving against thy power, most sinful, and yet instead of
craving thy favor, for pardon of our sins, a thousand ways deserving thy
heavy displeasure

These things considered with my self (my loving savior) make me (ah vile
wretched sinner) almost in despair, and desperate of Mercy, but thy sweet and
loving promises do encourage me with assured hope and undoubted Faith, that at
what time soever I, even I, a most wretched and abominable sinner, shall from
my heart heartily, and not with Words alone outwardly, cry unto thee for
mercy, remission of my sins, and Favor: that then even at that instant,
thou will have compassion upon me, and pardon and release me of all my
sins and iniquities. To thee therefore O Lord God, with most humble and hearty
Repentance I cry for mercy for my sins past, and beseech thee of thy grace and
holy Spirit to govern me ever hereafter, and truly to guide me in all truth
and righteousness, and in the perfect knowledge of thee, and thy holy laws,
so long as I shall here continue in this vale of misery, eue^ for thy dearly
beloved son Christ his sake: So in most assured hope and faithful trust to
thy mercies, cleaving unto thy promises laying my heavy burden upon thy most
mighty shoulders, and prostrating my self before thy heavenly throne, from
the very bottom of my heart, I cry unto thee, saying: O our Father which art
in heaven.

A prayer for grace, wherein is declared the weakness of man.
ALmighty, eternal, and everlasting God, grant that thy holy Spirit may
always remain in our hearts, and that through the inspiration of thy most
Heavenly grace, we may euer-more perform the effects of thy holy Laws, and
live according to thy blessed commandments. And although man is always more
prone and ready to transgress against all thy precepts generally then any
thing at all able to perform the least iotte of thy Divine pleasure: yet O
most merciful lord GOD, of thy great and tender Mercy, grant us grace and
willing minds and obedient hearts, diligently to read thy Holy Scriptures
for our learning* and so to follow the^ in our living that fruits thereof may
spring out to thy glory, and to the profit of our Neighbors. Always confessing
and affirming with the holy Apostle, that when we have done all that we can
do, yet then we are unprofitable servants:

Grant us thus thy grace, O loving GOD, that we may live in thy fear, and
leave this transitory life in thy favor: and after this life remain with thee
in thy heavenly habitation, amongst thy blessed Angels, singing to thee with
heavenly melody: O holy, holy* holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

To whom be all laud, praise and thanks, for evermore, Amen.

A prayer to our Savior Christ, for remission of sins.
O Christ my Redeemer, and only savior, vouchsafe of thy great clemency to
have regard unto me whom thou have redeemd, who am now most miserably wrapped
in so unmeasurable a number of grievous sins as nothing may rid me from the
heavy wrath of my heavenly father, due for my deserts, unless thou be mine
advocate and Peacemaker for me. And I do know assuredly, that the Holy
Spirit, sent from my heavenly father thorough thy mediation, and being
thorough his bountiful goodness poured into my sinful heart, is the only
and chief medicine salve and precious Oil, which cures and comfort my
wounded Conscience and wretched soul.

Have mercy vppoa me O Christ, and now behold with thy Glorious eyes, the
Sorrows and hearty greefes wherewith I am oppressed: and as I am of a vile
piece of earth made and constituted, to the likeness and shape of thine own
image, and thou have also breathed life into me, and endued me with reason. So
likewise, I humbly beseech thee, to show thy loving countenance unto me, to
grant that thy grace may evermore remain with me, to pardon and release me of
al my sins and iniquities, and when thy good will and pleasure is to dissolve
this flesh in me, and to take me out of this miserable life to thy mercy. And
in the mean time, grant unto me the perfect gift of patience and humbleness
of heart meekly to hear and suffer all those thy crosses and afflictions of
body and mind, wherewith it has pleased thee in mercy thus loungly to visit
me.

Strengthen me O my Savior, that I despair not, and weaken the force of my
ghostly enemy that he have no power to subdue my soul by any manner of
temptation so shall my tongue, heart and soul with full consent, yield lawde
and praises to the high and glorious majesty of thy heavenly father and to thee
mine only savior with the holy Ghost, with full assured trust, by thine only
merits and bloudshedding O christ, to have full remission of my sins: and so
finally to obtain a resting place in thy heavenly habitation, for ever and
ever, world without end. So be it.

Other prayers for remissin of sins, and remedy against temptations.
TO thee, O heavenly father, king of all kings, and most mighty Creator and
Governor of all things: I thy most wretched creature, presume with all
humbleness of heart, to make my complaints unto thee.

Hearken, O God, to the prayers which my sinful soul does pour out before
thy Divine majesty, with assured confidence to be relieved at thy merciful
hands. Out of thine heavenly throne, and Glorious habitation, vouchsafe to
behold the grievous affliction of me thy poor and wretched servant.

Make me strong by thy mighty Power, to withstand al temptations and assaults
of all mine Enemies both bodily and ghostly, least they prevail against me,
and overcome me.

Assist me always with thy grace, and renew in me an humble spirit and willing
mind, to perform my duty toward thee and my neighbor. Increase in me true
contrition of heart, to confess, bewail, and lament my sins past, and grant
me grace to amend my life hereafter, and persist only in those things which
may please thee and be acceptable before thee.

Strengthen me good Lord with thy power and grant perfect patience and meeknes
unto me, humbly and wilingly without grudging, to suffer and obey thy loving
corrections since with my hear I do acknowledge my self to have deserved much
greater punishments, if thou should deal with me according to mine
offenses: wherein (O Lord) vouchsafe to spare me, and grant unto me thy
favor and loving countenance for thy dear son Jesus Christ his sake. In
whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, rests my true, perfect, and only
saluaon, which from my heart I confess, saying, I believe in God, etc.

Waken me, O my loving father, from my sluggish sleeping in sin, lighten my
heart with thy heavenly grace and show thy bountiful mercy toward me. Assuage
the rigor of thy heavy displeasure which I have deserved. Give me diligence
to hear and receive thy holy word and let the same take such deep root in my
heart that I may truly learn to know thee, and be diligent and careful in
doing my duty toward thee daily endeavoring my self to lead this my
mortal life according to thy Godly and holy precepts.

Lord, let not any vile temptation, worldly desire, or fleshly lust prevail
against me, nor be of force to draw my mind, heart, or Soul from thee. Let not
my sins further increase which are already so innumerable, that I fear thy
wrath and heavy displeasure. Nevertheless, with the holy prophet, I trust and
confess, saying: In thee O Lord GOD do I put my trust let me not be
confounded. Save thou my soul which puts her trust in thee. Receive the
same, O Lord, into thy merciful tuition.

Be thou, O God, my ready help and comfort, when any temptation does assail
me, and suffer me not to be tempted beyond my power, but show thy loving
countenance unto me, now and ever: Amen.

A prayer declaring the unthankfulness of man, for the manifold benefits of
our heavenly Father.
O Eternal and omnipotent GOD, who does rule and govern al things by thy
power, to whom all creatures in the world as well man in what state or degree
soever thou of thy goodness have constituted or placed him, or also all Beasts
of thr field, Fishes of the sea, and fowls of the air are subject.

Which creatures thou by thy diutne wisdom, have not only created in his
kind but also have limited and appointed unto every one of them, a certain
knowledge and order, whereby each Creature in his kind does obey thee. Saving
man, to whom thou have been most beneficial whom thou have endued with
Reason, discretion, and Wisdom, besides a number of thy heavenly blessings,
and have also placed him in this world as chief above al other creatures, and
have ordained and appointed all Fowls of the Air, fishes of the sea, and
fruits, and beasts of the earth, for his sustenance and necessity.

Notwithstanding, O most gracious and loving Father, we are altogether
unthankful for thy great and manifold gifts, so largely, plentifully, and
abundantly bestowed upon us and careless of our duties toward thee not
regarding thy goodness and Loving favor, as we ought, but abusing and
misvsing those good Virtues and gifts which thou have bestowed upon us, nether
using Wisdom Reason, nor Discretion, or any other endeavor to such purpose,
as may tend to the performance of thy godly pleasure, but contrariwise in all
our doings, actions trade of life, and ungodly thoughts, we daily and howrly
commit most abominable and heinous offenses, and transgressions against thy
divine Majesty, whereby we provoke thy Wrath and grievous displeasure against
us, for our just punnishmentes, which woorthily should fall upon us: were not
thy manifold mercies about our infinite offenses: and thy great love toward us,
more then our deserving according to thy loving and favorable kindness,
manifested unto us by those most comfortable declarations of thy favor toward
us, affirming that thou will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
may return from his wickedness and live. Nevertheless (O most comfortable.
Savior) such is the froward mind and vile condition of Man, that he is
always more ready to transgress and rebel against thee and thy helye Laws,
then at any time showing his due Obedience, rather stubbornely striving against
thy mighty power, that reasonable submitting of himself unto thy fatherly and
loving corrections, knowing in our consciences how many ways we daily do
offend thee, and how justly we do deserve thy heavy wrath. Lord God of thy
loving mercy and accustomed clemency, and bountiful grace, take thy grievous
wrath from us, correct us not in thy heavy displesure, deal not with us
according to our iniquittes: spare us good Lord, yea spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed Be gracious and favorable unto us.

Pull out of our hearts, minds and thoghts those Subtle slights, iniuring
Duties, and vain affections, which either the world through vanity, the deuiil
through policy, or the flesh through filthy desire have rooted in us, to the
end, to draw us away from thee.

Receive us (O Lord GOD) into thy favor again, renew the right spirit of
grace in our hearts purge and cleanse our souls from the most filthy and
foul spots of pride, gluttony, envy, fornication, drunkenness, and al other
abominable sins, wherein we have long wallowed, to the utter confusion and
damnation of our own souls (if that thou O Lord be not merciful. Plant and
ingraffe in us all lowliness, meekness, Obedience, love, charity, pati^nce
and al other gif^s of virtue which may subdue and overcome vice in us. This O
lord, we be seech thee in mercy grauntvnto us, for the Love of our Lord and
only Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all
praise* honor, and glory, amen.

An humble confession of sins.
I Most humbly beseech thee, O Christ, the true and only son of our heavenly
Father, that for thy mercy sake thou will have pity and compassion upon me,
that thou will with thy favorable eyes behold the great affliction of mind,
and hearty grief of me thy poor Servant, whom thou have redeemd. Unto thee are
all my sins and offenses known, and I humbly confess that it is not in the
power of any creture on earth or work of any man's hand, that the
intercession nor prayer of any S. Apostle, or angel in heaven, that may
relieve me or help me: But only thou, who by thy precious bloodshedding,
have purchased full redemption, and perfect salvation for so many as do trust in
thee and withvnfaigned heart, do confess their sins unto thee, and do call
upon thee to entreat for mercy thee to entreat for mercy to our heavenly and
almighty father.

Even now therefore, O Christ my Redeemer, I do confess unto thee my
manifold sins, and with my heart I am inwardly sorry that I have been so
unthankful for the sundry and inumerable benefits which thorough thee I have
received of my Heavenly father. And it does grieve my wretched Soul, that I
have been so negligent a Laborer in the Lords vineyard where is much plenty and
great abundance of all good things, and so great store of pleasant and most
sweet mirth: whereof we unthankful and disobedient creatures of al others most
wretched, receive the whole increase and profit to the releeuing of our
necessities.

All which notwithstanding, so subject unto our weak and frail flesh, so led
by the desires and affections of the world, and so blinded with the subtle
sleights of our adversary the devil, that we do altogether fall from thee,
and do not in any wise seek the Honor and Glory of our Heavenly father: but
do rather purchase to our selves, Death, and utter Damnation, if thou, O
Christ, of thy continual Mercy, did not entreat for the mittigation of the
just punnishment due for our offenses.

Refuse not, O most gentle and loving Advocate, mine humble suite which now I
make unto thee, for that I have been so long a sluggish loyterer careless
servant, and negligent workman in the service of my Lord God.

The remembrance whereof my loving savior, and the horrible fear of his heavy
displesure do make me to consume my days in sorrow, and to abhor this
wretched life, wherein man so many ways does fall from thee. But even for thine
own agony and passion sake, I beseech thee to entreat my Heavenly father for
me, to release and pardon my former negligence and wretched, and careless
unthankfulness, and to forgive my great transgressions and offenses. Through
which I have spent so long a time without calling for Grace receive my, humble
Petitions, and hearty submission accept my repentance which my heart, mind, and
soul do yield unto thee, and with perfect consent and agreement do earnestly
sue unto thee for thy favor and loving countenance, with assured hope that
thou will entreat for me, and strengthen me, and that through thee I may
obtain grace from above, whereby I may ever hereafter truly serve my Lord God,
and never fall from him again.

Suffer thou not my merciful Redeemer, that satan and his wily Ministers and
subtle spirits who according unto their kind, can craftily change themselves
into Angels of light, bearing, or rather counterfeting the countenance of
truth, and by their practices and sundry temtations, are able to overthrow and
deeeiue so many, over whom thou give them power to prevail, and generably
over all creatures, whose force is ouer-weake, if thy grace and holy Spirit be
not assistaunt, or rather a defendant) in the behalf of us miserable wretches
against the assaults and allu^ements of so great and mighty adversaries.

Wherefore, O Christ, in thy might defend us, keep us under thy protection,
be thou our continual mediator unto our Heavenly Father, for us his
prodigal children, the straying sheep from his fold, and the widows lost
groat: Be thou our advocate, that he may receive us again as obedient and
penitent children, confessing our Sins against him, with most hearty
repentance. Our only hope and trust of salvation, O Christ, rests in thee,
and our utter and everlasting Damnation, comes thorough our own manifold
transgressions, and nothing can help us, nor other remedy we have none but
this, that it pleased our heavenly father to send thee to be our redeemer and
Savior, even so many as do faithfully believe, through thy Death for us to
have received full and free redemption and remission of sins. Such (O Christ)
have everlasting life and shall not come unto damnation but are escapt from
death unto life.

Be thou therefore continually with us i^ grace, faith, and hope: comfort us
in all distress, affliction, and troubles: accept and receive our lamentable
and grievous complaints for our sins past. Mollify these our stome hearts,
that we may truly, heartily, and sincerely cry unto our heavenly father for
mercy, and that we may serve him, with all our hearts, minds, and strength,
and diligently search the holy scriptures for in them we have eternal life,
and they are the Testimony and witness bearers of our Heavenly Father.

Deny not O most dear Christ, thy mercy to us penitent and sorrowful
sinners. Let us that seek thy favor, and heartily repent us of our wicked
lives find release and forgiveness at thy pitiful hand. Open unto us, O
Christ, even unto us that do earnestly knock, with the heavy Tears of our
hearts at the still and gentle gates of thy tender mercy those gracious gates
from which all Mercy does abound, according to that heavenly and glad
proclamation, commanding us to ask, and we shall obtain mercy, to seek and
we shall find favor, to knock and it shall be opened unto us: what, even all
abundance of Grace, plenty of mercy and favor free remission and
forgiveness of sins: yea, and all joy, bliss, and life everlasting: If we
return from this world unto thee, if we leave following the desires thereof,
and cleave unto thee thou art the only peacemaker betwixt us and our Heavenly
father. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, and
glory, for ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said going to bed.
Thanks be given to thee O Lord God, for all thy mercies. Hallowed be thy
name, for all thy wonderful works Vouchsafe this night to preserve me in thy
safe custody as thou have this day past defended me. Make me strong thorough
thee to understand all manner of temptations, illusions, dreams and fantastes of
the night through the deceits whereof, a number of wretched souls have fallen from
thee. Ah my Lord God, I do heartily beseech thee that I may not only receive
quiet rest of body but that my mind may also be quiet, and my soul safely
preserved from all perils and dangers. Save me for Christ his sake, in thy
blessed tuition and lighte^ in me the bright flames of thy grace. We miserable
sinners, O Lord God, even all the number of earthly creatures, have no power of
our selves to withstand the assaults and temptations of our bodily and Ghostly
adversaries, but through thee.

Again, such are the fierce temptations subtle baits, and craft^ fl^ights of
our Enemies, that if thou be not our defender our souls cannot escape the
snares which day and night are laid to catch us and bring our souls unto
confusion. Loving father, all this thou know, and do not wish the death of
a sinner, remember us how weak we are, and defend us, sith in thee is all
our trust.

Let not our enemies by night or day prevail against us, for if thou be our
keeper, no evil can subdue and overcome us, unless thou O Lord God do
permit and suffer it. Into thy hands commend I my Soul, beseeching thee to
receive the same into thy blessed tuition.

Show unto me thy loving Countenance, and make me thy true servant strengthen
me in all good things that may make me able to serve thee. Let thy peace and
grace remain with me at all times: and that the love of thy blessed son
Christ, showed toward all creatures, in redeeming us, may evermore continue
toward us, to the comfort of our souls: and let the comfortable fellowshippe
of thy holy spirit, direct all my thoughts and works, assuring my Life in
this vale of wretchedness, that in my life I may serve thee, and at my death
glorify thee. Through Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer to be said in the time of sickness.
Through the extremity of this thy gentle and loving correction, O Lord I am
put in remembrance of my grievous sins, through which I have fallen from thee,
and I acknowledge to have deserved more sharper scourge: But such is thy mercy
to chastise me so gently for which I heartily thank thee, and am heartily sorry
that I have so much displeased thee. Lord have mercy upon me and regard mine
humble submission and reject me not because I have been stubborn heretofore.
In thee alone rests al my hope, comfort and consolation, and I trust through
our Lord Jesus Christ, thy dear son to have remission and free pardon of all
my sins and offenses which are in numerable, and which do deserve great
punnishment, if thou should revenge in thy wrath, or deal with me according
to my worldly acts: but I do firmly believe, that through the only merits of
christ, al my faults shall be utterly blotted out of thy sight at the day of thy
general judgment, and that my name shall be registered ^n the book of everlasting
^fe. Mittigate, O Lord GOD thy heavy wrath which I have deserved: ^elease me
of those punishments, wherewith thou (...) mercy have proved me. Even as thy
will is, (O Lord) solet it be with me unto the end of this transitory life.

This thy gentle chastisement which we call a gentle correction, by the which we
whom it has pleased thee to visit, are touched with grief of the stomach,
ache of the bones and pain of the head, and generally in all other parts of
the Body, is not a sufficient correction for us.

I know O lord God that in my self is not one good thought, or deed and that
thereby* I thy miserable and wretched creature, have justly deserved death and
damnation, both of body and soul, were not thy Mercies above my innumerable
iniquities: wherefore I do humbly sue unto thee for relief and comfort, in
whom rests all health of Body in this world, and the salvation of the soul
in the world to come: nothing doubting, but that it will please thee to have
pity and compassion upon me, and to restore unto me my health again in this
world and that always I may hereafter live in thy fear, or that it will
please thee to dissolve this flesh in me, and when thy good pleasure is, take
me out of this life, and give me a place with thee among thy holy Angels.

A prayer for Grace and Wisdom.
MOst mighty God, and merciful father, pour into my heart thy heavenly grace
and Wisdom. Comfort my sinful soul with thy heavenly manna, mollify my
hard heart, with the sweet and pleasant Oil of thy most holy word. Suffer
me not, O merciful Lord to swerue or slide from the ways of truth, but
grant that by help of thy holy Spirit I may walk in the same unto my lives
end, and let not thy heavenly wisdom depart from me at any time during this
life.

According to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offense. Preserve me
from this my youth and infancy, under thy favorable protection. Give me, O
Lord, that grace that I may even to the grave continue a faithful and manly
soldier in defense of thy truth and that I may in all my life, daily grow to
the ripe perfection of godly wisdom, and truly and justly acknowledge thee my
onelyl God that I may only fear and honor thee. That I may cleave fast unto
thee: that I may trust only to thee. That I do not after the abomination of
any idolatrous people, worship stocks or stones. Neither let me, O Lord,
hearken to any false Prophets, that reach their own imaginations, and not the
word of God.

Now vouchsafe O Lord God to hear me, and let thy holy wisdom govern me, I
know, O GOD that no creature can truly say, I have done my duty in the service
of the Lord: neither is it in the power of Man, who is so deeply subject to
sin, to escape al these stumbling blocks which have made our ways so
dangerous and perilous, thorough those innumerable slightes and practices,
wherewith satan our great enemy, through his malice and craft has devised
to entrap our sinful souls, to our utter destruction.

Lord of thy great mercy root and pull out of my heart all the works of
satan, namely, fornication Adultery, uncleanness, Wantonness pride, envy,
unnatural desires, vnpure thoughts, lewd behavior, idleness, and al other
vicious and naughty actions, which being followed according to the pleasures
and delig^ts of the World in this Life, bring with them everlasting Damnation
of body and soul in the world to come.

Increase in me (O Lord) such abundance of thy Grace, Wisdom, and Heavenly
Blessing, that thorough the operation of the same in me, I may prove a true
workman in thy harvest, such a servant as occupyeth his Masters Tallent unto
gain, a witness that bears testimony of Christ, to all People, and at all
times, and in every place continue constant in thy truth, during the whole
course of this my mortal life.

In thy truth, O God do I delight, therefore make me perfect in that same. In
thee alone do I repose my whole trust and confidence save me O god of all
m^rcie, and defend me against my enemies.

Establish and confirm me. O Lord, in faith toward thee Keep thou my lips,
and govern my tongue. Suffer not my heart to purpose any thing that may
displease thee: nor my tongue or lips at any time to speak oght whereby I
should purchase thy wrath.

Whosoever does trust in thee, O God, shall understand thy truth, and the
faithful shall have rest in thy favor, but the ungodly according to their own
wicked thoughts shall find corruption. The souls of the just are in the hands
of God and the force of death shall not touch them.

All wisdom comes from the Lord, and has been with him always, and is
with him from the beginning The fear of the Lord does expel sin, Lord of thy
great mercy grant me thy Heavenly wisdom, whereby I may truly learn to know
thee rightly, and be diligent to perform all thy precepts effectually.

Lord leave me not in my young days, but let thy heavenly wisdom enter into
my heart, and make thy habitation in my soul, so shall I live in thy favor,
and persevere in thy laws through thy grace.

Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord GOD of hoastes be ashamed: let not
those that seek thee be confounded. O God hear me in the truth of thy
salvation.

In thee alone, O heavenly Father, are all good things generally and what is
not of thee is altogether naught.

Replenth and ofesse me, O Lord, with all good gifts: show thy loving
countenance toward me, govern me by thy grace, continue me in the favor,
and protect and defend me now and evermore, under the wings of thy manifold
mercies, so shall no vile temptation have power to prevail against me.

Such is the force of thy Heavenly Wisdom, O God, that whosoever obtains
the same, and directs his life accordingly, shall prosper and see good days.
O Lord GOD, vouchsafe to grant these things unto me for thy sons Christ his
sake, our only Lord and savior. Amen.

A godly prayer for the preservation of the Kings Majesty.
GRant O lord God unto this little Realm of England, that our royal King
James, may long live reign, and rule over us: pour the rich and plentiful
gifts of thy heavenly wisdom and grace into his godly heart by the continual
operation whereof, he may evermore from hence forth as heretofore his grace
has done, ordain and establish good and wholesome laws, both for the increase
maintenance and preservation of the free passage of thy holy word, and sure
and perfect establishing of the same in all parts of his Realms and dominions,
according to his Highness godly will, great care and zealous endeavor, so many
years already spent, and that most earnestly toward the setting forth of thy
glory. Lengt he nand prolong his happy days, grant unto him, a long quiet,
and prosperous reign, many years to endure and continue, eu^n for thy trueths
sake.

Bless his Grace with the heavenly influences of thy Grace and holy spirit,
and evermore preserve and keep him from all his enemies.

This (O Lord) we beseech thee grant, for the love of thy son Christ Jesus,
Amen.

A godly Prayer for Bishops and ministers of the word of God.
INflame and enure the hearts, minds and lives of all Bishops, Pastors,
Ministers, and professors of thy holy word, with perfect Love, and fervent
zeal and affection toward the setting forth of thy glorious Gospel.

Give them O Lord, abundance of learning effectually to search and find out
the hidden secrets and mysteries contained in the Scriptures and Letters,
containing and comprehending thy holy Word, Gospel, and truth, written by
the blessed Apostles Evangelists and Prophets, and left to them by Christ
himself, declaring his old and new Testament, first written bythe finger of
Gods own hand, as true and certain testimonies of his great love and Favor
toward us and of his wonderful works and miracles wrought in the creation,
redemption, and salvation of all us wretched and sinful People: Lord give us
grace to be thankful.

Let thy heavenly grace O Lord God cast out her bright beams of godliness into
their hearts, and grant them true understanding, and perfect knowledge, so that
they may rightly interpret, set forth and declare thy holy Scriptures, to the
edifying of weak, simple, and unlearned people, and that each one in his
degree and calling, may be painful Pastors and diligent shepheardes over the
flock committed to them. Lord let their Doctrine and lives agree in all
virtuous and godly conversation.

Grant that the dilligent travels and careful ouersights of all Bishops and
chief Pastors be examples to interior Ministers, whereby they may be
approved faithful members of thy glorious and most precious word, and that of
all parts the people may be truly taught: sin abolished, Idolatry rooted out,
Antichrist ouerthrown, satan trodden down hell may be conquered, the gospel
may flourish and righteousness may shine: that God may have due praise, Thanks
and glory, for evermore, Amen.

A Godly Prayer for love and obedience.
Almighty God, of thy manifold great mercies, vouchsafe to pour into the
hearts of all thy People, earnest love and true affection toward thy most holy
Gospel, make them dilligent and wiling hearers of thy word, and obedient
followers and performers of thy heavenly will and pleasure in all their lives
to the setting forth of thy glory, and the attainment of the only true
Salvation of their souls.

Establish also in their hearts, true subjection unto our most virtuous King,
faithful obedience toward his laws, and just dealing one with another, that
so all the whole nation of this English Flock or Countr^y, may agree and
consent to and in one unity and agreement of one perfect religion and doctrine,
utterly rejecting all sects, schisms, and erroneous Opinions whatfoeuer.

Lord thou have promised by the holy Prophets, that thou will give to thy
people a New heart, that thou will deliver to them a new Spirit, that thou will take away their stony hearts, and give unto them hearts of flesh, that so
they may walk in thy precepts that they may keep thy judgments and perform
them: that they shall be thy people, and thou will be their God, O Lord let it
so come to pass for thine only names sake, to whom be all honor and Glory,
both now and for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for the Church, for daily increase of Gods holy word.
LEt thy holy Word, O Lord daily increase: let thy true church triumph, and
thine infallible truth flourish: let us forsake our old blindness and ignorance
and cleave only unto thee* In thee, O Savior, rests our hope and confidence
Give us grace therefore to rejoice only in thy truth and holy word, which
testifies thy great mercy toward us. Give unto us one heart, one mouth, and
one spirit and that of one truth, by and through the which we may rightly
agree in all things that may please thee Lord let us persevere in the same, and
we shallbe saved Confirm and strengthen our hearts in faith. Grant likewise,
that we being justified by faith may have peace with God, thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be all praise,
honor, and glory, both now and evermore, Amen.

A fruit^full Prayer, that God of his mercy woules stop the mouths of all the
wicked that rise up against his truth.
STop and shut up O lord the mouths of al papists Anabaptists, sectaries, and
scismatickes, thorough whose erroneous and superstitous Doctrines, thy people
have been, and yet are daily blinded in ignorance, and the Glorious light of
thy holy Gospel dimmed, and almost utterly extinguished, if of thy mercy thou
had not in time turned thy wrath away from us, restoring us to thy loving
and favorable countenance again, sent us a most godly and gracious prince by
whom thy undoubted true church has bene^^dified, and thy true and sincere
Doctrine restored amongst us: God make us to show our selves thankful
therefore.

Plant in thy Church godly ministers, and painful preachers, which are able by
true and sound doctrine to stir up thy people to the love of thee, and thy most
holy word: Such as are the true salt of the earth Mat. 5, 13. And such as are
the light of the world, who hold forth the true Gospel of Christ to all the
world. Let them O Lord be true fishers of men, by whom we may be won unto
thee and brought to thy fold. By whom we may be carefully and truly taught our
duties toward thee in this world, that after this life we may remain and
dwell with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom, thorough our Lord and only Savior
Jesus Christ, Amen.

Godly prafers to our heavenly father for continual grace and assistance, to
avoid the temptations of the world, the devil and flesh our monstrous enemies.
GRant us, O heavenly father, our humble petitions, which we thy sinful
creatures destre of thee and vouchsafe of thy great mercy to send thy holy
spirit into our hearts, which may govern, direct and lead us into al good
things, and defend us from al manner of temptations

Lord for thy manifold mercies, let thy Heavenly grace always remain with
us. Let thy truth be evermore with us, and make us constant in the same, yt we
n^uer be afraid of any thing that lies in man over our bodies, confessing
that if thou be with us in grace and truth man cannot prevail against thee.
Increase faith love, charity, and fear of thee in the hearts of all people. Let
not the desires of the world draw us from thee through the frailty of the Flesh,
which causes our daily fall from thee, whereby satan does overthrow and
triumph over us, who by all means seeks our utter confusion both of body and
soul.

Defend us from all temptations of the World, the flesh, and the devil, least
we fall into them: for to such as follow the world, and fly from thee, follow
their own destruction in this mortal life, and everlasting damnation in the
world to come.

O merciful God of thy goodness and loving kindness strengthen us: be
favorable unto us, and also bless us. Let thy holy spirit be with us for
evermore, and that by the operation of thy grace in us, we may serve thee in
all humbleness and obedience due to thy glorious majesty and that we may with
all our hearts acknowledge thee to be the true Messiah, the offered Lamb, even
our Savior and Redeemer Christ Jesus, through whose death and merits a^ people
shall receive salvation, and thorough whose mediation, the wrath of our
heavenly Father, for our iniquities is appeased Before who^ as our chief and
high judge, we shall rise to judgment: who as the most high steward will call
us to account of our travels in this our pilgrimage, and render every one their
just reward, either with punishment or mercy. Receive us, O Lord, into thy
merciful tuition and protection, and be our continual Governor in the whole
race of this our life. Be thou also our defender and grant unto us thy
countenance, make us strong against all temptations.

Weaken the strength of our great enemy Satan. Let not him and his ministers
have power over us, for that he is but thy bondslaue, whose power cannot
preuail against us without thy sufferance: and whose snares can take no hold
upon us if thou direct our steps wherefore even for thy mercy sake, vouchsafe
to consider our weakness, and grant that we may do al things to please thee,
and find favor at thy hands, who alone art our defender against Satan and
a^l his sleightes. To whom be al praise, honor, and glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.
London imprinted by W. Iaggard, and are to be fold by John Hammon, dwelling
in Angell-alley in Aldersgate street. 1617.


