THE TRUE LIGHT Owned and Vindicated, AND THE BELIEVERS IN IT DEFENDED: AND
Blasphemy and Blasphemers Justly Detected.

Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever thou art, that
judged: For wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou
that judge, do the same things.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
ONE Eminent Proof of a Christian is, a Peaceable Spirit, and his living, as
much as in him lies, at Peace with all Men: Indeed it is a State and Station so
desirable by us, that had we met with Reflections and Revilings which were
only Personal, we value the Peace and Comfort of Retirement so much, that we
should have willingly lain down under it, with only speaking to the Persons
that have injured us: But the occasion of our now appearing is Doctrinal, and
in Defense of the Holy Light within, which some Priests in Norfolk have Charged
with Exposing Us, the Followers of it, to Blasphemy, as taught by us.

Now our Opposers pretend to Accuse Us out of the Writings of some of our
Friends, but have hitherto dealt unfairly by us, in refusing us the Knowledge
of those Books, and their Pages, wherein they are dissatisfied; which, if they
had granted us, it might have made way for an Amicable Satisfaction.

We have been Conversant with some of the Writings of our Friends, but know not
any Book (to be just to the Author) that has any such gross Consequence to be
drawn from it; if we met with any thing of that Nature, we should with
Sincerity Detest the same: And we have desired Justice in this respect, viz. To
know the Name of the Author, Book and Page; but they have denied us, which
makes us conclude, that it is a contrived Business by them, 1st. To cast that
Scandal and Odium upon us, and then endeavor to Incense the Government against
us. And indeed their Practice in our Country of Norfolk, to stir up some
Mgistrates against us, and to carry it further, viz. To Incense the Government,
does sufficiently show, that it was a design: Yet we know there is an
Overruling Power, that bounds and limits all things, and before him we spread
our Cause, and doubt not, but he will be our Helper in every Exercise, that
comes upon us.

And this know, though we have returned the Charge upon these our Adversaries, it
is not that we delight in Controversy, but to Vindicate that Glorious Truth,
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has made known unto us.

And now we Appeal to all People, that have had knowledge of us, whether we
have Acted like Blasphemers: For God knows our Hearts and Consciences, we are
not Conscious to our selves herein.

This is our tender and just Request to all that shall read this ensuing
Treatise, Lay aside all Partiality, and (Noble Berean- like) examine the
Testimony of Scripture, and see whether what we have herein Asserted be not
Consonant therewith.

THE TRUE LIGHT Owned and Vindicated, etc.
Controversy we love not, but are concerned to appear in the just Defense of
our Holy Profession; and at this time, more Principally, of that divine Light
within, which being struck at by certain Priests in Norfolk, who are in an
eager Pursuit after us, as though they had a design to devour us at once; and
for that end, they have endeavored to blacken the People called Quakers with
most gross Charges of Blasphemy, and in as high a Nature as well could be
Exhibited against a People: And all this with a design to render us Obnoxious
to the Government, who have granted us the free Exercise of our Consciences
toward God: For which Privilege we have been and are truly Thankful unto God
and the Government, and hope we shall never give occasion unto them to abridge
us of the same.

But we being of late Exposed in Print, by a Charge of Blasphemy, and several
loud Clamours, as though we were Blasphemers; and that Henry Meriton, John
Meriton, and Laurence Park, the Priests aforesaid, might do their Business
effectually, in Charging us, they have given under their Hands, in their first
Letter, these Charges, viz. That we, the People called Quakers, are guilty of
Blasphemy; take it in their own words (say they) I. We Charge you, with
Blasphemy against God. II. We Charge you with Blasphemy against Jesus Christ.
III. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against the Holy Scriptures.


Very high, and most severe Charges; and to complete and confirm their Charges,
says, in their Fifth Charge, V. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught
by you, leaves you without any certain Rule, and exposes you to the
forementioned, and many other Blasphemies.

Now this being Assigned by them, for the Exposing Cause of the
aforementioned, and many other Blasphemies; we shall make it appear, that it
has no such Tendency, or Exposing Cause or Effect in it: So we may conclude
the whole Structure of their Charges, being built upon it, becomes Null and
Void; and instead of Proving the Quakers Blasphemers, they (the aforesaid
Priests) have brought the Guilt of Blasphemy upon themselves, in all those
Particulars, they have Charged the Quakers withal, which is plainly Proveable
upon them: And God will plead with them, for that great Indignity they have
offered to his Divine Being, who is the Glorious and Everlasting Light, and
Shines in Man. It Is probable these Men see not what they have done; for
Prejudice has blinded them, and drawn them into a Fierce Pursuit of the
Quakers, and that causlessly too, which has ensnared themselves. But had they
minded that Exhortation of Paul, Philip. 4. 5. they had not lost the Conduct of
Moderation, which might have kept them back, from wronging an Innocent People,
and also have preserved them from that Guilt of Blasphemy they have brought
upon themselves; and the Beam is in their own Eyes, Mat. 7. 3, 4. And they are
taken in their own Snare, which they have laid for the Quakers. Here are their
Charges truly Stated and Applied, according to what they import, against the
Quakers.

Pr. I. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against God.


Qu. How comes this to be so?


Pr. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to
Blaspheme God.


Pr. II. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against Jesus Christ.


Qu. How comes this to be so?


Pr. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to
Blaspheme Jesus Christ.


Pr. III. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against the Holy Scriptures.


Qu. How comes this to be so?


Pr. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to
Blaspheme the Holy Scriptures.

Ay! And not only the forementioned, but many other Blasphemies, the Light
within, as taught by you, exposes you unto.


Now let all Moderate People judge, by what here follows, whether these Men
beforementioned are not become Guilty of Blasphemy themselves, in every
respect, as is abovesaid: For First, We do Solemnly, and in good Conscience,
Testify and Declare, in behalf of the People called Quakers, That they Profess
and Teach no other Light within, for Man to be led and guided by, than what the
Holy Scriptures hold forth, and declares of very plainly, concerning the
Eternal God, and Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, and the Eternal Spirit,
proceeding from the Father and the Son; who with the Father and Son, is one God
blessed for ever.

Now, says the Scripture, 1 John 1. 5. This then is the Message that we have
heard of him, and declare unto you, That God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all: And Verse 7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light,
then have we Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin. 1 Cor. 4. 6. For God, who commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. This they, the
Quakers, teach, and nothing contrary, nor repugnant thereunto (nor never did.)

Now, says the Priests aforesaid, in their Fifth Charge, We Charge you, That
the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to the aforementioned, and
many other Blasphemies.

Observe, The Quakers are taught to believe, according to the aforementioned
Testimonies of Scripture, That God is Light, and Shines in Man, to make Man
Fruitful in the Knowledge of Himself: Therefore God's Appearance within, is
their Light within. And this the true Ministers teach, according as every one
has received Ability from God: And contrary to this the Quakers never taught.

Now says H. M. J. M. and L. P. in their aforementioned Charge, viz. We Charge
you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to Blaspheme God.

Now the Quakers teach no other Light, but what the Holy Scriptures do plainly
and plentifully declare of, viz. Jesus Christ, as God's Covenant of Light, who
came in the Flesh, in the fullness of Time; who was Conceived of the Holy Ghost,
and Born of the Virgin Mary, Mat. 1. 18. and 2. 1, 2. Luke 1. 30, 35. and 2.
11. Being of the Seed of Abraham and David, according to the Flesh; and in the
Body by the Grace of God: Tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. Offered up
himself a Sacrifice for Sins, acceptable and well-pleasing to God the Father,
Ephesians. 5. 2. Bearing our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to
Sin, should live unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes healing comes to the
truly Believing Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And that through Death, he might destroy
him that has the Power of Death; and bring forth Life and Immortality unto
Light, through the Gospel of the Grace of God, Heb. 2. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And
is declared to be the Son of God, with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1. 3, 4. And is ascended into
Heaven, sits at the Right Hand of God, glorified with the same Glory that he
had with the Father, before the World was, John 17. 5. And is our Mediator,
appearing in the Presence of God for us; and in the appointed Time of God the
Father, shall come to Judge the Quick and the Dead; and now is in a most
Spiritual Glorious Manner with his Church: And in his Divine Being is one with
the Father; and is Eminently Declared of, as God's Covenant of Light, as the
Holy Scriptures witnesses; John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. In the Beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning
with God: All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made
that was made. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. Verse. 6, 7,
8, 9. There was a Man sent from God, whose name was John: The same came for a
Witness, to bear Witness of the Light, that all Men through him might Believe.
He (John) was not that Light, but was sent to bear Witness of that Light: That
was the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World. John
8. 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the World;
he that follows me, shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life. And Paul, that able Minister of Jesus Christ, was sent to the Gentiles,
Acts 26. 18.
To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God, that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and
Inheritance among them which are Sanctified by Faith that is in Christ.

And when some were turned to the Lord at Ephesus, he says unto them, Ye were
sometimes Darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8, 9, 10.
but now are ye Light in the Lord: Walk as Children of Light (for the Fruit of
the Spirit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth) Proving what is
acceptable unto the Lord. And other Scriptures plainly show forth the Excellent
Appearance of Christ, as God's Covenant of Light, as Isaiah 49. 6. Luke 1. 78,
79. and 2. 32. Acts 13. 47.

Now as God is in Christ, and he says, I and my Father are One: So is he the
Divine Light in Man; and we own no other Light within for a Teacher, but as is
aforesaid, of the Father and Son, Inlightning us by the Holy Spirit: And we
profess no other Light within to be our Guide.

Now the Priests Second Charge is, Blasphemy against Jesus Christ; and say
they, We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to
Blaspheme Jesus Christ.

1. If the Light which shines in the Heart of Man, be God and Christ, as we
believe and teach, then it is impossible the Light within, so taught by us,
should expose us to Blasphemy against God, Christ, or the Holy Scriptures.

But the Light which shines in the Heart of Man, is God and Christ, Therefore,
etc.

2. If the holy Scriptures proceeded from this divine Light within, as we
believe and teach, then it is impossible this divine Light within, should
expose us to Blasphemy against the holy Scriptures.

But the holy Scriptures proceeded from this divine Light within, therefore,
etc.

3. Now we the People called Quakers, do own and teach no other Light within,
to be our Guide, but what the Scriptures do declare of, concerning God, Jesus
Christ and the holy Spirit; and as the Scriptures testify of the Light, so
they set forth its Teachings. Psalm. 43. 3. O send out thy Light and thy Truth;
let them lead me, let them bring me, unto thy holy Hill, and to thy
Tabernacles: Psalm. 36. 9. For with thee is the Fountain of Life, in thy Light
shall we see Light: Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a
Light unto my Paths. John 12. 36. While you have the Light, believe in the
Light, that you may be Children of Light; and verse 46. (says Christ) I am
come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in me, may not abide in
Darkness: John 3. 21. But he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his
Deeds may be made manifest, that they are all wrought in God. But to the
Unbelievers hear what the Scriptures say, Isa. 10. 17. The Light of Israel
shall be for a Fire, and his holy One for a Flame, and it shall burn and devour
his Thorns and his Briers in one Day: John 3. 19, 20. And this is the
Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds were Evil; For every one that does Evil, hates
the Light; neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: Ephesians.
5. 13, 14. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light:
For whatsoever does make manifest is Light: Wherefore he says, Awake thou that
Sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light: 1 John 1.
7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one
with another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin:
1 John 2. 10. He that loves his Brother abides in the Light, and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him.

The holy Scripture does excellently set forth the true Light in Man, and the
precious Benefits received by believing in it, and walking in it; it guides to
Christ the Fountain, that we may be washed, and know the cleansing Virtue of
his Blood, and thereby know a part with him: Yea, a holy Interest sealed to our
Immortal Souls.

Now the Scriptures bears this Testimony to, and concerning, the divine Light,
and the Quakers own nor teach no other Light for their Guide, than as the
Scriptures does thus plentifully set forth, and bear Testistimony unto:
Therefore they that contradict the Scripture in their Testimony concerning the
divine Light within, and its teachings, they Blaspheme the Scriptures. But the
Priests aforesaid do contradict the Scripture; therefore they Blaspheme the
holy Scripture-Testimony, in saying, The Light within as taught by us, exposes
the followers of it to Blasphemy. And until they can prove that the Quakers
teach another Light, than what is aforementioned, their Charges are returned
upon themselves. 1st, Guilty of Blasphemy against God. 2ly, Guilty of Blasphemy
against Jesus Christ. 3ly. Guilty of Blasphemy against the holy Scriptures: And
all this is proved upon them, from their 5th Charge under their own Hands, and
lies upon them until they can make it appear, that the Quakers hold forth
something else for the Light, than what the Scripture witnesses unto,
concerning the divine Light, which we are satisfied they can never do; and
indeed looks like a piece of Madness in these Undertakers, that they should
Charge Christ the Light within to expose to Blasphemy.

O! how will they answer this in the great Day of Judgment, to offer such great
indignity to God, the Father Jam. 1. 17.
of Lights? O! that they might find a place of Repentance, for God inlightens
mankind not to expose them to Error, but to show and preserve them out of It.
And Man cannot Err in following of the Light, but does always Err, when he goes
from, or Rebels against the Light. They are of those that rebel Job 24. 13.
against the Light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths
thereof: But the Path of the Prove. 4 18. 19.
Just is as a shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day:
The way of the wicked is as Darkness, they know not at what they stumble. Thus
it is plain, when Man Errs, he goes from the Light, and therefore he is judged
by the Light: And if any professing the Light for their Leader, do Err (which
they may) the Light it self is not to be charged therewith, because it leads
Man to abstain from every appearance of Evil, and to cleave to that which is
Good: To Romans 12. 9.
eschew Evil, and do Good, and live for ever more; Blessed be the Name of the
Lord, who has preserved the holy Scriptures, that we have the Testimony
thereof, which are so plain concerning these divine Truths; happy are they,
that know the Light of God's holy Spirit to inspire and inlighten Them; they
can say, that which was written aforetime, was written for our Learning, that
we through Patience, and the Comfort Romans 15. 4.
of the Scriptures might have hope: And they are truly profitable for Doctrine,
Reproof, Correction, Instruction 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
in Righteousness, that the Man of God (which none can truly be, but as they
are led by the Spirit of Romans 8. 14.
God) may be perfect; thoroughly furnished unto every good Work.

The Lord open the eyes of Nations, and (if it be his Will) all People that
they may come to his Light, Isa. 60. 3.
that the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God 11. 9.
may cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea; that so Darkness may be
dispersed, and Wickedness put an end unto, and Sincerity, Integrity,
Tenderheartedness, with Love unfeigned, may grow amongst all People: So shall
we wear the Badge of Christ's John 15. 12.
Disciples. This will open our Hearts more and more, in Love toward God, and
this will dispose and incline us to Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, so
Mat. 5. 6.
shall we have a taste of Heaven here, and by abideing faithful, and following
the Lord fully, shall have an assurance of the full enjoyment thereof
hereafter; which the Lord grant, for his dear Son's Sake, to all sincere
tenderhearted People, of whatsoever Name or Profession they may be; is our
desire, who love Sobriety and Tenderheartedness among all Persuasions.

Richard Ashby, John Fiddeman, John Cade.


FINIS.

