A Copy of a Letter sent by E. B. an eminent Quaker in London, to the Pope at
Rome, transmitted thence by Cardinal Bromio to a Person of Quality in England.
With a Copy of the Faculties granted to John Locet, Englishman and Priest at
Rome, 1678. for England, Scotland, and all the Kings Dominions, Ireland
excepted.
Friend,
I Am moved at this time by the Spirit, to speak to thee a few words, which
plainly proceed from the Light within, and may prove for thy Edification and
Conversion, I will not revile thee, nor call thee Antichrist, the Whore of
Babylon, the Scarlet Whore, nor the Beast, the Dragon or the Serpent, Titles
frequently bestowed on thee, and which if thou deservest thou best know: But
I come to thee in the Meakness, and the werds of Truth and Light, to speak to
thy Soul, as thou art a Man and pretendest to have Lordship and Dominion over
both the Souls and Bodies of Men. But by what Authority do thou usurp the
Title of Papa, Father of the whole Church of Christ? Who first conferred that
Title on thee? Was it from above or from Men? Jesus when he was on Earth
commanded Peter to feed his Sheep, and as a Servant to administer to them, he
gave him no Authority to Slaughter them, or to Flcece them, or to use any
Tyranny toward them. Thou pretendest to sit in Peter's Seat, have a care, I
warn thee, that it be not Satan's Chair, for it is very doubtful if the Man
Peter was ever at Rome, and it is for certain never had any Authority there,
and was neither Lord, Master or Pope, but a Servant to the Servants of Jesus
Christ, which Title thou also ownest in Words, when in Deeds thou art proud as
Lucifer, and would set thy Feet on the Necks of Kings and Princes, and
proudly trample on the People of God. Thou pretendest to the Spirit, show it by
thy Works; to Infallibility, but thou have failed in thy Doctrine and in thy
Practices. I hold with thee that the Spirit is to be the guide of the Saints,
and that the Spirit is infallible and can never be mistaken, but it is not to
be confined to thee, and to thy Cardinals, for I tell thee, our Pope George
Fox, has as much of the Spirit as thou have, and it is as infallible, and
therefore thou ought not to ingross it to thy self, since it is communicated
to all the Children of God, and to all the Saints that observe and hearken to
the Light within. But thou have done wickedly; thou and all thy Predecessors,
for several hundreds of years, have been building a very Babel of Confusion,
thou have made Religion the Devils stalking Horse, to drive Souls into his
Snares, thou have set up the Calves at Dan, and in the Mount, thou have
polluted Religion with Idolatry, and made of it a mere piece of Art, Policy,
and Legerdemain, I tell thee plainly thou have set up a Pompous outward
Religion, only full of Gaudy outsides, without any Truth or Sincerity, and
without the Spirit, the Light, or the Life of God. Look therefore, I advise
thee as a Friend, and Brother, to the Light within thee, which shines in thy
darkness, that will teach thee better things, thou can not but see and know
the vanity of thy Religion, which thy Sons and thy Daughters follow; and thou
thy self laughest at the Ignorance and Folly of most of thy Adherents and
Followers, who zealously follow thy Dictates without sight or knowledge. Thou
actest against thy own Conscience, and against Knowledge, and against Light,
which is the Sin against the Holy Spirit, and for this thou shall be condemned,
unless thou timely repent thee of, and reform thy Errors. It is to maintain thy
Pride, thy Lust, and thy Covetousness, that thou strivest to kick against the
Pricks, and to establish thy Abominations in the sight of the Israel of God;
but the day will come, and is even at hand, that thou and thy Ismaelites, which
are become the Sons of the Bondwoman of Sin, that he cast out into utter
Perdition. Thou and thy gor-bellied Cardinals, that live like Princes, and
fatten themselves up in their abominable Lusts, against the day of Slaughter,
are very unlike the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, who taught and preached
the Word with Pains Care and Travel, in meekness and Poverty from the true
Light and Spirit shining within their Souls; and were the Primitive Christians
on Earth again, to see the Shop of confusion, thou and thy Hierarchy have made
out of their simple spun thread, they would not be able to know or believe this
to be any part of the Religion they taught or begun, with so great Labor,
Travel, Pains, and Martyrdom. Thus have thou made all their Labors of little
or no effect; and still take care to keep poor Souls in the Snares of sin,
and in the bonds of Ignorance. I tell thee plainly, thy Conscience does witness
against thee, and thou do fee these Truths, but it is thy Pride that makes
thee Tyrant like to exercise Lordship and Dominion over others, and to maintain
this Lordship and Tyranny, thou art fain to exercise cunning Arts and policies
of the Carnal man, and even to fly to the subtilties of the Serpent, and the
wicked one, leaving no stone unturned to maintain thy Vanity and to fulfill thy
Lusts. Thou know well enough there is no Purgatory, such as thou have
invented to affright and delude poor ignorant people out of their money, but the
execrable gain which thou make by Indulgencies will not let thee Reform that
wicked and abominable Error. Thou also know the Vanity of praying to Saints,
and to carved Idols, express against the Word of God.

Yet because of the Gain and Reputation these bring to thee, and the means to
delude the ignorant, by false Miracles, and pretended Relics, thou still
keep it a Foot with all thy ridiculous Shows, Proccssions, Jubilies,
Holy Water, Exorcisms, Altars, Copes, Miters, Crosiers, Surplices and other
Trinkets, invented by the Devil and his Instrument, the vain mind of subtle
Man, to draw the Eyes and Ears, but not the Hearts of the Calvish Multitude,
who bleat after these things, and understand them not. Thou know the
unnaturalness and impossibility of thy breaden Gods real Presence, and yet for
the great respect it begets to thee and thy Priests, with the Rabble of Moncks,
Friars, Nuns, Eremits and such like; thou still most stiffly against Religion,
Sense and Reason, maintainest that idle Opinion. Think therefore before it be
too late, of Repentance and Reformation: do the work thoroughly. The Light has
formerly shined, with some glimmering in the times of the Albingenses in
France, and of Wickliff in England, and of Jerome and Huff in Pragne, and
afterward of Luther in Germany; they caused some Reformaiion from the grosest
of thy superstition and filthiness of Idolatry: but yet too much of the Dregs
remains, and the Carnal minded man yet retains much of thy Pride, Vanity, Pomp
and Show in their outward Worship; and much of thy ambitious Lordship and
Dominion; but we the simple and harmless Sheep of Gods Fold, called by the
People in scorn, Quakers and Shakers, from the strong actuating of the Spirit
within, have reformed our selves to the Pattern of the Apostles and Primitive
Teachers and Preachers, and being filled with the Spirit, speak from the Light
thereof. And from this Light I now plainly write to thee, being stirred up to
warn thee of the Wrath to come, and to tell thee, that unless thou make a
through Reformation, according to our Holy Pattern, and come into the Community
of the Saints on Earth, thou shall never have Communion with those in Heaven. I
am to denounce Judgment against thee, and thou shall be overthrown, and thou
shall be scourged for thy abominable Practices against the People of England,
in the Plotings, underminings, Murders and wicked Contrivances of thy Ban-Dogs
that call themselves Jesuits, but are Judasses, that betray Kingdoms and wurry
the People. Thy time is but short, and thy Reign of a few days; for either the
King of France if ever he gets the Monarchy of the West, will unnest thee, and
remove thy Sea to Paris, and have a Pope of his own, or else God will let loose
the Rage of the Turk against thee, and suffer him to plant his Half-moons in
Rome as well as in Jerusalem, for a scourge and Vengeance of all the filthiness
and Abominations acted in that ploce. Look to it, I give thee this friendly
warning, take it to heart, for I tell it thee in plainness and sincerity and
from the Light, which shines in

Thy Friend in the Love and in the Truth. E. B.
From London, the 7th day of the 4th Month, in the year 1679.
Faculties granted at Rome, 1678. to John Locet Englishman and Priest for
England and Scotland, and for all the Kings Dominions excepting Ireland.
1. Power to absolve from Heresy and Apostasy, all both Ecclesiastics and
Laics. 2. To absolve in all Cases of the Bulla Caenae. 3. Power of dispensing
Marriages within the 3d and 4th Degree of Consanguinity and Affinity, and to
declare them Lawful, and such Issue Legitimate. 4. Power of administering all
the Sacraments. 5. Power of restoring the just Right of asking being lost. 6.
Power of Celebrating Mass in all decent places above or under Ground, on
Portable Altars twice a day if necessary* and if it cannot be otherways
Celebrated for fear of Heretics. 7. Of laying up of Holy things in secret,
without Lights if there be danger. 8. Power of reciting the Rosary or other
Prayers if they cannot have a Brevary or other Office. 9. Power of keeping and
reading any Prohibited Books besides those contained in the Bulla Coena,
besides those of Charles Moline, Nicholas Machivel, and Books of Judicial
Astrology. Also of giving License to others to read the Scriptures faithfully
tranflated into English, and to the Laics English Books ogainst Heretic, as
need shall be. 10. Power of dispensing and communicating simple Vows for a
reasonable cause, that of Chastity and of Religion being excepted. 11. Power of
blessing the Sacraments and other Holy Utensils necessary for the Mass where
there is not Unction. 12. Power of Dispensing the eating of Flesh, Eggs'
white-meats also in the time of Lent. 13. Power of granting a Plenary
Indulgence for those Converted from Herefie, and to those who cannot be
confessed in the Article of Death. 14. Power of granting every Lords day, and
on Holy days an Indulgence for 10 years to those that assist at those Meetings,
and a plenary Indulgence to those that confess and receive the Sacrament on
certain Feast-days. 15. Power of having the Benefit of these Indulgencies
themselves. 16. Power of Celebrating the Mass de Requiem for any one on a
portable Altar for the freeing a Soul out of Purgatory.
They were granted for 7 years only, and reversable without showing Cause, at
the will of the Pope.

signed, Barbarine Proctor. Chr. Abbas Blancus Secretary.


FINIS.

