THE COUNCILS OF WISDOM: OR, A Collection of the Maxims of SOLOMON.

Most necessary for a Man wisely to behave himself.

With Reflections on those Maxims.

Rendered into English by T. D.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for Stephen Swart, at the Bible and Crown near the
Exchange, 1683.

THE COUNCILS of WISDOM



To the Right Worshipful the Mayor, the Worshipful the Justices. with the
capital and inferior Burgesses of the Borough of Taunton Saint Mary Magdalen
and St. James's, in the County of Somerset.
Gentlemen,
WEre I accountable to any how I pass my time here; 't were certainly to you,
who know that I was not one of the idlest at home, wherefore partly to satisfy
you, the following Manual I took the pains to translate out of French, the
contents of which, as they are universally necessary, are designed for all, but
dedicated to your selves, as persons so much more in need of it, as you are
public Persons, and called to show your abilities or defects more than your
Neighbors; And if any member of our Body politic, thinks himself scandalized,
and that he is too wise to take the Councils of Solomon in good part, he is one
that least deserves them, I wish to all the same satisfaction in the perusal,
as I had which encouraged me to translate it, and should be glad of any
opportunity agreeable to the following Maxims, to (...) you that I am,

Your humble Servant, THO. DARE.
Amsterdam, Febr. 14. 1683. S. N.
THE PREFACE.
IT is long since, Thotimus, that you did me the favor to pity me, and to
feel for me the Pains of my Solitude, I have often taken the liberty to answer
you, that it is to me no great misfortune to be unknown: permit me to testify
to you this day, that I should be to blame to tire my self, and that I have
here company, that is well worth all other that I should be able to see.

I can at least assure you, that during our conversations, the sad spectacles,
and affrightful silence of the desert, where fortune yet keeps me, does not
hinder, that the hours do not pass there very swiftly, and that time were one
of the things which are wanting.

It is easy for you to judge, that I speak of Solomon. You know that formerly I
did comfort my self in Books: you are about to see in the writing that I send
you, that I employ my self now to explain them; and to endeavor by my
reflections to make the wise men of the World see Truths unknown to their
Philosophy.

I thought of it immediately at the entry into this Solitude where I am. All
melancholic as it is, or as it appears to your eyes; I know nothing more
commodious, for a man who would busy his thoughts, or meditate on the writings
of this learned Prince. I say it, because I believe that I read lately, that
Wisdom who dictated these Proverbs when it was solitary, explains them not, but
to persons who are so also, and who go to ask it, as he did, in places where
one hears no news of the Creature, nor any noise capable of troubling the
attention, and the pleasure of those that hearken.

Solomon loved to be alone, as much as the Princes of his Court to be near him,
and to hear him speak. The time to which his desires aspired was, When after
the labors of the day, weary of the affairs, of the honors, and the noises of
the World, he could retire himself from the sight of company, and when he went
to entertain himself with God in a Country House called Hetta near enough to
the City.

It pleased him more then any of the Royal Houses, because that besides the
magnificences, and the riches added by the hands of men, there were great
Woods, with Rocks and Streams and other workmanship of nature, proper to raise
his spirit to Heaven, and to make him remember eternity.

It was in this stately desert, at the sight of the beauties of God, that his
contemplations disclosed to him; That he conceived such great contempts of the
beauty of mortal things; and that after the other complaints that he made,
against the treacheries of their promises and their flatteries, he sung this
famous Song, that the Caves and the Waters of his palace first heard, but its
eccho's have been since heard throughout, and shall be made to resound, even to
the end of ages, Vanitas vanitatum, cuncta vanitas.

The moral and politic sentences, of which his Book of the Proverbs is filled,
and those which the Son of Syrach has brought together and kept by his care,
were born in the same solitude where silence and tranquillity helped them into
the World: And it is without doubt, That to these devout walks, that the
universe is obliged for the knowledge of the truths which are gone out of the
Pen of this learned Prince, which have enlightened all Nations I have chosen
amongst these sentences, those of which I believed I could be able to help my
self, in working at my design, which is to draw from their Texts, subjects of
meditation, proper for persons who would live amongst the Laws of Conscience
and Prudence, and conduct themselves wisely in the various occasions of a civil
life.

It is but a little piece as it appears. If I had had a little more leisure and
a little more light, perhaps it should have been bigger: But to say with an
Ancient, if I had more of one and the other, in stead of enlarging, I should
endeavor to shorten it, and I should remember what one of the best
Writing-Masters of our time told me, That to excel in the Art of writing well,
it is necessary to be able to blot well out.

This thought is not only his, I observe; it is common to the Masters of every
Art and Science, and that it keeps even the first rank among their Maxims.

When they are willing, that what they do should be their Masterpiece, all
their industry is employed to make it pass well into the Spirit and to leave
there but little matter.

Force and delicacy are the perfections of all works: that of a Book is
sovereign, when it can be read in few hours, and that it can not be read, nor
meditated enough in many years.

Much Truth, few Words, was heretofore the device of a great Divine; very great
in that, but infinitely less than God, who encloseth infinite truths in one
word alone, and who says all that can be said to eternity, when he pronounces
his word.

The Book is divided into two Parts.
The First, divided into 4 ARticles contains Maxims necessary for a Man to
demean himself well. First of all, are the Maxims necessary for the Conduct of
the Conscience. Secondly, Maxims necessary for the Conduct of the Wit. Thirdly
for the Conduct of the Heart and Passions. Fourthly, for governing the Tongue.
The second Part, contains necessary Maxims for a Man's wise Conduct, in regard
to his family and other persons. The Wife, Children, Servants, Friends and
Enemies, are the Articles which divide it.
ARTICLE I. MAXIMS For the Conduct of the Conscience.
FIRST MAXIM. Of making many Books there is no end. Let us hear the conclusion
of the whole matter. Fear God and keep his Commandments; this is the whole duty
of Man, Eccles. 12.
PARAPHARASE.
MUch is the Counsel that is given, and many are the Books that are written to
help Man to become great, and to render him perfect.

Wisdom has but one word thereupon: and this word is the Compendium of all that
wise Men have said, the end of all that, which its self said since the
beginning of ages. It has never spoken nor ever writ, but to make Men
understand how to love God and obey his Will this is to be the whole duty of
Man.

REFLECTION.
WHen the Creator formed the project of our nature, and that he conceived the
Idaea of Man, as he pretended that this was the chief and most excellent Piece,
he conceived not only a Body and a Soul.

He saw well, that as the Body separated from the Soul would be but rottenness,
even so the Soul separated from God would be another deformity, infinitely more
frightfull; and instead of the being chief of the work he contrived he should
but make a monster.

Not to fail in his design, at the same time that he joined the Body with the
Soul, he judged that it was necessary to join the Soul with God, by the means
of Grace, and he would that this Grace entered into his workmanship, and that
these three together were the whole Man.

Stop a moment and consider well the Wisdom of God, when he proposed to himself
the meeting of these three so different things, and to form thereof the chief
of his work? How many marvels in Man when they are united? How many misfortunes
when they are separated.

Grace repelled and withdrawn the Soul, there is reprobation and sin. The Body
separate from the Soul there is death. The Soul separated from the Body and from
Grace there is Hell. Three objects of horror or of fear. Rejoyn these, and
make but one, they are three celestial beauties, and the three greatest
miracles of divine power united together, and that is Man. Time Deum hoc est
omnis Homo.

II. MAXIM. Let thy glorying be in the fear of the Lord, and all thy
communication in the precepts of the most High. Eccles. 9.
PARAPHRASE.
EStablish your Honor by fearing God, and being faithful to him, If you would
that Men should look on you with respect and esteem, and always see on your
countenance that modesty, and in your conduct that force and tranquillity of
spirit which raises a man above other men; have always in your self some
thought of the goodness of the Creator and his eternal perfections, and
accustom your heart not to rely but on him in all its designs and hopes.

REFLECTION.
DO not as the proud man, In timore Domini sit tibi gloriosio.
who is ashamed to fear and to worship God, because people fear and worship
him, and who establishes his honor by making light of his duty.

Take you heed (in forming your opinions and Maxims) of taking for a man of
nobility and greatness, your being less wise then others: And do not believe a
folly that is particular, to be more worth then Wisdom that is common. If
because you are noble, it is painful to you, to do what mean people do; That
which is good, you ought to do better then they.

Do not imitate his devotion, surpass it. Do not follow him in the ways of
salvation, and in the exercise of righteousness and holiness, have regard to
your condition: March first, and serve as an example.

Keep your rank in the Churches, permit not that any should be more devout, nor
more modest then you: Since you are first in quality, your place before the
Altars and during the sacrifices, is to be more near to God, and the more
raised by Prayer.

Remember that you have no surer means to put your self above this crowd of
little people, then to abase your self more then they, before this supreme
Majesty, and to adore him more perfectly.

III. MAXIM. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles.
1.
PARAPHRASE.
YOu must love nothing but God. Universa vanitas.
The true good and true pleasure, is not to be found, but in him alone. The
good which appears before our eyes deceives us, it is nothing but illusion and
vanity. And this false and apparent good, becomes a real evil, as soon as it
pleases us and that we begin to love it.

REFLECTION.
ALl the felicities of this life are vain and deceitful. When they present
themselves to us, we take them for stable and immovable things: Our heart
being drawn by this appearance, stretches out its arms and blindly fastens its
self unto them, promising its self eternal pleasures in possessing them.

But it is to embrace running water; from the hour that we begin to possess
rhem, they begin to run away from us. During embracements and joys, and amidst
our mutual promises and hopes of an inseparable tie, they escape from between
our hands and continue their course: we continue ours and we quit our selves:
we go, each where our destiny calls us, and where time leads us: They to
nothing, we to death.

Time goes apace, and the end is near, it is not far between the pleasures of a
moment and the tears of eternity. These long years that we figure between the
two, are very often but a night. Perhaps those who shall see us this evening
settled in a high and powerful fortune; will find us next morning buried in its
ruins.

To day, prosperity, health, riches and honors: To morrow, all these vanities
in the air, wind and smoke, our Body in a Tomb, our Soul in another World,
there to lament, and to say eternally, but too late, Universa vanitas, and
afflictio spiritus.

The justest reason we ought to contemn these runagate felicities for, Vanitas
vanitatum.
consists in this word Vanitas. God alone is the true Good, created goods are
the productions and shadows of this essential and Infinite Good. Consider, and
open your eyes. You are rich: but if God withdraws himself from your heart,
what remains, and of what do you boast?

To be heir and master of the shadow of an house, without having any right to
the house, and without being able to go into it, what Patrimony and what sort
of inheritance is this for a man? To be Master of a Treasure or a Revenue,
Master of a Kingdom, an Empire, a part of the World, the whole World, and all
the appearances of good; Possess all the shadows of God, all his works, all his
gifts, but without possessing of himself, What a possession is this for a Soul
who breaths after the true Good, and who cannot be filled or satisfied but by
him alone?

The worst of it is, that these shadows of the Creator, these Riches and
Magnificences which are about us, are not in us. Gold and Silver enter into the
Houses, Pleasures enter into your eyes and senses, but they pass no further,
they never arrive so far as the Spirit, nor there where your greatest needs and
immortal desires are, they send there only their figure: Of so many felicities
heaped round about you, and kept together with so much pain, their shadow alone
is the share that belongs to your heart.

Meditate a little, and if you can understand the cries and complaints, which
during pastime and pleasure resound from the bottom of this miserable heart,
bewail your selves, and confess that it is worthy of compassion. So long as it
has searched ever since its birth, and that without ceasing, with utmost
desires, it asks the Truth of truths to be happy, not to find in himself but
this vanity of vanities, this shadow of shadows, this mage of appearances and
illusions. Vanitas vanitatum, and afflictio spiritus.

To comfort it, do not direct it to its self; And hope not to give it rest, and
to render it happy by the Maxims of Pride and the Philosophy of the Word.

Il know well, that human wisdom and the policy of self love; Sapiens ad beat
vivendum se ipso contentus est. Seneca.

Nullam sui partem extra se quaerit. Transivi ad contemplandam sapientiam
locutus quae cummeute mea animadverti Eccl 2. But animadverti quod hoc quoque
esset vanitas.


would that a man to be happy, should renounce both Creator; and Creatures and
seek no other happiness, then to be to himself, to enjoy his own
entertainments: That this possession were the true Felicity, and to please a
man's self a better fortune then to please Kings and Angels.

Remember that since your Spirit is the most perfect and noblest Image of the
first Being, when it is deprived of grace, it is the vilest of vanities. All
that is vast enough and capable of containing God, cannot be separated from
God, but must be so void as God is great.

That is to say, that when our Soul is reduced to love nothing, nor possess any
thing but its self: The greatness of this spiritual and immortal Soul, is no
other thing but an immense privation and endless grief.

Our Soul is so divine a thing and so excellent, that as soon as God is no more
with it, it becomes, what they call damnation, and is its own hell.

The difference between two sinful Souls, the one damned, and the other living
upon the Earth and enclosed in a Body, is this, that one sees its self clearly
and feels the substance which is its evil; and the other neither yet sees or
feels it.

When that your Soul separated from God by sin, and from thence infinitely
unhappy, shall feel its self, and see it self by the fire; the motions of his
despair and the cries of his grief, shall be those that the Prophet heard from
far, and that he repeated by these words: Redidit me quasi vas inane. It shall
say, God had made me a Vessel large and precious, capable to enjoy his Glory,
and to possess his Divinity, nevertheless he has withdrawn himself and left me
empty: I am no more then my self, and that is the affliction of afflictions and
the true Hell, to be Spirit and alone to be an immortal Soul and vanity.
Vanitas and afflictio Spir tus.

IV. MAXIM. God shall bring every work into judgment, whether it be good or
evil, Eccl. 12. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Prove. 1.
PARAPHRASE.
THe fear of God is the principle of true Wisdom, That which comes from the
fear of offending men, or from desire to please them, is false and deceitful;
and although there are in the World abundance of Wise men and Politicians, the
number of Fools is no less.

There is not a greater folly, than to be wise toward all, if not toward God
and to offend no body, but him alone.

REFLECTION.
THe first and chief Maxim that you ought to choose to Conduct you wisely, Timor
Domini principium sapientiae, Prove. 1.
is that you must fear your Master and your Judge.

If you would that this saving fear should be born in your Souls, Memorare
novissima tua and in aternum non peccabis.
and that it should destroy all that remains in you of an inclination to sin,
the best means is to remember the first and last truths, and to understand
well, by continual and devote reflections, from whence you come, and whither
you go, what has been your Original, and what shall be your end, from whom you
have received, and unto whom you are responsible, what you owe to your Creator,
and what your Judge owes you.

Your debts and obligations to the bounty of the Creator are not the Subject of
a long discourse but a long meditation, and although there were but one word to
each point, there is matter of admiration and silence on each word, for too
many years and ages.

That which seems more wonderful and which we ought particularly to consider,
is that those debts, which have not ceased to increase ever since you have been
born, and do yet increase every day with your age, have preceeded your birth,
and are more ancient than your self.

You have begun to live, but you have not begun to mind, your self; Before the
beginnings and before time, God was, and you were loved. Consider also, you who
were in nothing, of what fashion you are taken thence, and with how much honor
are you come out of that eternal reproach when he was fain to produce you in
the person of the first man. The Creator made Heaven and Earth, that is to say,
two Worlds and two Paradises, and has not made them but for you.

The top of all favors is, that he has not made you but for himself; and that
he has not given you a Being but to the end that you may be eternally united to
him: having even willed, that the most Divine employ of his Eternity, which is
to know and to love God, should be the employ of your time and your mortal life.

Oh unspeakable favor! Oh Sovereign and infinite honor! But it is a very
terrible thing, in this so glorious life, that each moment, where you live
without any love of God, is a moment of sin, and that all the moments of sin
and ingratitude, shall be reckoned and examined at the hour of your death.

God has begun by favors, he will finish by judgment.

He who seeks you so many years to save you, will suddenly call you to be
judged: and the business of his justice shall be, when you shall be before his
eyes, to consider in your person, what comes on his part and on yours, what he
has done in you and what you have done there, and are yet doing this day.

He will compare your actions with his own, Adducet in judicium, sive bonum,
sive malum sit.
and he will oblige your Conscience it self to compare them, and to contemplate
the works of his Holiness, and the works of your Malice assembled in one and
the same heart.

Compare them from hence forth, and do at the feet of the Cross, before your
Redeemer and your Father, what you will do that day before your Judge, when
that you shall see the truth written in the Book where all is written.

Consider that this is a Mercy which has outrun your merits.

Ingratitude which has followed Mercy, and which has been conceived in the
midst of favors.

Justice which examins the good and the evil, which weighs the goodnesses of
God and the sins of man, and who in the one and the other sees nothing but
Infinite.

In fine, it is an eternity where sinners shall never cease to be sinners and
proud, and where the Judge shall never cease to be just: where his Holiness
shall be the measure of his anger, his anger infinitely offended the measure of
their pain, and his infinite beauty which they shall never see the measure of
their despair.

I say too much in a Subject, where is least need of speaking, The whole
History of man needs but these four words:

His pleasures shall end.

His actions shall be judged.

His sins shall be punished.

His pains shall be eternal.

There is, not only whereof to read but to contemplate and meditate. What
opinion so ever the World has of an able man, if he has not yet begun to
meditate thereupon, he has not yet begun to be wise.

Youth and Folly think only on the present time. Avarice on time to come,
Prudence and Policy remembers often what passed yesterday, and foresees what
will happen to morrow: true Wisdom looks on one side, even to the beginning of
time and the creation of man; and on the other side, to death and eternity, and
from these two distant extremes it makes its time present, and gives them
thoughts of this day.

V. MAXIM. When the wicked man comes, then comes also contempt, Prove. 18.
PARAPHRASE.
THat which hinders you from making serious on Christian truths, and which
makes you slight the business of your conversion, as least of all the affairs
of a Man of wit and quality, is the custom that you have contracted of living
disorderly and not refusing any thing to your passions

This unhappy custom is the bottom of that Gulf from whence it is rare to see
any sinner go out and to enter again into the ways of repentance and salvation.

It is nevertheless necessary to go out from thence. The Holy Fathers, and the
fathers spiritual will tell you means; One of the best is that which Solomon
presents you in the following Maxim.

VI. MAXIM. When I perceived that I could not otherwise obtain her, except God
gave her me, I prayed unto the Lord and besought him with my whole heart, Wisd.
8.
PARAPHRASE.
DEsiring to obtain grace to overcome my evil habits, and to live holily, I
address my self to God, and I have asked it of him with all my affection, and
with all the endeavor that an ardent desire could produce.

Steeped in tears and prostrate before His Altars, where I heard his voice
which called me to repentance, I said unto him: O Lord, shed into me that
Wisdom and Light which makes Man see that beauty of virtue which is in thee.
Thou command me to be chaste and devout: give me devotion and chastity, and
then command what thou please.

REFLECTION.
HOpe not to receive these sorts of favors, nor any other, spiritual or
temporal, if you ask them not. Without prayer, there will be no change of life.
You would have Grace, which gives the first power to be chaste, but according to
the ordinary Laws of Wisdom, you shall not have it but by the means of Prayer;
Grace gives the will to be, and to accomplish effectually this good desire.

In like manner hope not for them, if you ask them not strongly and with an
ardent and sincere affection.

To pray to God feebly to have pity on your miserable life, is to pray him to
defer punishing of you; to the end that you might defer turning to him, and
this testifies that you fear that he hears you not, because you fear, to break
the chains which tie you to the Creature, and to love nothing more then it.

God would, Deprecatus sum illum ex totis praecordiis.
when we pray to him, that our bowels themselves should have a voice, and that
there should be in us a Divine fire, which should give to our groans, the force
to mount up to himself, and to follow him as far as his justice would make him
fly, that he might not hear us.

God would be pursued, solicited, importuned; Follow Him, press Him, be
importunate and be constant: Fear nothing, but letting your self be overcome by
his refusals, and your not persevering.

Hope in his Word as the Saints have done against hope it self, Etiamsi
occideris me, in ipso sperabo.
and in despite of despair. Tell him when you see him with a sword in his hand
to sacrifice you to his wrath, and when you see the sword thrust into your
Heart, that from the bosom of Death, even to the gates of Hell, you will adore
his goodness, and that you will yet expect favor, and you may be assured of
his succors.

Say that the way to perish, is to fly when he threatens; That there is no
place so sure (during in wrath) in the World as to be near him; that it is the
only way where the afflicted, sinners, and the dead, can find safety; Ad quem
ibimus? Verba vitae aeternae habes. I am a sinner, I am mortal, where shall I
go too but to thee?

Confess that he can do all, that he is the Master, but maintain, that as all
powerful as he is, Indignum, etc. In te Domine speravi; non confunda in
aeternum.
he cannot resist the Prayers of the humble and afflicted: and since all is put
to trust before him, desire him to regard you without pity and to abandon a
heart who sincerely confides in his protection and love.

Talk boldly and say with the Canaanitish Woman, that he ought to be no more
cruel, nor more pittyless toward you, then Masters toward the little Dogs of
their houses; that you ask not but the Crumbs of his table, as the rest of the
Saints. Speak as this Woman who knew well how it was necessary to speak to a
God. Although he calls you an importunate Body, although he pu^h you back and
bids you to get out, Stay, Fasten your self to his feet, and declare to him,
there you will be so long as that he has either punished importunity with
death, or heard you. In fine, do well by your holy violences, as that you may
draw from his heart the lovely word which has comforted so many sinners, and
which may oblige you to say: O Mulier, magna est fides tua, fiat tibi sicut
vis. Matt. 15. Thou astonished me, oh infidel! Great is thy confidence! be gone
then in peace, what thou will shall be done.

The glory of a mortal Prince is to prevent petitions and to give before they
speak to him. The Glory of God is to expect that you pray to him, and he is so
much the more liberal, as he lets you pray and weep long before he grants. His
kindness does in some sort cease to be such, when they come too soon: His
favor is not perfectly favor, nor perseverant, but when it happens after
desires which have a long time continued.

Take good heed of yielding to his first refusal, and your retiring as soon,
either by despite, despair, or cowardice. This has been the misery of those
who have obtained nothing. The true secret to succeed well, is to be
importunate.

Our importunity pleases him, as much as it is unpleasant to men. That is the
mark, when we ask spiritual favors, that we desire ardently, and when we ask
temporal favors, it is a sign, we would obtain them from him alone, and that
we renounce all other hopes. Both the one and the other testimony can do all,
on his Mercy and on his Justice. He sees in our continual and importunate
Prayers, the proofs of a filial confidence, which opens his heart and infinitely
pleases him.

VII. MAXIM. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3.
PARAPHRASE.
EStablish your hope in God; trust your affairs to his care and goodness; look
on him in all your actions and keep your hearts always leaning on him. It is
the best and most excellent Maxim that you can take and the first that you
ought to have to conduct you well, and to make you do wisely and happily what
you have to do.

Whilst that your eyes shall contemplate him with confidence and love, he shall
hold you by the hand, and you shall march without fear.

REFLECTION.
WE see many miserable ones in the World, because we see there very few who are
willing to confide in God.

There is nothing that has been oftener promised us, then that God will help
those whose hope is only in him: and there is nothing that we are less willing
to try.

We stay our selves sometimes on him, but as Saint Peter on the Water, doubting,
whether he will have power or will to bear us up.

We love rather to trust to the favor of the Creatures, and to seek our rest,
in relying on them and their word. But, as said Isaiah, It is to trust to
feeble reeds and cruel, who by their hidden points pierce the hand of him who
leans on them.

The Crearures are deceitful, they have no strength to support us, but they
have wherewith to betray and destroy us.

Their access, and manner of receiving one is magnific, giving us great hopes.
But their first present, are Promises: the second, Excuses: the third,
Slanders: the fourth, Treacheries.

There it is, that ordinarily the friendship of the World ends, and nothing
makes us plush nor lament more, then having believed, hoped and loved, because
we are thereby always deceived; and that it is from perfidious hopes, and blind
friendship, that affronts repentings, and despairs come.

These three things, To Believe, to Hope, and to Love, which are three
Theological virtues, and three sovereign perfections when they regard God, are
three frailties, and the three most shameful vices of the spirit of a Man, when
they regard the ^eatures. When that we put our confi^nce in the Word of God;
and we tremble not in our selves there is nothing without that can shake us. We
walk securely amidst the dangers and disorders of the World; and we are on the
waves as on the most immovable Rocks. God is under who does strengthen the
whole and bear us up. But as soon as distrust makes us tremble, the rest shakes
as soon; and we see nothing a round us but bottomless pits who open themselves,
and who show us Death and Hell.

Saint Peter accused the Tempest in the danger where he was: our Lord accuses
not, but his Fear. When we begin to perish, we betake our selves to the
Tempest, to fortune, or to the malice of men, and we ask God wherefore he has
not appeased the Winds nor averted the misfortunes.

God who sees the Truth betakes himself to nothing but to our little Faith. He
asks us wherefore we have doubled his word and his love, and wherefore we have
trembled. Modica fidei, quare dubitasti?

VIII. MAXIM. Be thou merciful, and so thou shall be as the Son of the most
High. Eccl. 4.
PARAPHRASE.
IF you aim at Salvation and the happiness of being of the number of the
Predestinate and of the Children of God, bear the mark of the Elect, and choose
for your particular virtue to be charitable toward those that suffer.

REFLECTION.
THere is herein, as well true Devotion as true Nobilily, and true Courage
These three eminent qualities have but one mark to make them known. Their
common Character, Non desis Plorantihus in consolatioui. Et cum moerentibus
embula. Eccl. 7.
is to have Magnanimous good will, a sincere and a distinterested inclination
to please others and to comfort them in their pains. If this be not the
Character of your soul and if this virtue displease you, you are not a man of
honor, nor a man of quality, nor a man of devotion and of Conscience, nay, not
a Christian. People call you what they please; God who sees all, will call you
an Infidel and a Reprobate.

The law of Christianity touching mercy and Charity regards you so much the
more by how much the more power you have, and by how much the higher rank you
are in.

Do not only know the Privileges of your Nobility, or of your charge, know
also your duties; and remember that God has not elevated you above other men,
either in a City or in a Country, but as he has elevated the Sun above
Mankind to be their universal Benefactor.

Your grando and your power in that Country, is no other thing but an
obligation to protect the innocent and support the weak: so many miserable ones
as you see there; they are so many persons unto whom you owe your succors and
good offices. Your cares and your time are not your own, what you have and what
you are belongs to them: Your life its self is a present which God has made
them, it is not to be employed but to serve them. Help those that injustice and
jealously persecutes, whose cries and complaints you hear.

Have the courage to deliver them from the oppression of the proud, Libera eum
qui injuriam patitur de manu superbi, Eccl. 4.
make your Arm strong to take them out of their hands. Prefer no other business
before that and be not at rest, but when good people shall be so, in those
places where you live and have authority.

Give audience to the poor without vexation, without impatience and without
slander. Permit them at least to speak to you, and add not to their
afflictions, the sadness of being refused and seeing that one is even angry at
the knowledge of their pains. Hearken to them, and be not so cruel as to refuse
them a word of consolation. At least let there be some sweetness in your eyes,
and believe not, that this were to abase your self, and to forget your Rank; to
regard the afflicted and to permit them to lament before you.

Deal with God as his Slave. Congregationi pauperum affabilem te facito, and
magnati humilia caput tuum, Eccl. 4.
With the Simple as your Brother. With the Proud as your Master. Keep your Rank
by these Raise your selves above the insolence of men, but abase your selves
under the powerful and Divine Majesty: Be humble before him who has made you
great; adore the hand that can destroy you; Have pity of the miseries that may
be common to you. And do not despise the Tears which you see run from eyes that
resemble yours.

Be you not in your Province or in your Land as a Lion, Noli esse sicut leo in
domo tua evertens domesticos, and opprimens subditos. Eccl. 4.
which tears what he meets there. Be ashamed that your Family should perish,
because you live: That your House should be unhappy because you are the Master,
and that those who dwell with you, should not dwell there, but as the damned,
and were not there but to suffer the furies and follies of a Devil, that
possesses you and acts you.

Live after that manner that a man of honor and virtue ought to live in a
perpetual evenness of spirit present to your self, attentive to your business;
at peace during the several motions of fortune, equitable and courteous toward
your Domestics, officious toward your Friends, charitable toward the Poor,
obliging toward all the World.

See you nothing more fine in your riches and dignities, then being able to
serve a greater number of persons; and judge that the services and submissions
that men pay to you; and the friendships which all companies express to you,
are no honor to you, and they are unjust, if you endeavor not to do more good
then they do you, and if you love not at least as much as you are loved.

IX. MAXIM. A man's pride shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the
humble spirit, Prove. 29.
PARAPHRASE.
GLory seeks humble spirits, and though they hide themselves, it will find
them. The ambitious who seek it shall be humbled. Whosoever would raise himself
by pride, shall find naught but what he flies, he shall fall into reproach and
there he shall perish.

REFLECTION.
IN this there has not been excepted, neither Men or Angels: The most lovely
are the most despised and hated as soon as they become proud. Insolence mixed
with their perfections and their virtues, form thereof, and I know not what,
that is intolerable. That which in a dead man, is rotteness and stink, pride is
in immortal spirits: they are every where insufferable; they are not at all
regarded in Heaven, and on Earth but with horror; both the one and the other
World conspire to scorn and to hate them.

The conspiration is not less common to honor humility.

The admiration of men, the friendship of the Angels, the favors of the Son of
God, all the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and all the honors of time and
eternity, are for the humble. There are not now amongst us others Predestinate
then these, we shall see no other happy in Paradise, Grace and Glory are their
lot. The only and true secret, to be honored is to abase a man's self. Spiritum
humilem suscipiet gloria.

To think meanly of your self, learn and know well what you are. You shall not
learn it in reading of Books, nor in harkening to Masters: Your Conscience must
tell it you, and make you to comprehend it. Ask it: You shall be humble as soon
as you hearken to it, and that you give your self the leisure to consider, what
it knows thereupon and what it will oblige you to believe and confess.

Humility wholly consists in saying from the heart, and with a devout and
sincere sentiment, that you are of your self nothing but sin, frailty and
corruption: and all the rest which is in your person comes from the Creator;
And if you had in your birth any advantage above others and any natural
qualities; These laudable qualities were not the price of your virtue nor the
work of your hands, but the gifts of his providence and of his love: but in
truth he has done you many favors which increase yet every day, and your sins
increase as much as they: And that these are the two most remarkable things in
your life; The one, that your miseries have not hindered God from loving you
tenderly and heaping of good things on you; The other, that so many kindnesses
and so much love has not hindered you from being unthankful, but have been so
ever since you knew that he loved you.

Say that from the Heart, think it sincerely, and let your humble and
respectful looks, your gestures and motions, and all that appears outwardly of
you carry the mark of this lowliness and of this inward contempt of your self.

Have in your conversation a modesty, which were the image of your innocent and
humble Soul: have it in your Conduct at every occasion and with every body. In
any place that you are, live and speak as a man who evidently knows his own
unworthiness.

When that you are near God, at the time of Prayer and the Exercises of a
devour life, if you would please him and deserve that he should choose you to
glorify you in his power, let your principal devotion be to represent to him
how much you deserve that he should contemn you. In contemplation of his
truths; confess yours: See your darkness in his Light; confound your self,
tremble and lament. Unto what condition soever you may be raised by his Grace,
never cease to adore him by all nullitys proper to a nullity that has sinned
and rendered himself worse and more miserable then he was eternally when he was
nothing.

When that you are in business, during the exercise of your Authority, among
the multitude of those who seek after you and honor you, if you would that
they should do it sincerely, show them that you well know your self.

In like manner, let it appear on your countenance and by the Conduct of your
words and actions, that you are not ignorant, that in the midst of felicities
and honors of fortune, as in the midst of the richness of a stately Tomb,
you are nothing but a shadow, or a little ashes hid there under: that you hold
before them the Rank of a Judge or a Master, but that before God you have no
other but that of Nothing and Sinner.

Do not say it with your mouth, it is enough to believe it: but perfection is
what I have said, to believe it and think it so well, that the thoughts of your
Soul appear visibly marked in the modesty of your eyes.

These are in effect those thoughts, marked in that manner, which have rendered
great men so lovely, and so powerful over hearts, when they have seen the
sweetnesses of humility joined to the force of their wit, and mingled with the
splendour of their triumphs and glorious actions.

When you are in Companies where it is rare to find a man who knows himself, and
speaks modestly and humbly, be ye humble, but take heed, that you are not so by
affectation and vanity.

Do not boast, nor blame your self: observe the Laws of Wisdom, say not of your
self neither good nor evil. Do not you consider your self, as a more imperfect
man then others; but as a Nothing of which there is nothing to say, and of
which you must never talk.

Do not ask one to slander you; have only a care of being offended when one
does, and endeavor to be humble enough to desire one should do it: Praise not
those who ought to be blamed; content your self to condemn no body.

When you meet scandalous persons, instead of contemning them, learn from them,
how much you ought to be slighted your self, and look on them as a mirror
which discover to you an important truth.

The shadow which you see at your feet, whilst the Sun casts its eyes on you
and enlightens you, what is it other then a figure which represents your body
such as it is at night, black and dark and such as it should always have been,
if this Star had never appeared?

The miserable wretches that you find in this World, whilst that God sheds on
you his blessings, and that he heaps on you happiness and wealth; What are
they, but an hideous picture, where you are represented such as you would be,
if it pleased Divine Providence to abandon you?

Say then, you who are rich and happy and who want nothing, when you see on the
straw a Beggar covered with sores and diseases, dying of hunger and cold; say,
Behold my shadow, there is what I should be, had it not been for the particular
goodness and care which God has had of me.

You who are wise and devout, when you hear the scandalous life of an infamous
sinner spoken off, say likewise, There is my shadow, it is this that I should
have been, and this that I should be from this day, if my Sun withdrew its
Light, and if his Grace forsook me.

It is true that the life of this Person is scandalous and horrible: but it is
your Image. Humble your selves and adore the mercy of God, who has done great
things in you.

X. MAXIM. There shall no evil happen to the just. Prove. 12
PARAPHRASE.
THe just and devout man enjoys always inward rest. There shall be no accident
which hinders him from keeping himself in his duty and order, or excites him to
disorderly motions.

Fear and sadness are storms which mount not to the region where he is elevated
by grace. The noises shall Echo thither, but Peace shall never leave him, and
whilst his Soul shall be peaceful, in matters little to him that his fortune
were troubled or his affairs disordered.

REFLECTION.
Accustom your self to look on all that happens, without astonishment and
without fear. When affliction happens fret not against God, and quit not your
design of being eternally faithful to him.

Bear chastisement with respect and humility, and let not your courage and your
virtue abate under the pain. Remember that God chastises those that are dear
to him: and as a Father never finds a Son more lovely, then when he receives
correction humbly and respectfully: So likewise does man never please his
Creator more then when he is humble, obedient and faithful in adversity.

There is no Man that endures not. No true Christian that endures not with
patience. No true Saint that endures not with pleasure.

The beginning of holiness is to be calm and modest under the hand of God when
he afflicts us: The perfection of it, is to be happy thereby, and to feel what
the Apostles tied, Ibant gaudentes a conspectu Concilis quod digni habiti sunt
pro nomine Jesu contumeliam pati.
when that going from before their Judges, charged with outrages and affronts,
they gloried therein holily, and marched through the streets as in triumph
amongst the reproaches of Christ.

There is, without doubt, the highest Estate of spiritual life: and I can say
which the holy Fathers, that it is to see, that which is the most admirable to
behold in the new and powerful grace of the incarnate word, To see a man, who
in the midst of poverty, and the ruins of his house, enjoy in his Soul an
heavenly rest, and has no other complaints to make to those that visit him,
nor to the Angels who contemplate him, but those of St. Paul, when he suffered;
superabundo gaudio, joy overwhelms me, it surpasses my peins and my strength.

Other Saints have had no other thoughts, they have always spoken of the times
of affliction, as of the most happy and most desirable.

It is by afflictions that on Earth we resemble our Crucified Savior, that we
equal the Martyrs in Heaven, that we surpass the Angels in death.

To die and to suffer are the consummation of Divine charity: and this was the
highest sublimity of the glory of the Word made man, when he finished love on
the Cross, amongst the pains of death, that he cried out, consummatum est.

The Angels cannot arrive at this good fortune, your devout Soul may. Aspire
thereto, whilst you are mortal and capable of suffering. It is not enough to
imitate the Angels, and to love: Do that which to them is unimitable; love in
suffering and dying.

At least maintain your selves in this Condition by patience. That whilst
sickness and poverty, or other miseries over whelm you: let not your heart sink
under its pressures, and suffer not that the disturbances and persecutions in
the World should shake you, and bereave you of any of your inward repose.

Above all have a particular care of not letting your self be troubled by those
pains, Non contristabit justum quid ei acciderit.
who have their first rise within our selves, and who are born of our
corruptions, as are melanchollies and scrupulous fears and the other torments
of a weak and a fearful imagination. The most part of these hidden miseries
within us, and incurable by humane industry; are no other thing then an inward
night of thick clouds where the Devil forms, Specter and Visions to affright
us.

Be not amused nor so much alarmed as to dispute or fight with these chimerical
monsters. Wait only in patience the coming of the morning, which destroy them
all without noise, and make known the mistake of your fear and disquiets. I
speak of the Wisdom of God, which after these sorts of obscurities he implants
in holy Souls.

Wisdom is the first Ray of the light of Glory, and the true dawning of the day
of Eternity.

It is this Aurora that disperseth all the dreams, Doctrinam quasi ante
lucernam omnibus illumino Eccl. 24.
fancies and ignorances in the Imagination of Man, who shall re-establish
reason in its force and in its Empire, which renders truths apparent which
makes duty and virtue loved, which reimplants courage, makes a coherence
between the light and our hopes, and which appears on our Horizon; but to tell
us, that the Sun comes to us assuredly; and that we are of the number of the
Predestined who shall see him.

Far be it from you to abate by secret persecutions, Non contristabit justum
quidquid ei acciderit.
or by the ordinary accidents of fortune, to be troubled or disturbed, trouble
not your selves, either at your sins or unforeseen relapses.

When you happen to fall into any fault, do not amuse your selves to cry and
complain as a Child fallen into the mire. Withdraw your self gently and help
your self in stretching your hand to mercy who offers you his. Weep, but hope;
hate your malice and infirmity which have rendered you a sinner; hut adore the
Wisdom of God who can draw his glory, out of that shameful and reproachful
estate that you are in.

Learn that the most Divine action of his power and love is to change into good
the evil that you have done. Whilst that you blush to see your self,
contemplate with admiration, the designs of Love and Grace, that his Providence
considers of, occasioned by your fault.

Fear his justice and flee it but never avoid it but by running to his
goodness. Be ye touched with compunction, without being dejected; be you
resolved to govern your self better for time to come, without being impatient,
or despairing from what is past.

Although true contrition bursts the heart, it has yet somewhat of sweetness
that bears it up, and which makes it known and distinguishes it from a false
repentance.

The two marks most certain that we are in that condition God would have have
us, are Tranquillity and Humility. Assure your self that every affair where
there is too much earnestness, although it be the most Holy, is done without
intention to please God. All inspiration that causes disorder in you, comes not
from the Holy Spirit. All grief for sin which carries you to despair, comes
infallibly from the Devil; All mortification that renders you disobedient and
proud, is the Council of your enemy.

All humility which makes you fear that there is no pardon for you, and that
God despises your tears, is false and deceitful, it leads you to impenitence
and the death of the proud and reprobates.

Treat your selves the most meanly and with the most severity you can. Humble
your self, and confess that Holiness is above your courage, and that you are
one of the most slack and ungrateful of men; but have not the humility of the
damned and say not that Salvation is above your might.

Pray to God to give what he commands from you, and then offer your self to
Him, and pray Him to command all that he please.

ARTICLE II. MAXIMS For the Conduct of the Wit.
FIRST MAXIM. Buy the Truth and sell it not; also Wisdom and Instruction, and
Understanding. Prove. 23.
PARAPHRASE.
Endeavor to purchase, but take good heed you sell not that which is more
worth than all the gold and silver in the World.

Buy truth, but don't rid your self of Wisdom: part not these two virtues,
possess both the one and the other.

Let Truth be in your words, and Wisdom in your thoughts, when that you judge
of things, know them, and deceive not your self. When that you speak, lie not
and deceive those that hear you.

Think wisely and speak sincerely. In one word, aspire to the highest and
happiest estate that the Wit of man may be raised unto. Have the courage to
believe nothing, nor to say any thing that is untrue. Be wise and be sincere.
Veritatem eme, and noli vendere sapientiam.

REFLECTION.
IT is a precious Grace, the grace of being sincere and not to yield to the
violences of injustice, nor to its flatteries, when it would engage us to tell
a lie and betray our Consciences.

Many have bought this Grace by their own blood, and have given for it what
has been most dear to them in the World: And if you have it not as yet, spare
nothing to purchase it at any rate. That which you shall give is infinitely
less worth then it. Fear not to dye, but fear to live with the reputation of a
man without Word, and who loves the Truth less th^n a mortal life, and a
miserable fortune, Eme veritatem.

Grave that Maxim in your heart that a wise Prince writ with his finger on the
lips of his Son: Rather dye then lie. Hate a lie more then death: and although
in Company men call it, Verbum mendax justus detestabitur.
the most innocen^ sin, and in the Palace, the most necessary: yet do you call
it, the most shameful to nature, the most intolerable to a man of honor and
Conscience.

Since that you bear in your Soul the Image of the Truth of God, Non decet
principem verbum mentiens, Prove. 17.
Take that for you, that Solomon said to the Kings, that whatsoever ornament
you can give to a lie, it is very indecent in your mouths. Conscendam, ero
similis Altissimo.


It becomes none but the proud Angel who chose it for his character, and who
began by it, when he would render himself the horror of nature, and transform
himself into a Devil.

The first proposition he made to the Angels in Paradise was a lie. Nequaquam
morte morieris, eritis sicut Dii. Genesis 3.
The first word he spoke on earth, was another lie that he made to the Man.

The first thought he had at his entrance into Hell, and the first design he
took there to revenge himself on God, was to lie eternally. And the first
promise that he made himself, to comfort him in his pains, that all Men should
lie also, and that he would find a means to spread his sin and his own
corruption as far as the sin of the first Man.

An enterprise, alas, wherein he has been too lucky, and wherein he succeeds
this day six thousand years! Who is the Man that lies not? Children do in the
Cradle. The Philosophers and holy Men, in the Schools of Wisdom, and even on
the Throne of Truth: Men do it in every condition and every age. Among all
those who have sinned in Adam and who have been able to speak, there is not one
who has not lied, and who has not born on his tongue this Image of the Devil.

Leave it not upon yours. Tear away all the remains of this unhappy
inclination; Remove a te os pravum and detrahentia labra sint procul a te,
Prove. 4. Viam pravam and os bilingue detestor. Pro. 8.
detest this fatal sin. Politicians make it their study, many make it their
pastime and others their trade. Make you of it what all great Men have, the
abomination of your heart: look upon it as the unworthiest crime, and the most
infamous accident which can happen to a noble Soul.

But if it be shameful to lie and deceive, it is no less to be deceived by
liars. Freedom (or openheartedness) and sincerity are virtues of great price.
Possess them; but, to have them don't sell prudence.

It Is a light as necessary as your eyes, keep it well and consider that you
live in the night.

Treacheries, praecipices and darkness are on the Earth. Tread not thereon
without being enlightened and seeing where you are, and what is about you.

You see there abundance of giddy fires and lighted exhalations, take heed you
take them not for torches: and mark that, among your Maxims, That the
misfortune or affront most to be feared of humane Wit, is to follow counterfeit
lights and to be made the sports of cheats and Hypocrites.

Know those men who treat with you or who approach you: have the skill to read
in their heart, when they speak to you: and by things they tell you, to
understand those which the dissemble.

Distinguish true modesty from the false, Quando submiserit vocem, ne
credideris ei, quoniam septem nequi^iae sunt in cord illius. Prove. 26.
and do not suffer your self to be surprised, says Solomon, by a sort of
people, who under their modest looks, and their sweet and devout voices; carry
in their Souls, seven sorts of Poisons to shed into yours.

Know what a prudent man in business ought to know, and all that he ought to
know, to keep at each meeting and in each company, the rank of a Man of honor,
incapable to deceive or be deceived.

At least be not ignorant of the four most necessary things, though ordinarily
the most unknown and the most hidden. Your own defects, the thoughts of Men,
the secrets of Nature and Truths of God.

We have within us, by the benefit of Providence and Grace, Torches to help us
easily to know and discover those things.

We know our defects and miseries by the Light of Conscience.

The thoughts and intentions of Men, by Experience and Judgment.

The secrets and wonders of Nature, by the Light of Philosophy.

In fine. The greatness of God and the Mysteries of Religion, by the Light of
Faith.

But the happiness to which you ought to aspire, is that Wisdom should be the
fifth and Sovereign.

For as these Torches may sometimes go out, Non extinguitur in nocte lucerna
ejus. Prove. 31.
the employment of Wisdom is to keep them always lightened; and to have a care,
that the day be never wanting to us, during this night and these dangers.

I say too much if you will meditate, you shall find all in these two words:
Veritatem eme, and noli vendere Sapientiam.

II. MAXIM. Be not Wise in thine own eyes. Fear the Lord and depart from evil.
Proverb. 3.
PARAPHRASE.
BE not wise, in such sort as can make none believe that you are wise but your
self, and do not make to your self a Wisdom, of which you would be the Author,
and that you would draw from your own Wit.

Remember that there is no other but the ancient and true, which is to fear
God, and to do nothing contrary to the Laws of Conscience and Reason.

REFLECTION.
LEt it never enter into your mind, Ne sis sapiens apud temet ipsum.
that you are a man of merit. Be you the only person, who neither knows, nor
speaks of your own worth.

Whoever knows that he is wise, shall not be so long; and as soon as he says he
is, he is so no longer; and perhaps never shall be more.

Man ought to be ignorant of his perfections, at least he ought not to consider
them. Since that we are of a spiritual nature, it is necessary that our actions
of esteem and friendship should regard some body besides our selves.

Let us be afraid of pleasing our selves, for fear we please none but our
selves; and if we would be loved, have a care of being suspected, to believe
that we ought to be so.

In fine, our eye and our tongue, are no more for us, then our heart. To speak
of our selves is no less folly then to speak to our selves. To look on a man's
self is scarce more worth, then to love a man's self, and perhaps, it is as
dangerous for one to know, that he has somewhat good in him, as to be ignorant
of what he has that is evil.

It is of the virtues and beauties of our Soul, as the deformities and
nakedness of our Body, we ought to hide them from our eyes. It is not a thing
less criminal to fix the sight on the one then the other. All these aspects
make immodest looks. Bashfulness and honesty turn away from it, and nature
equally blushes at them.

III. MAXIM. Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee, neither search
the things that are above thy strength, Eccles. 3.
PARAPHRASE.
Endeavor not to attain to that which is above you, nor to comprehend
mysteries which are above your understanding. Content your self to know what
God commands you and is necessary for your salvation. And touching his works
natural, look on and contemplate what he exposes thereof to your eyes. But
undertake not to discover, what he would should be unknown.

REFLECTION.
THe excellency and the skill of a fine Wit, when it contemplates this World,
consists not in knowing and seeing better then others, which cannot be either
seen or known. But better to know and better to admire what he does see, and
what Providence has discovered.

When an excellent Artist considers a piece of Painting publicly exposed, he
does not glory in seeing there, what was to others invisible. The simplest and
most ignorant see all the fine strokes in the workmanship as much as he; but
they see them not as he sees them.

His advantage above them is, That in seeing he remarks them, and by his
reflections he knows and sees that in his mind, which those see not by the eyes
of the body, and that which enters not into their blind understanding.

When a wise Philosopher contemplates the Sun and the Stars, and that in these
incorruptible Lights he sees some glimpses or shadows of the beauty of the
Creator, he sees nothing but what the Profane and Atheists see clearly, and
what they behold as well as he.

But to behold and to look, is a small matter, the Eagles do it. That of
importance is to observe and remark; it is this, that ungodly Men do no more
then beasts do.

These shadows of Divinity and other marvels which enter into their outward
senses, go no further: Their brutish and ignorant Soul knows nothing thereof.

The part of a wise Man is to discover to his understanding all that nature
discovers to his eyes. He sees nothing that he minds not. And it is in that,
that consists his difference from other people, and all the glory of his
knowing and sublime Wit.

It consists not, as I have said, to see or know things impenetrable. That
which providence has been willing to cover and to keep hidden, is equally so
for all men. Philosophers who seek it, are neither learned Men, nor Artists,
but when they shall not find it.

True Philosophy is not to enquire; and in questions where one must of
necessity say (I know nothing on it) those who say it soonest, and who do not
study twenty years to say it, are the most wife and most happy.

IV. MAXIM. Thou shall not trust to thy own Prudence.
PARAPHRASE.
WHen you seek the truth, believe not your own sentiments, nor do not rely on
your particular thoughts. Fear what comes from you, and which is new, and take
heed of making thereof, rules of Philosophy and Maxims of Conduct.

Draw from your Prudence what Light you are able: but try it by Lights more
shining and sure then yours. When it shall enlighten you; have other Torches to
enlighten that first and never go in the dark and near to praecipices with it
alone.

REFLECTION.
NE innitaris prudentiae tuae. A Liar does not always lie, but it is always
imprudence to trust to his word: Although our reasoning sometimes does not
deceive us, we never fail to be blame worthy when we hearken to it, and that we
take for certain truths, What we know not but from it alone.

This particular reasoning is not in man, but to betray him and to lead him to
his ruin. It Is it, that produces ignorances, errors, impieties, false
Religions, false Philosophers, and that forms these by paths and deceitful ways
where we see many people to wander.

Some enter into these ways by simplicity: but most by pride; They believe that
Wisdom and Justice would that they went on that side, because their own
reasoning leads them there.

But they follow a strange guide. Beasts are lead by their passion. Fools by
their arguing, and wise Men by reason.

None will profit by the misfortunes of others; Although each Philosopher,
during the disputes cry with all the endeavors of his voice to warn his
friends that their reasoning deceives them; each will believe that his will not
deceive him; and each hears it as his Master: there is no authority that
overweighs their own; nay, even of the Gospel nor experience.

The Proud respect nothing but this unhappy prudence, and it happens more then
once in an age, that a little Philosopher undertakes to examine Religion, or to
reform the Elements and overturn the World; because it is the dictate of his
reasoning so to do.

A wise Man in reasoning with himself, according to humane thoughts has never
learnt any thing certain, but that his arguing was blind; and that he never
drew any other profit thence, then to say to himself. Ne innitaris prudentiae
tuae.

V. MAXIM. Wisdom stands in the top of the high places, by the way in the
places of the paths. She cries at the gates, at the entry of the City. Unto
you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of men, Proverb. 8.
PARAPHRASE.
WIsdom speaks upon the Mountains, and in the high ways, at the gates of
Cities, in the midst of the streets, and in all places where it finds most
people. There it infuseth it self on the tongues of the people; and it makes
use of their voices, to the end it might make it is self heard afar off and to
speak more strongly: Supra viam in mediis semitis.

It is there, that the curious who would learn it is Doctrine, and who aspire to
be the Oracles of their Nation, and Masters of Science in particular
Universities ought to go. O viri, ad vos clamito. O Philosophers, it is to you
that I direct my words, if you will be truly wise, come and hearken to me, when
I teach truth in the assembly of men.

REFLECTION.
WHat one calls here the People is not a heap of little folk, but a mixture of
all men who speak naturally without study, and without artifice, and without a
Conduct of any acquired Science, and of any reflection

The voice of this People, and the voice of Wisdom in fused, or to say better,
the voice of the instinct, which is impeccable, and which has always been the
true Master of Philosophers, whereon consider the 3. following words.

1. That our business during this life, when God has given us the Wit, is to
study, and to apply our selves to know the most hidden marvels of nature.

2. That the business of the Creator, from the day of our birth, is to teach us
himself and to engrave on the chiefest part of our Soul, the first principles,
the chief and fundamental Truths of this natural Philosophy.

3. That the business of the instinct, is to make those so remote Truths to
approach to our senses, that we may be the better able to know them. To put
them on the tongue of people, and to tell them to us by the general voice of
all Nations.

What Nations say, and what they have said by common consent in all ages they
have said it, being driven by this instinct, and who makes it say nothing, but
what he finds written by the Spirit of God in the spirit of all Men.

In one word, it is the voice of the Holy Ghost in Christian Theology, and the
voice of the Conscience in the moral, the voice of the instinct and of the
people in the Physic. It Is it, which pronounces the decisions and decrees
incontestible.

The people are ignorant and blind but well led: It understands not what it
says, but it speaks Truth: and our glory in studying or in teaching is not to
correct it, or to speak otherwise then it, but to explain its words, and to
understand them, better than it understands them it self.

It is on this public and universal voice, that the wise Philosophers ought to
support their Science. Before arguing on any visible thing in the world, they
ought to interrogate, this great Ignorant called, The people, and to hearken
how they talk in the streets, that they might know how they ought to speak in
the Schools, to the end that upon that Answer, as on a Divine principle, they
might establish their propositions and the works of their particular Doctrine.

Follow this Council and stop at this Maxim, whatsoever the bait may be that
invites you to take others, do not quit it.

If to be Author of a new invention, instead of building on the Earth, you
would build in the Air, you shall build nothing but follies and ruins. If for
the better setting of new thoughts in order that come to you, and to form a
wondrous Philosophy, you think it necessary to give the people the lie, and to
say, The fire has no heat, nor the snow whiteness, nor other quality; That the
Earth is not immovable; That a Beast is no living Creature; That the Soul of
man is not immortal: if you would that these should be the principles contained
in the great Volumes of your mavelous Philosophy, all your wonders shall be
but dreams of impieties and ignorance.

VI. MAXIM. There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof
are the ways of death, Prove. 16.25.
PARAPHRASE.
MIstrust your self and your own judgment: but don't trust all sorts of
persons. False Maxims and evil Councils, enter easily and sweetly into the
spirit. Fear them, and leave not your self to be lead by men who go out of the
common way.

There are paths in the spiritual life which appear fair, and one sees therein
many things, that make men believe, that they are shortest to arrive to
holiness; but it is dangerous to follow them: and they are ordinarily those,
which lead soonest and most certainly unto death.

REFLECTION.
ONe ought not to be astonished, at finding here below such paths as these,
since one finds there, proud Men and Hypocrites.

The unavoidable blindness and common to all proud men, is to persuade
themselves, that they see spots in the Sun, errors in the Doctrine of the
Church, and abuses in its Conduct.

And that which is yet worse, is, That driven by the zeal, that the illusion
inspires them with, they undertake to wipe out these spots and to correct those
errors. Nothing which the hand of God has made seem to them finished, but when
they have changed something or that they have given the last strokes thereto.

It Is thence that all the changes in the exercise of Devotion comes that we so
often complain of, and from thence all these particular ways of repentance and
salvation where each one runs, drawn by the splendour of novelty, and where each
seeks to wander and to perish.

There does not appear presently in those ways. but of footsteps holy and
right, seemingly marked by the rules of the Gospel and by the actions of the
Apostles; But, Novissima ducunt ad mortem.

Novelty is a way that leads to the eldest sin, that is, Apostasy, and to the
last of evils which is impenitence and despair.

The cause why so many fine people are seen in this way so fatal, is that the
Devil has always gone there first.

All Devil as he is, he has I know not what, which pleases the Woman when he
counterfeits the devout one, although Heaven and Earth could tell her, she must
run after him.

And when the Woman is seduced, she has I don't know what, that bewitches the
man. Each man does what Adam did, The wisest run after her.

And when wise Men begin to wander and to loose themselves, there is then
neither blind nor fool that follows them not, and that believes not that it is
Wisdom to imitate them and to perish with them.

One sees people run from far to enter into this dangerous way, and to go where
example and hypocrisy draws them. Our Souls are tied to one another by certain
invisible chains and it is thereby, That the poison of the Serpent, without
being able to be seen or stopped, spreads it self in the hearts, and that it
carries throughout corruption and death.

All the new fashions of saving ones self, are the inventions of him who would
that the Saints should be damned. Est via, quae videtur homini recta; novissima
autem ejus ducunt ad mortem

VII. MAXIM. Inquisition shall be made into the Councils of the ungodly. Wisd.
1.
PARAPHRASE.
AS the ungodly fear Men, although they fear not God; When they have any doubts
to propose, on the mysteries of Religion, they propose them to themselves, they
ask secretly their spirit, from whence he knows that the World has been made by
a Creator; and that after Death there is a Judgment, a future Life, an Hell,
an Eternity, etc.

REFLECTION.
THe little questions of worldly Philosophy are not far from great. It is by
these that one suddenly learns to render himself a Master in Impiety, and to
propose to his heart, and to his disciples boldly, doubts scandalous and
against eternal truths.

The Maniche who asked his friend, If it is God who made the Flies, is very near
asking, if it is God who has made Man.

One Frederick, who asks of the Societies and Philosophers of his Court, if the
Birds are living, will quickly ask himself, if the Angels are so, and if there
are immortal Souls?

It is fine in an assembly of the curious to do toward the souls of Bulls and
Elephants, what they do about stones when they burst them, and to show that
under the false appearance of the Unity, they are but multitudes of grains of
sand, and of heaps of dust: But at the rebound of these academic conversations,
it is that the Democritus's and Metrodorus's, have in their solitudes proposed
to their Conscience, other prouder questions, and to maintain to it, That all
the great things of the Earth, and even those of Heaven, dreaded so much by
people, are not great Bodies, nor great Spirits, nor great Divinities: but
great assemblies of little Nothings; and that there are not in the universe
three things truly united, as those of Atoms and Nothings arrived to the last
estate of an indivisible smallness.

Have a care, dangers are pleasant to youth and folly. Be Wise, and follow not
Masters who to go establish their School on the brink of praecipices.

Withdraw your self as far from thence as you can, and although this brink
seems firm, remember there are none but blind men, who will stay on a place
where there needs but one puff of wind, to drive them to the bottom of an abyss.

It is true, that those who lead others into these dangers, when they explain
themselves publicly, have expressions and terms, which are like choice colors
and proper to paint innocence and truth on the gate of a House where they are
not: But their Philosophy is no better.

To be wise and bold Philosophers, or for us not to be Criminals, is very
little less then to speak correctly, and not to speak any thing that one can
accuse: the point is, to do in such sort, as that our innocent and unreprovable
propositions may not give cause to believe, that our thoughts are worth nothing.

It is of Sciences, as it is of words. The most dangerous are the chastest, and
the most modest, when that under the vail of their modesty, they find
themselves the properest to convey corruption into the heart, and to make them
understand, that they may think well of things, of which the Teacher durst not
speak.

Have not the curiosity, to know the way of your ruin, and go not to School to
learn to perish, nor to learn there to forget what you have learnt and known
from the Cradle. Have the happiness to bear the evident mark of a Soul well
made, and of a Wit well brought up, which is not to be pleased with any
Doctrine, but that which serves you, to know God, and helps you to love him.

VIII. MAXIM. The way of a Fool is right in his own eyes; but he that
hearkeneth to Council is wise, Prove. 12.
PARAPHRASE.
THe senseless Man believes, that his Conduct is good, and he will have no
other Judge than himself. The wise Man distrusts his own judgment. As he learns
what he ought to believe, from the sentiments of the Church, so he learns what
he ought to do on each occasion, by the council of his friends.

REFLECTION.
THere are but these two Lights that are faithful, and that we may be able to
to follow safely, amidst the darknesses which surround us.

The greatest Wits have gone astray, in following themselves. The meanest and
most ignorant have never done it in following the Gospel. When one hearkens to
his own prudence, for enlightened as much as can be, one often fails of being
happy in his attempts: But in the hearkening to the council of friends, one is
always praise worthy.

Fortune may trouble the success of our actions wisely managed, and with
council, but it cannot rob us of the honor of it.

It is success enough in a design, to acquire the glory of having acted
discreetly therein, and the reputation of being wise.

IX. MAXIM. When he speaks fair believe him not, for there are seven
abominations in his heart. Proverb. 26.
PARAPHRASE.
WHen there is danger for Consciences in a City, and that there runs any noise,
of a new contagious Doctrine, don't leave your self to be deceived by its
sweetness nor its luster. Distrust words that please you, and devotions that
astonish you, much more. A devout voice, a pale and a dejected countenance, a
simple and a reformed habit, mysterious words: mortifications exemplary and too
apparent, are vails proper to cover the poison of Hell, when they are brought
into company, and distributed to the curious.

REFLECTION.
THe primitive Christians were excused, when they suffered themselves to be
deceived by appearances of holiness, and perhaps we could excuse some innocent
women this day, when we see them admire the look of an Hypocrite that
counterfeits the Reformer.

But since one has known by six hundred years experience, that the archest
Heretics and Antichrists of each age, have begun their life of Seducers, by a
life of Alms and fasting, and by an extatick Devotion; there can happen nothing
more shameful, to Men of Wit and Judgment, then to take a dogmatist or a cheat,
for a Prophet: and although he preach manifestly against the Church of God, to
believe nevertheless that he comes from Heaven, because he does Alms, makes
long Prayers, and has the secret of painting modesty on his countenance.

Ne credideris ei, says Solomon, who ever he be that meddles with Divine
mysteries, were he one come out of the Caves and the greatest severities; were
he, as says St. Paul, an Angel descended out of Paradise; were he, as sait
Saint Cyprian, a Martyr stretched on a wheel, and suffering for the Name of the
Savior, all the pains of a cruel and infamous death; If from the top of this
wheel, he witnesses, that there rests in his Soul any thoughts or opinions
contrary to the sentiments of the Church, he is an Apostate and a Reprobate.
You are one your self, if you render your self his disciple; he damns himself
in dying the death of the Saints, and you damn your self in hearkening to this
Martyr of Jesus Christ. Nec perveniet ad Christi praemia, qui relinquit
Ecclesiam Christi.
Si occisus pro nomine Christi, fuerit ab unitate divisas, coronari in morte
non poterit. Whosoever believes not the Church, is out of the Church, and
whosoever dies out of the Church, although he die between the hands of Tyrants,
dies out of the number of the Predestined ones, he has no portion among the
Elect of the Son of God. Alienus est, profanus est, hostis est: habere non
potest Deum Patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet Matrem.

In one word, Fili mi, says the Wise man. Si te lactaverint pecoatores, ut
acquiescas eis. Whatsoever sweetness and whiteness there is in the Milk, take
heed of taking of it when they are poisoners that give it.

It would be an horrible phrenzie, if because you are counseled to beware of
this Milk so dangerous, that you should desire to taste it, and if in the same
hour, you should do it, in despite to those charitable persons, who prayed you
not to do it, and who would oppose this unhappy design.

It Is nevertheless the strange and in conceivable fancy: or the strange Devil
of many. As Soon as the Church declares to them that there is the poison of Hell
mixed in any Doctrine; and by an holy charity, advises them to renounce, and
to avoid those who teach it; from thenceforth they feel themselves drawn
thither ward, and there they run, as to a precious Doctrine, worthy to be known
and maintained, in despite to the Holy Spirit of God, and in despite of all
those who persecute and condemn it.

Be you not of their number, but reflect young man as you are, that its time
for you to be wise, since you judge it is time to speak of holy things, and
that you say your sentiments thereon in company and in the Schools.

At least respect the dignity of your Soul, formed after the Image of the
Wisdom and of the Holiness of God; and profane it not so shamefully, as to be
willing to take for his Gospel or his Philosophy, all the novelties that fools
are pleased daily to invent and propose in their discourses.

X. MAXIM. He that walks uprightly walks sure: but he that perverteth his
ways, shall be known, Prove. 10.
PARAPHRASE.
He that walks plainly and sees where he will go marches with assurance, but
he who counterfeits or wipes out his steps, shall be known. In hiding his
crafts one hides not himself Dissemblers and deceivers bear in their faces the
character of their Genius. It is sufficient, to see a Traitor, to make you
distrust him and fear him.

Life is found in the public ways of righteousness and fidelity: but crooked
and hidden paths lead to death.

REFLECTION.
TAke good heed of entering into any of these paths, and of following the
company who walk in those dark and by-roads.

Banish from you craft, dissimulation, and lies: have no vail upon your heart,
and engage it not in the intrigues of dangerous affairs, and criminal parties,
where there is need of being covered.

Be you glad, that nothing hinders it from being seen, and remember that the
fairest and most excellent of things, have no better policy to gain men, and to
merit their esteem and friendship then to show themselves.

If there be beauty in your Soul, it cannot have too much day; and you ought to
assure your self, that one will have so much the more respect and love for you,
as you shall have of freedom and sincerity.

It is true, that silence is necessary on many occasions, but you must always
be sincere and courteous. You ought to retain some thoughts but disguise none.
There are ways of holding ones peace without shutting up the heart; of being
discreet, without being dull and silent; of hiding some truths without covering
them with lies; of being faithful to his friends, without deceiving others, and
without betraying his Conscience.

In fine, it is a great advantage to thrive in the World, and to have the
reputation of telling nothing which ought to be secret, or was false.

XI. MAXIM. A wise man fears and departs from evil: but the fool rages and
is confident, Proy. 14.
PARAPHRASE.
IN troublesome occurrences, and in affairs where danger appears, that wise Man
is fearful. He shuns the misfortune by turning out of this ill passage and in
taking a further way about. The indiscreet Man he marches without fear, and
falls without possibility of help.

REFLECTION.
IT is true, that when difficulties present themselves, if a Man can succeed by
courage, and overcome them boldly, it is the most glorious and most short: but
the most shameful of misfortunes is to perish by rashness.

A wise Man in a all occurrences, ought to know more ways then one, or to
remember, there is more then one time. One drowns himself to day, where to
morrow he can walk dry foot. And it is a fine art to manage happily and
diligently ones affairs, and to be able to stop himself and be quiet seasonably.

XII. MAXIM. Every prudent man deals with knowledge: but a fool lays open
his folly, Prove. 13.
PARAPHRASE.
THe principal Law, which natural, as well as supernatural, and Divine prudence
imposes on us, is to confer as often as we can with friends of most insight
and to help our selves by their remonstrances; to see what ought to be seen in
our affairs and designs. Whilst passion keeps our eyes fixed, on the beholding
that at which we aim, we see not that which follows us, or is about us.

Our faithful friends, better enlightened then our selves, make us to see that;
and it is in that, consists the extreme necessity of their presence, and the
most impertant office of their friendship.

REFLECTION.
WHen folly is entered with pride into a great Spirit, the most evident mark
that it is there; and the most certain presage, of the misfortune of that man,
is, That he can no more ask, nor suffer that council be given him,

The wife Man attempts nothing without having first known the sentiments of his
friends, and discoursed of his affair with discreet and judicious persons: And
even his Maxim is; That on occasions where deliberation is necessary, if he
fails of other Counselors; It is a wiser action to deliberate with an ignorant
man or a fool, and to make him speak, then to hearken only to himself, provided
always that there be no danger concerning a secret.

Whosoever he be that speaks, he profits of what they say to him. It is an
error, not to be willing to ask, but Men of great judgment and reputation. A
man of wit hearkens to what the least of the mean people say, and he judges
not this to be lost time, that is spent in hearing them discourse of the
difficulties of a business.

By one of the most mavelous secrets of nature, he knows how to draw from
each of their propositions, some spark or ray of Light; and from these little
Lights put together, he gets so much day as is necessary to Conduct him well in
his undertaking.

One is always wise in harkening unto Councils: Innocens credit omni verbo,
astutus considerat. Prove. 14.
but not always in following them. To follow them without being willing to
consider them, is not to serve a man's self of them; But it is to obey them, and
to render himself indiscreetly a slave to him who gives them.

The ordinary fate of weak Wits, when they are raised by fortune, to some rank
of authority, is that they perish by their Councils.

The multitude of confidents, does about these infirm and blind powers, as a
multitude of Physicians about a rich patient.

How faithful soever those intimate friends whose sentiments you hearken unto
may appear, take heed, have an eye at their hearts and penetrate their
intentions, when they speak to you.

For, Alas! how many sellers of evil councils, are there about a man, who has
means to buy them? And how many businesses undertaken by such kind of councils
have ruined the undertaker, and enriched the Counselor?

The custom, or the Maxim of the wise Man, when one brings him advice, is to
hearken to them, and to receive them civilly, as a friend; to examine them as a
Judge, and to execute them as a Master.

When he does, what one has counseled him, he follows not the opinon of
another, but his own.

Good Councils appertain not properly to those, who invent them by their Wit,
and who propose them, but those who consider them, and choose them by judgment.

In one word, one of the most inviolable rules of prudent and experimental
policy; is to examine others, on his own affairs and the resolutions that one
has taken; and to be assured that in such occasions, the most clear sighted men
become blind, as soon as he is alone.

The senseless Man sees nothing, because he thinks that he beholds all things
in seeing himself. Via stulti recta in oculis ejus: qui autom sapiens est audit
consilia.

IV. MAXIM. He that is of an hard mind rusheth into evil.
PARAPHRASE.
HE who has a Soul hard and inflexible, and who keeps himself stubbornly tied
to his own will, or resists the Councils of others, without being able to be
persuaded by reason, or admonitions, nor bent by tears, nor forced by
threatenings and by fear, shall fall into misery and drag thither much people.

The extremity of evil is, when this conceited Man thinks to be wise, and that
to let all go to ruin rather then to blot out a word, or let go a capricious
resolution, is to edify the public and to obey his conscience.

REFLECTION.
COnstancy ought without doubt, to be put among the most laudable and chief
perfections of humane Wit; but its name and its colors, serve often to cover
our natural hardness, and to make it to be put in the rank of virtues and
heroic qualities.

The true constancy, consists not in willing firmly what we have justly and
wisely resolved: It consists in willing always what Justice and reason requires
of us.

Many designs are good in one day, who are not in another, and it can easily
happen; That what was yesterday deliberated and appointed by Wisdom to be done,
would be folly to execute to day.

The wise Man is constant and firm; his Soul is immortal and invariable, but
his resolutions are not so. As they are bound to circumstances, dependant on
time and fortune, they ought to be changed, according as the changes and
motions of the World take away from them the conformity they had to reason.

It is the duty and perfection of a Cock on a Dial to be always steady, without
ever changing of place; but this should be a great disorder, if its shadow
stood still also.

It is true, that our reason has no honor, nor advantage above mortal things,
but as it has of firmness and immortality more then they. Yet it should cease
nevertheless to be reason, and to be the living Image of the Wisdom, and
eternity of God, if its designs were unchangeable.

I have said it, and I have resolved it, it shall be done then, whatsoever shall
happen; see, there is the Wisdom of God, the sin of the Angel, and the folly of
man amongst the most ridiculous fools, there are certain little Wits, which
spread themselves, that they might be enlarged; and who think that it is to
measure themselves with the Wits of the first rank; and to become Heroes and
invincible is to render themselves inexorable.

On each new occasion we ought to review our resolutions, and consider if
prudence gives us not new orders, and if there is nothing to change in our
wills.

This new order, perhaps may be on the part of this prudence, To see at our
feet a multitude of persons beseeching, and a multitude of new tears, worthy to
touch and to soften the heart of Man.

Tenderness destroys neither constancy nor courage. Gold has so much the more
splendour and force, and is so much more perfect and pure, as the fire has
softened it.

Our noble Soul is never more noble nor never more courageous, and more Divine,
then when it is made tender by a just compassion, and comforts the Angels and
Saints in pardoning a criminal, or in quitting any resolution, of which the
severity would be a public affliction.

The Glory of being constant costs us very dear, and its but little different
from an unhappiness, if it procures us the reputation of being hard and
pittiless.

Qui mentis est durae, corruet in malum. Proverb. 24.

ARTICLE III. MAXIMS For the Conduct of the Heart, and its Passions.
The first MAXIM. Let thy mind be upon the Ordinances of the Lord, and he will
establish thine heart. Eccles. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
THe best Maxim that you can observe in regard of your Heart and its passions,
is to look upon God, and apply your self to know his Will, and to yield an
inviolable and a faithful obedience thereto, Dedit Deus Salomoni latitudinem
cordis sicut arenam quae est in littore maris. 1 Reg. 4.
Then will God give you a Heart, which shall be a present worthy of his
magnificence and his Power, and which, as that of Solomon, being stretched
beyond the borders of the Ocean, shall have immensity for its character.

REFLECTION.
ONe of the most shameful, and ugliest deformities, that can happen by defect
of nature, is to have a straight heart.

Those who have it in that manner, although the world adore them, are yet
contemptible. Where the Heart is little, the rest is so likewise, in despite
of fortune.

It is thereby that we measure men, and it is thence, we judge that in a
City, the most numerous part of the inhabitants ought to be called little
people.

Others who are elevated above those, are not so by purple, nor ornaments. If
there had not been great courages among us, there had never been Princes. Men
have not made them Masters of the world, but because they found hearts as great
as it.

The heart of those men, Ipse dabit tibi Cor.
is the heart which God gives. Behold and aspire.

Endeavor at least, to frame your example to his, and to mark upon your
actions, some strokes of his character, which is, as I have said, a goodness
magnanimous and bold.

Have courage: do nothing that can be able to wound your reputation, or your
Conscience: love honor, and observe its two laws, of being incorruptible and
fearless.

Permit not, that avarice, or any loose hope, render your soul a slave; let the
love of your duty alone be the ground of your actions.

Possess your liberty and enjoy the right proper to God alone, to do nothing
by constraint or interest. Be you independent as to mortal things, disingaged
from your passions, raised above the favors, the promises, and above the
threatenings of fortune, invincible by violence or flattery.

But join to this firmness of spirit, all that you can of sweetness, and the
graces of a good nature.

Without looseing any thing of your vigor, endeavor to become by love and
good will, that which Gold, the firmest of metals becomes by the fire,
tractable, and capable of receiveing all sorts of shapes.

Let each find his humor in you, without finding his faults there. Accomodate
your self to the inclinations of persons, to their customs, their affairs,
their sentiments; and fear not undervaluing your self by this complaisance.
Remember, that to appear most noble, and to keep the first rank of honor in
Company, is to be the most ready to do, all that Civility requires on every
occasion, and most proper to do it, with a good grace.

It Is true, that your humor, to be the humor of a wise man, ought to be
always equal, and always the same, but this laudable evenness consists in
being constantly of the humor of others / and to conform your self to the
condition, wherein you find their soul, in the various accidents of mortal life.

Know you what comforts them, what afflicts them, what touches them, and be
you your self touched thereby = as of things which are common to you.

By a true sympathy; feel you their pains, and make them see on your
countenance, and in your words, the marks of this generous conformity.

Observe worthily, and faithfully, the rules of friendship; and judge that the
immense greatness, of a noble soul, consists in its being pesent by its cares,
and the application of its thoughts, to each part of the Duties, that justice
and friendship prescribes to it.

It is no great virtue to love persons, who please you by the splendour of their
fortune, or the fair qualities of their wit and nature.

But it is so, when you love those truly that you love; of any humor or any
condition that they can be,

Have here in the sentiments of Solomon. That which was particularly admirable
in his Conduct, was, that the precious friendship contracted with so many
Princes, as he knew in the world, hindered him not from having a tender
affection, for the officers of his court, and even for the meanest of the
slaves that labored in his house, and of whom he knew he was beloved.

He believed that the fidelity and love of servants, can not be justly
recompensed, Si est tibi servus fidelis, sit ti by quasi anima tua.
but by the love of their master: and that the heart of the meanest of men,
when he loves his King sincerely and without interest, is not less worth then
the heart of a King.

He looked on himself as their father, and one of the finest exploits of his
wisdom and faithfulness, was to have so done, as that no body entered into, or
dwelt in his house who was not faithful, and that no body went out thence, who
was not rich.

Their fortune entered into the number of his own affairs: he even felt his
own felicities cease to please him, when he saw any of his Domestics, who
seemed to have no share therein, and who carried in his eyes any mark of
sadness or disquiet.

Let your Principal and first business in the exercise of your charge be, to
assure your self of the good will, and to deserve to be loved, of those who
ought to obey you.

Whatsoever name of Prince, Lord, or Magistrate, that you bear in a Province or
City, believe this, That you shall not have any power, nor be really the Master
of any thing, but when you shall be the Master of Hearts.

But observe, that to be beloved of the people, the first lesson is, in loving
them, love nothing but their persons, seek nothing else by your goodness
toward them, but the pleasure of obliging them without interest, and the
honor of loving them sincerely, and that without hope.

That of feigning love, is a wicked trade, and by acting the part of a friend
on the stage of the World, by promises and comical civilities; A Man learns
nothing, but to deceive and betray himself. In the art of gaining hearts the
great secret, is to love naturally, and that without art, without reflection it
self, and (if I might so say) without virtue.

Love is so much the more powerful over the will, and so much the more virtuous
and more admirable, as it does without virtue the good it does, and follow
nothing but its instinct the nature.

Divine charity it self is not perfect, but when it is transformed, into the
nature of the charitable person, and that it is become his inclination and its
weight.

Futhermore, let clemency be inseparable from your person, and let it enter
into all your Councils. Be severe in words and actions, when you must be so:
but then, have you another tongue and other hands besides your own. Employ not
your hands, but when you must distribute favors, and let not your tongue serve
you but to pronounce edicts of mercy and love.

Take not those for enemies, who are sincerely afflicted for having displeased
you; And when its necessary to punish any guilty person, do not give him time,
if possible, to repent before your face, and have recourse to your goodness. If
his tears and his grief prevent you; believe that you have lost the rights of
your anger; and endeavor to imitate, the Master of Kings and Judges, who
cannot punish sinners but in the time that they are proud, and who does not
make the misery of any one, to continue eternally, but because they love
eternally their malice.

II. MAXIM. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
life. Prove. 4.
PARAPHRASE.
LEt your greatest care, and your chief business be, to keep your Heart,
because it is the first spring of life.

When that finds it self in disorder, the rest must necessarily be so also; and
nothing in your person nor your house, can be happy whilst your heart is not.
Govern your passions and lusts, and do not follow them.

Distrust your own will, because it is your own enemy, and that it seeks no
other thing, by its impatient desires, and disorderly inclinations, then to
beget in you intestin wars, and to see there, confusion despair and death.

Keep all that in chains, and let them be as so many rebellious prisonners,
committed to the Conduct of your reason.

REFLECTION.
THe Passions are a very wise invention of nature, who was willing to give man
extraordinary forces, on occasions where he ought to act strongly, for the
repelling a dangerous evil, or acquireing any good, of which the conquest is
painful.

When these invisible fires are lighted in the veins, a man is more then
himself, and he then does nothing but what seems miraculous.

There goes out of his heated blood, sparks and I know not what, points of
flame, as stings, which enter into the heart, and by unforeseen motions, push
it on to bold attempts. He runs where vehemence carries him, finding nothing
difficult, being able to believe nothing to be invincible, nor more powerful
and strong then the fire of which he feels him self animated.

The mischief is, that these forces shut up in man, are contrary to him. These
are seditious and cruel domestics. At least if they are not kept chained
always he is lost: if they are not his slaves, he must of necessity be their
victime.

The Passions knit to the heart of man, by the eternal wisdom, are as Lions,
or as horses of great price, fastened to the Chariot of a Conqueror.

When that our spirit, exempt from crime, without dependence on interest,
Master of its desires, Conqueror of the world, Image of the greatness and of
the Majesty of God, comes to appear there on, drawn by them into glory and
immortality, there is not in nature a statelier spectacle, nor more worthy to
be contemplated, nor admired by Angels.

But when it happens during the triumph, that the horses break their bits, they
carry away their guides by force from their Master, and there can be nothing
seen more sad and disastrous, they drag along with them, all the triumph into
precipices: And this conqueror which the people gatherd together, admired and
contemplated, is no more any thing, but the sport of a Troop of furies, and a
sad example of the weakness, of the virtues of the man, and the vanity of his
greatness.

The Passions are from God, the excess which happens is of the sin of the first
Man.

The work was holy and pure, when it went out from the hands of the Creator:
But the fire of hell is set thereto: and our tears had not been able to quench
it, although we had never ceased to weep since it was lighted.

The evil has lasted near six hundred years already, and continues, to this
very day, and it is thence, that all the mischiefs that betide us form
themselves.

Our spirit sent from Heaven into this lower world, Corpus mortis Caro peccati.
enters into an house built of earth, into a body, composed of a corruptible
matter, of dirt filled with the stings, of sin and of death.

The vapors of this corruption form within us a thick dark and tempestuous
cloud, which covers us with horror and obscurity.

Our passions wrapped up in this Cloud, they heat themselves, and there take
fire, and go out thence, like lightning and whirlwinds. These turbulent fires
drive on the Imagination, the imagination being driven and carried away,
carries with it, the thoughts and the will of the soul.

The immortal soul follows motion, and goes where heat and fury leads it, It
takes designs, and conceives blindly, inconsiderate opinions, foolish and
deceitful hopes, and impetuous desires. It runs and hazards it self, and its
headlong rashness stops not its self, but when in the end, it is arrived to
its unhappyness and lost in an abiss of crimes and tears.

The worst of it is, that when it finds it self there, it is ashamed to retire
thence. It falls there, by folly, and it abides there by Pride. Man coverd with
darkness, and filled with errors, plunged in filth and laden with chains,
tied by stubborness, to his customs and his ignorance, is a sad spectacle for
Heaven, who contemplates with pity this image of God, in so deplorable a
condition.

During the estate of innocence the passions raised not themselves, but by the
orders of reason.

In the state of wisdom, and of Christian holiness, the same passions raise
not themselves, but under reason, but in a state of licentiousness they raise
themselves above it.

These tempestuous darknesses cover the whole man, and spread trouble and
obscurity, even to the highest region.

The passions are strong, so are you, much stronger then they: I can say, at
least of the wise man, of all great men, that they have in their persons, three
powerful helps against these domestic enemies, three benefits of the Orator
Sanctified by Grace. Good nature, Courage, and wisdom.

III. MAXIM. I had a good spirit, and came into a body undefiled. Wisd: 8.
PARAPHRASE.
I have found in me, says Solomon, from my youth, all the bounties of an
excellent nature. They are not the fruits of my pains, nor the gifts of
fortune: God who governs the accidents of our birth and life, has given them
me, it is the work of his hands, and a present of his love, more ancient then my
self.

REFLECTION.
AN excellent and fine nature is no other thing, Sortitus sum animam bonam veni
ad corpus coinquinatum.
then the excellency and the beauty of a noble soul communicated to the
Passions.

As souls of that rank, possess their nobility, and greatness, from the birth:
when they enter into the body, they have the power, to help nature, to compose
their temperaments, and these are they, Tabernarulum pro habitu suo fingunt.
who by the impression of their force and sweetness, do form the imagination,
give the Character to the organs.

They shed out of themselves their qualities and all they can of their divine
fire and heavenly inclinations, to mingle it among the blood and the corrupted
passions; and by this happy medley, they weaken the poison of the corruption,
and the mortal violence of the malady that it finds there.

These pure stars, have influences which insinuate themselves, secretly among
the flames of lust, and there tempers that, which is most burning in their
fury, and most unruly in their motions.

One sees in many persons, a moderation and a purity, which makes one think,
that there remains not any spot, of the sin of Adam in them.

There appears nothing, but what is handsome in their passions, nor any thing
which seems not, to agree with the spirit, and to have spiritual inclinations.

That comes here from, that this spirit sublime, by privilege common to all
perfect Beings, has a secret power; of which that of the Loadstone is a
shadow, to draw from the earth all that it touches, and to draw it unto its
Pole.

The passions touched, by the virtue of a noble soul, turn themselves toward
Heaven, and aspire not, but to laudable and honest ends. Vir sapiens fortis
est. The spirit of Man is wise and strong, because that there is nothing in his
person, which opposes it self unto its elevation, and which refuses to follow
them.

IV. MAXIM. He that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty, and he that
rules his spirit, then he that takes a City. Prove. 16.
PARAPHRASE.
COurage and the love of true honor, is enough to render a man Master, of his
lusts and desires.

Courage contains two virtues, force and patience. And these are as the two
parts which compose it, and distinguishes it, from the other perfections of
our nature.

By force we resist Men, and our enemies that are strangers; by patience, our
passions and domestic enemies.

Conquerors of Men, are admired and crowned upon earth: Conquerors of
themselves, Violenti capiunt illud.
are so in Heaven; and it is for them, that all the triumphs and immortal
Crowns, are there prepared.

The vigor of those is worth much, and it deserves the reputation that it has
in the World.

The Patience of these, although the World prize it less, is much more worth;
it is the most necessary and ought to be most honored.

The one and the other have been always put in the first rank, of the moral
virtues; and they are those, that have given the name of Great to the
Constantines, and the Charlemains, and which have made the Heroes of old
adored. But if you cannot aspire, but to one of the two, choose that which wise
Men have preferred, and mark that amongst your Maxims, the words that one has
seen written upon some Princes Standards, and that all great Souls find graven
in themselves, as a device of natures choosing. Melior est patiens viro forti,
and qui dominatur animo suo, expugnatore urbium.

REFLECTION.
ONe demands what this Courage is. Every body answers? It is easy to deceive
ones self therein and to take appearance for truth.

Many do ill to put it in the number, of fevers and the heats of their
corrupted nature; and to believe, that it is no other thing then an
inflammation of choler, which unexpectedly kindles it self, at the meeting of
some object of Anger, and which heating the imagination and troubling the
humors of the body, pusheth the man inconsiderately into dangers.

Courage is not of the number of the passions, it is their Master; nature keeps
it in the middle of them, not as a Criminal amongst its Accomplices, but a
Conqueror amongst his Slaves, to keep them in duty and subject them to labor.
Their fires are different from his, but they are fit to serve him.

Some perfwade themselves, that this which we call true Courage, is a Military
Angel, who during combats, enters into the souls of the Heroes, and there
produces the Marvels that we admire.

Others, That it is only the inspiration, or the breath of this Angel, which
pusheth on the hearts of soldiers, and gives motion to armies.

The most wise, have very wisely said, that it is a spiritual flame, kindled by
the Creator, in the highest part of our Soul, as a starr in the highest part of
the Firmament.

A peaceful and regular flame, sublime, incorruptible, ardent, pure and
fruitful, always fastened to Heaven and busy on earth, by an inexhaustible
emanation of influences, necessary for the conservation of the repose, and life
of the people.

But whatsoever Courage may be, do not you believe, that to be courageous you
are obliged to take arms, and go seek enemies in far Countries. Abide where you
are, and make war against your passions; you shall do (says Solomon) more than
those who wear the sword.

When that you pardon injuries, and by a generous patience you suffer slanders
and calumnies, you are better then the soldier that revengeth them.

And it is more honorable to you, to stop in you, any transport of anger, or
to repel in you, any thoughts which flatter you and draw you to sin, then to
destroy an Army and to take Cities.

Your greatness and your glory, is not to abase others before you; but to be
great in your self, and to have above those, an elevation independent on their
fall or misery.

When you overcome your irregular impatience, and you resist the motions, that
carry you to loose actions, that are prohibited by duty; you make your merit
and your virtue to be believed, when you overcome strange enemies, it
increases nothing that is in you; The defeat of an Army lessens the number of
men, but it adds not a jot to your stature, nor one degree of perfection to
your spirit.

In one word, prize patience. I do not say, contemn vigor: Although it is not
be valued, as this victorious patience, I confess it is worth much and deserves
the admiration that all ages have had for it. But further, that the one and the
other to be perfect, ought not to be separated; because they are the two parts
of courage, the two halfs, of one and the same whole that separation will
necessarily weaken and obscure.

There is no courage, nor nobleness, nor supreme grandour in a Soul, where
these two virtues are not together: it is only by their union; that they have
the power, to carry men to the most eminent degree of heroic Glory, and to give
to their actions this Divine luster which dazles the eyes of the World, and
which obliges fame, to speak of them to all Nations and in all ages.

It is true, that it is an illustrious thing, and very justly to be applauded
and admired by the people, to see what courage does in a Prince; when that
during a battle, pushed on by this celestial fire, He passes unhurt through
all the furies of death, and runs (upon an Army overthrown) after victory which
calls and leads him.

In like manner, it is true, That there is another spectacle yet more rare and
more worthy of public admiration, to see a Prince, when in the midst of
triumphs and success, and amongst the most glorious felicities of humane life;
he can contemn what he possesses, and that he visibly declares by his modesty,
and by the fidelity of his Conduct, that he had rather lose all that, and lose
Empires and Worlds too, if he had them, then to commit an action of injustice.

But to see these two marvels united, and tied to each other in one and the
same Conqueror; To overcome the enemies of the State, and to overcome himself,
to increase in Wisdom and moderation by Combats; to increase in goodness by
victories; to take Towns and gain Hearts; to be the most beloved and most
dreadful of men, without doubt, is the most ravishing sight under Heaven. I do
not know whether the Ancients have seen it with their eyes, or if posterity
shall see it in our Annals.

All the sentiments of this true Courage, are heaped together in these two
words. Rather to dye then to fear Men, and to fly before an Army; and rather to
dye, then not to fly at the sight of dangers which threaten the Conscience; and
preferring the interests of self love, or a loose passion, before the duties of
fidelity.

If you are not of the condition, nor the humor to say the former; or if your
particular profession, subject you to the Laws of the Gospel, oblige you to
pardon all injuries: comfort your self in remembering, That it is a Prince more
valiant then the Caesar's, and more enlightened from God then the Prophets, who
assures me. Melior est patiens viro forti, qui dominatur animo suo, expugnatore
urbium.

V. MAXIM. A breath of the Power of God, a pure influence flowing from the
Glory of the Almighty, the brightness of the everlasting Light, the unspotted
mirror of the Power of God. Wisd. 7.
PARAPHRASE.
AMongst the perfections of God, that which renders a Man eternally at peace in
himself, is Wisdom: It is from thence that he draws the third remedy, that he
presents us against the troubles and disorders, which we carry within us, and
who are born of our own infirmity.

This supernatural Wisdom is a vapor of its virtue, communicated to the
Passions of the Man, and shed even into the midst of their corruptions and
tumults, to cause there peace and holiness.

The peace of the Saints enters into us with Wisdom; and the design of God is,
That there remaining in our Soul, no more of any motion or spot, it becomes a
mirror, where he can contemplate his Divine beauty without, and there know
himself, as he knows himself eternally in his word. Speculum Majestatis Dei.

REFLECTION.
GOod nature weakens the Passions; Inclinavi cor meum ad faciendas
justificationes tuas.
Courage daunts them, Wisdom elevates them. And by a miraculous transformation,
it changes them into virtues, and sanctifies what they have criminal and most
contrary to grace, in putting them sweetly under obedience.

I will tell you, Cor meum and caro mea exultaverunt in Deum.
that when the Law declares to us, the Will of the Creator, and that it
obliges and constrains us to obey them, Wisdom adds the inclination to this
obligation; and that it produces in our hearts certain delicious motions which
act us, and make our very passions leap for joy, to aspire with us, to the
happiness of doing what God will, and to be employed to serve and honor him.

In one word, the Law obliges us, Grace helps us, and wisdom inclines us, to
observe divine commandments.

As soon as Man enlightened, Justiciae Domini laetificant Corda.
by the rays of this Aurora, he finds his repose, and its joy, in the
excercises of righteousness.

Whatsoever it be that one proposes to him, Justificatione tua exultatio
cordis mei.
as soon as its just, that he may do it, he is inclined to do it: as soon as
reason commands he obeys by love: duty is his pleasure, obedience is his
liberty, fidelity is his humor.

His soul wills what is good, without deliberating; it undertakes it without
combating against it self, and having no difference, or affairs with any of
his passions. These domestic enemies, are no more what they were; wisdom
transforms the whole man.

This wise soul frames great designs, and it pursues them; it aspires to honor
immortal, and thither it runs without stirring it self: it walks not, its
carried; and they are those heats of blood, and flames of ambitious lust,
heretofore so turbulent and rebellious, who serve him as slaves, and carry it
in this triumph.

Triumph, where one sees what did appear, most divine among the works of the
power of God, the day that he created the world. A Man, within whom all the man
conspires to love duty and virtue.

God gives wisdom freely to some, and he would that others should obtain it by
prayer. One of the surest means to invite it, is to hearken to the counsels of
this same wisdom; even this, is to be already very wise, to begin to follow
them and to govern a man's self according to its instructions and maxims.

VI. MAXIM. Envy and wrath shorten the life and carefulness brings age before
the time. Eccles. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
IF you will serve God worthily and conserve your devotion and innocence until
death, do what wise men have done to keep their health; possess an inward
peace, and do not leave your selves to be troubled by any business or Passion;
Jealousy, anger, and hatred, are not in man, but to destroy his virtue and to
shorten his life. The excess of affection and application to any undertaking,
although laudable, is not less dangerous, then other disquiets. All that there
is violent in us, pusheth us on to sin, and drags us to the grave. Nothing is
immortal and glorious, but that which is calm.

REFLECTION.
TAke good heed of pleasing your self too much, with any thing whatsoever, nay,
even with your very duty; or of thinking too strongly on things, and applying
your self thereto, with earnest and impatient care.

Have so much moderation and so much power over your self, as one may be able
to say; That you undertake business by reason, That you labor in it by
inclination, and, That you see the success thereof with indifference.

I say not that you should be insensible. It is necessary that you have
Passions, and that these Passions were ardent. It is necessary your Horses
should love to run, and that they have fire. Coolness ought not to be, but in
Counsels; Indifference, but in Reason

And it is in that, consists the beauty of humane life, That one sees a
magnanimous heat in our actions and desires, but never any rashness or
transport.

God does, without troubling himself, all that a God ought to do; and he is as
the Sun in Heaven, always busied about an infinite number of works and always
peaceful.

Be you here below, as the shadow on a Dial; Walk and go, where duty calls you.
Do every thing which a person that governs an House, or a City, or the Estate,
ought to do; or one who rules the actions of people. But be you so wise, and so
reserved, that it may seem by your modesty and sedate temper, that you are in a
perfect repose and that you have no care.

VII. MAXIM. A Fools wrath is soon known, but a prudent Man covers shame.
Prove. 12.
PARAPHRASE.
THe most ordinary indiscretion of Man, is to declare his anger too soon. The
Duty of Virtue is to extinguish it; And that of interest to Conduct it
secretly: As Soon as it is born, the Politician covers it; but the wise Man
choaks and kills it as soon.

REFLECTION.
DO you yet better, hinder it if possible from being born, The least time, that
unruly anger abides in your Soul, or appears on your countenance, it cannot be
without disorder and shame.

Its unforeseen motions which are not your crimes, are your infirmities:
although they render you not guilty, they do not leave you but unseemly; and
since there is suppressing them, there is yet more, not to feel them.

I know well, that it is glorious to resist and overcome: but when it is a
question to resist a dangerous passion, and to overcome your self; it is yet
more glorious, not to be attacked, and to have nothing in you, that were
necessary to destroy, or that you ought to dread.

Fear the Triumphs where it is necessary, that you be the Captive. And choose
rather to be in perfect health, then to have precious remedies; to have a
patient and modest spirit then excellent Maxims against impatience.

At least remark, That Wisdom who gives unto hot and choleric persons,
abundance of fair instructions to moderate their heat, if it were in their
power to melt their natures, and entirely to new-make themselves would council
them no more then one thing, and would not have more to tell them then this one
word only. Renovate your selves.

VIII. MAXIM. A wounded spirit who can bear. Prove. 18.
PARAPHRASE.
WHo is he that shall be able to live, with a man that vexes himself
continually, and without reason, and who is subject to frequent fits, of
violent anger? But how is it, that he can endure himself, and be accustomed to
see himself in so shameful a condition.

The worst is, That his evil as the other evils of Hell, have no remedy, and
that they cannot be cured without ceasing to live, or without returning to the
fountain of Life, there to change the temper and take another body.

REFLECTION.
AMongst angers, the most indecent to persons of quality, and the most
intolerable, is without doubt this, which needs none to kindle it but it self,
and which takes fire, as a tempestuous cloud, from whence one sees unexpectedly
lightnings and horrible noises to break out, when no body puts fire to it.

One cannot be near them in safety or quiet, no not even when they are so? The
rest of their anger, is as the delicate slumber of a sick Prince. You must
speak very low, and take great care, and walk with much fear and circumspection
least you awake him.

The strange destiny, of people of this evil humor, according to the thoughts
of a Philosopher, is that there is nothing for them in the World but is
encompassed with thorns; and that they feel themselves stung, by whatsoever
they touch, or that comes near them.

In the most kind civilities and even in benefits and favors, they find
certain, I don't know what, that wound them: What you do and what you say to
please them, is that by which they account themselves justly offended, and of
which they complain.

Your most respectful words and actions, are the sparks that fall upon their
choler. You see them suddenly out of themselves, transported into dreadful
furies; because that their caprice has seen in your words, or in your eyes,
some equivocation or look of a double meaning, which they do not understand.

It Is true, that each one has his infirmities and miseries, variously
distributed by corrupted nature. Unhappy is the M^n who has these for his
burden! if they are yours, weep and fear.

I well know that you call those angers, unavoidable accidents, or necessary
faults, which should cause pity and merit excuse. Great question: come to the
point.

One does not complain of your being subject to a distemper, which is an enemy
to mankind; but they complain, that you would live with men. It is a misfortune
to bear this plague in the bottom of the heart; but it is a crime to bring it
into a City, and to appear in company with it.

That which is most inexcusable, is that you bring it even upon tribunals, and
that you would exercise a charge, where you are obliged to treat with all sorts
of persons.

Wherefore is it necessary, That the scandalized World should come to know
every day such a reproach to the spirit of Man, and to view during your
transports all the disorders and follies of such a ridiculous and brutish
infirmity.

Either cure your self, or hide your self. An Ancient has very well said, that
Dens and Caves of Rocks, are habitations prepared by the Creator, for persons
subject to impetuous and blind anger: Retire thither.

It shall be much easier to you, to suffer your self alone in Solitude, then to
render your evil common, to a City or an whole Country.

Learn what nature ought to teach you, and what all the people of honor feel.
(viz.) That the cruelest affliction and most difficult to bear, is to be
intolerable to others. Spiritum ad irascendum facilem, quis poterit sustinere?

IX. MAXIM. Seek not of the Lord pre-eminence, neither of the King the seat of
honor, Eccles. 7.
PARAPHRASE.
GIve ambition no power over your heart: nor permit that this wind drive you,
and make you run after smoke and vanity; nay, not after charges truly
honorable.

When the Glory of this World presents it self to you, and that it is
providence which sends it, receive it: but if one speak to you to go before it,
and prevent it by gifts and solicitations, excuse your self, and give this
humble and generous answer: That the least charge, when they are offered with
love, are worthy to be received, and that they ought to be; but the greatest
are too mean to be sought after.

Answer also, That in regard of honors; It Is to cease from deserving, when one
asks what he deserves.

REFLECTION.
Ambition becomes a wise Man, Indecens est stulto gloria. Prove. 26.
and so does Honor a Fool.

If you are a Man of evil example, and if there be disorder and scandal in your
Conduct, fly from honor, and hide your self: And if perhaps the Prince
obliges you to ask any favor, do not pray him, as a famous Fool did
heretofore, to withdraw his face from before your Sun; Pray him to leave you in
your darkness.

Look on the employs that they offer you, and of which your friends speak or
those that pride desires, as your confusion and unhappiness, since that you
cannot bear under them, by understanding or by virtue.

There is nothing more ugly, Indecens stulto, etc.
nor shameful to our spirit, then glory, when it possesses it, without grace
or desert.

When we are truly contemptible, all humane dignities and greatness, increases
nothing in us but our reproach.

Our stature becomes no finer, nor higher on a Theater, but our lowness of body
would better be seen.

Crowns and Mitres do not raise us, we bear up them; and we shall be always
little with them, if we are not great personages without them.

You vex your self, when others honor you, to divert themselves and to laugh
at you; but you do ill if you vex not more, when they do it sincerely and with
affection. Honor seriously paid, to a person unworthy of it, is no less a
ground of anger, then honor given by mockers.

In fine, suffer not that one raise you on high, least those who shall see you
in a chair of honor boast, To have seen as well as Solomon, the most horrible
thing to see under the Sun. Malum quod vidi sub sole, positum stultum in
dignitate sublimi.

X. MAXIM Give not sadness to thy Soul, nor afflict thy self in thy Council.
PARAPHRASE.
DO not load your self with cares nor wearisomenesses; banish sadness from
your heart. Sadness kills many a man, and it serves for nothing, but to give
strength to the little pains of this life; and to change the shaddows and
apparences of evils, into real and immortal ones.

REFLECTION.
WHen there happens an unhappy occurrence, consult your reason, and deliberate
with it, but without earnestness or trouble. Let your thoughts enlighten you,
but not consume you: Let business employ you but not afflict you, nor ever
disquiet you: business is given as the employment of the mind, not as the
punishment thereof.

In manageing your designs, regard with patience, the failings which happen on
your part, or the part of fortune; and believe, that to learn by ten faults,
to do one action well, and happily to frame one undertaking, is to be wise and
able enough: Despair not by such misfortunes; profit by them.

To raise your thoughts some times to God, and to be familiar with him by
perpetual entertainments of a respectful considence, is an excellent remedy, so
exempt you from disquiet, during the administration of your charge, and to keep
your passions, in their obedience and order.

Although he knows all that you know of your affairs; or that regard, them,
and although he sees better then you do, the pains and difficulties that
trouble you and render you irresolute; he is pleased to learn them from your
self. These are the secrets of your heart, that you owe to his love, come,
tell him confidently, draw near to him without fear, and remember that in your
Cabinet, and in the places where you are alone with him, his only care is to
think only of you, and that all the application of his providence and goodness,
regards your particular needs. He is not there, but to comfort you, and to
learn what condition, the affairs of your house, or your office, or your
conscience are in, Tell him then freely and with sincerity, what you know
thereof: discover your heart to him and make seen to him all the bitterness and
disquiet that is therein, with all the motions of your thoughts, agitated by
fear or sadness. Vide, Domine, quoniam tribulor.

Behold me, my God, lost and swallowed up, in a Sea of grief: Thou see my
pain, thou love me, thou hear my groans; and I, see my remedy on thy lips,
speak and comfort me: at least refuse not to look on me, and to let that
power go forth from thine eyes, which draws back the afflicted from the grave,
and gives strength and life.

He is not angry, but during your displeasures, you address your self to
creatures, to be eased by them: but when they have not the power, or the will
to help you, it pleases him, that you come and testify to him your sentiments
there on, and to complain between his arms, of their impotence and ingratitude:
Verbosi amici mei.. My friends have nothing but words. It is to thee, Divine
Savior, that I am about to recount my afflictions, and address my tears. Ad
Deum stillat oculus meus.

His goodness inclines him to grant all desirable consolations, but would (if
I might so say) be forced by prayers and remonstrances, that suffer him not to
refuse.

XI. MAXIM. Turn away thine eye from the beautiful woman Eccles. 9.
PARAPHRASE.
DO not let love enter into your Soul, nor into your eyes. Turn away your light
from a Woman that would please, and look not on a beauty, that comes to blind
you, and take away the hopes of ever seeing, the infinite and sovereign beauty.

REFLECTION.
THere is nothing more dreadful, then the sweetness and tendernesses of a
malicious Woman. Fear her approaches and civilities. Custodi te a muliere
blanda and a lingua extranea, and ne capiaris nutibus illius.
Fear her voice, her eyes, her hands, she has nothing sweet and lovely, which
may not be mortal to you. Her instinct can make darts and arms, of all that is
in her.

That which is nothing elsewhere, is in her a dangerous power, there needs but
a twinkling of an eye to beat you down, and but a hair to drag you along.
Flight it self stands you not in much stead; if you have seen her before
flying, you fly not far.

Do not suffer your self to be taken by her deceitful flatteries: her words are
as dew that runs from her lips, and enter deliciously into your heart. But that
shall quickly turn into poison which shall rent your bowels. Her beginnings are
sweet as honey, but her end is bitter as Wormwood.

The things that she promises have on the Tongue very dangerous baits. There
is much gayness in her discourse and looks, but this brightness is but as that
of a Comet which appears not, but to warn you of misfortunes. Prove. 5. As Soon
as you perceive it, begin to fear and assure your self, you shall suddenly weep.

That which draws you, Viae inferi domus ejus penetrantes in inferiora mortis.
and that you see upon her countenance are the rays of the true Sun. Their
beginning is the beauty of God, look on that side, and go thither; but the way
to which they are directed here below, are an abyss of filth, despair and of
tears.

Many before you, have gone thither headlong: and it is from the bottom of this
abyss, that comes out those doleful voices and lamentable cries, which have
echoed these six thousand years, repeating the sad words of unhappy Solomon.
Vanitas and vexat^^ spiritus.

Illusions and treacheries: false beauties, true sins; dreams of pleasures, and
truth of eternal repentings. The Wisdom of the Creator has made one Master
piece, in framing their Wit and countenance; but to view these safely, you must
call back the time of innocence, or wait the day of glory and immortality.

XII. MAXIM. When a man has done, then he begins; and when he leaves of,
then he shall be doubtful. Eccles. 18.
PARAPHRASE.
ONe of the most ordinary remedies to preserve us, from the disorders of our
passions, is Work.

The prudent Man is never idle: when he has not wherewith to employ himself,
he thinks upon what he has done, and reviews his actions.

REFLECTION.
THe coverous Man busieth himself to gain wealth, the ambitious Man to gain and
merit honor, the wise Man to gain by labor. He endeavors to acquire, by one
employment or another, and to provide himself of cares and business the most
important, and most necessary provision of this life.

It is better to want nourishment then an employ. The man who wants the one, or
the other will perish. The difference is, That by hunger, a Man dies without
dishonor, and very soon; and by idleness, he dies shamefully and slowly.

The beauty of the mind, the goodness of the nature, the force of Courage, and
the purity of the Conscience, retain somewhat of the nature of Fire: they cannot
continue nor preserve themselves, but by motion and action. To render them
immovable, is to extinguish them; and this is that, which idleness does, which
by its criminal repose, destroys more things then time by its agitations, and
by its courses that overthrows every thing. The worst is, that this idleness
does yet more then death, and corrupts that which is most incorruptible and
Divine within us.

Time has not been able to do any thing against the Sun, this six thousand
years: there would need but one days idleness to destroy it

There would need but one hour, nay less, to destroy the innocence and fidelity
of the Soul, that all the cruelties of Tyranny and the flatteries of Pleasure,
had not been able to corrupt during so many years.

Rest is every where the original of Evil Deadly Herbs, venomous Beasts,
Rottenesses, Corruptions, Plagues, Famines, are not begot, but by the idleness
and immobility of the Elements.

One finds no where sins, ignorances, nor even follies nor despaires, as in
souls who have nothing to do, but torment themselves. What heretofore a wise
man said, is true, That infinitely and eternally to punish a spirit, there
would no other hell be needful, then an everlasting idleness.

ARTICLE IV. MAXIMS For the Conduct of the Tongue.
The first MAXIM. A soft answer turns away wrath: but grievous words stir up
Anger. Prove. 15.
PARAPHRASE.
SWeet and humble words, subdue the anger of others: it is not the point of the
sword that does it. When they cry, we our selves cry, and employ injuryes and
threatenings, and violent means, to make them hold their peace; and we forget
our selves, that there needs not but a word of softness and Civility.

A soft, discreet, and an eloquent tongue is a tree of life in the house and in
the company where it is. Each plucks from thence fruits of consolation, and
remedies for disquiets, and other inward diseases. It cures all the wounds of
our souls. But a rash tongue, is a wounding sword, who by its inconsiderate
words carries mortal blows, to the bottom of the heart.

REFLECTION.
THere is nothing in which Man exercises himself as much as in speaking and
conversing with his friends, nor any thing in which he profits less, and is
more imperfect.

We begin to converse from the Cradle, and yet we know not at the age of sixty,
how it is to do it well. We unlearn even by study and exercise; and by how much
the more we advance in age, by so much the more inexcusable is our fault.

Some teach the Trade of conversing well, all learn it, but few know it.
Masters say very well and do very ill: they write excellently but their Tongues
are not led by their writings. The Rules that they give surpass their power,
they cannot observe themselves, insomuch that there is no art, that has finer
precepts, nor less fine examples then this, to converse wisely.

If you cannot attain to the height of perfection, nor to be of the number of
those great Men who charm company; endeavor not to be of the number of the
importunate, and unprofitable or troublesome, at least do not make your self to
be put into the number of the intolerable.

Men put in this Rank certain people, whose faculty is to know all that is
shameful in the house, and the life of every body, and whose conversation and
employment is without ceasing, Odibilis est qui procax est ad loquendum.
Eccles. 20.
to talk of it and to publish it abroad: people bold in slanders, indiscreet,
and impudent in reparties, inexhaustible in words.

To avoid meeting with these people, is to be very wise.

And it is to be no more so, if when you meet them, you let them talk on and
have no difference with them. But to be perfectly wise, is to do in such
manner, as they may fear to have any with you, and that they may be constrained
to be wise, every where, where you are.

Men put in this Rank of intolerables the great talkers; that sort of Men and
Women, who, during discourses and entertainments, have their mouths always
open, and of whom the conversation (as heretofore that of the Philosopher
Anaximenes) is to spill a River of words in company, and one drop of good sense.

Be you better learnt and modester: Let them speak when you have spoken; Give
others leave to answer you, and have the power to hold your Tongue when they
speak. Show them that you can hearken when it comes to your turn, and permit
them not to think of you what they said of this Philosopher; that in stead of
two ears, nature had given him three tongues.

There are also put in this rank, persons that one has much to do to bear,
Fools, who can neither speak themselves, nor will not suffer others to speak,
but of their own praises; who seem to know nothing, but the history of their
fortune, and their actions; and the worst on it is, That they would that others
should also know nothing but the same history, they recount it unto whomsoever
he be, and although they say it again without ceaseing, they forget they have
told it, and begin again at every turn.

Persons who are given to boasting, are not much better in company then these
that have an ill scent.

It Is a grievous chance for a man of honor to find himself between the two and
not dare fly.

It Is the worst nevertheless to stay there and to hearken to their
sottishnesses; this were to learn their evil, and to contract by their
example, the speaking and boasting of your self likewise. Suffer them; but
imitate them not.

Have this for your Maxim. Laudet te alienus and non os tuum. Prove: 27.
That it is incomparably less shameful to be blamed, and mocked of others, then
to praise ones self.

Cheats and Libertines have often blamed the wise, and accused them, but a wise
man never praised himself.

Men put yet in the same rank of intolerables, those rash and giddy Buffoons,
who can not speak without rallying, nor Jest without offending those who hear
them.

It is true, that modest and honest jests, are the necessary salt to
conversation, which easily corrupts and becomes unsavory, and loathsome when one
laughs not; But too much salt is worse then none at all, and observe that this
too much, is not far from a very little. There is much wisdom nece^^ary, to
keep a man in moderation, and for him not to run into excess.

Do not concern your self to laugh, or sport with others in words, if you are
not extremely wise, and if you understand not the method of doing it well and
gracefully.

Jesters would be discreet enough in this, had they but as much discretion as
the Beasts. When Beasts play together, and fight by diversion, one would
believe they would bite one another to the bowels, and tear each other to
pieces.

They do nothing but flatter, they govern their feet and their claws with
wonderful address, nothing enters with in the skin.

Jeerers cannot govern their tongues, they push their stings, and their
pricking, indiscreet jeers, into the bottom of the soul.

Dureing their pla^, blood always runs, there is always some mortal wound in
the heart of their friend, one comes not near them without being hurt.

There is in our conversations a common Itch, to declare war against some one
or other, and to attacque him by the shafts of wit, and by the innocent malices
of a pleasant humor. But our cruelty, dureing these counterfeit wars and
quarrels, is, that we would have them always mingled with some true contempt.
We do not believe our selves to have laughed, if our friend is not sensibly
pricked at the heart and if we have said nothing which has displeased or
offended him.

Men of great wit and an excellent nature, can mingle these familiarities, and
feigned quarrels with respect, and hinder that among the repartees of a good
humor and strokes of friendship, there slips not any blow of pride and
despite, nor any disobligeing word.

Their faculty passes yet further. They know to mingle the same respect, in
reprimands and threatenings and even in true angers.

A wise man can speak as a Master to a servant, without slandering him, and
without saying a word of which he could be offended.

He can speak as a Judge to a guilty person, and upbraid him of his faults with
severe and terrible words, without failing of that respect that be owes to the
dignity of a man. He accuses not but the will of the man, he blames what he
has done by his liberty, with out blameing any thing, that nature or fortune
has done in him.

We owe to one another an inviolable respect. You must not refuse, even to
infants, nor the poor, what justice obliges us to pay them, since they have on
the Image of God as well as others.

Since we carry in your souls the Image of the Divinity there is sacrilege
in contemning one another.

The unhappy inclination that we have to witness the little account we make of
by the Devil with Poison that he shed there, the day that he corrupted our
nature.

If we could respect one another as we ought, there would be nothing but
heavenly sweetness in our familiarities and liberties of our domestic life.

Mutual contempt begets all that there is of War in our Houses, and this War,
all the misfortunes that happen therein.

II. MAXIM. A wise man by his words makes himself beloved. Eccles. 20.
PARAPHRASE.
WOrds are the paint of the Soul. They are those that make known what it is.

This spiritual substance cannot be better seen, than on the Tongue.

When a Soul speaks of other things, it needs not to speak of it self, to be
known: As Soon as one has heard, what the one has spoken, it is known what the
other was.

REFLECTION.
THe happiness of making ones self loved, In verbis seipsum amabilem facit.
depends on the manner of guiding the the Tongue.

To speak easily, not to speak too much; to have no pain to speak well, or to
hold ones peace; To hold grave discourses and higher, when there is need, and
to speak worthily of important and serious things; to abase a man's self also,
when it is necessary; to be able to laugh with those that laugh, and keep
therein the rules of decency and civility; to be able to mingle praises, and
true civilities amongst plays and jests, and not to strike others in playing;
but as much as is needful, to caress or honor them: to say nothing but wisely
and modestly, with a grace and with sincerity, is to take men's hearts, as one
ought to take them, and the best fashion that one can do it; I will say, by
words, which should be the Image of one of excellent parts.

Good offices have not taken men, but very rarely; Presents neither take, nor
touch but the eyes: it is necessary to converse, either to love or be beloved.

They are prudent and respectful words, which have implanted those immortal
inclinations and all those noble and famous friendships, which we see, and have
heretoforee seen among friends.

The Men of account, Men of Council, Judges, famous and sought after, all the
learned and great Personages, owe their reputation, and their fortune of their
learned and discreet Tongue

Women who make themselves most to be considered in the World, and most
beloved, are not those who have most of exterior graces, and most wit, nor
those that know most things, the reputation that they acquire, by these
admirable qualities, pass swiftly away: If any one be constantly and perfectly
beloved, she is so, because she is wise and discreet in her words.

As it seems that there is nothing more easy, then to govern the Tongue; so it
seems that nothing is more easy, then to make ones self beloved.

It is nevertheless rare, because we refuse to speak, according as it pleases
those who hear us; we will say what pleases our evil humor; we love rather to
render our selves intolerable to others then give our selves the pain, of
keeping in some inconsiderate words, or the trouble of speaking humbly and
courteously.

We are in company often, to show that which is most infamous and shameful in
us to see, and which ought to be most hidden; A base spirit, We will have that
men see it, only because we will speak.

The Mask is an excellent invention for deformity; But the best for folly, is
that of silence. If Fools could hold their peace, their folly would be unknown.

III. MAXIM. Wisdom that is hid, and Treasure that is hoarded up, what is in
them both? Eccles. 29.
PARAPHRASE.
THe wise Man does wrong unto others, when he speaks not a word; Riches hidden,
and understanding mute, are equally unprofitable; But he that hiddeth his folly
is much more worth, then he that hides his Wisdom.

REFLECTION.
IT happens often enough, that those who have Wit and who know many things,
speak little.

That comes, either from a melancholic complexion, which makes them love
solitude, and to find pleasure in entertaining themselves; or else by a
critical conscience, which makes them apprehend inevitable faults during
conversation, and which would carry a way the glory, of having said nothing
impertinent.

But it is a question, whether it be more criminal and shameful to speak, then
indiscreet to hold ones pe^ce. They ought to remember that the last and least
degree of Wisdom touching the Conduct of the Tongue, is to be able to hold ones
peace. The second is to speak but little. The third and most perfect is, to be
able to speak much, without speaking ill, or too much.

It is true, there is need of great discretion, to keep in what ought not to be
known: but there must be much more, on occasions used, to hinder others from
suspecting, or knowing by our silence, that we would hold our peace on purpose.

Perfection, is to cover this silence by words, and to hide our secrets by
speaking freely and ingeniously, that which may, and ought to be said in
company.

It is of a secret, as of a treasure, It is half discovered, when it is known to
be hid.

IV. MAXIM. Make a door and bar for thy mouth, beware thou slide not by it.
Eccles. 28.
PARAPHRASE.
MAke a door to your Mouth. Leave rather your Coffers and your Treasures
without locks, then your lips; and have a care, that there never goes out any
word which may offend, or which ought to be blamed.

Imagine you, Attend ne forte labaris in lingua.
(says the Prophet) that you are in company as on the Ice, and that you must
walk thereon gently and wisely. Fear always, least your Tongue slip, and your
judgment fall with it. As many unbecoming words, indiscreet or rash, as you
pronounce; they are as so many falls of your wit, that fall upon others and
either wound or incommodate them.

REFLECTION.
TO hinder that none of these sorts of words, should be able to come out of our
mouth, by putting locks there, is as good counsel as can be given us.

But as it is necessary to open often, and speak when reason and necessity
would have it, it seems that these locks would not serve for much.

Wicked words are nearest the door, and these escape amongst the good; and
because that it is good to speak, it is as impossible to hinder speaking ill.

One can nevertheless when Wisdom keeps the keys. And its principal business
among us, is to be continually at this door, to open and shut it, as often as
is necessary.

As Soon as it is absent, there happens disorders; Lingua tertia eivitates
muratas destruxit: domos magnaterum effodit. Eccles. 28.
and one may say, that the most part of the disasters, which happen in Towns
and Houses, that cause so many tears to be shed, comes from this, That Wisdom
is not every where, where Tongues are.

When it is found there, there passes one of the most admirable things of
humane life, That a wise Man speaks as others, readily without seeking, and
counting his words, and that in the mean while, he speaks not a word that
Wisdom considers not, and upon which it makes not judicious reflections.

His discourse is a running and a swift water: but this course does not hinder,
its having time enough to observe each drop, and not to let any pass, that he
knows not and does not examine.

So true is it, that the most miraculous readiness in the World, is that of an
eminent and clear understanding, to consider what it says.

Where the Tongue needs hours to speak, the mind wants less then a minute, to
contemplate all the words it pronounces, and all that it retains; and to
distinguish, what it ought to say from what it ought to be silent in.

In a word, the sovereign perfection of Man, in conversing with his like; is
that each word bears the mark, that it is not picked and chosen, and that
nevertheless it is perfectly examined.

V. MAXIM. He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and
shame unto him, Prove. 18.
PARAPHRASE.
HE that answers before he hears, answers not, but to tell that he is a Fool.

REFLECTION.
ONe of our most ordinary failings, is speaking inconsiderately and too fast.
One of our most shameful pains, is to unsay what we have unseasonably or
impertinently spoken, and one of our most punishable sins, is not to avoid this
shame, and not to be willing to recant.

The fear of falling into any of these inconveniences, renders a wise Man
extremely circumspect in his discourse, and makes him take this for a Maxim,
Never to say any thing, without being first assured, he shall not be obliged to
say it backward.

VI. MAXIM. Be not hasty in thy Tongue, and in thy deeds slack and remiss.
Eccles. 4.
PARAPHRASE.
BE not ready in your words, and slow in your actions: speak discreetly and act
courageously: promise little, and do much.

REFLECTION.
IMitate not the most part of mankind, who are too good; and it may be, there
is not a more dangerous malice, then this excess of their goodness, because
there is nothing more a cheat.

They promise according to their desire, which is great; and they do according
to their power, which is small.

In engaging our word, and in obliging our selves to serve others, to act
wisely and prudently, is to promise less then they ask, and to do more then
they hope.

VII. MAXIM. Open not thy heart to every man, Eccles. 8.
PARAPHRASE.
DEclare not your sentiments, and discover not your heart to all the World.

REFLECTION.
KNow the heart of others, and see all, if it be possible without being seen.
Be you secret without being dissembled. Content your self to keep back your
thoughts, not to cover them with crafts. When you must act secretly, exempt
your self from lies and use silence only.

Have you the most royal of perfections, (viz.) to be able to speak, and to be
able to hold your peace as it pleases; to say as well, what one has a mind to
say, and as little.

Keep this Maxim, and know how to hold your peace, principally touching
affairs, and undertakings committed to your prudence.

A design discovered, is scarce more worth then a design broken.

The least damage, that you ought to fear from words too hasty, is that they
delay success.

Time destroys all that is done, and the Tongue all that is to do.

Observe that same Maxim in regard of other things, that one shall have told
you confidently, and be faithful to those who have believed that you are so.

When you let go out of your lips, the secrets of your friend; Believe that
friendship, fidelity, honesty, honor; wisdom, and justice, go out of your Soul
at the same time; and that there is no other difference between you, and a
beast, but that his brutality consists in not being able to speak; and yours,
in not being able to hold your peace.

Observe that touching the faults of other persons. Many boast that they do not
the evil that they see done; do you better yet, do you boast that you never so
much as speak of it.

The sin of your neighbor, when it is covered with the darkness of silence and
the night, it is a simple sin, and many times offensiv to him alone, when you
discover it, you make it an infamy to his innocent house, an example to loose
persons, and a scandal to the Church.

That which he had done, (if that I might so say) was not but the beginning of
a sin, but you have consummated it by your Tongue.

It is hence forward a crime finished, and accompanied with all the reproaches
and misfortunes of a scandalous and unpardonable fault.

Publish not that, which Divine mercy would have you hide. Do not publish also,
which nature endeavors to hide, such are ordinarily, the imperfections that it
has left in any persons, or the faults that it has made it self in their
birth. If you observe them your self, have the goodness not to make them
observed by others.

It Is true, that these reviling or jeers please many, but be you not so loose,
as to please your self therewith; and do not afflict your own heart, in willing
it to laugh at such a discourse, as renders an honest man ridiculous. Have
displeasure in the knowledge of his faults, an aversion to speak of them, and
an horror to divert your self by them.

Aspire to the happiness that an Holy man received, who in dying thanked God,
that during the sixty years that he had lived, he remembered not, that he had
said any word capable of offending, or disobliging his neighbor.

In fine, study to hold your peace. That is, as said Aristotle, the study of
Princes and Kings, and all the men of quality.

One of the occ^sions, where silence is very comely, is in regard of good
offices and favors, with which one is resolved to gratify any one.

A kindness promised, has but one half of its grace when it appears. It is
Royal when it surpriseth, and when it comes without expectation or hope.

It is much to prevent requests; It is more glorious to prevent desires: but
it is yet more to prevent a man's own words, and to do before he speaks.

VIII. MAXIM. A Fool lifts up his voice with laughter: but a wise Man does
scarce smile a little. Eccl. 21.
PARAPHRASE.
THe indiscreet Man laughs with noise; The laughter of a good Man may sometimes
be seen, but one cannot hear it.

REFLECTION.
THe general object of laughter, has not yet been known, but it is known that
there is nothing makes wise Men laugh, but vice suddenly deceived by its self;
and that they are never wiser, nor modester then when they laugh.

THE COUNCILS OF WISDOM:

The Second Part. Containing the MAXIMS of SOLOMON, Most necessary for a Man's
well-behaving himself toward others.

FIRST ARTICLE. MAXIMS, Necessary for a wise Man, to demean himself well in
regard of the Wife.
FIRST MAXIM. A good Wife is a good Portion, which shall be given in the
Portion of them that fear the Lord. Eccles. 26.
PARAPHRASE.
A Virtuous Wife is a great good fortune, and an advantageous portion. It Is the
chief and most precious of all recompenses, that God gives in this life to
those that fear him. Do not hope to do it by your violences: but endeavor to
obtain by your holy actions, that yours should be good.

REFLECTION.
Virtuous and wise Women are not so rare as one thinks; The rarity and the
difficulty is to know them well, and to distinguish them from others. When you
are in condition to seek one, do not trust to your own prudence. You shall
never have light enough, to judge who is proper for you: undertake not to choose
her, but pray God to give her to you.

When you shall have her, render not your self unworthy to keep her.

If you are morose to an innocent Wife who loves you, you shall not possess her
long: either death shall soon part you: or that which is most to be feared, her
goodness shall die before you, and you shall not love but to be punished.

II. MAXIM. Blessed is the Man that has a virtuous Wife, for the number of his
days shall be double. Eccles. 26.
PARAPHRASE.
HAppy is the Husband of an obedient and a peaceable Wife. If a man could be
immortal, it were by the sweetness of her company, at least he shall live twice
longer then he should otherwise have done.

An officious and an humble Wife, is the only remedy to prolong a man's years.

REFLECTION.
BEatus Vir. God has made two Persons, because he would form in their hearts a
visible shadow of his adorable felicities.

The bond of two is Love, which is not personal, nor threefold, but in God
alone; but which ought to be immortal between the two who are united.

As it cannot continue but by the grace, and virtue of the object loved. To the
end that it might continue between the Husband and the Wife: God intended the
countenances of the one and the other, should be a compendium of the created
beauties; that their Soul should be the Image of the Divine; and that all which
is lovely in the rest of the World, should meet in their persons.

But sin happened, which has troubled his design, and corrupted his
workmanship. It is no more but misery and confusion; and the Husband of the
wisest, and most virtuous Wife in a City, is not so happy, or so wise, as he
that has none.

III. MAXIM. Houses and Riches are the inheritance of Fathers; and a prudent
Wife is from the Lord. Prove. 19.
PARAPHRASE.
YOur House and your Riches, are the favor of your Parents: but if you have a
wife and a discreet Wife, look upon her as a present from the hand of God.

The complaisance of a virtuous Wife, Species mulieris exhilarat faciem viri,
and super omnem concupiscentiam superinducit desiderium.
entertains joy in the heart, and upon the countenance of her Husband. Her good
Conduct, and her vigilance about domestic affairs, exempts disquiet and
trouble, and lust cannot make him hope for pleasures, comparable to those, that
virtue promises by a chaste Spouse.

Especially if the graces of her countenance, Si est lingua curationis and
mitigationis.
are animated by a sweet speech; and if this Wife has a Tongue that can cure
grief, and appease anger; for then one can say, that he who possesses her, is
one of the richest, and the most happy Men in the World.

REFLECTION.
WIves who aspire unto this happiness, ought to remember, that of all the
Powers of the universe, the strongest is the sweetness and humility of a Wife;
That there is no Power that resists these two virtues, nor hardness to them
impenetrable.

Submission and obedience, are the only means for Wives to reign in their
Houses, and there to usurp the empire, that the Husband possesses by the right
of nature.

It Is the sweetness and modesty of the Wife, which puts an equality between the
Sexes, and which makes the Government belong without difference, to the one and
the other.

God has not intended, that authority should be, but for one of the two; But he
would, That nature should give it freely to the Man; and that the Woman should
deserve it by humility. A Wife who endeavors, not to please her self but in
the Will and commands of her Husband, puts him quickly in a condition, not to
dare, and not to be able to command any thing, but that which pleases such a
Wife.

Among truths that one often forgets to observe, here is one most remarkable;
That the person of the Man, was not preferred before the person of the Woman,
but after their sin was committed; that before this misery happened, there was
a perfect equality between the two Sexes, and that during the days of
innocence, their Life according to the intention of the Creator, failed not of
being a glorious Image, of that which passed in the glorious Trinity.

In effect, one of the most incomprehensible things of this mystery, is that
the Persons of the Father and the Son, infinitely equal in their greatness and
perfections, are the same also in the Soverainty of their Rank, and in their
mutual independance; although the one were the Principle of the other: and that
comes, according to the Fathers, from this, that they are united by an infinite
love, as ancient as their Being. Love, infinitely an enemy of dependence and
subjection, between persons who infinitely love each other.

That is to say, that if in managing things here below, the Husband could not
will any thing but by love, and the Wife do nothing but by love; although the
Man were the principle of the Spouse, Their ancient and just equality, should
be as soon established in its first Estate; That there should be no more amongst
them, neither Chief, nor Master, nor Mistress, nor Commandment, nor Obedience;
but all that, miraculously transformed, should be nothing but love; And that
among the visible things of this World, there should be found, better to
represent the joys of the future life, and of happy eternity, then the peace
and tranquillity of their mortal life.

IV. MAXIM. Stumble not at the beauty of Woman, and desire her not for
pleasure. Eccles. 25.
PARAPHRASE.
IN the choice that you shall make of a Wife, have more regard to her
behavior, and her virtue, then her beauty: and do not ground the repose of
your life, on the contemplation of a figure, formed upon sand; nor depend upon
winds, which make such disappointments of men's eyes their sport.

REFLECTION.
THere is nothing more to be feared of a Woman, then that which pleases at
fight. A fair face, and a proud Soul. The beauty of one fades, the fierceness
of the other remains.

The Devil of Pride enters into your Idol when you adore her, and when you deck
her stately; But he will not go out, when you would contemn her, and are tired
and weary of so many ceremonies, and so much charge; It will dwell there in
despite of you, and it will make you know but too late, what you have been
told timely enough. That a fine Idol costs much incense, much care and many
tears.

The worst is, when that this Idol is not without a Tongue, nor without Wit,
nor without study, and that it says well what it knows. It is true, that all
that in her passes for a wonderful thing; but it is a miracle that every one is
willing to see.

There enters into your House abundance of Admirers: and she who hearkens to
the praises of so many fine people, is scarce the more of an humor to praise
and admire you, nor even to render herself admirable, when she sees no body but
your self.

Moreover, the wise Man said very well, that great wealth is not in Houses
where there are great trains, and a great resort of company; but in those where
are abundance of people, that work much and say little.

Heretofore, say the Fables, at each fine word that went out of the lips; there
went a piece of gold: Now as well as in Solomon's time. Ubi verba sunt plurima,
ibi frequenter egestas. They speak to little purpose, they spit nothing but
wind. Silver increases not, where Women sow words, and one may say of many
others, what a Father said of a Dame in his time, Hujus in ore omnis suppellex.
Theodoret.

V. MAXIM. Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the Wife of thy youth.
Prove. 5.
PARAPHRASE.
TO the end that your posterity may be blessed, and that the fountain of
happiness, that runs into your House, may not dry up, seek not your
satisfaction and repose, but with the Wife that is your lot, and that you your
self have chosen in your younger years, let her and your Children be all your
delights; let their conversations be the chains of your heart, and make you
discover from day to day, new graces and lovelinesses in her mind.

In fine, conform your self to the intentions of the Creator, when he
instituted marriage: Have the happiness (if it be possible) that the years,
which weakens and destroys love in other families, may make yours increase, and
that they may give it the power to remain, longer then time, and live even
after death.

REFLECTION.
TO the end that conjug^l friendship might be so constant, it is not necessary,
that all that which is fair in the Wife should beimmortal, but it is necessary
that all which is immortal in her, should be fair, and that it should be
beloved.

If she has care to beautify her Soul, and you have the power to regard this
Soul and stop your sight there, you shall never tire your selves one of the
other. Whilst your virtue remains, your pleasure shall never have an end.

VI. MAXIM. A Woman if she maintain her Husband, is full of anger, impudency
and much reproach. Eccles. 25.
PARAPHRASE.
THe Wife who by her imperious mind, is Mistress in the House, is rigorous to
her Husband: She cannot have dominion over him, but she changes it into
tyranny, nor see him her subject, without making him her slave.

REFECTION.
THe Wife that one fears, is truly to be feared. As Soon as one trembles before
her, she is terrible; And the more ready an Husband is to obey her, and to
comply with her, the more unsufferable and cruel is she.

Please your self with all that is pleasant to her; but govern her so wisely,
that nothing shall please her but her duty. Have you always over her the
authority that belongs to you; but join thereto so much of love and goodness,
as that she may have more pleasure in obeying you, then you shall have in
commanding her.

If you know by long experience, that it is not in your power to bring her to
good, take heed, that at least she bring you not to evil: Part from her rather,
as much as may be permitted: it is better to quit her; then to follow her into
misery; but leave her not in disorder. This were to cause scandal, and to make
a great noise in avoiding her, and not to be well escaped from this domestic
torment.

VII. MAXIM. There is no head above the head of Serpent, and there is no wrath
above the wrath of a Woman. Eccles. 25.
PARAPHRASE.
AMongst the heads of Animals, that of the Adder is the worst and most
dangerous: and among angers, that of a Woman is most dreadful, and the
subtilest to invent treasons and means to destroy you.

You shall have more contentment in dwelling with a Dragon, Commorari leoni and
draconi placebit, quam habitare cum muliere nequam.
or a Lioness, then in having a wicked Wife in the House. One may tame, or
daunt wild Beasts, or else one may find means to escape from them and save ones
self by flight: But the rage of an unruly Woman is inevitable, you can neither
daunt her, appease her, nor fly from her.

REFLECTION.
IT is true, that amongst the disorders caused by sin, one of the most
deplorable and most fatal, is that which ordinarily appears in a Woman.

Gods design was, that her countenance, her voice, her nature, and her spirit,
should not be hut sweetness; That the spirit of Man should not be but vigor
and Wisdom, and that of these two qualities joined together, should the
felicity of Houses be composed.

Sin has overthrown this design, There is happened in our nature a corruption,
which in the greatest part of Women, has strange effects.

The force of fumes and vapors; the weakness of the Organs and of the
Imagination; and in fine the blindness of the mind, cause many tears to those
that love them, and much misfortune in most affairs wherein they meddle.

In them, objects vehement, light, or vagabond, govern themselves, and stir of
themselves. The Imagination delicate and feeble, follows their transport; the
proud and blind mind, approves their faults, and maintains them: The Woman
believes that all which passes in herself, though in despite of her, is just
and praise worthy.

It seems that in all this, there is some remainder of the old Serpent, or some
sort of possession. That which we call Caprice, Obstinacy, and very often
madenss, etc. is the Devil that enters their head, and who without taking away
the judgment and the liberty, makes them do what we see.

VIII. MAXIM. Her Husband shall sit among his Neighbors: and when he hears
it, shall sigh bitterly. Eccles. 25.
PARAPHRASE.
HEr unfortunate Husband, whom she incessantly afflicts, his common exercise is
in making of complaints; and all the comfortable answers he receives from those
who hear him are but sighs.

REFLECTION.
IT is very improper to complain publicly of domestic disorders. It Is a
shameful harm that a man is loath to discover to the Physician. Those who
suffer it, ought to blush at it, as well as those who make it.

Let the Wife be loose, fierce or violent, the Husband does himself wrong
as soon as he accuses her. It is no less his interest to keep her fault secret,
then to cure it.

There is necessary, Prudence and Power. The point is, effectually to remedy
the evil, and in the mean while to hinder that the Patient does not cry out.

Choose well a Woman before taking her. When you have her, do not adore nor
despise her.

Take heed either of stirring her up, or indiscreetly driving her to anger, by
severe and unjust outrages, or making of her proud by a loose complaisance and
importunate kindnesses. Love her perfectly, but show her only one part of your
love, at least hide the infirmities thereof.

Your duty and your happiness is to inspire her with Wisdom; but remember, That
you shall never make her wise, but in rendering your self otherwise lovely then
by too much friendship.

ARTICLE II. MAXIMS For the government of Children.
The first MAXIM. For I was my Fathers Son, tender and only beloved in the
sight of my Mother, He taught me also, and said unto me: Let thine heart retain
my words, get Wisdom, etc. Prove. 4.
PARAPHRASE,
SOlomon says, I have heretofore been young, and a little Child, well-beloved
of my Father, and governed by my Mother, unto whom I was very dear, and who
kept me always near her, that I might receive as well instructions, as caresses
from her. I lost no time, even whilst I was at play, for whilst I played and
took the diversions due to my age; she would that I should always have a mind
attentive, and an open heart ready to hearken, because she had always some good
word to tell me, Her discourse ordinarily was.

My Son, love Wisdom and Virtue more then all the wealth of the World, the rest
is but vanity.

That which shall render you an honest man, is the true wealth; and that which
God shall prize in you, is the true greatness. Observe his Law, and obey his
Will. Don't forget any thing that you have learned, touching the happiness of
being in his favor; don't quit that, for any violence you shall be brought to
suffer. Fear nothing; That shall preserve you, as long as you keep it.

REFLECTION.
HOw great are the inventions of Wisdom, in the least things! What a high and
sublime policy h^s it, in the Conduct of a Child, who comes out of the Cradle!
How fair and profitable Councils, in an unimitable example!

Love a Child tenderly, and caress it on every occasion, without spoiling the
flower of his age, or making the candor of his innocence and simplicity to
fade; preserve it in him, without perplexing him, keep him in fear and duty,
without taking away his liberty, Give him an inclination to good and make him
bend to that side, without breaking any thing, and without doing any violence
to his honor.

Do in such sort, as that he may loose nothing, neither of respect during
familiarity, nor love during corrections, nor time during play, let him always
learn something that may help him to become Wise, and let every accident that
happens to him, be made a lesson of Wisdom and Piety; let him have all his
pleasures in the presence of his Father and Mother, and although one suffer him
not to commit faults there, yet nevertheless he cannot suffer to be kept
elsewhere.

Let him know that the reproofs that you give him, come from good will, let his
Mother appear as lovely during threatenings as caresses; let severities bear so
well the marks of a true affection, as that he may hold himself thereby
obliged, as by gratifications and recompenses.

Let him accustom himself to take the little discontents of his Mother, for the
greatest misfortune, and let him have no ruder punishment, than the sadness of
her counrenance and her silence.

Let him with the milk, suck the first sweetness of devotion, and let this
Maxim be imprinted in his Soul betimes; That on earth there is no other
felicity, then to live according to the Laws of Reason and Justice; let them
often say again the same things to him, after different Methods, and with that
weariness and address, as that he may not loath to hear it; And that to tell
him one good word, let the proper time be made use of; whilst that he plays and
that his heart is open by tenderness, to the end that words may enter sweetly,
and that he may feel nothing but pleasure in learning what he ought to learn.

II. MAXIM. He that loves his Son, causes him often to feel the rod, Eccl. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
HE that loves his Son, cease not to instruct him according to the needs of
his age; and he regulates all the motions of his body and mind, by perpetual
and judicial advices.

REFLECTION.
BEgin to apply your self to the instruction of your Children, as soon as they
are able to hearken, and forget not, that education ought to follow soon after
the birth, since corruption and the inclination to evil comes with it.

For little as a Child can be, since that he has a spiritual and an immortal
Soul, it is scandalous to let them live brutishly; and to expect that reason
should be thoroughly awake, before you speak to him of his duty, is to wait very
long*

Whilst that nature is soft and flexible, it is necessary to bend it, and give
it the first folds of the affections and habits, that it ought to have in the
time of its strength. It is necessary that your Child practice good before he
knows it: it is necessary that he accustom himself thereto by obedience or
necessity, before he choose it by judgment; and that without knowing what he
does, he should do nothing, but according to the rules of reason and honesty.

Infancy has its perfections and its virtues: order it so, that they appear in
the infancy of your Son. As Soon as nature teaches him to will and to speak,
teach him to will and to speak as is necessary; and do so well, that any of his
humane actions, may not have the air and appearance of the actions of a Beast.

The Child that is happily and well brought up, is he in whom the passions are
subdued, and obedient before reason is awake, in such manner, as that when it is
awake it has nothing else to do but to reign in peace, and to enjoy the victory
that education has won.

III. MAXIM. He that teaches his Son shull have joy in him, and shall rejoice
of him among his acquaintance Eccl. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
THe Father who teaches his Son, and has care himself of his education, shall
draw honor from thence, and shall with much joy see him dearly beloved of his
Parents, and esteemed of his fellow citizens.

A Son nursed by the Mother, and instructed by the Father, shall be the joy of
their House, and the happiness of their Town.

REFLECTION.
THe negligence of the one, and the affairs of the other, have introduced the
custom of confiding in Masters, for instructing of their Children. This is not
what Nature intended. When it gave milk and tenderness to the Mother, and
intelligence and prudence to the Father, its design was to accomplish the glory
of their fruitfulness, and to render them Father and Mother of a Son, who was
entirely theirs; and who owed his nourishment and his Wisdom, but to their
pains and conduct.

A Mother that lets not her Child go out of her arms, but when reason is come
to him: A Father who lets him not go out of his House, but when that reason
shall govern him, and that he has contracted, the habits of acting by
judgment, and of loving honor, tastes the true pleasures of paternal
authority; and no man is perfectly happy in having a Son, but he who has given
him life, science and virtue.

If your Son holds his virtue from another and not from you, he is not yours by
one half; and you have no right to attribute to your self, any of his fine
actions. He holds from you the power to eat and sleep, and from the Master the
power to act wisely and to live as an honest Man.

IV. MAXIM. He that teaches his Son, grieveth the enemy, and before his
friends, he shall rejoice of him. Eccl. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
HE who brings up his Son carefully, labors as well for others as himself. He
can boast amongst his kindred and neighbors that he is their good friend,
since he is a good Father, and one who prepares them a successor, and a
faithful heir, who shall revive the friendship that he had for them, and the
good examples that he has given them.

REFLECTION.
A Man has not much wealth, when he has none for his Children: But he has yet
less virtue, if he has not enough of it to make an Inheritance, and to hinder
that this virtue does not die with him.

If you aspire unto immortality, and if you are touched with the laudable
desire of acquiring it, do so, as that all the most precious and excellent
things that you possess, may remain after you; and let each remain in the place
proper to them, to be immortal and glorious; Your Soul in Heaven, your virtue
in the heart of your Children, your reputation and your name in the memory of
your friends, in fine, your silver in Gods Treasury, in the hands of the poor.

But observe, that virtue is not bestowed as wealth in saying, I leave.

Touching this Article, To say at the hour of death, or by the hand of a
Notary, in ones. Will, I give and bequeath unto my Son, my Devotion and my
Wisdom, etc is to do nothing at all: your Son shall not have them thereby* If
you would that he possess them, do so in the time of your health, as may put
him in possession of them, and put good examples before his eyes, from whence
he may learn that this possession is lovely, and that it ought to be loved,
more then riches and other goods which perish.

V. MAXIM. Ax Horse not broken becomes headstrong; and a Child left to himself
will be willful. Ecc. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
AN Horse neglected and that one tames not betimes, becomes untameable; and a
Child that one abandons to his liberty, without reproof or correction becomes
incorrigible.

REFLECTION.
EXpect not but that yours should commit crimes great enough, for you to
correct, or reprove. Malice increases with age, and in the end arrives to a
pitch, and to an excess, where chastisement is not only very unprofitable, but
very dangerous.

Do not expect but that his little indevotions will become sacriledges, and
that his little angers will change themselves into furies, and they may
meditate designs of treachery and parricidie. Punish them whilst you can draw
honor, and profit out of your severities, and have a great care, that others
have not occasion to punish him, when the punishment shall be the death of your
Son, the loss of your Honor, the ruin of your House, and the reproach of your
posterity.

VI. MAXIM. Cocker thy Child, and he shall make thee afraid, Play with him and
he will bring thee to heaviness. Eccl. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
IF you treat your Son always with caresses and kisses, and if you continue to
give him milk, at the age of fifteen or sixteen, he will return you gall, and
he will oblige you to fear him, as much as you should have loved him.

If you play with him, you shall lose much at that play, your familiarity shall
be recompensed by a contempt, that shall cause your death.

REFLECTION.
CHildren come to an age, when they need no milk, nor caresses, nor laughter,
nor familiarity.

There must always be love; but at that age your Son ought to divine that you
love him: it does not belong to you to tell him so.

Have you a reservedness and a silence which should do all, which corrects when
he is faulty, and commends when he does well. Spare not either Praises or
Corrections, but do in such sort as that you give neither but by the eyes.

When he has failed, let your presence and your sadness be all his punishment.

When he has done well, let him be ravished to see you, and let him take that
for his recompense. Approve what he has done; but let your approbation be, if
possible without words; at least, let it not be much, and let the declaration
that you shall make to him, of your sentiments touching his demeanor, be
little better then silence it self.

VII. MAXIM. Laugh not with him, least thou have sorrow with him, and least
thou gnash thy teeth in the end. Eccl. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
DOn't laugh with a Child, if you are not willing to weep with him. If you have
not incessantly the hook in hand, to prune the branches of this tree, and to
lop off that which is offensive, you shall pluck but bitter fruit, such as
shall make your teeth gnash, and make you feel most grievous pangs in your
latter days.

REFLECTION.
THere are three things, which necessarily make you loose your authority over
your Son. To laugh with him and render him too familiar; To suffer and
dissemble his faults; and in the end to give him evil examples, and to make
your passions, and weakness appear before him.

These are the three indiscretions, that take away the respect that is due to
you, and which accustomes him to contemn you. Avoid them carefully: For as soon
as you see your authority lost; be you assured that your Son himself is lost.

In one word, do not adore him: and in regard of Children, take heed of
following the fatal example of so many other Fathers, who make Fools of them by
their education, and then Judges, Magistrates, and Masters of the people, by
their silver or credit.

VIII. MAXIM. Bow down his neck whilst he is young, least he wax stubborn, and
be disobedient to thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart. Eccl. 30.
PARAPHRASE.
BOw down his neck in his youth, and bring down his pride, and make his
rebellious spirit bend to obedience and duty, with all the strength you are
able. Never fail to correct him on occasion, least he harden himself in evil,
and his wicked nature become inflexible; otherwise you shall have the
displeasure, and the shame of seeing him arrive at that pass; and you shall
suffer eternal repentings for your negligence.

REFLECTION.
NEvertheless in taming him free your self from anger. Correction does wonders,
against the looseness of youth when most incorrigible and desperate, but choler
mixed in this most excellentmedicine is poison. If you give the one with the
other, you go to destroy him, believing thereby to remedy his distemper, and
you render your self his murderer in acting the Physician.

Learn to be severe and dreadful without being in rage; to be firm and
inflexible, without ceasing to be reasonable, to be just and entire without
being violent; and know the way to have the countenance and the word of a
terrible Judge, at the same time that you conserve a Fathers heart.

IX. MAXIM. Give not thy Son and thy Wife, thy Brother and Friend, power over
thee whilst thou live, and give not thy goods to another, least it repent
thee and thou entreat for the same. Eccl. 33.
PARAPHRASE, And REFLECTION.
WHilst you live don't put your self under the Conduct of those, whom you your
self ought to manage, neither Wife, Children, nor Friends.

Retain always that authority that God has given you, and the free disposal of
your Goods, without confiding in any whosoever it be, for fear, least instead
of the ease and rest you hope for, you fall into contempt, and that you do not
render those cruel and ungrateful, whom you think, your liberality should
render wiser and more acknowledging.

As Soon as you shall have given all to your Sons and Daughters, they will
believe that they now owe you nothing more. And when your hands shall be empty,
your countenance shall be odious and intolerable: Suffer not that by any prayer
or application whatsoever, they make you ever to change your resolution: for
it is better to see your Children dependant on your good will, then to rely upon
their acknowledgement and justice.

Deal so, as that they have always need of you, or hope for something from you,
but stand not in need of them, if you intend to be loved by them. Show them
your hands during life, but keep them shut and don't let all go but at death.

ARTICLE III. MAXIMS For the government of Servants.
The first MAXIM. A yoke and a collar bow the neck, so are torments and
tortures for an evil Servant. Eccl. 33.
PARAPHRASE.
THe mighty yoke brings down the (...) and lofty neck: and daily labour^
^enders a Servant humble: an^ in the end, gives him an inclination to his duty.

Never leave your Servant without employ, Mitte illum in operationem ne vacet:
multam enim malitiam docuit otiositas.
for Idleness is the Mistress, of the School of malice. It Is she that teaches
it in Houses, and render all those learned therein who have the leisure to
study it, and who want business.

If you give your Servant work he will give you rest, Operatur in disciplina,
and quaerit requiescere laxa manus illi, and quaeret libertatem.
if you spare him he will give you pain. When he does nothing, he thinks of
doing evil; and the more at liberty he is, the more inclination has he to
looseness and debauchery.

REFLECTION.
TAke no body to serve you, if you have not wherewith to employ him at all
times of the day. One quarter of an hours idleness joined to another, shall
quickly be long enough, to give a Servant the will to do no more, and to teach
you, That a Master who nourishes a sloathful person, is very near to
nourishing a Traitor and an Enemy.

II. MAXIM. Bread, Correction and Work are for a Servant, Eccl. 33.
PARAPHRASE.
THere are three things, of which your Servant ought not to stand in need,
(viz.) Bread, Work, and Admonition.

REFLECTION.
OF Bread, because it is his right; of Work, because it is his condition; of
Admonition or chastisement because it is your interest.

Without Admonition, he corrects not his own faults; without labor he will
commit new ones and greater; without Bread he will believe that he may commit
them, and that all his thefts are allowed him. In one word, when by your
indevotion, serious advices are wanting in your House, as well as wholesome
correction; When that by your negligence they are not well employed, and when
that by your covetousness, they are neither well paid or well fed. Take them
for Ungodly, Unchaste and Thieves, all those who are content to dwell with you.

III. MAXIM. If he be not obedient, put on more heavy fetters, be not excessive
toward any, and without discretion do nothing. Eccl. 33.
PARAPHRASE.
WHen he refuses to obey, punish him; but do nothing by passion and without
judgment. The transports of your wrath do not correct him, they pervert your
self and render you more blame worthy then him.

REFLECTION.
As Soon as you know him to be incorrigible, send him away, and believe that
it is better to be rid of him a month sooner, then to employ him this month to
vex you, and make you commit without ceasing, faults of impatience and
transports of anger. But if you judge that he may amend himself, and that you
have cause to hope for an amendment and service from him; distinguish between
his faults of sloathfulness, or evil will, and those of his ignorance, and have
therein a most judicious conduct, and the most just that you are able.

The most excellent means to be feared and well served in your House, is to
render your self serious toward your domestics; and to have few words with
them. Know all that they do, but hinder them from knowing what you think, and
what you will do.

They will not have of respect for you, but as you have of moderation or
reserve toward them.

Heretofore Idols were adored, because they were Images of men who had their
eyes open, but said not a word.

A Man who sees every thing in his House, and who speaks not, is respected as a
God: They tremble without his threatening, and the only fear that they have, by
his not speaking, keeps every one in his order, and in his duty.

IV. MAXIM. If thou have a faithful Servant, let him be to thee as thy self,
and treat him as a Brother. Eccl. 33.
PARAPHRASE.
WHen you have a faithful, ingenious and an humble Servant, let him be as dear
to you as your Life, Treat him as a Brother or as a Friend. Remember not only,
that it is one of the rarest things in the World, and that one cannot buy it too
dear; but remember also, that the eternal Wisdom, which disposes of the
servitude and liberty of men, has put him into your hands, and it is a present
of his providence and love.

REFLECTION.
FEar not to be familiar with a wise Servant, who has affection for his duty.
Only have a care, that he does not accustom himself to guess, but to ask what
your intentions are, and what your will is on each occasion.

Discharge your self on him, of your disquiets and household business. But if
you would do that happily it is necessary at least, that you take one trouble,
(viz.) To look to it; and to know all that passes.

See you all that he does; not so as to have a watch on his fidelity, but to
hinder him from forgetting his condition. If you do not make him remember it,
he will without doubt forget it; and things shall arrive to a pitch, that shall
necessitate your dependence on him.

It is very easy to make a good Servant an ill Master.

And although he commands very wisely and governs your House keeping with much
success, it is yet shameful for you to obey in your own House, You cannot loose
more then in loosing your authority there.

It Is an ill way of understanding, either right or policy, to recompense the
long services of a waiting Gentleman by serving him your self, and fearing him
in your turn.

Since he is wise, put your goods and your business into his hands. But know
that you must not communicate power, as a Father communicates life; but as the
Sun communicates Light, giving it incessantly, and in keeping the Person
obliged, by a perpetual dependence.

A Servant to whom one trusts all, without taking any notice of what he does,
shall quickly be a Thief or the Master of the House.

V. MAXIM. Whereas thy Servant works truly, entreat him not evil, let thy
Soul love a good Servant. Eccl. 7.
PARAPHRASE.
AFflict not a Servant who does what he can, and who employs heartily all his
strength and health to serve you. You are unworthy to live, if your evil
humors make those to suffer who love you, and who live not but for you alone.

REFLECTION.
DO so well, as that one may be content to serve you, when he enters into your
House, that one may be faithful and happy when he is there, and that one may be
rich, if it be possible when one goes out thence.

That is your honor, for one of the qualities of great Men, is to make those
great who faithfully serve them with love. Do not as some, who render
themselves easy and good to their Servants, provided that their Servants were
content to be poor and miserable. But on the other, neglect not your interest,
settle things so, That the advancement of those who gain with you, come no
otherwise but your liberality and their Wisdom: And that their treasure
increase not by your losses. For it is very shameful to see, what is every day
seen, of rich Servants and poor Masters.

VI. MAXIM. Labor not to be rich, cease from thine own Wisdom. Prove. 23.
PARAPHRASE.
OVer whelm not your self by labor, nor loose your health to heap up riches.

Fear and Prudence which makes you to foresee future needs, are a true folly,
if they interest themselves in preserving the Innocence and Tranquillity of your
soul, as well as the making your revenue increase.

REFLECTION.
YOu give your selves disquiet this day, and you labor hard to be rich, to
rest your selves some years hence. Do better then that, Take you rest to day
and put off giving your self grief and disturbance till that day.

Rid your self of the ambition of acquiring much wealth, and know by the
experience of others, that it is to acquire much trouble.

To have too much silver in ones Coffers, and too much nourishment in the
stomach, are two commodities equally dangerous. Rest and pleasure increase not
with wealth, when Goods are arrived to a sufficiency or to a middle condition,
you have attained to the utmost limits of pleasure.

You may be more rich, but never more content, nor more at ease.

When you shall be a great Lord, and that you shall see your self in the
midst of a multitude of Officers. All the advantage above Persons of a middle
degree, shall be, That you shall have more trouble and importunity about you,
more unprofitablenesses in your movables, more vanities and follies in your
clothes, more company at your Table, more noise in your House, and more trouble
in your mind.

With all the millions you can possess you cannot buy a second Body: and whilst
you have but one, you shall have no need of two Houses, nor three Tables, and
yet less need of forty hands to serve you.

All this multitude of pains and unrest, shall be for other Persons, that you
shall nourish; and certainly one may say, that those who labor most to enrich
themselves; are the very Persons, who least enjoy the pleasure of their own
labors.

IV. ARTICLE. MAXIMS, For the Conduct of a Wise Man toward his Friends.
FIRST MAXIM. A faithful Friend is a strong defense, and he that has found
such an one, has sound a Treasure. Eccles. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
A Faithful Friend is a fortress that defends, and a Treasure that enriches.
He that possesses it is happy, and his happiness is secure.

REFLECTION.
KEep this Treasure carefully; and if there remains in your Soul, any
remembrance of its Heavenly extraction, and any strokes of its resemblance with
God, never live without friendship.

It suffices even to live. To know that there is in us a necessity to love.
For as our Souls are created after the Image of the Creator, they must of
necessity, have a goodness which drives them, as it were to go out of
themselves, and that all their substance should be no other thing then a Divine
and an immaterial flame, which raises it self toward Heaven, and who in
aspiring to God, seeks another heart then its own, as a Companion and an help,
to be assisted in its elevations, and to arrive more easily at its sovereign
happiness.

Each spirit is but the one half of another. Not that these are divided in the
making, and two made of one: But they are formed with a proportion and a
sympathy, which inspires them with desire, and gives them power to join
themselves, and to act so by their intimate communications that they become as
one. But before all may be accomplished, there are formed in the Soul of Man,
much anguish and doleful melancholy, and several sorts of distempers and
miseries, because it is the Image of God, the eternal felicity of which
consists in this, that neither of those persons is ever alone.

One part of a wise Man's skill, is to know, that the most of the miseries of
our mind, come from inward solitude; and that their remedy is a true
friendship. Amicus fidelis medicamentum vitae.

II. MAXIM. Well is him that has found Prudence (or a Friend) and he that
speaks in the ears of him that will hear. Love thy friend and be faithful to
him. Eccl. 25.27.
PARAPHRASE.
TO find a good Friend, and ears capable, either to hearken to profitable
truths, or to retain secrets of consequence, is an happy rencounter.

Love your like, and content your Soul in joining your self with him by a
perfect confidence, without having any thing upon the heart, which may not be
common to him.

REFLECTION.
THat which our Souls would trust, and that which they would draw out of
themselves, to transport it into other Souls, are three things. Their
Knowledge, their Secret, and their Person.

When they communicate their Science, (viz.) Their Knowledge that they have
acquired by study, or the News that they have learned by same, or the Light
that they come by from public affairs and other occasions; In one word. When
they communicate their indifferent thoughts with pleasure, it is familiarity.
When they pass further, and that they communicate their secret thoughts, it is
friendship.

When they go even to the utmost pitch, and that they aspire to the
communicating themselves, and to transport their heart into another heart, and
as far as is possible to nature and grace, of two spirits to make but one, It Is
properly and precisely what we call Love.

Good will follows Love, and that follows Friendship. We will the welfare of
the object, as soon as we love it. Our own welfare is common to him. What
belongs to a Man belongs to his Friend.

To gain a faithful and a sincere Friend, is to acquire in a moment, all that
which he possesses, and that he has been many years in getting. Beatus, qui
invenit verum amicum.

III. MAXIM. Nothing countervails a faithful Friend and his excellency is
invaluable. Eccl 6.
PARAPHRASE.
THere is nothing more precious in the World, than a good Friend. In the
balance of the wise it weighs heavier than all the gold and silver in the
World.

REFLECTION.
MEn speak this day excellently of friendship: but it is a subject whereon men
seem, very ill to proportion the good they do, to what they say.

Our age is the most eloquent that has been thereupon, and the happiest in
words and thoughts. Never has there been so many Admirers of this fair virtue,
nor never so many Panegyricks and pieces composed in honor of it. In Books, in
all Societies, in the Court, and amongst the People; men speak not but of
friendship. One sees nothing else on the countenances and lips: it is every
where but in men's hearts. Friendship pleafeth us but interest is our Master,
and there is no loss with which we are less touched, or less afflicted then
that of a good Friend.

V. MAXIM. A faithful Friend is the medicine of Life, and they that fear the
Lord shall find it. Eccl. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
OUr Bodies have distempers which shorten our mortal Life: Our Soul has those
which render its immortality unhappy: The remedy of the one and the other is a
good Friend; but you must fear God, to find it.

Have many Friends, but have no more then one confident. Be much with all the
World, but be single with one alone.

Let your House, your Treasures, your Hands, your Ears be open to many Persons;
but let your Heart be open, only to the intimate Friend, that you have chosen.

REFLECTION.
YOur Heart was made to be given: it cannot refuse it, without crime and
infamy: but its greatest reproach and shamefullest injustice, is to give it
self to many.

It and its secret is no more any thing worth, when once they are common. The
excellency of the Heart of man, is to procure the general good, and its self to
be a particular one.

It is necessary, that it should be of the condition of the Sun, who obliges
the whole World, who is admired of Men and Angels, but governed and possessed
only by one.

In one word, the Heart is well made, when it is as a stately Garment, and that
it can take this for its device. Agreeable to all, proper to one alone.

V. MAXIM. If thou would get a Friend, prove him first, and be not hasty to
credit him. Eccl. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
IF you would have a good Friend, try him, and before that you trust him know
his fidelity. But remember that you have no other balance for that, then the
time of affliction.

REFLECTION.
IT is true that perfect friendships are begotten at the first moment of an
enterview, and that great wits know one another from that instant.

But a wise Man, who hinders not his inclination from begetting, does hinder it
from declaring it self so readily.

He pleases himself to feel the unforeseen motions, and the sweet and
powerful attractions, that incline him to love the Person that seems lovely to
him; but before that he resolves, he asks his reason, and he trusts not, but to
its councils: and reason, before consent, asks concerning the time, and trusts
none but experience. Whosoever has not seen more then a year, cannot say that he
knows; and whosoever has suffered nothing, cannot say certainly that he is
beloved.

VI. MAXIM. For some Man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide
in the day of trouble. Eccl. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
FOr there are Friends, who are not so but in fair weather. They fly away when
the winter comes near; and when you begin to lament, they know you no more.

REFLECTION.
THeir opinion is, that friendship consists in pleasing themselves with your
conversation, and laughing with you, when you are in good humor, during
prosperity and happy days.

They ought to know, that to declare ones self a Friend to any one, is to
oblige a man, self not to have money in the time of his need, nor leisure in
the time of his business, nor blood and life in the time of his danger, which
are not his, and of which he may not be able to dispose.

VII. MAXIM. Again some Friend is companion of the Table, who will not continue
in the day of thy necessity. Eccl. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
THere are some who are good Friends when they are at Table: but from thence
they know no body. They promise every thing, when they divert themselves with
you, and at your expense; after that they remember nothing, and ordinarily
feasts serve, but to feed deceivers and ungrateful Persons.

REFLECTION.
THey believe that to love you, is to help you laughing with a brazen face,
during debaucheries, and in the commitment of sin with more boldness and
insolence.

Believe them not; for if you take those for enemies, who use their hands and
sword against you, don't take those other sorts of Murderers for Friends,
those who employ your own hand to bring death into your Heart, and who persuade
you to stiffle in you, by scandalous and brutish actions, both Innocence, Grace
and Honor, which are the true Life of Man.

Flee those Men: whatsoever may be the tie that fastens you to their company,
burst it, and look on them as unknown, or as Traitors. Remember that death
breaks all Mar^iages, and crime all Friendships.

There are others who are Phantastics and odd humored; Et est amicus ad
inimicitiam.
who love without interest, and are offended without grounds, and who make
friendships, but to make complaints, and to seek occasions to accuse and
persecute a Friend.

Engage not your self so far as to see them: and be constant in refusing and
avoiding the acquaintance, and familiarity of two sorts of Persons.

That of Libertins, who are happy in possessing you, and diverting themselves
with you, but are always ready to betray you, and to sell you for a little
silver.

And that of those passionate and jealous Friends, who take for treachery, the
least look that you cast on any body else, and who have made an Ancient say
very wisely, That there is no hatred more intolerable, and more to be feared
than their friendship.

VIII. MAXIM. And there is a Friend, who being turned to enmity and strife will
discover thy reproach. Eccl. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
THere are others, who cannot keep a Secret during anger, and who in the least
difference that happens, declare all they know of you, and cruelly vilify your
confidence and your sincerity.

REFLECTION.
IT is true that these transports of their anger are dangerous, and they may
cause fatal displeasures; But remember that when you have received any one into
your friendship, that you are not only to feel his afflictions, but you are
also obliged to suffer his faults; and that it is to suffer very little for him,
if you have not the courage to endure what comes from himself.

There is no Friend but has his imperfections and failings, and there are no
failings in your Friends, that you ought not to excuse: But there are none
also, but you ought to have known before loving and choosing him. Choose well,
and never engage your self to love a Man, whose faults and weaknesses are the
intervals of hatred, and who during anger is a true enemy.

IX. MAXIM. Whosoever fears the Lord shall direct his friendship aright, for as
he is, so shall his neighbor be also. Eccl. 6.
PARAPHRASE.
WHen you have found a constant Friend, look on him as another self. Make him
enter into your House, with the same liberty as into his own; let him dispose
of your family, and concern himself with your affairs as of his own.

It Is the happiness of friendship, to live in two hearts, and to command in two
Houses.

REFLECTION.
WHat Men say of two Suns, (if they were in the World,) would not be true, if
they could love one another.

These were not two things incompatible, but two equal powers, when that a
right understanding were between them; and all Laws that Men make to govern the
universe, in favor of the unity; were not good, but because discord is an
inseparable companion of two Sovereigns. When that love is the third, there is
the number necessary, to command happily both in Heaven and upon Earth.

X. MAXIM. Forsake not an old Friend, for the new is not comparable to him.
Eccl. 9.
PARAPHRASE.
A New Friend is never worth an old. Change not: what you have already, is
assuredly better then what you yet have not. If the Person that you have long
loved, be less perfect and less precious, it is nevertheless properest for you,
and best made to your humor.

The sweetnesses of friendship come not from the Nobility of a Man, nor his
knowledge, nor the beauty of his mind, but from the conformity of his heart to
yours.

You cannot be more ill clad, then by a gaudy and rich suit too big for you,
and that fits not well; neither can you be more ill beloved, then by a man that
nature has not made for you.

Moreover, there is no new Garment that does not incommode the body; nor new
acquaintance, that does not torment and wound the spirit.

The reserves and ceremonies continue a long time, and these are the grand
affairs, at the beginnings of friendship.

In a word, whosoever can cease to love a first Friend, is unworthy to have a
second, and whosoever can let a good and a true friendship die, shall never
have another which may be immortal.

XI. MAXIM. Do good to thy Friend before thou die. Eccl. 14.
PARAPHRASE.
DO not stay till the hour of death, to do good to your Friend. Love makes
companions, not heirs. It does not offer what it loses, and what it is
constrained to leave, but it renders that common which it possesses, The time
of its liberality, is the time of its life.

It Is avarice, or necessity that gives at death, and which makes Testaments.

In doing well, do not make reproaches; In bonis non des querelam, and in omni
dato non des tristitiam verbi mali. Eccl. 18.
and when you oblige a Friend by any favor, let your countenance and your
words oblige yet more. The sadness of the giver, offends him who receives; and
changes the good done, into displeasure.

Denial oftentimes ought to be excused, because it may come from inability. But
a sad consent and trouble, cannot but be very odious; because it can come from
nothing, but covetousness or want of affection.

When you have occasion to help your Friends, have always three things open,
your Hands, your Countenance, and your Heart.

To do a kindness with speed, is to do it twice; BUt to do it in a civil and
courteous manner, is to do it more then an hundred times.

In like manner, Ne dicas amico tuo: Vade, and reverte: tras dabo tibi. Prove. 3.
let that never happen, as to say to a Friend, Come again to morrow and I will
give it you.

A favor delayed is scarce more worth then denial; and it is not given from
the day that one can give it, one gives but at halves.

It seems as if by this delay, you did seek time, to find means to do nothing,
at least, you demonstrate, that you do not oblige with pleasure. Joy is ready,
and every thing that pleases it, is suddenly done.

XII. MAXIM. Change not a Friend for any good by no means. Eccl. 7.
PARAPHRASE.
MOlest not your Friend, who defers the payment of what he owes you. It is
better to have your money a little too late, then loose so dear a friendship
too soon.

To lend by affection, is to employ your money well; but to loose a Friend to
recover it, is to loose more then that is worth.

REFLECTION.
SInce you are in haste to be paid, conceive that he is more straightened to
perform it; and know, that it is not so painful to an honest man to want money,
as it is to owe it. Be content that he is afflicted and disturbed: don't render
him shameful by speaking to him of that affair.

Those who have a little true friendship, blush at the calling to mind the debt
of a Friend. Since you have much courage and much love do you your self blush
at the remembrance thereof.

To hold ones peace thereupon, is not to be generous enough, perfect kindness is
quite to forget it.

XIII. MAXIM. Loose thy money for thy Brother and thy Friend, and let it not
rust under a stone to be lost. Eccl. 29.
PARAPHRASE.
HAzard your money, by lending it to your Brother or your Friend: And know,
that it is always more honorable and more safe, then it would be in a hidden
Treasure, and shut up under stones.

REFLECTION
YOu ought to believe it lost, as soon as it is useless to your Friends: When
they come to ask a favor of you, be you ready to offer it: fear no other
danger, but that of deliberating too long; and have no other displeasure, then
for not having prevented them, and for not being happy enough to guess, that
they had need of you.

Have herein the Maxim of that ancient Hero, who being advised by his
Treasurer, that there was no more left, and that his liberalities had exhausted
it, made him this heroic answer? You deceive your self, said he, There remains
to me all that I have given: it is mine more then ever, since it is in the hands
of my Friends. Hoc habeo quodcunque dedi.

XIV. MAXIM. Who so discovers secrets, loses his credit, and shall never
find a Friend to his mind. Eccl. 27.
PARAPHRASE.
TO reveal the secrets of one Friend, is to loose many. An unfaithful man,
shall never be loved of any body, and those who have made him tell it, shall be
first that shall fear and hate him.

REFLECTION.
IN affairs of friendship, as well as in those of State, the least and lightest
indiscretions of the Tongue are irremissible crimes. Their Secret is a
Religious order, who have no pardon for faults, nor pity for penitents. They
punish those faults, after the most terrible manner, and most to be feared of a
man, who has any thing of sentiment or an heart. Which is, That they never
give him any more the occasion to fall again.

XV. MAXIM. If thou have opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear not; for
there may be a Reconciliation. Eccl. 22.
PARAPHRASE.
IF (being in an ill humor,) you have happened to say ought to your Friend in
cross terms, or have inconsiderately injured him, but that signifies nothing;
fear not, for reconciliation is not difficult.

In like manner, if during a flesh of anger, Ad amicum, si produxeris gladium,
non desperes.
you draw a sword against him, despair not of re-establishing your friendship.
Man is indulgent toward the passions of his Brother, when they are blind and
carry away the reason. There needs but one word of regret, or one tear to wash
away the memory of a bloody quarrel.

That which is dangerous, Excepto convitio, and improperio, and superbia, and
Mysterii revelatione, and plaga delosa, in omnibus effugiet amicus.
and renders anger for ever irreconcilable, is to cast in the teeth of a
Friend, any thing that reflects on the honor of his House, or to upbraid him
with the services you have done him, or of any pleasure that he shall have
received, or to testify any contempt of him, or to appear proud in his
presence, or in fine, to declare his secrets, or to betray him in any business
where he puts confidence in you.

All that makes him shun you to the end of the World: you may see his face
again, but you shall never more find his heart nor confidence.

REFLECTION.
IN fine, contemn not your Friend, for contempt is the mortal wound of
friendship, and the only wound that the heart of man cannot bear.

Nature and Fortune which might render us contemptible, are not able to render
us insensible and indifferent under contempt: habitude cannot accustom us
thereto; and virtue which sometimes may be able to stiffle the grief, cannot
blot out its remembrance.

We have no experience, even that the quality of Persons who contemn us, do
lessen the resentment The praises that we receive from the part of our enemies,
do not leave to be agreeable to us: But the contempts that come by means of our
greatest friends, sensibly wound the heart.

That which comes even from Princes or Masters, is not sweeter, nor better
received. Whatever power or authority, that one has over us, we never think
they have a right to contemn us, when we are guilty; and those who confess,
that their crimes deserve death, cannot believe they deserve contempt.

Grace takes away from many the desire of revenging themselves, but it gives to
very few contentment to suffer it. If some may love to be contemned for the
Glory of God, I do not know, that many love those however, that do contemn them.

XVI. MAXIM. One man bears hatred against the other, and does he seek pardon
from the Lord? Eccl. 28.
PARAPHRASE.
HOw can that man dare to ask blessings and favors from God for him self, Ipse
cum caro sit, reservat iram and propitiationem quaerit a Deo.
who prepares evil for another? And he who would cause his neighbor to
perish, can he hope that God will preserve him?

Man would himself be in wrath, and desire that God should be appeased. He who
is but flesh and corruption, would punish the faults of those like himself:
And he prays God, who is infinite in his holiness, that he might dissemble
his, and that God would endure them: what pretentions and what hopes are these?

REFLECTION.
TO choke the sentiment of ill words, that one gives you, or of wrong that one
does you in business, have you often in your mind this undoubted truth.

That of all sorts of injustice, the two greatest are, First, That God should
be offender, the second, That we should take ill other men's offending us, and
that we should take the liberty to resent them, and complain of them.

When you have a difference with any body, you go and relate the business, and
ask of your friends, if it be not true, that you have wrong, and that you ought
to revenge it: you have so much right on your side: you do and say so well;
that each one confesses it and answers you that it is true.

But to the end that you might better know the truth, tell them the whole;
relate to them ingenuously, what your Conscience knows, touching the most
enormous sins, and shameful ingratitudes that you have committed against God;
and there shall no body say, but that you merit insinitely more evil, and more
contempt then you have as yet received.

During quarrels and suits at Law, the question is, to know if you ought to
destroy a Man, whom God makes use of, to punish in you great sins, and to
punish them by so small an evil as that is, which you pretend that one does
you. Be you the Judge; examine and decide the question your self.

XVII. MAXIM. Abstain from strife, and thou shall diminish thy sin Eccl. 28.
PARAPHRASE.
LEssen the number of Law suits, and there shall remain fewer sins. To
prosecute a relation; To enrich Judges, and persons unknown; To ruin your
family; to multiply your faults, and to lose Paradise, is that which ordinarily
you gain by pleading.

There is no quarrel but may be ended, by means of mildness and civility: and
there is no peace but is more worth then all the victories of the Bar, and
than all the Triumphs, that pride causes you to make over your enemies.

REFLECTION.
LIve in peace, and establish your happiness, by so doing, as that nothing may
trouble you, and that you may not be obliged to defend your self, nor to
complain of any body.

It is not so honorable to overcome enemies, as not to have any. Mad men, and
Beasts themselves have a part in the first honor: The second belongs only to
men of a Divine and heavenly nature.

But if we must unfortunately have enemies, let us believe, that it is less
glorious to us, to overthrow their house and fortune, then to sweeten their
anger; and all the cares we take, to gain on them in our process, let us employ
to gain their hearts

Let us not undertake the causing them to perish: Let us aspire to a more
illustrious Victory, to do so as that in spite of themselves they may love us,
and blame themselves for having disobliged us.

Let us carry repentance into their Consciences, and let us make them see by
good offices, that we are lovely, and that we deserve to be loved, when they
have done us displeasure.

If we would use sweet and respectfull words, and endeavor to subdue them, by
the allurements of an officious and an obliging nature, they must themselves
confess they were in the wrong to treat us ill; and this confession is a more
desirable honor, and the most famous victory, which an honest man can aspire
unto.

In fine, we are obliged to extinguish in our Souls, all enmities and all
desires of revenge.

By the Law of nature, who has not given us other arms, or means to overcome
other men, then love.

By the Laws of the Gospel, which has given us a precept, and made thereof an
indispensable commandment.

By the Law of him who was God and Man, who gave us the example of it.

By the Law of the Creator, who has been willing, that our spirit and our
person, should be no other thing, then a living Image of his substantial and
infinite charity.

By the Law of Paradise, of which the inscription graven on the Gate, is, That
no man shall enter there, who has hatred or anger in his heart.

Our interests oblige thereto as much as the rest; and we ought to assure our
selves, that there is no enemy so cowardly or fearful, who would not hurt us;
nor so feeble as that it cannot; nor so ignorant, as not to know means, or to
have address and subtilty enough to find occasions and do it.

FINIS.

