His Majesty's gracious and last Message, SENT By the Earl of Dorset. The Earl
of Southampton.
Sir John Culpepper,Chancellor of the Exchequer. And Sir William V-Vedall, Knight.

To both the honorable houses of Parliament, from Nottingham, 25. August 1642.

Whereunto is added the late Message of both houses of Parliament in answer to
his Majesty's message of the 25 of August present, agreed upon to be sent to
his Majesty the 29. Aug.

Also their several Votes Resolved upon the Questions.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE printer's device consisting of the
English royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and
Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other

Printed for Fr. Coals. this 30. of Aug.

His Majesty's gracious message to both Houses of Parliament, sent from
Nottingham the 25. of August, 1642.
By the E^^les of Southampton and Dorset, Sir John Culpeper Knight, Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and Sir William Vvedall. Knight.
We have with unspeakable grief of heart long beheld the Distractions of this
Our Kingdom, Our very soul is full of anguish until We may find some remedy
to prevent the miseries which are ready to overwhelm this whole nation by a
civil war. And though all our endeavors tending to the composing of those
unhappy differences betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament (though pursued
by us with all zeal and sincerity) have been hitherto without that success We
hoped for, yet such is our constant and earnest care to preserve the public
peace, that We shall not be discouraged from using any expedient, which by the
blessing of the God of mercy may lay a firm foundation of peace and happiness
to all our good Subjects. To this end, observing that many mistakes have arisen
by the Messages, Petitions and answers betwixt us and our two Houses of
Parliament, which happily may be prevented by some other way of treaty, wherein
the matters in difference may be more clearly understood, and more freely
transacted. We have thought fit to propound to you, that some fit persons may
be by you enabled to treat with the like number to be authorized by Us, in such
a manner, and with such freedom of debate, as may best tend to that happy
conclusion which all good men desire, The peace of the Kingdom: wherein as We
promise in the word of a King all safety and encouragement to such as shall be
sent unto Us, if you shall choose the place where We are for the treaty, which We
wholly leave to you, presuming of the like care of the safety of those we shall
employ, if you shall name another place; So we assure you and all Our good
Subjects, that (to the best of Our understanding) nothing shall be therein
wanting on Our parts, which may advance the true Protestant Religion, oppose
popery and superstition, secure the Law of the Land (upon which is built as
well Our just Prerogative, as the propriety and liberty of the Subject)
confirm all just power and Privileges of Parliament, and render Us and Our
people truly happy by a good understanding betwixt Us and our two Houses of
Parliament. Bring with you as firm resolutions to do your duty, and let all
Our good people join with Us in Our prayers to Almighty God for his blessing
upon this work.

If this proposition shall be rejected by you, we have done our duty so amply,
that God will absolve Us from the guilt of any of that blood which must be
spilt, and what opinion soever other men may have of Our power, we assure you
nothing but our Christian and pious care to prevent the effusion of blood has
begot this motion, our provision of men, Arms, money, being such as may secure
Us from further violence, till it shall please God to open the eyes of our
People.

French fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown Tudor rose surmounted by a crown
Irish harp surmounted by a crown Scottish thistle surmounted by a crown
A Message of both Houses of Parliament in answer to his Majesty's Message of
the 25 of August present, agreed upon, and sent to his Majesty this 29. of Aug.
1642.
May it please your Majesty:
THE Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled; having received your Majesty's
message of the 25 of August, do with much grief Recent the dangerous and
distracted state of this Kingdom, which we have by all means endeavored to
prevent, both by our several advises and Petitions to your Majesty; which
have bin not only without success, but there has followed that, which no ill
Council in former times has produced, or any age has seen: Namely, those
several proclamations and declarations against both the houses of parliament,
whereby their actions are declared treasonable, and their persons Traitors. And
thereupon your Majesty has set up your Standard against them, whereby your
Majesty have put the two houses of Parliament, and in them, this whole Kingdom
out of your Protection: So that until your Majesty shall recall those
Proclamations and Declarations, whereby the Earl of Essex, and both Houses of
Parliament, and their Adherents, and such as have obeyed and Executed their
Commands and Directions, according to their duties, are declared Traitors. And
until the Standard set up in pursuance of the said Declarations be taken down:
your Majesty has put us into such a Condition that whilst we so remain, We
cannot by the Fundamental Privileges of Parliament, the public Trust reposed
in Us, or the General good or safety of this Kingdom, give your Majesty an
other answer unto this your message.

REsolved upon the Question by the House of Commons at the time of passing the
Vote in answer to the Kings message on Saturday the 27 of Aug. 1640.

That the Lords be moved to join with the Commons in a direction to the Lord
General, that he advance his Forces with all possible speed for the defense
and safety of the Kingdom.

Resolved further, etc.

Ordered that this answer be forthwith printed and then published.

Hen. Elsyng C. P. D, C.



FINI

