AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 5 th. 1773.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH FIFTH, 1773. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE the BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH,
1770.

BY DR. BENJAMIN CHURCH.

Impius haec culta novalia miles habebit? Barbarus has segetes? En quo
discordia cives perduxit miseros? En queis consevimus agros?

VIRGIL. Ecl. 1. O SOCII

O passi graviora, dabit Deus his quoque finem: -- revocate animos, maestumque
timorem mittite, forsan et haec olim meminisse juvabit.

VIRGIL. Aene. 1. BOSTON: Printed and Sold at the NEW PRINTING-OFFICE, in
HANOVER-STREET near CONCERT-HALL. M,DCC,LXXIII.

BOSTON ss.
AT a meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the town of BOSTON,
duly assembled at Faneuil Hall, and held by adjournment at the Old-south
Meeting House, on Friday the fifth of MARCH, Anno Domini 1773.

UPON a motion made, VOTED unanimously that the thanks of the town be, and
hereby are given to Dr. BENJAMIN CHURCH, for the elegant and learned ORATION,
delivered by him at their request, in commemoration of the HORRID MASSACRE
perpetrated on the evening of the fifth of MARCH 1770, by a party of soldiers
of the 29th regiment, under the command of Captain Thomas Preston, and that

The Honorable John Hancock, Esquire the Honorable James Otis, Esquire Mr. Samuel
Adams, John Scollay, Esquire Dr. Joseph Warren, Mr. William Dennie, Colonel Thomas
Marshall.

Be a committee to wait upon Dr. BENJAMIN CHURCH, and to desire a copy of the
ORATION for the press.

Attest, William Cooper, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN:
THE approbation of my fellow-citizens, with which I have been so undeservedly
distinguished, influences me without any reluctance, to submit this Oration to
the public inspection, in confidence that the exemplary generosity and candor
of this sensible metropolis will so far prevail as to shield this hasty
production from the severity of criticism.

I am Gentlemen with due respect your most Obedient, humble servant, BENJAMIN
CHURCH Jun.
MARCH 9th, 1773.

AN ORATION.
FROM a consciousness of inability, MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN, I have
repeatedly declined the duties of this ANNIVERSARY. Nothing but a firm
attachment to the tottering liberties of America, Periculosae plenum opus aleae
Tractas, incedis per ignes Suppositos cineri doloso.
added to the irresistible importunity of some valued friends; could have
induced me (especially with a very short notice) so far to mistake my
abilities, as to render the utmost Extent of your candor truly indispensable.

WHEN man was unconnected by social obligations; abhorrent to every idea of
dependence; actuated by a savage ferocity of mind, displayed in the brutality
of his manners; the necessary exigencies of each individual naturally impelled
him, to acts of treachery, violence and murder.

THE miseries of mankind thus proclaiming eternal war with their species, led
them probably to consult certain measures to arrest the current of such
outrageous enormities.

A SENSE of their wants and weakness in a state of nature, doubtless inclined
them to such reciprocal aids and support, as eventually established society.

MEN then began to incorporate; subordination succeeded to independence; order
to anarchy; and passions were disarmed by civilization: Society lent its aid to
secure the weak from oppression, who wisely took shelter within the sanctuary
of law.

INCREASING society afterward exacted, that the tacit contract made with her
by each individual at the time of his being incorporated, should receive a more
solemn form to become authentic and irrefragable; the main object being to add
force to the laws, proportionate to the power, and extent of the body
corporate, whose energy they were to direct.

THEN society availed herself of the sacrifice of that liberty, and that
natural equality of which we are all conscious superiors and magistrates were
appointed, and mankind submitted to a civil and political subordination. This
is truly a glorious inspiration of reason, by whose influence, notwithstanding
the inclination we have for independance, we accept control, for the
establishment of order.

ALTHOUGH, unrestrained power in one person may have been the first and most
natural recourse of mankind from rapine and disorder; yet all (...) power, made
by laws, or participation of sovereign (...) apparent improvements upon what
began in unlimited power.

IT would shock humanity, should I attempt to describe those barbarous and
tragic scenes, which crimson the historic page of this wretched and detestable
constitution, where absolute dominion is lodged in one person: Where one makes
the whole, and the whole is nothing. What motives, what events, could have been
able to subdue men, endowed with reason, to render themselves the mute
instruments and passive objects of the caprice of an individual!

MANKIND apprized of their privileges, in being rational and free; in
prescribing civil laws to themselves, had surely no intention of being
enchained by any of their equals: and although they submitted voluntary
adherents to certain laws for the sake of mutual security and happiness; they
no doubt intended by the original compact, a permanent exemption of the subject
body, from any claims, which were not expressly surrendered, for the purpose of
obtaining the security and defense of the whole: Can it possibly be conceived
that they would voluntarily be enslaved, by a power of their own creation?

THE constitution of a magistrate, does not therefore take away that lawful
defense against force and injury, allowed by the law of nature; we are not to
obey a Prince, ruling above the limits of the power entrusted to him; for the
Commonwealth by constituting a head does not deprive itself of the power of
its own preservation. The celebrated Mrs. Maccauley.
Government or Magistracy whether supreme or subordinate is a mere human
ordinance, and the laws of every nation are the measure of magistratical power:
And Kings, the servants of the state, when they degenerate into tyrants,
forfeit their right to government.

A BREACH of trust in a governor, Ibid.
or attempting to enlarge a limited power; effectually absolves subjects from
every bond of covenant and peace; the crimes acted by a King against the
people, are the highest treason against the highest law among men. Salus populi
suprema lex esto.


"IF the King (says Grotius) has one part of the supreme power, and the other
part is in the senate or people, when such a King shall invade that part which
does not belong to him, it shall be lawful to oppose a just force to him,
because his power does not extend so far."

THE question in short turns upon this single point, respecting the power of
the civil magistrate: Is it the end of that office, that one particular person
may do what he will without restraint? or rather that society should be made
happy and secure? the answer is very obvious -- And it is my firm opinion that
the equal Justice of GOD, and natural freedom of mankind must stand or fall
together.

WHEN rulers become tyrants, they cease to be Kings; they can no longer be
respected as GOD's vicegerents, who violate the laws they were sworn to
protect: The preacher may tell us of passive obedience, that tyrants are
scourges in the hands of a righteous GOD to chastise a sinful nation, and are
to be submitted to like plagues, famine and such like judgments: such doctrine
may serve to mislead ill-judging Princes into a false security; but men are not
to be harangued out of their senses; human nature and self preservation will
eternally arm the brave and vigilant, against slavery and oppression.

As a despotic government The ingratitude and corruption of Rome, is perhaps in
no instance more strongly marked than in her, treatment of her colonies, by
their labors, toils, and arms she had reached to that summit of glorious
exaltation as to be like BRITAIN the wonder and dread of the world; but by
fatal experience those ruined colonies, inculcate this serious lesson, the
ambition of a DESPOT is boundless, his rapine is insatiable, the accomplishment
of his conquests over his enemies, is but the introduction of slavery, with her
concommitant plagues, to his friends.
is evidently productive of the most shocking calamities, whatever tends to
restrain such inordinate power, though in itself a severe evil, is extremely
beneficial to society; for where a degrading servitude is the detestable
alternative, who can shudder at the reluctant poniard of a Brutus, the
crimsoned ax of a Cromwell, or the reeking dagger of a Ravilliac?

To enjoy life as becomes rational creatures, to possess our souls with
pleasure and satisfaction we must be careful to maintain that inestimable
blessing, LIBERTY. By liberty I would be understood, the happiness of living
under laws of our own making, by our personal consent or that of our
representatives. The very idea of a representative, deputy or trustee includes
that of a constituent, whose interest they are ordained and appointed to
promote and secure; my unappointed self-constituted agent in the british
parliament, has fraudulently and arbitrarily surrendered my best interest
without my privity or consent; I do therefore hereby protest against all such
powers as he shall claim in my behalf, and most solemnly discard him my service
forever. See Lock civil government Risum tene^tis amici!


WITHOUT this, the distinctions among mankind, are but different degrees of
misery; for as the true estimate of a man's life consists in conducting it
according to his own just sentiments and innocent inclinations, his being is
degraded below that of a free agent, which heaven has made him, when his
affections and passions are no longer governed by the dictates of his own mind,
and the interests of human society, but by the arbitrary, unrestrained will of
another.

I THANK GOD we live in an age of rational inquisition, when the unfettered
mind dares to expatiate freely on every object worthy its attention, when the
privileges of mankind are thoroughly comprehended, and the rights of distinct
societies are objects of liberal enquiry. The rod of the tyrant no longer
excites our apprehensions, and to the frown of the DESPOT which made the darker
ages tremble, Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. The citizens
of Rome, Sparta or Lacedaemon, at those blessed periods when they were most
eminent for their attachment to liberty and virtue, could never exhibit
brighter examples of patriotic zeal than are to be found at this day in
America, I will not presume to say that the original british spirit has
improved by transplanting; but this I dare affirm, that should Britains stoop
to oppression, the struggles of their American brethren will be their eternal
reproach.
we dare oppose demands of right, and appeal to that constitution, which holds
even Kings in fetters.

IT is easy to project the subversion of a people, when men behold them, the
ignorant or indolent victims of power; but it is extremely difficult to effect
their ruin, when they are apprized of their just claims, and are sensibly and
seasonably affected with thoughts for their preservation. GOD be thanked, the
alarm is gone forth, The instituting a Committee of grievances and
correspondence, by the (...) of Boston, has served this very valuable purpose:
The general infraction of the rights of all the colonies, must finally reduce
the discordant provinces, to a necessary combination for their mutual interest
and defense: Some future congress, will be the glorious source of the salvation
of America: The Amphictiones of Greece, who formed the diet or great council of
the states; exhibit an excellent model for the rising Americans.
the people are universally informed of their CHARTER RIGHTS; they esteem them
to be the ark of GOD to NEW ENGLAND, and like that of old, may it deal
destruction to the profane hand, that shall dare to touch it.

IN every state or society of men, personal liberty and security must depend
upon the collective power of the whole, acting for the general interest. Lord
chief Justice Coke observes "when any new device is moved in the King's behalf,
for (...) or the like; the commons may answer, they dare not agree without
conference with their counties." The novel device of fleecing the colonies, was
introduced in a way the constitution knows not of, and crammed down their
throats by measures equally iniquitous.

I will (...) the sticklers for the present measures, by confronting (...) more
state authorities; if they will permit me the following (...) express
declaration of (...), which they may chew (...). NO MAN CAN (...) WHICH IS
ANOTHER'S.


If this collective power is not of the whole, the freedom and interest of the
whole is not secured: If this confluent power acts by a partial delegation, or
for a partial interest; it is operation is surely determinable, where it is
delegation ends.

THE constitution of England, I revere to a degree of idolatry; but my
attachment is to the common weal: The magistrate will ever command my respect,
by the integrity and wisdom of his administrations.

JUNIUS well observes; when the constitution is openly invaded, when the first
original right of the people from which all laws derive their authority is
directly attacked; inferior grievances naturally lose their force, and are
suffered to pass by without punishment or observation.

NUMBERLESS have been the attacks made upon our free constitution, numberless
the grievances we now resent: But the Hydra mischief, is the violation of my
right, as a BRITISH AMERICAN freeholder; in not being consulted in framing
those statutes I am required to obey.

THE authority of the BRITISH monarch over this colony was established, and his
power derived from the provincial CHARTER; by that we are entitled to a
distinct legislation As in every government there must exist a power superior
to the laws, viz. the power that makes those laws, and from which they derive
their authority: Nothing, continued: the Corporal, can be so sweet,
An' please your honor, as liberty;
Nothing Trim -- said my uncle Toby, musing --
Whilst a man is free -- cried the Corporal, giving a flourish with his stick
thus.
TRISTRAM SHANDY.
therefore the liberty of the people is exactly proportioned to the share the
body of the people have in the legislature; and the check placed in the
constitution on the executive power. That state only is free, where the people
are governed by laws which they have a share in making; and that country is
totally enslaved, where one single law can be made or repealed, without the
interposition or consent of the people.

THAT the members of the British Parliament are representatives of the whole
British Empire, expressly militates with their avowed principles: Property and
residence within the Island, alone constituting the right of election; and
surely he is not my delegate in whose nomination or appointment I have no
choice: But however the futile and absurd claim of a virtual representation,
may comport with the Idea of a political visionary; he must (if possible)
heighten the indignation, or excite the ridicule of a free born American, who
by such a fallacious pretext would despoil him of his property.

AN American freeholder according to the just and judicious conduct of the
present ministry, has no possible right to be consulted, in the disposal of his
property: When a lordly, though unlettered British Elector, possessed of a
turnip garden; with geat propriety may appoint a legislator, to assess the
ample domains, of the most sensible opulent American planter.

BUT remember my Brethren! When a people have once sold their liberties, it is
no act of extraordinary generosity, to throw their lives and properties into
the bargain, for they are poor indeed when enjoyed at the mercy of a master.

THE late conduct of Great Britain so inconsistent with the practice of former
times, so subversive of the first principles of government, is sufficient to
excite the discontent of the subject: The Americans justly and decently urged,
an exclusive right of taxing themselves; was it indulgent conciliating or
parental conduct in that state, to exaggerate such a claim, as a concerted plan
of rebellion in the wanton Americans? And by a rigorous and cruel exercise of
power to enforce submission, excite such animosities, as at some future period
may produce a bitter repentance.

CAN such be called a legal tax or free gift? It is rather levying
contributions on gruding enslaved Americans by virtue of an act framed and
enforced, not only without, but against their consent; thereby rendering the
provincial assemblies a useless part of the constitution.

WHERE laws are framed and assessments laid without a legal representation, and
obedience to such acts urged by force, the despairing people robbed of every
constitutional means of redress, and that people brave and virtuous; must
become the admiration of ages, should they not appeal to those powers, which
the immutable laws of nature have lent to all mankind. Fear is a slender tie of
subjection, we detest those whom we fear, and wish destruction to those we
detest; but humanity, uprightness and good faith, with an apparent watchfulness
for the welfare of the people, constitute the permanency, and are the firmest
support of the sovereign's authority; for when violence is opposed to reason
and justice, courage never wants an arm for it is defense.

WHAT dignity, what respect, what authority, can Britain derive from her
obstinate adherence to error? She stands convicted of violating her own
principles, but perseveres with unrelenting severity; we implore for rights as
a grace, she aggravates our distress, by lopping away another and another
darling privilege; we ask for freedom and she sends the sword!

To the wisdom, to the justice, to the piety of his most sacred Majesty, I
unite in my appeal with this unbounded Empire; GOD grant he may attend to the
reiterated prayer, instead of the murmurs of discontent, and the frowns of
louring disaffection, we would universally hail him with those effusions of
genuine joy, and dutious veneration, which the proudest DESPOT will vainly look
for, from forced respect or ceremonial homage.

PARTIES and sactions since the days of the detested Andros, have been
strangers to this land; no distinctions of heart felt animosity disturbed the
peace and order of Society till the malignant folly of a The Nettleham Barronet.
late rancorous commander in chief conjured them from the dead: When shall this
unhappy clime be purged of its numerous plagues? When will our troubles our
feuds our struggles cease? When will the locusts leave the land? Then, and not
till then, peace and plenty shall smile around us; the husbandman will labor
with pleasure; and honest industry reap the reward of it is toil.

But let us not forget the distressing occasion of this anniversary: The sullen
ghosts of murdered fellow-citizens, haunt my imagination "and harrow up my
soul," methinks the tainted air is hung with the dew of death, while Ate' hot
from hell cries havoc, and lets fly the dogs of war. Hark! The wan tenants of
the grave still shriek for vengeance on their remorseles butchers: Forgive us
heaven! Should we mingle in voluntary execrations, while hovering in idea over
the guiltless dead. Where is the amiable, the grace^ Maverick? the opening
blossom is now withered in (...) cheek, the sprightly fire that once lightened
in his o^ is quenched in death; -- Hic ubi barbarus hostis, ut fera plus
valiant legibus arma facit. Ovid de Pont^
the savage hands of bru^ ruffians, have crushed the unsuspecting victim, and
in^ evil hour snatched away his gentle soul.

WHERE is the friendly, the industrious Caldwell? he paced innoxious through
the theater of death, inconscious of design or danger; when the winged fate
gored his bosom, and stripped his startled soul for the world of spirits. Where
are the residue of active citizens that were wont to tread these sacred floors?
Fallen by the hands of the vindictive assassins, they swell the horrors of the
sanguinary scene. Loyalty stands on tiptoe at the shooking recollection, while
justice, virtue, honor, patriotism become suppliants for immoderate vengeance:
The whole soul clamours for arms, and is on fire to attack the brutal banditti,
we fly agonizing to the horrid aceldama, we gaze on the mangled corses of our
brethren, and grinning furies glotting over their carnage; the hostile attitude
of the miscreant murderers, redoubles our resentment, and makes revenge a
virtue.

AT heaven they are! Thus nature spoke, and the swollen heart leaped to execute
the dreadful purpose; dire was the interval of rage, fierce was' the conflict
of the soul. In that important hour, did not the stalking ghosts of our (...)
fore-father's; point us to bloody deeds of vengeance? did not the consideration
of our expiring LIBERTIES, impel us to remorseless havoc? But hark! The
guardian GOD of New England issues his awful mandate. "PEACE, BE STILL," ^^sh'd
was the (...) war, the louring tempest frowned in's rage away. Confidence in
that GOD, beneath whose wing we shelter all our cares, that blessed confidence
released the dastard the cowering prey: With haughty scorn we refused to become
their executioners, and nobly gave them to the wrath of heaven: But words can
poorly paint the horrid soene -- -- Multaque rubentia caede Lubrica faxa
madent, nulli sua profuit aetas. LUCAN. Lib. 2.
Defenseless, prostrate, bleeding countrymen -- the piercing, agonizing groans
-- the mingled moan of weeping relatives and friends: -- These best can speak;
to rouse the lukewarm into noble zeal, to fire the zealous into manly rage;
against the foul oppression, of quartering troops, in populous cities, in times
of peace.

Thou who yon bloody walk shall traverse, there
Where troops of Britain's King, on Britain's Sons,
Discharged the leaden vengeance; pass not on
Ever thou have blessed their memory, and paid
Those hallowed tears, which sooth the virtuous dead.
O stranger! Stay thee, and the scene around
Contemplate well, and if perchance thy home,
Salute thee with a father's honored name,
Go call thy Sons -- instruct them what a debt
They owe their ancestors, and make them swear
To pay it, by transmitting down entire
Those sacred rights to which themselves were born.

