A COMMENT ON SOME PASSAGES IN THE BOOK of JOB.

BOSTON: Printed by ISAIAH THOMAS, at his Printing-Office near the MILL-BRIDGE.
MDCCLXXIII.

A COMMENT ON SOME PASSAGES IN THE BOOK of JOB.
IMPERIAL JOB grew old without a care;
Vast were his stores, and sumptuous was his fare.
Of numerous herds and spacious fields possessed,
What monarch could be more securely blessed?
Nor was his wealth, the wealth of fields alone;
His heart with every grace divinely shone.
Each comfort heaven unweariedly bestowed;
With each paternal joy his bosom glowed.
But now he must his blessedness forego,
And groan beneath variety of woe:
Now he is the victim of Satanic rage,
And nature seems malignant war to wage:
His fields are burnt; his flocks, his Sons, are slain;
His body scared and spotted over with pain.
He wept; he sunk; yet bowing to the rod,
His soul adores a more immediate GOD:
He shudder's to reproach his maker's name
Though by his foolish wife urged to blaspheme,
In all the various emphasis of grief,
His friends confess his woes beyond relief;
Each with his mantle rent sits on the ground;
They smite their breasts; the skies with groans resound.
Seven days were all in awful stillness spent
'Till JOB thus gave his long pressed anguish vent,
"Perish the day wherein I was conceived;
"In each revolving year, of light bereaved,
"Be it forgot; let horrid darkness lower
"Through all the night, and chase the dawning hour,
"Be it accursed; because a child it gave
"A child of grief, nor saw the womb my grave,
"Wherefore did GOD then spare me, in his ire?
"Oh! had I been permitted to expire!
"Then should I now have slumber'd with the just;
"Where kings and slaves partake an equal dust;
"Where all the wicked are forbid to reign;
"And where the oppressed poor, no more complain:
"Where groaning prisoners find a full release
"And men no longer are at war with peace: Where men no longer are at war with
peace.
"Where rest and mortals are no longer foes."
Young.

"There are they hushed: together there they rest;
"In all the quiet of oblivion blessed."
His strange complaints astounded all his friends;
His murmurs they reprove, and he defends;
The secret paths of providence they scan,
And vindicate the ways of GOD to man; And vindicate the ways of GOD to man.
Milton.

Declare the upright are uniformly blessed,
And none but sinners are, like JOB, distressed.
Still he complains, impatient of his smart,
And pleads his fixed integrity of heart:
Nor hesitates to crave, devoutly crave Nor hesitates to crave, devoutly crave,
-- Nor fears to crave,
Death, instant death, impatient for the grave.
Young.

Immediate death, in longings for the grave.
And now they both with rising wrath reply,
Till the debate is silenced from the sky;
A black'ning whirlwind did the voice invest,
While these rebukes, in thunder, were expressed.
Who dares in such deep counsels to contend
And darken themes he cannot comprehend?
Who censures me? what reptile of the dust,
Presumes to tell his maker what is just Presumes to tell his maker what is
just.
"And tells the world's Creator what is just."
Young.
;
Gird up thy mind; prepare almighty man,
Infinite deeds and purposes to scan.
Where did thou dwell, when from the bed of night,
Chaos uprose adorned with beauteous light:
Who hung this earth in boundless space, declare,
And who invests it with its robe of air?
Who shaped and fixed the mighty corner stone,
When all the morning stars so brightly shone;
When sons of GOD their acclamations raised
That Heaven was rocked with thunder as they praised.
Say, did thy span, its broad circumf'rence bound,
Its form, design, and fashion it around?
Who balances the clouds, the seasons guides,
Controuls the winds, and regulates the tides?
Survey the far-extended, azure main;
Can thou that boisterous world at pleasure rein?
Who has the waves, with doors and bars confined?
And who can with a word the ocean bind.
Do thou arrest it in its rage and say,
Here come, but here proud billows be your stay;
Have thou yet dived those lengths beneath the day,
And seen what gems and rubies pave the sea;
Those radiant walks, when has thy bold foot trod?
And searched at large beneath the incumbent flood:
Have thou beheld the center all displayed?
With upper, nether, and surrounding shade,
Beset, the vale of death passed to his gate,
And stood within the dark retreats of fate?
That shade immensely deep what eye can see; That shade immensely deep what eye
can see.
"Deep are those shades, but shades still deeper hide
"My (...) from the ken of human pride."


Yet shades as deep conceal my ways from thee?
Do thou pronounce where day light first shall gleam?
And where the sun shall pour his fiercest beam?
Can thou arrest him, on his argent way
And thy earth gladden with perpetual day?
Or when he holds the summit of the skies
Call and make universal midnight rise?
Where dwells the light? trace its resplendent home? Where dwells the light?
trace its resplendent home?
Where dwells the light? in what refulgent dome?
And where has darkness made her dismal home?


And darkness where? in what tenebrious dome?
Say, for thou can, since thou wast early born?
Before I arched the eyelids of the morn.
Say, since the vast profound, the lofty sky,
And the wide earth hides nothing from thine eye; And the wide earth hide
nothing from thine eye.
-- "Heavens unmeasurable height
"And the deep hell hide nothing from thy sight."
Pope.

Have thou surveyed the treasures of the snow?
By whom surcharged do northern tempests blow?
These are my rod; these, JOB, my scourges are,
When bold iniquities the vengeance dare.
Who makes the wilderness with verdure bloom,
And wafte upon the air, its rich perfume?
Where does mist, and where does frost a fire show,
And who arrays the fields in glittering dew?
Who feeds the fountain, parent of the main?
From whom descend the pearly streams of rain?
Do thou ordain the seasons of the year,
When plains a green or hoary garment wear?
When breezes waft the odours of the spring
And when their yellow treasures harvests bring.
When clouds with snow and hail impregnate lower,
Or earth replenish with a vernal shower.
Did thou the rainbow fix? its hues impart?
Those hues that distance the exploits of art?
On verdant fields, who sends his eastern blast
And lays at once the wealth of harvests waste.
By whom instructed do the planets know,
Where orient or meridian beams must glow?
Can thou the influence of Orion bind,
And free the year, in his cold bands confined?
The Pleiades sweet efficacy, loose,
Or freeze, or thaw the seasons, as you choose?
Bid Mazaroth prevent or chase the day
And guide Arcturus on his spangled way?
Who makes the blazing comet round the sun,
In its immensely devious orbit run?
Do thou replenish their exhausted fire,
And do they roll to execute thine ire?
Who does the curious form of man inspire,
With vital and with intellectual fire?
What wondrous power, declare, produced the mind,
And taught it to expatiate unconfined?
Nurtured by whom, does tender reason grow?
Kindled by whom, does infant passion glow?
Who wings progressive thought, those thoughts that fly
So wide around, so far beneath, on high?
A babble blown of error, weakness, fear,
Shall man that phantom of a shadow dare, Shall man that phantom of a shadow
dare?
"Dream of a dream and shadow of a shade."
Young.

My reign to censure, and my conduct blame,
Who sun and moon, and all the etherial frame.
Uphold; bid swarms of gilded infects play
Those clouds of insects that eclipse the day.
With equal eye on emmets who look down
Or raptured cherubs, that surround my throne?
Now righteous JOB, a full reply prepare,
The Almighty spoke, and thunder rent the air.
Then the Chaldean bowed with sore dismay
Abasht he spoke, while on low earth he lay.
Lo! I am vile; my lips have once rebelled,
But hence my murmurs shall be all expelled.
In fearful blackness, was the day suppressed,
While from the whirlwind JOB was still addressed.
Can thou with mighty thunderings shake a land?
Do lightenings sport or wound at thy command?
Can thou make earth to its deep center cleave?
And swallow generations in one grave?
Are regions, at thine awful anger, hurled?
Or can thou with a deluge drown the world?
The excellency of thy strength display,
And see oppressors prostrate with dismay;
Look down on all who persecute the just,
And trample them together in the dust.
Then with thy GOD contend; then will I own
Thy bliss, and being lodged in thee alone.
Who feeds the ravens, and their hungry brood,
When they with hoarse complainings, call on GOD? When they with hoarse
complainings, call on GOD.
-- "And grants their hoarse request."
Young.

Who banished from the Ostrich's hardened breast,
Each soft inquietude toward her nest?
Hatched by their parent, the prolific sun,
Alone, the unfledged weak brood are left to run.
In flight she scorns the steed; than winds more fleet;
She triumphs in the alertness of her feet.
The Peacock, JOB, is exquisitely fair,
When clouds forsake and when invest the air.
His gems now brightened by a noontide ray,
He proudly waves his feathers to the day;
A strut majestically slow, assumes,
And glories in the beauty of his plumes.
His train uprear'd! his wings! his tap'ring chest!
With glowing green, and gold, and azure dressed,
Survey; the starry ranges as they shine,
Proclaim the hand that made him all divine.
The Hawk, before autumnal tempests rise,
Pursues the summer through the southern skies;
She sees ill days approach with prescient ken
And early leaves the winter's rage to men. -- Leaves the winter's rage to men.
-- "Leaves ill days to men."
Young.

Thoughts only reach the eagle's lofty way,
Whence she distinctly views her scaly prey.
On cliffs aerial she holds her throne, On cliffs aerial she holds her throne,
"Where far above thy world she dwells alone;
"And proudly makes the strength of rocks her own."
Young.

And sees their strength impregnably her own.
On yellow pinions born her ample size
Full to the already promised victim flies, -- To the already promised victim
flies.
-- "Enjoys the promised gore."


The height repassed, she nimbly hovers over
Her untorn host, in raptures of its gore;
The reeking entrails quiver on their claw;
The dainty meets the cravings of their maw.
Hale is the offspring of the goat and hind,
Free from the frailties of the human kind.
Can thou declare how many moons revolve,
While they the pangs of pregnancy absolve?
Skilled in the physic of the field they know,
Where to find case, when with vast pain they bow;
They leave their young through the wide earth to stray;
I guide them on their solitary way.
Go to the ant; learn of its ways, be wise:
It early heaps its stores, lest want surprise.
Skilled in the various year, the prescient sage,
Beholds the summer chilled in winter's rage:
Survey its arts; in each partition'd cell
Economy and plenty deign to dwell.
Who first the art of distillation knew?
From poisonous flowers educ'd nectareous dew?
Behold the ass range through the desert free,
And wildly triumph in his liberty.
Shall he on distant embassies, be rode?
Has he, by mighty monarchs, been bestrode?
On thee, with hungry braying does he call
For food; and court admission to thy stall?
Will the strong unicorn, yoked with thy steed,
Bring to thy door, the produce of thy seed?
In battle ranged behold the martial horse
His stately prancings, and his furious force:
With ardent longings for encounter, mad
He rears his high sleek neck with thunder clad;
Collected flames from his wide nostrils roll,
Such fury actuates his warlike soul.
His eye on prostrate hosts already paws,
And from the vale a radiant trophy draws.
The war in sight he swallows up the ground
And scarce for joy believes the trumpet's sound,
By the keen faulchion pierced he neighs disdain;
In transports of his pride, forgets the pain;
Transfixed in every part, he groans to yield;
And dies to see the foe possess the field.
From his dark den, the mighty lion stalks,
While streams of gore, mark his nocturnal walks.
He makes the frighted desert all his own:
What blooming sweets are seen by him alone?
With hunger pained he casts a rolling glare;
The couchant herds are half consumed with fear.
The spacious concave when his roarings rend,
What voice in thunder shall with his contend?
Led by the moon, the ground they lash, they tear:
While melancholy shrieks disturb the air.
The quivering limbs they to their brood convey,
And over a bloody banquet, waste the day:
Survey their strength; their talon shakes the plain,
Fierce majesty sits on their bushy main;
From their large eye balls darts a distant light;
Though strong, they overcome the swift in flight.
See Behemoth emerge from out the flood,
And slowly cross the burdened strand for food.
His stature how incomparably great!
His nerves how solid, strong, and complicate!
That sword alone through his wide ribs shall pass,
Which penetrates the bars of triple brass.
Sinews and bones of steel, his heart defend;
When moved his tail, a cedar seems to bend.
His shadow boasts a large extent, and shields
From noontide heat, the natives of the fields,
The produce of the hills, is his repast,
While there he roams, the beasts retreat aghast;
But soon around the harmless monster play,
Forget to graze, and with new joy survey.
His vastness all outstretch'd upon the glade,
Whole groves can scarce invest him with their shade.
Burning to slake his thirst, his glaring eye,
See rivers sunk, his longing to supply;
Jordan is swallowed up with vast desire;
And only serves afresh his drought to fire.
Go, cast thy hook, into the swelling Nile;
With slender hair, Leviathan, to foil:
Go; with thy silken net the monster bind,
And see his greatness writhe by thee confined;
Will he with supplications court release?
Or with his mighty sports thy maidens please?
Shall the glad merchants own so rich a prey,
And to sea-fever'd marts their shares convey?
Let kings against him join, in furious war
And seek one fang or scale to load their car.
Incapable of wound, he knows no fear,
Nor can be waked by the rebounding spear.
To scatter death, he fiercely takes delight,
When once the strong, provoke him to the fight.
The stoutest, JOB, are not ashamed to flee,
Who then shall ever dare to turn on me?
Am I indebted for the gifts I own?
Behold whatever lives, is mine alone.
Wherever the zephyr breathes, or genial shower
The parched meadow glads; or fragrant flower
Perfumes the plain; wherever the orient dew
Adorns with pearl each sweetly blushing hue;
Wherever the fruitage shoots, or loaded tree
All breathe, glad, perfume, blush and shoot from me.
See my Leviathan prepare to rise,
And heave his ample stature to the skies:
His scaly height majestically rolls,
His eye the nations of the flood controuls,
Broad as the morn, when it begins to rise.
His adamantine skin, the spear defies.
Whenever he breathes, the frighted floods retire,
He breathes a cloud of mingled smoke and fire.
Survey with fear: What fangs! What scales are seen!
So close no air can edge its way between.
His hardened jaws, like spacious doors, unfold;
His teeth the mighty with dismay, behold.
When for his sport, he stains the waves with mud;
Behold vast stones uprais'd swim through the flood.
The ocean with the skies, a tempest blends,
When through the deep his hoary way he bends:
The distant mariner the track descries,
And from the furrowed foam, with terror flies.
His hugeness now buoyant on the streams,
His scales pour back against the sun, his beams.
Is ought on earth so strong, beyond compare,
So utterly incapable of fear!
Then the Chaldean all his crime deplored;
Trembling he ceased to murmur, and adored.
Thy might is wonderful, great king of kings,
Thou can perform unutterable things.
Thine ire if once incensed who can endure;
To thee compared arch-seraphs are impure.
From thy pervading eye is ought concealed;
Lo! every thought before thee stands revealed.
How deeply are thy counsels hid from men?
Thy wondrous purposes surpass their ken.
Should Heaven's bright host aspire to reign with thee;
And with thy godhead claim equality;
Thou might on all that vast refulgent train,
Look from thy throne, with infinite disdain.
This have I heard; but never could I see
Till now, thy wisdom, might and purity.
Hence my rebellious thoughts shall all be slain,
My work shall be to worship not complain.
FINIS.

