Mr. Cary's SERMONS ON THE Importance of Salvation, etc.

The Importance of Salvation considered; the Method of obtaining it explained;
and a Concern to secure an Interest in it recommended and urged. Being the
Substance Of several SERMONS PREACHED AT NEWBURY-PORT. BY THOMAS CARRY, A. M.
PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN THAT TOWN.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, at the Heart and Crown
in Cornhill, 1773.

TO THE FIRST CHURCH AND CONGREGATION in NEWBURY-PORT.
My Christian Brethren,
I LITTLE thought when I wrote these Sermons they would ever have been more
public than the Preaching would make them. That they were composed in haste,
under many Avocations, and in early Life, are Reasons why I should decline
committing them to the Press. But when I consider that Affection you showed me
when I first came among you, the great Kindnesses and steady Attachment I have
ever since experienced, and the very general and repeated Desire expressed for
their Publication: I thought it not best to refuse, and this must be my Apology
to the World.

THE Subject of them (Salvation) is the greatest and noblest, and demands your
most serious Attention. And might I hope what is here offered would awaken or
strengthen in you a just Sense of it; it would give me a Satisfaction and Joy
inexpressible. "For what is our Hope or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing, are not
even ye in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming."

TO lead you to believe in Jesus as the Way, the Truth and the Life, as the
only Foundation of your present or future Happiness; and to excite you to a
Temper and Conduct worthy his Name, has been the Design of my constant
Preaching. Faith in Christ, and a practical Subjection to his Gospel, I pray
may ever be your habitual and distinguishing Character.

THAT my Ministry may be successful to these Purposes, that I may have a daily
Remembrance in your Prayers; and that the best of Heaven's Blessings may rest
on you and yours, is the sincere Desire of your affectionate Friend and Pastor,

T. CARRY.

ACTS XVI. 30. "Sirs, what must I do to be saved?"


THIS World is the Place of our Birth but not of our Abode; we cannot expect
always to continue here. There must be a Time, and how soon is known only to
God, when we are to be called hence, must quit the Scene. That an End should be
put to our Being is not to be supposed. Reason tells us otherwise, and
Revelation certainly asserts the contrary; and we have as much Evidence as we
can, 'till we arrive at our destined Home. A serious, an earnest Concern about
our future Condition, must be both our Duty and Interest. We know the state
there is different: Everlasting Happiness or Misery; and as we realize these,
so shall we be sollicitous about the Question in the Text, "what must I do to
be saved?"

IN some preceding Verses we find Paul and Silas going to their Devotions in
the House of Lydia, who had been converted to the Christian Faith and baptized.
While passing, they met a Woman possessed of the Spirit of Divination, and who
brought by this Means her Masters much Money. She declared to the People who
they were; and they being grieved to see her in such unhappy Circumstances,
commanded the Spirit by whom she was possessed, to leave her. Her Masters
finding that now their Hopes of further Profit were at an End, were enraged at
Paul and Silas, and entered a Complaint to the Magistrates -- that they
exceedingly troubled the City -- taught Customs which were not lawful for them
to receive, neither to observe, being Romans. They were therefore commanded to
be beaten, cast into Prison; and Orders given to the Jailor to keep them
safely: Who having received such a Charge thrust them into the inner Prison,
and made their Feet fast in the Stocks. They were not intimidated with these
Things, but at Midnight and when all were asleep, they prayed and sang Praises
to God. Upon this there was suddenly a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken, and immediately all the Doors were
opened and every one's Bands were loosed. And the Keeper of the Prison awaking
out of his Sleep, and seeing the Prison-Doors open, he drew out his Sword, and
would have killed himself, supposing, the Prisoners had fled. But Paul cried
with a loud Voice, saying, do thyself no Harm, for We are all here. Then he
called for a Light and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul
and Silas, and brought them out and said as in our Text, Sirs, what must I do
to be saved?

"GOD, we are told, does often rouse up Men's sleepy and senseless and
lethargic Minds by some present Terror, Judgment or Affliction, which brings
them to consider the Concerns of their Souls and another World, when Nothing
else will. This shakes off their thoughtless Security, and alarms their stupid
and unthinking Minds, to look about them, and see what a dangerous Condition
they are in." But if this should not be the Case, yet the Question asked by the
Jailor is important and necessary; and if properly considered may be useful to
us.

I SHALL therefore make two or three Observations therefrom.

FIRST. We may observe the vast Importance of Salvation.

THIS the Jailor supposed when he asked the Question, and this must be by
Others.

MAN was made upright, but he soon sought out many Inventions. Sin has entered
into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death has passed upon all Men, for
that all have sinned. We are the Children of fallen Man, and are Ourselves
Sinners. The Importance of Salvation therefore, will appear, if we consider --
The unhappy Situation of Persons without it -- and Blessedness of such as
possess it.

THOSE who are not in a State of Salvation are defiled and corrupted. They are
estranged from God, under the Influence of Sin, and are disposed so to
continue; they are unclean and unholy. This is the Case with All who reject and
refuse the Salvation offered them, have not received nor are influenced by it.
The Apostles found it so in their Day. They declare of the Gentile World, that
they were Enemies of God, being in a State of Idolatry and Unrighteousness.
Ephesians. II. 1.
That they were dead in Trespasses and Sins, wherein in Time past they walked
according to the Course of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of
the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience. That
Ephesians. iv. 17, 18.
they walked generally in the Vanity of their Mind, having their Understanding
darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is
in them, because of the Blindness of their Heart: Who being past Feeling have
given themselves over to work all Uncleanness with Greediness. So corrupt and
defiled did they find them. And as to the Jews, they were also, by far the
greatest Part of them, by an universal Corruption of Manners, lost in Sin.
Their whole Head was sick and their Heart was faint; and, as emblematical of
their Corruption, it is represented that there was no Soundness in them, but
they had Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores. And if we consider some who
call themselves Christians, and would think it hard to be deprived of the Name,
yet do we not see many of These lead unholy, ungodly Lives, notwithstanding all
the Threatenings denounced against Sinners, all the terrible Things recorded in
the Word of God. They slight and disregard them. They have sinned, and will
sin, and will not be deterred from it. They are unconcerned about their future
Condition, overlook their Souls, as though they were of no Consequence, can see
them perishing before their Eyes without Remorse or Compunction. Such then must
certainly be corrupted, estranged from God and Goodness, and therefore their
Situation unhappy.

THEY also continually lie under the Anger of Almighty God.

IF defiled and corrupted, are estranged from Him, and if so are his Enemies,
and exposed to his Resentment. For God is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity, and he is angry with the Wicked every Day. And the Thoughts of this
ought to alarm and terrify All who are conscious of any wilful Wickedness or
Immorality. For who knows the Power of God's Anger, which can excite Horrors
and Pains in the Minds of Sinners, intense and durable beyond all Conception
and Imagination. If we are afraid of falling under the Displeasure of the Great
and Powerful of this World, who yet, when they have done their utmost, can only
kill the Body, how much more fearful must it be to fall into the Hands of the
ever living and holy God, who after he has killed, has Power to cast into
Hell. Certainly, when God's utter Abhorrence of Sin is considered, and of those
who are disposed to continue under it is Dominion; their Situation must be
deplorable, and evince the Importance of Salvation.

AND they can have no inward Peace and Quietness of Mind.

UNHAPPINESS must ever attend the Practice of Sin. Misery comes along with it,
brings Torment to the Mind and Disease to the Body. All Ungodliness has this
Tendency, and there are frequently Instances thereof. The Fermentation of the
Passions, and all the Effects of a sinful Mind, must make Men unhappy. A State
of Innocence would not have produced this. Man would have been a Stranger
hereto. We read indeed of "the Pleasures of Sin," but beside that they are of
the baser and grosser Kind, it is said of them, "They are but for a Season, for
a Moment, and the End of them is Heaviness. That the Ways of Sin may seem broad
and pleasant, but that they lead down to Death and take hold on Hell." It is
Isaiah xxxii. 17.
"Righteousness that gives Peace, and it is the Effect of that which is
Quietness and Assurance forever." It is for wicked Men to dread God, and to
endeavor to banish the Thoughts of Him out of their Minds. What Peace and
Satisfaction can such have, who must know that their Conduct is dishonorable
and ungrateful to God, unworthy their Characters, and will be productive of the
greatest Evils? Which brings me to say, that,

THOSE who are not in a State of Salvation, are liable to, and must suffer
everlasting Misery.

"THE Wages of Sin is Death." Romans vi. 23.
Those who reject the Means of Grace and Salvation, must expect to reap the
Fruit of their own Way and be filled with their own Devices. "The same, says
the Scripture, Rev. xiv. 10.
shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without
Mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire
and Brimstone, in the Presence of the holy Angels, and in the Presence of the
Lamb. And the Smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever." That
State is eternal, is what will know no End, and compared with which, the
longest Life of Pleasure, has not the Proportion of a single Moment. Such then
must depart from the Presence of God to dwell with Devils and damned Spirits
forever, in the Place where the Worm dies not and the Fire is not quenched.

NOW let us consider the Blessedness of those who are of the contrary
Character, are in a State of Salvation.

THEY are delivered from the Power and Dominion of Sin. They are redeemed from
all Iniquity, that Sin should no longer reign in their mortal Bodies, that they
might fulfill the Lusts thereof. The Situation of Sinners we see is, that they
are in Bondage and Slavery, subject to their Lusts, and to the Temptations,
Arts and Cunning of a designing Adversary. But those who are saved, are in
Measure delivered herefrom. The Creature shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Their nobler Faculties
have got the Ascendency and are triumphant. They are not carried away with
every Sin and Temptation. Iniquity has not the Dominion, but is rejected and
renounced. They have the Influences of the Spirit of God, that Comforter which
was promised and is provided. And they possess him not as a transient Visitant,
but as a constant Guest; assisting them to mortify the Deeds of the Body,
overcoming their Corruptions, all the Oppositions they meet with, helping their
Infirmities, and purifying their Souls. And they are conformed to God, his
Image and Likeness; are cleansed from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit.

THEY have also the Pardon of their Sins. And what a glorious Privilege must
this be. "Blessed, Psalm. XXXII. 1.
says the Psalmist, is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is
covered; blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity." By this
must be meant, a full Indemnification from all past Sins and Transgressions. It
is to forget, forgive and remember them no more. It intends the Abolition of
them, their Guilt, and freedom from the deserved Destruction consequent upon
them, and a Reception to the divine Mercy. The Book is crossed, the Debt is
cancelled; and they are not subjected to the Payment. The Obligation to
Punishment is made void. God no longer accounts Men obnoxious, but the Sentence
against them is revoked. This assuredly will be the Case; for God is good, he
is ready to forgive, he is plenteous in Mercy to all that call upon him. "There
is no Condemnation to any who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit."

AND they shall at last be received to everlasting Glory and Happiness. They
shall be made to enter into the Joy of their Lord. The Wicked must go away into
everlasting Punishment, but the righteous into eternal Happiness and Life.
Christ has purchased this by his Blood; entered Heaven by a new and living Way,
and has consecrated it for them, through his Flesh. He gives unto them eternal
Life and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his
Hands. We have the Declarations of God himself: who is not a Man that he should
lie, or the Son of Man that he should repent. And who has declared, that they
shall inherit the Kingdom prepared for them from the Foundation of the World.
Matthew. XXV. 34.
For he so loved the World as to give up his only begotten Son, that whoever
believed in him might not perish but have everlasting Life. John III. 16.
This is the present Support, and will be the future Felicity of the Saints.
"Good Men have the sure Word of Prophecy to found and direct their Faith. Here
therefore they may fix their Foot with full Assurance of Faith, rejoicing in
Hope of the Glory of God." Certainly then our Salvation is not an indifferent
Thing, seeing, without it, we shall be forever miserable, and with it
everlastingly happy. And these must evidence it is Importance.

DO we then see the Importance of Salvation, how thankful ought we to be that
it is offered us.

THIS indeed is worthy our Thanks and demands our Gratitude. To God, who is the
Author of it, who has found out a Way for Man whereby he may be reconciled to
Him and be at Peace with his own Conscience. To Jesus, for that Compassion and
Grace which were so conspicuous in him. God found out a Way for the Peace of
Man, but that he might possess it, Christ himself dies, offers up his Body as
an atoning Sacrifice. For it pleased the Father that in him all Fullness should
dwell, and (having made Peace through the Blood of the Cross) by him to
reconcile All Things to himself. And he is still the Bestower of it to Men.
When therefore they are sensible of it is Importante, they eagerly and readily
embrace the Way offered; are thankful there is one, their Hearts overflow with
Joy and Gladness.

THE vast Importance of Salvation shows us the Stupidity of those who are
careless and unconcerned about it.

DID Men consider, they could not be so negligent and heedless. It must be
owing to their Inattention to the great Things of their Peace, that they
conduct as they so often do: This is their Bane -- this their Ruin. This is the
Charge God brings against his People Israel. Isai. I. 3.
"My People, says he, do not consider." And in the Seventh of Hosea he
complains of the Hypocrisy and Impiety of his People; but this was their
Unhappiness. "They consider not in their Hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness. On Account of this, Sinners are often compared in the Scripture to
the brutal Creation. Prove. vii. 12.
"He goes after her straitway as the Ox goes to the Slaughter, and
considers not that it is for his Life." Therefore is it Men are so easy as to
their Wickedness, they do not consider the Tendency and End thereof. "He
knows not that the Dead are there, and her Guests in the Depths of Hell."
"This is the Sleep and Lethargy of the Soul: It keeps Men unconcerned, though
they are in the Way to Ruin, and upon the very Brink of Destruction." And if
Men become religious, desirous of Salvation in good Earnest, they must be
awakened out of their Stupidity, brought to think; and to say, as with the
Jailor, "What must I do to be saved?"

LET us then be all excited by the Grace of God to consider how great this
Salvation is, and to seek after it.

IT is of the utmost Importance, demands our Attention, our greatest Care.
Considering who is the Author, and who the Purchaser; Nothing can be greater.
Considering Ourselves, our Character and Situation, none can need it more. No
great Arguments then are wanting to excite to it. The Unhappiness of not being
saved is set before us; the Blessedness of being so, shown us; and None can be
at a stand. Now then is the Time* now the accepted Time, and now the Day of
Salvation. Awake thou that sleep, and Christ shall give you Life. Know in
this your Day the Things that concern your everlasting Welfare, before they
shall be for ever hidden from your Eyes. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
"consider your Ways." "Keep your Hearts with all Diligence." Seek him to enable
you to know your true Interest and pursue it. To do it with Alacrity, with a
Zeal adequate to it is Importance and Worth.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION I make from the Words is, That there is Something to be
done by us, in order to our being saved. Here we shall endeavor to consider --
What is to be done -- and then evince the Truth of it.

I. WHAT is to be done.

NOW if we look into the Verse following our Text, we shall find the Direction
of Paul and Silas to the Jailor, when he asked what he should do to be saved.
They said "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved." This is
what he was directed to, and this must be done by others, would they be saved.

FAITH or BELIEF in general, is defined as a Persuasion of the Mind, or Assent
to some Truth, or the Existence of a Person, or Thing; and this upon the
Testimony of those that declare it. And thus it is said to differ from other
Kinds of Knowledge; because in them we assent upon the clear and plain Reason
of Things, and here upon the Authority of Persons; and therefore our Faith is
firm or weak in proportion to the supposed Ability and Honesty of him that
testifies. There are different Kinds of Faith, and accordingly have different
Objects; as human, divine, and christian. It is the last that is here intended,
and therefore Christ is the Objecte "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ." Now
this is,

1st. To believe the Gospel of Christ.

OUR blessed Lord made a Declaration of his Father's Will to the World, and
that "in those Sermons, Parables and Discourses of his which we find recorded
in the four Evangelists, in which the Will of God concerning the Way and Method
of our Salvation is revealed. The Apostle Paul declared Acts xx. 27.
to the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, that he had not shuned to declare the
whole Counsel of God. And this Counsel which he had preached was that Account
of our Savior's Discourses and Actions we have in the Gospel." And whoever
therefore believes the Gospel, believes its History and its Doctrine.

THE HISTORY. Thar there was such a Person as Jesus Christ, and as there
described. That he was the Son of God. In this Character he is represented. i
Luke i. 35.
That holy Thing, says the Angel to Mary, which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God. This is the Character of one who is born of God and
overcomes the World, that he believes that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 1
John v. 5.
So when any were converted to the Christian Faith, they believed this. Thus
the Eunuch tells Philip, Acts VIII. 37.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And the Apostle Paul after his
Conversion believed, and so preached Christ that he is the Son of God. And it is
said of every one that shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that
God dwells in him, and he in God. 1 John IV. 15.
So is it also said, that he was sent of God. God so loved the World that he
gave his only begotten Son. And Christ says, I proceeded forth and came from
God, neither came I of myself, but He sent Me. And being thus sent, that he
lived as is declared, performed those wonderful Things recorded, suffered an
ignominious Death on the Cross, was laid in the Grave, rose from the Dead and
ascended to Glory.

HIS DOCTRINE is said to contain Precepts, Promises and Threatenings. And a
Faith in Christ includes a firm Belief of these, "of the Precepts of the Gospel
as the Matter of our Duty, and the Rule of our Life; and of the Promises and
Threatenings of it as Arguments to our Duty, to encourage our Obedience and
deter us from Sin." So that he who believes in Christ, believes the Gospel, and
believing that, he believes the Truth of it, and All it contains.

2. To believe in Christ is to trust in, and depend on Him alone, for Salvation.

HE alone can procure it, and it is only He that can be trusted in for it. Now
this may imply -- that we are fully satisfied and believe we can obtain
Salvation only in, and by Christ -- and also a full Persuasion of his being an
able and allsufficient Savior.

1. THAT we believe and are fully satisfied we can obtain Salvation only in,
and by Christ.

CHRIST is the only Mediator between God and Man -- the Medium of Access to
Him, or Means of Reconciliation with Him. The Apostle Peter when he had cured
the lame Man, and was brought before the Rulers on that Account, thus declares:
Be it known unto you all, and to all the People of Israel, that by the Name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the Dead;
even by Him does this Man stand before you whole. This is the Stone which you
Builders rejected, which is now become the Head of the Corner. Neither is there
Salvation in any other: For there is none other Name under Heaven given among
Men whereby we can be saved. The Favor of God being forfeited by Sin, Christ
undertakes to make Atonement -- to open a door whereby sinful Men may draw nigh
to God, have Hopes of Audience, Forgiveness and Acceptance. His Death was to
expiate Guilt by making Satisfaction to divine Justice. Accordingly we read,
"God laid upon Him the Iniquities of us All -- that we have Redemption through
his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins." It was this only that obtained it, we
being redeemed not with corruptible Things as of Silver and Gold, but with the
precious Blood of Christ, as a Lamb without Blemish, and without Spot. To
believe therefore in Christ is to be satisfied there is no other Way and desire
none.

CHRISTIANITY, says Dr. Doddridge, is the Religion of Sinners, and it never
will be really welcome to a Soul that is not sensible of the Malignity of Sin.
Many of Mankind forget God, do not seek after him at all, will not have him to
reign over them. But if their Consciences be properly awakened, they must see
their Dependence on him, and their Need of an Interest in his Favor: And as
having justly offended, they want one to interpose for them. For having proper
Notions of God, they are sensible that his Justice and Holiness are essential
to his Nature, as his Wisdom and Goodness. And therefore when they consider
themselves as appearing in his Presence, guilty of the greatest Crimes, they
must be led to cry out, from a deep and inward Sense, Who is able to stand
before this holy Lord God? Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow
myself before the high God? Surely I need some perfectly righteous Mediator,
high in his Favor, to introduce me to him, and to render my Access safe and
comfortable, by appearing as a Day's-Man betwixt us, to lay his Hand upon us
both. And this those who believe in Christ readily acknowledge, and heartily
acquiesce in.

2. THEY have also a full Persuasion of his being an able and allsufficient
Savior.

THEY believe the truth of the Declaration, "that he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives making
Intercession." They consider him as appointed of God. That God has laid in
Zion, for a Foundation, "a tried Stone, a precious Corner Stone, a sure
Foundation." That God is infinitely wise and good, knows what are the best
Means, most adapted to answer Ends; and that whatever he determines to be best,
they may undoubtedly rely on. They consider his Character, as the Son of God,
and the Manner of his Appearance. That it was necessary He should take Flesh
upon Him; and that such an high Priest became Men, who was holy, harmless,
undefiled and separate from Sinners. And They view Him as accepted of God --
that He was an Offering and Sacrifice to Him for a sweet smelling Savor. Being
therefore convinced of these Thins, they do accordingly trust in, and depend
upon Him for Salvation. "Heartily consent to own and accept Him in the
Characters He bears; and have their Spirits impressed suitably to the Nature
and Importance of what they assent to concerning Him. As He is the only Savior
of Sinners, set forth in the Gospel for a Propitiation; through whom Pardon and
Acceptance with God may be had; and as He is sufficient therefore: So their
Belief of these is attended with the committing of themselves to Him, to be
saved in His own Way, and a firm reliance upon Him as able and willing to
perform all the kind Offices for them which are included in the Character of a
Savior."

3. FAITH in Christ is productive of new Obedience.

THIS will ever be exercised by those who believe in Jesus, and whenever this
Obedience is wanting, Mankind may assure themselves, they are mistaken,
notwithstanding all their Pretenses.

THEREFORE was it, that the Apostle directs Titus (that his Hearers might not
be deceived in so important a Matter) Titus III. 8.
"to affirm it (not transiently but) constantly, that they who have believed in
God be careful to maintain good Works." He supposed this must be so, if they
had true Belief. And thus is it elsewhere represented. Thus, Romans X. 16.
But they have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Esaias says, who has believed
our Report? Heb. V. 9.
Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation to them that obey Him. The Apostle
Paul was sent to the Gentiles Acts XXVI. 18.
to open their Eyes and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power
of Satan unto God, that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and an
Inheritance among them which are sanctified by FAITH that is in Him. And put no
Difference between us and them, purifying their Hearts by Faith. Acts XV. 5.


FAITH, REPENTANCE, CHRISTIAN OBEDIENCES, HOLINESS, LIKENESS to God, etc.
though variously expressed, are but one and the same Thing. There cannot be one
without the other. He who truly and properly believes in Christ, does sincerely
repent of his Sins, and if there is Time for it, heartily endeavors by the
Grace of God to render an Obedience to all His Precepts.

AND I find it observed by Writers on the Subject of Faith, that where it is
mentioned as a Condition of Salvation, it denotes not only a naked Assent to
the Truth of this Proposition; that He is the Son of God, and the Messenger of
God's Mind and Will to the World, and the Savior of Sinners; but that it
includes also whatever is naturally consequent thereunto. For thus* say they,
it is very ordinary with the Scripture to express the natural Effects and
Consequences by their Causes. This is the Love of God, says the Apostle John, 1
Epist. V. 3.
that we keep his Commandments. Whereas in Strictness of speaking, our keeping
His Commandments, is only the Effect or Consequence of loving Him. So says the
wise Man. Prove. VIII. 13.
The Fear of the Lord is to hate Evil, whereas indeed this is only the Effect
or Consequence of the Fear of the Lord. And thus by knowing, and hearing, and
remembering of God; the Scripture usually expresses the consequent Effects of
them. And so also Faith or believing, when it is used as connected with eternal
Life, must always imply it is natural Effects and Consequents: i. e. sincere and
universal Obedience to those Rules of holy Living which the Gospel prescribes:
For this is the most natural Effect of our believing in Jesus Christ. 1 John V.
^.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, i. e. whosoever so
believes the Truth of this Proposition as to practice upon it, and govern his
Life and Actions according to the Tenor and Direction of it, is truly a Child
of God. For he who believes Christ to be the Messiah, but continues obstinately
disobedient to his Laws, is so far from being a Child of God, that he thereby
becomes ten Times more a Child of the Devil. For, says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor.
XIII. 2.
If I have all Faith and have not Charity, I am Nothing. For, says he again,
Gal. V. 6.
For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any Thing or Uncircumcision,
but Faith which works by Love. And what he means by this, he tells us, Gal.
VII. 16. Circumcision is Nothing and Uncircumcision is Nothing but the new
Creature. And what he means by this, he tells us, 1 Cor. VII. 9. Circumcision
is Nothing and Uncircumcision is Nothing but keeping the Commandments of God.
So that the only Thing which is genuine and will be advantageous* is Faith
working by Love. Faith working by Love is the new Creature, and the new
Creature is keeping the Commandments of God.

THIS then may serve to correct the Mistakes of those who place the whole of
saving Faith upon a bare Dependence on Christ for Salvation.

HOW many are there that have, and will have no other Conception of it? And it
is to be feared, flatter themselves to their Ruin and Destruction. This is a
Part, and but a Part; was it the whole, would be dishonorable to God, defeat
the Design of Christ's Coming; and be subversive of all Holiness and Goodness.
There can be no true Faith in Christ without believing in His Gospel, and in
His whole Character as therein represented; so neither can there be this,
without an Obedience to His Injunctions. They are joined in the Word of Truth.
We have no Right to separate them.

AND this may serve also to correct the Mistakes of those who think they have
no true Faith, because they are not certain of their Salvation.

THIS is a Mistake that some Christians run into, "That they don't believe to
any saving Purpose 'till they believe their own particular Salvation." Hence
arise Fears and Distresses, their Lives are rendered uncomfortable, being
subject to Bondage. Because they cannot find Perfection in themselves, they are
not certain, and therefore do not believe aright. Certainty in this Life is not
(ordinarily) to be expected. Such are our Situation and Circumstances here,
such our Liableness to transgress; and the Temptations we are exposed to; that
we are to fear in some Degree; have a godly Jealousy over ourselves. The
Apostle Paul, as good as he was, cries out, Romans VII. 24.
"O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death."
Though he says, he Ver. 22.
"delighted in the Law of the Lord after the inward Man." The Apostle John
tells us, 1 Epist. III. 21.
"If our Heart condemn us not, then may we have Confidence toward God." If our
Aim in the Main is right, and we endeavor to approve ourselves to God, we may
have Hope; and if we have that, we nay be encouraged that we believe aright,
though Certainty does not take Place. And we ought to guard against the
contrary Conception.

LET us then endeavor after right Notions and Apprehensions of Faith.

A MISTAKE in this Matter may have an unhappy Tendency, prove of fatal
Consequence. Let us look to Jesus; believe in Him as the Way, the Truth and
Life; trust in and rely upon Him as the only Savior of Sinners; and endeavor
that we also do the Things which He says -- Believe His Doctrines, and obey His
Precepts, remembering that He has told us, "that if we keep His Commandments, we
shall abide in His Love -- that we are His Friends if we do whatsoever He has
commanded us, and that not every one that says unto Him, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but He that does the Will of His Father who
is in Heaven."

THINK how inconsistent it must be, to profess to believe in, and yet in Works
to deny Him: That this must be unworthy our Character, and end in Misery. Be
sensible that of ourselves we can do Nothing, that our Sufficiency is of God,
that Faith is His Gift, let us be earnestly seeking for it, in the way He has
appointed. Endeavor to "be continually building ourselves up in our most holy
Faith;" growing up to Him in all Things who is the Head; making our Calling and
Election sure, that our Hope may be more enlarged, strengthened and confirmed.
So shall we go on our Way rejoicing, be able to confide in the Mercy of God,
and be finally received there, where our Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision,
and our Hope in Fruition.

WE come now to the

2d PARTICULAR under this OBSERVATION. To evince the Truth of it, or show that
Something must be done in order to our being saved.

HERE may enquire, why Something must be done? which will guard against
Mistakes, and evidence it to us.

NOW certainly Nothing is expected and required, because by our doing it, we
can merit and purchase Salvation. We are Sinners, and have lost the Favor of
God. If therefore we are saved, we must owe it to His free and rich Grace and
Mercy in Jesus Christ. Christ's Death is the Foundation of a Sinners
Acceptance. 1 Cor. iii. 11.
"Other Foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ." We are therefore accepted in the Son of God. Justified freely by His
Grace through the Redemption there is in Jesus Christ: and therefore not for
any Works of Righteousness which we have done, but of His Mercy He saves us.

AND here it is observed, and that justly, we are to fix our Hopes of
Justification and Salvation, viz. on that perfect Propitiation and Satisfaction
which Christ by the Sacrifice of Himself once offered, has made for the Sins
of Men. For the alone Merit of this Sacrifice God is graciously pleased to
forgive us all our Sins. So that through Faith in the Blood of Christ, and not
by Confidence in ourselves, and our own righteousness, we obtain Remission of
Sins and eternal Life. And it is not only in itself great Arrogance, but great
Ingratitude to our blessed Redeemer, who gave Himself for us; to ascribe that
to the Merit of our Righteousness, which nothing in Heaven or Earth, but the
Blood of Christ could have purchased for us. Whatever we give God is his own;
and when we have done all we can, it is but our Duty, and we must acknowledge
we have fell short; and that we are but unprofitable Servants. Something
therefore is not required of us on this Account. This being premised, we
proceed to say,

IT is incumbent on us to be active in the Affair of Salvation, in Reference to
the Encouragement to Religion; and as an essential Distinction of Character is
connected with it.

SALVATION is offered to Sinners, yet none may expect it without they believe
in Christ, repent of Sin, and return to God. It is the repenting, returning
Sinner that is encouraged, and who only can hope to receive Favor. Therefore
are Sinners directed to seek the Lord while He may be found, to call upon Him
while He is near; to forsake their Thoughts and return to Him; and are told He
will have Mercy on them, and abundantly pardon them. So our blessed Lord while
on Earth gives this kind Invitation: John VII. 37.
"If any Man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink." And He says also: Matt.
XI. 28, 29.
"Come unto Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest.
Take my Yoke upon you and learn of Me, and ye shall find Rest to your Souls."
This it seems must be done if they experienced Blessings from Him; and implies,
that they would not have, and could not expect them without. And this He
elsewhere declares fully. For He says, Matt. XXIII. 37.
"How often would I have gathered thy Children together as a Hen gathers her
Chickens, and ye would not; therefore your House is left to you desolate,."
John V. 40.
"And ye will not come to Me that ye might have Life." And therefore because
they did not come, they were not to have it, and which they would, had they
complied.

IF no Attention is to be paid to the Temper and Behavior of Men, it would
matter not what were their Character; they need not be sollicitous how they
conducted; it might be as well to be wicked, in this view, as to be virtuous.

BUT it may be said, if there were no Heaven or Hell hereafter, it would be
best for Men to be good. Be it so. But the Question is, whether they would be?
Do we not, considering our Make and Situation, want Something by Way of Motive;
and is it not the Hope of Happiness or Good arising, that actuates Men in all
their Conduct? It is interwoven in our very Natures, and it is impossible
almost, to act abstractedly from it. And the Motive of present-Good only, would
perhaps be hardly sufficient.

WE are surrounded with many Temptations, and we strongly incline and listen to
them; and we should undoubtedly give way, were it not for the Motives of future
Happiness set before us in the Gospel. We see, powerful as they are, they are
not always sufficient; and what would be the Case if there were none. If
therefore it matters not whether Men conduct differently: No good comes of
their Mortifications and Self-Denials, their Labors and Endeavors, why should
they be at the Pains? They Might say as the Epicurean, in Regard to Futurity,
"Let us eat and drink for Tomorrow we die." Let us take Life while we have it.
We are as well and shall stand as fair, as those who are endeavoring to fear
God and keep His Commandments. What Encouragement would here be to Vice? What
Discouragement to Virtue?

BUT how different is this from the Reality? How strongly are Men exhorted and
encouraged to forsake sin and live to God? "Repent and turn from your evil
Ways, so Iniquity shall not prove your Ruin." "Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved." And how earnestly are Men threatened, when
pursuing the contrary Conduct? -- "That if they will not repent, they shall be
destroyed," "That he that believes not is condemned already. He that believes
not the Son shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him."

IT is also incumbent on us to be active in the Affair of our Salvation, in
Reference to the Rule of final Judgment.

THAT there will be a Day of Judgment, must be evident to us from our own Make
and Constitution. Man has a Spirit formed within him, something that directs
him, whose Faculties are capacious, and are designed for Continuance. He is
capable of forming proper Judgment of Things, and knowing the Nature of
Actions; of recollecting and reviewing Things past, and looking forward in some
Measure to those that are future, their Effects and Consequences. He must
therefore be accountable, and was designed to be judged.

THE Force and Apprehensions of our Consciences prove it to us. The Uneasiness
or Pleasure arising from the Commission of a good or bad Action, and this when
Actions are secreted from the Knowledge of all Mankind; and which must be owing
to a secret Foreboding or Presage, that they must hereafter account for the Sin
committed.

THE Dispensations of Providence. The unequal Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments. And the Revelation God has afforded, do also fully point it out.
It is declared, "That Men are once to die, and after Death the Judgment -- That
God has appointed a Day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by
that Man whom He has ordained; whereof He has given Assurance unto all Men,
in that He has raised Him from the Dead."

IF then there is to be this Judgment, there must be some Rule, by which God
will proceed in the final Determination. Now the Apostle Paul declares, Romans I.
16.
"that God will judge the Secrets of Men by Christ Jesus according to the
Gospel." The Gospel of Christ then is the Rule whereby Men are to be judged.
And that declares, Romans II. 6 -- 11.
"that God will render to every Man according to his Deeds; to them who by
patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory and Honor and Immortality;
eternal Life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth,
but obey Unrighteousness; Indignation and Wrath; Tribulation and Anguish upon
every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile:
But Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every Man that works Good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile: For there is no Respect of Persons with God."

GOD bestows temporal Blessings when and where he pleases. He causes it to rain
upon one city and not on another; favoring some Men with outward Prosperity,
and causing Adversity to be the Lot of others. He is not accountable herein; He
has a right to bestow his Favors and Blessings as He sees fit.

BUT now in judging Men in order to reward or punish, He acts differently. He
views their Character and State; the Advantages they have had, and the
Disadvantages they have labored under. He acts by the most consummate Wisdom
and impartial Justice, not by capricious or arbitrary Power. Every Man must
receive according to the Things done in the Body. God we see, it is said by the
Apostle, is no Respecter of Persons. He that has sinned without Law, shall
perish without Law; and he that has sinned in the Law, shall be judged by it.
If we suppose otherwise, we overthrow our natural Notions of Him, and indeed
all Revelation. It therefore cannot be.

TO whom then much is given -- much is required -- much is expected; and to
whom little is given, the one Talent; if that is properly improved, no more is
demanded. And herein the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God are manifested;
that He deals with Men as He has capacitated them, afforded them Knowledge; and
as they have improved. i. e. He deals with them as rational, accountable
Creatures, and will reward them as such. Somewhat therefore must be done in
order to his finally proceeding with them.

AND this is requisite in Reference to the divine Authority and Perfections.

THERE is a Harmony of the divine Attributes in the Salvation of Men. They all
act in Concert in this grand Affair. One is not exerted at the Expense of the
other, but All unite. But now, were there Nothing to be done by Men, Infinite
Wisdom would be called in Question. The divine Purity and Holiness would be
taxed: The infinite Truth and Faithfulness would be doubted.

THE Wisdom of God is conspicuous in contriving such an Expedient as He has, to
reconcile the divine Justice and Mercy together, when our Iniquities had set
them at Variance. He has so disposed all Things as that they must ultimately
redound to his Glory and the Good of Men. "Herein He has abounded in all
Wisdom and Prudence:" but certainly this would not appear, it must defeat
itself, if Men might be indulged in Sloth and Negligence; and would be
subversive of their Happiness.

GOD is Holy. Holiness is essential to his Nature. To destroy Sin and make Men
like to Him, He sent his Son. And 'till that Image which has been destroyed by
Sin is renewed, Men are incapable of the Enjoyment of Him. But might they be
idle and careless, would it not appear as though God was indifferent about it,
or connived at it? Psalm L. 21.
"Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thyself: But I will reprove
thee."

SUCH is the Justice of God, that He severely animadverts on those who
transgress his Laws; and He must govern All with the greatest Impartiality. He
has declared that He will. And his Ways and Judgments are true and righteous.
"He will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity.
The righteous Lord loves Righteousness, and his Countenance does behold the
Upright." And therefore it must be necessary, if we believe this, to endeavor
to forsake Sin and live to God. If we think otherwise, how can we suppose God
to be indeed as He is described?

GOD must be an all-perfect Being: possessed of absolute Rectitude. Every
Perfection must agree. Did they not, He would sink in his Character, and of
Consequence cease to be God. So that, upon the whole, the Truth of the
Observation must appear. We have Nothing to do by Way of Merit and Claim, but
Something must be done in the Way of Duty, as we are intelligent, accountable
Creatures.

WE may therefore adore and praise that Being who has thus conducted. The
Method He has appointed is consistent with his moral Government, and the State
of Men as fallen, but as rational -- As under Obligations to improve their
Faculties, to serve and obey Him. In this Way his Grace is honored. There is
Nothing inconsistent with his Perfections, and no Encouragement is given to the
Corruption or Inactivity of Man. We are therefore to reverence his Name and
render Him Thanks.

WE also see that it is not for us to stand still and expect Salvation.

GOD we find expects and requires Something of us; He has therefore given Means
for our Improvement. They are admirably adapted to the Purpose, and it is
ordinarily in the Use of these that He meets with Men, blesses and enables them
to believe to the saving of their Souls. If they reject them, they can have no
Reason to expect God will appear for them, but that they must be given over to
Blindness of Mind, and Hardness of Heart, and die in their Sins.

AND whatever Men in Health, and while engaged in the World, may think, yet it
is certain, when they come to quit the Scene, and Eternity opens to their View,
their Conceptions in the general are different. I believe it is seldom that one
goes out of the World, if he has his Senses, but blames Himself for not doing
more than he has: Either that he has not prayed to God at all, or not enough,
or that he has not attended on his Worship and Ordinances, or not with that
Devotion and Sincerity he ought. But why should Men, when going out of Life,
distress themselves with these Things, if they were needless, if it mattered
not whether they were done; and were of no Consequence to Salvation and
Happiness? The Mind of Man thus misgiving is a strong Evidence that we ought to
be working out our Salvation.

MEN therefore are not to be inactive. If they persuade themselves that they
may, and their Lives are agreeable to this Persuasion, they are undone, and
that forever.

GOD has been pleased to send his Son into the World to die: Salvation is to be
sought for only through Him. A Man must then labor earnestly after it. And
though his Diligence is not the Ground and Foundation of his Acceptance with
God, as I have said, and do always preach, yet ordinarily Nothing will avail
without.

LET those then who have Ground to hope, they know and believe in the only true
God and in his beloved Son, see that they endeavor to grow in Grace and in the
Knowledge of Christ. To this End they should often reflect on future unseen
Things. Knowing that "Faith is the Substance of Things hoped for, and the
Evidence of Things not seen:" and labor to have their Souls more affected with
them than with the Vanities of the World. They should be much in Prayer to God
for the Assistances of his Spirit, not be ashamed to own their Weakness; but be
diligently seeking for that Strength they need. By this Means they will be
making constant Advances in Religion. The Evidences of their Salvation and
Happiness will be stronger and clearer. Their Difficulties will lessen. They
will find God "a Sun and a Shield, and that He will withhold no good Thing from
them."

LET those who are yet in their Sins, be excited to throw off their
Sluggishness. Be not discouraged from the Difficulty of the Work. Consider
God's Grace is allsufficient, and that He is ready to afford it, if you
sincerely and heartily desire it. Think not that the securing the Happiness of
your immortal Souls is the Business of a Minute, an Hour or Day; but must be
the Work of your Lives. That is little enough, and yet enough if improved
aright. Cry to Him therefore for his Grace, that ye be not Despisers of the
Salvation offered, and made known in the Gospel; and so escape the Punishment
threatened therein, and which will be inflicted on those who must in the great
Day be judged by, and have rejected it. You have every Thing to invite you. O
then "take hold of God's Strength and eternal Life is before you."

THE THIRD AND LAST OBSERVATION I make from the Words is, That our Salvation is
what above all Things we ought to be concerned for.

HERE I shall endeavor to show -- When we may be said to be above all Things
concerned for our Salvation -- and then why we should be thus concerned.

1. WHEN we may be said to be above all Things concerned for our Salvation.

NOW this is so when it dwells most frequently upon the Mind, we give the
greatest Attention to, are chiefly inquisitive about it, and prefer it to every
Thing else.

MAN is a compound Being, consisting of Soul and Body; and as the Natures of
each are different, so are their Desires and Aims. He is possessed of the
Faculty of collecting in some Measure his Thoughts, and governing his
Imagination, fixing the Mind upon those Things that will enoble and profit Him;
and answer the End of his Being. For as soon as Men give way to
Thoughtlessness, and Vice is predominant, they forget the Design of their Being
-- what they are -- what they were made for; and put themselves upon an
Equality with the brutal Creation.

NOW proper Attention to any Thing is an Application of Mind, according to it is
Nature and Importance, thereby to become acquainted with, and have clearer
Apprehensions of it. And when Men are sollicitous about their Salvation, they
will endeavor rightly to consider, ponder and weigh it with the utmost
Impartiality, that thereby they may secure it, their Lives become duly
influenced; and they may act in Conformity to that, to which it would persuade
them. Man being a rational thinking Creature, is to be principally governed by
his Thoughts; and they will be engaged in those Things he has the strongest
Inclination to, and takes the greatest Satisfaction in. And if Men are made
sensible of the great Worth and Importance of Salvation, they will be most
thoughtful and inquisitive concerning it.

THIS will lead them to be afraid of missing it, to guard against those Things
that will endanger, and to pursue those that will tend to further and promote
it.

SALVATION is a great Thing, not so easy a Matter as Many may imagine it to be.
Our Lord tells us, Matthew. VII. 14.
"Wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and Many
there be that go in thereat: Because strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way
which leads unto Life, and Few there be that find it."

WE have indwelling Lust and Corruption to grapple with. A Law in our Members
warring against the Law of our Minds, and bringing us into Captivity to the Law
of Sin. We have certain Appetites and Passions implanted within us, which in
themselves are Good, but which are not always restrained. They are capable of,
and often are wrought upon and turned into different Courses, and upon
different Objects, contrary to our Reason and the Word of God. It requires
great Pains and Vigilance to keep them in due Subjection: And the breaking out
and indulging them is the Grief of good Men, and is acknowledged by them. "The
Good I would, says the Apostle Paul, Romans VII. 19.
I do not, but the Evil which I would not, that I do." And All must find, that
when they would do Good, Evil is present with them. This then is not an easy
Thing. If we give way, suffer them to get the Ascendancy, it is certain we
cannot be saved; and to get the entire Mastery over them, we shall find it
difficult.

WE are also exposed to the Solicitations of evil Spirits. They surround us
with innumerable. Temptations, are inveterate Enemies that must constantly be
opposed. These the Scripture informs us were once holy and happy, but are now
quite the reverse. They rebelled against their Maker and Sovereign, and were
banished the Regions of Light and Bliss. Their Pride is disappointed, and they
industriously labor to deceive and ruin Man, who by the Grace of God may obtain
that Happiness which they can never expect. Agreeable to this is that of the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. V. 8.
Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, goes about seeking whom he may
devour. Now when Men have such powerful and subtle Adversaries, it requires
great Resolution and Stedfastness. "Whom resist steadfast in the Faith;" the
Expression implies in it Difficulty: There is Need of great Circumspection.

AND Mankind are conversant with sensible Objects. They are used to Sense, and
readily follow it is Perceptions. The Objects present themselves, and have a
surprising Force and Influence. And these they see. But it is not thus with the
Reward of Salvation. That is Spiritual and is at a Distance; is principally to
be enjoyed hereafter. We are therefore apt to "look at the Things which are
seen, but not at the Things which are not seen; for the Things which are seen
are temporal, but the Things which are not seen are eternal."

AND then if we consider how extensive and universal is our Duty, if we would
be really religious; how much is included in, and will follow that Belief which
is necessary to the Saving of our Souls: That every Action of Man is to be
regarded; that "He that offends in one Point is guilty of All," it must be
difficult. There would be no great Difficulty in being saved, if Men might
indulge one Sin and discard the other, perform this Duty and neglect that. But
this he is not, nor can be allowed. His Character must be uniform, and his
Religion consistent.

NOW those who are above all Things concerned for their Salvation, are sensible
of this. It leads them to be on their Guard, and to endeavor their utmost, that
they may not finally miscarry.

THEY labor to know themselves, what are their prevailing Vices and
Temptations, and to lay aside every Weight and the Sin that does most easily
beset them, and to run with Patience the Race set before them. They are not
slothful in the Work of God, but followers of them who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises. They press on with all their Might, toward the
Prize, toward that Heaven "which Christ has purchased for them by his Blood,
which the Spirit of God prepares them for; and to which God incessantly calls
and invites them."

THEY endeavor to soar above the delusive Amusements of a vain transitory
World; and to think of another and better Happiness.. It is but a little, it is
true, that they know at present, but enough for their Encouragement; they keep
it in their Eye, and it quickens them.

THEY know they have their Duties and various Departments -- that it is the
Duty of All, the Work of every One, to take Care of his Soul, to be fitted for
that eternal Duration which remains for him after Death -- that the Life they
now live in this World is a Time of Exercise, a short State of Trial and
Probation, in order to a durable and endless State; in which they shall be
fixed in another World -- that they have their different Relations, were not
born for themselves, and are not to seek their own Things only, but every Man
also the Things of others -- conducting in such a Manner, in whatever Station
or wherever Providence has cast their Lot, as shall be productive of the
greatest Advantage to those around them.

AND finally, having the highest Concern for their Salvation, they will readily
part with all their Interest in this World, rather than forego their Interest
in the other.

THEY are fully sensible of, and believe what Christ has declared, Matthew. X. 37.
that "He that loves Father or Mother more than Him is not worthy of Him, and
he that loves Son or Daughter more than Him is not worthy of Him; and he that
takes not his Cross and follows after Him is not worthy of Him -- that they
must have such a constant Regard to the Salvation of their Souls, as shall
prevail above all Attachments to their dearest Relations and most intimate
Friends, to their own Ease and Comfort, and even to their Lives; as He has
again declared, Matthew. X. 39.
that "Whosoever will save his Life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his
Life for his Sake shall find it."

AND this was indeed verified in the Apostles and primitive Christians. They
renounced All, underwent the greatest Miseries, submitted to all Manner of
Torments, hazarded their Lives, gave them up for the Sake of propagating that
Religion, the Belief of which would save their Souls and those of others.

THE Persecutions against then were very severe, even by their own Friends and
Countrymen. The Apostle Paul was at first exceedingly mad against them. He
breathed out Slaughter, dragged them before the Sanhedrim and had them
condemned. Herod vexed certain of the Church and killed James the Brother of
John with the Sword; and he proceeded to take Peter also, and confined him in
Prison, with a View to kill him. And Paul himself and Silas were confined in
Jail at the Time when the Question in the Text was asked them.

WHEN the Gospel was spread farther, general Persecutions were raised against
it. The Believers of it bore the heaviest Load of Rage and Malice, being every
where persecuted by Banishment and Death, counting themselves happy, they were
thought worthy to suffer. Blessed be God it is not so now. But yet Christians
that are above all Things sollicitous for their Salvation, rather than lose it,
would resign up their Interests, submit to the greatest Inconveniences; and
even forfeit Life itself; considering that "A Man is not profited if he should
gain the whole World and lose his own Soul;" that there is Nothing he can give
in Exchange for his Soul. I am to say,

2. WHY we should be thus concerned.

NOW in a Word -- It is absolutely necessary for us -- and there is Nothing
worthy the like Notice and Attention.

IT is absolutely necessary. It is the One Thing needful. Necessary for All of
every Age and Condition. Many Things are needful for us here and only here. We
want Food, Raiment, etc. and cannot do without them. But Salvation is above
them all. This will enable Men to live in the true Sense in this World, and to
live forever.

INDEED a good Man is said to begin his Heaven on Earth, and to finish there
what he began here. For the more his Corruptions are mastered, and his Mind
improved in the Things of Salvation, the more is he spiritualized, and made
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. So, on the contrary, the more
a Man indulges himself in Sin, and neglects Religion, the fitter he becomes for
Hell, and the more deserving of the Punishment of it.

IF therefore Men would escape this, and go to Heaven when they die; they must
see, they are savingly acquainted with Christ, have secured an Interest in Him
who is the great Savior of Sinners; their Souls enlightened in the Knowledge of
Him and sanctified by his Grace.

AND there is Nothing that is worthy the like Notice or Attention.

A DESIRE of Good, of Happiness, is implanted in the Constitution of human
Nature; this All agree in, though they differ in the Thing itself and in the
Means of obtaining it.

NOW all temporal Happiness is unsatisfactory in it is Nature, and fleeting and
transitory. This is apt to engross the Faculties of the Soul, and by Reason of
it is Weakness and Imperfection it readily catches at it. But when gratified is
disappointed, and is still to seek an Happiness.

BUT could it be found herein, yet our own Experience shows us, that every
Thing here is of a transitory Nature, appears but a little while and then
vanishes. Riches take to themselves Wings and flee away. Friends leave us; They
must submit to the Stroke of Death. All the Enjoyments of Time and Sense will
have an End. And it is upon this Consideration, (upon the Vanity, Uncertainty,
and little Dependence there is to be had on Men and Things of the World) that
we are exhorted to renounce our Dependence upon, and check that Satisfaction
Men are apt to have in them. Psalm. CXLVI. 3, 4.
Put not your Trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man in whom there is no Help;
his Breath goes forth and he returns to his Earth. Col. III. 2.
Set your Affections on Things above, not on Things on the Earth. Psalm. LXII.
10.
If Riches increase, set not your Hearts upon them. Prove. XXVII. 24.
For Riches are not forever. But now if Salvation is secured to us we shall
enjoy an Happiness suited to our Souls, and which shall know no End, but be
growing, and increasing through all Eternity. So that upon the whole, this is
what above all Things we ought to be desirous of and concerned for.

IF it be then as has been said, how few are there that are properly concerned
for their Salvation?

MANY may not think of it at all. Others may admit it at Times, but do not
persevere. Though their Attachment to Sin is not wholly sufficient to exclude
"at present," yet great enough to prevent going any Lengths, and so of
"finally" excluding it.

THEY perhaps have set out with Warmth and Zeal, resolutely bent upon forsaking
Sin and living to God; but this has been but of short Duration. Particular
Providence may have affected them (as the Earthquake did the Jailor in the
Text) and for a while they felt the Force of their Impressions, but they have
gradually abated; they become indifferent about their Salvation, at least to
exercise that Diligence and Industry required; and a small Occasion of
Temptation will make them give it up. They keep up the Appearance, but can turn
themselves into any Shape, when their Interest requires it; become fickle and
inconstant, and possessed of no Steadiness.

WE should then be sollicitous to think properly of this Matter, to guard
against Deception, think of Salvation as it is, what is expected and required;
and how unhappy must be our Situation without.

SUFFER me then, to exhort you to embrace the Salvation made known and offered
in the Gospel.

THIS is tendered to All, to the greatest Sinner as well as the least. None may
despair. However vile and wicked, however they may have despised the Riches of
God's Goodness, Forbearance and Long-Suffering, yet if they have a Desire to
return, if they are willing to close with Christ. accept his Offers, they shall
assuredly be happy. Thus the Apostle Paul, after mentioning a Number of Vices,
tells the Corinthians, "that such were some of them," i. e. they had practiced
such Things. But, says he, "Ye are washed, sanctified and justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of your God."

NOT that a Commission of those Vices would recommend to the divine Favor, but
they are mentioned to show, that none may despair of the Grace and Mercy of
God; that there is a Sufficiency in the Merits of Christ for the greatest
Sinners, if they believe in and obey Him.

NONE thin can make any Objections. "Whosoever will, let him come and take of
the Water of Life freely. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters,
yea come buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price." Look to Jesus whom
ye have pierced, and mourn; and let it be your chief Concern to secure an
Interest in Him.

THINK what God expects of those to whom He has afforded great Knowledge. That
we are they, who are favored with the Gospel. Malachy IV. 2.
The Sun of Righteousness has arisen upon us with Healing in his Wings." We
have the greatest and most important Truths revealed -- Our Insufficiency to
save ourselves, that God has provided Salvation, wherein He will be appeased
and we justified. We have our Duty fully revealed, the Necessity of Holiness,
of a Change in Heart and Life -- the Knowledge of the other World made known,
it is Rewards and Punishments. We have the greatest Advantages, Means of Grace
afforded, frequent Opportunities of hearing the Word and being instructed in
it. Some of us have publicly and solemnly owned ourselves the Disciples of
Christ, and Him to be our Lord and Master; and have repeated Seasons of
renewing the Obligations we have laid ourselves under. How highly are we
favored? lifted to Heaven in Point of Privileges -- Privileges improveable to
eternal Happiness and Glory.

AND now what must be the Consequence of a Neglect? Can we plead Ignorance,
that we are unacquainted with the Way to Life after having enjoyed such
distinguishing Favors.

SHALL we please ourselves, that because we have to ease our Consciences
performed some Parts of Religion, those that are the least opposite to our
favorite Vices, that we shall escape; or that our Sentence shall be moderated,
our Punishment lessened? In vain are all such Imaginations. In vain may we
think of "gentle Flames:" Condemnation aggravated must be our Portion. Our
Wilfulness will not be over-looked, our Misery must be accumulated. What Manner
of Persons ought we then to be? how concerned that we rest not in any Change,
short of one which is universal and permanent.

O LET us be excited to improve the Means of Grace and Salvation.

PRAY to God daily and constantly through Christ. This is an Act wherein we
express our Dependence, that our Condition is imperfect; and that our Reliance
must be on God For All we want. And as we have Time allotted for the public
Worship and Service of God, we ought to embrace the Opportunities for our
Attendance, not be absent, let small Things divert us from it. This no Doubt is
a great, an happy Means of advancing the Honor and Glory of God, and promoting
the Salvation of the Souls of Men, therefore it must be incumbent on All; Every
Man is obliged by his Example to support the Solemnity and Credit of it; and
they contract Guilt who wilfully and causelessly neglect it.

WE are favored with the Ordinances of God's House, and it is necessary we
improve them, and endeavor to answer their End.

PARENTS should give up their Children to God in Baptism, and when they do,
they ought to understand it is Design and their Obligations.

AN Attendance on the other Ordinance is the Duty of Men. They are to see their
Views and Designs are good, and labor to reap it is Benefit. When they consider
what glorious Things are intended, and therein presented to their View, it
should inkindle a Flame of divine Love in their Souls, and excite them to make
the most suitable Returns.

IN a Word, we should All humbly cast ourselves on the Mercy of God, and
entreat Him for his Goodness Sake in Christ Jesus to have Compassion on us, and
by his Grace and Spirit "so to establish our Hearts and direct our Ways, that
having chosen the good Part, we may never relinquish it."

AND thus have I finished the Subject I have been some Time upon. I have not
labored for a nice Arrangement of Words, for Polish or Ornament. My Design has
been, with the greatest Plainness, and I hope I can say, with Sincerity and
Faithfulness, to consider the Importance of Salvation, the Method of it is
Obtainment; and how concerned we should be above all Things to desire and seek
after it. God grant it may make suitable Impression on All.

MAY Saints be built up in their most holy Faith, and Sinners quickened in their
Enquiry "what they shall do to be saved."

O MAY we All endeavor in the several Places and Relations in which God has
fixed us, to restore and increase vital Religion, promote it is Reputation by
our countenancing it. Then might we hope God would pour out his Spirit upon us
and his Blessing. He would own us as His, give evident Tokens of his Favor; and
receive us to dwell with Him for ever.


