PERSONAL SLAVERY ESTABLISHED, BY THE SUFFRAGES OF CUSTOM AND RIGHT REASON.

BEING A FULL ANSWER To the gloomy and visionary REVERIES, of all the fanatical
and enthusiastical WRITERS on that SUBJECT.

However amiable Justice and Virtue may be in our abstract ideas of them: the
policy of Kingdoms and Commercial States, ought ever to be regulated by the
more important considerations of necessity and convenience.

MACHIAVELUS AMERICANUS, Vol. 3d. Page 273. All Discord's harmony not
understood;
All partial evil, universal good:
And, spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite,
One Truth is clear, Whatever is, is right.
ESSAY ON MAN. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOHN DUNLAP, in MARKET-STREET.
M,DCC,LXXIII.

THE DEDICATION. TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMMITTEE MEN OF THE ROYAL AFRICAN COMPANY.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR WORSHIPS,
THE intention of the publication before you, being to vindicate a cause which
has been a principal object of your attention, has a consequent claim to your
patronage, I shall therefore make no apology for inscribing it to you.
Notwithstanding the endeavors of ignorant bigots, to represent the Slave trade
in an odious light, I hope this humble attempt to expose them, will meet your
approbation; and convince the world that the luster of your characters is by no
means impaired, but that like pure metal, the more they are rubbed by those
enthusiastic advocates for liberty, the brighter they will shine. I am under no
personal obligations to you -- the gratitude I feel arises from a nobler source
-- it is a just tribute to that generous disinterested exertion of benevolence
and philanthropy, which has been the principal means of heaping wealth and
honors on Europeans and Americans, and rescuing many millions of wretched
Africans, as brands from the fire, and even compelling them to the enjoyment of
a more refined state of happiness, than the partiality of fate had assigned
them in their native state. Go on, worthy sirs! in the glorious work; and
continue to merit from every liberal mind, that gratitude and admiration, which
warmly impress that of, honored gentlemen,

Your most obedient, and very humble servant, THE AUTHOR.

THE PREFACE.
IT is well observed by some author I have read, that the best human
institutions partake of imperfection; and the most excellent constitution has
its defects. -- The liberty of the press has doubtless some advantages; but it
may be questioned whether these outweigh its inconveniences. We may certainly
reckon among the latter, the opportunities with which it furnishes weak men of
venting the idle dreams of a distempered brain; or designing ones of carrying
on their dark purposes, by misrepresentation, slander, or other mischievous
means. Had it not been for this unrestrained liberty of the press, the task I
have undertaken would have been probably needless; and I had been spared the
distress which attends me, in being obliged to expose my poor abilities to the
public view. Confiding however in its candor, I will not increase my claim on
its patience by a long preface. I will only say, that in gratitude to the
author of " Slavery not forbidden by scripture, etc." I have endeavored to
adopt this plan so fully, that the following pages may answer the purpose of a
second edition of that celebrated work, with some corrections, transpositions,
and emendations.

NEW CASTLE COUNTY, Nov. 26th, 1773.
PERSONAL SLAVERY ESTABLISHED, etc.
HAVING attentively perused several of the late publications on the subject of
personal Slavery, I think it may not be amiss if I state, in a summary way, the
arguments adduced in them for and against the practice; and draw such
conclusions, as may be warrantable from the premises. The first on the subject,
which I shall notice, is a pamphlet entitled,

Considerations on keeping Negroes, etc. by John Woolman. As his arguments
against the practice are all drawn from the Old and New Testament, and their
authority has been long since rejected by some of our most prevailing systems
of politics, I think it is unnecessary to say more, than that it appears to be
the dull productions of a visionary enthusiast. -- The next work in my
catalogue, is

A short account of that part of Africa inhabited by the Negroes, etc. The
author or compiler of this work has taken great pains to convince us, that he
concurs with a number of other authors in condemnation of the Slave Trade, as
unjust, cruel, and impolitic; and to support their opinions, relates a number
of what he would suppose are facts. Now as those supposed facts constitute the
foundation of most of his arguments, if they are removed little need be said to
prove his opinions to be idle and nugatory. Those facts are generally the
relations of men, who are, or have been concerned or employed in the trade to
Africa for Slaves, unsupported by a single affidavit, or any other legal proof
of their authority; and moreover men speaking in a cause in which they are
parties; and therefore cannot be supposed to tell the whole truth, even could
we suppose what they have told is truth. I could produce numberless authorities
from our law books, to prove that no evidence can be admitted but what is well
established on oath, and that all offered by parties to the matter in dispute,
must be rejected. Such is the law, and the law being allowed to be the
perfection of reason, it follows that the arguments of our author on the
subject of slavery, are not only unreasonable, but also illegal, and therefore
inadmissable. -- Proceed we therefore to consider,

A caution and warning to Great Britain and her colonies, etc. by Ant. Benezet.
I will promise that on a particular enquiry, I have found that this gentleman
has no Negroes, and no concern in trade. We can therefore be at no difficulty
in accounting for a certain contraction of sentiment, evident in his abstract
ideas of right and wrong. They are merely theoretick, and a little acquaintance
with men and things would convince him, are better calculated for the amusement
of recluse bigots, than the attention of men endued with a more liberal turn of
thinking, and enlarged ideas. The general arguments he has made use of, are so
similar to those of the last mentioned piece, that the objections I have
advanced in considering that, are also applicable to this. The extract of a
sermon preached by the Bishop of Gloucester, which he has presumptuously tacked
to the end of his pamphlet, is such an absurd rhapsody, as in less corrupt
times would have deprived the Bishop of his See. Perhaps it has been tenderly
winked at, as owing to that intense application, which at the time that it
opened the treasures of knowledge to his view, obscured his faculties in using
them.

The next piece on the subject, which I have met with, is an address to the
inhabitants of the British settlements in America, upon Slave-keeping, etc. As
this piece is particularly animadverted on in a judicious and very candid
defense of the practice in general, and particularly of the West India planters
from the calumnies it contains, I shall state the sum of the arguments from
each, together. This last tract is entitled,

Slavery not forbidden by Scripture; or, a Defense of the West India planters
from the aspersions, etc. by a West-Indian. As the author's place of residence
was such, as must afford him the best opportunities of being well acquainted
with his subject; and it does not appear from the title page, that he had any
concern in the slave trade, nor had reaped any advantage from the labor of
slaves, we cannot hesitate in giving his sentiments their due weight, in
opposition to all that has been advanced against Slavery, by men who have not
had his opportunities. From the observations I have already made, I have left
but little room to doubt which side of the question I espouse; and it will
appear further evident from those I may make, as in expressing my sentiments of
the address I shall be apt, very frequently to use the words of the Defense, in
adopting this method, I hope I shall not incur the charge of plagiarism, as I
believe the essence of that crime consists in borrowing from an author without
confessing the debt. These things being premised, I shall proceed to consider
the Address not only as it relates to Slavery, but also as a most scandalous
and audacious libel on every individual inhabitant of every island in the
West Indies.

The author of the Address, pretending to aim at the reformation of mankind,
points out the practice of personal Slavery, as one particular that he thinks
requires it, and recommends the adoption of a plan that he opines would be
likely to abolish it, never giving himself time to consider our natural
frailties -- the impossibility of absolute perfection -- that there are faults
in every human institution, and that till self-interest ceases to have
influence over the actions of men, proposals that strike at the very root of
their temporal interests -- their ease -- their convenience and grandeur, will
never be listened to. He might as well have poured forth his eloquence against
the lawless ambition of Kings in sacrificing millions of their fellow creatures
-- the knavery of Statesmen -- the avarice of Bishops, Lawyers, Physicians and
Merchants -- the endless endeavors of men universally to overreach one
another, and the continued scene of bloodshed and cruelty exhibited by most of
our favorite sports; all which it is evident, from his not mentioning them, he
secretly approves; I say, he might as well have poured forth his eloquence on
all or any of these, as exercise his declamatory powers on Slavery. A man of a
liberal and benevolent way of thinking, would have seen that they are all but
the necessary consequences of the imperfection of our nature; and that his
leisure hours might have been better employed, than in railing at slavery,
which at the worst cannot be said to sacrifice millions for so trifling a
pittance as a small spot of land.

The Addresser absurdly endeavors to prove from scripture, that the Slavery
tolerated by the Mosaic law, was essentially different from that now imposed on
the Africans; and gives some reasons (as specious as he can make them) to
convince us they might have particular reasons for the kind of slavery they did
tolerate. He might as well have inferred that if the advocates for Slavery,
justify the practice under that law; the other parts of it, in every
particular, are still obligatory; and although subjecting us to some
inconvenient ceremonies, would give us a title to many valuable privileges, as
turning off a wise we might be tired of, etc. etc. But as I observed at setting
out, the authority of scripture is now generally rejected by men of a liberal
way of thinking. I shall therefore be more brief on any arguments drawn from it
on either side, and confine myself to such, as in my own opinion, are
reasonable and in point. Is it not highly probable that the Africans we
enslave, are descendants of the very same Heathen that were round about the
Israelites, who we all know lived a long time in Africa? If so, as they still
remain unconverted, are they not yet in the same predicament with their
ancestors? And as, without much arrogance we may esteem ourselves as
Israelites, or at least descended from them, will it be denied that we are
entitled to the liberty of enslaving the Africans and the Heathen round about
us also? This last is a trade we might drive on with very little shipping, and
may be worthy of consideration.

Our author, in attempting to prove the inconsistency of Slavery under the
Christian dispensation, is quite blasphemous. He would infer that although
there is no express precept against the Slave Trade to Africa or keeping
Slaves; they are both absolutely repugnant to the very genius and spirit of
Christianity. Just as if we were to imagine any evil was intended to be removed
that was not expressly forbidden in the New Testament. This would be to suppose
that the lawless ambition of Kings sacrificing millions of their fellow
creatures, and the little catalogue of other necessary consequences of the
imperfection of our nature, before mentioned, are inconsistent with the
Christian religion. How absurd is such reasoning? How impious its author! It Is
well he is not within the reach of a Popish inquisition; he certainly would
have made a principle character in an Auto de fe.

Notwithstanding his absurdities, and his being totally unacquainted with the
subject, I admit his arguments have some weight in these northern colonies.
Truth and justice should have very distinct ideas annexed to them at the pole,
from what they convey under the equinoctial. There is a certain political
necessity by which those ideas should be regulated; and as this necessity may
be very different in different latitudes, a practice may be meritorious in the
West Indies, which in Canada is far otherwise. Had our author and his
associates confined their slander to their own countrymen, and expressly
excepted the West-Indians from any share in them, I should have had no
objection to the display of their abilities. He certainly never considered that
the inhabitants of the British islands in the West Indies, hold to the value of
L. 22,000,000 in live stock, exclusive of quadrupeds and other chattels; and
that were his pernicious doctrines, (which thus impiously exclude the idea of
political necessity) to prevail, they might soon be twenty-two millions of
money poorer than they now esteem themselves to be. -- Rum, Sugar, Rice and
Indigo are indispensible necessaries of life, and if we exclude Negroes, we
must introduce white men in their cultivation, which would never answer; for
they could not sustain the labor as well as blacks, as this author himself is
pleased, with unusual candor, to allow; and perhaps it might be rather
difficult (especially if they were Britons) to persuade them to submit, to what
their masters might think a proper correction in compelling them to it. The
obstinacy of their tempers might occasion an exertion of spirit in the masters,
that would sometimes bring the lives of the latter as well as the former into
some danger, as without doubt it would happen now and then, that a surviving
fellow servant might be hardy enough to inform, and claim the vengeance of the
laws, which in the case of white men, may not be suffered to remain as they now
are. Besides this, there would be a danger that industrious servants would
frequently become masters; and if this ever happened in the sugar colonies, and
they were not able to make fifty hogsheads of sugar each; by joining in the
expense, they might obviate the difficulties arising from the great expense of
sugar-works; for it appears it is no more worth while to erect proper works for
the manufacture of any less quantity, than it would be in a wheat country, for
every petty farmer to build a mill for the grinding his own grain. By such
means in time the great estates of the West-Indians would be divided, and many
families, who by honest industry have risen to affluence, could rise no higher.
This would probably discourage that profusion of expense, for which the
West-Indians have been always remarkable, and which has been so advantageous to
the Mother Country, a consideration highly worthy of attention; even if by such
a division of estates, the revenues of government were not lessened, which
would certainly be the case if the number of whites was increased, who would
undoubtedly consume more among themselves. Now the quantity of West India
produce does not only benefit Britain in respect to the revenue, but the Sugar,
etc. sent home, by giving employment to the refiners of Sugar, sailors,
ship-builders, etc. also creates an increase of its inhabitants; whether by any
prolific, or what other quality in the Sugar, etc. I cannot tell; but such is
the fact, as I am informed by the Defense.

Was government sufficiently stupid to listen to the complaint of the author of
the Address and his associates, or any such visionary enthusiasts, and proclaim
liberty to four hundred thousand Negroes, who are said to be in the British
islands only, it is most probable that near four thousand gentlemen Christians,
and among them some of the richest British subjects, would be immediately
reduced to a most calamitous situation -- would be obliged to content
themselves with what they have already so equitably acquired by their labor;
and one hundred times that number of poor stupid Negroes would be turned
adrift, and forever after deprived of their kind care and protection. What an
unchristian conduct would this be? I am really quite tired of this writers
absurdities; nor less shocked at his want of humanity.

Had he and his associates confined themselves to the supposed propriety of
prohibiting the African trade in general terms, I should not have felt the
least desire of combatting their opinions. But he has represented the
West India Planters as a set of hardened monsters; or at least that many cruel
punishments are inflicted on their Slaves by some of them. He little thinks I
can trace most of his malicious hints to the identical persons he aims at. Does
he idly imagine that there is any difficulty in seeing that the syringe of his
venom is principally levelled against the Hon. Mr. -- of Bar -- s, John --, Esquire
of Ant -- a, Mr. -- of St. K -- s, -- a certain Honorable and worthy gentleman
of Jam -- ca, who commonly wears blue clothes, etc. etc. I could point out
several others who are evidently the particular objects of his slander, were I
so disposed; but these are sufficient to satisfy the public, that his
reflections are altogether personal, and that his Address is written solely
with a design to spread them. As to his particular instances of barbarity, he
does not mention one that is well supported by proof, and we cannot admit the
possibility of the facts, as the author of the Defense assures us he never was
an eyewitness of one single instance as particularized in the Address, etc.
and yet with a candor that is ever the companion of truth, he does allow a few
instances of the kind mentioned, had happened. One or two more of these fanatic
writers adduce authorities for some of their assertions of this sort. I would
not offer to impeach the credit of Sir Hans Sloan, but he was certainly a milky
tempered man, whose mind was not properly impressed with the idea of the
political necessity of such a conduct to keep slaves in proper awe; and I must
say, I think as he had received civilities from many gentlemen in Jamaica, and
considerable additions were there made to his collection of natural
curiosities, his character as a gentleman would have shone quite as
conspicuously, had he suppressed some of his reflections on their behavior to
their slaves. -- The deserving part of the Negroes will maintain their good
behavior, and the worthless from motives of fear take care never to merit
punishment; so that the little severity commonly used among them is unmerited
and merely in Terrorem. But when they are faulty, and you omit correction, they
will surely laugh heartily at your folly. If you are foolish enough to be
indulgent and easy with them, they will not only exercise their risible
faculties, but become complete villains; and the chances are ten to one that
your particular favorites are the ringleaders in every insurrection.
Notwithstanding all this, such is their clemency and forbearance, that the most
severe penalties are inflicted on any one who chastises a Negroe without
acquainting the proprietor, or if he should unluckily be in England, why then
rather than you should be laughed at (which we all know is very provoking) a
formal complaint to his Manager, who is always or generally a gentleman by
birth or education, will answer the purpose. The whip with which the driver
always follow the Negroes while at their work, is only carried as a badge of
authority, and so little used, that like Edward the Confessor's scepter, it may
be handed down to succeeding generations.

Another objection of our sagacious Addressor is pointed at the severity of the
laws in the southern colonies and islands, respecting Negroes. His ignorance
accompanies him in every line; and yet I admit that at first sight, many of
them do really appear harsh, and give an idea rather unfavourable of the
clemency of their legislatures; but on examination, the harshness of this first
appearance will entirely vanish; they will appear excuseable and absolutely
necessary to the good government, and safety of the white people. Thus the
looming of the fogs of ignorance, when dispelled by the winds of political
necessity, will no more deceive us. -- The disproportion of whites and blacks
is there very great; and self-preservation, that first and ruling principle of
human nature, has made them jealous and perhaps severe in their laws, but they
are but mere threats as it were, and only held up, as the drivers whip, to
intimidate delinquents. They are found to be essential in the very being of
those colonies. Is it not strange that those thunder headed scribblers cannot
view them through the medium of this political necessity on which I have so
clearly insisted? -- Slaves are never capitally punished but for the most
flagrant crimes, nor condemned without the clearest proof; nay, such is their
tenderness on this head, that I have known a humane gentleman frequently to
conceal the most attrocious crime, rather than suffer the unhappy perpetrator
to be punished with death. To suppose that masters would choose to forfeit
their service forever, which is the undeniable consequence of a capital
punishment, would be to prove them destitute of common sense as well as
compassion. In some cases we allow slaves have been burnt or gibited alive, but
neither of these modes of punishment, nor any other ever used among them, can
come under the idea of severity, it we reflect on what Ravailac, Damien, and
others have suffered for murdering, or attempting to murder Kings, or even that
cruel Israelitish practice of boreing the ear of a Slave with an awl, and
obliging him to do all his work fastened in that shocking manner to a door
post, which it is probable he was obliged to drag after him, when he had
occasion to move.

The charge of starving their Slaves is as groundless, and may as easily be
refuted. Would you, wise Sir! esteem it good policy to starve a yoke of oxen,
and especially in seed time and harvest, on the labor of which you depended
for bread? It is certainly true that they do not invite negroes to their turtle
feasts, nor feed them with the nicest dainties; but they have a proper
allowance of corn in all places; in some they are allowed a part of Sunday, and
in others even all that day, to raise their own provisions. Nay, it is not very
uncommon for very good masters, to give them their daily allowance, and all
Sunday besides to themselves. Hence it sometimes happens that provident cunning
fellows (for such there are even among these brutes) have been known to sell
considerable quantities of produce, and indulge themselves with a variety of
luxuries.

It is very evident that notwithstanding the accounts of fabulous voyagers, the
Negroes on the western coasts of Africa, are the most stupid, beastly race of
animals in human shape, of any in the whole world. The brutality, nastiness,
indolence and other criminal propensities of the Hottentots, are a convincing
proof of the truth of my assertion; and though I admit they are not destitute
of hospitality to strangers (of which Aesop gives us many instances, even in
four footed beasts) yet I am far from thinking this can counterbalance their
execrable fondness for raw flesh. -- The author of the Defense asserts that
there are four or five different species of men, -- with submission, I will
limit them to four, viz. 1st, Europeans, 2d, Assiaticks, 3d, Americans, and
4th, Africans, and retracting the word species, substitute genus, which is more
expressive of my idea as being a general term, by which I would distinguish the
last as only a species of that genus, though utterly devoid of reason. Carrying
this idea a little further, I would yet subdivide the Africans into five
classes, aranging them in the order as they approach nearest to reason, as 1st,
Negroes, 2d, Ourang Outangs, 3d, Apes, 4th, Baboons, and 5th, Monkeys. The
opinion of their irrationality is so well supported by facts, that to those
acquainted with them, I need advance very little on the subject; but to remove
every scruple from the skeptic, a little undeniable evidence may not be
improper. -- There never was a civilized nation of any other complexion than
white; nor ever any individual eminent either in action or speculation that was
not rather inclining to the fair. Africa, except a small part of it, inhabited
by those of our own color, is totally overrun with Barbarism -- nay such is
the contaminating influence of black, that I fear I need not except even the
whites among them. Perhaps this observation may assist us in accounting for the
few appearances of Barbarism we now and then discover among the whites in our
southern colonies and islands, where blacks bear so large a proportion to their
number. But to proceed from this short digression, Africa has no kingdoms of
any eminence, but chiefly consists of petty monarchies, excepting Bildulgerid,
Ethiopia, Nubia, Abissinia, Morocco, and many others that are rather large.
That they are all perpetually at war with each other, we are well assured, for
it is certainly the case with all the petty nations, that are not very distant
from our European factories on their western coasts, from the river Senegal to
the Cape of Good Hope; the Hottentots, Ferlys and some few others, only
excepted. The stupidity of the natives cannot be attributed to climate; for
that r^le would also effect the Chinese and the West-Indians themselves; and
besides, the Moors (who are situated at no great distance from the Slave
coasts) have always made a figure in history, and the Egyptians were once
eminent for the progress of the arts. But these are ra^^r instances of the
powers of sagacious instinct than a proof of my opinion, respecting the
irrationality of all Africans, being erroneous. Let not any in answer to what I
have said relating to their governments and wars, object the similarity of
description given by Tacitus and other historians, of many European nations in
early ages. Such an objection can have no weight, when we consider the
Europeans are blessed with reason, and therefore capable of improvement.
Besides the descriptions of this kind are made by Roman authors, who generally
gave an exaggerated picture of the manners of any people with whom they were at
war, and especially if they had any particular designs on them, or to enslave
them or any thing else for which they could pretend no just authoity, for such
representations might afford them some excuse for their lawless ambition. This
furnishes us too, with another strong reason for discrediting abundance of idle
tales, on which the arguments of these gloomy oppugners of Slavery are founded,
as I have before observed.

I could never perceive the Africans have the most distant notions of a supreme
being, which had they any rational powers, they would certainly have either by
intuition, or the benefit of the connection which those near our factories
especially must have with abundance of pious white people, whose lawful
concerns carrying them into Africa, we may suppose spare no opportunities of
benefitting them in any sen^^. In the conversation of these, the Negroes would
frequently hear imprecations, that would communicate the notion of the whites
on this subject. They have, however, a confused notion of an evil spirit called
Jumbee, who is able to do them mischief, and it is a custom among them to hang
a broken bottle, a bit of rag, or any thing else by way of charm near their
ground, which they call Oby, and is I suppose their good spirit. When their
property is thus guarded, few Negroes will have the boldness to steal any part
of it. How such irrationals came by even so much religion is hard to find,
except we may be allowed a conjecture that they have a faint notion of image
worship; borrowed probably from Roman itinerant Missionaries, as I think
Baretti tells us that among the Catholics, when any indecency is intended in
the presence of a picture (...) or Madona, a cloth is carefully placed before
the picture to conceal such indecency from their view. They also make some
little show of religion at their funerals, but this too may be well attributed
to imitation; and we may assign the same cause, if we discover any thing like
sentiments of friendship, gratitude, or other social ties among them. -- In
arts and sciences, they have never made the least progress, which is another
strong proof of their brutality. In their music, although there seems to be a
kind of discordant harmony, I have never been able to discover their having any
notion of the gamut; neither have they adopted our best system of astronomy.
When did we ever hear of a Caractacus or a Newton, a Boadicea or a Confucius
existing in Africa. It is true history informs us that it once had a Hannibal,
a Ptolemy and a Hipparchus, but then there is no positive proof of their being
natives of it. -- The author of the address has attempted to prove they have
some genius. I will be candid enough to allow there have been surprising
instances of docility in Negroes. Such for instance was that of a Negroe fellow
in Jamaica, who seemed to have some parts and learning, and could talk in a
manner, that had his color been concealed, and he had stuck a piece of wax on
his nose to make it a little more prominent, might have been mistaken for a
rational creature possessing a tolerable knowledge in the law. I have myself
seen several Negroes, who by dint of great labor and attention in their
owners, have become very good mechanics, as jewellers, watch-makers, etc. Nay
I have known more than one of them who were capable of keeping a set of books
in the Italian method in a neat correct manner. But we are not to suppose a few
such instances, or that a mere Lusus Naturae can add any strength to the
supposition of their being endued with reason. We all know that extraordinary
instances of docility in brutes have naturally excited great admiration in all
ages. Pliny and many others have given us surprising relations of this kind,
and I have been told when a boy, of an elephant in Africa following the
occupation of a tinker with some reputation. The ingenuity of mechanics have
also furnished us with occasions of wonder in imitations of diverse kinds; for
instance, the inanimate flying eagle at Vienna -- the crowing cock at Strasburg
-- the speaking clock in Ireland, and abundance more, which sufficiently prove
the ingenuity of Europeans, but do by no means convince us that the said eagle,
cock and clock were rational beings. Indeed what we are told of ingenuity in
Negroes, has sometimes a little staggered my hypothesis; and would induce a
suspicion of their mother's fidelity, was not the whole race of them so
extremely forbidding in their persons; and the antipathy of all the whites to
them and their descendants so unconquerable, as entirely to satisfy me on that
head. The probability of the falsity of such relations, or of their being much
exaggerated to gratify a natural fondness for the mavelous and wonderful, is
much more in its favor.

The Addresser endeavors to convince us that Negroes pine and degenerate in
the islands. It is evidently otherwise; for when an estate there is sold, much
higher prices are given for their two footed stock born in the West Indies,
than for those imported from Africa. -- Would this wise acre himself give as
much for a horse which had not been broke to the shafts or saddle, as for one
that had those advantages? Surely not.

He then goes on with his objections to the method of carrying on the
Slave Trade. The reasons I suggested in my observations on the pamphlets I
first took notice of, preclude the necessity of my enlarging on this particular
point. It is very plain that Slaves are bought in a fair course of trade; and
even could he prove that it is not in the course of a fair trade, it would be
nothing to the purpose -- if a commodity, a cow for instance, is brought to me
for sale, is it my business to enter with a critical nicety, into an enquiry by
what means the seller procured her? I am sure if I did, I should forfeit all
pretensions to the character of a gentlemen; and I am as confident, that
whatever the means are, by which slaves are brought among us, or whether their
servitude in the West Indies is voluntary or not; or even if I should admit all
the accounts of the villainies and cruelties practiced in the trade were short
of the truth, I should yet be justified in the purchase of them, as it is a
most certain introduction to health and happiness in a situation, where they
have fewer cares, and less anxiety about tomorrow, than any people in the
whole world. They have (in a general way however) their usual allowance of
provisions, and are entirely exempted from all the distresses attendant on war.
The Negroe it is true, cannot easily change his master, but to make amends for
this slight inconvenience, he enjoys a singular advantage over his brother in
freedom of being carefully attended in sickness, and of having the same
provision in old age as in youth. Instead of being oppressed to feed a large
family, like the free comfortless laborers in Europe, the more children he
has, the richer he becomes; for the moment a child is born, the happy parents
receive as much additional provision, as with their own allowance, will amount
to more than they can eat; and in case of their own death, (if by living among
whites, they should chance to have attained any thing like reflection) they
will quit the world with the comfortable certainty of their children being
brought up with the same kind care, they formerly experienced themselves. What
Philosopher, Epicurean or Stoic, could wish for more? In these islands and
colonies only, do the highly favored Africans realize the fabulous history of
the golden age. Was their happy state but known in Great Britain and Ireland --
what emigrations there would be in search of this terrestrial elysium? Acts of
Parliament would then be really necessary -- not indeed to comply with the
visionary schemes of gloomy enthusiasts -- but to prevent the entire
depopulation of those kingdoms.

The cause I plead is so well supported by the Suffrages of Custom and Right
Reason, that I fear I have made an apology to the public necessary for
detaining it is attention so long on arguments drawn from self-evident
principles. I have heard of a certain Philosopher who wrote a large folio
volume to prove that light came from the Sun. I flatter myself I am more
excuseable, as I write for the reformation of gloomy fanatics, who to mulish
obstinacy join a most illiberal and malevolent turn of thinking; and I have no
less in view than to convince them of errors far more mischievous in their
consequences, than any that could arise from its remaining undetermined, what
may be the true source of light.

That the Address is a scandalous libel, in which some of the West-Indians are
unworthily traduced, I have already proved; and am sure that the least the
public can do, to testify a decent detestation of it is most malevolent
slanders, is to have it formally committed to the flames by the hands of the
common hangman. The inhabitants should consider that the West Indies form a
considerable branch of their commerce, and that therefore it ill becomes them
to suffer any practice to be opprobriously stigmatized as unjust or impolitic,
in which the West-Indians happen to be concerned. They should also remember,
that a genteel sum of money was lately received from that quarter, for the use
of their College, for which they have been highly commended by its Provost.
Every one must suppose that in delivering his commendations, he spoke the
sentiments of the other Professors, and surely those Gentlemen, equally
remarkable for their piety and learning, would not have bestowed praises on a
people, whose conduct in any respect was exceptionable. It is therefore evident
that all the Professors are Advocates for Slavery, and being learned and pious,
it naturally follows that the Slave Trade in itself and in its consequences, is
not at all inconsistent with religion or sound policy.

What will not this same Addresser and his associates deserve, if in resentment
for their infamous usage of them, the West-Indians should determine to decline
their commerce with the northern colonies of America? Resentment working in men
of honor, may carry them a great way. They may find resources to supply
themselves with flour and pork, or with succedaneums that will do as well. The
white people of fortune in the West Indies are comparatively but few in number,
and might be supplied nearly with all they use of these articles from the
Carolinas. It would then only remain to supply the lower class of whites, and
the demands of the Negroes. -- It is supposed that one hundred thousand Slaves
are yearly shipped in the African ports for the British West India islands. Of
these perhaps twenty thousand die on the passage. Now when their death is not
occasioned by any bad disorder, if there was a proper quantity of salt on
board, the bodies might be cured in pickle or smoke; and the same method
pursued with those that die on land, or are past labor. A considerable
quantity of provision might be thus procured that would furnish a tolerable
succedaneum for pork and hams. I have never heard that this kind of meat is
deemed unwholesome, but on the contrary, that the Cannibals are a hardy robust
race of people. -- The scheme is new, and might not be very eligible -- I only
mention it as a dernier resort, and which a very high degree of resentment only
could ever incline them to have recourse to.

FINIS.

