Dr. Mather's SERMON, ON CHRIST's being sent to heal the broken hearted
Preached in the hearing of a Condemned Malefactor. 1773.

CHRIST sent to HEAL the BROKEN HEARTED. A SERMON, Preached at the Thursday
Lecture in Boston, On OCTOBER, 21 st. 1773. WHEN LEVI AMES, A YOUNG MAN, UNDER
A SENTENCE OF DEATH FOR BURGLARY, TO BE EXECUTED ON THAT DAY, WAS PRESENT TO
HEAR THE DISCOURSE:

By SAMUEL MATHER, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN Boston, NEW ENGLAND

They, that be whole, need not a Physician; but they that are sick. MATTHEW.
ix.12. A wise Physician skilled (Men's Souls) to heal
Is more than Armies to the public weal.
IN ACCOMMODATION TO HOMER Iliad. xi th. AND MR. POPE's VERSION. He gentle
medicines skilfully applied. HOMER Iliad iv It is an argument of a mind altered
for the better, that a man sees his vices, of which he hitherto was ignorant:
To which sick ones there is cause of congratulation; when they are sensible,
that they are sick. SENEC Epist. 8. To which is added, his Life written by
himself

BOSTON: Printed and Sold at WILLIAM M'ALPINE'S Printing Office in
Marlborough-Street. M,DCC,LXXIII

JESUS CHRIST sent to heal the broken hearted. A SERMON
ON LUKE IV.18. -- He has sent me to heal the broken hearted.


WHEN opportunities for doing of good, or at least our attempting to do some
good, are providentially presented and offered to our acceptance; it seems to
be fit and right that we should take and improve them in a proper manner.

And since such an opportunity is now afforded, for discoursing, in the
audience of a poor criminal under a sentence of death, which is this day to be
executed on him, and to such a large assembly collected on this occasion; it is
judged to be suitable and right to accept of it; however affecting, irksom and
painful it may be to the person who is now called to it.

With diffidence to myself therefore, and with a due concern of mind about a
right and profitable discharge of the duty, which at present falls to my lot,
it must be advisable to implore, and rely on, the aid and assistance of that
divine Lord, that strong Redeemer, who gives power to the feeble and to the
weak increases strength, that he would graciously uphold in this service and
carry well through it; and at the same time it must be desired, that all, who
are piously disposed in this assembly, would agree and unite in their good
wishes and prayers, that divine succors may be given in our discoursing and a
divine influence and blessing may accompany and follow it.

The passage, chosen for the subject of our following discourse, and
apprehended to be as apposite as any other to such an occasion as the present,
was uttered by him, into whose lips grace was poured, and who spoke as never
man spoke: He is now to be considered as being in the place, where he had his
education: For it is written in the context, v. 16. And he came to Nazareth,
where he was brought up: for, though he was born at Bethlehem; he had his
education at Nazareth. And as his custom was, he went there into the synagogue
on the sabbath day. So then although our blessed Savior was Lord of the sabbath;
it was however his custom to keep it. And why then should any of us think it
unfit and improper to spend one day in a week in holy rest and religious
worship according to his example, and to his honor as our maker and redeemer?
Our Lord then, according to his custom on the sabbath day went into the
synagogue; i. e. the house set apart for public prayers, and for reading,
expounding and hearing the word of God: And, being at meeting at the proper
time for it, he stood up to read. Such honor did the son of God put on the
holy scriptures: He chose to take the book, and read his text out of it, rather
than to deliver one of his own: And just as he is about to read his text out of
it, he rises up in a respectful manner toward it: And such like respect does
the word of God justly deserve from those, who preach, and those who hear it.

Now, when our Lord stood up to read, it follows, in the beginning of the 17.
v. there was delivered to him the book of the prophet Esaias. In order to your
understanding of which, we would observe to you, that a jewish synagogue had
ten persons, who had the management of its affairs; among whom one of them was
called the Chazan, and the angel, of the synagogue, or assembly; and he was
properly the overseer of it; to whom it belonged on the sabbath day to call
forth seven persons; five of which were usually common Israelites, such as he
thought fit, to read some portion out of the sacred volume. And it is very
probable, that even in this way, by the angel of the synagogue, our Savior was
furnished with a proper occasion of declaring the truth. Well! The book of the
prophet Isaiah was by the overseer of the synagogue delivered to our Savior.
And he opened the book; or as the greek more properly signifies, unfolded the
roll; as, when he had done reading, he closed the book, i. e. he rolled up the
roll: From which it evidently appears, that the books of those days were in the
form of rolls. But now our blessed Savior, having unfurled the roll; behold,
as divine providence ordered it, the LXI st. chapter of Isaiah's prophecies
strikes his eye, wherein is a celebrated prophecy concerning himself.

Some indeed have insisted on it, that the prophecy quoted in v. 18 and 19th,
under our view, was literally and punctually fulfilled with respect to the
prophet Isaiah himself: And it must indeed be acknowledged, that every sentence
of it might be accommodated to him.

But, behold, a greater than Isaiah is here: We have here the infallible
testimony of our Savior himself, that this whole passage refers to him and was
fulfilled in him.

We shall not now particularly illustrate all the parts of this prophecy, as
belonging to our Savior and accomplished by him: But we shall confine
ourselves to the particular clause, which has been read in your hearing; from
which it appears, that our Lord Jesus Christ was not only sent to preach
healing, but to communicate it to broken hearts: For, says he in the prophecy
of him, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted.

Here therefore we have two important and most interesting things presented to
our serious consideration and earnest heeding at this time.

I. The character of our divine Redeemer* which is that of a physician, or
healer of souls;

And,

II. The description of those, to whom he will approve and manifest himself to
be a divine healer: And these are the broken in heart.

Let us begin then with considering the amiable and excellent character of our
divine Redeemer: And this is that of a physician, or healer of souls.

It is declared in the prophecy concerning him, and also from him, he has sent
me to heal; and, in the following context, v. 21, we find, that he began to say
to them, this day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears. So then he was at
that time accomplishing the business for which he was sent of his father: He
was performing the part of a spiritual physician, and a healer of those, who
were broken in heart.

But not only in the prophecy, quoted in our text, but also in other prophecies
of the old testament: he is characterized as a glorious healer. And indeed he
is most justly characterized in this manner. He therefore speaks of himself as
a physician in Matthew. 9.12. Where sinners, sensible of their spiritual
indisposition, are described as the sick; and CHRIST is intended and meant as
the physician of those, that are sick in a spiritual sense.

And now, for the clearing and confirming it, that he is in truth and reality
the healer of souls; we would propose the following things to your
consideration.

First of all; He is such a healer with regard to his divine nature: for it is
he, that is to be understood as saying, in Exodus 15.26. I Jehovah, that heals
thee; in the Hebrew it is Repheka, i. e. thy physician. And indeed he not only
heals the diseases of natural Egypt, if they come upon his people; but he heals
the souls, which are afflicted with the distempers of spiritual Egypt, such as
blindness of mind and hardness of heart and the like maladies: For in truth
when the hearts of any are sick and wounded, can any but he, who is the wisest
and best physician, heal them? it is therefore sung to his perpetual praise and
glory, as in Psalm 147.3. He, i. e. Jehovah, heals the broken in heart, and
binds up their wounds; in which words our divine Lord is compared to a
skilful surgeon, as well as a physician; for he is herein represented not only
as binding up the wounds of human souls, but as applying healing medicines to
them. Thus the son of the highest as having the divine essence or nature in
him, is the healer of souls: Nor indeed, had he not the divine nature in him,
could he have healed one, that was broken in heart. As therefore it was very
fitly enquired in Mark 11.7. Who can forgive sins but God only? so we may with
the like fitness and propriety say, who can heal human souls but God only? now
it is our Savior God, who, by his divine influence and help, is the physician
and healer of the children of men.

But then; not only as God, but as the Mediator also, is he the healer of human
souls. As he is thus by office a spiritual healer, so he has been divinely
qualified and set apart for this office and business. As, under the old
testament dispensation, they, who were separated unto some special work and
business by the divine appointment, were anointed for it; so their priests and
their kings were anointed to their respective offices: Thus also our Lord Jesus
Christ is above all others the anointed of the Lord: hence the name of Messiah
in the Hebrew, and Christos in Greek is given to him; each of which words
properly signifies anointed. Not that Christ was anointed with any material
oil; as the priests and kings were under the old testament dispensation: but he
was anointed with a spiritual oil: For it was the spirit of the Lord, who
anointed him; with respect to his humanity: and, in consequence hereof, it
appears, that he was divinely replenished with gifts and graces: and hence he
is said, in our text and context; to be sent of GOD. Which implies and
intimates, as that he was qualified for the business; so that he was called and
sent forth to the office and work of a physician and healer of souls. And
indeed the father of our Lord Jesus Christ would not trust the souls of the
human race in any other hands but his: For he certainly knew, when he put them
all into the hands of his son, Christ Jesus our Lord, that he had put them into
most able, skilful and faithful hands; and that none of them, who would come to
him for help and healing, should miscarry; or be plucked out of his healing
hands. It is on the account of his being entrusted with this office of a
Mediator, that he is said to be the great shepherd and bishop, as well as a
physician of souls: And hence he is said to be the Savior of the world. Not
that he is a mere temporal Savior, as the Jews vainly imagined that he would
be; and as they even to this day vainly expect him to be. But he is a spiritual
healer and Savior; a Savior of immortal souls: When they are infected and
wounded by sin, he heals them, and saves them from death. It is as the
mediator, and the only mediator for the souls of men, that he affords relief
against every spiritual malady. As their souls are darkened and full of
ignorance with regard to things spiritual and divine; the son of God, as a
prophet, relieves and helps that malady. As they are guilty, alienated from GOD
and obnoxious to his displeasure; Christ, as a priest, delivers them from that
wretchedness. And the souls, which are under the power of sin and other
spiritual enemies, Christ Jesus the Lord rescues; and he subdues all those
enemies, which would otherwise have proved their ruin. It is observable, that,
in our text and context, there is a reference had to the threefold office of
our divine Redeemer. It seems here to refer to his prophetic office, that he is
said to preach the gospel to the poor. It seems to refer to his priestly
office* that he is described as affording relief to the sinners, who are broken
in heart: And, when he is said to afford deliverance to the captives, and the
recovery of sight to the blind, that, is to sinners, whose eyes are put out; it
intends and signifies, that God by his mighty power delivers them from this
wretchedness and misery, and that by virtue of his royal office.

Thus, have we considered and showed, how our Lord Jesus Christ as possessed of
a nature truly divine, and in the exercise of his mediatory office, is the
physician of human souls: And we shall further see, that he is the healer of
the souls of men; if we consider, what is the healing which he affords unto
them. And now there are various things implied in this:

For, first of all; Forgiveness of sin is implied in this healing. As long as
the guilt of sin, yea of any one sin, lies on the souls of men, they are in a
morbid and hazardous state: But, when this sin is pardoned, they are recovered
out of this state. Now this is obtained by our Lord Jesus Christ. Had it not
been for this glorious Lord our healer, we should never have had this remission
of our sins: But, through him, every one, that penitently believes on him, has
the free and full forgiveness of all his sins. It is with regard to this, that
the blood of the redeemer will heal the souls of men. Nor can any other balm or
medicine be so effectual as this: For, by his stripes and wounds and blood we
are healed. And O! what a healing, what a blessed medicine indeed is it, which
will produce and work a perfect cure of souls wounded by guiltiness? And then,

Another thing implied in this healing is the renewing and sanctifying of men's
souls. As the souls of men are wounded and made sick by the guilt of sin lying
upon them; so they are by the filth and impurity of sin: That therefore, which
is contrary to this and removes it, restores the soul and makes it well. Now
this is renewing and sanctifying grace, which causes the soul to recover from
its impurity. The beginning of this healing is, when any souls, by the
converting grace of God, are made new creatures: For it is this grace, which
heals human souls: And, the more of this grace any have within them, the
greater and more complete is the cure produced in their souls. And now this
healing is from Christ: As he is full of grace, as well as truth; he is made
also of God unto other's sanctification: And he thus heals them. His word
indeed, his gospel, is the instrument of the divine healing, which he affords
to human souls; and this has a virtue divinely healing in it: But the grand
efficient of renewing and sanctifying is the spirit of our living and powerful
Redeemer. As he is the spirit of grace, all healing virtue proceeds from him:
He quickneth and restores the feeble and languishing souls. And some of these,
that have been sick, and even nigh unto death, have by the spirit of our
glorious Lord been brought to life and health again: For, as these souls within
us quicken and actuate our bodies, so the spirit of Christ quickens and
actuates human souls; and by this, they are recovered and healed.

And further; the consolation of human souls is implied in this healing of
them. The souls, which are sad, very distressed and quite disconsolate are said
to be sick, to be wounded, to be brought low. Surely then, they must be
relieved and healed by the affording of consolation to them: And hence indeed
we read, of the restoring of comforts, as in Isaiah 57.18. And now this is a
special thing intended in the text: For to heal the broken hearted is to
restore comfort to them. And now our divine healer Jesus Christ is the great
author of this comfort. And, when any have been in trouble of spirit, and
afterward received good comfort, this relief and comfort has been from the
Redeemer, who has poured his wine and oil into their wounded souls. But it is
by the spirit of Christ, that this effect also is wrought: For this spirit is
not only a sanctifier, but a comforter also: And it is by his sprinkling the
virtue of the Redeemer's blood, that he causes the souls of his people to be
comforted and easy. And besides, it is by the word of promise, that he
communicates comfort, which is healing to their souls. Supposing their souls be
ever so disconsolate; yet a divine promise administered will as a cordial revive
it: And the souls which were before drooping and disconsolate, will be
presently thus restored. But now it is the spirit of Christ, who makes the word
of the gospel to become effectual, who applies the precious promises thereof to
their consolation and healing.

Thus far we have been considering the character of our divine Redeemer, as the
physician, or healer, of human souls; and showing the respects and instances,
wherein He appears to have been, and still to be, deserving of that character.
And we are now

In the second place, to consider the description here given of those, to whom
he will appear and manifest himself to be such a divine healer. And these are
the broken in Heart.

There are then some, who are broken in heart: And these are the people, to
whom which our Lord discovers and manifests himself as a healer.

In the first place then; we shall endeavor to show you, who they be, that
answer to the description of the broken hearted: And hereupon we shall attempt
to show you the Redeemer as healing them.

The broken hearted then are to be first known by us: And who are they, to whom
this description belongs? Now these are such as follow:

First of all; such as are grievously afflicted. There are some afflictive
things, which such poor frail creatures as we are cannot well bear: Instead of
holding up, our hearts give way and succumb; they sink and fail under the
weight and burden of them. Such heart breaking afflictions are bitter
reproaches and calumnies. And such also are grievous distempers and pains of
body, which render life very uncomfortable. So when any are deprived of their
estate, and of their liberty, and for many years they are deprived of
opportunities for the worship of the most high with his people; as was the case
of the Israelites in Babylon; it must than be a time of grievous affliction to
them, and breaking to their hearts. And when any are afflicted with spiritual
temptations, they usually find these to be heart breaking things to them: And
when they are thus buffeted, and their spirits by such means are broken and
humbled within them; they then are in vast need of divine healing; nor can they
subsist unless this be afforded from above unto them.

Again; A deep sense of sin, and hence of the divine displeasure and wrath due
for it, causes to be broken hearted. This will cause the most stubborn sinner
with the most obdurate heart, to give way. His heart will start and break
before it. And indeed what heart is there so strong and so stout, but must sink
and break under such an insupportable burden? A wounded spirit who can bear?
Now a spirit oppressed with the sense of its own guiltiness before God and
awakened with the sense of the divine displeasure and indignation, and the
effects of the same due for sin, is such a wounded spirit. And what pain in the
world is so great! What torment so exquisite as from a heart thus broken?

And further; The hearts of men are broken most advantageously with the
perception and sense of divine mercy: And verily that heart must be hard as a
rock, and stronger than an adamant, which love and mercy divine will not break.
Even the base and obdurate heart of a Saul began to break at the clear view and
perception of the mercy and kindness of his injured son in law David. But how
much more may the hearts of well-disposed people break under a proper sense of
the mercy of God in Christ our Lord? It was this sense of the divine mercy
through the Mediator in forgiving her many and great sins, which broke the
heart of the penitent Mary; and, from her broken heart, proceeded her
penitential tears and the other expressions and evidences of her love and
gratitude to her gracious Lord. We readily grant that a sense of the divine
displeasure may disturb and shock, and in some degree break the heart; but yet
it will not effectually break it, so as to prepare it for healing: No! It must
be a sense of divine mercy in Christ accompanying and following it, which will
produce this salutary effect.

But having thus showed you the brokenhearted; we are now, in the next place,
to consider the Redeemer as healing them: Which indeed is the very design and
end for which he was sent of his Father: For says he, in the prophecy, and by
our text also, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted. When the hearts of
the sinful children of men then are properly and thoroughly broken, then the
great and good Physician of souls will heal them. Indeed the breaking of their
hearts itself may be said to be owing to him. And as he is able to break a
stony heart, and he accordingly does it; so he can cure the stony heart, when
it is broken: The same divine and powerful hand, which is able to wound and
break the heart, can bind it up and heal it.

As for the broken hearted sinners themselves, they perceive their need of
Christ, as the Physician of their souls: And, while they who account themselves
righteous, and who are not sensible of their wounds and indispositions, will
not seek to the divine Physician, these will seek and cry earnestly to him for
help and healing: For, while the whole, or those who fancy themselves so, have
no need of a divine physician, or imagine that they have not any need of one;
the sick, the spiritually indisposed and wounded, and who know themselves to be
so, will apply to the heavenly Healer. So the Israelite of old, who was
sensible of his being bitten by a fiery serpent, and of the pain and anguish
arising from it, knew how to prize the brazen serpent, and looked anxious and
agonizing toward it, and so obtained healing: For, Sirs, the Lord is nigh to
them that are of a broken heart, i. e. he is nigh to help and heal them; and
saves such as be of a contrite spirit, as in Psa. 34.18: And as being near to
help, and powerful and gracious to save; doubtless he will help and save all
that weary and laboring come to him and rely on his ability and gracious
readiness to help and save them. And indeed he has promised that he will do so.
So then this promise belongs to all brokenhearted sinners. There is a promise
of grace to such to help them in their times of need. And there is a promise of
a free and full pardon made to such sinners, and of right therefore belonging
to them. And besides, Consolation strong and divine is engaged to such; and it
shall surely be fulfilled unto them.

Thus it is, that our divine Redeemer heals the broken hearted: He heals
them by confering on them the blessings which he has purchased for them, and
which he has promised to (...): And, as this was the purpose and end, for which
he was sent of his divine Father into the world; so he continues still to
accomplish and gain this divine purpose and end.

But, having offered these things for clearing, illustrating, and confirming
the heads of discourse proposed to our consideration from the text, we may now
reflect in some suitable manner from the whole. Here then,

In the First place, we see what is the sickness and indisposition of human
souls: It is the sin which is within them: And this causes the souls of men to
stand in need of healing. And had it not been for this, the human race would
have had no need of a divine Physician. Sin, therefore, is to be considered as
a disease: And this does to human souls, as sickness does to human bodies: It
enervates them, and causes a Prostration of strength within them: And, by this
they are rendered so infirm and feeble that they cannot walk, nor scarcely take
a step in the way of duty and happiness. And as sickness uses gradually to end
in death; so it is as to the disease of the heart and soul: It is in its own
nature and tendency deadly: And it will prove fatal, if there be not a timely
application and improvement of proper remedies: If there be not this, the end
of the spiritual indisposition will be death. But whoever converteth a sinner
from the error of his way will save his soul from death, and will hide a
multitude of sins, as it is written in Jam. v. 20. But,

In the Second Place, What will then become of these sinners, who are not
broken hearted, but are of hard and impenitent hearts? As they want healing, so
they will die without it: For die they must, if they be not divinely healed. We
do not read CHRIST was sent to heal those laboring of that hardness of heart,
which is contrary to brokenness of heart: Wherefore CHRIST will not heal such.
And how indeed should he heal the wounds of their souls, who are not properly
sensible that they have any? And alas! how many of these are there, and that
even in places of evangelical light and liberty! Though the word of GOD is like
a hammer, a ponderous hammer, which breaks the rock in pieces; yet it cannot
break their hearts: Though they have heard discourses of judgments divine, and
of salvation and mercy by Jesus Christ; They continue unhumbled, unbroken to
this very day. Nor yet will the divine dispensations, whether merciful or
afflictive, break their hearts: No! like Pharaoh, they harden their hearts
under all the divine dealings. And how many are there, who do not properly
mourn and grieve for their sins of heart and life? But they continue with
contentment and pleasure in their evil habits and ways; and they even make a
sport and mock at sin, and take delight in the iniquities of others as well as
their own. Now is Christ sent to heal such as these, who wilfully remain
impenitent; or does he any where say, that he will recover them, who go on with
hardness of heart in their trespasses? No indeed: But He has pronounced a woe
against them; saying as in Luke 11.25. Woe unto you that laugh now: For you
shall mourn and weep. Wherefore,

In the third place; Let us all seriously inquire and examine within ourselves,
whether we are yet such broken hearted ones as our divine Physician will heal?
We readily imagine, that one and all of us are willing to be healed by Christ;
that is to say, we are willing to have our sins forgiven and our souls
eternally saved: But the question is, whether, by brokenness of heart, we are
prepared for these blessings and entitled to them? Say then is moral evil, or
sin become distasteful and grievous to us; and is it our greatest burden? Do we
cry out under the pressure of it, O wretched that I am! who will deliver me
from it? And have we a becoming bitterness and agony of soul within us for all
our iniquities and abominations? If we have so, we may then comfortably hope
and expect, that he will heal us, and give rest and comfort to our souls. And
say further; are our wills broken and subdued to the divine will? Are we
happily brought to yield to our gracious God and Savior, to subject ourselves
entirely to him and say without any reserve at all to him, O my Lord and my
God, what would thou have me to do, or to undergo for thee? And casting
ourselves down at his feet, and lying prostrate there, can we acquiesce in his
disposal, and yet express our expectations of mercy and grace from him, saying,
Here I am, O Lord, before thee; be unto me even as thou will: Let the Lord of
all do with with me as seems good in his sight: But yet, O glorious Lord, my
hope is in thee; and all my expectation is alone from thee, who art mighty to
save, and gracious to help, in the time of need and anxiety. Moreover, let it
be enquired, are our hearts not only broken for sin, but also broken off from
it? Have we, with broken hearts and contrite spirits, both confessed and
forsaken all our sins, of heart and life, of flesh and spirit? And have we
endeavored in all fit ways, and to the utmost of our power, to make
restitution for the damages and wrongs which we have done to others by our
faults and iniquities? For, my hearers this day of all degrees, of all ages,
and of all conditions, we must recommend it to your consideration and your
remembrance for good, that so much brokenness and contrition of heart and soul
as this is necessary for us all in order to prepare us for divine healing: Nor
may we otherwise expect pardon and happiness through the Mediator: For without
a thorough coversion, we cannot obtain and enjoy these blessings.

But here, as it must be expected, it may therefore be allowed, to use a more
particular and pointed address to the poor young Prisoner, here before the
Lord, who is appointed to death for aggravated crimes, and must this day suffer
it from the hands of the civil Magistrate, who is a revenger for anger against
such as practice evil.

It is enough to affect us all in common with grief, and how much more
sorrowful then must it be to his afflicted relatives and friends, whom we
heartily pity, and with whom we weep, that he should so soon engage, and fast
proceed, and so rapidly hurry on in the paths of folly and vice to his own
destruction and ruin.

But ah! poor young man, what special cause have you now to mourn at the last
for your own past conduct and the sad effect of it, and to say in the
bitterness of your soul, how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to
them that instructed me! For I was almost in all evil.

And now you see the truth of the sacred proverb is found to be awfully
verified concerning you, He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, as in Prove. 29.1, For behold as
you have not only been stiffening your neck, but hardening your heart in your
evil ways, you now find the pernicious consequence of it: For having been
wicked overmuch, you are now doomed to die before your time.

But the great concern, which you are now to have upon your anxious mind, is,
how after a short life too much spent in idleness, folly, vice and wickednss,
you may die safely and happily; and it is, we hope, your sollicitous enquiry,
Sirs, what shall I do to be saved?

You have now been hearing of that sensibility of sin and brokenness of heart
for it, which is proper and necessary, in order to prepare for divine healing
and perfect and eternal happiness. But now, have you yet a due sense of your
sins and a becoming brokenness of spirit for them within you? Is your soul
become deeply humbled and abased, and thoroughly contrite before God, as for
those faults and crimes, which bring you to a disgraceful and untimely end; so
for all your other iniquities and crimes? And is your heart thus broken and
contrite for all the sins and transgressions committed by you, not only as
hurtful to the community and fatal to yourself, but as contrary to the holy and
good God, and opposite to his will and glory in the world? And abhoring
yourself in the presence of the divine Majesty for all your evil choices and
ways, are you at length brought to weep bitterly for them and to repent as in
dust and ashes? While you have been bound in fetters and holden as in cords of
affliction, has God our Savior showed you your work and your transgression,
wherein you have exceeded? Has he opened your ear to discipline, and commanded
you in a persuasive and overcoming way to return from all iniquity? And is your
heart now not only contrite for all your faults and transgressions; but broken
off from all your iniquities? For the divine directions and commands are, as in
Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby you have
transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: For why will you die?
And it is your immediate duty and interest to comply with these things, least
iniquity should prove your utter ruin.

Now therefore lift up your heart and soul in humble and importunate prayers to
the Son of God and Savior of a lost world, saying, O Lord, be merciful to me,
and heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee. And since our divine Lord now
say to you from the excellent glory by his word, as he sometimes said to his
patients in the days of his residence on earth, What would you that I should do
unto you? Therefore, now, and for the short time you have to live in the world,
let it be your heart's desire and prayer, O great and good God and Savior,
grant me, a brokenheart and contrite spirit; and show me that thou do not
despise it, by giving it an entire and perfect healing: Thou art mighty to save
and can save me unto the uttermost: Save me, then, O Lord, I beseech thee,
or I perish: O Lord, I beseech thee to deliver my whole self, my spirit, soul
and body, from every pollution, which I have contracted by wicked practices,
and from all my guilt: Grant that I may be accepted in the beloved Son of God,
and sanctified throughout by the holy Spirit of God: For, without holiness and
without remission of sins and acceptance through the Mediator, I cannot see the
Lord, but must perish in my sins: Wherefore, O Father of mercies, and God of
all grace, cause thou me to turn and live: Graciously afford me the
qualifications requisite for pardon, peace and happiness, a broken heart and a
renewed nature; and grant me the free and full forgiveness of all my neglects
and offenses, and the justification of life through the merits and mediation of
Christ Jesus the righteous; and according to the riches of his grace, I commit
myself into thine all-powerful and gracious hands, O almighty Savior: Lord
Jesus, receive my spirit at its departure: Lord remember me in thy kingdom;
and, as another penitent thief, admit me to paradise.

Thus cry earnestly to our God and Savior for his healing and saving mercy:
And it is our hearty wish and prayer for you, that God our Savior and healer,
would hear you in the day of trouble, and keep and strengthen you from his
sanctuary, and grant you according to those wishes, which we would have in your
heart, and earnestly offered to Heaven by you: God be merciful to you, young
man, and prepare you for his healing and saving blessings, and confer them on
you, to the glory of his grace, and your comfort and rejoicing, Amen!

But we have not yet done: We must finish our present discourse, by suitably
exhorting and counselling this whole assembly, in the last place; Hearken then
our dear children and young people, and all of you of every age, condition, and
character, now before the Lord, that God may hearken unto you.

If then you love your own souls, and really desire their spiritual health and
welfare, and eternal happiness, now at the call and invitation of the Son of
God, and the great Savior of men, repair to him for complete healing, and
perfect and eternal happiness: Do it now, we say, for, behold now is the time
of acceptance, behold now is the day of salvation! And therefore today hear
the voice of the LORD; and harden not any longer your hearts.

A compassionate little maid, who was a captive servant, concerned for the
health and comfort of her master, Naaman, the Syrian, said to her mistress, as
we may find in 2 Kings, 5.3. Would God that my Lord were with the Prophet, that
is in Samaria: For he would recover him, etc. And we would in like manner wish
and urge, that sinners of all sorts and complections, who are brokenhearted,
would apply to the great Prophet, as well as Priest and King of God's
anointing: For he would recover and heal them: He is for certain a perfectly
knowing and powerful Physician: He is therefore skilful and able to heal and
save all who rightly apply to him. And, as he is a perfectly good and gracious
Physician, he is therefore as willing, as he is able, to heal and restore all
broken, diseased, and infirm souls, that are sensible of their want of him.

Other Physicians, and even they who have the cure of souls, with regard to
distempered minds and hearts, are comparatively of no value and quite
insignificant: For, however well inclined, knowing, and able they may be, they
cannot heal diseased souls, and cure their spiritual wounds. It is therefore in
vain to depend on them for restored souls and spiritual health.

Wherefore, ceasing from men, even while improving them, as it is our duty to
be, we are to repair and address ourselves to him, who has the words of eternal
life, the words of perfect healing and everlasting happiness: For to whom else
should we go but unto him?

Let us all then, with broken hearts, look and cry to him, and rely on him for
his healing and saving mercies; and that with a cordial inclination and firm
purpose to follow all his directions and counsels, in order to our obtaining
forgiveness and salvation from him: And, if some of these counsels appear hard,
as to pluck out a right eye and cut off a right hand and cast them away from
us, and to restore what we have wrongfully taken away from others, as far as it
is in our power to do it; yet we ought to comply with them, in order to our
obtaining pardon and happiness.

It may not be amiss here, but very proper and seasonable, to put a momentous
question to any inconsiderate, vain, and impenitent person that may be in this
assembly: If then you own yourself a human creature and a reasonable being, let
me demand of you, and let your conscious heart, in the fear of God, give
answer: Is it not better to part with every sin, and even that which is most
dear and pleasing to you, for Christ and to gain healing and happiness by him?
Is it not vastly, yea infinitely, better for you to be renewed and pardoned,
and so to have your soul saved from sin and wrath, and to be perfectly and
forever blessed, then to continue in vice and retain your lusts, and to perish
forever?

Seriously and impartially weigh these things both now, and when you return to
your own homes: And immediately resolve and endeavor, in the divine strength,
most earnestly sought and most sedulously and faithfully improved, to address
yourself to Christ, and give up yourself entirely and forever to him, as your
Teacher, Lord and Savior, with a full and hearty purpose to abhor and forsake
all iniquity in heart and life, and to conform to his will and example, as he
has taught and required us.

This, this is the prescribed way, and the approved method to be healed and
saved to the uttermost by him; in whom, and from whom alone is complete health
and perfect happiness: For there is no other name given under heaven among men,
whereby we must be healed and saved.

And unto him, therefore, who is the Lord our healer and Savior, be all the
glory of purchasing and procuring, of applying, perfecting and establishing
complete health and happiness to the children of men, both now and forever.

At the request of the Printer, the Author of the foregoing Sermon has given
consent that LEVI AMES'S narrative of his own manner of life and conduct may be
annexed hereto.
AMEN.
The LIFE, LAST WORDS, and DYING SPEECH of LEVI AMES, Who was executed at
Boston, on Thursday Afternoon, the Twenty-first day of October, 1773, for
Burglary. Taken from his own mouth, and published at his desire, as a solemn
warning to all, more particularly young people. There is a way that seems
right to a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. Prove. 14.12.
I LEVI AMES, aged twenty-one years, was born in Groton, in New England, of a
credible family: My father's name was Jacob Ames, who died when I was but two
years old. I am the first of the family who was ever disgraced. My prevailing
sin, and that for which I am soon to suffer death, was Thieving; to practice
which I began early, and pursued it constantly, except at certain intervals,
when my conscience made me uneasy, and I resolved to do so no more.

My first thefts were small. I began this awful practice by stealing a couple
of eggs, then a jack-knife, after that some chalk. But being detected and
reproved for the crime, I thought to repent and reform; but found myself
powerfully urged to repeat this wickedness, by the temptations of the devil,
with which I again complied. My tender mother seeing me take to such horrid
courses, and dreading the consequences, often entreated and pleaded with me to
turn from my evil ways, and I as often assured her that I would. Had I followed
her good advice and council, I should never have come to this shameful and
untimely end. But I am now made to feel the anger of GOD against me, for my
disobedience to my parent! GOD will not let disobedient children pass
unpunished.

Having got from under my mother's eye, I still went on in my old way of
stealing; and not being permitted to live with the person I chose to live with,
I ran away from my master, which opened a wide door to temptation, and helped
on my ruin; for being indolent in temper, and having no honest way of
supporting myself, I robbed others of their property.

About this time I stole a gun at Woburn, from Mr. Josiah Richardson, and a
large silver spoon from one Mr. Howard of the same town. I then broke open the
shop of Mr. Edward Hammond, in the county of Plymouth, and took out a piece of
broad-cloth and some money. I stole between twenty and thirty dollars from
another person, whose name I have forgot. I broke open the shop of Mr. Jonas
Cutler, of Groton, and took from him a good piece of broad-cloth, a quantity of
silk mitts, and several pieces of silk handkerchiefs. I also stole a quantity
of money from Jonathan Hammond, of Waltham, and a hat from Jonas Dix, Esquire of
the same place; and when in goal at Cambridge, I stole a silver spoon which was
brought from Mr. Braddish's, the goal-keeper, for me to eat with. I robbed the
Rev. Mr. Clark, of Lexington, of a tankard, twelve tea-spoons, one large ditto,
a pepper-box, and two pair of sugar tongs. I also stole from Mr. Keith, at
Natick, two coats and jackets, with which I dressed myself when I came to
Boston; I gave John Battle twenty dollars to make up the matter with Mr. Keith,
being part of the money I stole from Mr. Hammond, of Waltham. I stole ten or
eleven dollars from Mr Symonds, of Lexington, whose son-in-law, Mr. Meriam,
while I was in prison, informed me where the money was and how to get it, but
he never received any of it; I supposed he gave me this information through
envy against his father-in-law, through whose means he was then confined for
debt. I stole a pair of silver buckles, and a pair of turned pumps out of a
pair of saddle bags at Leason's tavern in Waltham; the buckles were marked I.
D. which I delivered to a man at Marlborough* a blacksmith, to make up with him
for some stockings I took from him; his name I do not remember. I twisted a
padlock and entered the cellar of a Minister's house at Marlborough, I then
went up the cellar stairs, lighted a candle in order to get some victuals. I
have several times taken sundry articles off of lines, hedges, fences, bushes,
apple trees, grass, etc. but cannot recollect the owners. Thomas Cook and I
stole two great-coats and sold them. I have left three shirts and several pair
of stockings at Scipio Burnam's, at Newbury-Port: I then went by the name of
Isaac Lawrence. I stole an ax out of a cart and hid it in a stone wall between
Watertown and Boston, (the night before I took the money from Mr. Hammond) in
Little Cambridge, near to Mr. Dana's tavern; there I left it with a design to
tell it when I came back. I broke open the house of Mr. Rice, in Marlborough,
on the Lord's Day, while the people were gone to public worship, having been
advised to it by Daniel Cook, when we were in Concord goal; was taken in the
house, and returned the things to the owner.

Some time last fall I saw Thomas Cook, who told me he had seven pounds of
plate hid, viz. a tankard, a number of table spoons, and one soup ditto; these
he dug up while I was with him; we carried them away from that place and hid
them in a stone wall, near a barn, close to the sign of the bull on Wrentham
road, but he never informed me where he got them, or how he came by them; he
offered me half if I would dispose of them, but I was afraid to do it.

Last June an Irishman who called his name Thomas Smith, of middle statute,
much marked with the smallpox, told me that he know of a watch which was taken
from his Excellency some time ago, and I suspected that he was the person who
stole it, because he said he knew the Governor's house well: He also assured me
that his Excellency had a considerable quantity of money in the house, and
asked me to go with him to get it. I denied, knowing that the Governor had many
servants, which I urged as a reason why I would not join him. He said he had
one to assist him, whose name he would not tell me, unless I would be one of
the party. He farther declared that he should go well armed with swords and
pistols. Upon this I absolutely refused, because I never thought of murdering
any man, in the midst of all my scene of thieving. He thought to prevail on me
by telling me that there was a chest of dollars in the house but I would not go
with them.

In the same month (June) I lodged at a tavern in Killingsley or Pomfree, in
Connecticut government, on the Lord's Day* where I (...) and drank and went off
without paying. A few evenings after, I returned, shoved up the window, and put
in my hand and stole a box with a johannes, some small change, a pair of knee
buckles, and sleeve buttons, for which I was apprehended, confessed the fact,
returned the goods, was punished and set at liberty. The same night as above I
took a horse out of Killingsley, and rode him down to the county of Worcester,
where I broke open a shop about day light, and took a quantity of coppers and a
remnant of satin: The owners have got them again. I also robbed a baker at
Rhode Island of a quantity of coppers which I found in three baskets, and spent
them.

As for Atwood, in company with whom I committed that theft for which I am soon
to die, my acquaintance with him began in the following manner: I was standing
at a countryman's cart in the market at Boston, asking the price of a turkey;
Atwood came up to me, and we fell into conversation; he asked me to walk with
him to beacon-hill, which I did. We asked each other about the place of resort.
I told him I lodged at Capt. Dickey's. He said his money was all spent, except
one copper which he had in a snuffbox. I asked him where he belonged? He said
he was born in an island in the West Indies, and that his parents lived in
Rhode Island. I asked him where he had been? He told me he lately came from
Portsmouth. I told him that since he had no money, if he would go with me to my
lodgings, I would give him some dinner. I asked him what he would do with some
silver plate, if he had any to dispose of? He told me he knew of a goldsmiths
who would take it, because he had sold some to him before. I told him I knew
where there was some, and if he would go with me, we would get it; to which he
consented. We then went to Menotomy, and found it hid in a stone wall. We kept
it about us until next morning. He told me he knew of a vendue-master in
Boston, with whom he had lived, who had a large sum of money by him, and if I
would join him we would get it. I asked who it was? he said Mr. Bicker. We
accordingly agreed to steal it. At night, after we had slept, we went to a
joiner's shop, into which I entered and took out three chizels; we then went to
Mr. Bicker's house, and on the way were hailed by a watchman, to whom we
answered, friends. Having come to Mr. Bicker's house, we found a front chamber
window open; we pulled off our shoes, and Joseph Atwood with my assistance
climbed up to the window and entered the house, and opened the doors for me; we
then went together to the desk, which we broke open with the chizels. Atwood
pulled out the first drawer, and said there was small change in it, which was
all he could find. As he was going away, I pulled out another drawer, in which
I found a bag of silver coin. After that we came out and went to fox-hill, near
the powder-house, there we hid the plate, which we had kept in our pockets
while we were at supper, and when we entered Mr. Bicker's house. The small
change in silver which Atwood took were equally divided, though the gold which
Atwood had then secreted I knew nothing of, nor did he ever give me any of it.
Before sunset I saw him at Mr. Bell's, when he informed me that a warrant was
out for me; he went with me to Winisimit, and advised me to go over the ferry,
promising to meet me at Portsmouth the Wednesday following at the house to
which he was taken. I returned again to Boston to see if any of my clothes were
done which I had bespoke; on Saturday I was taken by Mr. Bicker and committed
to goal, and saw Atwood no more until I saw him in the prison-yard after he was
apprehended.

Thus have I given an account of that shocking manner in which I have filled up
a short life, and of which I am now ashamed. May GOD forgive me my dreadful
wickedness, committed both against him, and many worthy men, of whom also I
would ask forgiveness, it being not in my power to make restitution, which if
it was I would readily do it. I also forgive from my heart Joseph Atwood, who
swore on my trial that I entered the house of Mr. Bicker first, and let him in,
when he knows in his conscience that he entered first and let me in. I die in
charity with all mankind. But though I lived such a wicked life it was not
without some severe checks of conscience. For after I had stolen, I have been
so distressed at times, as to be obliged to go back and throw the stolen goods
at the door, or into the yard, that the owners might have them again. And not
long before I was taken for this last robbery, I passed the gallows on Boston
neck with some stolen goods under my arm; when my conscience terribly smote me,
and I thought I should surely die there, if I did not leave off this course of
life. What I then feared is now come upon me.

Having thus given an account of my dreadful life of wickedness, I would also
mention the manner in which I have conducted, and my mind has been exercised
during my confinement in goal, since the awful sentence of DEATH was passed
upon me.

At first I had secret hopes of escape; that I should by some means get out of
prison. When I saw it was impossible, I endeavored to reconcile myself as well
as I could. My conscience made me uneasy; I thought I had been so wicked that I
should certainly go to hell. And when I considered how short my time was, I
knew I could not do good works to go to heaven. To hell then I was sure I
should go. And I seemed to have such an awful sight of hell and the grave, that
I was very much terrified indeed; I then took to drinking strong liquor an
order to drown my sorrow. But this would not do; I left that off and took to
reading my bible; my conscience became so uneasy, that I could have no rest. O!
a wounded conscience who can bear? I tried to pray; but it came into my mind
that the prayers of the wicked would not be heard. Yet I could not help crying
for mercy. I was at times ready to despair of the mercy of GOD. But the
ministers who visited me, assured me that the blood of CHRIST was sufficient to
cleanse me from all sin, which gave me a little encouragement to go on crying
to GOD. I now began to understand something of that law of GOD which I had
broken, at condemning me for the wickedness of my heart as well as life. I saw
that I was undone, that my heart and life were bad beyond all account. I saw
that if GOD should damn me a thousand times he would be just, and I should have
nothing to say. In this condition I was a week before the time fixed for my
execution. The loss of body and soul made me tremble; though I could not freely
tell all that I felt to all who came to see me. I thought that if I should be
executed in this condition, I must be dragged like a bullock to the slaughter.

But GOD's name be blessed forever; that on Friday evening, the 8th instant, I
turned over a little book which was put into my hands, in which I saw, Ezekiel.
36.26, 27. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put upon you:
And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a
heart of flesh. And I will pour out my spirit upon you, etc. This at once
surprised me: I knew that I wanted this new heart, and could not help looking
on this as GOD's gracious promise to me: And I thought that as I knew GOD could
not lie, if I would not believe this, I would believe nothing: My mind at once
felt easy. I now saw that I had sinned against GOD all my life with as much
envy, as ever I killed a snake; which I always hated.

After this I had, and now have such a view of the way of salvation by CHRIST,
that I felt and do feel my soul rest on him as my only hope of salvation. Since
which I have found peace of mind, anger against myself for sin, and a desire to
be made holy. At times the terrors of death seem to be removed; at other times
I am full of fears lest I should deceive myself. Yet I cannot but hope that
CHRIST has freely pardoned me. On him I desire to rest living and dying; and to
give him all the praise.

And now as a dying man I mention the following things, viz.

1. To keep your doors and windows shut on evenings, and secured well to
prevent temptation. And by no means to use small locks on the outside, one of
which I have twisted with ease when tempted to steal. Also not to leave linen
or clothes out at night, which have often proved a snare to me. Travelers I
advise to secure their faddle bags, boots. etc. in the chambers where they
lodge.

2. Parents and masters I entreat you who have any concern for, and connection
with children, to have an eye over their actions, and to take special care for
their precious and immortal souls.

3. All Persons whether old or young, who may see these lines, spoke as it were
by a poor, dying sinful man, now bound in chains, and who has but a short space
of time before he must launch into an endless eternity; guard against every
temptation to sin. If at any time you are tempted to do any thing like the poor
soul who now speaks to you, earnestly pray to GOD for strength to resist the
temptation, as well as for repentance for your past sins.

The youth more especially I would solemnly caution against the vices to which
they are most inclined -- Such as bad woman, who have undone many, and by whom
I also have suffered much; the unlawful intercouse with them I have found by
sad experience, leading to almost every sin. I also warn them to guard against
the first temptation to disobedience to parents. Had I regarded the many kind
entreaties and reproofs of my tender Mother, I had never come to this shameful
and untimely death.

Profane cursing and swearing I also bear my dying testimony against, as a
horrid sin, and provoking to GOD.

Nor must I omit to mention gaming, to which young people are much inclined,
and which at this day prevails to the ruin of many. For when a youth has gamed
away all his money, he well be tempted even to steal from his master or
parents, in order to get at it again. Besides, this sin leads to drunkenness
another dreadful vice.

There is one sin more that I must warn all persons against, and that is, a
profanation of the Lord's day, and of public worship. Oh! how many such days
have I despised, and while others have been engaged in serving GOD, I have been
employed in wickedness, which I now confess with grief of heart.

4. I have one request more to make from the borders of the grave, a compliance
with which is earnestly desired by a poor dying mortal; which is, that no
person, old or young, would ever reflect on my poor dear mother, or brother, or
any of my relations, on account of my shameful and untimely death, who could
not prevent my wickedness, and have trouble too much to be borne, by the life I
have lived, and the death I am to die.

I desire sincerely to thank all the good Ministers of the town, who have taken
great pains with me ever since the sentence of death was past upon me, to
convince me of my unhappy situation, of my lost and undone condition by nature,
of my aggravating sins by practice, and of the infinitely free rich grace and
mercy of God, only through the merits and mediation of my dear Savior Jesus
Christ. I also thank all the good people both of town and country, who, I have
reason to think, have offered up many prayers at the throne of grace for me. I
also thank Mr. Otis, the goal-keeper and his family, who have all been very
kind to me during my confinement in goal. LA MES.

Ames was attended to the place of execution by the rev. Samuel Stillman, one
of the baptist-ministers in this town, who constantly visited and prayed with
him while he was under confinement, and spared no pains to reform and bring him
to a just sense of his unhappy condition and guilt; in short, such was the
assiduity of that reverend and pious Gentleman, that his utmost efforts were
not wanting, in season and out of season, to sit and prepare him for a future
(...): So great affection and concern did he show for the future welfare of
this unfortunate young creature, that while he was accompanying him to the
fatal tree, with tears in his eyes, he clasped this young convert round his
waist, and seemed to take the greatest satisfaction in conversing with him
about the things that concerned his everlasting happiness; to sum up the whole
in a few words, his whole deportment, in his agreeable moments spent in his
travel, seemed to bespeak, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you. The Prisoner was turned off just at four o'clock, having
first given a short but pathetic exhortation to the vast concourse of people,
who attended this awful scene, supposed to consist of seven or eight thousand
persons, and particularly the YOUTH, who he earnestly entreated to avoid
Stealing, the crime which he was most addicted to, and for which he was to
suffer an ignominious death. He took by the hand Mr. Edward Ranger,
housewright, (a member of Mr. Stillman's church) and returned him and Mrs.
Ranger thanks for their kindness to him. After which he made a short prayer,
and seemed to die a true penitent, without scarce a struggle.


