A JOURNAL, OF THE LIFE and TRAVELS OF JOSEPH-BILL PACKER.
To the Printers.
GENTLEMEN,
WHEREAS I am now under sentence of death in the City-Hall of Albany, for
having as it is supposed, counterfeited the currency of this province; and
having scrutinized my conscience, which bears witness to the truth of what I
shall now deliver, of my own free will, which I hope will be published
according to my desire.

If I were to write the whole of my transactions they would fill a large
volume; but in this my journal, I only mean to give a concise and tree
narrative of my proceedings.

I was born in Connecticut, at a place called Groton, near New London, in the
Year 1720. My parents were reputable people, who, both by example and precept
endeavored to inculcate principles of virtue and honor in me. From my youth I
have been an admirer of the operations of nature, and never desisted from
enquiring info any thing that I thought an arcanum until I had obtained some
idea of it, my thirst after knowledge being insatiable.

When I arrived at the twenty second year of my age, my inclination prompted me
to visit the southern colonies, I traveled into Virginia, where I resided near
sixteen years* The principal part of my business was curing cancers; of this
art I may justly call myself master, as I have cured every species of them
except the sanguine cancer, and even that some times when the blood was not too
much infected. I understand the separation of metals, and was often called upon
to examine minerals. In Virginia, Colonel Cheswell, who had lead mines,
employed me to work upon lead and copper ore: He died, and Colonel James Bird,
who became sole owner of the mines, declined having them worked. From these
works, which are situate at a place called New-River, near the line which
divides North Carolina from Virginia, I went to Dan River, which I crossed and
came to a place called Salisbury, in Roan county, North Carolina. After
spending a few days there I steered my course to Meclinburgh, which lies upon
the Calava River. This seemed to be a good place for my business; and, as the
county was young and the court house then building. I resolved to make that the
place of my residence.

HAVING agreed for my board and lodging, and being informed that several
persons in the nieghbourhood were afflicted with cancers, I published an
advertisement, the purport of which was, that I would undertake to cure them,
and if I did not succeed, no money should be demanded. This had the desired
effect, for in a few days I had several patients.

THE (...) that I cured was Colonel Lewison, of a can^^^ (...) the second, the
Widow Canada, who had (...) afflicted for four years with a cancer near her
nose; the next was one James Mac, he had been distressed with a cancer for
upwards of twenty two years, and was, indeed, a miserable spectacle to look
upon; three months elapsed before I could cure him. I cannot forbear relating
an incident that happened to this man while he was my patient: After I caused
the cancer to fall out, and he place nearly healed, a cow broke into his
corn-field which put him in a violent passion; he loaded a pistol almost full
with powder and salt, went into the field to frighten the cow, and snapped the
pistol several times, but it missing fire, he held it carelessly in his hand;
however, some sparks having remained in the pan, it went off at a time when he
did not expect it; the cock flew up, cut his under lip two thirds off, struck
through his nose, and broke up the cancer: I was obliged to sew his lip and
heal that wound, which required nearly as much time as the cancer had done.
This happened in Tryon County, near Broad River, that falls into Santee on the
south border of North Carolina.

IN that country I became acquainted with several gentlemen, who desired me to
make their houses my home, when I came near them; they declared it should not
cost me any money if I would tarry with them all that winter. -- I accepted
their kind invitation; and, as I understand watch work, I constantly employed
myself at that business, unless when called abroad.

IN that situation I remained several years, but having a strong desire to
visit my brethren in New England, I made application to my patients, and got in
part of the money they owed to me; those who could not pay I did not distress,
nor would I accept of any reward from those persons who required my help and
were in low circumstances, being always apprehensive that if I accepted a fee
it might disenable them to provide necessaries for their children; nor did I
turn away poor people who applied to me for help but constantly exerted my
abilities for their relief.

WHILE I remained in North Carolina, at the house of a gentleman who was a
Justice of the peace, there came a poor woman driving a cow before her; my
landlord enquiring where she was driving the cow, she answered, to the doctor,
that it was the last she had, and that her children must now be deprived of
milk. I asked what was her disorder; she replied a cancer in her nose; I
desired to see it, and to know how long she had been in the doctor's hands; she
said (to the best of my remembrance) a year or a year and a half. My landlord
informed me that she was a poor widow who lived about four miles distant from
his house; that her name was Clark, and that she had a great many poor naked
children. My heart then felt a melting charity for the distressed widow: -- I
told her, that with the assistance of God, I would cure her, and desired her
call upon me when she returned from the doctor. She complied, and I applied my
medicine, and told her, that by the time she got home the cancer would drop
out, which accordingly happened, and in less than three weeks she was perfectly
cured. The poor creature was willing to give me all she had in the world, but I
would accept of nothing; for God gave me the cure, not to oppress widows, or
make fatherless children cry for bread, but to relieve the afflicted; and this
duty corresponds with my natural disposition.

IN the month of September, 1770, I began my journey into from North Carolina,
to New England. No remarkable event happened in my travels until I came to
Wyoming, on Susquehanna, where I found several of my relations, but we did not
know each other till I told them my name; then they remembered that they had
heard their fathers speak of me. Upon the road to Wyoming, I had obtained
intelligence that a company of Pennsylvanians were coming to drive off the
settlers there; and, as I always was a lover of my countrymen, I warned them of
the approaching danger.

AT Wyoming I continued with my relations four days, and then proceeded on my
journey to Delaware River; there I was informed that Captain Ogden and his
company had marched to East-Town, after having lain in wait for some time to
intercept such New England people as might pass between Susquehanna and
New England. There was a man and a woman with me, the man's name was John
Wickisine, we were well armed and resolved not to be imposed upon whatever
might be the event. We went on unmolested, came to Fish Kill Ferry, and crossed
Hudson-River, we traveled on the post road until we arrived at De Bois's
Tavern, there we continued two days, as my companion Wickisine wanted to hire a
house for himself and family, but the landlord and him could not agree upon the
terms. At this Tavern I met with one Doctor Smith, he informed me that he lived
near Groton River, and that he had been at New York upon affairs of importance:
He was a man of affability and a good orator; we entered into an argument, and
I found him to be a man of sense and learned in the sciences. I was so charmed
with his discourses upon philosophy, that I could have spent the remainder of
my days with him: He desired me to ride along with him, I complied, and the
subject of our conversation was nature, the productions of nature, and the
primary causes of such surprising effects. The Doctor conducted me to his own
house, which was a tavern, and there I lodged that night: During the evening we
talked about various matters, but not a word was mentioned about counterfeiting
money. Among other things our conversation turned upon the transmutation of
metals; the Doctor told me that he was master of that art, but that his
extensive practice of physic would not permit him to prosecute his discoveries
in alchymy. I informed him that I intended to begin a course of experiments if
I could get a convenient place to carry it on the process: He recommended me to
Capt. Hard of New-Millford, who, he said, had for several years been carrying
on operations of that nature.

HAVING taken leave of Doctor Smith, I proceeded to New-Millford, enquired for
Capt. Hard, and was very courteously received by him; I found him to be a
gentleman of strict honor and integrity, and I had a very cordial esteem for
him.

I had not remained long there until I received a visit from Doctor Smith; he
requested that I would cut his coat of arms, which he told me he wanted to put
into his books and gave me a precedent that was done in England. I cut the
plate and sent it to him by one David Thar, whom he sent to receive it; soon
after the Doctor favored me with another visit, and after a long prefatory
discourse, informed me that he wanted more work done, and that if I would take
it in hand to execute it I should be handsomely rewarded. I enquired what he
wanted engraved, he said he would show me a pattern, and soon after brought me
a ten shilling bill and asked if I could imitate it; I answered him in the
affirmative, but told him I did not choose to do such work, being then engaged
in philosophic studies: I represented to him the enormity of the crime, and
endeavored to disuade him from persisting in it: his reply was, that the great
men are guilty of greater frauds, and that for his part he did not mean to
enrich himself by emitting a large number of bills, his principal motive being
curiosity to know how near he could imitate the true bill. I told him it was
impossible to do it so exact as not to be distinguishable from the genuine
bill: He said that a little difference was not material, with sundry other
words to that effect. Capt. Hard, understanding his errand, gave him a sharp
reprimand, and told me that if I worked for the Doctor I should not stay one
hour longer in his house: I promised that I would not, but one word brought on
another, we differed, and I left him. -- Oh! unhappy day! -- for having no
overseer to watch for my good I met again with Mr. Smith; who, taking advantage
of my week capacity, debauched my judgment with sophistical reasoning and made
me err.

ANXIOUS to improve myself by philosophic studies, naturally inclined to
learning, remarkably inquisitive about the secrets of nature and science, I
traveled to Saratoga, with an intention to set up my works; and accordingly
built a shop for that purpose at the house of John Davis. I agreed with Capt.
Garrison to bring me stills, glasses, and other materials from New York. When
these things arrived I prepaired to begin my operations, but a misunderstanding
happening between the woman of the house and me, I resolved to leave that place.

I went down to New-Britain, but it being the winter season and the cold very
intense, I could not erect my works, but embraced that opportunity to
transcribe my philosophy book, which I did at the house of Samuel Wheeler.

As I understood that Doctor Whiting kept potters works, and having occasion
for some earthen stills, I went to his house and gave him directions about
them; it required some time before they could be finished, and in the interim I
employed myself in preparing medicines at Samuel Wheeler's house.

I went again to Doctor Whiting's, expecting my stills were done, but found
they were not. This circumstance retarded my business, and because I applied
closely to my studies and spent the greatest part of my time in my shop, a
report was circulated about the country that I was counterfeiting bills and
coining money. I declare, before God! that the said report, was false! for I
did not make nor offer to pass any bad money, nor never had any thoughts on
that subject. Conscious of my innocence, I gave myself no trouble about their
surmises, until I heard that they had applied for and obtained a warrant,
either at Kinderhook or Clavarack, against me. This made me very uneasy and
confirmed my determination of abandoning a place where the people were so
censorious and malicious.

I then resolved upon a recluse way of life, and erected a house in a solitary
place, where intended to carry on my chemical process; but having made an
excursion from my habitation, I met with one Hulburt, who informed me that he
had been long searching for me, and that he was employed by Daniel Lewis of
Sheffield.

WHEN he acquainted me with his business, I told him that nothing could induce
me to be concerned in his Scheme; that being now an old man, and my eyesight
much decayed, I had given over engraving nice work; and that being then engaged
in other business, I had neither time nor inclination to comply with his
requisition; but he persisted to persuade and make me large offers.

I am now tried, convicted and condemned, on suspicion of having counterfeited
the currency of this province; but, if the word of a dying man can be taken, I
am innocent of the crime imputed to me. I never did make, sign or pass
counterfeit Bills; nor had I any hand in the scheme further than what I have
related. In my manner of living I always studied not to give offense even to
Children; and as I practiced no deceit, it never occured to me that others
would use it. In the days of prosperity Gold and Silver was not too precious
for me; but no sooner did adversity appear, than those whom I formerly imagined
to be my best friends, having obtained their ends and glutted their mischevious
appetites; they compassed me about like a troubled sea, and having the poison
of (...) under their tongues they have done their utmost to destroy their
fellow creatures in hopes to clear their own characters. Alas! the strongest
castle may be taken when besieged by superior force; and if a man is (...) by
large offers and insinuation, it is not surprising if he surrender, especially
if his poverty and good nature are taken the advantge of. By over persuasion I
engraved, to gratify those who are now cleared and have got their pardon, but
it plainly appearth that I never coined, dispersed, nor passed one penny of bad
money; but it seems that I must be an Escape Goat to bear their transgressions
into the other world. LORD strengthen me to bear their burden in this world,
and be merciful to my soul in that which is to come.

As it is appointed for all men once to die, and it seems that the time of my
dissolution draws near, I desire that these my transactions may be published
for the satisfaction of the public; for that reason, Messrs, Printers, I have
sent these manuscripts to you; print them with all convenient speed, and you
will greatly oblige your humble servant,

JOSEPH BILL P --.
City Hall, Albany, March 9, 1773,
Messirs. ROBERTSONS,
SINCE I wrote the preceding pages, I have recollected the following material
occurrences of my Life, which you will be pleased to add as a postscript to
what I formerly sent. I would most willingly communicate my recipe for curing
cancers to the world, but I have very strong reasons, to be silent on that
topic; I am very sorry that this is the case, for, notwithstanding the
hardships put upon me, my heart is warm with universal good will and
benevolence to my fellow creatures.

I am, Gentlemen, yours, etc. J. B. P.
City Hall, Albany, March 16, 1773.
POSTSCRIPT.
IN the course of my peregrinations through Virginia, I came to a certain
gentleman's house which I made my home for upwards of four years. During that
time I became acquainted with one of his daughters, and at last we bought
proper, and indeed it was high time, to marry; accordingly we entered into the
connubial state. About half a (...) after, my wife and me held a consultation
upon the posture four affairs; and, after a good deal of confabulation, we
included that living with her parents did not suit our convenient. I proposed
to go and seek a place that would be more ^^^^^able to us, and observed to my
wife, that as I had two (...) horses, she might, if she pleased, take a ride
along with she acquiesed, and, having made some necessary preparations for our
journey, we set off together.

We rode about eighty miles up into the country, and came to a quaker
settlement called Opechen Creek, where we put up at a friend's house; the
gentleman was extremely civil, and we discoursed very jocosely together. He
asked where we were journeying: -- we answered, to seek our fortune, and
enquired if they wanted to hire a School master at that settlement? He said
they did, and should be very fond of a good one. His reply pleased me exceeding
well, and we determined to abide with them; the friends being a very good
people to live with, especially if they find that those whom they employ are
honest and have merit.

I engaged with them a year. They built a house for me and my wife, and a
school house adjacent. When the buildings were finished, the brothers and
sisters, as they call them, presented us with every utensil necessary for house
keeping. We then made as respectable an appearance as any of our neighbors* I
opened my school, went on extraordinary well, and had the universal applause of
my constituents.

GENERAL BRADDOCK'S defeat happening about four months after our settlement at
Opechen, threw a damp upon our happiness; I was in my school house when the sad
news arrived; the whole settlement was alarmed, being apprehensive that the
victors would follow their blow and ravage the country with fire and sword. I
still continued my school, but, in about two months after, the murder shout was
heard in our neighborhood; numbers of people were killed and scalped, and the
miserable fugitives who escaped with life were at a loss where to fly for
protection! At last I was obliged to abandon my happy settlement, and, with my
wife, repair to a fort; there not remained near two months, but the place being
much (...), by the multitude who came there for protection and we having our
two horses with us, made it very (...) stay there. My wife and me came to a
(...) to leave the fort, and not choosing to settle again in a country so open
to the incursions of a merciless enemy, we prepared for a journey into the
province of Pennsylvania; we arrived safe there, rented a room, and I resumed
my practice of surgery and curing cancers. I had surprising good success, and
obtained the name of an experienced practitioner in physic, but the tide of
fortune again turned and set hard against me; I catched the infection of the
smallpox; the eruption was copious and the symtoms very unfavourable. I
entreated my wife to leave my room and keep at a distance from me, but her
tenderness for me would not permit her to comply with my request. I was under
violent apprehensions, that if she got infected, in the condition she was then
in, that the consequence would be fatal. Alas! my imaginary distress was very
soon realized; she sickened, the pustles appeared, and on the sixteenth day of
her illness, to my inexpressible grief, (...).

I had a boy three years of age, who was dangerously ill of the same distemper
that had been fatal to his mother; at the same time, I was not sufficiently
recovered to quit my bed; my situation was truly pitiable, I was sick,
dejected, and forlorn, among strangers; my expense for attendance, nursing, and
indeed I may say for every thing, amounted to a considerable sum, and I was
then in a place where something could not be had for nothing.

UPON my recovery I proposed to visit my old friends the Quakers, but hearing
that times were altered, much for the worse, in their settlement, I declined
it. Having agreed with an old welsh widow for my boy's board and lodging, I
continued my practice of surgery and had tolerable success. As soon as my boy
was able to go, I sent him to school, and he became a very good scholar -- I
fervently implore the A mighty to preserve, govern and bless him.

THE War still continuing, I was, by the recommendation of several gentlemen
who interested themselves in my behalf, appointed surgeon's mate to the
garrison of Agusta; there I continued until a detachment of our men were
draughted to go against Fort Du Quesne; our principal doctor went with them,
but before his departure he wrote to the commissioners in my behalf, without
informing me of the favor he had conferred upon me. In consequence of his
recomendation I was sent for to Philadelphia, and there received a commission
to be chief surgeon to the garrison of Augusta; at the same time I got a chest
of medicines and then went back to my station, where I continued seven years.
At the conclusion of the war I was discharged at Lancaster, in Pennsylvania:
Being then out of employment, I went down to Virginia to visit my father in
law, and continued in these parts. My transactions, after that time, I have
mentioned in my Journal, to which I refer the reader hereof.

I would willingly write a more minute detail of the various vicissitudes of my
life; which would (...) large volume, but my time is much too short for (...)
an undertaking; if I could obtain a (...) for two months, the work might be
finished. (...) time I can spare, from my more weighty concerns, shall be
devoted to the above purpose; and if my sentence is exec^^^^, at the time
appointed, I shall leave what manuscripts I have, in the hands of the Printers
hereof.

When from this World I take my Flight,
To Fields and Regions of Delight;
My cruel Foes need not Exult,
For they will be punished for their Fault.
And those who brought on my Distress,
Will never Taste of Happiness;
Sunk in Despair and lost to Hope,
Their only Remedy's a Rope.
Me quite unwary, for their Sake,
Put Character and Life to Stake;
Deceived, I did the Law transgress;
Words cannot utter my Distress.
I from a Brother asked relief,
He only laughed at my Grief;
Oh! may no Brother in Distress,
Be forced to ask of him Redress!
To Bliss they can have no Pretense,
Whose Heart disclaims Benevolence;
To me the Needy welcome were,
I gave them what I had to spare.
FINIS.

