The Progress of DULLNESS. PART SECOND.

The Progress of DULLNESS, PART SECOND: OR AN ESSAY On the LIFE and CHARACTER of
DICK HAIRBRAIN, OF FINICAL MEMORY; Being an Astronomical Calendar, Calculated
for the Meridian of New York, North Latitude, 41. West Longitude 72; 30'; but
which may serve without material Error, for any of the neighboring Climates:

CONTAINING, Among other curious and surprising Particulars, DICK'S Soliloquy
on a College-Life -- a Description of a Country-Fop -- Receipt to make a
Gentleman, with the Fop's Creed and Exposition of the Scriptures -- Dick's
gradual Progress from a Clown to a Coxcomb -- His Travels, Gallantry, and
Opinion of the Ladies -- His Peripaetia and Catastrophe, with the Moral and
Application of the whole.

Published for the universal Benefit of Mankind.

Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXXIII.

IT is become an universal custom for every Author, before he gives himself up
to the fury of the Critics, to make his dying speech in a Preface; in which,
according to the usual style of criminals, he confesses his faults, tells the
temptations that led him to the crime of scribbling, gives good advice to the
rest of his fraternity, and throws himself upon the mercy of the Court. These
speeches are commonly addressed to a sort of imaginary being, called the kind,
courteous, candid and sometimes, benevolent Reader. Not that I would deny the
existence of such a being, as an Epicurean once did of the soul, because he
could not find an account of it, in the complete zoology of animals. The first
part of this Poem met with very kind reception from many of this class: nor am
I concerned least the second should receive any ill usage from them. Authors
have much more to fear from readers of a different stamp; and though we are
usually loath to speak out so plainly, the truth is, we should not make such
long prologues to the Candid, were we assured of our safety from the attacks of
the Malicious. For my own part, being an enemy to ceremony and circumlocution,
and having moreover some outstanding accounts to settle, I shall directly
address myself to this last kind of Critic; assuring him however, upon my word
of honor, that I was not moved to do him this homage, as the Indians are to
worship the devil, out of any fear of his power to do mischief; since I have
already experienced that his malice has its proper antidote in his impotence.

To the Envious and Malicious Reader.
May it please your Worship, or your Reverence; or your Illnature, by what
title soever dignified and distinguished:
AS you have expressed great resentment against the first part of this Poem and
its Author, you might perchance think yourself slighted, if I should let the
second come abroad without paying you my proper acknowledgements. I own myself
much your debtor; and am only sorry that the number of your brotherhood is so
inconsiderable, that the world may perhaps think this dedication almost
entirely needless. Had a greater number shown themselves affected, I should
have had more grounds to hope that the Poem might be useful. Satire is a
medicine very salutary in its effects, but quite unpleasant in its operation;
nor do I know a more evident symptom that the potion has taken its proper
effect, than the groans and distortions of the Patient.

I had the pleasure, my Illnatured Reader, on the first publication of my poem,
to hear the remarks made upon it by a cluster of your fraternity, who might
each of them have sat for the picture of Tom Brainless. And as you may have
frequent occasion to talk against it yourself, and yet be at some loss what to
allege in its reproach, I will do you the favor to acquaint you with the
result of their criticisms; in order to save you the trouble of so much
thinking, and assist you a little in the style and expression of your
resentments.

It was determined by the meeting, nem. con. that the whole piece was low,
paltry stuff, and both scurrilous in the sentiments and dirty in the style;
that it was evident, the Author knew nothing of language, or versification, and
was incapable of writing with any degree of elegance; that he was an open
reviler of the Clergy, and an enemy to truth and learning; that his apparent
design was to ridicule religion, disgrace morality, sneer at the present
methods of education, and in short, write a satire upon Yale-College and the
ten commandments; that he treated the subject in the most partial and
prejudiced manner, and must certainly be either a Separatist, or a Sandemanian.
Though the truth of the assertions in the poem could not so conveniently be
denied, yet much was said against the intention of the Author; and it was
affirmed that if indeed the world in one or two points was not quite so good,
as they could wish it, yet things in the present state could never be altered
for the better, and it was folly, or madness alone could propose it.

Now to give you as much light as possible into this matter, I would assure
you, the Author had very little hopes that the world would, in his day, arrive
at the point of perfection, from which it is at present he knows not how many
leagues distant; and his expectations are not very sanguine, that these
pictures of the modern defective manners will do much service. He is fully
sensible, that the moral World is as difficult to be moved out of its course,
as the natural; that there is in it as much power of resistance or vis
inertiae, as the Philosophers term it; and that the projectors are equally at a
loss for engines and foothold. He is as much satisfied that the present year
has borne a sufficient number of fools to keep up the breed, as that there has
been a tolerable crop produced every season, for these forty years past. But he
thought, though perhaps the picture might not reclaim many, there could be no
harm in trying his hand at the draught: In which, if the good people, who sat
for the painting, have the ill hap to find themselves drawn with a wide mouth,
a long nose, or a blear eye, he begs of them to get a little acquainted with
their own faces, and see whether these be not their real defects of nature,
before they begin to rail at the Painter, for the badness of their resemblance.

I am fully sensible, my Illnatured Reader, that you have good reasons in your
own breast, to account for your resentment against my first essay, and direct
you in the manner of your remarks. You ought in gratitude to defend that
carelessness in the examination of Candidates for preaching, to which it is not
at all impossible, but you may yourself be indebted for your reverence and your
band. Justly may you despise the study of those finer Arts and Sciences, of
which, in a smooth journey through life, you never once knew the want, or
perceived the advantages: justly should you undervalue them in comparison with
that ancient Learning, which from experience you rightly term Solid, as your
own wits were never able to penetrate it. With good reason also do you affirm
the satire to be levelled at the Clergy in general, since that assertion is the
best method of preventing the public from dragging to view those particular
men, at whom it is, and ought to be, pointed; though you might discern, with
any other eye than that of wilful prejudice, that the Author has the highest
veneration for the ministerial robe, or he would never thus trouble himself
about the spots that defile it. As for those, however dignified in station, who
rail at the Progress of Dullness, to gain favor with a particular party, or
order of men, he thinks them unworthy the notice of an answer. He would hint
only to such as hope to screen themselves in the crowd, and draw on him the
resentment of those he esteems, by affirming the satire to be general, that he
would thank them, if they would so far throw off the mask, that by acquiring a
right to their names, he may have an opportunity hereafter to render it more
particular. He especially recommends this hint to two Persons, the haughtiest
Dullard, and the most impertinent Coxcomb of this age; from whom he has already
received numberless favors, and who by their future good conduct may stand a
chance, at some fortunate period, to figure at the head of a Dedication to the
first and second parts of the Progress of Dullness.

And new, my Evil Reader, with regard to the Poem before you, which is properly
a counterpart to the other, I design pretty much to let it speak for itself.
Perhaps, since I have now endeavored to ridicule and explode both extremes,
this second part may assist you a little to judge what are the sentiments I
would wish to enforce: but in plain truth, I have very little hopes of you.
Nevertheless before I leave you, I will tell you one secret, and give you a few
words of advice. The secret, which I am sure you would never have been able to
discover, is this; In conformity to the delicacy of your taste, I have raised
the style of this part, about two degrees by the scale, higher than the other.
The advice is, that it will be no unwise proceedure in you to hint that the
spirit of the piece is not well supported, nor this part half so good as the
first: and an observation, or two, upon the Author's impudence, seasonably
introduced, might not be wholly without effect. But as to the old trite way of
calling men, Heretics, Deists and Arminians, it has been lately so much
hackneyed and worn out by some Reverend Gentlemen, that I cannot promise it
would do you any manner of service.

I cannot conclude without declaring to the world in this public manner, that
whoever shall take on himself this character, by criticizing on these Poems in
the method above specified, shall have my free license and permission to
appropriate to himself the whole of this dedication, and be distinguished for
the future by the title of my Envious and Malicious Reader: and I do assure him
that this preface was written purposely for him; not designing however to
exclude from a proper share every one, who shall join with him in those
sentiments, from this first day of January, new style, A. D. 1773, henceforth,
and as long as the world shall endure, be the same term longer or shorter.

Witness my hand, THE AUTHOR.
P. S. I Wish you a happy New-year.




The Progress of DULLNESS.
'TWAS in a town remote (the place
We leave the reader wise to guess;
For readers wise can guess full well,
What authors never meant to tell)
There dwelt secure a Country-clown,
The wealthiest Farmer of the town;
Though rich by villainy and cheats,
He bought respect by frequent treats;
Gained offices by constant seeking,
Squire, Captain, Deputy and Deacon;
Great was his power; his pride as arrant:
One only Son his heir apparent.
He thought the Stripling's parts were quick,
And vowed to make a man of Dick;
Blessed the pert dunce, and praised his looks,
And put him early to his books.
More oaths than words Dick learned to speak,
And studied knav'ry more than greek;
Three years at school, as usual, spent,
Then all equipt to College went,
And pleased in prospect, thus bestowed
His meditations, as he rode.
"All hail, unvex'd with care and strife,
The bliss of Academic Lfe;
Where kind repose protracts the span,
While Childhood ripens into man;
Where no hard parent's dreaded rage
Curbs the gay sports of youthful age;
Where no vile fear the Genius awes
With grim severity of laws;
Where annual troops of Bucks come down,
The flower of every neighboring town;
Where wealth and pride and riot wait,
And every rogue may find his mate.
Far from those walls, from pleasure's eye,
Let care and grief and labor fly,
The toil to gain the laurel-prize.
That dims the anxious student's eyes,
The pedant-air of learned looks,
And long fatigue of turning books.
Let poor, dull rogues, with weary pains,
To college come to mend their brains,
And drudge four years, with grave concern,
How they may wiser grow and learn.
Is wealth of indolence afraid,
Or does wit need pedantic aid?
The man of wealth the world descries,
Without the help of learning, wise;
The magic powers of gold, with ease,
Transform us to what shape we please,
Give knowledge bright and courage brave,
And wits, that nature never gave.
But naught avails the hoarded treasure;
In spending only lies the pleasure.
There Vice shall lavish all her charms,
And Rapture fold us in her arms,
Riot shall court the frolic soul,
And Swearing crown the sparkling bowl;
While Wit shall sport with vast applause,
And scorn the feeble tie of laws;
Our midnight joys no rule shall bound,
While games and dalliance revel round.
Such pleasures youthful years can know,
And Schools there are, that such bestow.
And oh, that School how greatly blessed,
By fate distinguished from the rest,
Whose seat is fixed on sacred ground,
By Venus' nunn'ries circled round;
Where not, like monks, in durance hard,
From all the joys of love debarred,
The solitary Youth in pain
For rapture sighs, yet sighs in vain:
But kind occasion prompts desire
And crowns the gay, licentious fire,
And Pleasure courts the sons of Science,
And Whores and Muses hold alliance.
Not Those "There is a certain Region on the Western Continent, situated within
the northern temperate Zone, where in some of the most notable and respectable
Schools, not only Indolence and Dullness, but almost every Crime, may by the
rich be atoned for with pecuniary satisfaction." Dudon's Geographical
Paradoxes. No. 45.
so blessed, for ease and sport,
Where Wealth and Idleness resort,
Where free from censure and from shame,
They seek of learning, but the name,
Their crimes of all degrees and sizes
Atoned by golden sacrifices:
Where kind instructors fix their price,
In just degrees on every vice,
And fierce in zeal against wicked courses,
Demand repentance -- of their purses;
Till sin, thus taxed, produces clear
A copious income every year,
And the fair Schools thus free from scruples,
Thrive by the knav'ry of their Pupils.
Even thus the Pope, long since has made
Of human crimes a gainful trade;
Keeps every pleasing vice for sale,
For cash, by wholesale, or retail.
There, pay the prices and the fees,
Buy rapes, or lies, or what you please,
Then sin secure, with firm reliance,
And bid the ten commands defiance.
And yet, alas, these happiest Schools
Preserve a set of musty rules,
And in their wisest progress show,
Perfection is not found below.
Even there, indulged, in humble station,
Learning resides by toleration;
No law forbids the youth to read;
For sense, no tortures are decreed;
There study injures but the name,
And meets no punishment, but shame."
Thus reasoning, Dick goes forth to find
A College suited to his mind;
But bred in distant woods, the Clown
Brings all his country-airs to town;
The odd address with awkward grace,
That bows with all-averted face;
The half heard compliments, whose note
Is swallowed in the trembling throat;
The stiffen'd gait, the drawling tone,
By which his native place is known;
The blush, that looks, by vast degrees,
Too much like modesty to please:
The proud displays of awkward dress,
That all the Country-fop express,
The suit right gay, though much belated,
Whose fashion's superannuated;
The watch, depending far in state,
Whose iron chain might form a grate;
The silver buckle, dread to view,
O'ershad'wing all the clumsy shoe;
The white-glov'd hand, that tries to peep
From ruffle, full five inches deep;
With fifty odd affairs beside,
The foppishness of country-pride.
Poor Dick! though first thy airs provoke
The obstrep'rous laugh and scornful joke,
Doomed all the ridicule to stand,
While each gay dunce shall lend a hand;
Yet let not scorn dismay thy hope
To shine a Witling and a Fop.
Blessed impudence the prize shall gain,
And bid thee sigh no more in vain.
Thy varied dress shall quickly show
At once the spendthrift and the Beau.
With pert address and noisy tongue,
That scorns the fear of prating wrong,
Amongst listening coxcombs shall thou shine,
And every voice shall echo thine.
As when, disjointed from the stock,
We view with scorn the shapeless block,
The skilful statuary hews us
The wood in any form he chooses;
So shall the arts of Fops in town
From thee smooth off the rugged clown,
The rubbish of thy mien shall clear,
Till all the Beau in pomp appear.
How blessed the brainless Fop, whose praise
Is doomed to grace these happy days,
When wellbred Vice can genius teach,
And fame is placed in Folly's reach;
Impertinence all tastes can hit,
And every Rascal is a Wit.
The lowest dunce, without despairing,
May learn the true sublime, of swearing,
Learn the nice art of jests obscene,
(While Ladies wonder what they mean)
The heroism of brazen lungs,
The rhet'ric of eternal tongues;
While whim usurps the name of spirit,
And impudence takes place of merit,
And every moneyed Clown and Dunce
Commences Gentleman at once.
For now, by easy rules of trade,
Mechanic Gentlemen are made!
From handycrafts of fashion born;
Those very arts so much their scorn.
To tailors half themselves they owe,
Who make the clothes, that make the Beau.
Lo! from the seats, where (Fops to bless)
Learned Artists fix the forms of dress,
And sit in consultation grave,
On folded skirt, or straightened sleeve,
The Coxcomb trips with sprightly haste,
In all the flush of modern taste:
Often turning, if the day be fair,
To view his shadow's graceful air;
Wellpleas'd with eager eye runs over
The laced suit glittring gay before;
The ruffle, where from opened vest
The rubied brooch adorns the breast;
The coat with lengthening waist behind,
Whose short skirts dangle in the wind;
The modish hat, whose breadth contains
The measure of its owner's brains;
The stockings gay with silken hues;
The little toe-encircling shoes;
The cane, on whose carved top is shown
And head just emblem of his own;
While wrapped in self, with lofty stride,
His little heart elate with pride,
He struts in all the joys of show,
That Tailors give, or Beaus can know.
And who for Beauty need repine,
That Is sold at every Barber's sign;
Nor lies in features or complexion,
But curls disposed in meet direction,
With strong pomatum's grateful odor,
And quantum sufficit of powder?
These charms can shed a sprightly grace,
Over the dull eye and clumsy face;
While the trim Dancing-master's art
Shall gestures, trips and bows impart,
Give the gay piece its final touches,
And lend those airs, would lure a Duchess.
Thus shines the form, nor aught behind,
The gifts that deck the Coxcomb's mind;
Then hear the daring muse disclose
The sense and Piety of Beaus.
To grace his speech, let France bestow
A set of compliments for show;
Land of Politeness! that affords
The treasure of newfangled words,
And endless quantities disburses
Of bows and compliments and curses:
The soft address, with airs so sweet,
That cringes at the Ladies feet;
The pert, vivacious, playhouse style,
That wakes the gay assembly's smile;
Jests that his brother-beaus may hit,
And pass with young Coquettes for wit,
And, prized by Fops of true discerning,
Outface the pedantry of learning.
Yet Learning too shall lend its aid,
To fill the Coxcomb's spongy head,
And studious often he shall peruse
The labors of the Modern Muse.
From endless loads of Novels gain
Soft, simpring tales of amorous pain,
With double meanings, neat and handy,
From Rochester and Tristram Shandy.
The blundring aid of weak Reviews,
That forge the fetters of the muse,
Shall give him airs of criticizing
On faults of books, he never set eyes on.
The Magazines shall teach the fashion,
And commonplace of conversation,
And where his knowledge fails, afford
The aid of many a sounding word.
Then least Religion he should need,
Of pious Hume, Voltaire and Bolingbroke are three of the most noted Deistical
Writers, whose admirers are more numerous, even in America, than perhaps many
of our honest Country-readers may imagine. It will be easily discerned, that my
design was to draw a complete character of a first-rate Coxcomb, and not to
confine myself merely to the inferior, second-handed, imitative Beaus of this
country, among whom, though we can boast of some promising Geniuses, yet
Foppery seems to be but just cleverly dawning.
Hume he will learn his creed,
By strongest demonstration shown,
Evince that nothing can be known;
Take arguments, unvex'd by doubt,
On Voltaire's trust, or go without;
Against Scripture rail in modern lore,
As thousand fools have railed before:
Or pleased, a nicer art display
TO expound its doctrines all away,
Suit it to modern taste and fashions
By various notes and emendations;
The rules the ten commands contain,
With new provisos well explain;
Prove all Religion was but fashion,
Beneath the Jewish dispensation,
A ceremonious law, deep-hooded
In types and figures long exploded;
Its stubborn fetters all unfit
For these free times of Gospel Light,
This Rake's Millennium, since the day
When Sabbaths first were done away;
Since Shame, the worst of deadly fiends,
On Virtue, as its 'Squire, attends;
Since Pandar-conscience holds the door,
And lewdness is a vice no more;
And fools may, swift as crimes convey 'em,
Flee to their place, and no man stay 'em.
Alike his poignant with displays
The darkness of the former days,
When men the paths of duty sought,
And owned what revelation taught;
Ever human reason grew so bright,
Men could see all things by its light,
And summoned Scripture to appear,
And stand before its bar severe,
To clear its page from charge of fiction,
And answer pleas of contradiction;
Ever myst'ries first were held in scorn,
Or Bolingbroke, or Hume were born.
And now the Fop, with great energy,
Levels at Priestcraft and the Clergy,
At holy cant and godly prayers,
And bigot's hypocritic airs;
Musters each vet'ran jest to aid,
Calls Piety the Parson's trade;
Cries out it is shame, past all abiding,
The world should still be so Priest-ridden;
Applauds free thought, that scorns control,
And generous nobleness of soul,
That acts its pleasure, good or evil,
And fears nor Deity, nor Devil.
These standing topics never fail
To prompt our little Wits to rail,
With mimic droll'ry of grimace,
And pleased impertinence of face,
Against Virtue arm their feeble forces,
And sound the charge in peals of curses.
Blessed be his ashes! (under ground
If any particles be found)
Who, friendly to the Coxcomb-race,
First taught these arts of commonplace,
These topics fine, on which the Beau
May all his little wits bestow,
Secure the simple laugh to raise,
And gain the Dunce's palm of praise.
For where is the theme that Beaus could hit
With least similitude of wit,
Did not Religion and the Priest
Supply materials for the jest?
The poor in purse, with metals vile
For current coins, the world beguile;
The poor in brain, for genuine wit
Pass off a viler counterfeit;
(While various thus their doom appears,
These lose their souls, and those their ears)
The want of fancy, whim supplies,
And native humor, mad caprice;
Loud noise for argument goes off,
For mirth polite, the ribald's scoff;
For sense, lewd droll'ries entertain us,
And wit is mimick'd by profaneness.
Thus 'twixt the Tailor and the Player,
And Hume, and Tristram and Voltaire,
Complete in modern trim arrayed.
The Clock work-Gentleman is made;
As thousand Fops ever Dick have shone,
In airs, which Dick ever long shall own.
But not immediate from the Clown,
He gains this zenith of renown;
Slow dawns the Coxcomb's opening ray:
Rome was not finished in a day.
Perfection is the work of time;
Gradual he mounts the height sublime;
First shines abroad with bolder grace,
In suits of second-handed lace,
And learns by rote, like studious play'rs,
The fop's infinity of airs;
Till merit, to full ripeness grown,
By constancy attains the crown.
Now should our tale at large proceed
Here I might tell, and you might read
At college next how Dick went on,
And prated much and studied none;
Yet shone with fair, unborrow'd ray,
And steered where nature led the way.
What though each academic Science
Bade all his efforts bold defiance!
What though in Algebra his station
Was negative in each equation;
Though in Astronomy surveyed,
His constant course was retrograde;
Over Newton's system though he sleeps,
And finds his wits in dark eclipse!
His talents proved of highest price
At all the arts of Cards and Dice;
His genius turned, with greatest skill,
To whist, loo, cribbage and quadrille,
And taught, to every rival's shame,
Each nice distinction of the game.
As noonday sun, the case is plain,
Nature has nothing made in vain.
The blind mole cannot fly; it is found
His genius leads him under ground;
The man, that was not made to think,
Was born to game, and swear, and drink:
Let Fops defiance bid to satire,
Mind Tully's rule, and follow nature.
Yet here the Muse, of Dick, must tell
He shone in active seenes as well;
The foremost place in riots held;
In all the gifts of noise excelled;
His tongue, the bell, whose rattling din would
Summon the Rake's nocturnal synod;
Swore with a grace, that seemed designed
To emulate the infernal kind,
Nor only make their realms his due,
But learn, betimes, their language too;
And well expert in arts polite,
Drank wine by quarts to mend his sight,
(For he that drinks, till all things reel,
Sees double, and that is twice as well)
And ever its force confined his feet,
Led out his mob to scour the street;
Made all authority his may game,
And strained his little wits to plague 'em.
Then, every crime atoned with ease,
Pro meritis received degrees;
And soon, as fortune chanced to fall,
His Father died and left him all:
Then, bent to gain all modern fashions,
He sailed to visit foreign nations,
Resolved, by toil unawed to import,
The follies of the British Court;
But in his course o'erlook'd whatever
Was learned or valued, rich or rare.
As fire electric draws together
Each hair and straw and dust and feather,
The traveled Dunce collects betimes
The levities of other climes;
And when long toil has given success,
Returns his native land to bless,
A Patriot-fop, that struts by rules,
And Knight of all the shire of fools.
The praise of other learning lost,
To know the world is all his boast,
By conduct teach our Country-wigeons,
How Coxcombs shine in other regions,
Display his traveled airs and fashions,
And scoff at College-educations.
Whoever at College points his sneer,
Proves that himself learned nothing there,
And wisely makes his honest aim
To pay the mutual debt of shame.
Mean while our Hero's anxious care
Was all employed to please the Fair;
With vows of love and airs polite,
Often sighing at some Lady's feet;
Pleased, while he thus in form addressed her,
With his own gracefulness of gesture,
And gaudy flattery, that displays
A studied elegance of phrase.
So gay at balls the Coxcomb shone,
He thought the Female world his own.
By beauty's charms he never was fired;
He flattered where the world admired.
Himself (so well he prized desert)
Possessed his own unrivaled heart;
Nor charms, nor chance, nor change could move
The firm foundations of his love:
His heart, so constant and so wise,
Pursued what Sages old advise,
Bade others seek for fame or pelf;
His only study was Himself.
Yet Dick allowed the Fair, desert,
Nor wholly scorned them in his heart;
There was an end (as often he said)
For which alone the Sex were made,
Whereto, of nature's rules observant,
He strove to render them subservient;
And held the Fair by inclination,
Were formed exactly for their station,
That real virtue never could find
Her lodging in a female mind;
Quoted from Pope, in phrase so smart,
That all the Sex are "rakes at heart,"
And praised Mahomet's sense, who holds
That Women never were born with souls.
Thus blessed, our Hero saw his name
Ranked in the foremot lists of fame.
What though the learned, the good, the wise,
His light, affected airs despise!
What though the Fair, of higher mind,
With brighter thought and sense refined,
Whose fancy rose on nobler wing,
Scorned the vain, gilt, gay, noisy thing!
Each light Coquette spread forth her charms,
And lured the Hero to her arms.
For Beaus and light Coquettes, by fate
Were each designed the other's mate,
By instinct love, for each may find
It Is likeness in the other's mind;
Then let the wiser sort desert 'em,
For 'twere a sin to try to part 'em.
Nor did the coxcomb-loving climate
To these alone his praises limit.
Each gayer Fop of modern days
Allowed to Dick the foremost praise,
Borrowed his style, his airs, grimace,
And aped his modish form of dress.
Even Some, with sense endued, felt hopes
And raised ambition to be fops:
But Men of sense, it is fixed by fate,
Are Coxcombs but of second rate.
The pert and lively Dunce alone
Can steer the course that Dick has shown;
The lively Dunce alone can climb
The summit, where he shines sublime.
But ah! how short the fairest name
Stands on the slippery steep of fame!
The noblest heights we are soonest giddy on:
The sun never stays in his meridian;
The brightest stars must quickly set;
And Dick has deeply run in debt.
Now what avails his splendid show,
With all the arts, that grace the Beau!
Not all his oaths can Duns dismay,
Or deadly Bailiffs fright away;
Not all his compliments can bail,
Or minuets dance him from the jail.
Law not the least respect can give
To the laced coat, or ruffled sleeve.
Off fly at once, in saddest woe,
The dress and trappings of the Beau;
His splendid ornaments must fall,
And all is lost; for these were all.
What then remains? in health's decline,
By lewdness, luxury and wine,
Worn by disease, with purse too shallow,
To lead in fashions, or to follow,
The meteor's gaudy light is gone;
Lone Age with hasty step comes on;
The charms he once with pride displayed,
All vanished into empty shade;
And only left, in tawdry show,
The superannuated Beau.
How pale the palsied Fop appears,
Low-shivring in the vale of years;
The ghost of all his former days,
When folly lent the ear of praise.
And Beaus with pleased attention hung
On accents of his chatt'ring tongue.
Now all those days of pleasure over,
That chatt'ring tongue must prate no more.
From every place, that blessed his hopes,
He Is elbow'd out by younger Fops.
Each pleasing thought unknown, that chears
The sadness of declining years,
In lonely age he sinks forlorn,
Of all, and even himself, the scorn.
The Coxcomb's course were wondrous clever,
Would health and money last forever,
Did Conscience never break the charm,
Nor fears of future worlds alarm.
But oh, since youth and years decay,
And life's vain follies fleet away,
Since Age has no respect for Beaus,
And Death the gaudy scene must close,
Happy the Man, whose early bloom
Provides for endless years to come;
That learning seeks, whose useful gain
Repays the course of studious pain,
Whose fame the thankful age shall raise,
And future times repeat its praise;
Attains that heartfelt peace of mind,
To all the will of heaven resigned,
Which calms in youth, the blast of rage,
Adds sweetest hope to sinking age,
With valued use prolongs the breath,
And gives a placid smile to death.
Then let us scorn the praise that springs
From gaudy, sublunary things.
Hate the vain joys, that vice can claim,
To nobler thoughts exalt our aim,
With ardour seek the immortal prize,
And seize our portion in the skies.
ADVERTISEMENT.
To be published by the next Commencement at farthest, The Progress of DULLNESS,
PART THIRD and LAST: Otherwise called, The Progress of COQUETRY, OR An Essay on
Female EDUCATION; For the use of the Ladies and their Parents.


