A POEM ON DIVINE REVELATION; BEING AN EXERCISE DELIVERED At the PUBLIC
COMMENCEMENT AT NASSAU-HALL, SEPTEMBER 28. 1774.

By the same Person, who on a similar occasion, Sept. 25. 1771. delivered a
small Poem on the rising Glory of America.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY R. AITKEN, BOOKSELLER, OPPOSITE THE
LONDON-COFFEE-HOUSE, FRONT-STREET.

M.DCC.LXXIV.

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following Poem, or as perhaps it may be better styled
Poetical Oration, may seem to have been rather unhappy in the choice of his
subject, which being a good deal historical, did not admit of much poetic dress
or ornament, nor gave much scope to fancy or imagination to exert itself, that
in which the great strength of a poet lies. With respect to this he would beg
leave to observe, that the subject was chosen perhaps happily enough, as the
foundation of an Exercise in an institution under the patronage of gentlemen
distinguished as friends to Revelation, and on an occasion when the greater
number of them were convened.

In the second place it may be objected, that an imitation of the poet Milton
may be traced through the whole of the performance, though the Author has not
been able to attain to any thing of the spirit of that immortal bard. To this
he has only to reply, that an imitation of great originals is placed by
Longinus among the sources of good writing. He therefore conceives himself free
from censure on account of any imitation of the poet Milton, which may be seen
in his performance, though he is sensible of his unhappiness in not having been
able to attain to any degree of his excellent spirit. This however is a
misfortune common to him with many honest writers, and for which he throws
himself on the candor of the Public.

ARGUMENT.
The introduction, complimenting the college and the assembly convened on the
day of commencement. -- The subject proposed. -- A view of divine revelation
from its earliest dawn after the fall of Adam, to its fuller splendour in the
writings of the prophets. -- From this source the heathen philosophers received
much light and information. -- Reason of itself unable to give the knowledge of
the truth. -- The meridian brightness of divine revelation and its general
diffusion at the coming of the Savior. -- Its happy influence at that period,
in banishing heathen superstition, restraining the ferocity of war, and giving
a new range to poesy and eloquence; life and immortality being brought to
light. -- A short hint of the first opposition to the gospel. -- Darkness of
Popery which came upon the west. -- Mohammedan delusion which about the sixth
century took place in the east. -- Some countries of Europe emerging from
Popish superstition, Bohemia, etc. -- Reformation in England. -- The light of
revelation rising on America. -- Rekindled in the east. -- Mohammedan imposture
destroyed. -- The Jews confessing the Messiah. -- Pagan idolatry and ignorance
removed -- The glory with which revelation shall yet appear on this continent.
-- Divine knowledge covering the earth as the waters the sea. -- Its streams
flowing back at the last scene of things to their first source, and mixing with
the bright floods of celestial day^ -- The conclusion valedictory to
NASSAU-HALL, the place of the author's education.

AN EXERCISE DELIVERED At the PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT AT NASSAU-HALL, September 28.
1774.
THIS is a day of happiness, sweet peace,
And heavenly sunshine; upon which convened
In full assembly fair, once more we view,
And hail with voice expressive of the heart,
Patrons and sons of this illustrious hall.
This hall more worthy of its rising fame
Than hall on mountain or romantic hill,
Where Druid bards sang to the hero's praise,
While round their woods and barren heaths was heard
The shrill calm echo of the enchanting shell.
Than all those halls and lordly palaces
Where in the days of chivalry, each knight,
And baron brave in military pride
Shone in the brass and burning steel of war;
For in this hall more worthy of a strain
No envious sound forbidding peace is heard,
Fierce song of battle kindling martial rage
And desperate purpose in heroic minds:
But sacred truth fair science and each grace
Of virtue born; health, elegance and ease
And temperate mirth in social intercourse
Convey rich pleasure to the mind; and often
The sacred muse in heaven-breathing song
Does wrap the soul in ecstasy divine,
Inspiring joy and sentiment which not
The tale of war or song of Druids gave.
The song of Druids or the tale of war
With martial vigor every breast inspired,
With valor fierce and love of deathless fame;
But here a rich and splendid throng convened
From many a distant city and fair town,
Or rural seat by shore or mountain-stream,
Breathe joy and blessing to the human race,
Give countenance to arts themselves have known,
Inspire the love of heights themselves have reached,
Of noble science to enlarge the mind,
Of truth and virtue to adorn the soul,
And make the human nature grow divine.
Oh could the muse on this auspicious day
Begin a song of more majestic sound,
Or touch the lyre on some sublimer key,
Meet entertainment for the noble mind.
How shall the muse from this poetic bower
So long removed, and from this happy hill,
Where every grace and every virtue dwells,
And where the springs of knowledge and of thought
In riv'lets clear and gushing streams flow down
Attempt a strain? How sing in rapture high
Or touch in vari'd melody the lyre
The lyre so long neglected and each strain
Unmeditated, and long since forgot?
But yet constrained on this occasion sweet
To this famed hall and this assembly fair
With comely presence honoring the day,
She fain would pay a tributary strain.
A purer strain though not of equal praise
To that which Fingal heard when Ossian sung
With voice high raised in Selma hall of shells;
Or that which Pindar on the Elean plain,
Sang with immortal skill and voice divine,
When native Thebes and every Grecian state
Poured forth her sons in rapid chariot race,
To shun the goal and reach the glorious palm.
HE sang the pride of some ambitious chief,
For olive crowns and wreaths of glory won;
I sing the rise of that all glorious light,
Whose sacred dawn the aged fathers saw
By faith's clear eye, through many a cloud obscure
And heavy mist between: they saw it beam
From Judah's royal tribe, they saw it shine
Over Judah's happy land, and bade the hills,
The rocky hills and barren valleys smile,
The desert blossom and the wilds rejoice.
This is that light and revelation pure,
Which Jacob saw and in prophetic view,
Did hail its author from the skies, and bade
The scepter wait with sov'reignty and sway
On Judah's hand till Shiloh came. That light
Which Beor's son in clearer vision saw,
Its beams sore piercing his malignant eye;
But yet constrained by the eternal truth
Confessed its origin and hailed its rise,
Fresh as a star from Judah's sacred line.
This, Amos' son touched with seraphic fire
In after times beheld. He saw it beam
From Judah's royal tribe; he saw it shine
Over Judah's happy land, and bade the hills,
The rocky hills and barren valleys smile,
The desert blossom and the wilds rejoice.
This is that light which purifies the soul,
From mist obscure, of envy, hate, and pride;
Bids love celestial in the bosom glow,
Fresh kindling up the intellectual eye
Of faith divine, in beatific view
Of that high glory and seraphic bliss,
Which he who reigns invisible, shall give
To wait on virtue in the realms of day.
This is that light which from remotest times
Shone to the just; gave sweet serenity,
And sunshine to the soul, of each wise sage,
Famed patriarch, and holy man of God,
Who in the infancy of time did walk
With step unerring, through those dreary shades,
Which veiled the world ever yet the golden sun
Of revelation beamed. Seth, Enos, and
The family of him preserved from death
By flood of waters. Abram and that swain
Who erst exiled in Midian did sing
The world from chaos rising, and the birth
Of various nature in the earth, or sea,
Or element of air, or heaven above.
This is that light which on fair Zion hill
Descending gradual, in full radiance beamed
Over Canaan's happy land. Her favorite seers
Had intercourse divine with this pure source,
And often from them a stream of light did slow,
To each adjoining vale and desert plain,
Lost in the umbrage of dark heathen shades.
'Twas at this stream the fabling poets drank
And sang how heaven and earth from chaos rose;
'Twas at this stream the wiser sages drank
And straightway knew the soul immortal lives
Beyond the grave and all the wrecks of time.
From Judah's sacred hills a partial ray
Extraneous, visited and cheered the gloom
Spread over the shaded earth; yet more than half
In superstition and the dreams of night
Each hoary sage by long experience wise,
And high philosopher of learning famed
Lay buried deep shut from the light of day.
Shut from the light of revelation clear
In devious path they wandered often,
Nor could strong reason with the partial beam
Of revelation, wholly dissipate
The midnight horrors of so dark an age.
Vain were their searches, and their reason vain,
Else whence the visionary tales received,
Of numerous deities in earth, or heaven
Or sea, or river, or the shades profound
Of Erebus, dark kingdom of the dead.
Weak deities of fabled origin
From king or hero, to the skies advanced
For sanguinary appetite, and skill
In cruel feats of arms, and tyranny
Over every right, and privilege of man.
Vain were their searches, and their reason vain,
Else whence the sculptured image of a god,
And marble bust adored as deity,
Altar and hecatomb prepared for these,
Or human sacrifice when hecatomb
Consumed in vain with ceremony dire,
And rites abhorred, denied the wished success.
Reason is dark, else why heroic deemed
Fell suicide, as if 'twere fortitude
And higher merit to recede from life,
Shunning the ills of poverty, or pain,
Or wasting sickness, or the victor's sword,
Than to support with patience fully tried
As Job, thence equaled with him in renown.
Shut from the light of revelation clear
The world lay hid in shades, and reason's lamp
Served but to show how dark it was; but now
The joyous time with hasty steps advanced,
When truth no more should with a partial ray
Shine on the shaded earth; now on swift wings
The rosy hours brought on in beauty mild,
The dayspring from on high, and from the top
Of some fair mount Chaldean shepherds view
That orient star which Beor's son beheld,
From Aram east, and marked its lucid ray,
Shedding sweet influence on Judah's land.
Now over the plain of Bethl'em to the swains
Who kept their flocks beneath the dews of night,
A light appears expressive of that day
More general, which over the shaded earth
Breaks forth, and in the radiance of whose beams,
The humble shepherd, and the river-swain
By Jordan stream, or Galilea's lake,
(a see each truth and paradox explained,
Which not each wise philosopher of Greece,
Could tell, nor sage of India, nor the sons
Of Zoroaster, in deep secrets skilled.
Such light on Canaan shone but not confined
With partial ray to Judah's favored land,
Each vale and region to the utmost bound
Of habitable earth, distant or nigh
Soon finds a gleam of this celestial day:
Famed Persia's mountains and rough Bactria's woods
And Media's vales and Shinar's distant plain:
The Lybian desert near Cyrene smiles
And Ethiopia hails it to her shores.
Arabia drinks the luster of its ray
Than fountain sweeter, or the cooling brook
Which laves her burning sands; than stream long sought
Through desert flowing and the scorched plain
To Sheba's troop or Tema's caravan.
Egypt beholds the dawn of this fair morn
And boasts her rites mysterious no more;
Her hidden learning wrapped in symbols strange
Of hieroglyphic character, engraved
On marble pillar, or the mountain rock,
Or pyramid enduring many an age.
She now receives asserted and explained
That holy law, which on mount Sinai writ
By God's own singer, and to Moses given,
And to the chosen seed, a rule of life.
And strict obedience due; but now once more
Engraved on the living tablet of the heart,
And deep impressed by energy divine,
Is legible through an eternal age.
North of Judea now this day appears
On Syria west, and in each city fair
Full many a church of noble fame does rise.
In Antioch the seat of Syrian kings,
And old Damascus, where Hazael reigned.
Now Cappadocia Mithridates' realm,
And poison-bearing Pontus, whose deep shades
Were shades of death, admit the light of truth.
In Asia less seven luminaries rise,
Bright lights, which with celestial vigor burn,
And give the day in fullest glory round.
There Symrna shines, and Thyatira there,
There Ephesus a sister light appears,
And Pergamus with kindred glory burns:
She burns enkindled with a purer flame
Than Troy of old, when Grecian kings combined
Had set her gates on fire: The Hellespont
And all the Egean sea shone to the blaze.
But now more west the gracious day serene
On Athens rising, throws a dark eclipse
On that high learning by her sages taught,
In each high school of philosophic fame;
Vain wisdom, useless sophistry condemned,
As ignorance and foolishness of men.
Let her philosophers debate no more
In the Lyceum, or the Stoics porch,
Holding high converse, but in error lost
Of pain, and happiness, and fate supreme.
Fair truth from heaven draws all their reasoning high
In captive chains bound at her chariot wheels.
Now Rome imperial, mistress of the world
Drinks the pure luster of the orient ray
Assuaging her fierce thirst of bloody war,
Dominion boundless, victory and fame;
Each bold centurion, and each praetor finds
A nobler empire to subdue themselves.
From Rome the mistress of the world in peace,
Far to the north the golden light ascends;
To Gaul and Britain and the utmost bound
Of Thule famous in poetic song,
Victorious there where not Rome's consuls brave,
Heroes, or conquering armies, ever came.
Far in the artic skies a light is seen,
Unlike that sun, which shall ere long retreat,
And leave their hills one half the year in shades.
Or that Aurora which the sailor sees
Beneath the pole in dancing beams of light,
Playing its gambols on the northern hills.
That light is vain and gives no genial heat,
To warm the tenants of those frozen climes,
Or give that heavenly vigor to the soul,
Which truth divine and revelation brings;
And but for which each heart must still remain,
Hard as the rock on Scandanavia's shore,
Cold as the ice which bridges up her streams,
Fierce as the storm which tempests all her waves.
Thus in its dawn did sacred truth prevail,
In either hemisphere from north to south,
From east to west through the long tract of day.
From Shinar's plain to Thule's utmost isle,
From Persia's bay to Scandanavia's shores.
Cheered by its ray now every valley smiles,
And every lawn smote by its morning beam.
Now every hill reflects a purer ray,
Than when Aurora paints his woods in gold,
Or when the sun first in the orient sky,
Sets thick with gems the dewy mountain's brow.
The earth perceives a sovereign virtue shed
And from each cave, and midnight haunt retires
Dark superstition, with her vot'ries skilled,
In potent charm, or spell of magic power;
In augury, by voice, or flight of birds,
Or b^ding sign at morn, or noon, or eve,
Portent and prodigy and omen dire.
Each oracle by Demon, or the craft
Of priests, made vocal, can declare no more
Of high renown, and victory secure,
To kings low prostrate at their bloody shrines.
No more with vain uncertainty perplex
Mistaken worshippers, or give unseen
Response ambiguous in some mystic sound,
And hollow murmer from the dark recess.
No more of Lybian Jove; Dodona's oaks,
In sacred grove give prophecy no more.
The infernal deities retire abashed,
Our God himself on earth begins his reign;
Pure revelation beams on every land,
On every heart exerts a sovereign sway,
And makes the human nature grow divine.
Now hideous war forgets one half her rage,
And smoothes her visage horible to view.
Celestial graces better sooth the soul,
Than vocal music, or the charming sound
Of harp or lyre. More than the golden lyre
Which Orpheus tuned in melancholy notes,
Which almost pierced the dull cold ear of death,
And moved the grave to give him back his bride.
Peace with the graces and fair science now
Wait on the gospel ^ar; science improved
Puts on a fairer dress; a fairer form
Now every art assumes; bold eloquence
Moves in a higher sphere than senates grave,
Or mixed assembly, or the hall of kings,
Which erst with pompous panegyric rung.
Vain words and soothing flattery she hates,
And feigned tears, and tongue which silver-tipt
Moves in the cause of wickedness and pride.
She mourns not that fair liberty depressed
Which kings tyrannic can exto^^, but that
Pure freedom of the soul to truth divine
Which first indulged her and with envious hand
Plucked thence, left hideous slavery behind.
She weeps not loss of property on earth,
Nor stirs the multitude to dire revenge
With headlong violence, but soothes the soul
To harmony and peace, bids them aspire
With emulation and pure zeal of heart,
To that high glory in the world unseen,
And crown celestial, which pure virtue gives.
Thus eloquence and poesy divine
A nobler range of sentiment receive;
Life brought to view and immortality,
A recent world through which bold fancy roves,
And gives new magic to the power of song;
For where the streams of revelation flow
Unknown to bards of Helicon, or those
Who on the top of Pindus, or the banks
Of Arethusa and Eurotas strayed,
The poet drinks, and glorying in new strength,
Soars high in rapture of sublimer strains;
Such as that prophet sang who tuned his harp
On Zion hill and with seraphic praise
In psalm and sacred ode by Siloa's brook,
Drew HIS attention who first touched the soul
With taste of harmony, and bade the spheres
Move in rich measure to the songs on high.
Filled with this spirit poesy no more
Adorns that vain mythology believed,
By rude barbarian, and no more receives,
The tale traditional, and hymn profane,
Sung by high genius, basely prostitute.
New strains are heard, such as first in the morn
Of time, were sung by the angelic choirs,
When rising from chaotic state the earth
Orbicular was seen, and over head
The blazing sun, moon, planet* and each light
That gilds the firmament, rushed into view.
Thus did the sun of revelation shine
Full on the earth, and grateful were its beams:
Its beams were grateful to the chosen seed,
To all whose works were worthy of the day.
But creatures lucifuge, whose ways were dark,
Ere this in shades of paganism hid,
Did vent their poison, and malignant breath,
To stain the splendor of the light divine,
Which pierced their cells and brought their deeds to view
Numerous combined of every tongue and tribe,
Made battle proud, and impious war brought on,
Against the chosen sanctified by light.
Riches and power leagued in their train were seen,
Sword, famine, flames and death before them preyed.
Those faithful found, who undismayed did bear
A noble evidence to truth, were slain.
Why should I sing of these or here record,
As if 'twere praise, in poesy or song,
Or sculptured stone, to eternize the names,
Which writ elsewhere in the fair book of life,
Shall live unsullied when each strain shall die:
Shall undefac'd remain when sculptured stone,
And monument, and bust, and storied urn
Perpetuates its sage and king no more.
The power of torture and reproach was vain,
But what not torture or reproach could do,
Dark superstition did in part effect.
That superstition, which saint John beheld,
Rise in thick darkness from the infernal lake.
Locust and scorpion in the smoke ascend,
False teacher, heretic, and Antichrist.
The noon day sun is dark'ned in the sky,
The moon forbears to give her wonted light.
Full many a century the darkness ruled,
With heavier gloom than once on Egypt came,
Save that on some lone coast, or desert isle,
Where separate far a chosen spirit dwelt,
A Goshen shone, with partial-streaming ray.
Night on the one side settles dark; on Rome,
It settles dark, and every land more west
Is wrapped in shades. Night on the east comes down
With gloom Tartarean, and in part it rose
From Tartary beneath the dusky pole.
The ruthless Turk, and Saracen in arms,
O'er-run the land the gospel once illum'd;
The holy land Judea once so named,
And Syria west where many churches rose.
Those golden luminaries are removed,
Which once in Asia shone. Athens no more
For truth and learning famed. Corinth obscured,
Ionia mourns through all her sea-girt isles.
But yet once more the light of truth shall shine
In this obscure sojourn; shall shoot its beam
In morning beauty mild, over hill and dale.
See in Bohemia and the lands more west
The heavenly ray of revelation shines,
Fresh kindling up true love and purest zeal.
Britannia next beholds the risen day
In reformation bright; cheerful she hails
It from her snow-white cliffs, and bids her sons,
Rise from the mist of popery obscure.
Her worthier sons, whom not Rome's pontiff high,
Nor king with arbitrary sway could move.
Those mightier who with constancy untamed,
Did quench the violence of fire, at death
Did smile, and maugre every pain, of bond,
Cold dark imprisonment, and scourge severe,
By hell-born popery devised, held fast
The Christian hope firm anchor of the soul.
Or those who shunning that fell rage of war,
And persecution dire, when civil power,
Leagued in with sacerdotal sway triumphed,
Over every conscience, and the lives of men,
Did brave the Atlantic deep and through its storms
Sought these Americ shores: these happier shores
Where birds of calm delight to play, where not
Rome's pontiff high, nor arbitrary king,
Leagued in with sacerdotal sway are known.
But peace and freedom linked together dwell,
And reformation in full glory shines.
Oh for a muse of more exalted wing,
To celebrate those men who planted first
The christian church in these remotest lands;
From those high plains where spreads a colony,
Gen'^ (...) and free, from Massachusett-shores,
To the cold lakes margin'd with snow: from that
Long dreary tract of shady woods and hills,
Where Hudson's icy stream ^^lls his cold wave,
To those more sunny bowers where zephyrs breath,
And round which flow in circling current swift
The Delaware and Susquehannah streams.
Thence to those smiling plains where Chesapeak
Spreads her maternal arms, encompassing
In (...) embrace, full many a settlement
Wh^^ ^pulence, with hospitality,
And (...) manners, and the living plant
Of scien^^ ^^ooming, sets their glory high The author has a principal
reference to an infant Seminary at Back-Creek Somerset County Maryland, where a
handsome building is erected, capable of accommodating with the greatest
convenience, near 100 Scholars.

This institution, though of few years standing has risen to considerable
eminence, and is still carried on with a spirit, which does honor to the
Province. It is situated in a part of the Colony very distant from the
Seminaries of reputation to the Northward, and near the Bay of Chesapeak into
which many rivers empty themselves from Maryland and Virginia on the Western
shore and afford an easy communication. It was very much wanted and is of real
service to the advancement of virtue and science in that part of America.

It may not perhaps be impertinent to give some view of the general plan upon
which this School is conducted. A board of Trustees cosisting of 15 Gentlemen
of the first reputation in the county, convene once every three months, or
oftener if necessary, in order to inspect the situation and regulate the
affairs of the school. A steward is chosen by them who lays in provisions of
the best kind and at the lowest rates, for which he brings in his bill at the
expiration of a year: This with the wages of the servants and principal Cook is
equally assessed on the students. From the great plenty and cheapness of
provisions in this settlement, and the economy of the Trustees in managing the
School, the expenses of education seldom amount to more than L 18 per annum --
Board L 13 -- Tuition L 5.

The plan of education is the same with that pursued in other schools of
character, and therefore needs not be mentioned. With respect to the internal
regulation it may suffice to observe, that the Bell rings for prayers generally
at sunrise; for study at the interval of half an hour. The remaining part of
the day is divided between study and vacation. In the evening the bell rings
for prayers, after which the students retire to their chambers.

The school is placed in a genteel neighborhood, having in view the dwellings
of several Gentlemen of considerable property, who are constantly attentive to
its wants, and ready to do the students every good office in their power.

It may now be asked why so particular in the account of this institution, and
what has it to do with an exercise delivered at Nassau-Hall in the province of
New Jersey? The author has principally this to reply, that on residing some
time in the county of Somerset, he became acquainted with the merit of the
school, and thought himself under an obligation as a wellwisher to mankind, to
recommend it to the Public.


.
Thence to Virginia, sister colony,
Liberal in sentiment, and breathing high,
The noble ardour of the freeborn soul.
To Carolina thence, and that warm clime
Where Georgia south in summer heat complains,
And distant thence toward the burning line.
These men deserve our song, and those who still,
With industry severe, and steady aim
Diffuse the light in this late dreary land,
In whose lone wastes and solitudes forlorn,
Death long sat brooding with his raven wing.
Who many 'a structure of great fame have raised,
College, and school, upon the Atlantic coast,
Or inland town, through every province wide,
Which rising up like pyramids of fire,
Give light and glory to the western world.
These men we honor, and their names shall last
Sweet in the mouths and memory of men;
Or if vain man unconscious of their worth,
Refuse a tear when in some lonely vale
He sees those faithful said; each breeze shall sigh,
Each passing gale shall mourn, each tree shall bend
Its heavy head, in sorrow over their tombs,
And some sad stream run ever weeping by.
Weep not O stream, nor mourn thou passing gale,
Beneath those grassy tombs their bodies lie,
But they have risen from each labor here
To make their entrance on a nobler stage.
What though with us they walk the humble vale
Of indigence severe, with want oppressed?
Riches belong not to their family,
Nor sloth luxurious nor the pride of kings;
But truth meek-ey'd and warm benevolence
Wisdom's high breeding in her sons revered
Bespeaks them each the children Judges viii 48.
of a king,
The christian truth of origin divine,
Grows not beneath the shade of civil power,
Riches or wealth accompanied with pride;
Nor shall it bloom transplanted to that soil,
Where persecution, in malignant streams,
Flows out to water it; black streams and foul
Which from the lake of Tartarus break forth,
The sickly tide of Acheron which flows,
With putrid waves through the infernal shades.
This plant of heaven loves the gentle beams,
Of truth and meekness, and the kindly dew
Which sell on Zion hill; it loves the care
Of humble shepherds, and the rural swain,
And tended by their hands it flourishes
With fruit and blossoms, and soon gives a shades,
Beneath which every traveller shall rest,
Safe from the burning east wind and the sun.
A vernal shade not withering like the gourd
Of him who warned Nineveh, but like
The aged oaks immortal on the plain
Of Kadesh, or tall cedars on the hill
Of Lebanon, and Hermon's shady top.
High is their fame through each succeeding age
Who build the walls of Zion upon earth.
Let mighty kings and potentates combine,
To raise a pyramid, which neither storm,
Nor sea indignant, nor the raging fire,
Nor time can waste, or from firm basis move.
Or let them strive by counsel or by arms,
To fix a throne, and in imperial sway,
Build up a kingdom shadowing the earth,
Unmoved by thunder or impetuous storm
Of civil war, dark treason, or the shock
Of hostile nations, in dire league combined.
They build a kingdom of a nobler date,
Who build the kingdom of the Savior God.
This, not descending rain, nor mighty storm,
Nor sea indignant, nor the raging fire,
Nor time shall waste, or from firm basis move.
Founded on earth its head does reach the skies,
Secure from thunder, and impetuous storm,
Of civil war, dark treason, or the shock
Of hostile nations in dire league combined.
This still shall flourish and survive the date,
Of each wide state and empire of the earth
Hid in sepulchral monument of kings,
Shall bear an equal date with that true light,
Which shone from earth to heaven, and which shall shine
Up through eternity, and be the light
Of heaven, the new Jerusalem above.
This light from heaven shall yet illume the earth
And give its beams to each benighted land
Now with new glory lighted up again.
Then ruthless Turk and Saracen shall know
The fallacies of him Medina bred,
And whose vain tomb, in Mecca they adore.
Then Jews shall view the great Messiah come,
And each rent tribe in caravan by land,
Or ship by sea, shall visit Palestine
Thrice holy then, with vile Idolatry
No more defiled, altar on mountain head,
Green shady hill, or idol of the grove.
For there a light appears, with which compared,
That was a twilight shed by rite obscure,
And ceremony dark and sacrifice
Dimly significant of things to come.
Blessed with this light no more they deviate
In out-way path; distinguished no more
By school or sect, Essene or Saducee,
Cairite or Scribe of Pharisaic mould.
Jew and Samaritan debate no more,
Whether on Gerizim or Zion hill
They shall bow down. Above Moriah's mount
Each eye is raised to him, whose temple is
The infinitude of space, whom earth, sea, sky
And heaven itself cannot contain. No more
The noise of battle shall be heard, or shout
Of war by heathen princes waged; There Is naught
Shall injure or destroy; they shall not hurt
In all my holy mountain says the Lord.
The earth in peace and every shadow fled,
Bespeaks Emmanuel's happy reign when Jew,
And kindred Gentile shall no more contend,
Save in the holier strife of hymn and song,
To him who leads captive captivity,
Who shall collect the sons of Jacob's line,
And bring the fullness of the Gentiles in.
Thrice happy day when Gentiles are brought in
Complete and full; when with its genial beams
The day shall break on each benighted land
Which yet in darkness and in vision lies:
On Scythia and Tartary's bleak hills;
On mount Imaus, and Hyrcanian cliffs
Of Caucasus, and dark Iberian dales;
Japan and China, and the sea-girt isles
The ancient Ophir deemed; for there rich gems
And diamond pearl, and purest gold is found.
Thrice happy day when this whole earth shall feel
The sacred ray of revelation shed,
Far to the west, through each remotest land
With equal glory rivalling the day
Poured on the east. When these Americ shores
Shall far and wide be light, and heavenly day
Shall in full glory rise on many a reign,
Kingdom and empire bending to the south,
And nation touching the Pacific shore.
When Christian churches shall adorn the streams
Which now unheeded flow with current swift
Circling the hills, where fiercest beasts of prey,
Panther and wolf in nightly concert howl.
The Indian sage from superstition freed,
Be taught a nobler heaven than cloud-topt-hill,
Or separate island in the watery waste.
The aged Sachem fix his moving tribe,
And grow humane now taught the arts of peace.
In human sacrifice delight no more,
Mad cantico or savage feast of war.
Such scenes of fierce barbarity no more
Be perpetrated there, but truth divine
Shine on the earth in one long cloudless day,
Till that last hour which shuts the scene of things,
When this pure light shall claim its native skies;
When the pure stream of revelation shall,
With refluent current visit its first hills:
There shall it mix with that crystalline wave,
Which laves the walls of Paradise on high,
And from beneath the seat of God does spring.
This is that river from whose sacred head
The sanctified in golden arms draw light,
On either side of which that tree does grow
Which yields immortal fruit, and in whose shade
If shade were needed there, the rapt shall sing,
In varied melody to harp and lyre,
The sacred song of Moses and the Lamb:
Eternity's high arches ring; It Is heard
Through both infinitudes of space and time.
Thus have I sung to this high-favour'd bower,
And sacred shades which taught me first to sing,
With grateful mind a tributary strain.
Sweet grove no more I visit you, no more
Beneath your shades shall meditate my lay.
Adieu ye lawns and thou fair hill adieu,
And you O shepherds, and ye graces fair
With comely presence honoring the day.
Far hence I go to some sequest'red vale
By woody hill or shady mountain side,
Where far from converse and the social band,
My days shall pass inglorious away: In these lines the author has not the
least reference to the place of his present residence but to some western part
of America, where in the course of his life he may possibly be thrown. Should
he ever remove from his present situation, it shall be with equal melancholy
and regret, and if the Muse can produce a strain it shall be remembered in
song. For though it may seem a vain boast after the preceding poem which is
really very moderate, to talk of giving memory to fountain, landscape, or
grove, yet it is very certain that love will raise the mind to language and
sentiment, to which cold weak geneus of itself, could never attain.

But this shall be my exultation still
My chiefest merit and my only joy,
That when the hunter on some western hill,
Or furzy glade shall see my grassy tomb,
And know the stream which mourns unheeded by,
He for a moment shall repress his step,
And say, There lies a Son of Nassau-Hall.
THE END

