A DIALOGUE, BETWEEN A Southern Delegate, AND HIS SPOUSE, ON HIS RETURN FROM
The Grand Continental Congress.

A FRAGMENT, INSCRIBED To the MARRIED LADIES of America, By their most sincere,
And affectionate Friend, And Servant, MARY V. V.

Printed in the Year M, DCC, LXXIV.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
WIFE. -- IN less than a Year,
Mark me Sir, you will repent often, as sure as you're there.

HUSBAND. Pray, for God's Sake, my Dear, be a little discreet;
As I hope to be saved, you will alarm the whole Street;
Don't delight so in scolding yourself out of Breath;
To the Neighbors it is Sport, but to me it is Death.
I submit for Peace sake, to be led by the Nose;
Don't make the World think that we are come to Blows:
If once but a Crotchet in your Head you have got,
For your Husband's Advice, Ma'm, you care not a Groat.
There are many wise People, I Would have you to know,
Who often have asked it, and have followed it too:
If I speak but a Word, you rave like a Fury,
The Patience of Job, Madam, would not, could not endure ye:
Had I a Million of Sons, Ah! by the Lord Harry,
I Would advise every one of them never to marry.

WIFE. Call the Doctor! -- by this unusual Palaver,
I fear thou'st been bit, you so foam and so slaver:
Alas! never, -- ah! -- never, elect him again;
This pride of Delegation, turns many a Brain.

HUSBAND. You mistook me, my Dear, I did not pretend,
Every Measure of Congress, right or wrong to defend;
Many Things they have left undone, they should surely have done,
Many Things they have done, they should have sure let alone:
The -- Suffolk -- Approbation,
--
England -- d -- m -- n
--
Nice Discussions, a wise Man will ever decline,
When his Head and his Heart are over heated with Wine:
Men, when drunk, are all Heroes, all prudent, all gallant;
Stark Fools, become Sages; rank Cowards, grow valiant:
High Matters of State should be planned before Dinner;
A Saint in the Morn, is at Night often a Sinner:
But grant their Resolves were more absurd than they are,
Could you really expect your meek Husband would dare
Oppose such a Torrent, when (...) well known,
He dares not say to your Face, his Soul is his own.

WIFE. God bless us, and keep us! why, my Dearest, till now,
I never heard you so wise, or so witty, I vow;
I protest this same Congress's a very fine School;
A Man comes back a Chatham, who went there a Fool.

HUSBAND. You're afraid to hear all, but for once I will speak,
Wherever I am known, I am called Jerry Sneak;
I bear, for all that, with your Caprice, and your Tricks,
But prithee, Dear, dabble not in our Politics.

WIFE. Prithee! ha, ha, ha, Prithee! my Senator grave!
Sir! I Will make you repent of that Speech, to your Grave;
Why had not said, KNOW THEN, like the mighty Congress,
I presume you would a Hand in that civil Address:
Indeed, my sweet Sir, when you treat with your Betters,
You should mind how you speak, and how you write Letters.

HUSBAND. That Horse-laugh is all feigned, with much better Grace,
You know Ma'm, you could hit me a Slap in the Face:
Consider, my Dear, you're a Woman of Fashion,
It Is really indecent to be in such Passion;
Mind thy Houshold-Affairs, teach thy Children to read,
And never, Dear, with Politics, trouble thy Head.

WIFE. Good Lord! how magnanimous! I fear Child you are drunk,
Do thou think thyself, Deary, a Cromwell, or Monck?
Do thou think that wise Nature meant thy shallow Pate,
To digest the important Affairs of a State?
Thou born! thou! the Machine of an Empire to wield?
Art thou wise in Debate? Shoud'st feel bold in the Field?
If thou'st Wisdom to manage Tobacco, and Slave,
It Is as much as God ever designed thee to have:
Because Men are Males, are they all Politicians?
Why then I presume they are Divines and Physician*
And born all with Talents every Station to fill,
Noble Proofs you have given! no doubt, of your Skill:
Would! instead of Delegates, they would sent Delegates Wives;
Heavens! we could not have bungled it so for our Lives!
If you had even consulted the Boys of a School,
Believe me, Love, you could not have played so the Fool.
Would it bluster, and frighten, its own poor dear Wife,
As the Congress does England! quite out of her Life?

HUSBAND. This same Congress, my Dear, much disturbeth thy Rest,
God and Men ask no more, than that Men do their best;
It Is their Fate, not their Crimes, if they have little Pretense,
To your most transcendent Penetration and Sense;
It Is great Pity, I grant, they had'nt asked the Advice
Of a Judge of Affairs, so profound, and so nice;
You're so patient, so cool so monstrous eloquent,
Next Congress, my Empress, sha'l be made President.

WIFE. I have said it, my Dear, and I Will say it again,
That your famous Congress were a strange set of men:
To you, my dear Love, I may be sometimes too pert,
But then, you know well, Dear, it is but for a Spirt:
Though I do now, and then, take the Freedom, to glance,
At your Dreams, and your Visions, I mind the main Chance;
Regard your true Interest, your Health, and your Ease,
And am ever disposed, to do just, as you please*
Sometimes, to be sure, it is not quite convenient,
But since I swore to obey, I Am always obedient;
I defy you, to say now; you cannot for your Life,
That I Am not, at the Bottom, a very good Wife:
Could I see you in Prison, or hanged, without Pain?
Then, pray, have not I reason enough to complain?

HUSBAND. Psha! for God's Sake, what Hazard of that do I run?


WIFE. Psha, on, but beware, Dear, that you are not undone;
'Twou'd soon break my Heart, though we do now and then jar,
Were you ruined, or taken, or killed in War.
From the Love I bear you, and our dear Girls and Boys,
I have examined this Book, that makes so much Noise:
Without seeing through Millstones, its soon understood,
As sure as you are born, this will at last end in Blood:
(...) Cabal, which the high sovereign Power defies,
No matter whether prompted, by Truth, or by Lies;
No Matter for us, whether without, or with Reason,
In Law, they says deemed, little short, of High Treason.
Three thousand Miles distant, we may crow and exult,
But can you hope, any State, will bear such Insult.
To your high mighty Congress, the Members were sent,
To lay all our Complaints, before Parliament;
Usurpation reared its head, from that fatal Hour,
You resolved, you enacted, like a sovereign Power.
Acts, though not enjoined, on Pain of Gibbets, and Flames,
Disobeyed, at the Price, of our Fortunes, and Fames.
Your Non-Imports, and Exports, are full fraught with Ruin,
Of thousands, and thousands, the utter Undoing:
While, without daring to bite, you're showing your Teeth,
You Have contrived to starve, all the poor People to death.
Into all that is most sacred, you have made mad Inroad,
Morocco itself, would be ashamed, of your Code.
Pretty Sovereigns, in truth! God help us, what Things!
To make deep Politicians, or Statesmen, or Kings?
If Philadelphia or York, proposed some wise Plan,
From that very Moment, you all branded the Man
-- of Sense and of Honor -- derive
-- Carpenters-Hall -- alive
-- murder or rob
-- Pieces -- Mob.
Instead of imploring, their Justice, or Pity,
You treat Parliament, like a Pack, of Banditti;
Instead of Addresses, framed on Truth, and on Reason,
They breathe nothing, but Insult, Rebellion, and Treason;
Instead of attempting, our Interests to further,
You bring down, on our Heads* Perdition, and Murder.
When I think how these Things must infallibly end,
I am distracted with Fear, and my Hair stands an end.

HUSBAND. Youv'e been, heating your Brain, With Romances, and Plays,
Such Rant, and Bombast, I never heard in my Days.

WIFE. Were your newfangled Doctrines, as modest, and true,
'Twou'd be well for yourselves, and this poor Country too:
But supposing Great Britain, quite out, of the Case,
And you all should be saved, by some high Act, of Grace;
Lets return to ourselves, if you have Eyes, you will see
Your Association, big with rank Tyranny.
Its hardly worth ones while, to show Indignation
At that foolish Bugbear, your Non-Importation;
For Men do so hunger, and so thirst, after Pelf.
That when thousands are starved, 'twill blow up, of itself.
You have read a great deal, -- with patient Reflection,
Consider one Moment, your Courts of Inspection:
Could the Inquisition, Venice, Rome, or Japan,
Have devised, so horrid, so wicked a Plan?
In all the Records, of the most slavish Nation,
You Will not find an Instance, of such Usurpation.
If Spirits infernal, for dire Vengeance designed,
Had been named Delegates, to afflict Human kind,
And in Grand Continental Congress, had resolved,
"Let the Bonds of social Bliss, be from henceforth dissolved,"
They could not have planned, with more exquisite Skill,
Nor have found, a tame Race, more submiss to their Will.
Let Fools, Pedants, and Husbands, continue to hate
The Advice of us Women, and call it all Prate:
Whilst you are in Danger, by your good Leave, my Dear,
Both by Night and by Day, I will ring in your Ear --
Make your Peace: -- Fear the King: -- The Parliament fear.
Oh! my Country! remember, that a Woman unknown,
Cried aloud, -- like Cassandra, in Oracular Tone,
Repent! or you are forever, forever undone.

FINIS.

