GEORGE WHITEFIELD. M.A.


MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF THE REVEREND GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M. A. Late CHAPLAIN to
the Right Honorable THE COUNTESS OF HUNTINGDON: IN WHICH Every Circumstance
worthy of Notice, both in his private and public Character, is recorded.

Faithfully selected from his ORIGINAL PAPERS, JOURNALS, and LETTERS.

ILLUSTRATED BY A Variety of interesting and entertaining ANECDOTES, from the
best Authorities.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, A particular ACCOUNT of his DEATH and FUNERAL; and
Extracts from the SERMONS, which were preached on that Occasion.

COMPILED BY THE REV. JOHN GILLIES, D. D.

They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

DAN. xii. 3. For he that wins souls is wise.

PROVE. xi. 30. NEW YORK: Printed by HODGE AND SHOBER, of the NEWEST
PRINTING-OFFICE, in Maiden-Lane. M. DCC. LXXIV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COUNTESS OF HUNTINGDON, THESE MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE
OF THE REV. MR. WHITEFIELD, ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY HER LADYSHIP'S
MOST OBEDIENT, AND MOST HUMBLE SERVANT,

JOHN GILLIES.

NEW YORK, May 7, 1774.
THE Publishers return their most hearty thanks to the Subscribers, for the
generous encouragement and patronage which they have shown toward the
reprinting The Memoirs of the Life of the Rev. Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD, whose
memory is held in the highest esteem by many thousands on this extensive
Continent, for his zeal in the best of causes, and his unremitted labors and
usefulness, to the end of life: -- And they have, at the request of many
Gentlemen, exhibited the following PROPOSALS FOR PRINTING BY SUBSCRIPTION, IN
TWO VOLUMES DUODECIMO, A SELECT COLLECTION OF SERMONS, ON VERY IMPORTANT
SUBJECTS. BY THE REVEREND GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M. A.

Late CHAPLAIN to the Right Honorable the COUNTESS of HUNTINGDON.

From the last LONDON EDITION; prepared by Himself for the Press; in which are
many Sermons never before published.

CONDITIONS.
I. The two Volumes will contain thirty-four Sermons, printed in larger
Twelves, with the same neat Types and American Paper as these Memoirs. II. The
Price to SUBSCRIBERS will be no more than SIX SHILLINGS each Volume, neatly
bound and lettered. III. They shall be put to the Press as soon as Three
Hundred have subscribed; and the Names of the SUBSCRIBERS will be affixed to
the first Volume. IV. Each Volume, as soon as finished, will be delivered to
the SUBSCRIBERS, upon paying SIX SHILLINGS. V. Those who subscribe for Twelve
Sets, to have a Thirteenth gratis.
* The Printers presume, that they need to say little in favor of this
undertaking, as the avidity with which the people in Great Britain have
purchased the works of this pious Minister, evidently show their value; and the
inhabitants of the British colonies have discovered the same regard toward his
MEMOIRS, etc. And they engage, that they will exert their utmost endeavors to
give satisfaction to those who are pleased to subcribe.

HODGE AND SHOBER.

SUBSCRIPTIONS are gratefully received by HODGE and SHOBER, the Editors, at the
Newest Printing Office, in Maiden-Lane, NEW YORK; and by all the Printers and
Booksellers on the Continent.

LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
A
JAmes Abercrombie, Esquire Mr. Joseph Aicken, Essex county. Mr. Jacob Allen,
Gunsmith, New York. William Allen. Job Allen, Morris county. Albert Amerman,
New York, 2 books. Dirk Amerman, Ditto. Thomas Amerman, Ditto. Peter Amerman,
Ditto. James Alner, Ditto. John Anderson, Printer, Ditto. Alexander Anderson,
Cabinet-maker, Ditto. Aaron Arson, Baker, Ditto. Elisha Ayers, Morris county.
B
Mr. John Bailey, Cutler, New York. Francis Bailey, Printer, Lancaster. Daniel
Baker, Elizabeth Town. Stephen Blewmer Balch, Student, Nassau-Hall. Elias
Baldwin, Princeton. Nathaniel Ball, New Jersey, 3 books. Peter Ball,
Cabinet-maker, New York. John Ball, House Carpenter, New York. Mrs. Ann Banks,
Philadelphia. Mr. Jonas Barnes, Claverack. John Barrow, Baker, New York.
Francis Basset, Pewterer, Ditto. Benjamin Beach, Morris county. Lemuel
Beardslee, Stratford, Connecticut. James Bingham, Philadelphia. Charles Clinton
Beatty, Student, Nassau-Hall, Andrew Bell, Blacksmith, New York, 2 books. Mrs.
Mary Bennet, Ditto. Capt. John Berrien, jun. New York. Mr. Samuel Bethel. Mrs.
Darcas Betts, New York. Mr. John Betts, Cabinet-maker, Ditto. Thomas Bible.
Henry Bicker, Hatter, New York. Benjamin Blagge, Esquire Ditto. Mr. Daniel
Bleakman, of Stratford, Connecticut. Stephen Bloom. Jos. Bloomfield, Student of
Law, Woodbridge. Cornelius H. Bogart, Bushwick, Long Island. E. Bonon, 2 books.
Ephraim Bostwick, Carpenter, New York. William Bostwick, Middletown, 2 books.
Mrs. Abigail Bostwick, of Connecticut. Mr. Thomas Bosworth, Cooper, New York.
Ebenezer Bradford, Student, Nassau-Hall. Charles Branden, New York, James Bray,
Philadelphia. Ralph Bridge, Morris county. George Bright. Thomas Brinckle,
Tailor, New York. William Brisben, Philadelphia. Samuel Brooker, Stanford,
Connecticut, 2 books. Jacob Brouwer, Baker, New York. Charles O. Bruff,
Silversmith and Jeweller, Ditto. Capt. Edward Brush, Ditto. Mr. William Bryan.
John Buchanan, New York. Joseph Buslington. Joseph Bullock. Edward Bunn,
New Jersey. John Burger, Goldsmith, New York. James Burnet, Morris county.
Ichabod Burnet, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books. Thomas Byerley, New York.
C
Mr. John Calley, Philadelphia. E. Carey. John Carman, New York. Mr. Nicholas
Carmer, Ironmonger, New York. Arnout Cannon, Ditto. Duncan Campbell, Ditto.
William Calwall, Morris county. George Calwall, Ditto. William Cannon,
Philadelphia. Arnout Cannon, New York. John Carle, Morris Town. Jonas Carle,
Ditto. John Carnes, Morris county. Roderick Cheyne. James Clarke, Essex county.
Robert Clark, Elisabeth Town. John Clawson, Bricklayer, Elisabeth Town. William
Claypole, Student, Nassau-Hall. James Claypole. David Clayton, Freehold. Peter
Clopper, Merchant, New York. William Coats. Moses Coe, Morris county. John E.
Colhoun, Student, Nassau-Hall. John Collom, 2 books, Stephen Conkling, Morris
county. David Conkling, Essex county. Daniel Connet, Essex county. William
Connor, 12 books. John Cooper. Joseph Cooper, Ship-carpenter, New York, Philip
Condiet, Morris county. David Cory, Elizabeth-Town. Joseph Cox, Freehold.
Benjamin Crane, the 3d, Essex county. Joseph Crane, Ditto. Isaac Crane, Ditto.
Amos Crane, Ditto. David Crane, Morris Town. Alexander Crawford. Cresson.
Abraham Cruzce, Princeton. William Cumpton, Morris county. Mrs. Ann Croston,
Philadelphia. Mr. John N. Cumming, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books Robert
Cumming. John Cummings. Ebenezer Cundit, Morris county.
D
Mr. Lebbeus Dad, Morris county. Samuel Dalglie^h, Morris Town. William Darby,
jun. Essex county. Franklin Davenport, in Burlington, New Jersey. Enoch David.
William Davidson, Morris County. Isaac Davis. Hezekiah Deforeest, Stratford, in
Connecticut. Benjamin Deforeest, Ditto. Benjamin Deforeest, jun. Ditto. Abraham
Delanoy, sen. Grocer, New York. Abraham Delanoy, jun. Merchant, Ditto. Samuel
Delap, Bookseller, Philadelphia. John DeLemater, jun. Carpenter, New York. Miss
Rachel Dewees. Mr. Peter Dickerson, Morris county. Dr. John Dodge, New York.
Mr. Nathaniel Donald, Philadelphia. John Donnell. George Douglas, Philadelphia.
Mrs. Isabel Drake, Morris county. Mr. Anthony Duche. Lucken Duffe, New York.
John Dueham, Morris county. Thomas Duglas, Chair-maker, New York. John Dunlap,
Printer, Philadelphia, 130 books.
E
Mr. Eastburn, Ship-wright, New York. Charles Eddy. Messrs. Edes and Gill,
Printers, Boston, 100 books. Mr. Samuel Edmonds, New York. Daniel Edwards,
Providence township, Phila. co. John Eles, New York. Francis Elsworth, Baker,
Ditto. Mr. David Ellison. Daniel Evans. Israel Evens, A. B. Nassau-Hall.
F
Capt. Reuben Fairchild, New York. Mr. Lewis Fairchild, Connecticut. Joseph
Fairchild, Morris county. Phinehas Fairchild, Ditto. William Falconer. Paul
Farber, Morris county. Capt. David Ferguson, New York. Mr. Joseph Ferris,
Carpenter, Ditto. Peter Fish, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books. Edward
Fitzrandolph. Thomas Fleeson. James Fletcher, Schoolmaster, New York. Jonathan
Ford, Morris county. Hezekiah Freeman, Morris county, 2 books Jonathan Frasy,
Ditto. Mrs. Ann Frazier. Mr. Ezekiel Frost, Morris county. Abner Frost, Essex
county.
G
Mr. Henry Gaddy, New York. Rev. Mr. John Gano, Ditto. Mr. Hugh Gain, Printer,
Ditto, 7 books. Charles Garrison, Elisha Gallaudet, Engraver, New York. James
Gillil^nd, Schoolmaster, Ditto. Matthias Globe, Morris county. Simeon Goble,
Morris county. Benianan Goble, Ditto. William Goforth, New York. Daniel
Goldsmith, Ditto. Jeremiah Goldsmith, Cabinet-maker. Ditto. Daniel Goldsmith,
jun. Schoolmaster. Mrs. Mary Goldsmith, New York. Elizabeth Gordon,
Philadelphia. Mr. John Gordon, Ditto. Samuel Green, Long Island. Mr. Daniel
Green, Shoemaker, New York. John Green, New Jersey. John Gwinnep, Morris
county.
H
Mr. Samuel Hacket, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books. Joseph Haight, Fish-Kills, 2
books. Thomas Hale. Alexander Hale. William Hall, Printer, Philadelphia. Daniel
Hall, Merchant, Norwich, Connecticut. Daniel Halsey, Elizabeth-Town. Isaac
Halsey, Essex county. John Haley, Esquire Mr. Joshua Hambert, Hanover. Mrs. Martha
Hambleton, Princeton. Mr. Josia Hand, Morris county. Gerardus Hardenbrook,
New York. Amos Hare, Ship-Carpenter, New York. John Harris, Clerk, Ditto.
Abraham Harris, junior. James Harris. Abraham Hazelbert. John Haring, Esquire
Orange county. Mr. Jonathan Hathway, Morris county. Benoni Hathway, Ditto.
Matthew Hawley, Stratford, Connecticut. William Hayward, Morris county. George
W. Hazard, Stud. Nassau-Hall, 2 books. Andrew Heisler, New Jersey. John
Hendricks, West-field, New Jersey. Robert Henry, Student, Nassau-Hall. Matthias
Hetfield, Essex county. John High, West-field. John Hinds, Essex county. Mrs.
Sarah Hoddman. Mr. Levi Hopkins, Student, Nassau-Hall. Mrs. Jane Hossick,
New York. Mr. William Horn, Philadelphia. George Hortwich, Pilot, New York.
Sil^s Howell, Morris county. Mr. John Hughes. Garret Hughes. Timothy Hughes,
New York. Tho. P. Hulings, Esquire Burlington, New Jersey. Timothy Humberfield,
Morris county. Asheton Humphreys, Esquire Philadelphia. James Humphreys, jun.
Printer, Ditto, 28 books. Davis Hunt, Fire-Engine-maker, New York. Ward Hunt,
Cabinet-maker, Ditto. Mrs. Sarah Hunt, Ditto. Mr. Glover Hunt. William Hurtin,
Watchmaker, New York. Jacob Hutchins, Ditto.
I
Rev. Mr. William Jackson, A. M. Pastor of the Reformed Dutch Churches, at
Bergen Staten 1st. Mr. Joseph Jadwin, Cooper, New York. Francis Janrier. Robert
Johnson, Esquire James Johnston, Morris county. Rev. Mr. David Jones, Croswick. Mr.
Francis Jordan. John Imlay, Merchant, New York. Thomas Inglis, Cabinet-maker,
Ditto. Robert Irwin. Capt. Agur Judson of Stratford, Connecticut. Mr. Agur
Judson, jun. Ditto.
K
Mr. James Keen, Morris county. Isaac Keith, Student, Nassau-Hall. William
Kelsey. Daniel Kenly, Cecil county, Maryland. Lawrence Kemble, Tin-man,
New York. Thomas Kennan, Morris county. Henry Kerts. Leonard Kessler,
Philadelphia. Daniel Ketcham, Middletown, Samuel King, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2
books. Frederick King, Morris county. Rev. Mr. Hugh Knox, St. Croix, 12 books.
L
Mr. Howard Lackey, New York. John David Lamb, Essex county. Jacob Lasher,
New York. Elisha Lawrence. Peter Layton, Morris county. Charles Lee, Student,
Nassau-Hall. Henry Ph. Levingston, Student, Ditto. Ichabod Lewis, Esquire
Stratford. Samuel Lhommedue, Morris county. Robert Lilley, Whitepain township,
Phil. county. Philip Lindsly, Morris county. John Lindsly, Ditto. Eleazer
Lindsly, Ditto. George Lindsay, Stone-Cutter, New York. John Linton, John
Littel, Essex county. David Littel, jun. Ditto. Abigail Littel, Ditto. John
Logan, New York. Mrs. Anna Lloyd, Philadelphia. Mr. Sam. Loudon, Bookseller,
New York. 42 books. Cornelius Ludlow, Morris county. John Ludlow, Ditto. Samuel
Ludlum, Ditto. Cornelius Ludlum, Essex county.
M
Mr. Spruce Macay, Student, Nassau-Hall. Samuel MacGee, Student, Ditto. Dellas
MacGuire, near New York. Mrs. Garthary Maggridge, near New York. Mr. Matthew
Macguire, Philadelphia. Peter MacKinlay, Philadelphia. Thomas Mash, Essex
county. Mrs. Elenor Marselis, New York. Mr. Simeon Marsh, Essex county. Ephraim
Marsh, Ditto. Mrs. Mary Marsh, Philadelphia. Mr. Christopher Marshall,
Philadelphia. Daniel A. Martin, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books. Mr. James
Maxwell, New-Rochelle. Samuel Meek, jun. Springfield. James Merton. James
Miller, Morris county. Andrew Miller, Essex county. Moses Miller, Morris Town.
William Miller, the 4th, Ditto. Melyn Miller, Elisabeth-Town. Jonathan Miller,
sen. Ditto. Jonathan Miller, jun. Ditto. John Miller, Ditto. Enoch Miller,
Essex county. Rev. Mr. Samuel Mills, of Bedford, 2 books. Mr. Elisha Mills,
Stratford, in Connecticut. Timothy Mills, Morris county. John Mills, Ditto.
Alexander Mills, Philadelphia. John More, Morris Town. Joseph Morris, Morris
county. Richard Mount, Student, Nassau-Hall. Michael Mount, Freehold. David
Mulford. Solomon Munson, Morris county.
N
Messrs. Noel and Hazard, Booksellers, N. York, 23 books. Mr. George Nelson,
Isaac Nichols, Cabinet-maker, New York. Thomas Nixon, Merchant, Ditto, 6 books.
Rich. Norwood, Coppersmith, Ditto, 2 books. Tobias Norwood, Shoemaker, Ditto.
Andrew Norwood, Shoemaker, Ditto.
P
Mr. Jeremiah Pangborn, Essex county. John Park, Esquire Mr. James Parker, Morris
county. William Patterson, Esquire Christeen. Jonathan Pearcy, Cabinet-maker,
New York. J. Pease, Charshethton, Pennsyl. Prove. 26 books. Nathaniel Peek,
Morris county. Elijah Pierson, Ditto. Mr. William Pierson, Essex county. Mrs.
Mary Penrose. Mr. John Phillips, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books. George Philips,
Morris county. Griffith Philips. John Pigeon, Student, Nassau-Hall. John
Pintard, Student, Ditto. Capt. John Price, New York. Mr. William Post, Painter,
New York. William Potts, West-Jersey. Peter Priden, Morris county. John Priden,
Ditto. Anthony Pritchard, Esquire Charlestown, Chester county, Pennsylvania. Mr.
Norton Pryor, 2 books.
R
Mr. Garret Rapaljie, Merchant, New York. John Redman, M. D. Philadelphia.
William Reese. Renshaw. Jacob Resler, Tallow Chandler, New York. Nathan Reeve,
Morris county. Sylvanius Reynolds, Merchant, Connecticut. Peter Ricker,
Merchant, New York. Henry Ricker, Cabinet-maker, Ditto. William Roberts. Mrs.
Elizabeth Rockhill, New York. Mr. Daniel Robinson, Philadelphia. Rev. Mr.
William Rogers, Philadelphia. Mr. John B. Rogers, Student, Nassau-Hall. John
Roll, Morris county. John Roll, Essex county. John LC. Room, Esquire New York.
John Ross, jun. Essex county. William Roudless. Elias Runings, Morris Town.
Alexander Rutherford, Philadelphia.
S
Mr. Steven Sands, Watch-maker, New York. Mr. Cornzat Savage, Rope-maker,
New York. William Sayre, Morris Town. David Sayre, Ditto. Ezra Sayre, Elizabeth
Town. Moses Sayre, Ditto. Jacob Scheneh, Princeton. Dr. William Schooler,
New York. Dr. Moses Scott. Mr. Archibald Scott, Student, Nassau-Hall. William
Scott. John A. Scudder, Student, Nassau-Hall, 2 books. William Scudder,
Princeton, 2 books. Samuel Shaw, Esquire Mrs. Ann Sholtwell, Morris county. Mr.
John Shourt, Carpenter, New York. Mr. George Shepherd, jun. Philadelphia. John
Shields, Merchant, Philadelphia, 4 books. Thomas Shields, Ditto. Peter Shiras.
Thomas Shreave, A. B. New York. Jacob Shurt, Merchant, Ditto. John Sickels,
Merchant, New York. William Singleton. Rev. Mr. Robert Smith, 12 books. Mr.
Abraham L. Smith, Student, Nassau-Hall. John Smith, Carpenter, New York. John
Smith. John Smith. John Sotter, Morris county. John Springer, Student,
Nassau-Hall, 2 books. John Squier, Essex county. James Steal. Peter Stedham.
Augustus Steuert, New York. Stephen Stevens. Jonathan Styles, Morris county, 2
books. Ebenezer Styles, Ditto. Benjamin B. Stockton, St. Nassau-Hall 2 books.
Miss Mary Stoneburn, Germantown. Mr. Garret Striker, near New York. Silah
Strong, Esquire Brookhaven. Mr. John Stuges. William Suttie, New York. Peter
Sutton, Morris Town. Mr. Richard Swanick.
T
Mr. John Tailor. John Tembroock, Merchant, New York. John Thompson, Merchant,
Ditto. Andrew Thompson, Brick-layer, Ditto. Lemuel Thompson, Stratford,
Connecticut. Andrew Thompson, Ditto. Abel Thompson, Ditto. Hezekiah Thompson,
New Jersey. John Thompson, Brunswick, New Jersey. Thomas Thompson, Elizabeth
Town. Thomas Thompson, Middletown. Richard Thornhill, Cooper, New York. Isaac
Tichenor, Student, Nassau-Hall. Patrick Tommins, Philadelphia. Samuel Tonson,
Morris county. William Turnbull, Merchant, Philadelphia. Joseph Turner. Thomas
Tuttle, Morris county.
U
Mr. Thomas Ustick, A. B. New York. Capt. John Ute, 2 books. Mr. Herman Utt,
New York. Jonas Utt, Ditto.
V
Mr. David Valentine, Surveyor, New York. Jonas Valentine, Essex county.
Obadiah Valentine, Ditto. Jacobus Van Anterwerp, New York. John Vandike,
Princeton. William Vanderhoef, New York. Francis Vandyck, Chocolate-maker,
Ditto. Michael Van Gelder, Ditto. Rev. Mr. Wm. Van Horn, Southampton, Pennsyl.
Rev. Mr. Samuel Verbryck, Orange county. Mr. William Vernon, Student,
Nassau-Hall.
W
Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Ward, Bedford. Mrs. Warner, Princeton. Mrs. Watts, New York.
Mr. Abraham Wayne. William Weaver, Gent. New York. Mr. Elijah Weedge, New York.
Enoch Welsh. Obadiah Wells, Flax Inspector, New York. Mrs. Rachel Wells, Ditto.
Mr. Andrew Whitehead, Morris county. Nathan Wilkison, Morris Town. David
Williamson, Brunswick, 2 books. Marinus Willet, Cabinet-maker, New York. Henry
Wills, Pewterer, Ditto. Thomas Winslow, Ditto. William Wisseham, Merchant,
Ditto, 2 books. Jonathan Wood, Morris county. Joseph Wood, Ditto. Elias
Woodruff, Stew. Nassau-Hall. George Whitefield Woodruff, Student, Ditto. Aaron
Woodruff, Essex county. John Woodward, Merchant, New York. John Wyley, Tailor,
New York.
Y
Mr. James Young, Morris county. John Young, jun. William Young, L. F.
Those Subscribers whose places of abode are not specified, reside mostly in
Philadelphia.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
HIS birth and parentage, Page 25, 26 Early appearances of his eloquence at
school, Page 27 At seventeen, brought under religious impressions, Page 28
CHAP. II.
At eighteen, goes to the University of Oxford, and becomes acquainted with the
Methodists, Page 28 Is treated with great kindness by the Rev. Mr. John and
Charles Wesley, Page 29 Endangers his health, but is happily recovered, Page 30
After his recovery feels great peace and joy in believing on the Son of God,
Page 31 Is ordained by Bishop Benson the 22d year of his age, Page 32 Preaches
his first sermon in Gloucester, Page 32 Returns to Oxford, Page 33 Officiates
at the Tower, etc. Page 33 Longs to go and preach the Gospel in Georgia, Page
33 Gladly embraces an invitation to go thither, Page 33 His great popularity at
Gloucester, Bristol, and London, while he prepares to go abroad, Page 35, 36,
Opposition from some of the Clergy, Page 36
CHAP. III.
Embarks for Georgia, December 1737, Page 37 His behavior on board, Page 38-40
Touches at Gibraltar, and is courteously received, Page 40 Remarkable
particulars in his voyage from Gibraltar to Georgia, Page 41-43 His
observations on the Colony, at his arrival, Page 44, 45 Is convinced of the
utility of an Orphan-house, Page 46
CHAP. IV.
Re-embarks for England to receive Priest's orders, and get contributions for
the Orphan-house, Page 48 Is driven into Limerick harbor in Ireland; and is
kindly treated by Bishop Burscough, etc. Page 48 At his arrival in London,
meets with a cold reception from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of
London, Page 49 Offense taken at his Journals, Page 50 The Trustees for Georgia
receive him cordially, Page 51 Receives Priest's orders from Bishop Benson,
Page 52 Makes collections for several charitable purposes, Page 53 Preaches to
the colliers in Kingswood, Page 54, 55 Preaches in Wales with Mr. Howel Harris,
Page 56 Ventures to preach in Moorfields, Page 58
CHAP. V.
Preaches on Kennington-Common and Blackheath, to prodigious multitudes, who
were all attention, Page 59 Embarks the second time for America, Aug. 1739.
Page 60 Preaches at Philadelphia, New York, and in several places in Maryland,
Virginia, etc. Page 60-63 While making collections for the Orphan-house hires a
place for the reception of the poor children, Page 64 Begins to build the
house, March 1740, Page 65
CHAP. VI.
Preaches in various places with apparent success, Page 66-71 Receives pressing
invitations to New England, Page 71 His reception there, Page 72 Comes back to
Philadelphia, and preaches to several thousands, in a house built for that
purpose, Page 78 Returns to England in spring 1741, Page 80
CHAP. VII.
People's behavior toward him greatly changed, Page 81 Unwillingly parts from
Mr. John and Chapter Wesley, Page 82 Occasion of building the Tabernacle, Page 84
Is solicited to visit Scotland, Page 84 His parting from Messieurs Erskines,
Page 88
CHAP. VIII.
Letters showing his reception, ministrations and success, at the principal
places in Scotland, viz. Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, Dundee, etc. Page 90-104
A view of the whole from the posthumous papers of a learned Gentleman in
Scotland, Page 104-109
CHAP. IX.
Returns to England, October 1741, Page 110 His marriage at Abergavenny, Page
110 His success at Bristol and London, Page 111, 112 Preaches in Moorfields in
the holiday season, Page 113 Remarkable success of that hazardous attempt, Page
113, 114
CHAP. X.
Makes a second visit to Scotland, June 1742, Page 115 The religious concern at
Cambuslang, etc. Page 116-121 Mr. Whitefield's account of it, Page 122-126
Preaches in many towns in Scotland, Page 126-128 Is alarmed with the Spaniards
landing in Georgia, Page 129
CHAP. XI.
His labors at London and Bristol, and in Gloucestershire and South Wales,
1743, Page 130-133 Continues to travel and preach through the country in the
months of November and December, Page 133 The birth and death of his only
child, Page 134 Obtains a sentence against certain rioters for abusing the
Methodists, Page 135 Writes his letters to the Bishops, etc. Page 136 Is in
danger of being murdered in bed at Plymouth, Page 137, 138
CHAP. XII.
Embarks the third time for America, Aug. 1744, Page 140 After his arrival is
brought to the gates of death, Page 141 His reception at Boston, Page 142
Preaches to the officers and soldiers that went against Cape Breton, 1745, Page
145 Religious concern under the ministry of Mr. Gilbert Tennent, among the
people of New England, Page 147
CHAP. XIII.
Goes to Bermudas for the recovery of his health, and his Journal there, Page
151-165 Takes shipping for England, June 1748 -- And when on board retires and
corrects his Journals, Page 165
CHAP. XIV.
On his arrival at London is sent for by Lady Huntingdon to preach at her
house, Page 167 Several of the nobility desire to hear him, Page 167 Makes a
third visit to Scotland, Page 168 Debates concerning him in the Synod of
Glasgow and Air, Page 168-172 Proposes to turn his Orphan-house into a College,
Page 171 Corresponds with Mr. Hervey, Page 173 Is invited to Leeds by Mr.
Wesley's societies, Page 174 Has an interview with Dr. Doddridge, etc. Page 176
Makes another visit to Scotland, July 1750, Page 178 After returning to London
is seized with a fever, Page 179
CHAP. XV.
His first visit to Ireland, May 1751, Page 181 Returns from Ireland by Glasgow
and Edinburgh, Page 182 Embarks the fourth time for America, where he finds the
Orphan-house affairs flourishing, Page 186 Does not stay the summer season in
America, Page 187 Is glad to find at his return to England, that Georgia was
likely to be put upon a better footing, Page 187 Makes another visit to
Edinburgh and Glasgow, Page 188 Mr. Hervey and he revise each other's MSS. Page
190 Erects a new Tabernacle in London, and opens it, Page 191
CHAP. XVI.
Preaches at Glasgow against the Playhouse there, Page 193 His success at
Newcastle, Leeds, Oulney, etc. Page 194 Opens the new Tabernacle at Bristol,
Page 195 Hastens to London to pay his last respects to Mr. John Wesley, who was
thought to be dying, Page 195 March 1754, a fifth voyage to America, by Lisbon,
where he stays some weeks, Page 196 His reflections upon the Popish
processions, etc. Page 196 Describes the procession of St. Francis, the
superstitious farces of Holy Thusday, and Good Friday, Page 197-203 Visits the
College of New Jersey, and preaches several times before the Synod that met
there, Page 204 Receives the news that a Governor was nominated for Georgia,
and his friend Mr. Habersham Sec. Page 204 In spring, 1755, returns to England,
and rejoices to see the number of evangelical Ministers increased, Page 205
Opens the Tabernacle at Norwich, Page 206 Preaches against Popery and arbitrary
power, Page 206 Meets with great opposition, when preaching at Long-Acre
Chapel, near the play houses, Page 207 His letters to the Bishop of B -- on
that occasion, Page 207 May, 1756, he begins to build his Chapel in
Tottenham-Court-Road, Page 210 Makes another visit to Scotland, Page 210
CHAP. XVII.
In spring, 1757, he again visits Scotland, and preaches at Edinburgh during
the General Assembly, Page 212 Many Ministers attend his sermons, Page 213 At
Glasgow makes a collection for the poor, Page 213 From Glasgow goes a second
time to Ireland, Page 213 Narrowly escapes being murdered by a Popish rabble,
Page 214 After his return to London is brought very low by his extraordinary
labors and thoughtfulness, Page 215 Builds almshouses for widows around his
Chapel, Page 216 Goes again to Edinburgh, Page 216
CHAP. XVIII.
Summer, 1759, makes another visit to Edinburgh, Page 218 Is ridiculed in a
farce called the Minor, Page 220 Feb. 1761, collected near 600 l. for the
distressed German Protestants, and the sufferers in Boston, Page 222 Spring,
1762, goes to Bristol and returns to London, Page 224 Goes a voyage to Holland,
Page 224 Visits Scotland again in autumn 1762, Page 225 Summer, 1763, embarks
the sixth time for America, Page 225 Is much pleased with the conversation of
several young Ministers in America; and with accounts of the students at
New Jersey College, Page 226 While at New York, during the winter, he finds
prejudices strangely subsided, Page 226 March, 1764, preaches in places round
Boston, Page 127 Returns from Boston to the Orphan-house, Page 229 Prosperous
state of affairs there, Page 230 A College being much wanted in Georgia, he
returns to England, to apply for a charter, in 1765, Page 231
CHAP. XIX.
Invites Mr. Occum an Indian Minister (...) preach at Tottenham-Court Chapel,
Page 233 I^ of his negotiations about the intended College at Georgia, October
1767, Page 235 Summer, 1768, once more goes to Edinburgh, Page 238 Mrs.
Whitefield dies, Page 238 He opens Lady Huntingdon's Chapel in Wales, Page 238
Opens Lady Huntingdon's Chapel at Tunbridge, Page 239 Embarks the seventh and
last time for America, Page 239
CHAP. XX.
Extracts from his Journal before he left the Downs, Page 240-244 Is very happy
to see matters exceeding his most sanguine expectations at the Orphan-house,
Page 245 The Governor, Council, and Assembly of Georgia, express their
gratitude to him, Page 245, 246 Goes to the northern colonies to preach in the
summer season, and proposes to return to his Orphan-house in winter, Page 247
Is taken ill about the middle of September; but being recovered, hopes to see
Georgia about Christmas, Page 249 Dies at Newbury-Port, Sept. 30, 1770, Page
250 Mr. Smith's account of his death and funeral, Page 250-254 Reception of the
news at London, Page 254, 255
CHAP. XXI.
Description of his person, Page 257 Striking parts of his life and character,
Page 257-266 Extracts from his Funeral Sermons preached in America: -- by the
Rev. Mr. Parsons of Newbury, September 30; with a letter, giving an account of
the interment, Page 266-273 Dr. Pemberton's of Boston, Oct. 11. Page 273-278
Mr. Ellington's at Savannah, Nov. 11. Page 278-284 Extracts from his Funeral
Sermons preached in England: -- by the Rev. Mr. D. Edwards, Nov. 11. Page
284-286 Mr. John Wesley, Nov. 18. Page 286-291 Mr. John Venn, November 25. Page
292-296 Reference to several others, Page 279 Extract from the Rev. Mr. Josiah
Smith's sermon upon Mr. Whitefield, in 1740; to show the uniformity of his
conduct from that early period of his ministry till his death, Page 290, 300
Mr. Newton's manuscript Funeral Sermon, Page 301-304 Conclusion referring to
other Sermons, Page 304 His Will, Page 305-309 Present supply of Tabernacle and
Chapel, Page 310, 311
MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF THE REV. MR. GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
CHAP. I. From his Birth, to his going to the University of OXFORD, Anno 1732.
THIS eminent and pious servant of Christ, Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD, was born at
Gloucester, on the 16th day of December, O. S. 1714. His father, Thomas
Whitefield, nephew of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Whitefield of Rockhampton, in
Gloucestershire The Rev. Mr. Samuel Whitefield, great grandfather of George,
was born at Wantage in Berkshire, and was Rector of North Ledyard in Wiltshire.
He removed afterward to Rockhampton. He had five daughters, two of whom were
married to clergymen, Mr. Perkins and Mr. Lovingham: And two sons, Samuel, who
succeeded his father in the cure of Rockhampton, and died without issue; and
Andrew, who was a private gentleman, and lived retired upon his estate. Andrew
had fourteen children, of whom Thomas was the eldest, the father of Mr. George
Whitefield.
, was first bred to the employment of a wine merchant in Bristol; but
afterward kept an inn in the city of Gloucester. In Bristol he married
Mistress Elizabeth Edwards, who was related to the Blackwells and the Dimours
of that city; by whom he had six sons and one daughter Elizabeth, the daughter,
was twice reputably married at Bristol. John, his son, lies interred with the
family in St. Mary Decrypt church in Gloucester. Joseph died an infant. Andrew
settled in trade at Bristol, and died in the twenty-eighth year of his age.
James was Captain of a ship, and died suddenly at Bath. Thomas and Richard are
still living. The father died December 1716. The mother continued a widow seven
years, and was then married to Mr. Longden, an ironmonger in Gloucester, by
whom she had no issue. She died December 1751, in the seventy-first year of her
age.
. Of these, George was the youngest, who being bereaved of his father, when
only two years old, was regarded by his mother with a peculiar tenderness, and
educated with more than ordinary care.

He was early under religious impressions; but the bent of his nature, and the
general course of his younger years, as himself acknowledges See the two first
parts of his life at the beginning. Confessions of a like nature, are to be
found in the writings of St. Augustine.
with expressions of shame and self-condemnation, was of a very different kind.

Between the years of twelve and fifteen, he made a good progress in the Latin
classics, at the public school: and his eloquence began to appear, even at that
early period, in the speeches which he delivered at the annual visitations. It
is probable, the applause he received on these occasions, contributed to his
fondness for theatrical amusements: From whence it has been insinuated, that he
learned his oratory upon the stage. This, however, seems to have no other
foundation, than his acting a part sometimes with his fellow scholars;
particularly, in certain dramatic performances prepared for them by their
master: For that he was more indebted as an orator to nature, than to art of
any kind, must be evident to all persons of discernment who were acquainted
with him. Such could not fail to observe, that his eloquence was in a great
measure the effect of his genius, and proceeded chiefly from that peculiar
assemblage of extraordinary talents with which God had endowed him.

Notwithstanding this, it appears from his conduct, that he either had not yet
discovered where his talents lay, or could not find means to qualify himself
for entering into any profession where they might be properly exercised: for,
when he was about fifteen years of age, he declined the pursuit of learning,
and talked (...) getting an education that would better fit him for ^siness.
During this period, he still continued to (...) with his mother; and as (...)
circumstances were not then so easy as before, he did not scruple to assist her
in the business of the tavern. But the prevailing (...) of his genius began now
strongly to discover itself; for even in this unfavourable situation, he ^posed
several sermons, one of which he dedicated in (...) eldest brother: And after
having visited him at ^tol, he came home with a resolution to abandon his
present employment, and to turn his thoughts a different way.

After this, being for some time disengaged (...) every pursuit, and but poorly
supported out (...) in others scanty subsistence, he was in no small (...) of
being utterly ruined by the influence of his former companions: but it pleased
God to break the snare by filling him with an abhorrence of their evil deeds.

About this time, the impressions of religion began again to recover their
influence in his breast: And when he was seventeen years of age, he received
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. He now became more and more watchful, both
over his heart and conversation. He was frequently employed in fasting and
prayer; spentmuch of his time in reading books of devotion; attended public
worship twice every day; and so deeply was he engaged in these exercises, that
his thoughts were constantly set on the great things of religion.

CHAP. II. From the Time of his going to the University of OXFORD, to his
embarking for GEORGIA, Anno 1737.
WHEN Mr. Whitefield arrived at eighteen, he was sent to the University of
Oxford, where he was again exposed to the society of the wicked: But
remembering his former danger and deliverance, by the grace of God, he resisted
all their solicitations, and cultivated an acquaintance with the Methodists, as
the only persons that seemed to preserve a sense of religion, through the whole
of their deportment.

It would be going beyond our purpose, to give an account of the rise of
Methodism: For this, the reader is referred to the Rev. Mr. John Wesley's first
Journal. But it may not be improper to notice the spirit of the age, when it
first appeared. At that time, serious and practical christianity in England was
in a very low condition; scriptural, experimental religion, (which in the last
century used to be the subject of the sermons and writings of the clergy) was
become quite unfashionable; and the only thing insisted on, was a defense of
the outworks of christianity against the objections of infidels. What was the
consequence? The writings of infidels multiplied every day, and infidelity made
a rapid progress among persons of every rank, not because they were reasoned
into it by the force of argument, but because they were kept strangers to
Christ and the power of the gospel. We have a most affecting description of
this, by Bishop Butler, whom none will suspect of exaggerating the fact:
Preface to his Analogy, May 1736.
It is come, I know not how, to be taken for granted, by many persons, that
christianity is not so much as a subject of inquiry; but that it is, now at
length, discovered to be fictitious; and, accordingly they treat it, as if in
the present age, this were an agreed point among all people of discernment; and
nothing remained but to set it up as a principal subject of mirth and ridicule;
as it were by way of reprisals, for its having so long interrupted the
pleasures of the world. Such was the state of religion in England, and Scotland
was greedily swallowing down the poison, when it pleased God to raise up the
Methodists, as instruments to revive his work in the midst of abounding
impiety, and to bring multitudes who had scarcely a form of godliness, to
experience its quickening and renewing power.

Happy was it for Mr. Whitefield, that there was a Society of Methodists, at
that time, in Oxford, but especially, that he became acquainted with the Rev.
Mr. Charles Wesley, by whom he was treated with particular kindness. Such
benefit did he receive under his ministry, that he always accounted him his
spiritual father. And Mr. Wesley's reciprocal affection for him, stands
recorded in the verses at the beginning of Mr. Whitefield's second and third
Journals.

Like the other Methodists, Mr. Whitefield now began to live by rule, and to
improve every moment of his time to the best advantage. He received the
communion every Sabbath, visited the sick, and the jail prisoners, and read to
the poor. For daring to be thus singularly religious, he soon incurred the
displeasure of his fellow-students, and felt the effects of it in their unkind
behavior. In the mean time, he was greatly distressed with melancholy
thoughts, which were augmented by excessive bodily austerities. And at last, by
reading, and perhaps misunderstanding some mystic writers, he was driven to
imagine, that the best method he could take, was to shut himself up in his
study, till he had perfectly mortified his own will, and was enabled to do good
without any mixture of corrupt motives. He likewise imagined, that he must
relinquish external duties, and public worship; and lastly, (which was no small
trial and affliction to him) that he must deny himself the pleasure of
conversing with his religious friends. In this pitiable state of mind, Mr.
Charles Wesley found him one day, when he went to see him; apprized him of his
danger, if he persisted in that way of life, and recommended to him his
brother, as a person of greater experience; who readily gave him, from time to
time, his friendly advice. Soon after this, however, he carried his abstinence
and fasting to such an extreme, that his body was so emaciated and feeble, that
he could hardly walk up stairs. His tutor therefore thought proper to call a
physician, and it appeared by the event, he had rightly judged in doing so: for
it pleased God to make the physician's care and medicines successful to his
recovery.

His bodily health being restored, his soul was likewise filled with peace and
joy in believing on the Son of God. This joy was so great for some time, that
go where he would, he could not help praising God continually in his heart, and
with some difficulty restrained himself from doing it aloud. As he was urged to
go into the country for confirming his health, he returned to his native air at
Gloucester, where (his mind being now happily enlightened) he preferred the
sacred writings to all other books, and read them with constant prayer; in
which exercise he found unspeakable delight and benefit. But inclination
conspired with duty, to hinder him from consining his religion to himself:
Having a heart formed for society and friendship, he could not think of
shutting himself up in his closet; but made it his business to converse with
young persons, about his own time of life, in order to awaken them to a sense
of religion. God was pleased soon to give success to his endeavors this way;
for several of them joined with him, and notwithstanding the contempt they knew
it would bring upon them, met together from time to time for religious
exercises. He also there read to some poor people in the town, twice or thrice
a week, and read and prayed with the prisoners in the county goal every day.

Being now about twenty-one years of age, he was sent for by Doctor Benson,
Bishop of Gloucester; who told him, That though he had purposed to ordain none
under three and twenty, yet he should reckon it his duty to ordain him whenever
he applied. Upon which, at the earnest persuasions of his friends, he prepared
for taking orders.

His behavior on this occasion was very exemplary. He first studied the
thirty-nine articles, that he might be satisfied of their being agreeable to
Scripture. Then he examined himself by the qualifications of a Minister
mentioned in the New Testament, and by the questions that he knew were to be
put to him at his ordination. On the Saturday, he was much in prayer for
himself and those who were to be ordained with him. On the morning of his
ordination, (which was at Gloucester, Sunday, June 20, 1736) he rose early, and
again read, with prayer, St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy, and after his
ordination, went to the Lord's Table.

The Sunday following, he preached his sermon on The Necessity and Benefit of
Religious Society, to a very crowded auditory; and that same week he set out
for Oxford, whither he inclined to go, rather than to the parish which the
Bishop would have given him; because it was the place where he might best
prosecute his studies, and where he hoped his labors might be most useful.
Last Sunday in the afternoon, I preached my first sermon in the church where I
was baptized, and also first received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Curiosity drew a large congregation together. The sight, at first, a little
awed me. But I was comforted with a heartfelt sense of the Divine presence:
And soon found the advantage of having been accustomed to public speaking, when
a boy at school; and of exhorting and teaching the prisoners and poor people at
their private houses, whilst at the university. By these means, I was kept from
being daunted over much. As I proceeded, I perceived the fire kindled, till at
last, though so young, and amidst a crowd of those who knew me in my childish
days, I trust I was enabled to speak with some degree of Gospel authority. Some
few mocked; but most for the present seemed struck: and I have since heard,
that a complaint had been made to the Bishop, that I drove fifteen mad, the
first sermon. The worthy Prelate, as I am informed, wished that the madness
might not be forgotten, before next Sunday Letter xvi.
. Soon after this, he was invited to officiate at the chapel of the Tower of
London. The first time he preached in London, was August 1736, at Bishopsgate
Church. Having a very young look, the people were surprised at his appearance,
and seemed to sneer as he went up to the pulpit; but they had not heard him
long, when their contempt was turned into esteem, and their smiles into grave
attention. He continued at the Tower two months, preaching, catechizing, and
visiting the soldiers; and several serious young men came to hear his morning
discourses on the Lord's day. In the mean time the letters which the Rev.
Messieurs Wesleys and Ingham wrote home from Georgia, made him long to go and
preach the Gospel in those parts; yet he waited till Providence should make his
way more clear, and returning to Oxford, he found himself very happy in his
former employments, and had much pleasure in reading Henry's Commentary on the
Bible, and in the company of some religious young men, who met together in his
chamber every day.

In November 1736, he was again called from Oxford, to Minister at Dummer in
Hampshire. This was a new sphere of action among poor illiterate people; but he
was soon reconciled to it, and thought he reaped no small profit by conversing
with them. Nevertheless, he continued his studies with unwearied application:
Dividing the day into three parts; eight hours for sleep and meals, eight for
public prayers, catechizing and visiting; and eight for study and retirement.
During his stay here, he was invited to a very profitable curacy in London; but
did not accept of it, as he was still intent upon going abroad. Providence, at
length, seemed to open a door to him; for he received letters, containing what
he thought to be an invitation, to go to Georgia, from Mr. John Wesley, whose
brother came over about this time to procure laborers. It is easy to judge,
how readily this proposal would be embraced: and now that he thought himself
clearly called, (many things concurring to make his stay at home less
necessary) he set his affairs in order, and in January 1737, went to take leave
of his friends in Gloucester and Bristol. At Gloucester, the congregations when
he preached, were very large, and very serious. At Bristol, many persons were
forced to return from the churches where he was invited to preach, for want of
room. He went also to Bath, where he was kindly received, and preached twice.
But he did not stay long at any of these places, being obliged to go to Oxford
about the latter end of February; from whence he came up to London, to wait
upon General Oglethorp and the Trustees for Georgia. He was soon introduced to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, who both approved of
his going abroad. While he continued at London, waiting for General Oglethorp,
he preached more frequently than he had done before, and greater numbers of
people flocked to hear him. But finding that the General was not likely to sail
for some time; and being under particular obligations to the Rev. Mr. Sampson
Harris, Minister at Stonehouse in Gloucestershire, he went at his request, to
supply his charge, till he should dispatch some affairs in London. There he was
very happy in his public ministrations, but especially in his retirements,
which he used afterward to reflect upon with great satisfaction See Letter xxi.
. On Mr. Harris's return, he left Stonehouse, and upon repeated invitations
went a second time to Bristol, where he preached as usual about five times a
week. Here the multitudes of his hearers still increased Some hung upon the
rails, others climed up the leads of the church, and all together made the
church itself so hot, with their breath, that the steam would fall from the
pillars like drops of rain. Ibid.


. He was attended by persons of all ranks and denominations; private religious
societies were erected; a collection for the poor prisoners in Newgate, was
made twice or thrice a week; and large encouragement was offered to him, if he
would not go abroad. -- During his stay at Bristol, which was from the end of
May to the twenty-first of June, he paid a second short visit to Bath, were the
people crowded, and were seriously affected as at Bristol, and not less than
160 l. was collected for the poor of Georgia.

June 21, he preached his farewell-sermon at Bristol; and toward the end of
the discourse, when he came to tell them, "it might be they would see him no
more," the whole congregation was exceedingly affected; high and low, young and
old, burst into a flood of tears. Multitudes, after sermon, followed him home
weeping; and the next day he was employed from seven in the morning till
midnight, in talking and giving advice to those who came to him, about the
concerns of their souls and salvation.

From Bristol he went to Gloucester, and preached to a very crowded auditory;
and after staying a few days went to Oxford, where he had an agreeable
interview with the Methodists, and came to London about the end of August.

Here he was invited to preach and assist in administering the Sacrament in a
great many churches. The congregations continually increased; and generally on
the Lord's-days, he used to preach four times to very large and very much
affected auditories, and to walk ten or twelve miles in going to the different
churches. His friends began to be afraid he would hurt himself; but he used to
say, He found by experience, the more he did, the more he might do for God.

His name was now put into the newspapers, (though without his consent or
knowledge) as a young Gentleman going volunteer to Georgia, who was to preach
before the societies at their general quarterly meeting. This stirred up the
people's curiosity more and more. He preached on that occasion, his sermon on
Early Piety, which was printed at the request of the societies. After this, for
near three months successively, there was no end of people's flocking to hear
him, and the managers of the charity schools were continually applying to him
to preach See Letter xxviii.
for the benefit of the children; for that purpose they procured the liberty of
the churches on other days of the week besides the Lord's Day; and yet
thousands went away from the largest churches, not being able to get in. The
congregations were all attention, and seemed to hear as for eternity. He
preached generally nine times a week, and often administered the Sacrament
early on the Lord's Day morning, when you might see the streets filled with
people going to church with lanthorns in their hands, and hear them conversing
about the things of God.

As his popularity increased, opposition increased proportionably. Some of the
clergy became angry; two of them sent for him, and told him, they would not let
him preach in their pulpits any more, unless he renounced that part of the
preface of his sermon on Regeneration, (lately published) wherein he wished
that his brethren would entertain their auditories oftener with discourses upon
the new birth. Probably some of them were irritated the more, by his free
conversation with many of the serious Dissenters, who invited him to their
houses, and repeatedly told him, That if the doctrines of the new birth, and
justification by faith, were preached powerfully in the churches, there would
be few Dissenters in England. Nor was he without opposition even from some of
his friends. But under these discouragements, he had great comfort in meeting
every evening with a band of religious intimates, to spend an hour in prayer,
for the advancement of the Gospel, and for all their acquaintance, so far as
they knew their circumstances. In this he had uncommon satisfaction: once he
spent a whole night with them in prayer and praise; and sometimes at midnight,
after he had been quite wearied with the labors of the day, he found his
strength renewed in this exercise, which made him compose his sermon upon
Intercession.

The nearer the time of his embarkation approached, the more affectionate and
eager the people grew. Thousands and thousands of prayers were put up for him.
They would run and stop him in the alleys of the churches, and follow him with
wishful looks. But above all, it was hardest for him to part with his weeping
friends at St. Dunstan's, where he helped to administer the Sacrament to them,
after spending the night before in prayer: This parting was to him almost
insupportable.

CHAP. III. From the Time of his embarking for GEORGIA, to his re-embarking for
ENGLAND, 1738.
IN the latter end of December, 1737, he embarked for Georgia Here begins a
Manuscript of Mr. Whitefield's, from which several passages are taken in the
following account. It is referred to by M. S.
. This was to him a new, and at first appearance, a very unpromising scene. The
ship was full of soldiers, and there were near twenty women among them. The
Captains, both of the soldiers and sailors, with the surgeon, and a young
cadet, gave him soon to understand, that they looked upon him as an impostor,
and for a while treated him as such. The first Lord's day, one of them played
on the hautboy, and nothing was to be seen but cards, and little heard but
cursing and blasphemy. This was a very disagreeable situation; but it is worth
while to observe, with what prudence he was helped to behave among them, and
how God was pleased to bless his patient and persevering endeavors to do them
good.

He began with the officers in the cabin, in the way of mild and gentle
reproof; but this had little effect. I could do no more for a season, than
whilst I was writing, now and then turn my head by way of reproof, to a
Lieutenant of the soldiers, who swore as though he was born of a swearing
constitution. Now, and then, he would take the hint, return my nod with a,
Doctor I ask your pardon, and then to his cards and swearing again M. S.
. He therefore tried what might be done between decks, among the soldiers. And
though the place was not very commodious, he read prayers and expounded twice a
day. At first he could not see any fruit of his labor, yet it was encouraging
to find it so kindly received by his new red-coat parishioners, (as he calls
them) many of whom submitted cheerfully to be catechized about the lessons they
had heard expounded.

In this situation things continued for some time. But all this while, he had
no place for retirement, and there was no divine service in the great cabin,
both which he greatly desired. At last he obtained his wish: one day finding
the ship Captain a little inclined to favor him, he asked him to suffer him
now and then to retire into the round-house, where the Captain slept, and
offered him money for the loan of it. The Captain would not take the money, but
readily granted his request. Soon afterward, the military Captain, having
invited him to a dish of coffee, he took the liberty to tell him, That though
he was a volunteer on board, yet as he was on board, he looked upon himself as
his Chaplain, and as such, he thought it a little odd, to pray and preach to
the servants, and not to the master; and added withal, That if he thought
proper, he would make use of a short collect now and then, to him, and the
other Gentlemen in the great cabin. After pausing a while, and shaking his
head, he answered, I think we may, when we have nothing else to do. This
awkward hint was all he got for the present; yet he was encouraged thereby to
hope, that the desired point would soon be gained.

They were detained in the Downs, by contrary winds, for near a month; the
soldiers on board became by this time more and more civilized, and the people
at Deal heard him gladly. There he preached thrice, at the invitation of the
Ministers, and often expounded in the house where he lodged. This work was very
delightful to him; but he was suddenly called away by a fair wind, about the
end of January, 1738, just after he had preached in Upper-Deal church.

Being returned to the ship, he began to comfort himself with some promising
appearances of doing good in the great cabin. As he had no better place, he
generally every night retired with his friend Mr. Habersham, and his brother,
and two servants, behind the round-house, for prayer and other religious
exercises. Sometimes, he perceived Captain Whiting was hearkening within. One
day finding on the Captain's pillow the Independent Whig, he exchang-it for a
book entitled, The Self-Deceiper. Next morning the Captain came smiling, and
enquired who made that exchange; Mr. Whitefield confessed the charge, and
begged his acceptance of the book, which he said he had read, and liked very
well. From thenceforward, a visible alteration was seen in him. The other
Captain also, about the same time, met him as he was coming from between decks,
and desired, that they might have public service and expounding twice a day in
the great cabin.

In about a fortnight, they reached Gibraltar, whither they were bound to take
in some more soldiers. There, one Major Sinclair had been so kind as to provide
a lodging for him unasked, who, with the other military Gentlemen, even
Governor Sabine, and General Columbine, received him most courteously. Being
apprehensive, that at a public military table, he might be more than hospitably
entertained, by way of prevention, he begged leave to remind his Excellency of
an observation made in the book of Esther, on the Court of the great Ahasuerus,
"That none did compel." He took the hint, and genteely replied, That no
compulsion of any kind should be used at his table. And every thing was carried
on with great decorum. The officers attended at public worship with order and
gravity; the Ministers also behaved with great civility; and all concurred to
give him invitations to preach, which he did twice or thrice in the week:
Strange and unusual was the scene, both with respect to the place and people.
The adjacent promontories, and the largeness of the rock of Gibraltar, helped
me to enlarge any ideas of him, who in his strength sets fast the mountains,
and is girded about with power. And the place being, as it were, a public
rendezvous of all nations, I thought I saw the world in epitome M. S.
. In the evenings and mornings, when on board, he expounded, conversed and
prayed with a religious society of soldiers, who had liberty from the Governor
to assemble at any time in the church. His evening expositions were attended,
not only by the soldiers, but by officers, Ministers and town's-people; and
from all that could be judged, his labors were not without the divine blessing.

Finding another society of religious soldiers there, belonging to the church
of Scotland, he sent them, as well as the former, some proper books, talked
with several of them, and endeavored to unite both societies together; urging
on them the necessity of a catholic, disinterested love, and of joining in
prayer for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ. This exhortation also, by
the blessing of God, had a good effect; and two or three of the latter society
being draughted out for Georgia, desired leave to go in the ship with Mr.
Whitefield, which was readily allowed them.

Before the embarkation of the soldiers, by the General's consent, he gave them
a parting discourse in the church. And after embarkation, from time to time, as
the weather permitted, he preached to them on board their respective ships He
not only preached to them; but gave them notice, that he intended speaking to
them, one by one, to see what account they could give of their faith. -- Ibid.
At this time he began his Observation on select passages of Scripture turned
into catechetical questions, printed in vol IV. of his works.
. Colonel Cochran, who commanded, was extremely civil: and soon after their
setting sail, there was such a change upon Captain Mackay, that he desired Mr.
Whitefield would not give himself the trouble of expounding and praying in the
cabin, and between decks; for he would order a drum to be beat morning and
evening, and himself would attend with the soldiers on the deck. This produced
a very agreeable alteration; they were now as regular as in a church. Mr.
Whitefield preached with a Captain on each side of him, and soldiers all
around; and the two other ships companies, being now in the trade winds, drew
near, and joined in the worship of God. The great cabin was now become
a-Bethel; both Captains were daily more and more affected; and a crucified
Savior, and the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, were the usual topics
of their conversation. Once after public sermon, Captain Mackay desired the
soldiers to stop, whilst he informed them, that to his great shame, he had been
a notorious swearer himself, but by the instrumentality of that Gentleman,
pointing to Mr. Whitefield, he had now left it off, and exhorted them, for
Christ's sake, that they would go and do likewise. The children were
catechized; there was a reformation throughout the soldiery. The women cried,
What a change in our Captain. The bad books and packs of cards which Mr.
Whitefield exchanged for Bibles, and other religious books (abundance of which
were given him to disperse by the Society for promoting Christian knowledge)
were now thrown overboard; and a fever, that prevailed in general through the
whole ship, helped to make the impressions sink deeper. For many days and
nights, he visited betwixt twenty and thirty sick persons, crawling between
decks upon his knees, administering medicines or cordials to them, and such
advice as seemed suitable to their circumstances. The sailors did not escape
the fever; Captain Whiting gladly went with him to visit them. One of them in
particular, who had been a most notorious scoffer, sent for him in a bitter
agony, crying out upon, and lamenting his wicked life. The cadet, who was a
cabin passenger, being also seized, was wounded deeply, told Mr. Whitefield the
history of his life, and informed Captain Mackay of his desire to leave the
army, and to return to his original intention (having had an university
education) of devoting himself to the service of the church of God. Mr.
Whitefield himself was also seized, but by the blessing of God, he soon
recovered, and was strong enough, in about a week, to come out to the burial of
the cook of the ship, who had boasted, That he would be wicked till two years
before he died, and then he would be good. But he was suddenly taken ill and
died in about six hours This was the only adult, except a soldier (who had
killed himself at Gibraltar by perpetual drinking) that died out of all that
were on board. M. S.
.

It was the beginning of May, when they drew near to land. After preaching his
farewell sermon, he arrived at the parsonage-house at Savannah, May 7, 1738,
about four months after his first embarkation at Deptford.

Upon this voyage (many years after) he made the following reflection: A long,
and, I trust, not altogether unprofitable voyage. What shall I render to the
Lord for all his mercies? Besides being strengthened to go through my public
work, I was enabled to write letters and compose sermons, as though I had been
on land. Even at this distance of time, the remembrance of the happy hours I
enjoyed in religious exercises on the deck, is refreshing to my soul. And
though nature sometimes relented at being taken away from my friends, and
little unusual inconveniences of a sea-life; yet, a consciousness that I had in
view the glory of God, and the good of souls, from time to time afforded me
unspeakable satisfaction M. S.
.

One Mr. Delamot, who had gone volunteer with Mr. Wesley, and was left behind
by him as schoolmaster at Savannah, received Mr. Whitefield at the
parsonage-house, which he found much better than expectation. Here some serious
persons, the fruits of Mr. Wesley's ministry, soon came to see him. On the
morrow he read prayers, and expounded in the court house, and waited upon the
magistrates; but being taken ill, he was confined for above a week with a fever
and ague.

When he was recovered, and able to look about him, he found every thing bore
the aspect of an infant colony: and, what was more discouraging still, he saw
it was likely to continue so, by the very nature of its constitution. The
people (says he) were denied the use both of rum and slaves. The lands were
allotted them, according to a particular plan, whether good or bad; and the
female heirs prohibited from inheriting. So that in reality, to place people
there on such a footing, was little better than to tie their legs and bid them
walk. The scheme was well meant at home; but, as too many years experience
evidently proved, was absolutely impracticable in so hot a country abroad.
However, that rendered what I had brought over from my friends, more acceptable
to the poor inhabitants, and gave me an occular demonstration, which was what I
wanted, when the hint was given It was first proposed to me by my dear friend
Mr. Charles Wesley, who, with General Oglethorpe, had concerted a scheme for
carrying o^ such a design, before I had any thoughts of going abroad myself.
Vol. III. p. 463.
of the great necessity and promising utility of a future orphan-house, which I
now determined, by the divine assistance, to set about in earnest. The
Saltzburgers at Ebenezer, I found had one; and having heard and read of what
Professor Franck had done in that way in Germany, I confidently hoped that
something of the like nature might be owned and succeeded in Georgia. Many poor
orphans were there already, and the number was likely soon to increase.

As opportunity offered, I visited Frederica, and the adjacent villages, and
often admired, considering the circumstances and disposition of the first
settlers, that so much was really done. The settlers were chiefly broken and
decayed tradesmen from London and other parts of England; and several Scotch
adverturers; some Highlanders, who had a worthy Minister, named Maclcod; a few
Moravians; and the Saltzburghers, who were by far the most industrious of the
whole. With the worthy ministers of Ebenezer, Messrs. Grenaw and Boltzius, I
contracted an intimacy. Many praying people were in the congregation, which,
with the consideration that so many charitable people in England had been
stirred up to contribute to Georgia, and such faithful laborers as Messrs.
Wesleys and Ingham had been sent, gave me great hopes, that, unpromising as the
aspect at present might be, the colony might emerge in time out of its infant
state. Some small advances Mr. Ingham had made toward converting the Indians,
who were at a small settlement about four miles from Savannah. He went and
lived among them for a few months, and began to compose an Indian grammar; but
he was soon called away to England; and the Indians (who were only some
runaway Creeks) were in a few years scattered or dead. Mr. Charles Wesley had
chiefly acted as Secretary to General Oglethorpe, but he soon also went to
England to engage more laborers; and not long after, his brother, Mr. John
Wesley, having met with unworthy treatment, both at Frederica and Georgia, soon
followed. All this I was apprized of, but think it most prudent not to repeat
grievances. Through divine mercy, I met with respectful treatment from
magistrates, officers and people. The first I visited now and then, the others,
besides preaching twice a day, and four times of a Lord's day, I visited from
house to house: I was, in general, most cordially received; but from time to
time found, that Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt: Though
lowered in their circumstances, a sense of what they formerly were in their
native country, remained. It was plain to be seen, that coming over was not so
much out of choice, as constraint: choosing rather to be poor in an unknown
country abroad, than beholden to relations, or live among those who knew them
in more affluent circumstances at home. Among some of these, the event however
proved, that the word took effectual root. I was really happy in my little
foreign cure, and could have cheerfully remained among them, had I not been
obliged to return to England, to receive priest's orders, and make a beginning
toward laying a foundation to the Orphan-house. And thus the place I intended
to hide myself in, became, through my being obliged to return for these
purposes a means of increasing that popularity which was already begun, but
which by me was absolutely unforseen, and as absolutely undesigned. During my
stay there, the weather was most intensely hot, sometimes burning me almost
through my shoes. Seeing others do it who were as unable, I determined to enure
myself to hardiness, by lying constantly on the ground; which by use, I found
to be so far from being a hardship, that afterward it became so, to lie on a
bed M. S.
.

About the middle of August, having settled ore that came with him as
schoolmaster in a neighboring village, and left his friend Mr. Habersham at
Savannah, after an affectionate parting with his flock, he set out for
Charlestown, in South Carolina.

Here he paid his first visit to Commissary Garden, and at his entreaty
preached the next Sunday morning and evening, in a grand church, resembling one
of the new churches in London. The inhabitants seemed at his first coming up to
despise his youth; but their countenances were altered before worship was over.
Mr. Garden thanked him most cordially, and apprized him of the ill treatment
Mr. Wesley had met with in Georgia, and assured him, that were the same
arbitrary proceedings to commence against him, he would defend him with his
life and fortune. He also said something about the colony of Georgia that much
encouraged him, as if he thought its flourishing was not very far off; and that
Charlestown was fifteen times bigger now, than when he (Mr. Garden) first came
there.

CHAP. IV. From his Embarkation at CHARLESTOWN for LONDON, to his preaching
first in MOREFIELDS, 1739.
SEPTEMBER 6, 1738, Mr. Whitefield embarked in a ship bound from Charlestown to
London. They had a very uncomfortable passage, for near a fortnight, they were
beat about not far from the bar; they were soon reduced to an allowance of
water; and the ship itself was quite out of repair. They were also very poorly
off for provisions. When they were about a third part of their passage, they
met with a Jamaica man who had plenty of every thing. He sent for Mr.
Whitefield on board, and offered him a most commodious birth; but he did not
think it right to leave his ship-mates in distress, and therefore returned to
his own ship, with such things as they were pleased to give him. The remaining
part of the voyage was still more perilous. The only thing comfortable, was,
that in the midst of these trials, deep impressions were made on some that were
on board. All constantly attended public worship twice and some thrice a day.
Once the Captain cried out, Lord, break this hard heart of mine. Others were
impressed: particularly one Captain Gladman a passenger, on whom a great change
was wrought, and afterward, at his own earnest request, became Mr.
Whitefield's fellow-traveller. At length, after nine weeks tossing and beating
to and fro they found themselves in Limerick harbor. I wish I could never
forget what I felt, when water and other provisions were brought us from
ashore. One Mr. MacMahon, a country gentleman came from his seat at midnight on
purpose to relieve us, and most kindly invited me, though unknown, to his house
to stay as long as I pleased. M. S. and Journals.


At Limerick, Bishop Burscough received him very kindly, and engaged him to
preach in the cathedral, the good effects of which he heard of many years
after. From thence he went to Dublin, where he preached, and was courteously
received by Dr. Delany, Bishop Rundel, and Archbishop Bolton, who had heard of
him from a gentleman of Gibraltar. And after a passage of twenty-four hours
from Dublin, he arrived at Park-gate, Thursday, November 30, preached twice on
the Lord's Day at Manchester, and came to London the Friday following, December
8.

Here, he had a conference with the Moravian brethren, who were lately come to
London; and though he could not directly fall in with their way of expressing
themselves, yet he heartily agreed with them in the old Protestant Doctrine of
Justification in the sight of God, by Faith alone in the imputed righteousness
of Christ; and was not a little delighted to find a great increase of the work
of God, both as to light and love, doctrine and practice, through the
instrumentality of Mr. Charles, and especially of Mr. John Wesley.

Some of the clergy now began to show their displeasure more and more; so that
in two days time, five churches were denied him. And though the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, both received him civilly, it was but
coldly: And the latter enquired, Whether his Journals were not a little
tinctured with enthusiasm? He replied, That they were written only for himself,
and private friends and were published entirely without his consent, or
knowledge, or so much as his consent being asked at all. It was certainly wrong
to publish them, without his consent and revisal; otherwise, the publication of
them was a very proper way to prevent the misrepresentation of facts, either by
calumny and detraction on the one hand, or by exaggeration on the other. And it
is a great pity he did not continue them. They would have been the best
possible memoirs of his life. But we see how the offense given by, or taken at,
some passages, might help to determine him to proceed (as he afterward says)
in a more compendious way. The Journals were, indeed, mostly written amidst his
incessant labors in preaching, traveling, and writing a multitude of letters.
And the whole was told with that unguarded simplicity, which though it charms the
candid, and disposes them to forgive or overlook many things, yet gives
frequent handle to the critical and severe. It must also be owned, that his
unsuspecting honesty made him sometimes receive, with too little caution, the
characters of persons and societies, from those whom he took to be friends of
religion, and who, perhaps, were really so, but were misinformed. Being
therefore convinced, upon second thoughts, that both his Journals, and the two
first parts of his Life, needed correction, he promised a new edition of them,
which he accordingly published in 1756. And in the preface he ingenuously
acknowledges, That upon a review, he had found many mistakes, (which are now
rectified) and many passages that were justly exceptionable, (which are now
erased.) And in a note, upon September 24, 1740, he says, In my former Journal,
taking things by hearsay too much, I spoke and wrote too rashly, both of the
Colleges and Ministers of New England; for which, as I have already done when
at Boston last, from the pulpit, I take this opportunity of asking public
pardon from the press. It was rash and uncharitable, and though well-meant, I
fear, did hurt. But these corrections, while they show the author's candor and
humility, do not affect the history of his extraordinary labors and success in
the work of the Gospel.

The Trustees for the Colony of Georgia received him more cordially, were
pleased to express their satisfaction at the accounts sent them of his conduct,
during his stay in the colony, and being requested, by letters sent unknown to
him, from the Magistrates and Inhabitants, they most willingly presented him to
the Living of Savannah, (though he insisted upon having no salary) and as
readily granted him five hundred acres of land, whereon to erect an
Orphan-house; to collect money for which, together with taking Priest's Orders,
were the chief motives of his returning to England so soon.

Near a month elapsed, before a board sat to make him these returns. But during
that interval, he was not idle. He and his brethren went on in their usual
course, taking hold of every opportunity of doing good, and preaching
occasionally as churches were allowed them God gave us a most pleasant Gospel
Christmas season, and such a happy beginning of a New-Year as I had never seen
before. M. S.
. And though the churchwardens and clergy were averse, yet the common people
were rather more eager than ever. But what surprised him most was, to see many
of the heads and members of the London Societies, (who, by the accounts given
by Dr. Woodward and Horneck See Dr. Woodward's Account of the Rise and Pro^^ss
of the Religious Societies in the City of London, etc.
, he thought were founded on a good bottom) make such vir^^ut opposition.
However, numbers of them were of another mind, and other Societies were soon
formed in various parts of the town. A large room in Fetterlane was the general
place of rendezvous, where they had frequent meetings, and great satisfaction
in social prayer. It was a Pentecost season indeed. Sometimes whole nights were
spent in prayer. Often have we been filled as with new wine. And often have I
seen them overwhelmed with the Divine Presence, and cry out, Will GOD, indeed,
dwell with men upon earth! How dreadful is this place! This is no other than
the house of GOD, and the gate of Heaven! M. S.
At the same time, in the churches that were open, the people crowded, and were
affected more than ever. And he and his brethren were so much engaged, that for
some days he could walk, and preach, and visit Societies with very little
sleep, and religious exercises seemed to be their meat and drink.

January 11, 1739, he set out for Oxford to receive Priest's Orders from his
good friend Bishop Benson, which he did the next Lord's Day; and having
preached and administered the Sacrament at the Castle, and preached again in the
afternoon, to a crowded congregation, he returned to London, January 15.

As he had collected so much for the Charity schools last year, he reasonably
supposed that the pulpits would not be denied him for the use of the Georgia
Orphan-house this year. But the religious concern advancing, and spreading more
and more, opposition also increased. A pamphlet was published against his
sermon, On Regeneration. Several Clergymen made strong objections against him
and his brethren for expounding in societies; and some people were threatened
with prosecution by their parish ministers, for suffering them to expound in
their houses. Yet this did not discourage either preachers or hearers. The more
they were opposed, the more they were strengthened. New awakenings were heard
of in various parts; and, "What shall I do to be saved?" was the repeated
question of every day.

All the pulpits were not as yet shut up: Two or three churches were allowed
him to preach in, and to collect for the Georgia Orphans, and for erecting a
church for the poor Saltzburghers at Ebenezer. One Mr. Broughton behaved nobly
on this occasion. Application being made to him, to deny Mr. Whitefield his
pulpit, he answered, Having got the Lectureship of St. Helen's by Mr.
Whitefield's influence; if he insists upon it, he shall have my pulpit. Mr.
Whitefield did insist upon it, but (Mr. Broughton losing the Lectureship) he
afterward blamed himself much for his conduct.

In Bristol he had the use of the churches for two or three Sundays, but soon
found they would not be open very long. The Dean was not at home: The
Chancellor threatened to silence and suspend him. In about a fortnight every
door was shut, except Newgate, where he preached, and collected for the poor
prisoners, and where people thronged, and were much impressed; but this place,
also was soon shut against him, by orders from the Mayor.

Before his first embarkation for Georgia, when he talked of going abroad,
numbers in Bristol used to reply, What need of going abroad? Have we not
Indians enough at home? If you have a mind to convert Indians, there are
colliers enough in Kingswood. And before he left London, whilst preaching at
Bermondsey Church, and seeing so many thousands that could not come in, he had
a strong inclination to go out and preach to them (though he then used notes)
upon one of the tombstones in the churchyard. And this he mentioned to some
friends, who looked upon the motion, at first, very unfavourably; yet were
willing to take it into farther consideration. At Bristol he thought he had a
clear call to try this method. The colliers, he had heard, were very rude, and
very numerous; so uncultivated, that no body cared to go among them; neither
had they any place of worship; and often, when provoked, they were a terror to
the whole city of Bristol. He therefore looked upon the civilizing of these
people; and much more, the bringing of them to the profession and practice of
christianity, as a matter of great importance. I thought it might be doing the
service of my Creator, who had a mountain for his pulpit, and the heavens for a
sounding board; and who, when his Gospel was refused by the Jews, set his
servants into the high ways and hedges M. S.
. After much prayer, and many struggles with himself, he one day went to Hannam
Mount, and standing upon a hill, began to preach to about a hundred colliers,
upon Matt. v. 1, 2, 3. This soon took air. At the second and third time the
numbers greatly increased, till the congregation, at a moderate computation,
amounted to near twenty thousand. But with what gladness and eagerness, many of
these despised outcasts, who had never been in a church in their lives,
received the word, is above description. Having (as he writes) no righteousness
of their own to renounce, they were glad to hear of a Jesus who was a friend to
publicans, and came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The
first discovery of their being affected, was to see the white gutters made by
their tears, which plentifully fell down their black cheeks, as they came out
of the coal pits. Hundreds and hundreds of them were soon brought under deep
convictions, which (as the event proved) happily ended in a sound and thorough
conversion. The change was visible to all, though numbers chose to impute it to
any thing, rather than the finger of God. As the scene was quite new, and I had
just began to be an extempore preacher, it often occasioned many inward
conflicts. Sometimes, when twenty thousand people were before me, I had not, in
my own apprehension, a word to say, either to God or them. But I was never
totally deserted, and frequently (for to deny it would be lying against God) so
assisted, that I knew by happy experience, what our Lord meant by saying, Out
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. The open firmament above me,
the prospect of adjacent fields, with the sight of thousands, some in coaches,
some on horseback and some in the trees, and at times all affected and drenched
in tears together, to which sometimes was added, the solemnity of the
approaching evening, was almost too much for, and quite overcame me M. S.
.

Besides the colliers, and thousands from neighboring villages, persons of all
ranks flocked daily out of Bristol. And he was soon invited to preach, by some
of the better sort, in a large bowling-green in the city itself. Many indeed
sneered, to see a stripling, with a gown, mount a table, upon what they called
unconsecrated ground. And for once, or twice, it excited the contempt and
laughter of the higher rank, who formerly were his admirers, when he preached
in the churches. But God enabled him to stand the laugh, and to preach the
Gospel of Christ with earnestness and constancy; and was pleased to attend it
with his blessing. From all quarters, people flocked under great concern about
their souls. Sometimes he was employed almost from morning to night, giving
answer to those who came in great distress, crying out, "What shall we do to be
saved?" More assistance was wanted; he therefore wrote to Mr. John Wesley, who
had never yet been at Bristol, and having received a favorable answer,
recommended him and his brother, in the strongest manner, to the people, and
earnestly prayed that the last might be first; for he was determined to pursue
his scheme of the Orphan-house, and return again to his retreat at Georgia.

Mr. Wesley being come, he took an affectionate leave of his friends at
Bristol, and made a second excursion to Wales, where an awakening had begun
some years before, by the instrumentality of the Rev. Mr. Griffith Jones, and
was now carried on by the ministry of one Mr. Howel Harris, a layman. They met
at Cardiff, and in company with many others went to Husk, Ponty-pool,
Abergavenny, Comiboy, Carleon, Trelex, and Newport, and preached in all these
places, Mr. Whitefield first in English, and Mr. Harris afterward in Welsh, to
many thousands. The serious persons among them, of the Free Grace Dissenters,
rejoiced; but many of high-flying principles, and of another stamp, were
equally enraged, and expressed their dislike by mockings and threats. All
these, however, he was enabled to bear with patience, and without the least
discouragement.

About the 8th of April, from Wales he went to Gloucester, the place of his
birth, where a church was allowed him for once or twice, but no more. However,
he preached frequently in Boothall, (the place where the judges sit) and in his
brother's field, to many thousands. At the time of Mr. Whitefield's preaching
in Gloucester, old Mr. Cole, a dissenting Minister, used to say, These are days
of the Son of Man indeed. This Mr. Cole, Mr. Whitefield when a boy, was taught
to ridicule. And being asked once by one of his congregation, What business he
would be of? He said, A Minister; but he would take care never to tell stories
in the pulpit like old Cole. About twelve years afterward, the old man hearing
him preach, and tell some story to illustrate the subject he was upon, and
having been informed what he had before said, made this remark to one of his
elders, I find that young Whitefield can now tell stories, as well as old Cole.
He was much affected with Mr. Whitefield's preaching, and so humble, that he
used to subscribe himself his curate; and went about preaching after him in the
country from place to place. But one evening, whilst preaching, he was struck
with death, and then asked for a chair to lean on, till he concluded his
sermon, when he was carried up stairs, and died. Mr. Whitefield's reflection
upon this (Letter DXXIII.) is, O blessed God! if it be thy holy will, may my
exit be like his!

As to Mr. Whitefield's telling stories in the pulpit, some perhaps may find
fault; but beside, that he had an uncommon fund of passages, proper enough to
be thus told, and a peculiar talent of telling them; it was certainly, a mean
of drawing multitudes to hear him, who would not have attended to the truths of
the Gospel, delivered in the ordinary manner.

His concern for his countrymen, his fellow-citizens, and his own relations,
made him forget all bodily weakness, (to which about this time he was
frequently subject) and readily to comply with invitations given to preach at
Painswick, Chaltenham, Evesham, Badsey, Strou^, Chafford, places abounding with
inhabitants, and where there is ground to hope, many received much spiritual
benefit. To wander thus about from place to place; to stand in bowling-greens,
at market-crosses, and in highways, especially in his own country, where had he
conferred with flesh and blood, he might have lived at ease; to be blamed by
friends; and have every evil thing spoken against him by his enemies; was
(especially when his body was weak, and his spirits, low) very trying; but
still he was inwardly supported.

April 21. He again went to Oxford, and after staying a few days with the
Methodists there, came to London, where he attempted to preach at Islington
church, the incumbent, Mr. Stonehouse, being a friend to the Methodists; but in
the midst of the prayers, the churchwarden came and demanded his license, or
otherwise he forbad his preaching in that pulpit. He might perhaps have
insisted on his right to preach, yet for peace sake he declined; and after the
communion service was over, he preached in the churchyard.

Opportunities of preaching in a more regular way being now denied him, and his
preaching in the fields being attended with a remarkable blessing, he judged it
his duty to go on in this practice, and ventured the following Sunday into
Moorfields. Public notice having been given, and the thing being new and
singular, upon coming out of the coach, he found an incredible number of people
assembled. Many had told him, that he should never come again out of that place
alive. He went in, however, between two of his friends, who, by the pressure of
the crowd, were soon parted entirely from him, and were obliged to leave him to
the mercy of the rabble. But these, instead of hurting him, formed a lane for
him, and carried him along to the middle of the Fields, (where a table had been
placed, which was broken in pieces by the crowd) and afterward back again to
the wall that then parted the upper and lower Moorfields; from whence he
preached without molestation, to an exceeding great multitude in the lower
Fields. Finding such encouragement, he went that same evening to
Kennington-Common, a large open place, near three miles distant from London,
where he preached to a vast multitude, who were all attention, and behaved with
as much regularity and quietness, as if they had been in a church Words cannot
well express the glorious displays of Divine Grace, which we saw, and heard of,
and felt. M. S.
.

CHAP. V. From his preaching in MOORFIELDS, etc. to his laying the Foundation
of the Orphan-House in GEORGIA, 1740.
FOR several months after this, Moorfields, Kennington-Common, and Blackheath,
were the chief scenes of action. At a moderate computation, the auditories
often consisted of above twenty thousand. It is said, their singing could be
heard two miles off, and his voice near a mile. Sometimes there were upwards of
a hundred coaches, besides wagons, scaffolds, and other contrivances, which
particular persons let out for the convenience of the audience. Having no other
method to take, he was obliged to collect for the Orphan-house in the fields,
or not at all, which was humbling to him and his friends, who assisted him in
that work. But the readiness with which the people gave, and the prayers which
they put up when throwing in their mites, were very encouraging Once upwards of
twenty pounds were collected in halfpence. M. S.
. In the mean while, Mr. John Wesley was laboring with great zeal at Bristol,
his brother Mr. Charles, in London and elsewhere, Mr. Ingham had been preaching
in many churches of Yorkshire, Mr. Kinchin in Oxford, and Mr. Rogers in
Bedfordshire. Thus the seed sown was gradually increased, and the embargo which
was now laid on the shipping, gave him leisure for more journeys through
various parts of England; and God was pleased to ^^wn his labors with amazing
success.

Some demur happening in Bristol, he went there a few days; put Mr. John Wesley
(who had now made a progress in building the Kingswood school, and also had
begun a room at Bristol) in full power; and took him along with him, and
introduced him as a field preacher, at Gloucester and other places. Every where
the word seemed to sink deeper and deeper into the hearts of the hearers.
Singing and praying were heard in Kingswood, instead of cursing and swearing;
and in many other places the fruits of righteousness evidently appeared.

Many false reports were now spread abroad concerning him. Not a journey he
could make, but he was either killed or wounded, or died suddenly. One
groundless fiction was continually invented after another. And the Bishop of
London laid hold of this occasion for publishing a charge to his clergy, to
avoid the extremes of enthusiasm and lukewarmness. But amidst these
discouragements, he was not left without the countenance and friendship of
several persons of influence.

The embargo being taken off, and upwards of a thousand pounds collected for
the Orphan-house, he sailed the second time for America, August 14, 1739, with
a family consisting of eight men, one boy, and two children, besides his friend
Mr. Seward.

After a passage of nine weeks For the manner in which he employed his time on
board, see his Journals and Letters of this period. A little before he sailed,
he finished his Answer to the Bishop of London's Pastoral letter. And during
the voyage, he wrote his Letter to the Religious Societies of England. See vol.
IV. of his works.
, he arrived at Philadelphia in the beginning of November, and was immediately
invited to preach in the churches, to which people of all denominations
thronged, as in England. From thence he was invited to New York, by Mr. Noble,
the only person with whom he had any acquaintance in that part of America. Upon
his arrival, they waited on the Commissary; but he refused him the use of his
church. Mr. Whitefield, therefore, preached in the fields, and on the evening
of the same day, to a very thronged and attentive audience in the Rev. Mr.
Pemberton's meeting house; and continued to do so twice or thrice a day for
above a week; and by all that could be judged, with very great success.

On his way to and from Philadelphia, he also preached at Elizabeth-Town,
Maidenhead, Abingdon, Neshamini, Burlington, and New-Brunswick, in the
New-Jerseys, to some thousands gathered from various parts, among whom there
had been a considerable awakening, by the instrumentality of one Mr.
Freelinghausen, a Dutch Minister, and the Messrs. Tennents, Blair and Rowland.
He had also the pleasure of meeting with old Mr. Tennent, as well as his sons,
and with Mr. Dickinson. Mr. Tennent, and his brethren in presbytery, intend
breeding up gracious youths for our Lord's vineyard. The place wherein the
young men study now, is a log-house, about twenty feet long, and near as many
broad. From this despised place, seven or eight worthy Ministers of Jesus have
lately been sent forth, and a foundation is now laying for the instruction of
many others. The work, I am persuaded, is of God, and therefore will not come
to naught Journals, Nov. 22, 1739.
.

The event has verified his judgment about this institution. It is now a large
College at Princeton in New-Jerseys; and has already had many worthy
Presidents, (some of whose names are well known in the learned world) such as
Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Burr, Mr. Jonathan Edwards, Mr. Samuel Davies, Dr. Finley,
and at present Dr. Witherspoon, by whose abilities, care, and activity, it is,
under Providence, in a very flourishing condition.

And there has been lately, (summer 1770) a remarkable revival of religion
among the students, both in the college and grammar school.

It was no less pleasing than strange to him, to see such gatherings in a
foreign land; Ministers and people shedding tears; sinners struck with awe; and
serious persons, who had been much run down and despised, filled with joy. Mean
time, the Orphan-house affairs went on well. The things brought from England,
were sold for their benefit. A sloop was purchased, of which Captain Gladman
was master; and a young man, who had lately received serious impressions under
Mr. Whitefield's preaching, willingly offered himself as mate. Many little
presents were made to his family for sea stores, and the intended house. And
about the end of November, he took his leave of his family, and ordered them to
proceed in their voyage to Savannah, while himself, with Mr. Seward and two
more, determined to go thither by land.

Numbers followed, some twenty, some sixty miles out from Philadelphia. He
preached at Chester, Wilmington, Newcastle, (where he was met on the way by Mr.
Ross, Minister of the place) Christian-Bridge, and Whitely-Creek, where Mr.
William Tennent (whose meeting house is in the neighborhood) had erected a
tent for him. Here he observed new scenes of field-preaching, or rather
preaching in the woods, opened to him. At Whitely-Creek, perhaps the
congregation did not consist of less than ten thousand. Earnest invitations
were given him to come and preach elsewhere; which he had great encouragement
to do, from the visible success of his labors; but he hasted to be with his
family at Savannah.

In his way thither, he also preached in Maryland, at North-East and Joppa, and
at Annapolis, the capital, where he was received with much civility by the
Governor; and at Upper-Marlborough.

In Virginia also, he preached at Williamsburgh, where he was courteously
received by the Governor, and by Mr. Blair the Commissary, whom he speaks of
with great regard.

When he came to North Carolina, he thought it seemed to be the greatest waste,
and the most uncultivated of spots, both in a temporal and spiritual sense. Yet
here, in a place called Newburn-Town, his preaching was attended with an
uncommon influence. And it was not without effect at Newton on Cape-Fear River,
where were many from Scotland amongst the congregation, who had lately come
over to settle in North Carolina.

Immediately on coming into South Carolina province, (he says) a visible change
was observable in the manners of the people. And when he came to Charlestown,
(which was on Saturday, January 3, 1740) he could scarce believe but he was
amongst Londonners, both in respect of gaiety of dress, and politeness of
manners.

Here he soon perceived, that by field-preaching he had lost his old friend the
Commissary, who once promised to defend him with life and fortune. However, at
the request of the Independent Minister, (who continued his friend to his dying
day) he preached in his meeting house. At the first sermon, all was gay and
trifling, no impression seemingly made at all. But next morning in the French
church, the scene was quite altered. A visible, and almost universal concern
appeared. Many of the inhabitants earnestly desired him to give them one sermon
more; for which purpose he was prevailed upon to put off his journey till the
next day; and there was reason to think his stay was not in vain.

Next morning, he and his companions set out in an open canoe for Savannah; and
in their way, for the first time, lay in the woods, upon the ground, near a
large fire, which keeps off the wild beasts; upon which he makes this
reflection, An emblem, I thought, of the divine love and presence keeping off
evils and corruptions from the soul M. S.
.

On his arrival at Savannah, January 11, he was very happy to meet his family,
who had got there three weeks before him; and to find by letters from England,
New York, etc. that the work of God prospered. But it was a melancholy thing to
see the colony of Georgia reduced even to a much lower ebb than when he left
it, and almost deserted by all but such as could not well go away. Employing
these, therefore, he thought would be of singular service, and the money
expended, might be also a means of keeping them in the colony.

Before his arrival, Mr. Habersham had pitched upon a plot of ground for the
Orphan-house, of 500 acres, about ten miles from Savannah, and had already
begun to clear and stock it. The orphans, in the mean time, were accommodated
in a hired house. On this, many years after, he makes the following
reflections: Had I proceeded according to the rules of prudence, I should have
first cleared the land, built the house, and then taken in the orphans; but I
found their condition so pitiable, and the inhabitants so poor, that I
immediately opened an infirmary, hired a large house at a great rent, and took
in at different times, twenty-four orphans. To all this I was encouraged, by
the example of Professor Franck. But I forgot to recollect, that Professor
Franck built in Glaucha, in a populous country, and that I was building in the
very tail of the world, where I could not expect the least supply, and which
the badness of its constitution, which every day I expected would be altered,
rendered by far the most expensive part of all his Majesty's dominions. But had
I received more and ventured less, I should have suffered less, and others more
M. S.
.

The first collection he made in America, was at the Rev. Mr. Smith's
meeting house in Charlestown, whither he went about the middle of March, to see
his brother, the Captain of a ship from England. He was desired by some of the
inhabitants, to speak in behalf of the poor orphans; and the collection
amounted to seventy pounds sterling. This was no small encouragement to him at
that time, especially as he had reason to think it came from those who had
received spiritual benefit by his ministrations.

Having returned to Savannah, he went to the spot of ground, where he intended
the Orphan-house should be built, and upon the 25th day of March, 1740, laid
the first brick of the great house, which he called Bethesda, i. e. a house of
mercy. Long after this he writes, Blessed be God, I have not been disappointed
in the hope, that it would be a house and place of mercy to many, both in
respect to body and soul M. S.
. By this time, near forty children were taken in, to be provided with food and
raiment; and counting the workmen and all, he had near a hundred to be daily
fed. He had very little money in bank; and yet he was not discouraged, being
persuaded, that the best thing he could do at present for the infant colony,
was to carry on the work.

CHAP. VI. From his laying the Foundation of his Orphan-house in GEORGIA, to
his Arrival in ENGLAND, 1741.
MR. Whitefield again, therefore, set off in a sloop for Newcastle in
Pennsylvania, where he arrived about the middle of April. In this short passage
of ten days, he was much discouraged both by weakness of body, and low spirits.
But, as he observed afterward, Providence was infinitely better to him than
his fears, and exceeded his most sanguine expectations. For during the space of
two months, he was strengthened to preach, generally twice, and frequently,
besides traveling, thrice a day. At Philadelphia, the churches were no longer
allowed him; but he preached in the fields to congregations that consisted
sometimes of near ten thousand, and with great apparent success. Large
collections were made for the Orphan-house; once, not less than an hundred and
ten pounds sterling. S^^ieties for praying and singing were set on foot; and in
every part of the town, many were concerned about their salvation. Some were
wrought upon in a more instantaneous, others in a more progressive, some in a
more silent, others in a more violent manner Many negroes came; some of them
inquiring, Have I a soul? M. S.
.

At New York, New-Brunswick, Statten-Island, Baskenridge, Whitely-Creek,
Frogs-Manor, Reedy-Island, there was great concern upon the minds both of the
preacher and hearers.

Sometimes he was almost dead with heat and fatigue. Thrice a day he was lifted
up upon his horse, unable to mount otherwise; then rode and preached, and came
in and laid himself along upon two or three chairs. He did not doubt but such a
course would soon take him to his desired rest. Yet he had many delightful
hours with Messrs, Tennents, Blair, etc. Night, says he, was as it were turned
into day, when we rode singing through the woods. I could not help recommending
these men, wherever I went, in the strongest manner, beeause I saw they
gloried in the cross of Christ M. S.
.

In a journal written by Mr. William Seward, (Mr. Whitefield's companion in
travel) we have the following particulars belonging to this period.

April 9, 1740. Mr. Whitefield proposed my going to England upon several
important affairs, particularly to bring over Mr. Hutchins to take care of the
Orphan-house in his absence -- To acquaint the Trustees of Georgia with the
state of the colony, and the means, under God, for the better establishment
thereof, it being now upheld almost wholly by the soldiery and Orphan-house,
most of the people who are unconcerned in either, being gone or going -- The
proper means are principally three, 1. An allowance of negroes. 2. A free title
to the lands. 3. An independent magistracy, viz. such as are able and willing
to serve without fee or reward. My business with the Trustees will be farther,
to bring over the money, lodged in their hands for building the church at
Savannah. I am, moreover, to collect subscriptions for a Negroe school in
Pennsylvania, where our brother Whitefield proposes to take up land, in order
to settle a town for the reception of such English friends, whose hearts God
shall incline to come and settle there.

April 13. Mr. Tennent informed us of the great success which had attended our
brother Whitefield's preaching, when here last. For some time, a general
silence was fixed by the Lord on people's minds, and many began seriously to
think on what foundation they stood -- A general outward reformation has been
visible. Many ministers have been quickened in their zeal to preach the word in
season and out of season. Congregations are increased, and some few, it is
hoped, will be brought, through their convictions, into a sound and saving
conversion.

April 14. Mr. Jones, the Baptist minister, told us of two other ministers, Mr.
Treat and Mr. Morgan, who were so affected with our brother Whitefield's
spirit, that the latter had gone forth, preaching the glad tidings of
salvation, toward the seacoast in the Jerseys, and many other places which
lay in darkness and the shadow of death. The former told his congregation, that
he had been hitherto deceiving himself and them; and that he could not preach
to them at present, but desired they would join in prayer with him.

April 15. We were informed, that an Indian trader was so affected with brother
Whitefield's doctrine, that he is gone to teach the Indians, with whom he used
to trade.

April 18. This day was published our brother Whitefield's Letter to the
Inhabitants of Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, about their abuse
of the poor negroes See his works, vol. IV.
.

Heard of a drinking club that had a negroe boy attending them, who used to
mimic people for their diversion. The Gentlemen bid him mimic our brother
Whitefield, which he was very unwilling to do; but they insisting upon it, he
stood up and said, 'I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, unless you repent
you will all be damned.' This unexpected speech broke up the club, which has
not met since.

-- Notice was given of a new lecture at German-Town every Thursday, by four
Ministers.

April 22. Agreed with Mr. Allen for five thousand acres of land on the forks
of Delaware, at 2200 l. sterling, the conveyance to be made to Mr. Whitefield,
and after that assigned to me, as security for my advancing the money. Mr.
Whitefield proposes to give orders for building the negroe school on the
purchased land, before he leaves the province.

April 24. Came to Christopher Wigner's plantation in Skippack, where many
Dutch people are settled, and where the famous Mr. Spalemburg resided lately.
It was surprising to see such a multitude of people gathered together in such a
wilderness country, thirty miles distant from Philadelphia. -- Our brother was
exceedingly carried out in his sermon, to press poor sinners to come to Christ
by faith, and claim all their privileges, viz. Not only righteousness and
peace, but joy in the Holy Ghost: and after he had done, our dear friend Peter
Boehler preached in Dutch, to those who could not understand our brother in
English.

Before our brother left Philadelphia, he was desired to visit one who was
under a deep sense of sin from hearing him preach. And in praying with this
person, he was so carried beyond himself, that the whole company (which were
about twenty) seemed to be filled with the Holy Ghost, and magnified the God of
heaven.

April 25. Rose at three o'clock; and though our brother Whitefield was very
weak in body, yet the Lord enabled him to ride near fifty miles, and to preach
to about five thousand people at Amwell, with the same power as usual. -- Mr.
Gilbert Tennent, Mr. Rowland, Mr. Wales, and Mr. Campbell, four godly
Ministers, met us here.

April 26. Came to New-Brunswick. -- Met Mr. Noble from New York, a zealous
promoter of our Lord's kingdom. He said their society at New York was increased
from seventy, to one hundred and seventy, and was daily increasing; and that
Messrs. Gilbert and William Tennents, Mr. Rowland, and several others, were
hard laborers in our Lord's vineyard.

April 28. Had a most affectionate parting with our dear brother Whitefield,
and our other brethren The rest of Mr. Seward's journal was written mostly
during his passage to England, where he arrived June 19, and with which it
concludes. Mr. Whitefield, in the new edition of his Journals, 1756, observes,
April 28, 1740. This was the last time I saw my worthy friend; for, before my
return to England, he was entered into his rest, having left behind, a glorious
testimony of the transforming efficacy of converting grace. This has also been
the happy case of his brother Benjamin, who lately finished his course with joy.
.

With great joy he reached Savannah on the 5th of June, bringing his orphans,
in money and provisions, upwards of five hundred pounds sterling. Next day,
when they came to public worship, young and old were all dissolved in tears.
Some, who came to visit them, were also deeply impressed; particularly Mr. Hugh
Bryan and his family, and some For a more particular account of Mr. Bryan's
family, and of his visit to Mr. Whitefield, and what followed upon it, See No.
I. of Living Christianity delineated in the Diaries and letters of Mr. Hugh
Bryan and Mrs. Mary Hutson. Recommended by the Rev. Dr. Conder and Dr. Gibbons.
of his relations. Several from Beauford in South Carolina, then received their
first impressions. All these things gave him great encouragement. And though
his family was now great, (near a hundred and fifty, including workmen) and the
plan laid down would have required some thousands to support it; and although
very often he had not twenty pounds in cash, he was still kept from being
disheartened; and his friends, believing the work to be of God, continued
cheerfully to assist him.

Though he was very weak in body, yet the cry from various quarters for more
preaching, and the necessity of supplying so large a family, made him go again
to Charlestown, where, as well as at Dorchester, Ashley-Ferry, Ponpon, and
John's-Island, he preached to very attentive and affected auditories.
Charlestown was the place of the greatest success, and of the greatest
opposition. The Commissary poured out his anathemas, refused to give him the
sacrament, and published some letters against him. But all in vain. He preached
twice almost every day, to great crowds, in the independent and Baptist
meeting houses; besides expounding in the evening in merchants houses. Thus he
went on successfully (though often ready to die with the excessive heat) till
the end of August: when having received most pressing invitations from the Rev.
Dr. Colman, and Mr. Cooper, ministers in Boston; and being desirous of seeing
the descendants of the good old Puritans, and their seats of learning; and
having encouragement that something might be done for the Orphan-house, he
embarked in the Orphan-house sloop for New England, in company with several
Charlestown friends; and arrived at Rhode-sland, September 14.

Here several Gentlemen soon came to visit him, among whom was the Rev. Mr.
Clap, an aged dissenting minister, in whom he thought he saw what manner of men
the old Puritans were who first settled New England, and was much delighted
with his conversation. They went together to the incumbent's house, to ask the
use of the church, which was granted; and in it he preached three days, twice a
day, to deeply affected auditories.

This he thought was a happy entrance into New England. But he was still more
agreeably surprised, when, before he got to Boston, he was met several miles
from the city, by the governor's son, and some of the ministers, and principal
inhabitants, who conducted him to Mr. St -- nf -- rd's (brother-in-law to Dr.
Colman) who, with his colleague Mr. Cooper, and many others, came and joined in
prayer.

Jonathan Belcher, Esquire was then Governor of the Massachusett's colony, and
Josiah Willard, Secretary. Both these Gentlemen were his sincere friends, so
were the Ministers, Messrs. Web, Foxcraft, Prince, Dr. Sewald, Gee, etc. To
avoid, however, giving any just offense, he went to the English church to
morning prayers; but finding, by conversation with the Commissary, and some
other clergy, that there was no access there, he began preaching in the
afternoon, at Dr. Colman's meeting house, and so went round (except when he
preached on the common) to the other meeting houses, especially the largest of
them, for some time together.

Governor Belcher, generally attended; Secretary Willard, and several of the
Council, set the same example; and all seemed to vie who should show the
greatest respect. Congregations were exceeding large, both within and without;
and were much affected. Old Mr. Walter, who succeeded Mr. Elliot, commonly
called the apostle of the Indians, at Roxbury, said it was Puritanism revived;
and Dr. Colman said, when preaching at his meeting house the Sunday following,
that it was the happiest day he ever saw in his life.

He preached also at Cambridge, Marblehead, Ipswich, Newbury, Hampton, York,
Portsmouth, Salem, and Moulden, to large congregations. The Gentlemen of the
greatest repute had their houses open, in every place; collections were readily
made for the orphans: and, in about a week, having preached sixteen times, and
rode a hundred and seventy miles, he returned to Boston, October 6.

Here the congregations were still increased. At his farewell sermon, it was
supposed there were near twenty thousand people. He received a great number of
letters, and could have spent whole days in conversing with those that came to
him under soul concern. Ministers and students attended. Little children were
impressed. The contributions for the orphans were very considerable, amounting,
in town and country, to near five hundred pounds sterling.

He set out next for Northampton: having read in England, an account of a
remarkable work of conversion there, published by their Pastor the Rev. Mr.
Jonathan Edwards; and having a great desire to see him, and to hear the account
from his own mouth.

At Concord, Sudbury, Marlborough, Worchester, Leicester, Hadley, places all
lying in the way, pulpits and houses were every where opened, and a continued
influence attended his preaching. At Northampton, when he came to remind them
of what God had formerly done for them, it was like putting fire to tinder.
Both Minister and people were much moved; as were the children of the family,
at an exhortation which their father desired Mr. Whitefield to give them.

After leaving Northampton, he preached in Westfield, Springfield, Suffield
Windsor, Hertford, Weathersfield, Middleton, and Wallingford, to large and
affected congregations. And October 23, reached Newhaven, where he was
affectionately received by Mr. Pierpont, brother-in-law to Mr. Edwards, and had
the pleasure of seeing his friend Mr. Noble of New York, who brought him
letters from Georgia. Here also he was much refreshed with the conversation of
several Gospel Ministers. It being assembly time, and the Governor and
Burgesses then sitting he stayed till Lord's Day, and had the pleasure to see
numbers daily impressed, The good old Governor was particularly much affected;
and at a private visit which Mr. Whitefield paid him, said, Thanks be to God,
for such refreshings in our way to heaven.

On Monday morning he set forward, and preached with usual success at Milford,
Stratford, Fairfield, Newark, and Stanford, where he was visited by some
Ministers under deep concern.

This was on the borders of New York province, into which he now again entered,
and preached at Rye and Kingsbridge, on his way to the city of New York, where
he arrived October 30. Here for three days successively, and afterward at
Statten-Island, Newark, Baskenridge, his preaching appeared to be attended,
with more success than ever. At Trenton he had a long conference with some
Ministers about Mr. Gilbert Tenent's complying with an invitation to go and
preach in New England. After prayer, and considering the arguments both for and
against this proposal, they thought it best he should go; which, however
diffident of himself, he was persuaded to do. And his ministrations were
attended with an extraordinary blessing to multitudes, as is particularly
narrated elsewhere See Prince's Christian History, or, historical collections
of the success of the Gospel, vol. II. where the facts are set down in the
order of time.
.

About this time Mr. Whitefield wrote his Letter to some church members of the
Presbyterian persuasion, in answer to certain scruples and queries which they
had proposed See Works, vol. IV.
.

What sort of reception he had in New England, will farther appear from the
following letters of some eminent Ministers of Boston, and adjacent towns,
published by the Rev. Mr. Josiah Smith, of Charlestown, in the South Carolina
Gazette.

October 1, 1740. Rev. and dear Sir,
Your kind letter by Mr. Whitefield, and your other, are both now before me.
You raised our expectations of him very much, as did his Journals more, and Mr.
P. of New York, concurred with them; but we own now, that we have seen and
heard him, that our expectations are all answered and exceeded, not only in his
zealous, and fervent, abounding labors, but in the command of the hearts, and
affections of his hearers. -- He has been received here as an angel of God, and
fervant of Jesus Christ. -- I hope this visit to us, will be of very great use
and benefit to Ministers and people. He has found his heart and mouth much
opened to speak freely and boldly to us, and he finds it received with joy.


The same Gentleman, November 29, 1740, writes thus: -- Mr. Whitefield left us
seven weeks ago; the last week we heard of him at Philadelphia. I heard that
much of the presence of God is with him. He has left a blessing behind him, we
hope with us. Our people, high and low, old and young, are very swift to hear.
The excellent meekness of Mr. Whitefield's answer to the querists, will honor
him to you.

Another, in a Letter, October 22, 1740. expresses himself thus: Though it is
always a singular pleasure to me to hear from you, yet your two letters by Mr.
Whitefield, had a new circumstance of pleasure from the dear hand that
presented them. I perceive you was impatient to know what sort of entering in
he had among us. We (Ministers, rulers, and people) generally received him as
an angel of God. When he preached his farewell sermon in our common, there were
twenty-three thousand, at a moderate computation. We are abundantly convinced,
that you spoke the words of truth and soberness in your sermon relating to him,
such a power and presence of God with a preacher, and in religious assemblies,
I never saw before; but I would not limit the Holy One of Israel. The
prejudices of many are quite conquered, and expectations of others vastly
outdone, as they freely own. A considerable number are awakened, and many
christians seem to be greatly quickened. He has preached twice at Cambridge; he
has one warm friend there, Mr. --, the tutor, who has followed him to
Northampton, and will, for what I know, to Georgia. But Mr. Whitefield has not
a warmer friend any where, than the first man among us. Our Governor has shown
him the highest respect, carried him in his coach from place to place, and
could not help following him fifty miles out of town. I hope the religion of
the country will fare the better for the impressions left on him. -- The same
Gentleman writes, December 2, 1740, The man greatly beloved, I suppose, may be
with you before now. That his visit here will be esteemed a distinguishing
mercy of heaven by many, I am well satisfied. Every day gives me fresh proofs
of Christ's speaking in him. A small set of Gentlemen amongst us, when they saw
the affections of the people so moved under his preaching, would attribute it
only to the force of sound and gestures. But the impressions on many are so
lasting, and have been so transforming as to carry plain signatures of a divine
hand going along with him. -- Another Gentleman writes, October 21, 1740, and
thanks me for recommending to him, so worthy a person as the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield, who has preached Christ, and the great truths of the Gospel among
them, with remarkable fervor of spirit, and to a general acceptance, and hopes
that there are many awakened by his ministry. -- Another of the same date
writes, That he had conceived very highly of him by some clauses in my private
letters, and the sermon I preached by way of apology, etc. but confesses he had
not gone high enough in his opinion of him, and that his expectations are more
than answered in him. -- Another, November 21, 1740, blesses God that he was
sent thither; that he had so many opportunities of seeing him, and sitting
under his ministry. That he appeared to him a wonderful man indeed; that his
preaching was accompanied with a divine power, and energy, beyond any man's he
had ever heard before: and the effects of his ministry were very mavelous
among them. -- I shall conclude with the following passage of another
Gentleman, in a letter of November 1, 1740. I received yours by the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield, with whom I coveted a great deal more private conversation than I
had opportunity for, by reason of the throngs of people almost perpetually with
him. But he appears to be full of the love of God, and fired with an
extraordinary zeal for the cause of Christ, and applies himself with the most
indefatigable diligence, that ever was seen among us, for the promoting the
good of souls. His head, his heart, his hands seem to be full of his Master's
business. His discourses, especially when he goes into the expository way, are
very entertaining. Every eye is fixed upon him, and every ear chained to his
lips. Most are very much affected; many are awakened and convinced; and a
general seriousness excited. His address more especially to the passions, is
wonderful, and beyond what I have ever seen. I think I can truly say, that his
preaching has quickened me, and I believe it has many others besides, as well
as the people. Several of my flock, especially the younger sort, have been
brought under convictions by his preaching; and there is this remarkable
amongst them of the good effect of his preaching, that the word now preached by
us, seems more precious to them, and comes with more power upon them. My prayer
for him is, that his precious life may be lengthened out, and that he may be an
instrument of reviving dying religion in all places whithersoever he comes, who
seems to be wonderfully fitted for, as well as spirited to it.

Saturday November 8, Mr. Whitefield came back to Philadelphia, and next day
preached to several thousands in a house built for that purpose, since his last
departure. Here he both heard of, and saw many, who were the fruits of former
ministrations; and continued among them till November 17, preaching twice a
day. Afterward he preached in Gloucester, Greenwich, Piles-Grove, Cohensie,
Salem, Newcastle, Whitely-Creek, Fog's Manor, Nottingham; in many or most of
which places, the congregations were numerous and deeply affected.

November 22, he got to Bohemia in Maryland, and from thence he went to
Reedy-Island. At both places his preaching was attended with great influence.
And at last (their sloop being detained by contrary winds near a week) he
preached frequently. All the Captains and crews of the ships that were
wind-bound constantly attended, and great numbers crowded out of the country,
some as far as from Philadelphia: and as great concern as ever came upon their
minds.

December 1, he set sail from Reedy-Island for Charlestown in South Carolina,
and here he makes the following remark: It is now the seventy-fifth day, since
I arrived at Rhode Island. My body was then weak, but the Lord has much renewed
its strength. I have been enabled to preach, I think an hundred and
seventy-five times in public, besides exhorting frequently in private. I have
traveled upwards of eight hundred miles, and gotten upwards of seven hundred
pounds sterling in goods, provisions and money, for the Georgia orphans. Never
did I perform my journeys with so little fatigue, or see such continuance of
the divine presence in the congregations to whom I have preached. Praise the
Lord, O my soul Journals, December 1, 1740.
.

After a pleasant passage of eight or nine days, and preaching again at
Charlestown and Savannah, he arrived on the 14th of December at the
Orphan-house, where he found his family comfortably settled. At Rhode Island he
had providentially met with one Mr. Jonathan Barber, whose heart was very much
knit to him, and who was willing to help him at the Orphan-house. Him,
therefore, he left superintendent for the spiritual, and Mr. Habersham for the
temporal affairs; and having spent a very comfortable Christmas with his orphan
family, he set off again for At Charlestown, the Commissary was going to
proceed against him for correcting and preparing for the press, a letter
written by Mr. Hugh B -- n, in which it was hinted, that the clergy break their
canons. He also laid him under suspension for omitting to use the form of
prayer, prescribed in the communion book, when officiating in a dissenting
congregation. -- But Mr. Whitefield gave security for his appearance, and
appealed home.
Charlestown, where he arrived January 3, 1741, and preached twice every day as
usual, to most affectionate auditories, till the sixteenth of January, when he
went on board for England. He arrived the 11th of March at Falmouth, rode post
to London, and preached at Kennington Common the Sunday following.

CHAP. VII. From his Arrival in ENGLAND, in the Year 1741, to his leaving
SCOTLAND, the same Year.
THE new and unexpected situation in which he now found himself, will be best
described in his own words: But what a trying scene appeared here! In my zeal,
during my journey through America, I had written two well-meant, though
injudicious letters, against England's two great favorites, The Whole Duty of
Man, and Archbishop Tillotson, who, I said, knew no more of religion than
Mahomet. The Moravians had made inroads upon the societies. Mr. John Wesley,
some way or other, had been prevailed on to preach and print in favor of
perfection, and universal redemption; and very strongly against election, a
doctrine, which I thought, and do now believe was taught me of God, therefore
could not possible recede from. Thinking it my duty so to do, I had written an
answer at the Orphan-house, which though revised, and much approved of by some
good and judicious divines, I think had some too strong expressions about
absolute reprobation, which the Apostle leaves rather to be inferred, than
expressed. The world was angry at me for the former, and numbers of my own
spiritual children for the latter. One that got some hundreds of pounds by my
sermons, being led away by the Moravians, refused to print for me any more. And
others wrote to me, that God would destroy me in a fortnight; and that my fall
was as great as Peter's. Instead of having thousands to attend me, scarce one
of my spiritual children came to see me from morning to night. Once at
Kennington-Common, I had not above a hundred to hear me. At the same time, I
was much embarrassed in my outward circumstances. A thousand pounds I owed for
the Orphan-house. Two hundred and fifty pounds bills, drawn upon Mr. Seward,
now dead, were returned upon me. I was also threatened to be arrested for two
hundred pounds more. My traveling expenses also to be defrayed. A family of a
hundred to be daily maintained, four thousand miles off, in the dearest place
of the King's dominions. Ten thousand times would I rather have died, than part
with my old friends. It would have melted any heart to have heard Mr. Charles
Wesley and me weeping, after prayer, that, if possible, the breach might be
prevented. Once I preached in the Foundery, (a place which Mr. John Wesley had
procured in my absence) on Gal. iii. but no more. All my work was to begin
again. One day, I was exceedingly refreshed in reading Beza's life of Calvin,
wherein were these words, 'Calvin is turned out of Geneva, but behold a new
church arises.' A Gentlewoman lent me three hundred pounds to pay the present
Orphan-house demand: and a serious person (whom I never saw or heard of) giving
me one guinea; I had such confidence, that I ran down with it to a friend, and
expressed my hope, that God who sent this person with the guinea, would make it
up fifteen hundred: which was the sum I thought would be wanted.

Never had I preached in Moorfields on a week day. But in the strength of God,
I began on Good Friday, and continued twice a day, walking backward and forward
from Leadenhall, for some time preaching under one of the trees, and had the
mortification of seeing numbers of my spiritual children, who but a twelvemonth
ago could have plucked out their eyes for me, running by me whilst preaching,
disdaining so much as to look at me, and some of them putting their fingers in
their ears, that they might not hear one word I said.

A like scene opened at Bristol, where I was denied preaching in the house I
had founded: Busy bodies, on both sides, blew up the coals. A breach ensued.
But as both sides differed in judgment, and not in affection, and aimed at the
glory of our common Lord; though we hearkened too much to tale-bearers on both
sides, we were kept from anathematizing each other, and went on in our usual
way; being agreed in one point, endeavoring to convert souls to their ever
blessed Mediator.

About this time he was ordered to attend in the Parliament House, to give
information concerning the state of the colony in Georgia. April 10, 1741. I
have been at the Parliament House. The Georgia affair was adjourned. It was
somewhat of a trial to be in the house. I then remembered what the Apostle
said, 'We are become a spectacle to men' My appeal will come to nothing, I
believe. I have waited upon the Speaker. He received me kindly Letter CCLXXIV.
. Again, He treated me kindly, and assured me, that there would be no
persecution in this King's reign. Letter CCLXXXVI.


In consequence of this, one Mr. Cennick, a preacher, who could not fall in
with Mr. Wesley's sentiments, and one or two more in like circumstances, having
joined Mr. Whitefield, they began a new house in Kingswood, and soon
established a school among them, that favored Calvinistical principles. And
here, and in several other places, they preached to very large and serious
congregations, in the same manner as he had done in America.

Thither he intended to return as soon as possible. Mean time, it being
inconvenient, on account of the weather, to preach morning and evening in
Moorfields; some free grace Dissenters, (who stood by him closely in that time
of trial) got the loan of a piece of ground, and engaged with a carpenter to
build a large temporary shed, to screen the auditory from cold and rain, which
he called a Tabernacle, as it was only intended to be made use of for a few
months, during his stay in his native country. The place fixed upon, was very
near the Foundery, which he disliked, because he thought it looked like
erecting altar against altar; but upon this occasion he remarks, All was
wonderfully overruled for good, and for the furtherance of the Gospel. A fresh
awakening immediately began. Congregations grew exceeding large, and at the
people's desire, I sent (necessity reconciling me more and more to
lay-preaching) for Messieurs Cennick, Harris, Seagrave, Humphries, etc. to
assist M. S.
.

Fresh doors were now opened to him, and invitations sent to him from many
places, where he had ^^ver been. At a common, near Braintree in Essex, upwards
of ten thousand persons attended. At Halstead, Dedham, Cossleshall,
Whethersfield, Colcester, Bury, Ipswich, the congregations were very large and
much affected. Sweet was the conversation I had with several Ministers of
Christ. But our own clergy grew more and more shy, now they knew I was a
Calvinist; though no doubt (as Mr. Bedford told me when going to the Bishop of
London) our Articles are Calvinistical M. S.
.

At this time also, he was strongly solicited by religious persons of different
persuasions, to visit Scotland. Several letters had past between him and the
Messieurs Erskines, some time before See his Journals, and his Letters to the
Rev. Mr. R. E. and the Rev. Mr. E. E.

In his last to Mr. E. E. before coming to Scotland (Letter CCLXXX) he writes,
May 16, 1741. This morning, I received a kind letter from your brother Ralph,
who thinks it best for me wholly to join the Associate Presbytery, if it should
please God to send me into Scotland. This I cannot altogether come into. I come
only as an occasional preacher, to preach the simple Gospel to all that are
willing to hear me, of whatever denomination. I write this, that there may not
be the least misunderstanding between us. I love and honor the Associate
Presbytery in the bowels of Jesus Christ: but, let them not be offended, if in
all things, I cannot immediately fall in with them.

To the same purpose he writes to Mr. R. E. May 23, 1741. Letter CCLXXXVIII.


, and he had a great desire to see them. He therefore took his passage from
London to Leith, where (after five days which he employed in writing many
execellent letters to his Orphans, etc. See Letters CCCXI. to CCCXXXVII.) he
arrived July 30, 1741. Several persons of distinction most gladly received him,
and would have had him preach at Edinburgh directly; but he was determined that
the Rev. Messieurs Erskines should have the first offer; and therefore went
immediately to Dumfermlin, and preached in Mr. Erskine's Meeting House.

Great persuasions were used to detain him at Dumfermlin, and as great to keep
him from preaching for and visiting the Rev. Mr. Wardlaw, who had been
colleague to Mr. Ralph Erskine above twenty years, and who, as well as the Rev.
Mr. Davidson, a dissenting Minister in England, that went along with Mr.
Whitefield, were looked upon as perjured, for not adhering to the Solemn League
and Covenant. This was new language to him, and therefore unintelligible. But
that he might be better informed, it was proposed that the Rev. Mr. Moncrief,
Mr. Ebenezer Erskine, and others, members of the Associate Presbytery, should
convene in a few days, in order to give him farther light.

In the mean time, Mr. Ralph Erskine accompanied him to Edinburgh, where he
preached in the Orphan-house Park, (field-preaching being no novelty in
Scotland) to a very large and affected auditory, upon these words, The kingdom
of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. The next day he preached in the West Kirk, and expressed great pleasure
in hearing two Gospel sermons from the Rev. Mr. Gusthart, and the Rev. Mr.
MacVicar. And the following day, he preached in the Cannongate church, where
Mr. Ralph Erskine went up with him into the pulpit.

According to promise, he returned with him to Dumfermlin, where Mr. Ebenezer
Erskine, and several of the Associate Presbytery were met together. When Mr.
Whitefield came, they soon proposed to proceed to business. He asked them for
what purpose? They answered, to discourse, and set him right about Church
Government, and the Solemn League and Covenant. He replied, they might save
themselves that trouble, for he had no scruple about it, and that settling
Church Government, and preaching about the Solemn League and Covenant, was not
his plan. He then told them something of his experience, and how he was let
into his present way of acting. One of them, in particular, said he was deeply
affected. And Mr. Ebenezer Erskine desired they would have patience with him,
for that having been born and bred in England, and never studied the point, he
could not be supposed to be perfectly acquainted with it. But Mr. M. insisted,
that he was therefore more inexcuseable, for England had revolted most with
respect to Church Government; and that he being born and educated there, could
not but be acquainted with the matter in debate. Mr. Whitefield told him, he
had never yet made the Solemn League and Covenant the subject of his study,
being too busy about matters which he judged of greater importance. Several
replied, that every pin of the Tabernacle was precious. He answered, that in
every building, there were outside and inside workmen; that the latter, at
present, was his province; that if they thought themselves called to the
former, they might proceed in their own way, and he would proceed in his. He
then asked them seriously, what they would have him to do? The answer was, that
he was not desired to subscribe immediately to the Solemn League and Covenant,
but to preach only for them, till he had further light. He asked, Why only for
them? Mr. Ralph Erskine said, "They were the Lord's people." He then asked,
Were no other the Lord's people but themselves? If not, and if others were the
devil's people, they had more need to be preached to; that for his part, all
places were alike to him; and that if the Pope himself would lend his pulpit,
he would gladly proclaim in it the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Something passed about taking two of their brethren with him to England, to
settle Presbytery there; and then with two more, to go and settle Presbytery in
America. But he asked, suppose a number of Independents should come, and
declare, that after the greatest search, they were convinced that Independency
was the right Church Government, and would disturb no body, if tolerated;
should they be tolerated? They answered, No. -- Soon after this the company
broke up. And Mr. M. preached upon Is. xxi. 11, 12. Watchman, what of the
night? etc. And took occasion to declaim strongly against the ceremonies of the
Church of England, and to argue, That one who held Communion with that Church,
or with the backslidden Church of Scotland, could not be an instrument of
reformation. I attended; but the good man so spent himself in the former part
of his sermon, in talking against prelacy, the Common Prayer Book, the
surplice, the rose in the hat, and such like externals; that when he came to
the latter part of his text, to invite poor sinners to Jesus Christ, his breath
was so gone, that he could scarce be heard. What a pity, that the last was not
first, and the first last! Letter CCCXXXIX.
The consequence of all this, was, an open breach. Mr. Whitefield retired
thoughtful and uneasy to his closet, and after preaching in the fields, sat
down and dined with them, and then took a final leave. Having dropped something
about persons building a Babel. Mistress -- said, it was a hard saying. Upon
which I replied, I feared it was a true one, and that they would find the Babel
fall down about their ears. I was never received into their house any more.
Thus was I called to make another sacrifice of my affections. But what I had
met with in England, made this the more easy M. S. See also Letter CCCXV^I. to
Mr. D. E. August 13, 1741; and to the Rev. Mr. R. E. August 24.
.

Many waited at Edinburgh to know the issue of the conference, who were not
disappointed in the event. Thither he returned, after preaching at
Innerkeithing, and the Queen's-ferry; and continued preaching always twice,
often thrice, (and once seven times a day) for some weeks together. The
churches were open, but not being able to hold half the congregations, he
generally preached twice a day in the Orphan-Hospital Park to many thousands.
Persons of the best fashion, as well as of the meaner rank, attended Among his
particular friends were the Marquis of Lothian, the Earl of Leven, Lord Rae,
Lady Mary Hamilton, Lady Frances Gardener, Lady Jean Nimmo, Lady Dirleton. See
his Letters from August to December 1741.
; at some of their houses he generally expounding every evening. And every day,
almost, there were new evidences of the success of his labors. Numbers of
Ministers Particularly to Mr. Wilson of Maxton. See Letter CCCXXXVIII.
and students came to hear him, and aged, experienced christians told him, they
could set their seal to what he preached.

In this first visit to Scotland, he preached at Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen,
Dundee, Paisley, Perth, Stirling, Crief, Falkirk, Airth, Kinglassie, Aberdeen,
Culross, Kinross, Couper of Fife; and also, at Stonehive, Benholm, Montrose,
Brechin, Forfar, Couper of Angus; and at Innerkeithing, Newbottle, Galashields,
Maxton, and Haddington; and in the west country, at Killern, Fintry, and
Balfrone. To other places to which he was invited, he did not go Among these
was Cambuslang, and some places in the north of Scotland. See Letter CCCLIX.
wherein he mentions an invitation from the Ministers of the Presbytery, that
meets at Dornock in Sutherland.
at this time. But (having collected above five hundred pounds, in money and
goods, for his Orphans) he left Edinburgh in the latter end of October, to go
through Wales, in his way to London.

CHAP. VIII. Letters from Ministers and private Christians in SCOTLAND,
representing Mr. WHITEFIELD's Reception and Success there, in the Year 1741.
HIS reception, ministrations, and success at the principal places in Scotland,
will farther appear from the following Letters.

At Edinburgh, one of the Ministers of that city, thus writes to him. April 20,
1742 Glasgow Weekly History, No. XXVII.
. Rev. and dear Sir, Knowing that many are careful to inform you, from time to
time, what passes here, I have hitherto delayed answering your most acceptable
Letter, until I should tell you with the greatest certainty, what were the
blessed effects of your ministrations amongst us; and can now assure you, that
they were not more surprising than lasting. I don't know, or hear of any
wrought upon by your ministry, but are holding on in the paths of truth and
righteousness. They seem possessed of a truly christian spirit. Jesus is
precious to their souls; and like the morning light, they are advancing with
increasing brightness to the perfect day. Since you left Scotland, numbers in
different corners have been awakened. Many in a hopeful way. Religion in this
sinful city revives and flourishes. Ordinances are more punctually attended on.
People hear the word with gladness, and receive it in faith and love. New
meetings for prayer and spiritual conference are erecting every where.
Religious conversation has banished slander and callumny from several
tea-tables, and christians are not ashamed to own their dear Lord and Master.
Praise is perfected out of the mouths of babes and sucklings; and some
stout-hearted sinners captivated to the obedience of Christ.

I cannot easily express, with what pleasure I write these things; and
doubtless, they will give you no less joy in reading them. Should not these
droppings of the dew of heaven encourage our faith and hope of a plentiful
effusion of the Spirit, which will at once change our barren wilderness into a
fruitful field? Should not this hasten your return, that we may take sweet
counsel together, and enter into the house of God in company? You are often on
our hearts. We long to see you face to face. May much of your great Master's
presence ever attend, and come along with you.

Mr. George Muir, afterward the Rev. Doctor Muir, late Minister of Paisley)
thus wrote to James Aitken, schoolmaster in Glasgow Prince's Christian
history, No. XXXIV,
. Edinburgh, August 8, 1743. As you desired, I have with the assistance of Mr.
Archibald Bowie, Mr. Dun, and the Sea Letter CCCCXXII.
sergeant, informed myself a little, with respect to the number and situations
of the praying societies in this place, which you will take as follows: They
are, as near as we can guess, between twenty-four and thirty in number, some of
which will necessarily be obliged to divide, by reason of too many meeting
together; and that will increase the number. Amongst them are several meetings
of boys and girls, who, in general, seem not only to be growing in grace, but
really increasing in knowledge. The little lambs appear to be unwilling to rest
upon duties, or any thing short of Christ; as a young Gentleman of my
acquaintance told me, when under a temptation to think, that he was surely
seeking some imaginary refuge, instead of the Savior, he was made to cry out
in prayer, 'Lord, I want nothing else, and will have nothing short of the very
Christ of God.' There are several meetings of young women, who (although I
never, as yet, visited any of them) I am informed, hold on very well. The
sergeant tells me, that at one of these meetings, on the morning of the
Lord's Day, he has known them all wet with floods of tears, melted down with
love to Christ, and affection to one another for Christ's sake. I have myself
been much ravished (when in a meeting in the room below, where some of these
resort) to hear them sing the Lord's praises with such melodious voices. There
are numbers of young men who meet for the excellent purpose of glorifying God,
and promoting christian knowledge; amongst some of whom I have the honor to be
a member; many of them are Divines, who are useful in instructing the weaker
sort of us; and that they endeavor to do with the greatest anxiety and desire.
A good number of old men, substantial, standing christians, meet for their
edification and instruction (the glory of their God being always their chief
end) and are thereby often revived, and very much refreshed. The generality of
these sorts, abovementioned, do walk very circumspectly, and really make it
appear to the world, that they have been with Jesus: which is very much
evidenced in their cheerfully bearing reproaches for Christ's sake. And upon
the whole, we hope there is such a flame kindled, as shall never be
extinguished. And with respect to two particular societies, whereof Mr. Bowie
is a member, he gave me the enclosed To Mr. Muir. Edinburgh, August 6, 1743. As
you desire a short account of the two societies I am concerned in, I shall give
it in a very few words. They consist of twenty-five or twenty-six members each;
and, except a very few, are all persons whose concern about religion, began in
the late awakening. I never saw the ends of such societies answered near so
well, as among these. I think, I may safely declare, that I was never witness
to so much of real christian exercise among any persons I have known, as I have
observed, to my great satisfaction, among most of them. It is most amazing to
observe, how much some of them, who at their first concern, were brutishly
ignorant of every thing good, have now made such advances in knowledge, that
they excel those who were formerly far before them. The concern about their own
salvation is not only remarkable, but the abiding earnestness they show in
their prayers, for the increase of the Redeemer's kingdom, is most desirable;
and the care they show in watching over one another, is one convincing evidence
of their brotherly love, and true christian tenderness. I might say a great
deal more, but must conclude. I am, etc. A. Bowie.

There is also notice taken of some remarkable conversions, and of the
reformation observed in the Edinburgh Hospitals. In Numbers X. XI. XV. of
Glasgow Weekly history.


in writing; which you will peruse and return. This is not all; for several
country people are beginning to assemble together in little meetings, to
worship their God: particularly, the sergeant informs me of one, about two
miles from this place, where several plowmen, and other illiterate persons,
meet for these most noble ends and purposes; and are going most sweetly on,
much increased in grace and knowledge, and some are daily added to their
number. I am informed from the east country, (where there have been no
societies since the secession) that about Old Cambus, six miles from Dunbar,
many are now meeting together for social prayer, and mutual conversation about
matters of religion, wherein the Lord is with them of a truth. And in that
place, there is more eager thirsting for the word, than usual, and the
Ministers are learning to speak with new tongues. And one of my acquaintance,
who was in this place last winter, has happily been the Lord's instrument in
beginning these societies. How beautiful and refreshing is it, my dear friend,
to hear of so many following after the despised Jesus? Should we not take it as
a token for good, that young ones, instead of spending their spare hours in
idle, vain, and unprofitable play, do now assemble, and join in calling upon
the Lord. Is it not a good sign to hear many poor foolish virgins, (instead of
being employed in the vanities of the generality of their sex) meeting together
for prayer; and many prodigal youths, instead of revelling, and drunkenness,
chambering, and wontonness, now breathing after the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
and him crucified? O that the Lord would more and more exert his almighty power
amongst us. There are several other societies for prayer, near about this city,
prospering very well.

The Rev. Mr. Mac Culloch of Cambuslang, thus writes to Mr. Whitefield, a few
months after his first visit to Glasgow Glasgow weekly history, No. XIII.
; As it is matter of great joy and thankfulness to God, who sent you here, and
gave you so much countenance, and so remarkably crowned your labors when here
at Glasgow with success; so I doubt not, but the following account, of the many
seals to your ministry in and about that city, will be very rejoicing to your
heart, as our glorious Redeemer's kingdom is so much advanced, and the
everlasting happiness of immortal souls promoted.

I am well informed by some Ministers, and other judicious and experienced
christians, that there are to the number of fifty persons already got notice
of, in and about Glasgow, that by all that can be judged by persons of the best
discerning in spiritual things, are savingly converted, by the blessing and
power of God, accompanying your ten sermons in that place; besides several
others under convictions, not reckoned in this number, whose state remains, as
yet, a little doubtful. And besides, several christians of considerable
standing, who were much strengthened, revived, and comforted, by means of
hearing your sermons; being made to rejoice in hope of the glory of God, having
obtained the full assurance of faith.

Among those lately converted, here are several young people who were formerly
openly wicked and flagitious, or at best but very negligent as to spiritual
concerns, but are now in the way of salvation. Some young converts are yet
under doubts and fears; but a considerable number of them have attained to joy
and peace in believing.

Several lately wrought upon in a gracious way, seem to outstrip christians of
considerable standing, in spiritual mindedness, and many other good
qualifications: and particularly, in their zeal for the conversion of others,
and love to the ordinances, without a spirit of bigotry, or party zeal.

These converts by your ministry are discovered from time to time; a good many
are but lately got notice of, that were not known before; which was pattly
occasioned by their convictions not being so strong and pungent at the first,
as they proved afterward, partly by the discouragment they met with in the
families where they resided, and partly by the reserved tempers of the persons
themselves, and their bashfulness, because of their former negligences and open
enormities. These things give ground to hope, there may be more discovered
afterward, that are not yet known.

^esides these awakened, by the power of God accompanying your sermons, there
are others awakened since, by means of the great visible change discovered in
their former intimate acquaintance, that were then converted, when they saw the
change so remarkable, and the effects so abiding.

Young converts are exceeding active to promote the conversion of others,
especially their relations and near concerns, by their exhortations, and
letters to distant friends in the country; and there are some instances of the
good effects of these endeavors.

They have all a great love to one another, and all good christians, and a
great sympathy, with such of their number, as are under doubts and fears. Such
of them as have not received comfort, by their earnest and deep concern, and
close attendance on the means of grace, are hereby instrumental to excite
christians of elder standing, to more diligence in religion.

These, dear brother, are a few hints of some of the most remarkable things, as
to the success of your labors at Glasgow, by the divine blessing. May a rich
and powerful blessing, give a plentiful increase to them every where, where you
come with the glad tidings of the great salvation.

At Aberdeen, one of the Ministers of that city, thus writes of him, to a
person of distinction. October 3, 1741 Glasgow Weekly History, XXVIII.
. Honored Sir, at your desire, I shall not refuse, (however much reason I may
have for declining to offer my judgment, or opinion in things of this nature)
to acquaint you freely of what I think of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, or rather
what is the opinion of persons of more acquaintance with the good ways of God.

He is, I believe, justly esteemed by all who are personally acquainted with h^
(...) ^nent instrument of reviving, in their ^ng times, a just sense and
concern for the great things of religion. We have, of late, been much employed,
and a great noise has been made, about the lesser matters of the law: and are
now much broken in judgment about things, many of which, I must own, I do not
understand Of those who differed from their brethren, as to their judgment
about many things, was Mr. B --, one of the Ministers of Aberdeen. After he had
prayed and preached against Mr. Whitefield, in his hearing, and quoted some
passages of his first printed sermons, as heterodox: Sermon being ended, Mr.
Ogilvie gave notice, that Mr. Whitefield would preach in about half an hour.
The interval being so short, the Magistrates retired into the Session-house,
and the congregation patiently waited, big with expectation, (says Mr.
Whitefield) of hearing my resentment. At the time appointed, I went up, and
took no other notice of the good man's ill-timed zeal, than to observe in some
part of my discourse, That if the good old Gentleman had seen some of my later
writings, wherein I had corrected several of my former mistakes, he would not
have expressed himself in such strong terms. The people being thus diverted
from controversy with man, were deeply impressed with what they heard from the
word of God. Letter CCCLXI.
. The cry has been, and still continues loud, 'Lo here is Christ, and lo
there.' And now the Lord has raised up this eminent instrument, from a quarter,
whence we could not have expected it, to call us all to return to him; from
whom, it is plain, we have deeply revolted. His being by education and
profession of a different way, from what, I cannot but think, is most justly
professed among us, seems to me, to add n^ (...) ^ht to his testimony; as does
also hi^ (...) Lord by this is, as it were, attracting (...) and attention to
one, who had he been formerly of us, would doubtless, like others, be despised.
And yet, I cannot but look upon it as a sad instance of a departing God, that,
instead of regard, he meets not only with contempt, but with opposition also,
from those who ought to act a very different part. Did he preach another Jesus,
or another doctrine, he ought justly to be rejected: but this is not the case.
And yet this very thing is advanced as an argument against him: It is said, he
advances nothing new. And I allow it. This gives his friends joy. But these
reverend Gentlemen should mind, that there are two things in Gospel ordinances,
purity and power. The first in mercy, we still have in some good measure
(though complaints of the want of this are very open) but the last, we sadly
confess the want of, and this is what attends the Gospel dispensed by him. And
sure, I am, that even the credible reports of it should much endear him to all,
who wish well to the interest of our dear, though too unknown, and altogether
lovely Lord Jesus.

His calmness and serenity under all he meets with, yea his joy in tribulation,
is to me so surprising, that I often think, the Lord sent him to this place, in
particular, to teach me how to preach, and especially how to suffer.

His attachment to no party, but to Christ, and true grace alone, has long
appeared to me a peculiar excellency in him. Christianity has been so long
broken into so many different sects and parties, that an honest pagan might
justly be at a loss, was he among us, where to find the religion of Jesus.

One now appears, who loudly calls us (and whose voice the Lord seems to back
with power) to look into the original plan of that religion we profess: sure
nothing more just, nothing more reasonable. He tells us, wherein the kingdom of
God does consist. And yet how sad is it, he should be despised. Who knows but
this may be the Lord's last voice to us, before he takes his kingdom from us?

As to what you ask of his reception in this city; I invited him, nay, urged
him, to undertake this journey, in consequence of a correspondence with him,
for more than two or three years. I did it with the concurrence of a very few.
His journey was delayed, till bad reports had imbittered the minds of almost
all against him: so that when he came, I could scarce obtain liberty for him to
preach even in the fields. All that I could do, was what I had resolved long
before; I gave him with great pleasure, and full freedom, my pulpit, which, for
that day, was in the church which our Magistrates and principal people of note
frequent. And at once, the Lord, by his preaching, melted down the hearts of
his enemies, (except -- and --) so that, contrary to our custom, he was allowed
the same place and pulpit in the evening of that day and the other church as
often as he pleased.

While he stayed among us in this city, he answered our expectations so much,
that he has scarce more friends any where of its bulk, than here, where, at
first, almost all were against him. And the word came also with so much power,
that I hope several of different denominations, will bless the Lord for
evermore, that ever they heard him. And in his way from us, I saw in part, and
have heard more fully since, what satisfies that this was of the Lord, and for
the good of many. P. S. I suppose you have heard, that our Magistrates waited
on him while here, and made him free of this place; though that is a
compliment, rarely allowed to strangers, of late.

Mr. Willison, Minister at Dundee, wrote as follows, to his friend at
Edinburgh. October 8, 1741 Glasgow Weekly History, No. XIII.
. Honored Sir, I am favored with yours, wherein you desire my thoughts of Mr.
Whitefield, and an account of his labors and success with us. Although my
sentiments may be little regarded by many, yet when you put me to it, I think I
am bound to do justice to the character of this stranger, which I see few
willing to do. I am not much surprised, though the devil, and all he can
influence, be up in arms against the youth, seeing he makes such bold and
vigorous attacks upon his kingdom and strong holds. As you, Sir, do observe it
to be with you, so it is with us. He is hated, and spoken against, by all the
episcopal party, and even the most of our clergy do labor to diminish and
expose him: this is not to be wondered at, seeing his incessant labors for
Christ and souls, is such a strong reproof to them; besides, what he says
publicly, against the sending out of unconverted Ministers, and their preaching
an unknown Christ; this must be galling to carnal men. I look upon this youth,
as raised up of God, for special service, and spirited for making new and
singular attempts, for promoting true christianity in the world, and for
reviving it where it is decayed; and I see him wonderfully fitted and
strengthened, both in body and mind, for going through his projects, amidst the
greatest discouragements and difficulties. I see the man to be all of a piece;
his life and conversation to be a transcript of his sermons. It is truly a rare
thing, to see so much of God about any one man. To see one so eminent for
humility, in the midst of applause; for meekness and patience, under reproaches
and injuries; for love to enemies; for desire to glorify Christ, and save
souls; contentment in a mean lot, acquiesing in the will of God in all cases,
never fretting under any dispensation, but still praising and giving thanks for
every thing. It is rare to see in a man, such a flaming fire for God and
against sin, when in the pulpit; and yet most easy and calm in conversing with
men out of it; careful not to give offense to them, and yet never courting the
favor of any. God has bestowed a large measure of gifts and graces upon him,
for the work he is engaged in, and has made him a chosen vessel, to carry his
name among the Gentiles, and to revive his work in several other churches. O
that God may order his coming to poor Scotland, in such a cloudy time, for the
same end! And who knows, but God might be entreated, if we could wrestle with
him, notwithstanding all our provocations! Things appeared most unlikely, in
other places, some while ago, where now Christ is riding in triumph, going
forth conquering and to conquer. This worthy youth, is singularly fitted to do
the work of an Evangelist; and I have been long of opinion, that it would be
for the advantage of the world, were this still to be a standing office in the
church. And seeing the Lord has stirred him up to venture his life, reputation,
and his all for Christ; refuse the best benefices in his own country, and run
all hazards by sea and land, and travel so many thousand miles to proclaim the
glory of Christ, and riches of his free grace, of which he himself is a
monument; and especially, seeing God has honored him to do all this with such
surprising success, among sinners of all ranks and persuasions, and even many
of the most notorious, in awakening and turning them to the Lord; I truly think
we are also bound to honor him, and to esteem him highly in love for his
master's, and for his work's sake, according to 1 Thessalonians. v. 13. And for those
who vilify and oppose him, I wish they would even notice a Gamaliel's words,
Acts v. 'Let him alone, lest happily ye be found to sight against God:' Or
rather, that they would regard the Apostle Peter's words, apologizing for his
going in with the uncircumcised, Acts xi. when the Holy Ghost fell upon them;
'What was I that I could withstand God?' I have myself been witness to the Holy
Ghost falling upon him and his hearers oftener than once, I do not say in a
miraculous, though in an observeable manner. Yea, I have already seen the
desirable fruits thereof in not a few; and hope, through the divine blessing
on the seed sown, to see more. Many here are blessing God, for sending him to
this country, though satan has raged much against it.

The Lord is a sovereign agent, and may raise up the instruments of his glory,
from what churches or places he pleases; and glorifies his grace the more, when
he does it from those societies, whence and when it could be least expected.
Though Mr. Whitefield be ordained, according to his education, a Minister of
the Church of England; yet we are to regard him as one, whom God has raised up,
to witness against the corruptions of that church; whom God is still
enlightening, and causing to make advances toward us. He has already conformed
to us, both in doctrine and worship, and lies open to light to conform to us in
other points. He is thoroughly a Calvinist, and found to the doctrines of Free
Grace, in the doctrine of Original Sin, the New Birth, justification by Christ,
the necessity of imputed righteousness, the operations of the Holy Ghost, etc.
These he makes his great theme, drives the point home to the conscience, and
God attends it with great power. And as God has enlightened him gradually in
these things, so he is still ready to receive more light, and as soon as he
gets it, he is most frank in declaring it.

God, by owning him so wonderfully, is pleased to give a rebuke to our
intemperate bigotry, and party-zeal, and to tell us, that neither circumcision
nor uncircumcision avails any thing. But a new creature. P. S. Many with us
are for preferring Ministers, according to the party they are of, but commend
me to a pious, Christ-exalting, and soul-winning Minister, whatever be his
denomination. Such are Ministers of Christ's sending, and of such he says, 'He
that receives you, receives me, and he despises you, despises me;' which is
a rule of duty to us.

The four proceeding letters show the acceptableness and success of Mr.
Whitefield's ministrations in most of the great towns in Scotland. As to
smaller places the following extract of a letter from the Rev. Mr. Thomas
Davidson (his fellow-traveller) to the Rev. Mr. Henry Davidson of Gallashields,
dated Culross, December 3, 1741, will be an agreeable specimen.

Our journey to the north was as comfortable as any we had. In several places
as he came along, the Lord countenanced him in a very convincing manner,
particularly at a place called Lundie, five miles north from Dundee, where
there is a considerable number of serious christians, who hearing that he was
to come that way, spent most part of the night before in prayer together.
Although his preaching there was only in a passing way, having to ride to
Dundee after it, and it was betwixt three and four before he reached the place;
yet he had but scarce well begun, before the power of God was indeed very
discernable. Never did I see such a pleasing melting in a worshipping assembly.
There was nothing violent in it, or like what we may call screwing up the
passions: for it evidently appeared to be deep and hearty, and to proceed from
a higher spring.

The compiler lately received a transcript, from the diary of a very worthy
christian in Edinburgh, who died about two years ago, in which are the
following passages. Sabbati, August 9, 1741. What is surprising, is, that
numbers of all ranks, all denominations, and all characters, come constantly to
hear him, though his sermons abound with those truths which would be unwelcome
from the mouth of others. He is indefatigable in his works. Three hours before
noon he appoints, for people under distress to converse with him, when he is
much confined. Then he writes numbers of letters. And this week he is to add a
morning lecture to his work. I have reason, among many others, for blessing
God, for sending him to this place.

Sabbati, August 30, 1741. Mr. W -- preached Monday morning and afternoon,
Tuesday forenoon in the Canongate church, evening in the park, and gathered 25
l. 7s. 6d. for the poor Highlanders. Next day he went to Newbottle, and
preached twice. On Thursday to Whitburn; Friday morning at Torphichen; Friday
evening at Linlithgow; Saturday morning and afternoon both at Falkirk. And this
day he is at Airth. Tomorrow he will preach twice at Sirling. Culross, Tuesday
forenoon; Dumfermlin, afternoon. Wednesday, twice at Kinross. Thursday, Perth.
From Friday to Monday, at Dundee. Monday, Kinglassie, and came to Edinburgh on
Tuesday. Blessed be God, he seldom preaches without some one or other laid
under concern. Surely God has sent him to this place for good. The devil never
raged more by his emissaries. It is remarkable, there never was a Minister, no
nor any other man, against whom the mouths of the licentious have been more
opened. Since he came, I have found myself more desirous to be watchful, lest
my foot slipped at any time, and to guard against many things, which before I
thought indifferent.

Thursday, October 29, 1741. Yesterday Mr. Whitefield left this place, to
return to England. His departure was a great grief to many, whom the Lord has
mercifully awakened, under his ministry, the number of which, I believe, is
very great. Mr. W -- r alone, among about thirty young communicants that came
to converse with him, found about a dozen, who told him, They were first
effectually touched under his ministry; and gave very good accounts of a work
of God upon their souls. Some of the most abandoned wretches are brought to
cry, 'What shall I do to be saved?' I have often had the opportunity of
conversation with him, and, I think, I never heard him, or conversed with him,
but I learned some good lesson. I do not remember to have heard one idle word
drop from him, in all the times I have been in company with him, and others
that have been much more with him, give him the same testimony. On Tuesday
last, he preached and exhorted seven times. I heard him to my great
satisfaction the fourth time, in the park. From that he went to the Old
People's Hospital, to give them an exhortation; but indeed, I never was witness
to any thing of the kind before. All the congregation (for many followed him)
were so moved, that very few, if any, could refrain from crying out. I am sure,
the kingdom of God was then come nigh unto them, and that a woe will be unto
them that slighted the offers of a Savior then made to them. From that, he
went to Heriot's Hospital, where a great change is wrought, upon many of the
boys; for there, as well as in the Maiden-Hospitals, fellowship-meetings are
set up, which is quite new there; for the boys of that Hospital were noted for
the wickedest boys about town. I was with him in a private house in the
evening. When he came there, he was quite worn out. However, he expounded
there, which was the seventh discourse that day; and, what was very surprising,
he was much fresher after he had done, than at the beginning.

November 29, 1741, I had agreeable accounts of some of the children who were
wrought upon by the ministry of Mr. W -- d. I heard this day of a good many I
heard not of formerly, who were not only laid under concern, but seemed to have
a work of grace wrought upon their heart, appearing by a most remarkable change
in their conversation, and eager desires after farther degrees of knowledge of
the Lord's ways, which leads them to attend every opportunity they can have for
instruction.

Sabbati, December 6, 1741. Since Mr. Whitefield's coming here, I find
christians freer in conversation than formerly; which is a great mercy, both to
themselves, and all about them; the experience of which I have had this by past
week, in several places where I have been. I had occasion to see a soldier, who
was lately wrought upon by Mr. Whitefield's means. He seems to have come a
great length in a little time, and gives a very judicious account of the Lord's
dealings with his soul.

As a conclusion of this article, concerning Mr. Whitefield's first reception
and ministrations in Scotland, the reader will not be displeased to see the
following extract from the papers of a Gentleman deceased, who was eminent for
his learning and knowledge of the world, and who had a general acquaintance
with those who professed the greatest regard to religion.

Messieurs Ebenezer and Ralph Erskine corresponded with him for two or three
years, and invited him to Scotland. But afterward reflecting that if they held
communion with an episcopal Minister, because a good man and successful
preacher, they could not vindicate their renouncing communion with such
Ministers in the Church of Scotland: They wrote to him not to come. However, on
the invitation of some Ministers and people of the established church he came,
and preached his first sermon in Mr. Ralph Erskine's pulpit at Dumfermlin (a
town ten or twelve miles from Edinburgh on the other side of Forth.) At a
second visit to Dumfermlin, he had a conference with all the seceding brethren,
where he honestly avowed that he was a member of the Church of England, and as
he thought the government and worship of it lawful, was resolved, unless
violently thrust out of it, to continue so, rebuking sin and preaching Christ:
And told them the reckoned the Solemn League and Covenant a sinful Oath, as too
much narrowing the communinion of saints, and that he could not see the divine
right of Presbytery. On this they came to a presbyterial resolution to have no
more to do with him; and one of them preached a sermon to show that one who
held communion with the Church of England, or backslidden Church of Scotland,
could not be an instrument of reformation. This, however, did not hinder
multitudes, both of the Seceders and established Church of Scotland, from
hearing his sermons. His soundness in the faith, his servent zeal, and
unwearied diligence for promoting the cause of Christ; the plainness and
simplicity, the affection and warmth of his sermons: and the amazing power that
had accompanied them in many parts of England, and in almost all the North
American colonies, joined to his meekness, humility, and truly candid and
catholic spirit, convinced them there was reason to think well of him, and to
countenance his ministry. Conversions were become rare, little liveliness was
to be found even in real christians, and bigottry and blind zeal were producing
animosities and divisions, and turning away the attention of good men from
matters of infinitely greater importance. In this situation, an animated
preacher appears, singularly qualified to awaken the secure, to recover
christians to their first love, and first works, and to reconcile their
affections one to another.

The episcopal clergy gave him no countenance, though some few of their people
did. And in the established Church of Scotland, some of the more rigid
Presbyterians would not hold communion with him, on account of his connection
with the Church of England, and his seeming to assume the office of an
Evangelist, peculiar, in their apprehension, to the first ages of the church:
while some, who affected to be thought more sensible, or more modish and
polite, were mightily dissatisfied with him for preaching the Calvinist
Doctrines of Election, Original Sin, Efficacious Grace, Justification through
Faith, and the Perseverance of the Saints; and for inveighing against the
playhouse, dancing assemblies, games of chance, haunting taverns, vanity and
extravagance in dress, and levity in behavior and conversation.

Some Gentlemen and Ladies who went to hear, would not go a second time,
because he disturbed them, by insisting on man's miserable and dangerous state
by nature, and the strictness and holiness essential to the christian
character. But upon many of his hearers in Edinburgh of all ranks and ages,
especially young people, deep impressions were made, and many of them waited on
him privately, lamenting their former immoral lives, or stupid thoughtlessness
about religion, and expressing their anxious concern about obtaining an
interest in Christ, and the sanctifying influences of of the Spirit. In the
greatest part of these, the impressions have appeared to be saving, from their
circumspect examplary conduct since that time, or from their comfortable, or
triumphant deaths. Many Presbyterians begin to think more mildly and heartily
than before, of the Ministers and members of the Church of England This year
1741, he received the compliment honorary Burgess tickets from the towns of
Stirling, Glasgow, Paisley, and Aberdeen. And in 1742, from Irvine. And 1762,
from Edinburgh.
.

CHAP. IX. From his leaving EDINBURGH 1741, to his Return to that City in the
Year 1742.
MR. Whitefield having left Edinburgh in the in the latter end of October 1741,
set out for Abergavenny in Wales, where, having some time ago formed a
resolution to enter into the married state, he married one Mrs. James Her
maiden name was Elizabeth Burnell.
, a widow, between thirty and forty years of age; of whom he says (Letter
CCCLXXVI.) She has been a housekeeper many years, once gay, but for three
years last past, a despised follower of the Lamb of God. From Abergavenny he
went to Bristol, where he preached twice a day with his usual success. Upon
returning to London in the beginning of December, he received letters from
Georgia concerning his orphan-family, which, with respect to their external
circumstances, were a little discouraging. On the other hand, he had most
comfortable accounts of the fruits of his ministry in Scotland. This made him
think of paying another visit there in the spring. Meantime, he had the
pleasure of seeing his labors attended with the divine blessing at London and
Bristol. And from Gloucester he thus writes, December 22, 1741. Last Thursday
evening the Lord brought me hither. I preached immediately to our friends in in
a large barn, and had my Master's presence. On Friday and Saturday, I preached
again twice. Both the power and the congregation increased. On Sunday
Providence opened a door for my preaching in St. John's, one of the parish
churches. Great numbers came. On Sunday afternoon, after I had preached twice
at Gloucester, I preached at Mr. F -- 's at the hill, six miles off, and ^gain
at night, at Stroud. The people seemed to be more hungry than ever, and the
Lord to be more amongst them. Yesterday morning I preached at Painswick in the
parish church, here in the afternoon, and again at night in the barn. God gives
me unspeakable comfort, and uninterrupted joy. Here seems to be a new
awakening, and a revival of the work of God. I find several country people were
awakened when I preached at Tewksbury, and heard of three or four that have
died in the Lord. We shall never know what good field-preaching has done, till
we come to judgment. Many who were prejudiced against me, begin to be of
another mind; and God shows me more and more, that when a man's ways please the
Lord, he will make even his enemies to be at peace with him. Tomorrow morning I
purpose to set out for Abergavenny, and to preach at Bristol, in Wilts,
Gloucester, and Gloucestershire, before I see London.

In the latter end of December he came to Bristol, where he continued near a
month, preaching twice every day, and writing to his friends in London ^^d
Scotland. He also set up a general monthly me^^ing to read corresponding
letters. From Bristol he returned to Gloucester, and January 28, 1742, write
Letter CCCLXXXIX.
On Friday last I left Bristol, having first settled affairs, almost as I could
wish. At Kingswood, I administered the sacrament on Wednesday night. It was the
Lord's passover. On Thursday we had a sweet love-feast; on Friday the Lord was
with me twice at Tockington; on Saturday morning I broke up some fallow ground
at Newport; and in the evening preached to many thousands at Stroud; on Monday
morning at Painswick, and ever since twice a day here. Our congregations, ^
^hink, are larger than at Bristol. Every sermon is blessed.

On his way to London, Feb. 23, he was still farther encouraged by receiving
letters from Ameri^^ informing him of the remarkable success of the ^^^pel
there, and that God had stirred up some wealthy friends to assist his orphans
in their late straits. The everlasting God reward all their benefactors. I find
there has been a fresh awakening among them. I am informed, that twelve
negroes, belonging to a planter lately converted at the Orphanhouse, are
savingly brought home to Jesus Christ Letter CCCXCVIII.
.

Upon his return to London, he went on with greater zeal and success, if
possible, than ever. Our Savior (says he, writing to a brother Letter CCCCVII.
, April 6, 1742) is doing great things in London daily. I rejoice to hear that
you are helped in your work. Let this encourage you: go on, go on; the more we
do, the more we may do for Jesus. I sleep and eat but little, and am constantly
employed from morning till midnight, and yet my strength is daily renewed. O
free grace! It fires my soul, and makes me long to do something for Jesus. It
is true, indeed I want to go home; but here are so many souls ready to perish
for lack of knowledge, that I am willing to tarry below as long as my Master
has work for me.

From this principle of compassion to perishing souls, he now ventured to take
a very extraordinary step. It had been the custom for many years past, in the
holiday seasons, to erect booths in Moorfields, for mountebanks, players,
puppet shows, etc. which were attended from morning till night, by innumerable
multitudes of the lower sort of people. He formed a resolution to preach the
gospel among them; and executed it. On Whitmonday, at six o'clock in the
morning, attended by a large congregation of praying people, he began.
Thousands, who were waiting there, gaping for their usual diversions, all
flocked round him. His text was, John iii. 14. And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up. They
gazed, they listened, they wept: and many seemed to be stung with deep
conviction for their past sins. All was hushed and solemn. M. S. and Letters
CCCCXI. CCCCXII.
Being thus encouraged, (says he) I ventured out again at noon, when the fields
were quite full; and could scarce help smiling, to see thousands, when a
merry-andrew was trumpeting to them, upon observing me mount a stand on the
other side of the field, deserting him, till not so much as one was left
behind, but all flocked to hear the gospel. But this, together with a complaint
that they had taken near twenty or thirty pounds less that day than usual, so
enraged the owners of the booths, that when I came to preach a third time in
the evening, in the midst of the sermon, a merry-andrew got up upon a man's
shoulders, and advancing near the pulpit, attempted to slash me with a long
heavy whip several times. Soon afterward they got a recruiting sergeant, with
his drum, etc. to pass through the congregation. But I desired the people to
make way for the King's officer, which was quietly done. Finding these efforts
to fail, a large body, quite on the opposite side, assembled together, and
having got a great pole for their standard, advanced with sound of drum, in a
very threatening manner, till they came near the skirts of the congregation.
Uncommon courage was given both to preacher and hearers. I prayed for support
and deliverance, and was heard. For just as they approached us with looks full
of resentment, I know not by what accident, they quarrelled among themselves,
threw down their staff, and went their way, leaving, however, many of their
company behind, who, before we had done, I trust were brought over to join the
besieged party. I think I continued in praying, preaching, and singing, (for
the noise was too great at times to preach) about (...) hours. We then retired
to the Tabernacle, where thousands flocked. We were determined to pray down the
booths; but blessed be God, more substantial work was done. At a moderate
computation, I received, I believe, a thousand notes from persons under
conviction; and soon after, upwards of three hundred were received into the
society in one day. Some I married, that had lived together without marriage.
One man had exchanged his wife for another, and given fourteen shillings in
exchange. Numbers, that seemed as it were to have been bred up for Tyburn, were
at that time plucked as firebrands out of the burning.

I cannot help adding, that several little boys and girls, who were fond of
sitting round me on the pulpit, while I preached, and handing to me people's
notes, though they were often pelted with eggs, dirt, etc. thrown at me, never
once gave way; but on the contrary, every time I was struck, turned up their
little weeping eyes, and seemed to wish they could receive the blows for me.
God make them, in their growing years, great and living martyrs for him, who
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings perfects praise.

CHAP. X. From his Arrival in SCOTLAND 1742, to his Return to LONDON the same
Year.
SOON after this, he embarked a second time for Scotland and arrived at Leith,
June 3, 1742.

From the Diary, formerly quoted, we have the following, Edinburgh, Sabbath,
June 6, 1742. On Thursday last our dear friend Mr. Whitefield returned to this
place, to the great comfort of many honest christians, especially of those to
whom he was made a mean of conviction and conversion when last here. -- He
seems to have improved much in christian knowledge. He is much refreshed with
the accounts of the work of God in the west country. I have heard him preach
five excellent discourses, all calculated for the building up of christians,
(though he never fails to put in a word for the conviction of sinners) and I
think, can say, that I have never heard him without some influence attending
his preaching, especially in private houses. O may the impressions made on my
heart never wear off, lest at any time I should be in danger of dropping my
watch, and becoming untender.

Sabb. Oct. 17, 1742. It is a great recommendation of Mr. Whitefield to me,
that though the Seceders give him every bad character that can be devised, viz.
a sorcerer, etc. yet he takes all patiently, and wherever he goes, speaks well
of them, so far as he can: for none can approve of those gross parts of their
conduct: therefore these he chooses to cast a mantle of love over.

But here it is proper to take a view of the state of things in that country
upon his arrival. It had pleased God to bless his first visit to Scotland, not
only for the conversion of particular persons, and the comfort and quickening
of private christians, but to rouse them to more than ordinary concern about
the salvation of their neighbors, and to excite pious and conscientious
Ministers to greater diligence in their work. Prayers were put up, with some
degree of faith and hope, that God would now give success to their labors; and
not suffer them always to complain that they spent their strength in vain. Nor
were these prayers long unanswered: for in the month of February, 1742, an
extraordinary religious concern began to appear publicly at Cambuslang; and
soon after at Kilsyth and other places; the news of which quickly spread
through the land, and engaged general attention. Of this, a just though short
description is given in the following letter, written by the Rev. Mr. Hamilton
(then Minister in the Barony parish, now in the High-Church of Glasgow) to Mr.
Prince, Minister in Boston Prince's Christian History, No. x.
. Glasgow, September 13, 1742. We in the south and west of Scotland, have great
reason to join in thankfulness to God, with you, for the days of the Redeemer's
power that we are favored with. Mr. Whitefield came to Scotland in summer
1741, for the first time: and in many places where he preached, his
ministrations were evidently blessed, particularly in the cities of Edinburgh
and Glasgow, where a considerable number of persons were brought under such
impressions of religion, as have never yet left them; but they are still
following on to know the Lord. However, this was only the beginning of far
greater things: for about the middle of February last, a very great concern
appeared among the people of Cambuslang, a small parish, lying four miles
south-east of Glasgow, under the pastoral inspection of the Rev. Mr. William
MacCulloch, a man of considerable parts and great piety. This concern appeared
with some circumstances very unusual among us: to wit, severe bodily agonies,
outcryings, and faintings in the congregation. This made the report of it
spread like fire, and drew vast multitudes of people from all quarters to that
place. And I believe, in less than two months after the commencement of it,
there were few parishes within twelve miles of Cambuslang, but had some, more
or fewer awakened there, so a very deep piercing sense of sin: and many at much
greater distance. I am verily persuaded with your worthy brother Mr. Cooper, in
his preface to Mr. Edwards's sermon, that God has made use of these uncommon
circumstances, to make his work spread the faster. But, blessed be God,
Cambuslang is not the only place where these impressions are got. The same work
is spreading in other parishes, and under their own Ministers, particularly at
Calder, Kilsyth, and Cumbernaud, all to the north, and north-east of Glasgow.
And I doubt not, that since the middle of February, when this work began at
Cambuslang, there are upwards of two thousand persons awakened, and almost all
of them, by the best accounts I have, in a promising condition: there being
very few instances of impostors, or such as have lost their impressions; and
many whom we are bound to think are true Scripture converts, and evidencing it
by a suitable walk and conversation. There is evidently a greater seriousness
and concern about religion appearing in most of our congregations, than
formerly: a greater desire after the word; people applying themselves more
closely to their duty; and erecting new societies for prayer and spiritual
conference: which gives us the joyful prospect of a considerable enlargement of
the Messiah's kingdom.

My parish has likewise had some share in this good work. There has been above
an hundred new communicants among them this summer, who never did partake of
the blessed sacrament before: which is five times as many as ever I admitted in
any former year: most of them were awakened at Cambuslang; some of them in
their own church; and in others the impressions have been more gradual, and not
attended with these uncommon circumstances before mentioned. And, it is to be
observed, that before we admit any person to the Lord's table, we particularly
examine them, and are satisfied with their knowledge of the principles of
religion, of the nature and ends of the sacrament, and the impressions of
religion they have on their minds.

To the same purpose is the Rev. Mr. Willison's letter to Dr. Colman, Minister
in Boston, dated Dunde^, Feb. 28, 1743. Prince's Christian History, No. XI.
I must inform you a little of the work of God begun here. I told you in my
last, that after Mr. Whitefield's first coming and preaching three months in
Scotland, there were some beginnings of a revival of religion in some of our
principal cities, as Edinburgh and Glasgow, which still continue and increase,
especially since Mr. Whitefield's second coming in June last. But besides these
cities, the Lord has been pleased to begin a work much like that in
New England, in several places in the west of Scotland. The first parish
awakened, was Cambuslang; the next was the parish of Kilsyth, about nine miles
north east of Glasgow, and afterward the parishes of Calder, Kirkintilloch,
Cumbernaud, Campsie, Kilmarneck, Gargunnock, and a great many others in the
country. The awakenings of people have been, in a good many, attended with
outcryings, faintings, and bodily distresses: but in many more, the work has
proceeded with great calmness. But the effects in both sorts are alike good and
desirable, and hitherto we hear nothing of their falling back from what they
have professed at the beginning: and still we hear of some new parishes falling
under great concern here and there, though the great cryings and outward
distresses are much ceased.

The Lord, in this backsliding time, is willing to pity us, and see our ways
and heal them, however crooked and perverse they have been. O shall not this
wonderful step of divine condescension, lead us all to repentance, and to go
out to meet a returning God, in the way of humiliation and reformation. The
Magistrates and Ministers in Edinburgh, are beginning to set up societies for
reformation of manners, and new lectures on week days. ^ay all our cities
follow their example. There is a great increase of praying societies also in
Edinburgh and other towns and villages; and in them they are keeping days of
thanksgiving for the partial waterings the Lord is giving us: those in
Edinburgh send printed memorials to others through the nation, to excite them to
it.

The Rev. Mr. Macknight of Irvine, thus writes to Mr. Whitefield, June 21,
1742. Blessed be our glorious God, there are some awakenings amongst us at
Irvine; not only of those who have been at Cambuslang, but several others are
lately brought into great concern about their eternal state, and among them
several children; the news of which I know will rejoice you, and I hope will
encourage you to visit us, to help forward this great and glorious work of
converting sinners.

Extract of a letter from a person of distinction to the Compiler. Edinburgh,
February, 1772. I would not ascribe all the revival of religion in Scotland, to
the instrumentality of Mr. Whitefield. At Cambuslang, it began, before he had
been there; but in Edinburgh, and all the other places in Scotland, that I
heard of, after diligent enquiry, it began with his ^st visit. This honor he
had from his divine Master, and it ought not to be taken from him. And every
time he came to Scotland, it is an undoubted fact, that an uncommon power
attended his ministry: and many were always brought under serious and lasting
impressions.

The greatest strangers to religion could not avoid hearing of these things,
but they were very differently affected with them. Whilst some became more
thoughtful and serious, many mocked, and some were even filled with rage. On
the other hand, the temper and behavior of those who were the subjects of this
remarkable work, was the strongest of all arguments that it came from above.
Their earnest desire to be rightly directed in the way to heaven; their tender
and conscientious walk; their faithfulness in the duties of their stations;
their readiness to make ample restitution for any act of injustice they had
formerly committed; their disposition to judge mildly of others, but severely
of themselves; their laying aside quarrels and lawsuits, and desiring to be
reconciled, and to live peaceably with all men; such amiable and heavenly
qualities, especially when appearing in some who had formerly been of a very
opposite character, could not fail to strike every serious observer. In short,
it was such a time for the revival of religion, as had never before been seen
in Scotland Particulars may be found in the attested narrative of the work at
Cambuslang; Dr. Webster's Divine Influence the true Spring, etc. and in Mr.
Robe's Narratives and Monthly History. A view of the most memorable passages,
is given in vol. II. book IV. chap. vi. of Hist. Coll. relating to the Success
of the Gospel, printed in 1754; where is also some account of the abiding
fruits of these religious impressions.
.

The enmity which wicked and profane men discovered against this work, and the
derision with which they treated it, is no more than what might naturally be
expected. But it is not so easy to account for the conduct of the Seceders.
These, not satisfied with forbearing to approve of it, went the length even to
appoint a general fast among them, one of the grounds of which was, the
receiving Mr. Whitefield into Scotland; and another, the delusion, as they
called it, at Cambuslang and other places. And Mr. Gibb, one of their
Ministers, wrote a pamphlet inveighing against both, in the most virulent
language. Such was the bigotry, and misguided zeal of the bulk of the party at
that time. It is hoped their successors have juster views of this matter. But
it is not proper here to enlarge upon this subject The reader who wants to see
the objections against the work at Cambuslang, etc. fully refuted, may consult,
(besides the books mentioned in the last note) Mr. Robe's letters to Mr.
Fisher; and Mr. Jonathan Edward's Distinguishing Marks of a Work of the Spirit
of God. -- And as to the argument from the goodness of the fruits, which is
level to the capacities of all, the Compiler thinks it his duty to add, that
among his acquaintance, who were the subjects of that work, the fruits were
generally both good and lasting.
. With respect to Mr. Whitefield, the spring of their first opposition to him,
sufficiently appears from his conversation with them at Dunsermlin, formerly
mentioned. And the following letter, which he wrote at Cambuslang, August 1742,
and which was afterward printed at Glasgow, gives an account of their
objections, and his answers, which are perfectly agreeable to the spirit of
both Glasgow Weekly Hist. No. XXIII.
. I heartily thank you for your concern about unworthy me. Though I am not very
solicitous what the world say of me, yet I would not refuse to give any one,
much less a Minister of Jesus Christ, (and such an one I take you to be) all
reasonable satisfaction about any part of my doctrine or conduct. I am sorry
that the associate presbytery, besides the other things exceptionable in the
grounds of their late fast, have done me much wrong. As to what they say about
the supremacy, my sentiments, as to the power and authority of the civil
magistrate as to sacred things, agree with what is said in the Westminster
Confession of Faith, chap. xxiii. paragraph 3 and 4. And I do own the Lord
Jesus to be the blessed head and king of his church.

The Solemn League and Covenant I never abjured, neither was it ever proposed
to me to be abjured: and as for my missives, if the associate presbytery will
be pleased to print them, the world will see that they had no reason to expect
I would act in any other manner than I have done. What that part of my
experience is, that savours of the grossest enthusiasm, I know not, because not
specified; but this one thing I know, when I conversed with them, they were
satisfied with the account I then gave of my experiences, and also of the
validity of my mission; only, when they found I would preach the Gospel
promiscuously to all, and for every Minister that would invite me, and not
adhere only to them, one of them particularly said, 'They were satisfied with
all the other accounts which I gave of myself, except of my call to Scotland at
that time.' They would have been glad of my help, and have received me as a
Minister of Jesus Christ, had I consented to have preached only at the
invitation of them and their people. But I judged that to be contrary to the
dictates of my conscience; and therefore I could not comply. I thought their
foundation was too narrow for any high house to be built upon. I declared
freely when last in Scotland (and am more and more convinced of it since) that
they were building a Babel The event verified this conjecture. In his M. S.
notes, several years after, he makes the following remark: Such a work (the
religious concern at Cambuslang) so very extensive, must meet with great
opposition. My collections for the orphans gave a great handle; but the chief
opposition was made by the Seceders, who, though they had prayed for me at the
most extravagant rate, now gave out that I was agitated by the devil. Taking it
for granted, that all converted persons must take the covenant, and that God
had left the Scotch established churches long ago, and that he would never work
by the hands of a curate of the Church of England, they condemned the whole
work, as the work of the devil; and kept a fast through all Scotland, to humble
themselves, because the devil was come down in great wrath, and to pray that
the Lord would rebuke the destroyer (for that was my title.) But the Lord
rebuked these good men; for they split among themselves, and excommunicated one
another. Having afterward a short interview with Mr. Ralph Erskine, we
embraced each other, and he said, We had seen strange things.
. At the same time, they knew very well, I was very far from being against all
church government (for how can any church subsist without it?) I only urged, as
I do now, that since holy men differ so much about the outward form, we should
bear with, and forbear one another, though in this respect we are not of one
mind. I have often declared in the most public manner, that I believe the
Church of Scotland to be the best constituted national church in the world. At
the same time I would bear with, and converse freely with all others, who do
not err in fundamentals, and who give evidence that they are true lovers of the
Lord Jesus. This is what I mean by a catholic spirit. Nor that I believe a Jew
or Pagan continuing such, can be a true christian, or have true christianity in
them; and if there be any thing tending that way in the late extract which I
sent you, I utterly disavow it. And I am sure, I observed no such thing in it,
when I published it, though upon a closer review, some expressions seem justly
exceptionable. You know how strongly I assert all the doctrines of grace as
held forth in the Westminster Confession of Faith, and doctrinal articles of
the Church of England. These I trust I shall adhere to as long as I live,
because I verily believe they are the truths of God, and have felt the power of
them in my own heart. I am only concerned that good men should be guilty of
such misrepresentations. But this teaches me more and more to exercise
compassion toward all the children of God, and to be more jealous over our own
hearts, knowing what fallible creatures we all are. I acknowledge that I am a
poor blind sinner, liable to err, and would be obliged to an enemy, much more
to so dear a friend as you are, to point out to me my mistakes, as to my
practice, or unguarded expressions in my preaching or writing. At the same
time, I would humble myself before my Master, for any thing I may say or do
amiss, and beg the influence and assistance of his blessed Spirit, that I may
say and do so no more.

So much for Mr. Whitefield's difference with the Seceders. But notwithstanding
all this, upon his second arrival in Scotland, June 1742, he was received by
great numbers, among whom were some persons of distinction, with much joy: and
had the satisfaction of seeing and hearing more and more of the happy fruits of
his ministry. Edinburgh June 4, 1742. This morning I received glorious accounts
of the carrying on of the Mediator's kingdom. Three of the little boys that
were converted when I was last here, came to me and wept, and begged me to pray
for and with them. A Minister tells me, that scarce one is falling back, who
was awakened, either among old or young. The sergeant, whose letter brother C
-- has, goes on well with his company. Letter CCCCXXII.


And in the M.S. Societies (or fellowship meetings) I found set up for prayer,
especially at Glasgow and Edinburgh. Several young Gentlemen dedicated
themselves to the ministry, and became burning and shining lights. At Edinburgh
he preached twice a day, as usual, in the Hospital park, where a number of
seats and shades, in the form of an amphitheatre, were erected for the
accommodation of his hearers. And in consequence of earnest invitations, he
went to the west country, particularly to Cambuslang, where he preached no less
than three times upon the very day of his arrival, to a vast body of people,
although he had preached that same morning at Glasgow. The last of these
exercises he began at nine at night, continuing till eleven, when he said, he
observed such a commotion among the people, as he had never seen in America.
Mr. MacCulloch preached after him, till past one in the morning, and even then
could hardly persuade the people to depart. All night in the fields might be
heard the voice of prayer and praise. As Mr. Whitefield was frequently at
Cambuslang during this season, a description of what he observed there at
different times, will be best given in his own words M. S.
: Persons from all parts flocked to to see, and many from many parts, went home
convinced, and converted unto God. A brae, or hill, near the manse at
Cambuslang, seemed to be formed by Providence, for containing a large
congregation. People sat unwearied till two in the morning, to hear sermons,
disregarding the weather. You could scarce walk a yard, but you must tread upon
some, rejoicing in God for mercies received, or crying out for more. Thousands
and thousands have I seen, before it was possible to catch it by sympathy,
melted down under the word and power of God. At the celebration of the holy
communion, their joy was so great, that at the desire of many, both Ministers
and people, in imitation of Hezekiah's passover, they had, a month or two
afterward, a second; which was a general rendezvous of the people of God. The
communiontable was in the field; three tents, at proper distances, all
surrounded with a multitude of hearers; above twenty Ministers (among whom was
good old Mr. Bonner) attending to preach and assist, all enlivening and
enlivened by one another.

Besides his labors at Glasgow and Cambuslang, it is somewhat surprising to
think, how many other places in the west of Scotland he visited within the
compass of a few weeks, preaching once or twice at every one of them, and at
several three or four times. It is worth while to set down the journal Letter
CCCCXXVI.
of a week or two. In the beginning of July, he preached twice on Monday at
Paisley; on the Tuesday and Wednesday, three times each day at Irvine; on
Thursday, twice at Mearns; on Friday, three times at Cumbernaud; and on
Saturday, twice at Falkirk. And again in the latter end of August Letter
CCCCXLIX.
on Thursday, he preached twice at Greenock; on Friday three times at Kilbride;
on Saturday once at Kilbride, and twice at Stevenson; on Sabbath, four times at
Irvine; on Monday, once at Irvine, and three times at A Gentleman now living,
of an irreproachable character, thus writes to the Compiler, April 8, 1771.
When Mr. Whitefield was preaching at Kilmarnock, on the 23d of August, 1742,
from these words, And out of his fullness have all we received, and grace for
grace, I thought I never heard such a sermon on the fullness of grace that is
treasured up in Christ Jesus: and can truly say, that I felt the efficacy of
the Holy Spirit upon my soul, during that discourse. I afterward shut up
myself in my chamber, during the remaining part of that day; and before I laid
myself down to rest, I made a solemn and serious dedication of myself to God,
by way of covenant, extended and subscribed the same with my hands, and, I
think, had communion with God in so doing; to which I have often had recourse
since, in adhering thereto, and in renewing thereof; though my life since has
been attended with many backslidings from God, and have been perfidious in his
covenant; yet I still rejoice in his salvation through precious Christ. And it
is refreshing to behold the place at this very day, as I have often done since.
I from the era abovementioned, always looked upon Mr. Whitefield as my
spiritual father, and frequently heard him afterward in Edinburgh and Glasgow
with much satisfaction. It always gave me joy, the mentioning of his name, and
grieved me when he was reproached. And I can very well remember, that when Cape
Breton was taken, I happened to be then at Edinburgh; and being invited to
breakfast with Mr. Whitefield, I never in all my life enjoyed such another
breakfast. He gave the company a fine and lively descant upon that part of the
world, made us all join in a hymn of praise and thanksgiving, and concluded
with a most devout and servent prayer. In the evening of that day, he preached
a most excellent thanksgiving sermon, from the first two verses of the cxxvith
psalm.
Kilmarnock; I never preached with so much apparent success before. At
Greenock, Irvine, Kilbrid, Kilmarnock, and Stewarton, the concern was great: at
the three last very extraordinary. Letter CCCCXLIX.
on Tuesday, once at Kilmarnock, and four times at Stewarton; on Wednesday,
once at Stewarton, and twice at the Mearns. He was also at Inchannen, New
Kilpatrick, Calder, and Kilsyth, (where the religious concern still increased)
and at Torphichen. He was indeed sometimes taken very ill, and his friends
thought he was going off: But in the pulpit (says he) the Lord out of weakness,
makes me to wax strong, and causes me to triumph more and more Letter CCCCXXXV.
. And even when he retired for a day or two, it was on purpose to write
letters, and to prepare pieces for the press, so that he was as busy as ever
Particularly, A vindication of the work of God in New England. See Work vol.
IV. and several Letters about the affairs of the Orphan-house, some of his
friends there having met with harsh treatment from the Magistrates of Savannah.
See Letter CCCCXXXIX, to Mr. B --, and Letter CCCCXL. to the Trustees for
Georgia, and Letters CCCCXLII, CCCCXLIII, to General Oglethorpe, and to Thomas
J --, Esquire in Georgia.

At this time also he published at Edinburgh, a continuation of the account of
the Orphan-house, from January 1741, to June 1742. -- See his Works, vol. III.
where you have the whole account continued, from time to time, till April 1770.


.

When he was at Edinburgh, he received accounts that the Spaniards had landed
in Georgia. Upon this occasion he wrote to Mr. Habersham Letter CCCCLVII.
, I am glad my dear family is removed to Mr. Bryan's, and rejoice that our
glorious God had raised him and his brother up, to be such friends in time of
need. My thoughts have been variously exercised, but my heart kept steadfast and
joyful in the Lord of all lords, whose mercy endures for ever. I long to be
with you, and methinks could willingly be found at the head of you kneeling and
praying, though a Spaniard's sword should be put to my throat. But alas, I know
not how I should behave, if put to the trial; only we have a promise, that as
our day is, so our strength shall be. The thoughts of divine love carry me
above every thing. My dear friend, the Spaniards cannot rob us of this; nor can
men or devils. -- I humbly hope that I shall shortly hear of the spiritual and
temporal welfare of you all. And he was not disappointed; for a few weeks after
he was informed of his family's safe return to Bethesda The manner in which the
Spaniards were repulsed with remarks upon the kindness of Providence to the
colony, may be see in an extract of General Oglethorpe's proclamation for a
thanksgiving, in Letter DII.
.

About the end of October he left Scotland, and rode post to London, where he
arrived in about five days.

CHAP. XI. From his Arrival in LONDON in the Year 1742, to his embarking for
AMERICA, 1744.
ON Mr. Whitefield's arrival in London, he found a new awakening at the
Tabernacle, which they had been obliged to enlarge; where, as he observes, from
morning till midnight Letter CCCCXCI.
, I am ememployed, and, glory be to rich grace, I am carried through the duties
of each day with cheerfulness, and almost uninterrupted tranquillity. Our
society is large, but in good order. My Master gives us much of his gracious
presence, both in our public and private administrations.

In the month of March, 1743, he went into Gloucestershire, where the people
seemed more desirous to hear than ever. Preaching (says he) in Gloucestershire
Letter DIV.
, is now like preaching at the Tabernacle in London. And again, (in a letter,
dated April 7,) Letter DVI.
I preached and took leave of the Gloucester people, with mutual and great
concern, on Sunday evening last. It was p^^ one in the morning before I could
lay my weary body down. At five I rose again, sick for want of rest; but I was
enabled to get on horseback, and ride to Mr. F -- 's where I preached to a
large congregation, who came there at seven in the morning. At ten, I read
prayers and preached, and afterward administered the sacrament in Stonehouse
church. Then I rode to Stroud, and preached to about 12,000 in Mistress G -- 's
field; and about six in the evening to a like number in Hampton Common. After
this, went to Hampton, and held a general love feast with the united societies,
and went to bed about midnight very cheerful and very happy. Next morning he
preached near Dursley to some thousands; about seven reached Bristol, and
preached to a full congregation at Smiths-Hall; and on Tuesday morning, after
preaching again, set out for Waterford, in South Wales, where he opened the
association which he and his brethren had agreed upon, and was several days
with them, settling the affairs of the societies. He continued in Wales some
weeks, and preached with great apparent success at Cardiff, Lantrissant, Neath,
Swanzey, Harbrook, Llanelthy, Carmarthen, It was the great sessions. The
Justices desired I would stay till they rose, and they would come. Accordingly
they did, and many thousands more; and several people of quality. Letter
CCCCCIX.
Larn, Narbatt, Newton, Jefferson, Llassivran, Kidwilly, Llangathan, Landovery,
Brecon Trevecka, Guenfethen, Builth, and the Gore The work begun by Mr. Jones,
spread itself far and near, in South and North Wales, where the Lord had made
Mr. Howel Harris an instrument of converting several clergy as well as laymen.
Last year I visited several places, but now I went to more, and in every place
found, that not one half had been told me. The power of God at the sacrament,
under the ministry of Mr. Rowland, was enough to make a person's heart burn
within him. At seven of the morning I have seen perhaps ten thousand from
different parts, in the midst of sermon, crying, Gogunniant -- bendyitti --
ready to leap for joy. Associations were now formed, and monthly or quarterly
meetings appointed, and a closer connection established between the English and
Welsh, so that several came over to assist. M.S.
, and in the latter end of April returned to Gloucester, after having, in about
three weeks Letter DXIV.
, traveled about four hundred English miles, spent three days in attending
associations At one of these associations, a motion was made to separate from
the established Church: but (says Mr. Whitefield, Letter DXXXIII.) by far the
greater part strenuously opposed it, and with good reason: for, as we enjoy
such great liberty under the mild and gentle government of his present Majesty
King George, I think we can do him, our country, and the cause of God, more
service in ranging up and down, preaching repentance toward God, and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ, to those multitudes who would neither come into church
or meeting, but who are led by curiosity to follow us into the fields -- This
is a way to which God has affixed his seal for many years past.
, and preached about forty times.

In May he went back to London, Once more, as he expresses it, to attack the
prince of darkness in Moorfields, in the time of the holidays. The
congregations were amazingly great, and much affected. And by the contributions
which were now and formerly made for his orphans, he had the satisfaction of
paying all that was due in England, and of making a small remittance to Mr.
Habersham Letter DXIX.
.

About the middle of June he made another excursion, and preached at Fairford,
Glanfield, Burford, Bengeworth, and Gloucester; also at Bristol and Kingswood,
and at Brinkworth, Tetherton, and Hampton. At Bristol he continued some time,
preaching statedly every day twice, and four times on the Sunday. Afterward,
he preached at Exeter to very large congregations, where many of the clergy
attended.

In August he returned to London, but made no long stay there. I thank you,
says he to a correspondent Letter DXL.
, for your kind caution to spare myself; but evangelizing is certainly my
province. Every where effectual doors are opened. So far from thinking of
nestling at London, I am more and more convinced that I should go from place to
place.

Accordingly, we find him in the months of October, November, and December,
preaching and traveling through the country, as if it had been the middle of
summer. At Avon in Wilts, Tetherton, Clack, Brinkworth, Chippenham, Wellington,
Cullompton, Exeter, Axminster, Ottery, Biddeford Here is a clergyman about
eighty years of age, but not above one year old in the school of Christ. He
lately preached three times, and rode forty miles the same day. A young Oxonian
who came with him, and many others were deeply affected. I cannot well describe
with what power the word was attended. Dear Mr. Hervey, one of our first
Methodists at Oxford, and who was lately a curate here, had laid the
foundation. Letter DXL.
, St. Gennis Many prayers were put up by the worthy Rector and others, for an
outpouring of God's blessed Spirit. They were answered. Arrows of c^nviction
flew so thick, and so fast, and such an universal weeping prevailed from one
end of the congregation to the other, that good Mr. J -- their Minister, could
not help going from seat to seat to speak, encourage, and comfort the wounded
souls. Letter DXLI.
in Cornwall, Birmingham It is near eleven at night, and nature calls for rest.
I have preached five times this day, and, weak as I am, through Christ
strengthening me, I could preach five times more. Letter DXLIII.
, Kidderminster I was kindly received by Mr. Williams. Many friends were at his
house. I was greatly refreshed to find what a sweet savor of good Mr. Baxter's
doctrine, works, and discipline remained to this day. Letter DXLIV.
, and Browsgrove. Nor did he feel his health much impaired, though it was so
late in the season. He observes, indeed, (Letter D^LII) that he had got a cold;
but adds, "The Lord warms my heart."

February 1744, an event happened to him, which, amidst all his success, tended
to keep him humble, and served to cure him of a weakness to which he had been
liable, the trusting to groundless impressions. It was the death of his only
child, concerning whom he was so impressed, that he made no scruple of
declaring before the birth, that the child would be a son, and that he hoped he
would live to preach the gospel. Several narrow escapes which Mrs. Whitefield
had during her pregnancy, confirmed him in his expectations; which were so
high, that after he had publicly baptized the child at the Tabernacle, all went
away, big with hopes of his being spared to be employed in the work of God. But
these fond expectations were soon blasted by the child's death, when he was
about four months old. This was, no doubt, very humbling to the father; but he
was helped to make the wisest and best improvement of it. Though I am
disappointed, (says he writing to his friend Letter DXLVII.
) of a living preacher by the death of my son; yet I hope what happened before
his birth, and since at his death, has taught me such lessons, as if duly
improved, may render his mistaken parent more cautious, more sober-minded, more
experienced in Satan's devices, and consequently more useful in his future
labors to the church of God.

March 3, he attended the assizes at Gloucester. The occasion was, in the
Summer 1743, the Methodists had been persecuted and abused by the mob,
particularly at Hampton, where several were hurt, and the life of their
preachers threatened. Mr. Whitefield having tried other methods in vain,
resolved with the advice and assistance of his brethren, to seek the protection
of law: and accordingly got an information lodged against the Hampton rioters
in the court of King's Bench. Facts being proved by a variety of evidence, and
the defendants making no reply, the rule was made absolute; and an information
filed against them. To this they pleaded, Not Guilty, and therefore the cause
was referred in course to the assizes in Gloucester. There he attended and got
the better of his adversaries. After a full hearing on both sides, a verdict
was given for the prosecutors, and all the defendants were brought in Guilty of
the whole information lodged against them. This prosecution had a very good
effect. The rioters were greatly alarmed at the thoughts of having an execution
issued out against them. But the intention of the Methodists was, to let them
see what they could do, and then to forgive them Letter DXLIX, DL. -- See an
account of this trial in his works, vol. IV.
.

Some time before this, several anonymous papers, entitled, Observations on the
Conduct and Behavior of a certain Sect, usually distinguished by the name of
Methodists, had been printed, and handed about in the religious societies of
London and Westminster, and given to many private persons, with strict
injunctions to part with them to no one. Mr. Whitefield having accidentally had
the hasty perusal of them; and finding many queries concerning him and his
conduct contained in them; and having applied for a copy, which was refused
him, he thought it his duty to publish an advertisement, desiring, (as he knew
not how soon he might embark for Georgia) a speedy, open publication of the
said papers, that he might make a candid and impartial answer. He had reason to
believe the Bishop of London was concerned in composing or revising them: but
that he might not be mistaken, after the publication of the advertisement, he
wrote the Bishop a letter, wherein he desired to know, whether his Lordship was
the author or not; and also desired a copy. The Bishop sent word, "He should
hear from him." Some time after, one Mr. Owen, printer to the Bishop, left a
letter for Mr. Whitefield, informing him that he had orders from several of the
Bishops, to print the Observations, etc. with some few additions, for their
use; and when the impression was finished, Mr. Whitefield should have a copy.
-- For these reasons, Mr. Whitefield thought it proper to direct his Answer to
the Observations, to the Bishop of London, and the other Bishops concerned in
the publication of them. This Answer occasioned the Rev. Mr. Church's
Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Whitefield; to which he soon replied, with thanks
to the Author for prefixing his name See his works, vol. IV. where is also his
Answer to the Second Part of the Observations, etc. in a second letter to the
Bishops, written during his voyage to America that year.
.

Having resolved to make another visit to America, whither Mr. Smith, a
merchant, then in England, in the name of thousands invited him. With him he
took passage in a ship going from Portsmouth; but being informed, just before
he was about to take his farewell, that the Captain refused to take him, for
fear, as he alleged, of spoiling the sailors, he was obliged to go as far as
Plymouth. In my way, says he, I preached at Wellington, where one Mr. Darracott
had been a blessed instrument of doing much good. At Exeter also, I revisited,
where many souls were awakened to the divine life. At Biddeford, where good Mr.
Hervey had been curate, we had much of the power of God; and also at
Kingsbridge. But the chief scene was at Plymouth and the dock, where I expected
least success M. S. Upon mentioning Biddeford, he adds here a character of Mr.
Hervey: it is pity he did not write it down. -- However, we have a sketch of it
in Letter DCCLXIII. Your sentements concerning Mr. H -- 's book, are very just.
The author of it is my old friend; a most heavenly-minded creature, one of the
first of the Methodists, who is contented with a small cure, and gives all that
he has to the poor. He is very weak, and daily wai^^ for his dissolution.
. It is remarkable, that just before his success at Plymouth, he was in danger
of being killed. Four Gentleman, it seems, came to the house of one of his
particular friends, kindly enquiring after him, and desiring to know where he
lodged. Soon afterward, Mr. Whitefield received a letter, informing him, that
the writer was a nephew of Mr. S --, an Attorney at New York; that he had the
pleasure of supping with Mr. Whitefield at his uncle's house; and desired his
company to sup with him, and a few more friends, at a tavern. Mr. Whitefield
sent him word, that it was not customary for him to sup abroad at taverns, but
should be glad of the Gentleman's company to eat a morsel with him at his
lodging: he accordingly came and supped; but was observed frequently to look
around him, and to be very absent. At last he took his leave, and returned to
his companions in the tavern; and being by them interrogated, what he had done,
he answered, That he had been used so civilly, he had not the heart to touch
him. Upon which, it seems, another of the company, a Lieutenant of a man of
war, laid a wager of ten guineas, that he would do his business for him. His
companions, however, had the precaution to take away his sword. It was now
about midnight, and Mr. Whitefield having that day preached to a large
congregation, and visited the French prisoners, was gone to bed: when the
landlady came and told him that a well-dressed gentleman desired to speak with
him, Mr. Whitefield, imagining it was somebody under conviction, desired him to
be brought up. He came, and sat down by the bed side, congratulated him upon
the success of his ministry, and expressed much concern at being detained from
hearing him. Soon after he broke out into the most abusive language, and in a
cruel and cowardly manner, beat him in his bed. The landlady and her daughter
hearing the noise, rushed into the room, and seized upon him; but he soon
disengaged himself from them, and repeated his blows on Mr. Whitefield, who
being apprehensive that he intended to s^oot or stab him, underwent all the
surprise of a sudden and violent death. Afterward, a second came into the
house, and cried out from the bottom of the stairs, Take courage, I am ready to
help you. But by the repeated cry of Murder, the alarm was now so great, that
they both made off. The next morning, says, Mr. Whitefield Letter DLII.
, I was to expound at a private house, and then to set out for Biddeford. Some
urged me to stay and prosecute; but being better employed, I went on my
intended journey, was greatly blessed in preaching the everlasting gospel, and
upon my return was well paid for what I had suffered: curiosity having led
perhaps two thousand more than ordinary, to see and hear a man that had like to
have been murdered in his bed. And I trust in the five weeks time M. S.
, while I waited for the convoy, hundreds were awakened and turned unto the
Lord. At the dock also, near Plymouth, a glorious work was begun. Could the
fields between Plymouth and the Dock, speak, they would tell what blessed
seasons were enjoyed there.

CHAP. XII. Trim his embarking for AMERICA in 1744, to his going to the
BERMUDAS, in the Year 1748.
AS soon as the convoy came August 4. Our convoy is now come. I desire you all
to bless God for what he is doing in these parts; for preaching in the dock is
now like preaching in the Tabernacle. Our morning lectures are very delightful.
O! the thousands that flock to the preaching of Christ's Gospel. -- Letters
DLVIII, DLIX.

P. S. I must tell you one thing more. There is a ferry over to Plymouth. The
ferrymen are now so much my friends, that they will take nothing of the
multitudes that come to hear me preach; saying, 'God forbid that we should sell
the word of God.


, Mr. Whitefield embarked in the beginning of August 1744, though in a poor
state of health. The tediousness of the voyage, he imagined, occasioned no
small addition to a violent pain in his side. However, he says, Blessed be God,
in a week or two after we sailed, we began to have a church in our ship. We had
regular public prayer morning and evening, frequent communion, and days of
humiliation and fasting. After a passage of eleven weeks His letter to the
Clergy of the Diocese of Litchfield and Coventry, is dated during this voyage.
, he arrived a York in New England. Colonel Pepperell went with some friends in
his own boat, to invite him to his house. But he was not in a proper condition
to accept the invitation, being so ill of a nervous cholic, that he was
obliged, immediately after his arrival, to go to bed. His friends were very
apprehensive; but he himself had much inward peace. Great care was taken of him
by ^hysician who had been a notorious Deist, but was awakened, the last time he
was in New England. For some time he was, indeed, very weak: Yet (he writes) M.
S. and Letter DLXII. See Works vol. IV.
in three weeks, I was enabled to preach: but, imprudently going over the ferry
to Portsmouth, I caught cold, immediately relapsed, and was taken, as every one
thought, with death, in my dear friend Mr. Sherburne's house. What gave me most
concern was, that notice had been given of my being to preach. Whilst the
Doctor was preparing a medicine feeling my pains abated, I on a sudden cried,
'Doctor, my pains are suspended: by the help of God, I will go and preach, and
then come home and die.' In my own apprehension, and in all appearance to
others, I was a dying man. I preached. The people heard me as such. The
invisible realities of another world lay open to my view. Expecting to stretch
into eternity, and to be with my Master before the morning, I spoke with
peculiar energy. Such effects followed the words, I thought it was worth dying
for a thousand times. Though wonderfully comforted within, at my return home, I
thought I was dying indeed. I was laid on a bed upon the ground, near the fire,
and I heard my friends say, 'He is gone.' But God was pleased to order it
otherwise. I gradually recovered; and soon after, a poor Negro-woman would see
me. She came, sat down upon the ground, and looked earnestly in my face, and
then said, in broken language; Master, you just go to Heaven's gate. But Jesus
Christ said, Get you down, get you down, you must not come here yet; but go
first, and call some more poor Negroes. I prayed to the Lord, that if I was to
live, this might be the event.

In about three weeks I was enabled, though in great weakness, to reach Boston;
and every day was more and more confirmed, in what I had heard about a glorious
work, that had been begun and carried on there, and in almost all parts of
New England, for two years together. Before my last embarkation from Georgia,
Mr. Colman, and Mr. Cooper, wrote me word, that upon Mr. Tenant's going out as
an itinerant, the awakening greatly increased in various places See Prince's
Christian History, or historical collections, etc. Vol. II. page 304) where are
attestations of a above a hundred and twenty Ministers to the goodness of the
work.
, till, at length, the work so advanced every where, that many thought the the
latter-day glory was indeed come, and that a nation was to be born in a day.
But as the same sun that enlightens and warms the earth, gives vent to noxious
insects; so the same work, that for a while carried all before it, was sadly
blemished through the subtility of satan Thus it was at the Reformation in
Germany.
, and the want of more experience in Ministers and people, who had never seen
such a scene before. Opposers, who waited for such an occasion, did all they
could to aggravate every thing. One rode several hundred miles, to pick up all
the accounts he could get of what was wrong, in what he called only, 'a
religious stir.' And God having been pleased to send me first, all was laid
upon me. Testimonies signed by various Ministers came out against me He wrote
an answer, to a testimony by Harvard College. See Works, vol. IV.
almost every day, and the disorders were also at the highest; so that for a
while, my situation was rendered uncomfortable. But amidst all this smoke, a
blessed fire broke out. The awakened souls were as eager as ever to hear the
word. Having heard that I had expounded early in Scotland, they begged I would
do the same in Boston. I complied, and opened a lecture at six in the morning.
I seldom preached to less than two thousand. It was delightful to see so many
of both sexes, neatly dressed, flocking to hear the word, and returning home to
family prayer and breakfast, before the opposers were out of their beds. So
that it was commonly said, That between early rising, and tar-water, the
physicians would have no business.

A man of good parts, ready wit and lively imagination, who had made it his
business, in order to furnish matter over a bottle, to come and hear, and then
carry away scraps of my sermons: having one night got sufficient matter to work
upon, as he thought, attempted to go out; but being pent in on every side, he
found his endeavors fruitless. Obliged thus to stay, and looking up to me,
waiting for some fresh matter for ridicule, God was pleased to prick him to the
heart. He came to Mr. P. full of horror, confessed his crimes, and longed to
ask my pardon Letter DLXVII.
.

While some published testimonials against Mr. Whitefield, others published
testimonials in his favor: as Mr. Hobby, Mr. Loring; Fifteen Ministers
convened at Taunton, March 5, 1745. And the following paragraph is in Prince's
Christian History, No. XCIV.

Saturday Nov. 24, 1744. The Rev. Mr. Whitefield was so far revived, as to be
able to set out from Portsmouth to Boston, whither he came in a very feeble
state the Monday evening after: since which, he has been able to preach in
several of our largest houses of public worship, particularly the Rev. Dr.
Colman's, Dr. Sewall's, Mr. Webb's, and Mr. Gee's, to crowded assemblies of
people, and with great and growing acceptance. At Dr. Colman's desire, and the
consent of the church, on Lord's Day after his arrival, he administered to them
the Holy Communion. And last Lord's Day he preached for Mr. Cheever of Chelsea,
and administered the Holy Supper there. The next day preached for the Rev. Mr.
Emerson of Malden. Yesterday he set out to preach at some towns to the
northward, proposes to return hither the next Wednesday evening, and after a
few days, to comply with the earnest invitations of several Ministers to go and
preach to their congregations in the southern parts of the province. He comes
with the same extra-ordinary spirit of meekness, sweetness, and universal
benevolence, as before. In opposition to the spirit of separation and bigotry,
is still for holding communion with all protestant churches. In opposition to
enthusiasm, he preaches a close adherence to the Scriptures, the necessity of
trying all impressions by them, and of rejecting whatever is not agreeable to
them, as delusions. In opposition to Antinomianism, he preaches up all kinds of
relative and religious duties, though to be performed in the strength of
Christ: and in short, the doctrines of the church of England, and of the first
fathers of this country. As before, he first applies himself to the
understandings of his hearers, and then to the affections. And the more he
preaches, the more he convinces people of their mistakes about him, and
increases their satisfaction.

It was now spring 1745, and at that time the first expedition was set on foot
against Cape Breton. Colonel Pepperell, who was then at Boston, and constantly
attended Mr. Whitefield's lecture, was pleased, the day before he accepted a
commission, to be General in that expedition, to ask Mr. Whitefield's opinion
of the matter. He told him, with his usual frankness, That he did not, indeed,
think the scheme proposed for taking Louisburgh, very promising: that the eyes
of all would be upon him. It he did not succeed, the widows and orphans of the
slain soldiers, would be like lions robbed of their whelps; but if it pleased
God to give him success, envy would endeavor to eclipse his glory; he had
need, therefore, if he went, to go with a single eye; and then, there was no
doubt, but if Providence really called him, he would find his strength
proportioned to the day, About the same time, Mr. Sherburne, another of Mr.
Whitefield's friends, being appointed one of the commissaries, told him, He
must favor the expedition, otherwise the serious people would be discouraged
from enlisting; not only so, but insisted he should give him a motto for his
flag, for the encouragement of the soldiers. This he refused to do, as it would
be acting out of character. But Mr. Sherburne would take no denial. He
therefore, at last, gave them one, Nil desperandum Christo Duce. If Christ be
Captain, no fear of a defeat. Upon which great numbers enlistened Letter DLXXII.
. And before their embarkation, the officers desired him to give them a sermon.
This he readily complied with, and preached from these words: As many as were
distressed, as many as were discontented, as many as were in debt, came to
David, and he became a Captain over them. He spiritualized the subject, and
told them, How distressed sinners came to Jesus Christ, the son David; and in
his application, exhorted the soldiers to behave like the soldiers of David,
and the officers to act like David's worthies; then he made no manner of doubt,
there would be good news from Cape Breton. After this, he preached to the
General himself; who asked him, If he would not be one of his Chaplains? But he
excused himself, and said, He should think it an honor, but believed, as he
generally preached three times a day, in various places, to large
congregations, he could do more service by stirring up the people to pray, and
thereby strengthening his, and his soldiers hands. And in this practice he
persisted during the siege of Louisburgh, I believe, adds he M. S. and Letter
DLXXII.
, if ever people went with a disinterested view, the New-Englanders did then.
Though many of them were raw and undisciplined, yet numbers were substantial
persons who left their farms, and willingly ventured all for their country's
good. An amazing scene of Providence appeared See Mr. Prince's Sermon on that
occasion.
, and though some discouraging accounts were sent during the latter end of the
siege; yet in about six weeks, news was brought of the surrender of Louisburgh.
Numbers flocked from all quarters, to hear a thanksgiving sermon upon the
occasion. And I trust the blessing bestowed on the country, through the
thanksgiving of many, redounded to the glory of God.

The New England people had, some time ago, offered to build him a large house
to preach in; but as this scheme might have abridged his liberty of
itinerating, he thanked them for their kind offer, and at the same time begged
leave to refuse the accepting of it Letter DLXVII.
. As his bodily strength increased, and his health grew better, he began to
move farther southward; and, after preaching eastward, as far as Cascobay and
North Yarmouth, he went through Connecticut, Plymouth, Rhode Island, preaching
to thousands, generally twice a day. "And though," says he M. S.
, there was much smoke, yet every day I had more and more convincing proof,
that a blessed Gospel fire had been kindled in the hearts both of Ministers and
people. At New York, where I preached as usual, I found that the seed sown, had
sprung up abundantly: and at the east end of Long Island saw many instances. In
my way to Philadelphia, I had the pleasure of preaching, by an interpreter, to
some converted Indians, and of seeing near fifty young ones in one school, near
Freehold, learning the Assembly's Catechism. A blessed awakening had been
begun, and carried on among the Delaware Indians, by the instrumentality of Mr.
David Brainard See his Life and Journals.
, such a one as has not been heard of since the awakening in New England by
the venerable Mr. Elliot, who used to be styled the Apostle of the Indians; his
brothe^ ^ollowed him. Mr. William Tennent, whose part^* I found much upon the
advance, seemed to encourage their endeavors with all his heart.

His brother, Mr. Gilbert Tennent, being earnestly solicited thereto, I found
settled in the place formerly erected at the beginning of the awakening. The
Gentlemen offered me eight hundred pounds a year, only to preach among them six
months, and to travel the other six months where I would. Nothing remarkable
happened, during my way southward. But when I came to Virginia, I found that
the word of the Lord had run and was glorified. During my preaching at Gl^sgow,
some persons wrote some of my extempore sermons, and printed them almost as
fast as I preached them. Some of these were carried to Virginia, and one of
them fell into the hands of Samuel Morris. He read and found benefit See more
fully narrated Hist. Coll. Book IV. Chap. v.. 22.
. He then read them to others; they were awakened and convinced. A fire was
kindled; opposition was made; other laborers were sent for; and many, both
white people and negroes, were converted to the Lord.

In North Carolina, where I stayed too short a time, little was done. At
Georgia, through the badness of the institution, and the Trustees obstinacy in
not altering it, my load of debt and care was greatly increased, and at times
almost overwhelmed me. But I had the pleasure of seeing one, who came as a
player from New York, now converted unto God, and a preacher of Jesus Christ.
One Mr. Ratteray brought me ten pounds: and at my return northward, fresh
supplies were raised up. The generous Charlestown people raised a subscription
of three hundred pounds, with which I bought land, being cheap, during the war;
and a plantation, and a few negroes were purchased at Indian-Land. Thus, for a
while, the gap was stopped. I preached a sermon upon the rebellion. Was very
sick at Philadelphia; kindly received at Bohemia, and at New York.

As itinerating was my delight, and America, as being a new world, particularly
pleasing, I now began to think of returning no more to my native country. But
traveling, care, and a load of debt, contracted not for myself, but the
Orphan-house, weighed me down. And being much troubled with stitches in my
side, I was advised to go to Bermudas, for the recovery of my health.

In his Letters during this period, are the following passages:

August 26, 1746. The door, for my usefulness, opens wider and wider. I love to
range in the American woods, and sometimes think I shall never return to
England any more.

October 8. I have had some sweet times with several of the Lutheran Ministers
at Philadelphia.

November 8. I have lately been in seven counties in Maryland, and preached to
great congregations.

May 21, 1747. I have now been upon the stretch, preaching constantly for
almost three weeks. My body is often extremely weak, but the joy of the Lord is
my strength; and by the help of God, I intend going on till I drop, or this
poor carcass can hold out no more. The southern colonies lie in darkness, and
yet, as far as I find, are as willing to receive the Gospel, as others. If some
good books could be purchased, to dispose among poor people, much good might be
done.

June 1. The congregations yesterday were exceeding large. I am sick and well,
as I used to be in England: but the Redeemer fills me with comfort. I am
determined, in his strength, to die fighting.

June 4. I have omitted preaching one night to oblige my friends, that they may
not charge me with murdering myself; but I hope yet to die in the pulpit, or
soon after I come out of it.

June 23. Since my last, I have been several times on the verge of eternity. At
present, I am so weak that I cannot preach. It is hard work to be silent, but I
must be tried every way.

June 29. God has been pleased to bring my body to the very brink of the grave,
by convulsions, gravel, a nervous cholic, and a violent fever. For this week
past, I have not preached: but since my leaving Philadelphia, about three days
ago, I seemed to have gathered strength, and hope once more, tomorrow, to
proclaim amongst poor sinners, the unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ. I
purpose to go to Boston, and return by land, so as to reach Charlestown by
November.

July 4. At present, I am very weakly, and scarce able to preach above once or
twice a week.

September 11. We saw great things in New England. The flocking and power that
attended the word, was like unto that seven years ago. Weak as I was, and have
been, I was enabled to travel eleven hundred miles, and preach daily. I am now
going to Georgia to winter.

He embarked, and landed at Bermudas the 15th of March, 1748.

CHAP. XIII. From his Arrival at BERMUDAS to his Return to LONDON in July, 1748.
MR. Whitefield met with the kindest reception at Bermudas, and for above a
month, he preached generally twice a day, traversing the Island from one end to
the other: but his activity, usefulness, and treatment, will best appear by an
extract from his manuscript journal of that period.

The simplicity and plainness of the people, together with the pleasant
situation of the island, much delighted me. -- The Rev. Mr. Holiday, Minister
of Spanish-Point, received me in a most affectionate christian manner, and
begged I would make his house my home. -- In the evening, I expounded at the
house of Mr. Savage of Port Royal, which was very commodious, and which also he
would have me make my home. -- I went with Mr. Savage, in a boat, lent us by
Captain --, to the town of St. George, in order to pay our respects to the
Governor. All along we had a most pleasant prospect of the other part of the
island; but a more pleasant one I never saw. One Mrs. Smith, of St. George's,
for whom I had a letter of recommendation from my dear old friend Mr. Smith of
Charlestown, received me into her house. About noon, with one of the council
and Mr. Savage, I waited upon the Governor. He received us courteously, and
invited us to dine with him and the Council at the tavern. We accepted the
invitation, and all behaved with great ^civility and respect. After the
Governor rose from table, he desired, if I stayed in town on the Sunday, that I
would dine with him at his own house.

Sunday, March 20. Read prayers, and preached twice this day, to what were
esteemed here large auditories, in the morning at Spanish-Point church, and in
the evening at Brackish-pond church, about two miles distant from each other.
In the afternoon I spoke with greater freedom than in the morning, and I trust
not altogether in vain. All were attentive -- some wept. I dined with Colonel
Butterfield, one of the council, and received several invitations to other
Gentlemen's houses. -- May God bless and reward them, and incline them to open
their heart to receive the Lord Jesus! Amen and Amen!

Wednesday, March 23. Dined with Captain Gibbs, and went from thence and
expounded at the house of Captain F -- le, at Hunbay, about two miles distant.
The company was here also large, attentive, and affected. Our Lord gave me
utterance: I expounded on the first part of the viiith chapter of Jeremiah.
After lecture, Mr. Riddle, a Counselor, invited me to his house, as did Mr.
Paul, an aged Presbyterian Minister, to his pulpit; which I complied with upon
condition the report was true, that the Governor had served the Ministers with
an injunction that I should not preach in the churches.

Friday March 25. Was prevented preaching yesterday by the rain, which
continued from morning till night; but this afternoon God gave me another
opportunity of declaring his eternal truths to a large company at the house of
one Mr. B -- s, who last night sent me a letter of invitation.

Sunday, March 27. Glory be to God! I hope^ this has been a profitable Sabbath
to many soul^* It has been a pleasant one to mine. Both morning and afternoon I
preached to a large auditory, for Bermudas, in Mr. Paul's meeting house, which
I suppose contains above four hundred. Abundance of negroes, and many others,
were in the vestry, porch, and about the house. The word seemed to be clothed
with a convincing power, and to make its way into the hearts of the hearers.
Between sermons, I was entertained very civilly in a neighbouring-house: Judge
Bascome and three more of the Council came thither; each gave me an invitation
to his house. -- O how does the Lord make way for a poor stranger in a strange
land! -- After the second sermon, I dined with Mr. Paul, and in the evening
expounded to a very large company at Counselor Riddle's. -- My body was
somewhat weak, but the Lord carried me through, and caused me to go to rest
rejoicing. May I thus go to my grave, when my ceaseless uninterrupted rest
shall begin!

Monday, March 28. Dined this day at Mrs. D -- l's, mother-in-law to my dear
friend the Rev. Mr. Smith; and afterward preached to more than a large house
full of people, on Matt. ix.12. 'They that be whole need not a Physician, but
they that are sick.' Toward the conclusion of the sermon, the hearers began to
be more affected than I have yet seen them. -- Surely the Lord Jesus will give
me some seals in this island! Grant this, O Redeemer, for thy infinite mercy's
sake!

Thursday, March 31. Dined on Tuesday at Colonel Corbusiers; and on Wednesday,
at Colonel Gilbert's, both of the Council, and found, by what I could hear,
that some good had been d^^ and many prejudices removed. -- Who shall hinder^
if God will work? Went to an island this afternoon, called Ireland, upon which
live a few families, and to my surprise, found a great many Gentlemen and other
people, with my friend Mr. Holiday, who came from different quarters to hear
me. -- Before I began preaching, I went round to see a most remarkable cave,
which very much displayed the exquisite workmanship of Him, 'who in his
strength sets fast the mountains, and is girded about with power.' Whilst I
was in the cave, quite unexpectedly I turned and saw Counselor Riddle, who
with his son came to hear me, and whilst we were in the boat told me, that he
had been with the Governor, who declared he had no personal prejudice against
me, and wondered I did not come to town and preach there, for it was the desire
of the people; and that any house in the town, the Courthouse, not excepted,
should be at my service. Thanks be to God for so much favor! -- If his cause
requires it, I shall have more. -- He knows my heart; I value the favor of man
no farther than as its makes room for the Gospel, and gives me a large scope to
promote the glory of God. There being no capacious house upon the island, I
preached for the first time here in the open air. All heard very attentive, and
it was very pleasant after sermon to see so many boats full of people returning
from the worship of God. I talked seriously to some in our own boat, and began
to sing a psalm, in which they readily joined.

Sunday, April 3. Preached twice this day at Mr. Paul's meeting house, as on
the last Sabbath, but with greater freedom and power, especially in the
morning, and I think to as great, if not greater auditories: Dined with Colonel
H -- vy, another of the Council; visited a sick woman, where many came to hear,
and expounded afterward to a great company at Capt. John Darrel's, Mrs. D --
l's son, who with his wife courteously entertained me, and desired me to make
his house my home. -- So true is that promise of our Lord's, 'That whosoever
leaves father or mother, houses or lands, shall have in this life a
hundredfold with persecution, and in the world to come life everlasting. Lord,
I have experienced the one; in thy good time, grant that I may experience the
other also!

Wednesday, April 6. Preached yesterday at the house of Mr. Anthony Smith, of
Baylis Bay, with a considerable degree of warmth, and rode afterward to St.
George's, the only town on the island. The gentlemen of the town had sent mean
invitation by Judge Bascome, and he with several others came to visit me at my
lodgings, and informed me, that the Governor desired to see me. -- About ten I
waited upon his Excellency, who received me with great civility, and told me he
had no objection against my person or my principles, having never yet heard me,
and he knew nothing in respect to my conduct in moral life, that might
prejudice him against me; but his instructions were, to let none preach in the
island, unless he had a written license to preach somewhere in America or the
West Indies: at the same time he acknowledged it was but a matter of mere form.
I informed his Excellency, that I had been regularly inducted to the parish of
Savannah; that I was ordained priest by letters dismissory from my Lord of
London, and under no church censure from his Lordship; and would always read
the church prayers, if the clergy would give me the use of their churches. I
added farther, that a Minister's pulpit was looked upon as his freehold, and
that I knew one clergyman who had denied his own Diocesan the use of his
pulpit. But I told his Excellency, I was satisfied with the liberty he allowed
me, and would not act contrary to his injunction. I then begged leave to be
dismissed, because I was to preach at eleven o'clock. His Excellency said, he
intended to do himself the pleasure to hear me. At eleven the church-bell rung,
the church bible, prayer book, and cushion were sent to the townhouse. The
Governor, several of the council, the Minister of the parish, and assembly-men*
with a great number of the town's people, assembled in great order. I was very
sick, through a cold I catched last night* but I read the church prayers, (the
first lesson was the xvth of the first book of Samuel) and preached on those
words, 'Righteousness exalts a nation.' Being weak and faint, and having much
of the headache, I did not do that justice to my subject, as I sometimes am
enabled to do; but the Lord so helped me, that, as I found afterward, the
Governor and the other gentlemen expressed their approbation, and acknowledged
they did not expect to be so well entertained. -- Not unto me, O Lord, not unto
me, but unto thy free grace be all the glory!

After sermon, Dr. F -- bs, and Mr. P -- t, the Collector, came to me, and
desired me to favor them, and the gentlemen of the town with my company to
dine with them. I accepted the invitation. The Governor and the President and
Judge Bascome were there. All wondered at my speaking so freely and fluently
without notes. The Governor asked me whether I used minutes. I answered, No. He
said it was a great gift. At table his Excellency introduced something of
religion, by asking me the meaning of the word Hades. Several other things were
started about free will, Adam's fall, predestination, etc. to all which God
enabled me to answer so pertinently, and taught me to mix the utile and dulce
so together, that all at table seemed highly pleased, shook me by the hand, and
invited me to their respective houses. The Governor, in particular, asked me to
dine with him on the morrow, and Dr. F -- b, one of his particular intimates,
invited me to drink tea in the afternoon. I thanked all, returned proper
respects, and went to my lodgings with some degree of thankfulness for the
assistance vouchsafed me, and abased before God at the consideration of my
unspeakable unworthiness. In the afternoon, about five o'clock, I expounded the
parable of the Prodigal Son, to many people at a private house, and in the
evening had liberty to speak freely and closely to those that supped with me.
-- O that this may be the beginning of good gospel times to the inhabitants of
this town! Lord, teach me to deal prudently with them, and cause them to melt
under thy word!

Friday, April 8. Preached yesterday with great clearness and freedom, to about
fourscore people at a house on David's island, over against St. George's town;
went and lay at Mr. Holiday's, who came in a boat to fetch me; and this day I
heard him preach and read prayers, after which I took the sacrament from him.
Honest man, he would have had me administer and officiate; but I chose not to
do it, lest I should bring him into trouble after my departure. However, in the
afternoon, I preached at one Mr. Tod's, in the same parish, to a very large
company indeed. The Lord was with me. My heart was warm, and what went from the
heart, I trust went to the heart, for many were affected. -- O that they may be
converted also! Then will it be a good Friday indeed to their souls.

Sunday, April 10. Dined and conversed yesterday very agreeably with Judge
Bascome; who seems to have the greatest insight into the difference between the
Arminian and Calvinistical scheme of any one I have yet met with upon the
island. In the afternoon, I visited a sick paralytic, and this day I preached
twice again at Mr. Paul's meeting house. The congregations were rather larger
than ever, and the power of God seemed to be more amongst them. I think I see a
visible alteration for the better every Lord's day. Blessed be God! In the
evening I expounded at Mr. Joseph Dorrell's, (where I dined) to a very large
company; then went to his kinsman's, my usual lodging on Saturday and Sunday
evenings, who with his wife and other friends, seemed kinder and kinder daily.
-- Good measure, pressed down and running over, may the Lord, both as to
spirituals and temporals, return into all their bosoms!

Saturday, April 16. Preached since Lord's day at five different houses, to
concerned and affected congregations, at different parts of the island, but was
more indisposed one night after going to bed, than I had been for some time. On
two of the days of this week, I dined with the President and Captain Spafford,
one of the council, both which entertained me with the utmost civility.

Sunday 17. Still God magnifies his power and goodness more and more. This
morning we had a pleasing sight at Mr. Paul's meeting house. I began to preach,
and the people to hear and be affected as in days of old at home. Indeed the
prospect is encouraging. Praise the Lord, O my soul! After preaching twice to
large congregations in the meeting house, I at the desire of the parents,
preached in the evening a sermon at the funeral of a little boy about five
years of age. A great number of people attended, and the Lord enabled me so to
speak as to affect many of the hearers. Blessed be the Lord for this day's
work! -- Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but unto thy free grace be all the
glory!

Sunday, April 24. The last week being rainy, I preached only five times in
private houses, and this day but once in the meeting house; but I hope neither
time without effect. This evening expounded at Counselor Riddle's, who with
the other gentlemen, treats me with greater respect every day. Colonel Gilbert,
one of the council, has lent me his horse during my stay, and Mr. D -- ll this
morning informed me of a design the gentlemen had, to raise a contribution to
help me to discharge my arrears, and support my orphan family. -- Thanks be
given to thy name, O God! Thou know all things; thou know that I want to
owe no man any thing, but love and provide for Bethesda after my decease. Thou
have promised thou will fulfill the desires of them that fear thee. I believe,
Lord, help my unbelief, that thou will fulfill this desire of my soul. Even so,
Amen!

Saturday, April 30. Preached since Lord's day, two funeral sermons, and at
five different houses in different parts of the island to still larger and
larger auditories, and perceived the people to be affected more and more. Twice
or thrice I preached without doors. Riding in the sun, and preaching very
earnestly, a little fatigued me; so that this evening I was obliged to lie down
for some time. -- Faint, yet pursuing; must be my motto still.

Sunday, May 1. This morning was a little sick; but I trust God gave us a happy
beginning of the new month. I preached twice with power, especially in the
morning, to a very great congregation in the meeting house; and in the evening,
having given previous notice, I preached about four miles distant, in the
fields, to a large company of negroes, and a number of white people who came to
hear what I had to say to them. I believe, in all, there were near fifteen
hundred people. As the sermon was intended for the negroes, I gave the auditory
warning, that my discourse would be chiefly directed to them, and that I should
endeavor to imitate the example of Elijah, who when he was about to raise the
child, contracted himself to its length. The negroes seemed very sensible and
attentive. When I asked them, whether all of them did not desire to go to
heaven, one of them with a very audible voice said, 'Yes, Sir.' This caused a
little smiling; but in general, every thing was carried on with great decency;
and I believe the Lord enabled me so to discourse, as to touch the negroes, and
yet not to give them the least umbrage to slight or behave imperiously to their
masters. If ever a Minister in preaching, need the wisdom of the serpent to be
joined with the harmlessness of the dove, it must be when discoursing to
negroes. -- Vouchsafe me this favor, O God, for thy dear Son's sake!

Monday, May 2. Upon enquiry, I found that some of the negroes did not like my
preaching, because I told them of their cursing, swearing, thieving, and lying.
One or two of the worst of them, as I was informed, went away. Some said, they
would not go any more: They liked Mr. M -- r better, for he never told them of
these things; and I said, their hearts were as black as their faces. They
expected, they said, to hear me speak against their masters. Blessed be God,
that I was directed not to say any thing, this first time, to the masters at
all, though my text led me to it. It might have been of bad consequence, to
tell them their duty, or charge them too roundly with the neglect of it, before
their slaves. They would mind all I said to their masters, and, perhaps nothing
that I said to them. Every thing is beautiful in its season. Lord, teach me
always that due season, wherever I am called, to give either black or white, a
portion of thy word! However, others of the poor creatures, I hear, were very
thankful, and came home to their master's houses, saying, that they would
strive to sin no more. Poor hearts! These different accounts affected me; and
upon the whole, I could not help rejoicing, to find that their consciences were
so far awake.

Saturday, May 7. In my conversation these two days, with some of my friends, I
was diverted much, in hearing several things that passed among the poor
negroes, since my preaching to them last Sunday. One of the women, it seems,
said, 'That if the book I preached out of was the best book that was ever
bought at, and came out of London, she was sure it had never all that in it,
which I spoke to the negroes.' The old man, who spoke out loud last Sunday, and
said 'Yes,' when I asked them, Whether all the negroes would not go to heaven?
Being questioned by somebody, Why he spoke out so? Answered, 'That the
gentleman put the question once or twice to them, and the other fools had not
the manners to make me any answer, till, at last, I seemed to point at him, and
he was ashamed that no body should answer me, and therefore he did.' Another,
wondering why I said, 'Negroes had black hearts;' was answered by his black
brother thus: 'Ah, thou fool, do thou not understand it? He means black with
sin.' Two more girls were overheard by their mistress, talking about religion,
and they said, 'They knew, if they did not repent, they must be damned.' From
all which I infer, that these Bermudas negroes are more knowing than I
supposed; that their consciences are awake, and consequently prepared, in a
good measure, for hearing the Gospel preached unto them.

Sunday, May 8. This also, I trust, has been a good Sabbath. In the morning I
was helped to preach powerfully to a melting, and rather a larger congregation
than ever, in Mr. Paul's meeting house; and in the evening, to almost as large
a congregation of black and white as last Sunday, in the fields, near my hearty
friend Mr. Holiday's house. To see so many black faces was affecting. They
heard very attentively, and some of them now began to weep. -- May God grant
them a godly sorrow, that works repentance not to be repented of!

Friday, May 13. This afternoon preached over the corpse of Mr. Paul's eldest
son, about twenty-four years of age; and by all I could hear and judge of by
conversing with him, he did, indeed, die in the Lord. I visited him twice last
Lord's day, and was quite satisfied with what he said, though he had not much
of the sensible presence of God. I find he was a preacher upon his deathbed.
For he exhorted all his companions to love Christ in sincerity, and blessed his
brother and sister, and, I think, his father and mother, just before his
departure. A great many people attended the funeral. I preached on Luke vii.
13. 'And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her,
weep not.' Many were affected in the application of my discourse, and, I trust,
some will be induced, by this young man's good example, to remember their
Redeemer in the days of their youth. -- Grant it, O Lord, for thy dear Son's
sake!

Sunday, May 15. Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within thee praise
his holy name! This morning I preached my farewell sermon at Mr. Paul's
meeting house, it was quite full, and, as the President said, above a hundred
and fifty whites, besides blacks, were round the house. Attention sat on every
face; and when I came to take my leave, oh, what a sweet unaffected weeping was
there to be seen every where. I believe there were few dry eyes. The negroes
likewise without doors, I heard wept plentifully. My own heart was affected,
and though I have parted from friends so often, yet I find every fresh parting
almost unman's me, and very much affects my heart. Surely, a great work is
begun in some souls at Bermudas. -- Carry it on, O Lord! and if it be thy will,
send me to this dear people again. Even so, Lord Jesus. Amen!

After sermon, I dined with three of the Council and other gentlemen and
ladies, at Captain Bascome's; and from thence we went to a funeral, at which
Mr. M -- r preached; and after that I expounded on our Lord's Transfiguration,
at the house of one Mrs. Harvey, sister to dear Mr. Smith of Charlestown. The
house was exceeding full, and it was supposed above three hundred stood in the
yard. The Lord enabled me to lift my voice like a trumpet. Many wept. Mr. M --
r returned from the funeral with me, and attended the lecture, as did the three
Counselors, with whom I conversed very freely. -- May God reward them, and all
the dear people of the island, for those many and great favors they have
conferred on me, who am the chief of sinners, and less than the least of all
saints!

Sunday, May 22. Blessed be God! the little leaven throw^ (...) measures of
meal begins to serm^ (...) almost every day, for the we^k p^ (...) with souls
loaded with a sens^ of their sins, and, as far as I can judge, really pricked
to the heart. I preached only three times, but to almost three times larger
auditories than usual. Indeed the fields are white, ready unto harvest. God has
been pleased to bless private visits. Go where I will, upon the least notice,
houses are crowded, and the poor souls that follow are soon drenched in tears.
This day I took, as it were, another farewell. As the ship did not sail, I
preached at Somerset in the morning, to a large congregation in the fields, and
expounded in the evening to a large one at Mr. Harvey's house, round which
stood many hundreds of people. But in the morning and evening how did the poor
souls weep. The Lord seemed to be with me in a peculiar manner, and though I
was ready to die with heat and straining, yet I was enabled to speak louder,
and with greater power, I think, than I have been before. Gifts and grace,
especially in the evening, were both in exercise. After the service, when I lay
down on the bed to rest, many came weeping bitterly around me, and took their
last farewell. Though my body was very weak, yet my soul was full of comfort. It
magnified the Lord, and my spirit rejoiced in God my Savior. Abundance of
prayers and blessings were put up for my safe passage to England, and speedy
return to Bermudas again. May they enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath!
For God willing, I intend visiting this dear people once more. In the mean
while, with all humility and thankfulness of heart will I here, O Lord, set up
my Ebenezer. For hitherto surely thou have helped me! I cannot help thinking
that I was led to this island by a peculiar Providence. My dear friend, Mr.
Smith of Charlestown, has been made especially instrumental thereto. Thanks be
to the Lord for sending me hither. I have been received in a manner I dared not
expect, and have met with little, very little opposition indeed. The
inhabitants seem to be plain and open hearted. They have also been open handed.
For they have loaded me with provisions for my sea-store; and in the several
parishes, by a private voluntary contribution, have raised me upwards of a
hundred pounds sterling. This will pay a little of Bethesda's debt, and enable
me to make such remittance to my dear yoke fellow, as may keep her from being
embarrassed, or too much beholden in my absence. Blessed be God for bringing me
out of my embarrassments by degrees! May the Lord reward all my benefactors a
thousand fold! I hear that what was given, was given exceeding heartily, and
people only lamented that they could do no more.

After having transmitted to Georgia, what was given to him for the
Orphan-house, and dreading to go back to America in that season of heat, for
fear of relapsing, and having pressing calls to England, he took the
opportunity of a brig, and in twenty-eight days arrived at Deal. During this
voyage, among other letters, he wrote the following:

June 24, 1748. (on board.) Yesterday I made an end of revising all my
journals. Alas! alas! in how many things have I judged and acted wrong. I have
been too rash and hasty in giving characters both of places and persons. Being
fond of Scripture language, I have often used a style too apostolical, and at
the same time, I have been too bitter in my zeal. Wild fire has been mixed with
it, and I find that I frequently wrote and spoke in my own spirit, when I
thought I was writing and speaking by the assistance of the Spirit of God. I
have likewise too much made inward impressions my rule of acting, and too soon
and too explicitly published what had been better kept in longer, or told after
my death. By these things, I have hurt the blessed cause I would defend, and
also stirred up needless opposition. This has humbled me much, and made me
think of a saying of Mr. Henry's, 'Joseph had more honesty than he had policy,
or he never would have told his dreams.' At the same time, I cannot but praise
GOD, who filled me with so much of his holy fire, and carried me, a poor weak
youth, through such a torrent both of popularity and contempt, and set so many
seals to my unworthy ministrations. I bless him for ripening my judgment a
little more, for giving me to see and confess, and I hope, in some degree, to
correct and amend some of my mistakes.

At this time also he finished his Abridgement of Mr. Low's Serious Call; which
he endeavored to make more useful, by excluding whatever is not truly
evangelical, and illustrating the subject more fully from the Holy Scriptures
See his Works, vol. IV.
.

He reached London, July 6, 1748, after an absence of near four years.

CHAP. XIV. From his Arrival in LONDON 1748, to his going to IRELAND in the
Year 1751.
ON Mr. Whitefield's visiting a few of his friends, immediately after his
return, he found himself in no very agreeable situation. His congregation at
the Tabernacle was sadly scattered. And as to his outward circumstances,he had
sold all his household furniture, to help to pay the Orphan-house debt, which
yet was far from being cancelled. But under all these discouragements, he was
still supported. His congregation was soon reunited, and received him with the
greatest joy. And at this time a very unexpected thing happened to him. Lady
Huntingdon, before his arrival, had ordered Mr. Howel Harris to bring him to
her house at Chelsea, as soon as he came ashore. He went, and having preached
twice, the Countess wrote to him, that several of the Nobility desired to hear
him. In a few days the Earl of Chesterfield, and a whole circle of them
attended, and having heard once, desired they might hear him again. I therefore
preached again (says he) in the evening, and went home, never more surprised at
any incident in my life M. S. and Letter DCLXXIII.
. All behaved quite well, and were in some degree affected, the Earl of
Chesterfield thanked me, and said, 'Sir, I will not tell you what I shall tell
others how I approved of you;' or words to this purpose. At last, Lord
Bolingbroke came to hear, sat like an Archbishop, and was pleased to say, 'I
had done great justice to the divine attributes in my discourse It is also
said, that David Hume, Esquire of Edinburgh, was a hearer of Mr. Whitefield's and
was much taken with his eloquence. Such Testimonies are set down, not for their
weight, but their singularity.
. Soon afterward her Ladyship removed to town, where I preached generally
twice a week to very brilliant auditories. Blessed be God, not without
effectual success on some.

In September 1748, he made a third visit to Scotland, where he met with a
hearty welcome. Great multitudes flocked to hear him both at Edinburgh and
Glasgow. I have reason (says he, Letter DCC) to believe some have been
awakened, and many quickened and comforted. My old friends are more solidly so
than ever, and a foundation, I trust has been laid for doing much good, if ever
the Lord should call thither again. Two Synods, and one Presbytery, brought me
upon the carpet; but all has worked for good.

He means the Synods of Glasgow and Perth, and the Presbytery of Edinburgh.
What happened in the Synod of Glasgow may be seen in a Pamphlet, entitled, A
fair and impartial Account of the Debate in the Synod of Glasgow and Air, 6
October, 1748, anent employing Mr. Whitefield: published at Edinburgh the same
year, and supposed to be written by the Rev. Dr. Erskine, who was then Minister
at Kirkintilloch. The short history of the matter is this. A motion was made,
tending to prohibit or discourage Ministers from employing Mr. Whitefield. The
speeches made in support of the motion, were upon the following topics. His
being a priest of the church of England. That he had not subcribed the Formula.
His imprudencies. Chimerical scheme of the Orphan-house. Want of Evidence, that
the money he collects is rightly applied. Asserting that assurance is essential
to faith. Encouraging a dependence on impulses and immediate revelations.
Declaring on slender evidence, some people converted, and others carnal and
unregenerated. Often, indeed, pretending to repent of his blunders, and
retract; but as often relapsing into them. And lastly, his being under a
sentence of suspension by Commissary Garden, from which he had appealed to the
High Court of Chancery, and made oath to prosecute that appeal in a twelve
month; and yet it was never prosecuted.

On the other hand, the Ministers who were against the motion, spoke in this
manner. I blush to think, said one, that any of our brethren should befriend a
proposal, so contrary to that moderation and catholic spirit, which now is, and
I hope ever shall be the glory of our church. I am sensible, many things in the
Church of England need reformation; but I honor her, notwithstanding, as our
sister church. If Bishop Butler, Bishop Sherlock, or Bishop Secker were in
Scotland, I should welcome them to my pulpit. In this I should imitate Mr.
Samuel Rutherford, as firm a Presbyterian as any of us, who yet employed Bishop
Usher. There is no law of Christ, no Act of Assembly prohibiting me to give my
pulpit to an Episcopal, Independent, or Anabaptist Ministers, if of found
principles in the fundamentals of Religion, and of a sober life. Our Church
expressly enjoins, Act XIII. April 1711, that great tenderness is to be used to
foreign Protestants. The requiring strangers to subscribe our Formula, before
they preach with us, would lay as effectual a bar against employing those of
congregational principles, or Presbyterian Non-subscribers, as those of the
Church of England.

As to Mr. Whitefield, said another, there are few Ministers whose character
has been so well attested, by the most competent judges, both at home and
abroad. One thing I cannot but observe: those who have spoken most warmly
against Mr. Whitefield in this debate, acknowledge they have made little or no
enquiry into his character: whereas those on the other side, have made a very
careful enquiry; and that enquiry has turned out entirely to their
satisfaction. With regard to his imprudencies, there is a great difference
betwixt blunders owing to a bad heart, and those that are owing only to a
misinformed judgment; especially, when the mistakes that occasioned them, have
misled several great and good men. Whether Mr. Whitefield's scheme of the
Orphan-house be prudent or not, it is demonstrable it was honestly meant. The
Magistrates of Savannah published three years ago, in the Philadelphia Gazette,
an affidavit that they had carefully examined Mr. Whitefield's receipts and
disbursements, and found that what he had collected in behalf of the Orphans,
had been honestly applied; and that besides, he had given considerably to them
of his own property. As to his maintaining, that assurance is essential to
faith; encouraging an unwarrantable regard to impressions; and being too hasty
in pronouncing men carnal or converted; his sentiments in these particulars,
have been altered for upwards of two years. And now he scarce preaches a
sermon, without guarding his hearers against relying on impressions, and
telling them that faith, and a persuasion we are justified, are very different
things, and that a holy life is the best evidence of a gracious state. These
retractions are owing to a real change of sentiment. Letters from
correspondents in New England show, that this change is, at least, of two years
date, and that ever since it happened he has preached and acted with remarkable
caution. Lastly, with respect to the prosecution of his appeal; Mr. Whitefield
exerted himself to the utmost to get his appeal heard, but could not prevail on
the Lords Commissioners so much as once to meet on the affair; they, no doubt,
thinking of Mr. Garden's arbitrary proceedings with the contempt they deserved.

But say some, Mr. Whitefield being under a suspension not yet reversed, is now
no Minister. But for what was he suspended? Why, for no other crime, than
omitting to use the form of prayer prescribed in the communion book, when
officiating in a Presbyterian congregation. And shall a meeting of Presbyterian
Ministers, pay any regard to a sentence which had such a foundation?

The issue of the debate was a rejecting of the motion by a vote, 27 to 13; and
a resolution which was so expressed as to be a decent burial of it; laying no new
restriction on Ministers from inviting strangers, but leaving things precisely
as they were before. And they who chose to give Mr. Whitefield their pulpits,
never after met with any molestation. Upon the whole, the attacks made on Mr.
Whitefield's character, proved the occasion of informing the Synod of the
falsehood of many aspersions thrown out against him, of the great increase of
his prudence and caution, and the remarkable change of his sentiments and
behavior, so far as either were offensive. And thus what was intended for his
reproach, turned out to his honor.

While he was in Scotland, he endeavored to do all the service he could to the
New Jersey College, and in conjunction with some Ministers who wished well to
that institution See his Letter on this subject to Mr. M'Laurin Letters
DCCCXXXIV. and DCCCLXVIII.
, advised the sending over a Minister from America to make application in
person. Which was afterward done in the year 1754, when Mr. Tennent and Mr.
Davies applied to the General Assembly, and obtained an appointment of a
general collection. He also began to think of making his Orphan-house not only
a receptacle for fatherless children, but also a place of literature and
academical studies. Such a place, he thought, was much wanted in the southern
parts of America; and if conducted in a proper manner, would be of great
service to the colony. He therefore, after his return to England, wrote to the
Trustees, signifying that this was his intention, if they would be pleased to
put the colony upon another footing, and allow a limited use of negroes,
without which he had long been of opinion, that Georgia never could be a
flourishing province Letter DCCXLIV.
. Mean time, he went on his usual way, and with his usual success at London,
Bristol, and Gloucester, during the winter. And in February 1749, made an
excursion to Exeter and Plymouth, where he found a strange alteration in the
people, since he had been first there, about five years before; they now
received him with the greatest joy, and were importunate to hear him; and many
of them gave proofs of a solid conversion to God Letter DCCXXXIII. and M. S.
. Now (says he) Plymouth seems to be quite a new place to me. As his health was
impaired in London, he loved to range (as he calls it) after precious souls.
Though he never wanted to make a sect, or to set himself at the head of a party.

I have seen enough of popularity, (says he) to be sick of it; and did not the
interest of my blessed Master require my appearing in Letter DCCXLVII.
public, the world should hear but little of me henceforward. Yet he could not
think of remitting his diligence in the work of the Gospel. I dread the
thoughts of flagging in the latter stages of my road, is an expression that he
often uses in writing to his friends Letters DCCLXXXVII. DCCCXCVII. and
DCCCCXXIII.
. He was frequently very ill; but he imagined preaching and traveling did him
service. Fear not your weak body, (says he, in a letter to Mr. Hervey Letter
DCCCXXX.
; we are immortal till our work is done. Christ's laborers must live by
miracle; if not, I must not live at all; for God only knows what I daily
endure. My continual vomitings almost kill me, and yet the pulpit is my cure,
so that my friends begin to pity me less, and to leave off that ungrateful
caution, 'Spare thyself.' I speak this to encourage you.

About this time, he wrote Remarks an a pamphlet, entitled, The Enthusiasm of
Methodists and Papists compared. Wherein (with a candor very uncommon in
controversial writings) he says, Several mistakes in some parts of my past
writings and conduct are acknowledged, and my present sentiments concerning the
Methodists explained. See his Works, vol. IV.


In March 1749, he returned to London from an excursion of about six hundred
miles in the west, where he had the pleasure of seeing that his former visits
had been blessed with abundant success Letter DCCXLIII.
. In May he went to Portsmouth, and preached every day for more than a week, to
very large and attentive auditories. Many were brought under convictions,
prejudices seemed to be universally removed, and people, that a few days before
were speaking all manner of evil against him, were very desirous of his longer
stay to preach the Gospel Letter DCCLI.
among them.

June 24. He writes from Bristol: Yesterday God brought me here, after having
carried me a circuit of about eight hundred miles, and enabled me to preach, I
suppose, to upwards of a hundred thousand souls. I have been in eight Welsh
counties, and, I think, we have not had one dry meeting. The work in Wales is
much upon the advance, and likely to increase daily. Had my dear Hervey been
there, to have seen the simplicity of so many dear souls, I am persuaded he
would have said, Sit anima mea cum Methodistis Letter DCCLXII.
.

In the months of July and August he was at London, Bristol, Plymouth,
Biddiford, Exeter. When he returned to London, he had the pleasure of a visit
from two German Ministers, who had been laboring among the Jews, and, it is
said, had been made instrumental in converting many of them Letter DCCLXXV.
.

In the month of September he went into Northamptonshire and Yorkshire; and
preached at Oundle, Abberford, Leeds, and Hawarth, where good Mr. Grimshaw (who
was so indefatigable in his endeavors to bring souls to Christ) was Minister.
In his church they had above a thousand communicants, and in the churchyard
about six thousand hearers. At Leeds, the auditory consisted of above ten
thousand. Thither Mr. Whitefield was invited by one of the Rev. Mr. Wesley's
preachers, and by the societies. And Mr. Charles Wesley coming there, gave
notice of him to the people Letters DCCLXXVIII, DCCLXXIX.
, and also introduced him to the pulpit in Newcastle, where he preached four
times, and twice without doors.

It being now late in the year, he did not go forward to Scotland, but returned
to London, after having preached about thirty times in Yorkshire, and above ten
times in Cheshire, and Lancashire. He was also at Sheffield and Nottingham. And
the congregations were every where large and serious. Only in one or two
places, he had a little raw treatment; but this he did not mind, while he had
reason to think many received real benefit Letters DCCLXXXI, DCCLXXXVI.
. He arrived in London about the middle of November, and continued there till
the beginning of February, employed in his usual manner. Having offered to
assist, occasionally, at West-street chapel, it was accepted. Accordingly, he
preached four or five times there, and administered the Sacrament twice or
thrice. Congregations were very large Letter DCCCXIX.
.

February 6, 1750. He writes from Gloucester Letter DCCCXIV.
: Though I left London in a very weak condition, and the weather was but bad, I
came here on Friday evening, and was strengthened to preach on Saturday, and
likewise on Sunday evening, and twice the same day in the country, at the
New-house and at Hampton. And again from Bristol, February 12. Since I wrote
last, we have been favored both in Gloucester city, and in the country, with
very pleasant and delightful seasons Letter DCCCXVI.
. I have preached about twenty times, within this eight or nine days; and
though frequently exposed to rain and hail, am much better than when I left
London. From Bristol he went to Exeter, and to Plymouth, and in his way met
with the Rev. Mr. Pearsall, a dissenting Minister at Taunton, and Mr. Darracott
at Wellington; both of whom he speaks of in his letters with the highest regard
Letter DCCCXX.
. At Plymouth he preached twelve times in six days, and the longer he preached,
he had the greater number of hearers. His friends grew more and more zealous,
and the fury of his enemies began to subside. From thence he traveled near to
the Land's-end, preaching in a great many places, such as Tavistock. St.
Ginny's Four of Mr. Wesley's Preachers were present, and three Clergymen, Mr.
Bennet aged fourscore, Mr. Thompson, and Mr. Grigg. Letter DCCCXXIV. I found,
as I went along, a most blessed work had carried on by the instrumentality of
the Messrs. Wesleys, and their fellow laborers. M. S.
, Port Isaac, Camelford, St. Andrews, Redruth, Gwinnop, St. Mewins. All this he
accomplished before the 21st of March, when we find him again at Exeter.
Invitations (says he) are sent to me from several places. I want more tongues,
more bodies, more souls for the Lord Jesus. Had I ten thousand, he should have
them all Letters DCCCXXIV, XXV, and XXVI.
.

In April he was at London and Portsmouth. And in May went to Ashby, to wait on
Lady Huntingdon, who had been ill. In his way thither, he had a most
comfortable interview with the Rev. Dr. Doddridge, Mr. Hervey Mr. Harvey thus
wrote of this interview to a friend;

I have seen lately, that most excellent Minister of the ever-blessed Jesus,
Mr. Whitefield. I dined, supped, and spent the evening with him at Northampton,
in company with Dr. Doddridge, and two pious, ingenious Clergymen of the Church
of England, both of them known to the learned world by their valuable writings.
And surely, I never spent a more delightful evening, or saw one that seemed to
make nearer approaches to the felicity of heaven. A Gentleman of great worth
and rank in the town, invited us to his house, and gave us an elegant treat;
but how mean was his provision, how coarse his delicacies, compared with the
fruit of my friend's lips; they dropped as the honeycomb, and were a well of
life. Surely, people do not know that amiable and examplary man, or else, I
cannot but think, instead of depreciating, they would applaud and love him. For
my part, I never beheld so fair a copy of our Lord, such a living image of the
Savior, such exalted delight in God, such enlarged benevolence to man, such a
steady faith in the divine promises, and such a fervent zeal for the divine
glory; and all this, without the least moroseness of humor, or extravagancies
of behavior; sweetened with the most engaging cheerfulness of temper, and
regulated by all the sobriety of reason, and wisdom of Scripture; in so much,
that I cannot forbear applying the wise man's encomium of an illustrious woman,
to this eminent Minister of the everlasting Gospel; "Many (...) have done
virtuously, but thou excellest them all.


, and Dr. --.

Letter DCCCXXXII.
But at Ashby, where it might have been least expected, there was a riot made
before Lady Huntingdon's house, while the Gospel was preaching: and in the
evening, some people in their return home narrowly escaped being murdered. The
Justice being informed, sent a message, in order to bring the offenders before
him. So that I hope, (says Mr. Whitefield) it will be overruled for great
good, and that the Gospel, for the future, will have free course Letter
DCCCXXXV.
.

After he left Ashby, he preached at Radcliff church, Nottingham and Sutten
with great success. At Nottingham, (says he) several came to me, enquiring,
What they should do to be saved? I preached there four times. One evening, Lord
S --, and several Gentlemen, were present, and behaved with great decency. Many
thousands attended. Yesterday morning I breakfasted with three dissenting
Ministers; and Mr. P -- s, who told me, that Lady P -- desired he would press
me to preach at the church. Yesterday, in the afternoon, I preached at Sutton;
and this morning Letter DCCCXXXVIII.
at Mansfield. After leaving that place, he went to Rutherham and Sheffield. He
was at Leeds in the end of May, and observes, Methinks, I am now got into
another climate Letters DCCCXL, and XLIX.
, where there are many of God's people. From thence he went to Manchester,
Rosindale, and several other parts of Lancashire, Kendal, Whitehaven,
Cockermouth, preaching generally twice a day, and arrived at Edinburgh, July 6.
Having preached near a hundred times since he left London, and by a moderate
computation, to above a hundred thousand souls. It is amazing (he writes) to
see how people are prepared, in places where I never was before. What shall I
render to the Lord?

At Edinburgh and Glasgow, (in which places he spent the month of July, 1750)
he was received, as usual, in the most loving and tender manner, preaching
generally twice a day to great multitudes, whose seriousness, and earnest
desire to hear him, made him exert himself rather beyond his strength. By
preaching always twice, (says he) and once thrice, and once four times in a day
Letters DCCCLI, and LV.
, I am quite weakened; but I hope to recruit again. I am burning with a fever,
and have a violent cold; but Christ's presence makes me smile at pain, and the
fire of his love burns up all fevers whatsoever. He left Edinburgh August 3,
and soon found himself much better for riding. At Berwick, one of the ministers
sent him an offer of his pulpit, and he was informed that many more round that
town, were willing to do the same. At his return to London, he preached several
times at West-street Chapel. He had also the pleasure of Mr. Hervey's company,
who, at his desire, came up to town, and lodged in his house. In the months of
September and October, he made excursions to Portsmouth, Chatham, Gloucester,
Birmingham, Eversham, Wednesbury, and Nottingham; ranging about, (as he
expresses it) to see who would believe the Gospel report Letter DCCCLXVIII.
. And was particularly successful at Chatham and Canterbury.

He spent the winter in London, in his usual busy and laborious way, and with
equal success. He was confined, near a fortnight, to his room by a violent
fever, and inflammation of the lungs; but before the 17th of December, he was
able to preach again. And in the latter end of January 1751, he rode post to
Ashby, being alarmed with the accounts of Lady Huntingdon's dangerous illness,
and the afflictions with which it had pleased God to visit her family. He
writes from Ashby, January 29. Blessed be God, Lady Huntingdon is somewhat
better. Entreat all our friends to pray for her. Her sister-in-law, Lady
Frances H --, lies dead in the house. She was a retired christian, lived
silently, and died suddenly, without a groan. May my exit be like hers. Almost
all the family have been sick in their turns.

Having left London, March 5, He went again into Gloucestershire, and to
Bristol, and preached at Taunton and Wellington in his way to Plymouth. April
11. he was at Exeter, and writes thus to Mr. Hervey: Some good I trust, is to
be done this spring, to many souls. This western circuit, I believe, has been
blessed already. I have preached about forty times since I left London, and
have been enabled several times to ride forty miles a day. I find this sensibly
refreshes me. I wish you could say so too. At Plymouth we had sweet seasons;
and on Tuesday last I met with a young Clergyman, who was awakened under my
preaching seven years ago. He had been at Cambridge, and was ordained by the
Bishop of Exeter. He is followed much, and, I suppose, will soon be reproached
for his Master's sake. I hope you find strength to proceed in your book.

From Exeter he set out on a tour through Wales, where, in about three weeks he
rode near five hundred miles, and preached generally twice a day; and from
hence, he made his visit to Ireland, which had been in his thoughts some time.

CHAP. XV. From his first visit to IRELAND, to his opening the New Tabernacle
at LONDON, in the Year 1753.
AFTER a passage of five days from Wales, he arrived, May 24, 1751, at Dublin,
where he was gladly received, and lodged at the house of Mr. L --, and preached
every morning and evening as usual in other places: Surely (says he) here are
many converted souls, among whom are two or three students, and several
soldiers. At first Letters DCCCXCI, DCCCXCII.
the greatness and hurry of the place surprised me; but thanks be to the Lord
of the harvest, here as well as elsewhere, the fields are white, ready unto
harvest. Congregations are large, and hear as for eternity. And again: Athlone,
June 10. For this week past, I have been preaching twice almost every day in
some country towns. I find, through the many offenses that have lately been
given, matters were brought to a low ebb. But the cry now is, 'Methodism is
revived again.' I took a journey from near Haverford West to Ireland, where a
yet greater work had been begun and carried on to a high degree, amidst
prodigious opposition; numbers converted, not only from Popery, but to Jesus
Christ, at Athlone, Dublin, Limerick, Cork, and various other places M. S.
.

At Limerick he preached seven times to large and affected auditories, and
twice at Cork (where the Methodists had lately been mobbed) to a great body of
people, with all quietness. From thence he went to Bandon and Kinsale, where a
like blessing attended his preaching. At his return to Cork, the numbers and
affections of his hearers increased. At Belfast also he was detained some days
beyond his intention, by the peoples' importunity, and preached at Lisburn,
Lurgun, the Maize, and Lambag, towns and places adjacent. So many attended, and
the prospect of doing good was so promising, that he was sorry he had not come
to the north of Ireland sooner. But he hasted to pay another visit to Scotland,
before he embarked for America, which he was intent upon doing before winter.

He therefore came over in the beginning of July 1751, from Belfast to Irvine,
where, at the desire of the magistrates, he preached to a great congregation;
and so proceeded to Glasgow. From this place he writes, July 12. Though I
preached near eighty times in Ireland, and God was pleased to bless his word,
yet Scotland seems to be a new world to me. To see the people bring so many
Bibles, turn to every passage when I am expounding, and hanging, as it were,
upon me to hear every word, is very encouraging. I feel an uncommon freedom
here; and talking with the winter as well as with the summer saints, feeds and
delights my heart.

Here it may be proper, once for all, to take notice of some particulars
relating to Mr. Whitefield's visits to Scotland, which he continued till within
a few years of his death.

Though after the years 1741, and 1742, there was no such extensive new
awakenings, Mr. Whitefield's coming was always refreshing to serious persons,
and seemed to put new life into them: and also to be the means of increasing
their number. His preaching was still eminently useful in various respects. In
the first place, it had an excellent tendency to destroy the hurtful spirit of
bigotry, and excessive zeal for smaller M. S.
matters; and to turn mens' attention to the great and substantial things of
religion. Another effect was, that it drew several persons to hear the gospel,
who seldom went to hear it from other Ministers. Again, young people in general
were much benefited by his ministry, and particularly young students, who
became afterward serious evangelical preachers. Lastly, his morning
discourses, which were mostly intended for sincere but disconsolate souls, were
peculiarly fitted to direct and encourage all such in the christian life. And
his addresses in the evening to the promiscuous multitudes who then attended
him, were of a very alarming kind. There was something exceedingly striking in
the solemnity of his evening congregations in the Orphan-house park at
Edinburgh, and High-church-yard of Glasgow; especially toward the conclusion
of his sermons, (which were commonly very long, though they seemed short to the
hearers) when the whole multitude stood fixed, and like one man hung upon his
lips, with silent attention, and many under deep impressions of the great
objects of religion, and the concerns of eternity. These things will not soon
be forgotten; and it is hoped, the many good effects, which by the divine
blessing attended them, never will.

His conversation was no less reviving than his sermons. Many in Edinburgh and
Glasgow are witnesses of this, especially at Glasgow, when in company with his
good friends, Mr. MacLaurin, Mr. Robert Scott, etc. one might challenge the
sons of pleasure with all their wit, good humor and gaiety to furnish
entertainment so agreeable. At the same time, every part of it was not more
agreeable, than it was useful and edifying.

His friends in Scotland, among whom were many of all ranks, from the highest
to the lowest, were very constant and steady in their great regard for him. And
his opposers grew more and more mild. Some anonymous pamphlets were written
against him at his first coming: But these soon died and were forgotten.
Afterward a number of stories were handed about to his disadvantage; but upon
enquiry, it was found either that matters were misrepresented or exaggerated;
or that there was no foundation for such reports at all. In short, when they
were traced to their origin, they rather turned out to his honor. He used to
smile at good Mr. MacLaurin's honest zeal, who, on such occasions, spared no
pains to come at the truth, and when he had discovered it, was no less eager to
communicate the discovery to others, for the vindication of Mr. Whitefield's
character, in which he thought the credit of religion was concerned. The
following instance is well remembered. One Lieutenant Wright alleged, that Mr.
Whitefield had kept back money sent by a gentlewoman to her son in America.
This coming to Mr. MacLaurin's ears, he was restless till he procured a meeting
betwixt Mr. Whitefield and his accuser. They met; Mr. Wright did not retract
what he had said. Upon which a letter was instantly wrote to the mother at
London; and her answer being received, a confutation of the calumny was
published in the Glasgow Courant, in the following terms: October 31, 1748. A
story having been spread in this town of Mr. Whitefield's having received
twenty pounds sterling from a gentlewoman in London, to give her son in
Georgia: whereas, he had received only three guineas, which he had returned to
the gentlewoman when he came back from Georgia, her son having been gone from
thence before his arrival; a letter was wrote to London to clear up this
affair, to which the gentlewoman has sent this answer: 'Sir, this is to assure
you, that I received of Mr. John Stevens the three guineas, which was the full
sum that I gave you for my son. I hope it is only a false aspersion on him; for
I never heard that he should say any such thing, being three months in England.
I am, etc. September 13, 1748.' There is likewise a receipt come down, dated
September 3, to Mr. Stevens. Both the letter and receipt are to be seen in the
hands of the publisher.

But, indeed, Mr. Whitefield's whole behavior was so open to the eyes of the
world; and his character, after it had stood many attacks from all quarters,
came at last to be so thoroughly established, that several of his opposers in
Scotland seemed rather to acquire a certain degree of esteem for him; at least,
they all thought proper to give over speaking against him.

When he was at Glasgow, he always lodged with Mr. James Niven, Merchant, above
the Cross; till toward the end of his life, his asthmatic disorder made the
town air disagree with him. And then he went out in the evenings, and stayed
with his good friend Mr. MacCulloch at Cambuslang.

A person of eminence, whom a sincere esteem of Mr. Whitefield made attentive
to his reception and ministrations in Scotland, from first to last; writes thus
to the compiler:

Edinburgh, January 1772. I think more might be said with great justice,
concerning the effects of his ministry in Scotland, after the first two years;
as there was always a remarkable revival followed each of his visits; which
many of the Ministers testified from their particular knowledge, especially by
the number of new communicants. Mention might be made of the great number of
Ministers in Scotland, that employed him, and of the many affectionate letters
he received from them, of which there were a good many printed both in the
London and Glasgow Weekly Histories, from some of the most eminent men in the
church, who had employed him to preach in their pulpits, and continued so to
do, when opportunity offered; except in the Presbytery of Edinburgh; and even
there, the Magistrates always allowed him a church to preach in, every time he
came.

In the month of July, 1751, Mr. Whitefield was glad to understand that Mr.
Dinwiddie, brother-in-law to the Rev. Mr. MacCulloch of Cambuslang, was made
Governor of Virginia. In that province there had been a considerable awakening
for some years past, especially in Hanover county and the places adjacent. As
the Ministers of the establishment did not favor the work, and the people had
put themselves under the care of the New York Synod, they met with
discouragements from those in power. However, Mr. Samuel Davies (afterward
President of the College of New Jersey) being licensed, was settled over a
congregation; and the religious concern so increased, that one congregation was
multiplied to seven. There was now an agreeable prospect that these good people
would have the same privileges secured to them, which dissenting Protestants
enjoy at home Letter DCCCCI.
.

August 6, he set out from Edinburgh for London, in order to embark a fourth
time for America. He had thrown up much blood in Edinburgh; but the journey he
was now upon had a good effect in recovering him from that illness: and as he
went along, he was much refreshed with the accounts he received of the happy
fruits of his ministry at Kendal the year before. After a sorrowful parting
with his friends in England, which grew still more distressing to him, he went
aboard the Antelope, Captain MacLellan, bound for Georgia with Germans; and
took along with him several children.

He arrived at Savannah, October 27, and found the Orphan-house in a
flourishing condition. Thanks be to God, (says he) all is well at Bethesda. A
most excellent tract of land is granted to me very near the house, which in a
few years, I hope, will make a sufficient provision for it Letter DCCCCXII.
. From November 1751, to the beginning of April 1752, he was partly at
Bethesda, and partly in South Carolina, still upon the stretch in his Master's
work. I intend, (says he) by his assistance, now to begin; for as yet, alas! I
have done nothing. And again, O that I may begin to be in earnest! It is a new
year; God quicken my tardy pace, and help me to do much work in a little time!
this is my highest ambition Letters DCCCCX, DCCCCXI.
.

Being warned by what had happened to him formerly, he did not venture to stay
the summer season in America; but took his passage in the end of April for
London. At his arrival, he perceived he had returned in a very good time; for
Georgia was soon to be taken into the hands of Government, and put on the same
footing with other colonies, which gave ground to hope that it would soon
became a flourishing province. This was joyful news. He now thought providence
was appearing for Georgia and Bethesda. He determined therefore to sell his
plantation, and to carry all his strength to the Orphan-house.

About the middle of June, he planned a new rout. Next week, (says he) God
willing, I shall go to Portsmouth, from thence to Bath, then to the west, then
to Wales, and from thence, may be, to Letters DCCCCXVII.
Scotland and Ireland. Accordingly we find his letters of this period, dated at
Portsmouth, Bristol, Cardiff, Haverford-west. In returning to Bristol, he
attended an association, where were present about nine clergy, and near forty
other laborers, of whom he writes Letter DCCCCXXV.
: I trust all are born of God, and desirous to promote his glory, and his
people's good. All was harmony and love.

August 17. he was in London. His letter of this date to his acquaintance Dr.
F. the celebrated electrical philosopher, deserves particular notice. I find
you grow more and more famous in the learned world. As you have made a pretty
considerable progress in the mysteries of electricity, I would now humbly
recommend to your diligent unprejudiced pursuit and study, the mystery of the
new birth. It is a most important, interesting study, and when mastered, will
richly answer and repay you for all your pains. One at whose bar we are shortly
to appear, has solemnly declared, that without it, we cannot enter the kingdom
of heaven. You will excuse this freedom. I must have aliquid Christi in all my
letters Letter DCCCCXXVI.
.

From London he took another tour to Edinburgh, where he arrived in the
beginning of September 1752. In his way he preached twice at Lutterworth (the
famous John Wickliff's parish) and at Leicester; and in both places was
informed afterward that good was done. At Newcastle, he was as it were
arrested to stay, and preached four times to great congregations.

At Edinburgh and Glasgow (in which places he continued till the 10th of
October) he was employed as usual. He writes from Glasgow, September 29. At
Edinburgh great multitudes, among whom were abundance of the better sort,
attended twice every day. Many young Ministers and students have given close
attendance, and I hear of several persons that have been brought under deep
convictions. I intend to send you copies of two letters from a Highland
schoolmaster, who is honored of God to do much good among the poor Highland
children Letter DCCCCXXXI.
. I have brave news sent me from Leicester and Newcastle, and have strong
invitations to Yorkshire and Lancashire. What a pity it is that the year goes
round so soon.

In 1752, the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, upon a division of
the house, by a few votes deposed Mr. Gillespie; which afterward gave occasion
to the society called the Presbytery of Relief. Mr. Whitefield being informed
of the circumstances of that affair, writes thus Letter DCCCCXIV.
: I wish Mr. Gillespie joy. The Pope I find has turned Presbyterian -- The Lord
reigns, that is enough for us. And again Letter DCCCCXX.
: Now will Mr. Gillespie do more good in a week, than before, in a year. How
blind is Satan! What does he get by casting out Christ's servants? I expect
that some great good will come out of these confusions.

In his way back to London, he preached at Berwick, Alnwick, Morpeth,
Newcastle. From Sheffield he writes, November 1. Since I left Newcastle, I have
scarce known sometimes, whether I have been in heaven or on earth. At Leeds,
Burstall, Howarth, Halifax, etc. thousands and thousands have flocked twice or
thrice a day to hear the word of life. I am now come from Bolton, Manchester,
Stockport and Chinly. Yesterday I preached in a church. Four ordained
Ministers, friends to the work of God, have been with me. The word has run so
swiftly at Leeds, that friends are come to fetch me back, and I am now going to
Rotheram, Wakefield, Leeds, York, and Epworth. God favors us with weather, and
I would fai^ make hay whilst the sun shines. -- O that I h^ (...) many tongues;
as there are hairs upon my (...) the ever-loving, ever-lovely Jesus should have
(...) all. Fain would I die preaching Letters DCCCCXXXV, DCCCCXXXVI.
.

November 10. he arrived at London, and proce^^ed in his usual way at the
Tabernacle. December (...) he says, My hands are full of work; and I trust I
can say, the Lord causes his work to prosper in my unworthy hands. More blessed
seasons we never enjoyed. Our sacramental occasions have been exceedingly awful
and refreshing.

He now began to think of erecting a new Tabernacle, a large building eighty
foot square; which he accomplished in the spring and summer following.

About this time also, we find Mr. Hervey and him employed in revising each
others manuscripts. Of Mr. Hervey's he says. For me to play the critic on them,
would be like holding up a candle to the sun. However, I will just mark a few
places, as you desire. I foretell their fate; nothing but your scenery can
screen you. Self will never bear to die, though slain in so genteel a manner,
without showing some resentment against its artful murderer. Again, Letters
DCCCCXV, DCCCCLXIII.
I thank you a thousand times for the trouble you have been at in revising my
poor compositions, which I am afraid you have not reated with a becoming
severity. How many pardons shall I ask for mangling, and I fear murdering your
Thereon and Aspasio. If you think my two sermons will do for the public, pray
return them immediately. I have nothing to comfort me but this, that the Lord
chooses the weak things of this world to confound the strong, and things that
are not, to bring to naught things that are. I write for the poor, you for the
polite and noble; God will assuredly own and bless what you write.

He was much affected about this time with the ^^th of one Mr. Steward, a
Minister that began to ^opular in the church, but soon entered into his (...).
When I met the workmen to contract about the building, I could scarce bear to
think of building Tabernacles. Strange! that so many should be so soon
discharged, and we continued. Mr. Steward spoke for his Lord as long as he
could speak at all. He had no clouds nor darkness. I was with him till a few
minutes before he slept in Jesus Letter DCCCCLXVIII.
.

March 1, 1753. He laid the foundation of the new Tabernacle, and preached from
Exodus xx. 24. During the building thereof, he preached in Moorfields,
Spittalfields, and other places in London, and made excursions to Chatham,
Sheerness, and Braintree.

In the month of April he went to Norwich for a few days, preaching twice a day
to thousands, who attended with the greatest eagerness. At his evening sermons,
some rude people made opposition, but without effect. At this time also he
published his Expostulatory Letter to Count Zinzendorff, which is in the 4th
vol. of his works.

In May he made another excursion to Narboth, Pembroke, Haverford-west, etc.
where congregations were large, and a gracious melting seemed to be among the
people. Within little more than a fortnight he rode three hundred and fifty
miles, and preached above twenty times Letter DCCCCLXXVI.
.

Sunday, June 10, 1753. He opened his new Tabernacle, preaching in the morning
from 1 Kings viii. 11, and in the evening from 1 Chronicles. xxix. 9.

CHAP. XVI. From his opening the New Tabernacle in MOORFIELDS, to his preaching
at the Chapel in TOTTENHAM-COURT ROAD, 1756.
MR. Whitefield having preached in London at his Tabernacle for a few days with
his usual fervor, and success, and to large congregations, in the end of the
month of June, set out toward Scotland. In his way he had desirable meetings
at Oulney and Northampton. He preached also at Leicester, and Nottingham, where
a great multitude came to hear, and at Sheffield. In his way to Leeds, next
morning, he preached at Rotheram and Wakefield. At the former place he had been
disturbed twice or thrice, and was almost determined to preach there no more.
But he Letter DCCCCLXXXIV.
found this would have been a rash determination; for some who had been bitter
persecutors, now received him gladly into their house, and owned, that God had
made him instrumental in their conversion. At Leeds he had great success. At
York also he preached four times. Twice they were disturbed, and twice had very
agreeable seasons. At Newcastle he preached seven times, and once at Sunderland
to great multitudes who were deeply impressed. At five in the morning the great
room was filled, and on the Lord's Day, the congregation without was exceeding
large. In short, the prospect all around was so promising, that he almost
repented of his engagement to go to Scotland, and resolved to come back as soon
as possible.

He proceeded however, according to his promise, and having spent some days at
Edinburgh and Glasgow in his usual laborious and earnest manner, and with usual
acceptance, he returned to England, August 7.

All this time he preached twice or thrice a day, and once five times. This he
found rather too much for his strength. But he still went on, often expressing
his desires and hopes soon to see his Divine Master in glory.

After he had been in Glasgow, the following paragraph appeared in the
Newcastle Journal, August 11, 1753. By a Letter from Edinburgh we are informed,
that on the second instant Mr. Whitefield, the Itinerant, being at Glasgow, and
preaching to a numerous audience near the Playhouse lately built, he inflamed
the mob so much against it, that they ran directly from before him, and pulled
it down to the ground. Several of the rioters are since taken up, and committed
to goal.

It would not have been worth while to transcribe this, were it not another
specimen of the unaccountable liberties taken by some of the opposers of Mr.
Whitefield, in telling their stories concerning him. The fact was this. Mr.
Whitefield being informed, that the Players had lately come to Glasgow, and had
met with some encouragement, took occasion in his sermons to preach against
Play Houses, and to represent their pernicious influence on religion and
morality, especially in a populous, commercial city, and the seat of a
University. But there was no riot. It was the proprietor of the Playhouse (at
that time a slight temporary booth supported by the old walls of the Bishop's
Castle) who ordered his workmen to take it down.

On his return to England, he went from Newcastle to Stockton, Osmotherly, York
and Leeds. He assisted at the sacrament at Howard, where they had a
extraordinary season, and a vast many communicants. He went as far as Bolton,
Manchester and Stockport. The more he preached, the more eager the people
seemed to be. The last part of his circuit was to Lincolnshire, Rotheram,
Sheffield Nottingham and Northampton. He returned to London in the latter end
of September, having traveled about twelve hundred miles, and preached a
hundred and eighty times to many thousands Letter DCCCCXCII.
.

His stay in London was but short, in the month of October he took another tour
to Staffordshire. A new scene of usefulness seemed to open to him, while he he
preached at Oulney, at Oxen near Harborough, Bosworth, Kettering and Bedford;
at all which places preached in one week. At Birmingham also, and several
adjacent places, the people flocked to hear the gospel. At a place near Dudley
called Guarnall he was informed of a whole company that were awakened by
reading his sermons Letter DCCCCXCVI.
. He met with others awakened years ago, and heard of a notorious persecutor
and drunkard who had been powerfully struck. He loved to break up new ground,
as he expresses it; and had the pleasure to find sometimes that his way was
prepared by the blessing which God had given to his writings, particularly at
Alperam in Cheshire, and at Liverpool, where a person that had received benefit
by reading his sermons, met him at landing, and took him to his house. All was
quiet here, and at Chester, where he preached four times and had several of the
clergy in his congregations. But at Wrexham and Nantwich (where a Methodist
meeting house had lately been pulled down) he was disturbed by the mob, and
forced to remove his congregation to a place a little out of town Letter
DCCCCXCVII.
.

Thus he went on, returning at times for a few days to London. And November 16,
writes from Gloucester, After Lord's day I am bound for Bristol and Plymouth,
and hope to get into my winter quarters sometime before Christmas. Glad should
I be to travel for Jesus all the year round. It is more to me than my necessary
food Letter DCCCCXCIX.
.

On Sunday, November, 25. he opened the new Tabernacle at Bristol, which he
observes was large, but not half large enough; for if the place could contain
them, near as many would attend as in London. He also preached twice, in his
brother's great house to the quality. Though it was so late in the year, he set
out for Somersetshire, and preached several times in the open air, at seven
o'clock at night. My hands and body (says he) were pierced with cold; but what
are outward things, when the soul within is warmed with the love of God? The
stars shone exceeding bright; by an eye of faith, I saw Him who calls them
all by their names. My soul was filled with a holy ambition, and I longed to be
one of those who shall shine as the stars for ever and ever Letter MIV, MV.
. At this time his friend and fellow laborer, the Rev. Mr. John Wesley had by
his extraordinary labors brought his life into great danger, of which Mr.
Whitefield thus writes, Letter MV.
Bristol, December 3, 1753. I am now hastening to London to pay my last
respects to my dying friend. The Physicians think his disease is a galloping
consumption. I pity the church, I pity myself, but not him. Poor Mr. Charles
will now have double work. But we can do all things through Christ
strengthening us! His letters to both the brothers on this occasion are very
affectionate and sympathizing Letters MVI, VII, and VIII.
. And he soon had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Wesley recover. December 26. he
had a visit from Messieurs Tennent and Davies from America, who came over to
procure contributions for the College of New Jersey. As they were commissioned
to apply for a general collection in Scotland, he gave them recommendatory
letters, and heartily endeavored to promote their design. He stayed in London
all the winter of 1753, His letters written about the beginning of the new
year, show the habitual frame of his mind. Near forty years old, and such a
dwarf! The winter come already, and so little done in the summer. Again, I
heartily wish your Lordship, not the compliments but the blessings of the
season; even all those blessings that have been purchased for a lost world, by
the death and sufferings of an incarnate GOD. Letters MXV, MXVI.
longing for a spring campaign (as he expresses it) that he might begin to do
something for his divine Master.

March 7, 1754, having got twenty-two poor destitute children under his care,
he embarked with them for America, by way of Lisbon, (at which port the ship
was obliged to touch) where he stayed from the 20th of March to the 13th of
April.

From Lisbon he writes Letter MXXIX.
: The air agrees with my poor constitution extremely, and through divine
assistance, I hope what I see will also much improve my better part, and help
to qualify me better for preaching the everlasting gospel: again, a Gentleman
has most gladly received me into his house, and behaves like a friend indeed.
To day I dine with the Consul. Every day I have seen or heard something, that
has had a native tendency to make me thankful for the glorious Reformation
Letters MXXX, MXXXII.
. After a sight of some Popish processions, which were new and very striking to
him, he says, I returned to my lodgings not a little affected, to see so many
thousands led away from the simplicity of the gospel, by such a mixture of
human artifice and blind superstition, of which, indeed, I could have formed no
idea, had I not been an eyewitness Letter MXXXV.
. He was still more shocked at the procession of St. Francis; the following
description of which he wrote to his friend Letter MXXXVI.
, with expressions of praise and gratitude to Providence for the great wonder
of the Reformation: An intelligent Protestant, who stood near me, was so good
as to be my interpreter of the dumb show as it passed along. -- I say, dumb
show; for you must know, it was chiefly made up of waxen or wooden images,
carried on mens' shoulders through the streets, intending to represent the life
and death of St. Francis, the founder of one of their religious orders. They
were brought out from the Franciscan convent, and were preceded by three
persons in scarlet habits, with baskets in their hands, in which they received
the alms of the spectators, for the benefit of the poor prisoners. After these,
came two little boys in party-colored clothes, with wings fixed on their
shoulders, in imitation of little angels. -- Then appeared the figure of St.
Francis, very gay and beau-like, as he used to be before his conversion. In the
next he was introduced under conviction, and consequently stripped of his finery.
Soon after this, was exhibited an image of our blessed LORD himself, in a
purple gown, with long black hair, with St. Francis lying before him, to
receive his immediate orders. Then came the Virgin Mother, ( horesco referens)
with CHRIST her son at her left hand, and St. Francis making his obeisance to
both. -- Here, if I remember aright, he made his first appearance in his
friar's habit, with his hair cut short, but not as yet shaved in the crown of
his head. After a little space followed a mitre^ Cardinal gaudily attired, and
before him lay St. Francis almost prostrate, in order to be confirmed in his
office. Soon after this, ^he appears quite metamorphosed into a monk, his crown
shorn, his habit black, and his loins girt with a knotted cord. -- Here he
prays to our Savior hanging on a cross, that the marks of the wounds in his
hands, feet, and side, might be impressed on the same parts of his body. The
prayer is granted; blood comes from the hands, feet, and side; and the saint,
with great devotion, receives the impression. This was represented by red waxen
strings, reaching from those parts of the image to the corresponding parts of
St. Francis's body. Upon this he begins to do wonders; and therefore, in a
little while, he is carried along, as holding up a house which was just
falling. This miracle, they say, was performed, (if my information be true) at
Madrid, but the particulars of its history I have forgotten. At length the
father dies, and is brought forth lying in his grave. But lo! the briars and
nettles under which be lay, are turned unto fine and fragrant flowers. After
this he is borne along upon a bier covered with a silver pall, and four friars
lamenting over him. -- He then appears for the last time, but with an increase
of power; for he was represented as drawing tormented people out of purgatory
with his knotted cord, which, as you may well imagine, the poor souls catched
at, and took hold of very eagerly. At length came a gorgeous friar under a
splendid canopy, bearing in his hand a piece of the holy cross. After him
followed two more little winged boys, and then a long train of fat and well
favored Franciscans, with their calceis fenestratis, as Erasmus calls them;
and so the procession ended..... About ten o'clock at night, a train of near
two hundred penitents passed along, and several companies followed after with
their respective preaching friars at their heads, bearing crucifixes. The
penitents themselves were clothed and covered all over with white linen
vestments, only holes were made for their eyes to peep out at. All were
barefooted, and all had long heavy chains fastened to their ancles, which,
when dragged along the street, made a dismal rattling: but though alike in
dress, yet in other respects there was great variety amongst them. For some
carried great stones on their backs, and others dead men's bones and skulls in
their hands. Some bore large and seemingly very heavy crosses upon their
shoulders, whilst others had their arms extended quite wide, or carried a bow
full of swords with the points downwards. Most of them whipped and lashed
themselves, some with cords, and others with flat bits of iron. It being a
moonshine night, I could see them quite well; and indeed some of them struck so
hard, that I perceived their backs, (left bare on purpose to be slashed) were
quite red, and swollen very much by the violence and repetition of the blows.
The whole scene was horrible. He adds, O for an obediential acknowledgment to
the ever-blessed God, for our repeated deliverances. He further observes, The
preachers here have also taught me something; their action is graceful, Vividi
oculi, vividae manus, omnia vivida. Surely our English preachers would do well,
to be a little more fervent in their address. They have truth on their side;
why should superstition and falsehood run away with all that is pathetic and
affecting Letter MXXXVII.
? His two last letters from Lisbon contain the following lively description of
the superstitious farces which he saw acted on Holy Thursday as they call it,
and Good Friday: Letter MXL.
I have now seen the solemnities of an Holy Thursday, which is a very high day
in this metropolis, and particularly remarkable for the grand illumination of
the churches, and the King's washing twelve poor mens' feet. Go which way you
would, nothing was to be seen but illuminations within, and hurry without. --
For all persons, crowned heads themselves not excepted, are obliged on this day
to visit seven churches or altars, in imitation, as is supposed, of our LORD's
being hurried from one tribunal to another, before he was condemned to be hung
upon the cross. The following is an account of Good Friday's superstitious and
idolatrous farce: Letter MXLI.
Before all used to be noise and hurry; -- now, all was hushed and shut up in
the most awful and profound silence. No clock or bell had been heard since
yesterday noon. About two in the afternoon we got to the place, where (I had
heard some days ago) an extraordinary scene was to be exhibited: 'The
crucifixion of the Son of GOD, represented partly by dumb images, and partly by
living persons, in a large church belonging to the convent of St. De Beat.'
Several thousands crowded into it. -- Through the kind interposition and
assistance of a Protestant or two, I was not only admitted into the church, but
was very commodiously situated to view the whole performance. We had not waited
long before the curtain was drawn up. Immediately, upon a high scaffold, hung
in the front with black baize, and behind with silk purple damask laced with
gold, was exhibited to our view an image of the LORD JESUS at full length,
crowned with thorns, and nailed on a cross between two figures of like
dimensions, representing the two thieves. At a little distance on the right
hand, was placed an image of the Virgin Mary, in plain long ruffles, and a kind
of widow-weeds. Her veil was purple silk, and she had a wire glory round her
head. -- At the foot of the cross lay, in a mournful pensive posture, a living
man, dressed in woman's clothes, who personated Mary Magdalen; and not far off
stood a young man, in imitation of the beloved disciple. -- He was dressed in a
loose green silk vesture, and bob-wig. -- His eyes were fixed on the cross, and
his two hands a little extended. On each side, near the front of the stage,
stood two sentinels in buff, with formidable caps and long beards; and directly
in the front stood another yet more formidable, with a large target in his
hand. We may suppose him to be the Roman centurion. To complete the scene, from
behind the purple hangings came out about twenty little purple vested winged
boys, two by two, each bearing a lighted wax taper in his hand, and a crimson
and gold cap on his head. -- At their entrance upon the stage, they gently
bowed their heads to the spectators, then kneeled and made obeisance, first to
the image on the cross, and then to that of the Virgin Mary. When risen, they
bowed to each other, and then took their respective places over against one
another on steps assigned for them at the front of the stage. Opposite to this,
at a few yards distance, stood a black friar in a pulpit hung in mourning. For
a while he paused, and then, breaking silence, gradually lifted up his voice
'till it was extended to a pretty high pitch, though I think scarce high enough
for so large an auditory. After he had proceeded in his discourse about a
quarter of an hour, a confused noise was heard near the front great door; upon
turning my head, I saw four long-bearded men, two of which carried a ladder on
their shoulders, and after them followed two more with large gilt dishes in
their hands, full of linen, spices, etc. These (as I imagined) were the
representatives of Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea. On a signal given from
the pulpit, they advanced toward the steps of the scaffold. But upon their
very first attempting to mount it, at the watchful centurion's nod, the
observant soldiers made a pass at them, and presented the points of their
javelins directly to their breasts. They are repulsed. Upon this a letter from
Pilate is produced. The centurion reads it, shakes his head, and with looks
that bespoke a forced compliance, beckons to the sentinels to withdraw their
arms. Leave being thus obtained, they ascend; and having paid their homage, by
kneeling first to the image on the cross, and then to the Virgin Mary, they
retired to the back of the stage. Still the preacher continued declaiming, or
rather, (as was said) explaining the mournful scene. Magdalen persists in
wringing her hands, and variously expressing her personated sorrow; whilst John
(seemingly regardless of all besides) stood gazing on the crucified figure. By
this time it was near three o'clock, and therefore proper for the scene to
close. The ladders are ascended, the superscription and crown of thorns taken
off, long white rollers put round the arms of the image, and and then the nails
knocked out which fastened the hands and feet. Here Mary Magdalen looks most
languishing, and John, if possible, stands more thunderstruck than before. --
The orator lifts up his voice, and almost all the hearers expressed concern by
weeping, beating their breasts, and smiting their cheeks. -- At length the body
is gently let down. Magdalen eyes it, and, gradually rising, receives the feet
into her wide spread handkerchief; whilst John (who hitherto stood motionless
like a statue) as the body came near the ground, with an eagerness that bespoke
the intense affection of a sympathizing friend, runs toward the cross, seizes
the upper part of it into his clasping arms, and, with his disguised fellow
mourner, helps to bear it away. Great preparations were made for its interment.
It was wrapped in linen and spices, etc. and being laid upon a bier richly
hung, was afterward carried round the churchyard in grand procession, and in
about a quarter of an hour the corpse was brought in, and deposited with great
ceremony in an open sepulcher, prepared for the purpose. Upon all which he
says, Surely, thought I, whilst attending on such a scene of mock devotion, if
ever, now is the dear LORD JESUS crucified afresh; and I could then, and even
now, think of no other plea for the poor beguiled devotees, than that which
suffering innocence put up himself for his enemies, when actually hanging upon
the cross, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

After a passage of six weeks from Lisbon, he arrived at Beauford in
South Carolina, May 27. with his Orphan charge, all quite well. Having settled
them in his family in Georgia, which now consisted of above a hundred, and
spent some time in Carolina, he took a journey to the northward. At Charlestown
(says he) and other parts of Carolina my poor labors have met with the usual
acceptance, and I have reason to hope a Clergyman has been brought under very
serious impressions. My health is wonderfully preserved. My wonted vomitings
have left me, and though I ride whole nights, and have been frequently exposed
to great thunders, violent lightnings, and heavy rains, yet I am rather better
than usual, and as far as I can judge, am not yet to die. O that I may at
length learn to begin to live. I am ashamed of my sloth and lukewarmness, and
long to be on the stretch for God Letter MXLVIII.
. He arrived at New York by water July 27, and preached backwards and forwards
from New York to Philadelphia, and White Creek, till the middle of September.
Every where he observes, a divine power accompanied the word, prejudices were
removed, and a more effectual door opened than ever, for preaching the Gospel
Letter MLX.
. The latter end of September, he had once more the pleasure of seeing his good
old friend Governor Belchier at Elizabeth Town (New Jersey.) And it being the
New Jersey commencement, the President and the Trustees presented Mr.
Whitefield with the degree of A. M. The meeting of the Synod succeeded, before
whom he preached several times, and had much satisfaction in their company.
Tomorrow, (says he) October 1, God willing, I shall set out with the worthy
President (Mr. Burr) for New England, and expect to return back to the
Orphan-house, through Virginia. This will be about a two thousand miles
circuit; but the Redeemer's strength will be more than sufficient. He had also
some thoughts of going to the West Indies, had it been practicable, before his
return to England Letter MLXI.
.

He arrived with President Burr at Boston, October 9, and preached there a week
with great acceptance. At Rhode Island and Boston (says he) souls fly to the
Gospel, like doves to the windows. Opposition seems to fall daily. When he was
at Boston, he heard to his great joy that a Governor was at length nominated
for Georgia, and that his friend Mr. Habersham was made secretary; to whom he
writes, May the King of kings enable you to discharge your trust, as becomes a
good patriot, subject, and christian Letters MLXII, MLXIV.
! At this time, he went as far north as Portsmouth (New Hampshire) preaching
always twice, and sometimes thrice a day; his reception at Boston was more
favorable than that fourteen years before; and in general his labors seemed
to be attended with as great a blessing as ever Letter MLXVIII.
. He took leave of the Boston people at four in the morning, November 7, and
went to Rhode Island; from thence through Maryland At length I have got into
Maryland, and into a family, out of which I trust, five have been born of God.
Letter MLXX.
and Virginia, where the prospect of doing good was so promising, that he was
sorry he had not come sooner. Many came forty or fifty miles to hear him; and a
spirit of conviction and consolation seemed to run through all the assemblies.
Three churches were opened to him. Prejudices subsided; some of the rich and
great began to think favorably of his ministrations; and several of the lower
class came to him, and acknowledged what God had done for them by his
preaching, when there before Letters MLXXI, MLXXIV.
.

In the month of February 1755, he got back to Charlestown, and from thence
went to Savannah; continuing in these places till the latter end of March, when
he embarked for England. And on the 8th of May, arrived at New Haven in Sussex
Letter MLXXVII.
.

The first thing he took notice of, was the success of the Gospel in his native
country: Glory be to the great head of the Church! the word has still free
course. The poor despised Methodists are as lively as ever; and in several
churches, the Gospel is now preached with power. Many in Oxford are awakened to
the knowledge of the truth, and I have heard almost every week of some fresh
Minister or another, that seems determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified Letters MLXXXI, MLXXXII. In the M. S. he puts down the names
of Jones, Roman, Madan: of whom it appears he intended to have written more
particularly.
.

This consideration seems to have reanimated him. He went on preaching
earnestly at London, Bristol, Bath, and in Gloucestershire, till the month of
August. Then he went to Norwich, and opened a Tabernacle there. At this last
place (says he) notwithstanding offenses have come, there has been a glorious
work begun, and is now carrying on, (August 30, 1755.) The polite and great
seem to hear with much attention, and I scarce ever preached a week together
with greater freedom Letter MXCV.
.

After this he went his northern circuit, and found reason to bless God for
giving countenance to his labors all the way; particularly, at Northampton,
Liverpool, Bolton, Manchester, Leeds, Bradford, and York At York, I hope, a
fine Gentleman was touched; and several I find were awakened there, and at
Newcastle, at my last visit. Letter MCII.
. But when he had been some days at Newcastle, he found it too late to go to
Ireland, (as he once proposed) or even to Scotland: He returned therefore to
London, October 30, after preaching twice and thrice a day for two months, to
many thousands. At this time, he says, Next to Jesus, my King and country were
upon my heart. I hope, I shall always think it my bounden-duty, next to
inviting sinners to the blessed Jesus, to exhort my hearers to exert themselves
against the first approaches of popish tyranny, and arbitrary power This refers
to the encroachments made by the French, upon the British colonies in America;
and their threatening Great Britain with an invasion; which occasioned a
declaration of war against France, next year.
. O that we may be enabled to watch and pray, against all the opposition of
Antichrist in our hearts, for after all, there lies the most dangerous man of
sin. Letters MCIV, MCV.
About the end of November, he preached in pain, occasioned by a sore throat,
which was like to have terminated in an inflammatory quincey. This obliged him
much against his will, to be silent a few days. As soon as the danger seemed to
be over, he fell to work again One Physician prescribed a perpetual blister;
but I have found perpetual preaching to be a better remedy. When this grand
catholican fails, it is over with me. Letter MCXIV.
. He was now applied to by many serious persons, to preach twice a week at
Long-acre Chapel, near the play houses. Being informed that the place was
licensed, he complied, and preached there for the first time, on December 23,
1755; but met with great difficulties. The Bishop of B -- sent him a
prohibition. There was also a number of soldiers, drummers, and many of the
lower sort of people, hired to disturb him, by making a noise in the
neighboring house, or yard, of one Mr. C --; and this not once or twice, but
every time he preached at that Chapel; being hired by subscription, and
provided with a copper furnace, bells, drums, clappers, etc. they made it their
business to raise the loudest din they possible could, from the moment he began
preaching to the end of his sermon. By which, also, mobbers were encouraged to
come and riot at the chapel-door, during the time of divine service, and then
insult and abuse him, and the congregation, after it was over. The Chapel
windows, while he was preaching, were repeatedly broken by large stones, which
sadly wounded some of the hearers. Upon this occasion, Mr. Whitefield wrote
several spirited letters to the Bishop of B --, acknowledging, indeed his
Lordship's candor, and thanking him for his favorable opinion and good wishes;
(for the Bishop had wrote an answer to his first letter) but, at the same time,
with great strength of reason, and a becoming sense of British liberty,
defending his own conduct, and remonstrating against riotous proceedings of his
adversaries. Last Tuesday night, (says he) all was hushed. And in order to
throw off all popular odium, I gave it as my opinion that it was owing to your
Lordship's kind interposition. One Mr. C --, and one Mr. --, I am informed, are
greatly concerned. I know them not; and I pray the Lord of all lords never to
lay this ill and unmerited treatment to their charge. If no more noise is made
on their part, I assure your Lordship, no further resentment shall be made on
mine. But, if they persist, I have the authority of the Apostle on a like
occasion, to appeal unto Caesar. And thanks be to God, we have a Caesar to
appeal to, whose laws will not suffer any of his loyal subjects to be used in
such an inhuman manner. I have only one favor to beg of your Lordship, that
you would send (as they are your Lordship's parishioners) to the above
Gentlemen, and desire them, henceforward, to desist from such unchristian, (and
especially, at this critical juncture) such riotous and and dangerous
proceedings. Whether as a Chaplain to a most worthy Peeress, and a Presbyter of
of the Church of England, and a steady disinterested friend to our present
happy constitution, I have not a right to ask such a favor, I leave to your
Lordship's mature deliberation Letters MCXII, MCXVII, MCXIX, MCXX, MCXXII,
MCXXIV.
. In the mean time, his preaching was owned by God: particularly, ^s to one,
who had been a subscriber to hire men to make the noise Letter MCXVI.
.

In the beginning of February 1756, he sent eighty pounds of the collection
which he had made at the Tabernacle, on the day of the public fast, to the
society for relieving the poor persecuted French Protestants Letter MCXVIII.
This year, 1756, he published, A short Address to persons of all denominations,
occasioned by the alarm of an intended Invasion. Inserted in vol. IV. of his
Works.
.

As the uproar was still continued at Long-acre Chapel, and the facts were so
flagrant, he was advised to prosecute the offenders by law. This being
understood, his life was threatened. A man came up to him, in the pulpit at the
Tabernacle Letter MCXXIX.
, and three anonymous letters were sent him, denouncing, a certain, sudden, and
unavoidable stroke, unless he desisted from preaching, and pursuing the
offenders. Judging that others were concerned as well as himself, and that it
was an affair that had reference to the welfare of civil government, he sent a
copy of one of the letters to the Honorable Hume C -- ll, begging the favor
of his advice; and was advised by all means, to put all concerned into the
court of King's Bench Letters MCXXVII, MCXXIX.
. The Earl of Holderness, one of the secretaries of state) to whom he was
introduced on this occasion, received him very courteously, and seemed to have
no objection against issuing a reward for the discovery of the letter-writer.
"I find," says Mr. Whitefield, in his letter to Lady II -- n, May 2, 1756, that
all things happen for the furtherance of the Gospel. I suppose, your Ladyship
has seen his Majesty's promise of pardon, to any that will discover the
letter-writer; and this brings the further news of my having taken a piece of
ground, very commodious to build on, not far from the Foundling Hospital. I
have opened the subscription, and through God's blessing, it has already
amounted to near six hundred pounds. I hope, in a few months to have what has
been long wanted, a place for the Gospel, at the other end of the town. This
evening, God willing, I venture once more to preach at Long-acre. The place he
here speaks of, is the chapel in Tottenham-Court-Road, which he began to build
May 10, 1756.

After this he set out on one of his wonted tours, and having spent three weeks
in preaching, with usual success, at Bristol, and in Gloucershire, at Bradford,
From, Warminster, and at Portsmouth Letter MCXXXIX.
, he returned to London in the beginning of June.

July 27. he writes, The Gospel flourishes in London. I am just returned from
preaching it at Sheerness, Chatham, and in the Camp. Next day he set off for
Scotland Letter MCXLV.
. How he employed his time in his way thither, appears from the following
letter. Sunderland, August 14, 1756. How swiftly does my precious time fly
away! It is now a fortnight since I came to Leeds, in and about which, I
preached eight days, thrice almost every day, to thronged and affected
auditories. On Sunday last at Bradford, in the morning, the auditory consisted
of about ten thousand; at noon, and in the evening at Burstall, to near double
the number. Though hoarse, I was helped to speak so, that all heard. Next
morning, I took a sorrowful leave of Leeds, preached at Doncaster at noon, and
at York the same night; on Wednesday at Wawstall, about fifty miles off; on
Thursday, twice at Yarm, and last night, and this morning here. All the way he
heard of a great concern, since he was in these parts last year.

Upon pressing invitations from friends in the north, he proceeded to
Edinburgh, where he arrived August 20. and preached there Edinburgh, September
9, 1756. For near these three weeks, the Rev. Mr. Whitefield has been
preaching in the Orphan-Hospital-Park to very crowded auditories, twice every
day. As he was frequently very explicit in opening the miseries of popish
tyranny, and arbitrary power; and very warm in exhorting his hearers to loyalty
and courage at home, and in stirring them up to pray for the success of his
Majesty's forces, both by sea and land abroad; we have reason to believe, that
his visit at this juncture has been particularly useful. Glasgow Courant.

Edinburgh, September 23. On Tuesday evening, the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, after
sermon, made a collection for the poor Highlanders, when upwards of sixty
pounds sterling was collected. Ibid.


and at Glasgow, a^ usual, till September 22; about which time he received a
message from the new Governor of Georgia in London desiring to see and converse
with him before he embarked Letter MCXLVIII.
.

In his way to London, he again visited Leeds, and went some days into good Mr.
G -- and Mr. J -- 's round, preaching upon the mountains to many thousands. But
finding his last year's disorder was like to return, he was obliged to leave
off, and came to London in the end of October; and November the 7th, opened his
New Chapel in Tottenham-Court-Road, preaching from 1 Cor. iii.11. Letter
MCXLIX. and M. S.
For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XVII. From his opening his Chapel in TOTTENHAM-COURT-ROAD, to his
Arrival in EDINBURGH, in the Year 1759.
HIS constant work was now preaching about fifteen times a week, which, with a
weak appetite, want of ^est I could enlarge, but it is near six in the morning,
and I must away to preach. Letter MCLVI.
, and much care lying upon his mind, enfeebled his body exceedingly. But (says
he) the joy of the Lord is my strength, and my greatest grief is, that I can do
no more for Him, who has done and suffered so much for me Letter MCLIII.
.

His new Chapel succeeded according to his wish. On Sunday mornings hundreds
went away not being able to get in Letter MCLVII.
. Some people of distinction came, and begged they might have a constant seat;
and he received a very serious letter, from a person who was brought under
concern there, though he came at first out of curiosity, to see what sort of
place it was Letters MCLVI, LVII. A neighboring Doctor calls the place
Whitefield's Soul-trap. I pray the friend of sinners, to make it a Soul-trap
indeed, to many wandering creatures. Letter MCLVII. -- S --, the player, makes
always one of the auditory, and, as I hear, is much impressed, and brings
others with him. Letter MCLXIII.
.

In spring 1757, he set out again on his northern circuit, and came to
Edinburgh in the month of May, when the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland held their annual meeting. He was much pleased with this circumstance.
Many Ministers attended his sermons, perhaps a hundred at a time. Thereby
prejudices were removed, and many of them seemed to be deeply affected. About
thirty of them, as a token of respect, invited him to a public entertainment.
The King's Commissioner also invited him to his table.

Some of the Scotch clergy, who were prejudiced against Mr. Whitefield, took
upon them to signify to the Commissioner, (Lord Cathcart) by some of their
friends, that it would be better not to invite Mr. Whitefield to his table; and
that it would give offense. This overture his Grace received with indignation.

The Earl of L -- also, who was King's Commissioner before Lord Cathcart,
showed particular attention to Mr. Whitefield: And from the time of his first
coming to Scotland, showed a great and constant regard for him.

Thousands, among whom were a great many of the best rank, daily attended his
ministrations, and the longer he staid, the more the congregations increased
Letter MCLXVII.
.

From Edinburgh he went to Glasgow, where, having preached twice by the way, he
arrived june 8th, and continued till the 14th, preaching, as usual, in the High
churchyard, to great multitudes, morning and evening; besides on the
Lord's Day, both forenoon and afternoon, in one of the churches of the city.
The poor in Glasgow being at this time in very mournful circumstances,
notwithstanding the various sources of supply, he (with the countenance of the
magistrates) made a collection for them, at his sermon on Monday evening, which
amounted to near sixty pounds. Next day he preached at Paisley; and from thence
set out for Ireland.

His first reception was promising as formerly. Congregations at Dublin were
very large, and much affected. One of the Bishops told a Nobleman, (who
repeated it to Mr. Whitefield) that he was glad he was come to rouse the
people. All sorts attended, and all sorts seemed to be struck with a religious
concern Letters MCLXVIII, LXIX.
. But on Sunday afternoon, July 3. after preaching in Oxmantown-green, (a place
frequented by the Ormand and Liberty boys, as they call them, who often fight
there) he narrowly escaped with his life. It being war time, he took occasion
to exhort his hearers, (as was his usual practice) not only to fear God, but to
honor the King; and prayed for success to the King of Prussia. In the time of
sermon and prayer, a few stones were thrown at him, which did no hurt. But when
he had done, and thought to return home, the way he came, by the barracks, to
his great surprise access was denied; and he was obliged to go near half a
mile, from one end of the Green to the other, through hundreds of Papists, etc.
who finding him unattended, (for a soldier, and four preachers who came with
him, had fled) threw vollies of stones upon him from all quarters, and made him
reel backwards and forwards, till he was almost breathless, and all over a gore
of blood. I received many blows and wounds; one was particularly large, and
near my temples. I thought of Stephen, and was in hopes, like him, to go off in
this bloody triumph, to the immediate presence of my Master Letter MCLXX.
. At last, with great difficulty, he staggered to the door of a Minister's
house lying next to the Green, which was kindly opened to him. For a while he
continued speechless and panting for breath; but his weeping friends having
given him some cordials, and washed his wounds, a coach was procured, in which,
amidst the oaths, imprecations and threatenings of the Popish rabble, he got
safe home; and joined in a hymn of thanksgiving with his friends, by whom, he
says, none but spectators could form an idea of the affection with which he was
received. Next morning he set out for Port Arlington, leaving, (says he) my
persecutors to his mercy, who of persecutors has often made preachers. I pray
God, I may thus be avenged of them Letter MCLXX.
.

After preaching at Port Arlington, Limerick, and Cork; the beginning of August
he returned to England; and, while the weather permitted, continued to range
(as he expresses it) preaching with great earnestness every where. This
spiritual hunting, (says he) is delightful sport, when the heart is in the work
Letter MCLXXIV.
. At Plymouth he had the pleasure of seeing officers, soldiers, sailors, etc.
attending his sermons with the utmost solemnity. In Exeter also, Bristol,
Gloucester, and Gloucestershire, he had delightful seasons. About the middle of
October 1757, he returned to London.

His attendance this winter on both the Chapel and the Tabernacle, together
with his thoughtfulness, greatly impaired his health. He was troubled with
continual vomitings, got little sleep, and had no appetite. Still, however, he
went on as well as he could. I am brought, now Letter MCLXXXVII.
, (says he) to the short allowance of preaching but once a day, and thrice on a
Sunday. But when he was not preaching, he was projecting some scheme or other
for the advancement of religion: for instance the building of almshouses for
pious widows, on the ground that surrounded his Chapel. I have a plan, (says
he) for twelve. The whole expense will be four hundred pounds. I have got a
prospect of two. I propose allowing each widow half a crown a week. The
Sacrament money will more than do. If this be effected many godly widows will
be provided for, and a standing monument left that the Methodists were not
against good works Letters MCLXXXVII, MCLXXXIX.
. It was not long till this plan was put into execution. The foundation of the
almshouses was laid February 16, 1758, and the widows began to be admitted in
June following.

He began his summer-circuit this year at Gloucester: from thence he went to
Bristol, and then to Wales. When he was in Wales he was brought very low in his
health. He was not able to sit up in company, as he used to do; and could take
very little food. Yet continued traveling and preaching twice a day, through
various towns in South Wales, where multitudes attended; on Sundays the numbers
were almost incredible Letters MCCIII, MCCVI.
.

In the month of July he set off for Scotland. In his way he preached at
Everton, St. Neots, Kayso, Bedford, Oulney, Weston, Underwood, Ravenstone,
Northampton, and Newcastle. Four Clergymen lent him their pulpits. His bodily
strength increased so little by this journey, that he sometimes had thoughts of
turning back. But this he did not think to be his duty. Through divine
strength, (says he) I hope to go forward, and shall strive, as much as in me
lies, to die in this glorious work Letter MCCIX.
. Yet it pleased God to restore his health in a good measure, soon after his
arrival in Scotland. From Edinburgh he writes, August 19 and 24. For these four
months last past, I have been brought so exceeding low in my body, that I was
in hopes, every sermon I preached would waft me to my wished for home.
Scotland, I hoped, would finish my warfare; but it has rather driven me back to
sea again. On Tuesday next, I thought to have moved; but as it is race-week,
and my health is improving, friends advise me to stay, to stir them up to run
with patience the race that is set before us.

Edinburgh, September 12, 1758. Mr. Whitefield's presence, at this time, has
been particularly useful to the Orphan-Hospital, for which upwards of two
hundred pounds has been raised from the collection at the (...), and
seat-^nts. Before he left Glasgow, He made a collection for the Glasgow
Charitable Highland Society, for supporting and educating poor Highland
children; a scheme particularly useful at this time, when so many of their
parents and friends are abroad in America, in his Majesty's service. During his
stay here, he has had occasion to preach three thanksgiving sermons, for the
victory at Crevelt, the taking of Cape-Breton, and the late defeat of the
Russians. By his warm and repeated exhortation to loyalty, and a steady
adherance to the protestant interest, on this, and all other occasions, it must
be acknowledged, even in this view, his visit here has been useful to the
community in a civil, as well as a religious light. Glasgow Courant.


Having left Edinburgh, September 13, he preached in a great many places in the
north of England, Alnwick, Newcastle, Durham, Bishop-Aukland, Leeds, etc. and
came to London about the end of October.

He now talked of going over again to America, where his affairs were in a good
situation: Blessed be God (says he) that I can send you word, a never-failing
Providence has put it into my power to pay off all Bethesda's arrears. I am
talking every day of coming over; but how to do it in war-time, or how to get
the Chapel and Tabernacle supplied, I cannot as yet be clear in Letters MCCXIX,
MCCXX.
. Not being able, it seems, to get over these difficulties, he continued all
winter 1758 in London, and above the middle of May 1759, opened his spring
campaign at Bristol. In the month of June he was in Gloucestershire and
Yorkshire, where people, high and low, rich and poor flocked, as usual, to hear
him, twice a day I am growing fat; but as I take it to be a disease, I hope I
shall go home the sooner. Letter MCCXXV.
; and from thence re-visited Scotland.

CHAP. XVIII. From his Arrival at EDINBURGH 1759, to his opening Lady
HUNTINGDON's CHAPEL at BATH, in the Year 1765.
ABOUT the beginning of July 1759, he came to Edinburgh. His congregations here
and at Glasgow were very large, and very attentive, (...) formerly Edinburgh,
August 15, 1759. On Tuesday morning the Rev. Mr. Whitefield set out on his
return for England. It is said, that here and at Glasgow, within these six
weeks he has preached near a hundred times, and yet the congregations were
always increasing. Whatever this be owing to, every body must judge for
themselves: but it is certain he continually exerted all his rhetoric in
stirring up a zeal for his God, his King, and his Country in this time of
danger; and seemed particularly pleased, as were thousands more, that he had an
opportunity last Lord's Day evening, of preaching a thanksgiving sermon to a
most thronged auditory, on account of the glorious victory lately vouchsafed to
Prince Ferdinand over the French.

The sum collected for the benefit of the Orphan Hospital, during his stay
here, amounted to two hundred and fifteen pounds.


. But he complains in his letters, that with respect to the power of religion,
it was a dead time in Scotland in comparison with London, and several other
parts of England Letters MCCXXVI, XXVIII.
.

His visit to Scotland this year, gave occasion to a passage, which was much
for his honor, and a full confutation of the mercenary motives ascribed to him
by some of his adversaries. One Miss Hunter, a young Lady of considerable
fortune, made a full offer to him of her estate, both money and lands,
amounting to about seven thousand pounds, which he generously refused. And upon
his refusing it for himself, she offered it to him for the benefit of his
orphan-house in Georgia, which he also absolutely refused. These facts the
compiler has from undoubted authority.

He spent the winter October 1759, he wrote a preface to Mr. Samuel Clark's
Bible. See his Works vol. IV.
in London, and got his chapel enlarged.

March 14, 1760, he made a collection at his Chapel and Tabernacle, of above
four hundred pounds, for the distressed Prussians, who had suffered so much
from the cruelty of the Russians, at Newmark, Costrin, etc. For this
disinterested act of benevolence, it is said, he received the thanks of his
Prussian Majesty.
.

In summer 1760, he went into Gloucestershire and Wales, and from thence to
Bristol. When he preached at the Tabernacle in Bristol, there were more in the
evenings than it could well hold; and in the fields his congregations consisted
of not less than ten thousand Letter MCCXXXVII.
.

He now began to undergo a new kind of persecution (which however has sometimes
fallen upon men of the greatest eminence) that of being mimicked and burlesqued
upon the stage The compiler is uncertain as to the time when this was first
done. Mr. Whitefield first takes notice of it in his letter dated August 15,
1760. It seems to have taken its rise from the resentment of the playhouse
people, after they failed in their attempt to freighten him from preaching at
Long-acre chapel, and were farther exasperated by seeing him erect a chapel of
his own in Tottenham-court-road.
. His enemies had in vain used violence against him, and having found that the
law would not suffer them to proceed in that way, they therefore thought they
would try what they could do by mockery. For this purpose, they got for their
tool one Samuel Foot, a mimic, who having had some success in imitating Mr.
Whitefield's person, and speaking a few ludicrous sentences in his manner, was
encouraged to proceed farther, and to write a farce (called the Minor) to be
acted at the Theater in Drury Lane See a letter to David Garrick Esquire occasioned
by the intended representation of the Minor at Drurylane Theater, said to be
written by the Rev. Mr. Madan.
. This performance is otherwise very dull and uninteresting; but by its
impiety, it cannot fail of exciting the indignation of the religious and
sober-minded. For, in order to expose Mr. Whitefield to contempt, the author
makes no scruple to treat the very expressions and sentiments of the Bible with
ridicule; or (to put the most favorable construction upon the matter) he and
those whom he sent to the Tabernacle and Chapel to procure materials, were so
little acquainted with the sacred writings as not to know, that what they took
for Mr. Whitefield's peculiar language, was the language of the word of God.

Be this as it may, they lost their labor, (...) they were so far from
lestening the number of his congregations, that they increased them; and
brought thousands of new persons to hear the gospel; which was the very thing
he always aimed at: and thus Providence gave him the victory over them.

Mr. Foot being manager of the Edinburgh Theater in winter 1770, the Minor was
acted there. The first night it was pretty throng, as people fond of any
novelty were led to it without knowing any thing of the nature of the
performance. But (such was the public sense of the impurity and indecency of it
when known) that on the second night, only ten women appeared. When it was
acted on Saturday, November 24, a dispute arose among the spectators, whether
it was proper to bring Mr. Whitefield upon the stage, as he was now dead? This,
however, was done; and raised a general indignation in the inhabitants of that
city. Next day several Ministers (the Rev. Dr. Erskine, Dr. Walker, etc.) took
notice of it in their discourses from the pulpit. Dr. Walker (whose church is
frequented by the people of higher rank) observed in his lecture upon 2 Cor.
v.14-21, that he could not read the 17th verse, If any man be in Christ he is a
new creature, without expressing the just indignation he felt, upon hearing
that last night a profane piece of buffoonery was publicly acted, in which this
sacred doctrine is ridiculed. -- Mr. Baine, of the Kirk of Relief, preached a
sermon upon the occasion, December 2, from Psalm xciv.16, Who will rise up for
me against the evil doers? or who will stand up for me against the workers of
iniquity? which was published and sold off in a few days. Toward the
conclusion of the sermon, he says, How base and ungrateful is such treatment of
the dead; and that too so very nigh to a family of orphans, the records of
whose hospital will transmit Mr. Whitefield's name to posterity with honor,
when the memory of others will not. How illiberal such usage of one, whose
seasonable good services for his King and Country are well known; whose
indefatigable labors for his beloved Master were countenanced by Heaven.

March 14, 1760, Mr. Whitefield preached at the Chapel from Hos. xi.8, 9. and
at the Tabernacle in the evening, from the 80th Psalm and last verse. At the
former place he collected two hundred and twenty-two pounds eight shillings and
nine pence; and at the other, one hundred and eighty-two pounds fifteen
shillings and nine pence, for the distressed Protestants in Prussia. No man was
a more strict observer of public occurrences, or more endeavored to improve
them.

In the months of September and October 1760, he made a tour through Yorkshire;
and was in London during the winter, employed as usual. On the fast day, Feb.
13, 1761, he preached early in the morning at the Tabernacle on Exodus xxxiv.1,
etc. and collected one hundred and twelve pounds; in the forenoon he labored
at the Chapel, and discoursed on Joel ii.15. and afterward collected two
hundred and forty-two pounds; and in the evening he preached at the Tabernacle
from Genesis vii.1. and collected two hundred and ten pounds. These sums were
immediately applied to the noble purposes for which they were collected, the
relief of the German Protestants, and the sufferers by fire at Boston Four
hundred pounds were assigned to the Germans, and given into the hands of the
Rev. Mr. Ziegenhagen. Letters MCCXLI, XLII, XLVI.

Boston, Feb. 27, 1764. At a meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants
of the town of Boston on Friday last, it was voted unanimously* that the thanks
of the town be given to the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield, for his charitable care
and pains in collecting a considerable sum of money in Great Britain, for the
distressed sufferers by the great fire in Boston 1760; and a respectable
committee was appointed to wait on Mr. Whitefield, to inform him of the vote,
and present him with a copy thereof. Boston Gazette.


.

But his health, which had often been very bad It was happy for him that he
frequently got the assistance of clergymen from the country; and at this time
particularly of the Rev. Mr. Berridge, late Moderator of Cambridge, of whom he
writes (Letters MCCXLIII, XLV.) A new instrument is raised up out of Cambridge
University. He has been here preaching with great flame, and like an angel of
the churches indeed. -- The compiler is informed that the Rev. Mr. Berridge, at
Everton, still continues zealous and successful.
, (...) grew worse, so that in April 1761, he was brought to the gates of
death. After his recovery, being still weak, and not able to preach as
formerly, he left London, and made a visit to Bristol, Exeter, and Plymouth, by
which he found himself somewhat better; but could not bear long journies and
frequent preaching as he used to do Letter MCCL. -- The M. S. (which after the
year 1748, contains only very short and imperfect hints) ends here.
.

October 1761, he complains, I have not preached a single sermon for some
weeks. Last Sunday I spoke a little; but I feel its effects ever since. A sea
voyage seems more necessary to me now than ever. -- I know now what nervous
disorders are. Blessed be God that they were contracted in his service; I do
not repent -- though I am frequently tempted to wish the report of my death had
been true, since my disorder keeps me from my old delightful work of preaching
Letters MCCLII, LIII, LIVE.
. In a journey to Leeds and Newcastle this month, he could bear riding in a
post-chaise, but preached seldom, his friends being so prudent as not to press
him (...). I hope, however, says he, I am traveling in order to preach Letter
MCCLV.
. Accordingly, he prolonged his journey the length of Edinburgh and Glasgow,
and did not return to London till the month of December; when he found himself
considerably better, which (under God) he attributed to his following the
simple prescriptions of four eminent physicians in Edinburgh; being sensible,
as he said, that their advice had been more blessed, for his recovery, than all
the medicines and directions he had elsewhere Letter MCCLIX.
.

As soon as his health was in some measure restored, he fell to his beloved
work again. From Bristol, April 1762, he writes, Bristol air agrees with me. I
have been enabled to preach five times, this last week, without being hurt. Who
knows but I may yet be restored so far as to sound the gospel trumpet for my
God? The quietness I enjoy here, with daily riding out, seems to be one very
proper means Letters MCCLX, LXI.
. He continued thus to preach four or five times a week, notwithstanding his
weakness, till about the middle of May; and was sometimes enabled to "take the
field," as he expresses it, which gave him great joy; Mounts says he, are the
best pulpits, and the heavens the best sounding boards. O for power equal to my
will! I would fly from pole to pole, publishing the everlasting gospel of the
Son of God Letter MCCLXV.
. When he returned to London, the cares and labors that thronged upon him were
ready to bring him low again. In the month of July, therefore, he made a voyage
to Holland, and preached four times at Rotterdam: he found himself much better,
and writes from Norwich, July 31, The expedition to Holland, was, I trust,
profitable to myself and others; and if ever my usefulness is to be continued
at London, I must be prepared for it by a longer itineration both by land and
water. At present, blessed be God, I can preach once a day; and it would do
your heart good to see what an influence attends the word. All my old times are
revived again Letter MCCLXVII.
.

August 18, he arrived at Edinburgh, made a visit to Glasgow, where he preached
every day (and twice at Cambuslang) and continued preaching once a day at
Edinburgh till September 13, when he returned to England: and was glad (now
that peace was expected) of the prospect of embarking soon for America.

While in England, he found that preaching once a day did not hurt him, but
dared not venture oftener. At Leeds, Bristol and Plymouth, he had very
desirable seasons; but with respect to London, he says, Letter MCCLXXIV.
As affairs are circumstanced, every thing there tends to weigh me down. Having
therefore persuaded some of his intimate friends, as trustees, to take upon
them the whole care of the affairs of his Chapel and Tabernacle, and all his
other concerns at home; he resolved to sail from Greenock in Scotland. On his
way thither, in the month of March, 1765, he preached at Everton, Leeds,
Aberford, Kippax, and Newcastle; and was also employed in writing his
Observations, etc. in answer to Bishop Warburton Letters MCCLXXVIII, LXXIX. See
his Works, vol. IV.
.

When he came to Scotland, he continued to preach once a day, for some weeks;
but being taken ill of his old disorder at Edinburgh, he was obliged to be
silent (for the most part) for near six weeks afterward. At last, in the
beginning of June, he embarked the sixth time for America, in the ship Fanny,
Captain Archibald Galbreath, bound from Greenock to Virginia: where (after a
voyage of twelve weeks) he arrived in the latter end of August. Thanks to a
never failing Redeemer, I have not been laid by an hour through sickness, since
I came on board -- A kind Captain, and a most orderly and quiet ship's company,
who gladly attended when I had breath to preach. Scarce an oath have I heard
upon deck -- and such a stillness through the whole ship, both on weekdays and
the Lord's day, as has from time to time surprised me Letter MCCXC.
.

His letters in September, October, and November 1763, are dated from
Philadelphia. He found himself still an invalid; yet made a shift to preach
twice a week, Here, says he, are some young bright witnesses rising up in the
church. Perhaps I have already converted with forty new creature Ministers of
various denominations. Sixteen hopeful students, I am credibly informed, were
converted at New Jersey College last year. What an open door, if I had
strength! Last Tuesday we had a remarkable season among the Lutherans; children
and grown people were much impressed Letter MCCXCIV.
.

He wanted much to go forward to Georgia, but the physicians were absolutely
against it, till he got more strength. In the latter end of November he set out
from Philadelphia for New York, and on his way preached several times at
New Jersey College and Elizabeth-Town, with much acceptance. His spirits now
grew better, and he could sometimes preach thrice a week Letter MCCXCVIII.
. While he continued at New York during the winter, he writes, Prejudices in
this place have most strangely subsided. The better sort stock as eagerly as
the common people, and are fond of coming for private gospel-conversation. --
Congregations continue very large, and I trust saving impressions are made upon
many Letters MCCCII, III.
.

New York, January 23, 1764. The Rev. Mr. George Whitefield has spent seven
weeks with us, preaching twice a week to more general acceptance than ever; and
been treated with great respect by many of the Gentlemen and Merchants of this
place. During his stay, he preached two charity sermons; the one on the
occasion of the annual collection for the poor, in which double the sum was
collected that ever was upon the like occasion; the other was for the benefit
of Mr. Wheelock's Indian school at Lebanon, in New England, for which he
collected (notwithstanding the present prejudices of many people against the
Indians) the sum of one hundred and twenty pounds. In his last sermon he took a
very affectionate leave of the people of this city, who expressed great concern
at his departure. May God restore this great and good man (in whom the
Gentleman, the Christian and accomplished Orator shine forth with such peculiar
luster) to a perfect state of health, and continue him long a blessing to the
world, and the church of Christ Boston Gazette.
.

After leaving New York, he preached at East-Hampton, Bridge-Hampton, and
South-Hold, upon Long Island; at Shelter-Island also; and at New London,
Norwich, and Providence on the Main Land. Then proceeded to Boston, where he
arrived in the latter end of February 1764, and was received with usual warmth
of affection Letter MCCCIV.
. But as the smallpox was spreading through the town, he chose to preach for a
while in the adjacent places. At Newbury a great influence attended his
preaching. He writes from Concord to his friend Mr. S -- S --, How would you
have been delighted to have seen Mr. Wheelock's Indians? Such a promising
nursery of future missionaries, I believe, was never seen in New England
before; pray encourage it with all your might. I also wish you could give some
useful puritanical books to Harvard College Library lately burnt down Letter
MCCCV. Some years after, the Gentlemen of Harvard College expressed their
gratitude to Mr. Whitefield by the following vote: At a meeting of the
President and Fellows of Harvard College, August 22, 1768. The Rev. Mr. George
Whitefield having, in addition to his former kindness to Harvard College,
lately presented to the Library, a new edition of his Journals, and having
procured large benefactions from several benevolent and respectable Gentlemen;
VOTED, That the Thanks of the Corporation be given to the Rev. Mr. Whitefield,
for these instances of candor and generosity.

PRESENT,
The President, Mr. Appleton, Mr. Professor Winthrop, Dr. Eliot, Dr. Cooper,
Treasurer Hubbard.

A true Copy, per Edward Holyoke, President.



.

In the month of April he had a return of his disorder; but it did not long
keep him from preaching: and the Boston people were exceedingly eager to hear.
He was thinking to proceed immediately southward, but they sent after him, and
persuaded him to come back. June 1, 1764, he writes, Friends have even
constrained me to stay here, for fear of running into the summer's heat.
Hitherto I find the benefit of it. Whatever it is owing to, through mercy I am
much better in health than I was this time twelve months, and can now preach
thrice a week to very large auditories, without hurt. And every day I hear of
some brought under concern. -- This is all of grace Letter MCCCXI.
.

After a very sorrowful parting, he left Boston, and came back to New York,
from whence his letters are dated from the end of June till the latter end of
August. At present, says he, my health is better than usual, and as yet I have
felt no inconvenience from the summer's heat. -- I have preached twice lately
in the fields, and we sat under the blessed Redeemer's shadow with great
delight. -- My late excursions upon Long Island, I trust, have been blessed. It
would surprise you to see above one hundred carriages at every sermon in this
new world Letters MCCCXII, MCCCXIII, MCCCXV.
.

In September and October he was at Philadelphia; the provost of the college
there read prayers for him. Both the present and late Governor, with the
principal Gentlemen of the city attended, and thanks were sent to him from the
Trustees, for speaking for the charity-children, and countenancing the
institution Letter MCCCXVIII.
.

From Philadelphia he proceeded southward through Virginia. And November 22, at
New-Brunswick in Carolina, he writes, At Newburn last Sunday good impressions
were made -- From that place to this I have met with what they call New-Lights
A name given to those who favor the revival of religion under the Ministry of
Mr. Whitefield, Mr. Tennent, etc. -- Letter MCCCXIX.
lmost every stage. -- I have the names of six or eight of their preachers.
This, with every other place, being open and exceedingly desirous to hear the
Gospel, makes me almost determine to come back early in the spring.

After preaching at Charlestown, he arrived at Savannah in December, where he
found affairs prospering to his wish. "The colony," says he, is rising fast;
nothing but plenty at Bethesda, and all arrears, I trust, will be paid off
before I leave it; so that in a short time I hope to be free from these outward
encumbrances Letter MCCCXXI.
. And he was not disappointed his expectations; for he writes, Bethesda,
Jannuary 14, 1765, God has given me great favor in the sight of the Governor,
council, and assembly. A memorial was presented for an additional grant of
lands, consisting of two thousand acres. It was immediately complied with. Both
houses addressed the Governor in behalf of the intended college. As warm an
answer was given See the memorial, address, and answer in vol. III. of his
works, page 469, etc.
. Every heart seems to leap for joy at the prospect of its future utility
Letter MCCCXXII.
. -- Again. "Bethesda, February 13. Letter MCCCXXIV.
Yesterday morning the Governor and Lord J. A. G -- n, with several other
Gentlemen, favored me with their company to breakfast. But how was my Lord
surprised and delighted! After expressing himself in the strongest terms, he
took me aside, and informed me, that the Governor had showed him the accounts,
by which he found what a great benefactor I had been; that the intended college
would be of the utmost utility, to this and the neighboring provinces; that
the plan was beautiful, rational, and practicable; and that he was persuaded
his Majesty would highly approve of, and also favor it, with some peculiar
marks of his royal bounty.

He adds, in the same letter, Now farewell, my beloved Bethesda; surely the
most delightful situated place in all the southern parts in America. -- What a
blessed winter have I had! Peace, and love, and harmony, and plenty reign here.
Mr. W -- t has done much in a little time. All are surprised at it. But he
has worked night and day, and not stirred a mile for many weeks.

Having left Bethesda in such comfortable circumstances, February 18, Thanks be
to God, all outward things are settled on this side the water. The auditing the
accounts, and laying a foundation for a college, has silenced enemies, and
comforted friends. The finishing this affair confirms my call to England, at
this time. Letter MCCCXXIX.
he delayed his proposed to^ to the northward, and thought it best to embark
directly for England, to finish the affair about the college. He spent some
time, however, at Charlestown in the month of March, and after a very
affectionate parting, set out for Philadelphia, preaching as he went along in
several places All along from Charlestown to this place (Newcastle) the cry is
'For Christ's sake stay and preach to us.' O for a thousand lives to spend for
Jesus! Letter MCCCXXIX.
: but no ship offering at Philadelphia, he sailed from New York in the Earl of
Halifax packet, and arrived once more in England, July 5, 1765 We had but a
twenty-eight day passage. -- The transition has been so sudden, that I can
scarce believe that I am in England, I hope, ere long, to have a more sudden
transition into a better country. Letter MCCCXXXI. [When he arrived at London,
July 21, he was very ill of a nervous fever.]
.

After his arrival he found himself still very weak in body, and obliged to go
on much more slowly than he used to do. Yet this did not discourage him from
doing what he could, in hopes of soon entering into his rest. O to end life
well! (says he) Methinks I have now but one more river to pass over. And we
know of one that can carry us over, without being ankle deep Letter MCCCXXXIII.
.

October 6, he was called to open Lady Huntingdon's chapel at Bath The chapel
is extremely plain, and yet equally grand. A most beautiful original. All was
conducted with great solemnity. Though a very wet day, the place was very full.
-- I preached in the morning, Mr. Townsend in the evening. Letter MCCCXXXVII.
, when he preached from 2 Cor. vi.16.

CHAP. XIX. From his opening Lady HUNTINGDON's Chapel at BATH, to his embarking
for AMERICA in the Year 1769.
AFTER preaching some little time at Bath, he returned to London, from whence,
January 18, 1766, he writes Letter MCCCXXXIX.
to a friend at Sheerness, I am sorry to acquaint you, that it is not in my
power to comply with your request. For want of more assistance, I am confined
in town with the care of two important posts, when I am only fit to be put into
some garrison among the invalids. But he was relieved, for a little space,
early in the spring; for we find him in the month of March at Bath and Bristol.

March 17, he says, The uncertainty of my motions has made me slow in writing;
and a desire to be a while free from London cares, has made me indifferent
about frequent hearing from thence. -- Last Friday evening, and twice yesterday
Letter MCCCXL.
, I preached at Bath to very thronged and brilliant auditories.

About this time, the Stamp Act was repealed; on which occasion he greatly
exulted. The interest of the colonies always lay near his heart, and he hoped
this step would restore peace and happiness to his country. In his letter book
is the following sentence, "March 16, 1766, Stamp Act repealed, Gloria Deo."

Mr. Occum, an Indian preacher, and Mr. Whitaker, came over from America to
solicit contributions for Mr. Wheelock's Indian school, an institution which
Mr. Whitefield greatly approved. Concerning this he writes, Letter MCCCXLI.
London, April 15, The prospect of a large and effectual door opening among the
Heathens, blessed be God, is very promising. Mr. Occum is a settled, humble
christian: the good and great, with a multitude of a lower degree, heard him
preach last week at Tottenham-court Chapel, and felt much of the power and
presence of our common Lord. Mr. R -- n has preached, and collected one
hundred pounds; and I believe seven or eight hundred pounds more are
subscribed. The truly noble Lord D -- h espouses the cause most heartily, and
his Majesty is become a contributor. The King of kings, and Lord of all Lords,
will bless them for it Mr. Occum and Mr. Whitaker came afterward to Scotland,
and preached at Edinburgh and Glasgow, where they got very considerable
contributions; particularly from Mr. Sprewll's family in Glasgow, and from the
Rev. Mr. M'Culloch at Cambuslang.
.

June 19, we find him at Collam near Bristol, from whence* he writes, As my
feverish heat continues, and the weather is too wet to travel, I have complied
with the advice of friends, and have commenced a hot-well water drinker twice a
day. However, twice this week, at six in the morning, I have been enabled to
call thirsty souls to come and drink of the water of life freely. Tomorrow
evening, God willing, the call is to be repeated, and again on Sunday.

He was also at Bath and Bristol in the month of November this year. At Bristol
he preached to a very crowded auditory (though the weather was exceeding bad)
and administered the sacrament; and at Bath he preached to the most numerous
assembly of the nobility he had ever seen attend there.

In the month of January 1767, he wrote a recommendatory preface to a new
edition of Bunyan's works; which is inserted with his Tracts in vol. IV. and
March 20, he was called to open Lady Huntingdon's new chapel at Brighthelmstone
in Sussex, when he preached on 2 Peter iii.18.

After an excursion to Norwich, in April 1767, he says, I fear my spring and
summer fever is returning. If so, my intended plan of operations will be much
contracted. But future things belong to Him who orders all things well Letter
MCCCLII.
.

Yet the very month we find him preaching at Rodborough, Gloucester, and
Haverford-West in Wales; from whence he writes, May 31, Thousands and thousands
attended by eight in the morning. Life and light seemed to fly all around. On
Tuesday, God willing, I am to preach at Woodstock; on Friday at Pembroke; here
again next Sunday by eight, and then for England Letter MCCCLVII.
And when he returned to Gloucester, June 10, "Blessed be God," says he, I am
got on this side the Welsh mountains. Blessed be God, I have been on the other
side. What a scene last Sunday! What a cry for more of the bread of life; but I
was quite worn down Letter MCCCLIX.
.

September 11. he was at Leeds, having preached at Northampton and Sheffield in
the way; and September 20, at Newcastle, from whence he writes, Letters
MCCCLXIV, MCCCLXV, MCCCLXVI, MCCCLXIX.
I have now a blessed Methodist field-street-preaching plan before me. This
afternoon in the Castle-Garth, tomorrow for Sunderland, then to Yarm, etc. --
I have been enabled to preach in the street at several places, and hope to go
to Gesborough, Whitby, Scarborough, New-Malton, York, Leeds, Liverpool,
Chester, Manchester, etc. Again (from Thirsk, September 28) My body feels much
fatigued in traveling; comforts in the soul overbalance. -- And (Leeds,
October 3) Field and street preaching has rather bottered than hurt bodily my
health.

This winter his negociations about the intended college at Bethesda, came to
an issue. A memorial, addressed to his Majesty, was put into the hands of the
clerk of the privy council, setting forth the great utility of a college in
that place to the inhabitants of the southern provinces, and praying that a
charter might be granted upon the plan of the college at New Jersey. This
memorial was by him transmitted to the Lord President, and by his Lordship
referred to the consideration of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom also a
draft of an intended charter was presented by the Earl of D -- h. Upon which an
epistolary correspondence ensued betwixt the Archbishop and Mr. Whitefield; the
sum of which was, the Archbishop put the draft of the charter in the hands of
the Lord P. who promised to consider it and gave it as his opinion, that the
head of the college ought to be a member of the Church of English of That this
was a qualification not to be dispensed with. And also that the public prayers
should not be extempore ones, but the liturgy of the church, or some other
settled and established form. Mr. Whitefield answered, he could not agree to
either of these restrictions, because the greatest part of the Orphan-house
collections and contributions came from dissenters; and because he had
frequently declared the intended college was to be founded upon a broad bottom,
and no other. This, says he, I judged I was sufficiently warranted to do, from
the known, long established, mild, and uncoercive genius of the English
government; also from your grace's moderation toward protestant dissenters;
from the unconquerable attachment of the Americans to toleration-principles, as
well as from the avowed habitual feelings and sentiments of my own heart. This
being the case, -- and as your grace by your silence seems to be like-minded
with the Lord P -- t; and as your grace's and his lordship's influence will
undoubtedly extend itself to others, I would beg leave, after returning all due
acknowledgments, to inform your grace that I intend troubling your grace and
his lordship no more about this so long depending concern. As it has pleased
the great head of the church in some degree to renew my bodily strength, I
purpose now to renew my feeble efforts, and turn the charity into a more
generous, and consequently into a more extensively useful channel. I have no
ambition to be looked upon as the founder of a college; but I would fain act
the part of an honest man, a disinterested Minister of Jesus Christ, and a
truly catholic, moderate presbyter of the church of England See his Works, vol.
III. page 472-484, where the steps he took in this affair are more fully
narrated in a letter to Governor Wright -- and Letter, MCCCLXXVII, in which he
complains to his intimate friend Mr. K -- n, None but God knows what a concern
lies upon me now in respect to Bethesda. As another voyage, perhaps, may be the
issue and result of all at last, I would beg you, and my dear Mr. Hervey, to
let me have my papers, and letters, that I may revise and dispose of them in a
proper manner. This can do no hurt, come life, or come death.
.

Accordingly he resolved, in the mean time, to add a public academy to the
Orphan-house, like what was done at Philadelphia, before its college charter
was granted; and to wait for a more favorable opportunity of making fresh
application, for a charter upon a broad bottom.

October 28. he preached at the Tabernacle, to the Society for promoting
Religious Knowledge among the poor, when the collection amounted to above a
hundred pounds, (about four times as much as usual) and eighty persons became
new subscribers.

His text was, Luke xi.2. "Thy kingdom come." The place was quite full, and
many went away for want of room. A great number of dissenting Ministers were
present; probably, more than ever before met to hear a church Clergyman preach.
He afterward dined with the Ministers and whole company at Draper's-Hall,
where he was treated with great respect. All was very harmonious, and gave him
great pleasure in reflection Letter MCCCLXXV.
.

In the beginning of the year 1768, six pious students were expelled from
Edmund-Hall, in Oxford, for using extempore prayer, reading and singing hymns,
and exhorting one another in private religious meetings. Upon this occasion,
Mr. Whitefield wrote his letter to Dr. Durell, Vicechancellor of the university
See his works, vol. IV.
.

In the summer, he went once more to Edinburgh, where his Orphan-house-Park
congregations were as large, attentive, and affectionate as ever Letters
MCCCLXXXVII, LXXXVIII.
.

August 3. soon after his return to London, Mrs. Whitefield was attacked with
an inflammatory fever, and the 9th of August she died. The 14th of the month he
preached her funeral sermon, from Romans viii.20: and September 12. he writes, I
have been in hopes of my own departure. Through hard riding, and frequent
preaching, I have burst a vein. The flux is in a great measure stopped, but
rest and quietness are strictly enjoined. We were favored with glorious
Gospel-gales this day fortnight, and several preceding days, at opening good
Lady Huntingdon's chapel, and place of pious education in Wales From his
Memorandum Book. August 24, 1768, Opened good Lady Huntingdon's Chapel and
College, in the parish of Talgarth, Brecknockshire, South Wales, Preached from
Exodus xx.24. 'In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and
I will bless thee.' Aug. 25. Gave an exhortation to the students in the College
chapel from Luke i.15. 'He shall be great in the sight of the Lord.' Sunday
August 28. Preached in the court before the College, (the congregation
consisting of some thousands) from 1 Cor. iii.11. 'Other foundation can no man
lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
.

September 26. he writes concerning his friend and fellow laborer Mr.
Middleton: He is now made perfectly whole. He was buried from the Tabernacle
last Wednesday evening, and a subscription is opened for his four orphans. In
the midst of his torturing pains, being asked by his daughter, How he was? He
answered, 'A heaven upon earth.' Soon afterward he fell asleep in Jesus Letter
MCCCXCVII.
.

From his letters dated in November and December, it appears he was in a very
poor state of health, yet still continued to preach, as often as he was able.

Bristol, November 12. Last night, I hope, the Redeemer manifested forth his
glory. Friday evening, and the following Sunday, I shall preach at Bath. In
three weeks I expect to reach London, except called before that period, to
reside at the New Jerusalem. The pleasing prospect lies day and night open
before me. Letter MCCCXCVIII.


Next spring, 1769, he seems to have recovered a little; for we find him
preaching more frequently. It gave him great pleasure to see some more of the
nobility joined to Lady H -- n's society. Some more coronets, I hear, are
likely to be laid at the Redeemer's feet. They glitter gloriously when set in,
and surrounded with a crown of thorns Letter MCCCCIX.
.

In the month of May he preached at Kingswood, Bristol, Bradford, From,
Chippenham, Rodborough, Castlecomb, Dursley. But deferred his western circuit
on account of the opening the Chapel at Tunbridge Letter MCCCCXIII.
.

July 23, 1769, he opened Lady Huntingdon's New Chapel at Tunbridge Wells.
Preached from Genesis xxviii.17. This is none other but the house of God, and this
is the gate of heaven. In the evening, the congregation being too large to be
contained in the chapel, he preached out of doors, from a mount in the court
before the chapel; after which he gave a general exhortation; and next day
administered the sacrament, and preached from 1 Thessalonians. ii.11, 12.

Now he seriously began to prepare for another voyage; and in the beginning of
September he embarked the seventh and last time for America, in the Friendship,
Capt. Ball. I am comforted on every side. A civil Captain and passengers. All
willing to attend on divine worship, and to hear religious things Letter
MCCCCXXV.
.

CHAP. XX. From his last embarking for AMERICA, to his Death, September 30,
1770.
MR. Whitefield was detained near a month in the Downs by contrary winds One
ship was lost, but the passengers escaped in the boat. Letter MCCCCXXX.
; but he improved his time, as usual, in writing many excellent letters,
preaching on board; and sometimes came ashore and preached both at Deal and
Ramsgate.

The following extract of Mr. Whitefield's Manuscript Journal, relative to this
period, cannot be unacceptable.

Saturday, Sept. 2. Had a most awful parting season at Tottenham-Court-Chapel
sacrament, last Sunday morning, the sermon from Genesis xxviii. 12. And the same
at Tabernacle (which was more than full) on Wednesday morning at seven o'clock.
This day dined at my worthy, fast, and tried friend Mr. Keen's; and having
comfortably settled and left all my outward concerns in his hands, I took an
affectionate leave, and in company with some dear friends, this evening reached
Gravesend; where others met us. We supped and conversed together in some
degree, I trust, like persons who hoped, ere long, to sit down together at the
marriage feast of the supper of the Lamb. -- Hasten, O Lord, that wished for
time!

Sunday, September 3. Preached this morning at the Methodist Tabernacle from
John xiii. verse 32. The congregation was not very large. But God gave me great
freedom of speech, and made it indeed a house of God, and gate of Heaven. In
the afternoon I preached in the marketplace from Genesis iii. verse 13. to a much
larger, but not more devout auditory. In the out-skirts, as might naturally be
expected, some were a little noisy, but a great body was very attentive, and I
was enabled to lift up my voice like a trumpet. The remainder of the evening
was spent as the night before, with my christian London friends; who with me,
less than the least of all, exceedingly rejoiced at the opportunity of a
parting street-market-place preaching, where, I trust, some pennyless bankrupt
sinners were made willing to buy Gospel wine and milk, without money, and
without price. -- May the great day show that this hope was not altogether
ill-grounded!

Monday, September 4. Had my dear christian friends on board to breakfast with
me this morning. Conversation was sweet, but parting was bitter. 'What mean you
(said the Apostle) to weep and break my heart?' However, through infinite
mercy, I was helped to bear up, and after their departure the Divine Presence
made up the loss of all, even with new creature comforts. Lord, if this Divine
Presence go not with, and accompany me all the way, for thy infinite mercies
sake, suffer me not to go one step farther.

"But I believe thy promise Lord,
Oh! help my unbelief.
Tuesday, September 5. The Captain not coming down as was expected, we did not
weigh anchor till this morning's ebb.

The winds being contrary, and the weather hazy, we did not arrive in the Downs
till the Friday following. Interim, I had the opportunity of conversing a
little with the pilot, and steerage passengers. All attended divine worship
very orderly, and thanked me for my offer of lending them books, and giving
them what assistance lay in my power toward making their voyage comfortable.
All seemed thankful, and the pilot parted with tears in his eyes. -- May the
great, and never-failing pilot, the Almighty Jesus, renew us, and take us all
into his holy protection, and then all must necessarily end in our safe arrival
into the haven of eternal rest!

Tuesday, September 12. Preached last Sunday morning to my little flock on
board, and was most agreeably surprised today, with a kind unexpected visit
from the Rev. Dr. Gibbons. His discourse was very friendly and devout.

Wednesday, September 13. I went ashore and attended on an ordination
solemnity, at the dissenting meeting. Several Ministers officiated. Several
very important questions were asked, and answered before, and a solemn charge
given after, imposition of hands. But the prayer put up in the very act of
laying on of hands, by Dr. Gibbons, was so affecting, and the looks and
behavior of those that joined so serious and solemn, that I hardly know when I
was more struck under any one's ministration. The ordination being over, at the
desire of the Ministers, and Gentlemen, I went and dined with them. Our
conversation was edifying. And being informed, that many were desirous to hear
me preach, I willingly complied, and I trust some seed was sown the same
evening at Deal, which, by God's heavenly blessing, will spring up to life
eternal. The people of Deal seemed very civil, and some came to me who had not
forgotten my preaching to them, and their deceased friends and parents,
thirty-two years ago.

Friday, September 14. 15. I had received most pressing invitations to visit
Ramsgate, many weeks ago. These were now repeated by many of that place, who
came to the ordination at Deal; so there was no resisting their importunity. We
reached Ramsgate about two, took some refreshment, and there I preached about
four, not to a very large, but an attentive and affected auditory. This I did
also the morning following; and was most agreeable entertained with the
discourse, and good memory of one, in particular, who had been my
fellow-passenger, and frequent hearer many years ago, in the Wilmington,
Captain Darling, bound to Piscataway in New England. The people's behavior
here was so undissembledly generous, frank, genteel, and christian, that I know
not where I have been more pleased and delighted. Being quite uneasy, lest by
staying longer I should be unready, if the wind should turn favorable, I went
early on Sunday morning to Deal, and from thence immediately on board, and
preached in the afternoon. This morning came a surreptitious copy of my
Tabernacle Farewell Sermon, taken, as the shorthand writer professes,
verbatim, as I spoke it. But surely he is mistaken. The whole is so
injudiciously paragraphed, and so wretchedly unconnected, that I owe no thanks
to the misguided, though it may be well-meant zeal of the writer and publisher,
be they who they will. But such conduct is an unavoidable tax upon popularity.
And all that appear for Jesus Christ, and his blessed Gospel, much like their
master, expect to suffer from the false fire of professing friends, as well as
secret malice of avowed enemies. However, if any one sentence is blessed to the
conviction of one sinner, or the edification of any individual saint, I care
not what becomes of my character, though I would always pray to be preserved
from bringing upon myself, or others, needless, unnecessary contempt.

Monday, September 25. Weighed anchor last Tuesday morning, with a small
favorable gale and fine weather. So many ships which had lain in the Downs,
moving at the same time, and gently gliding by us, together with the prospect
of the adjacent shore, made a most agreeable scene. But it proved only a very
transient one. For by that time we got to Fairlee, the wind backened, clouds
gathered, very violent gales succeeded, and for several days we were so tossed,
that after coming over against Brighthelmstone, the Captain rightly judging,
turned back, (as did many other ships) and anchored over against New Rumsey and
Dungeness. -- Lord, in thine own time, thou will give the winds a commission to
carry us forward toward our desired port.

At last they got out of the Channel, and on the 30th of November, arrived at
Charlestown, in South Carolina. It had been a dangerous and trying passage;
yet, on his arrival, he found himself in better health than at the end of any
voyage he had made for several years; and the same day that he came ashore, he
preached at Charlestown, where his reception was as hearty, or heartier than
ever. For the last week (November 1769) we were beating about our port, within
sight of it, and confined for two days in five-fathom-hole, just over the bar.
A dangerous situation, as the wind blew hard, and our ship, like a young
christian, for want of more ballast, would not obey the helm. But through
infinite mercy, on November 30, a pilot-boat came and took us safe ashore to
Charlestown, after being on board almost thirteen weeks. Friends received me
most cordially. -- Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his mercies.
Oh, to begin to be a christian, and Minister of Jesus. Memorandum Book, and
Letter MCCCCXLI.


Here Mr. Wright came to meet him, and acquainted him that all was in great
forwardness at Bethesda. And when he arrived there, he writes, January, 1770.
Every thing exceeds my most sanguine expectations. And the increase of this
colony is almost incredible Letters MCCCCXLV, MCCCCXLVI. Two wings were added
to the Orphan-house, for the accommodation of students; of which, Governor
Wright, condescended to lay the foundation, March 25, 1769. See vol. III.
.

The great regard which the colony of Georgia thought themselves bound to
express toward Mr. Whitefield, at this time particularly, appears from the
following authentic papers.

Commons House of Assembly, Monday, January 29, 1770.
Mr. Speaker reported, that he with the House having waited on the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield, in consequence of his invitation, at the Orphan-house Academy;
heard him preach a very suitable and pious sermon on the occasion; and with
great pleasure observed the promising appearance of improvement, toward the
good purposes intended, and the decency and propriety of behavior of the
several residents there; and were sensibly affected, when they saw the happy
success which has attended Mr. Whitefield's indefatigable zeal for promoting
the welfare of the province in general, and the Orphan-house in particular.
Ordered, That this report be printed in the Gazette.

John Simpson, Clerk.

Extract from the Georgia Gazette. Savannah, January 31, 1770. Last Sunday, his
Excellency the Governor, Council, and Assembly, having been invited by the Rev.
Mr. George Whitefield, attended at divine service in the Chapel of the
Orphan-house Academy, where prayers were read by the Rev. Mr. Ellington, and a
very suitable sermon was preached by the Rev. Mr. Whitefield from Zechariah iv.
10. 'For who has despised the day of small things?' to the general
satisfaction of the auditory; in which he took occasion to mention the many
discouragements he met with, well known to many there, in carrying on this
institution for upwards of thirty years past, and the present promising
prospect of its future and more extensive usefulness. After divine service, the
company were very politely entertained with a handsome and plentiful dinner;
and were greatly pleased to see the useful improvements made in the house, the
two additional wings for apartments for students, one hundred and fifty feet
each in length, and other lesser buildings, in so much forwardness, and the
whole executed with taste, and in a masterly manner; and being sensible of the
truly generous and disinterested benefactions derived to the province through
his means, they expressed their gratitude in the most respectful terms.

Soon after this he writes from Charlestown, February 10. Through mercy, I
enjoy a greater share of bodily health than I have known for many years. I am
now enabled to preach almost every day. Blessed be God, all things are in great
forwardness at Bethesda. I have conversed with the Governor, concerning an Act
of Assembly, for the establishment of the intended Orphan-house College See a
paper of College Rules, at the end of vol. III. which was found written with
his own hand, and in which he orders the following authors in divinity to be
read: Henry, Doddrige, Guyse, Burkitt, Willison, Professor Frank, Boston,
Jenks, Hervey, Hall, Edwards, Trapp, Pool, Warner, Leighton, Pearson, Owen,
Bunyan. And the Homilies to be read publicly by rotation. He intended to
publish a new edition of the Homilies, the preface to which (with prayers on
several occasions) is to be seen in vol. IV.
. He most readily consents. I have shown him a draught, which he much approves
of; and all will be finished at my return from the northward. In the mean while
the buildings will be carried on. He adds, Letter MCCCXLVII.
Since my being in Charlestown, I have shown the draught to some persons of
great eminence and influence. They highly approve of it, and willingly consent
to be some of the Wardens. Near twenty are to be of Georgia, and about six of
this place; one of Philadelphia; one of New York; one of Boston; three of
Edinburgh; two of Glasgow; and six of London. Those of Georgia and South
Carolina, are to be qualified; the others, to be only honourary corresponding
Wardens.

His letters of a later date are in the same strain, full of expressions of
gratitude to Providence for the good state of his health Letters MCCCCL, LVII,
LIX, LX.
, and how exceedingly happy he was at Bethesda Letters MCCCCXLVIII, LII, LIVE.
. And of his purpose, (after he had traveled in the northern parts all summer)
to return to his beloved Bethesda, late in the fall Letter MCCCCLIX.
. But this event never happened.

From Philadelphia, May 24 Letter MCCCCLX.
, he writes, I have now been here near three weeks. People of all ranks flock
as much as ever. Impressions are made on many, and, I trust they will abide.
Notwithstanding I preach twice on the Lord's day, and three or four times a
week besides, yet I am rather better than I have been for many years.

Again, Philadelphia, June 14, Letter MCCCCLXI.
This leaves me just returned from a one hundred and fifty miles circuit, in
which, blessed be God, I have been enabled to preach every day. So many
invitations are sent from various quarters, that I know not which way to turn
myself.

And, New York, June 30, Letter MCCCCLXII.
Next week I purpose to go to Albany. From thence, perhaps, to the Oneida
Indians. There is to be a very large Indian congress. Mr. Kirkland accompanies
me. He is a truly christian Minister and Missionary. Every thing possible
should be done to strengthen his hands. -- Perhaps I may not see Georgia till
Christmas. In his memorandum-book is the following remark: July 2, 1770. Sailed
from New York with Mr. Kirkland, and two kind old friends, and arrived at
Albany, July 6. Was kindly received by Mr. Bays and Domine Westaloe. Preached
the same evening, and went the next day to see the Cohoes Falls, twelve miles
from Albany. O thou wonder-working God! Preached twice on the Lord's day at
Albany, and the next day at Schenectady, and was struck at the delightful
^ation of the place. Heard aftewards that the word ran, and was glorified both
there and at Albany. Grace, Grace!

And again, from New York, July 29, he writes, Letter MCCCCLXIII.
During this month I have been above a five hundred miles circuit, and have
been enabled to preach and travel through the heat every day. The congregations
have been very large, attentive, and affected, particularly at Albany,
Schenectady, Great Bamington, Norfolk, Salisbury, Sharon, Smithfield,
Powkeepsie, Fish-Kill, New-Rumbart, New-Windsor, and Pecks-Kill. -- Invitations
crowd upon me both from Ministers and people, from many, many quarters. -- I
hope to set out for Boston in two or three days.

When he was at Boston, September 17, he writes to Mr. W -- t at Bethesda,
Letter MCCCCLXIV.
Fain would I contrive to come by Captain Souder from Philadelphia, but people
are so importunate for my stay in these parts, that I fear it will be
impracticable. -- Two or three evenings ago, I was taken in the night with a
violent lax, attended with reaching and shivering -- but through mercy I am
restored, and tomorrow morning hope to begin again. -- I hope it has been well
with you, and all my family; hoping, ere long to see you, etc.

And lastly, to his dear friend Mr. R -- K -- n in London. Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, Sept. 23, Letter MCCCCLXV.
By this time I thought to be moving southward; but never was greater
importunity used to detain me longer in these northern parts. Poor New England
is much to be pitied: Boston people most of all. How grossly misrepresented! --
You will see by the many invitations, what a door is opened for preaching the
everlasting Gospel. I was so ill on Friday, that I could not preach, though
thousands were waiting to hear. Well! the day of release will shortly come; but
it does not seem yet: for by riding sixty miles I am better, and hope to preach
here to morrow. -- If spared so long, I hope to see Georgia about Christmas. --
Still pray and praise. -- Hoping to see all dear friends about the time
proposed, and earnestly desiring a continued interest in all your prayers, etc.

From the 17th the 20th of Sept. he preached daily at Boston; Sept. 20, at
Newton: Sept. 21, he set out from Boston upon a tour to the eastward, pretty
much indisposed: preached at Portsmouth and New Hampshire, Sept. 23: And from
that to the 29th, continued preaching every day; thrice at Portsmouth, once at
Kittery, and once at Old-York. Saturd^^ morning, Sept. 29, he set out for
Boston; but before he came to Newbury-Port, where he had engaged to preach next
morning, he was importuned to preach by the way, at Exeter. At this last place
he preached in the open air, to accommodate the multitudes that came to hear
him, no house being able to contain them. He continued his discourse near two
hours, was greatly fatigued, and in the afternoon set out for Newbury-Port,
where he arrived that evening; went early to bed, it being Saturday night,
intending to preach the next day. He awaked several times in the night, and
complained much of a difficulty of breathing. At six o'clock on the Lord's day
morning, he expired in a fit of the asthma.

Mr. Richard Smith, who accompanied Mr. Whitefield from England to America the
last time, and in his journeyings when there, to the time of his death, has
given a particular account of his death and interment, which it may not be
improper to insert.

On Saturday, Sept. 29, 1770, Mr. Whitefield rode from Portsmouth to Exeter
(fifteen miles) in the morning, and preached there to a very great multitude in
the fields. It is remarkable, that before he went out to preach that day,
(which proved to be his last sermon) Mr. Clarkson, senior, observing him more
uneasy than usual, said to him, 'Sir, you are more fit to go to bed than to
preach.' To which Mr. Whitefield answered, 'True, Sir:' but turning aside, he
clasped his hands together, and, looking up, spoke, 'Lord Jesus, I am weary in
thy work, but not of thy work. If I have not yet finished my course, let me go
and speak for thee once more in the fields, seal thy truth, and come home and
die.' The text he preached from was, 2 Cor. xiii. 5. 'Examine yourselves,
whether ye be is the faith; prove your own selves: know ye not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?' He dined at Captain
Gillman's. After dinner, Mr. Whitefield and Mr. Parsons rode to Newbury. I did
not get there till two hours after them. I found them at supper. I asked Mr.
Whitefield how he felt himself after his journey. He said, 'he was tired,
therefore he supped early, and would go to bed.' He eat a very little supper,
talked but little, asked Mr. Parsons to discharge the table, and perform family
duty; and then retired up stairs. He said, 'that he would sit and read till I
came to him,' which I did as soon as possible, and found him reading in the
Bible, with Dr. Watts's Psalms lying open before him. He asked me for some
water gruel, and took about half his usual quantity, and kneeling down by the
bedside, closed the evening with prayer. After a little conversation, he went
to rest and slept till two in the morning, when he awoke me, and asked for a
little cider; be drank about a wine glass full. I asked him how he felt, for he
seemed to pant for breath. He told me, 'His asthma was coming on him again; I
must have two or three days rest* Two or three days riding, without preaching,
would set me up again.' Soon afterward he asked me to put the window up a
little higher, (though it was half up all night) for, said he, 'I cannot
breathe, but I hope I shall be better by and by; a good pulpit-sweat today may
give me relief; I shall be better after preaching.' I said to him, I wished he
would not preach so often. He replied, 'I had rather wear out, than rust out.'
I then told him, I was afraid he took cold in preaching yesterday. He said, 'He
believed he had;' and th^^ sat up in the bed and prayed, that God would be
pleased to bless his preaching where he had been, and also bless his preaching
that day, that more souls might be brought to Christ, and prayed for direction,
whether he should winter at Boston, or hasten to the southward: prayed for a
blessing on his Bethesda College, and his dear family there; for Tabernacle and
Chapel congregations, and all his connections on the other side the water, and
then laid himself down to sleep again. This was nigh three o'clock. At a
quarter past four he waked, and said, 'My asthma, my asthma is coming on, I
wish I had not given out word to preach at Haverhill on Monday; I don't think I
shall be able: but, I shall see what today will bring forth. If I am no better
tomorrow, I will take a two or three days ride.' He then desired me to warm
him a little gruel, and in breaking the firewood, I waked Mr. Parsons; who
thinking I knocked for him, rose and came in. He went to Mr. Whitefield's
bedside, and ^sked him how he felt himself. He answered, 'I am almost
suffocated, I can scarce breathe: my asthma quite choaks me.' I was then not a
little surprised, to hear how quick and with what difficulty he drew his
breath. He got out of bed, and went to the open window for air. This was
exactly at five o'clock. I went to him, and for about the space of five
minutes, I saw no danger, only that he had a great difficulty in breathing, as
I had often seen before. Soon afterward he turned himself to me, and said, 'I
am dying.' I said, I hope not, Sir. He ran to the other window panting for
breathing, but could get no relief. It was agreed I should go for Dr. Sawyer;
and on my coming back, I saw death on his face, and he again said, 'I am
dying.' His eyes were fixed, his under lip drawing inward every time he drew
breath; he went toward the window, and he offered him some warm wine with
Lavender drops, which he refused. I persuaded him to sit down in the chair, and
have his cloak on; he consented by a sign, but could not speak. I then offered
him the glass of warm wine; he took half of it, but it seemed as if it would
have stopped his breath entirely. In a little time he brought up a considerable
quantity of phlegm and wind. I then began to have some small hopes. Mr. Parsons
said, he thought Mr. Whitefield breathed more freely than he did, and would
recover. I said, no, Sir, he is certainly dying. I was continually employed in
taking the phlegm out of his mouth with a handkerchief, and bathing his temples
with drops, rubbing his wrists, etc. to give him relief, if possible; but all
in vain, his hands and feet were cold as clay. When the Doctor came in, and saw
him in the chair leaning on my breast, he felt his pulse, and said, 'He is a
dead man.' Mr. Parsons said* 'I do not believe it, you must do something
Doctor.' He said, 'I cannot; he is now near his last breath.' And indeed so it
was, for he fetched but one gasp, and stretched out his feet, and breathed no
more. This was exactly at six o'clock. We continued rubbing his legs and hands
and feet with warm cloths, and bathed him with spirits for some time, but all
in vain. I then put him into a warm bed, the Doctor standing by, and often
raised him upright, continued rubbing him and putting spirits to his nose for
an hour, till all hopes w^ ^e. The people came in crowds to see him; I ^ed the
Doctor to shut the door.

The Rev. Mr. Parsons, at whose house my dear Master died, sent for Captain
Fetcomb, and Mr. Boadman, and others of his Elders and Deaco^ and they took the
whole care of the burial upon themselves, prepared the vault, and sent and
invited the bearers. Many Ministers of all pers^^sions came to the house of the
Rev. Mr. Parsons where several of them gave a very particular account of their
first awakening under his ministry, several years ago, and also of many in
their congregations, that to their knowledge, under God, owed their conversion
wholly to his coming among them, often repeating the blessed seasons they had
enjoyed under his preaching: and all said, that this last visit was attended
with more power than any other, and that all opposition fell before him. Then
one and another of them would pity and pray for his dear Tabernacle and Chapel
congregations, and it was truly affecting to hear them bemoan America and
England's loss. Thus they continued for two hours conversing about his great
usefulness, and praying that God would scatter his gifts and drop his mantle
among them. When the corpse was placed at the foot of the pulpit, close to the
vault, the Rev. Mr. Daniel Rogers made a very affecting prayer, and openly
confessed, that under God, he owed his conversion to the labors of that dear
Man of God, whose precious remains now lay before them. Then he cried out, 'O
my father, my father!' then stopped and wept, as though his heart would break,
and the people weeping all through the place. Then he recovered, and finished
his prayer and sat down and wept. Then one of the Deacons gave out that hymn,
'Why do we mourn departing friends?' Some of the people weeping, some singing,
and so on alternately. The Rev. Mr. Jewel preached a funeral discourse, and
made an affectionate address to his brethren to lay to heart the death of that
useful man of God; begging that he and they might be upon their watchtower,
and endeavor to follow his blessed example. The corpse was then put into the
vault, and all concluded with a short prayer, and dimission of the people, who
went weeping through the streets to their respective places of abode.

The melancholy news of Mr. Whitefield's death reached London on Monday,
November 5, 1770, by the Boston Gazette, and by three letters from different
persons at Boston, to his friend Mr. Keen, who also by the same post received
two of his own handwriting, written in health: one seven, and the other five
days before his death. Mr. Keen had the melancholy event notified the same
night at the Tabernacle, and the next night at Tottenham-Court Chapel. His next
step was to consider of a proper person to preach the funeral sermon; and
recollecting he had often said to Mr. Whitefield, If you should die abroad,
whom shall we get to preach your funeral sermon? Must it be your old friend the
Rev. Mr. John Wesley? And having received constantly for answer, "He is the
man." Mr. Keen accordingly waited on the Rev. Mr. Wesley on the Saturday
following, and engaged him to preach it on the Lord's day, November 18, which
he did to a very large, crowded, and mournful auditory: many hundreds going
away, who could not possibly get in.

In both the places of worship, the pulpits, etc. were hung with black cloth,
and the galleries with fine black baize. The pulpits had escutcheons placed in
the front, and on each of the houses adjoining, hatchments were put up: The
motto on each was, " M^^ vita Salus and Gloria Christus." Six months exp^d
before the mourning was taken down, and the escutcheons hung up in each vestry.
The hatchments remained twelve months, and when taken down, one was placed in
the Tabernacle, the other in the Chapel over a neat marble monument Mr.
Whitefield had erected for his wife, with room left for a few lines respecting
himself after his decease, as he purposed lying in the same vault had he died
in England. Accordingly the Rev. Mr. Knight of Halifax, in Yorkshire, drew up
the following lines.

In Memory of

The Rev. Mr. George Whitefield, A. M. Chapl^ to the Right Honorable the
Countess of Huntingdon, whose soul made meet for glory, was taken to Immanuel's
bosom, on the 30th of September 1770; and whose bo^y now lies in the silent
grave at Newbury-Port, near Boston, in New England, there deposited in hope of
a joyful resurrection to eternal life and glory.

He was a man eminent in Piety, of a humane, benevolent, and charitable
disposition; his zeal in the cause of God was singular, his labors
indefatigable, and his success in preaching the Gospel remarkable and
astonishing. He departed this life in the 56th year of his age.

And, like his Master, was by some despised;
Like him, by many others, loved and prized:
But theirs shall be the everlasting crown,
Not whom the world, but Jesus Christ will own.
Mr. Whitefield was not full fifty-six years of age at the time of his death:
thirty-four years of which he spent in the ministry. And if life is to be
measured by the greatest activity and enjoyment; such as being always intent
upon some good design, and vigorous in the pursuit of it; filling up every day
with actions of importance, worthy of a man and a christian; seeing much of the
world, and having a constant flow of the most lively affections, both of the
social and religious kind; Mr. Whitefield, in these thirty-four years may be
said to have lived more than most men would do, though their lives were
prolonged for many ages.

CHAP. XXI. A Description of his Person; a Review of his Life; and the most
striking Parts of his Character pointed out.
HIS person was graceful, and well proportioned: his stature rather above the
middle size. His complexion was very fair. His eyes were of a dark blue color,
and small, but sprightly. He had a squint with one of them. Occasioned either
by the ignorance, or the carelessness of the nurse who attended him in the
measles, when he was about four years old. His features were in general good
and regular. His countenance was manly, and his voice exceeding strong; yet
both were softened with an uncommon degree of sweetness. He was always very
clean and neat, and often said pleasantly that a Minister of the Gospel ought
to be without spot. His deportment was decent and easy, without the least
stiffness or formality: and his engaging polite manner made his company
universally agreeable. In his youth he was slender, and moved his body with
great agility to action, suitable to his discourse; but about the fortieth year
of his age, he began to grow corpulent; which however was solely the effect of
his disease, being always, even to a proverb, remarkable for his moderation
both in eating and drinking.

In reviewing the life of this extraordinary man, the following particulars
appear very remarkable.

First, we are struck with his unwearied diligence in the office of religion,
and his conscientious improvement of every portion of his time. Early in the
morning he rose to his Master's work, and all the day long was employed in a
continual succession of different duties. Take a view of his public conduct;
here he is engaged either in preaching the Gospel, in visiting and giving
counsel to the afflicted, in instructing the ignorant, or in celebrating the
praises of God. Observe his behavior in private company; there you hear him
introducing, upon all occasions, and among all sorts of people, discourse that
tended to edification. And if you follow him to his retirements; you see him
writing devout meditations upon the occurrences of the day, or letters to his
christian acquaintance full of piety and zeal. What a gloomy idea must a
stranger to vital piety entertain of a life spent in this manner? He will think
it must have been not only joyless and disgusting, but intolerably burdensome.
Far otherwise did it appear in the experience of this servant of Christ. He
felt the greatest enjoyment when engaged in a constant round of social and
religious duties. In these, whole weeks past away like one day. And when he was
visited with any distress or affliction, preaching, as he tells us himself, was
his catholicon, and prayer his antidote against every trial. The pleasure of a
man of business in successfully pushing his trade, or of a philosopher when
pursuing his favorite studies, may give us some faint conception of the joys
which he felt: yet so ardent were his desires after the heavenly happiness,
that he often longed to finish his work, and to go home to his Savior. Blessed
be God, the prospect of death is pleasant to my soul. I would not live here
always. I want to be gone Letter CCXLVIII.
.

Sometimes it arises from a fear of falling. Sometimes from a prospect of
future labors and sufferings. But these are times when my soul has such
foretastes of God, that I long more eagerly to be with Him; and the prospect of
the happiness which the spirits of just men made perfect now enjoy, often
carries me, as it were, into another world. Letter XCVI.


Again, we are justly surprised at his frequent and fervent preaching under all
the disadvantages of a sickly constitution, and the many fits of illness with
which he was suddenly seized. It must indeed be confessed, that change of air,
frequent traveling on horseback, and the many voyages he made, might
contribute to the preservation of his health and vigor: but when we consider
what exertion of voice was necessary to reach his large congregations; that he
preached generally twice or thrice every day, and often four times on the
Lord's day; but above all, what waste of strength and spirits every sermon must
have cost him, through the earnestness of his delivery; it is truly
astonishing, how his constitution could hold out so long "I preach till I sweat
through and through." Letter XLVI.
.

But there is another circumstance not less remarkable than either of the
former, which is, the uncommon desire that all sorts of people expressed to
attend his preaching; and that not upon the first or second visit only, but at
every succeeding opportunity. Wherever he went, prodigious numbers flocked to
hear him. His congregations often consisted of four or five thousand: in
populous places they swelled to ten, sometimes fourteen: and upon some
occasions the concourse was so great, that they have been computed to be from
twenty to thirty thousand.

It is wonderful to think how he commanded the attention of such multitudes;
with what composure they listened when he began to speak; how they hung upon
his lips, and were often dissolved in tears: and this was the case with persons
of the most hardy and rugged, as well as those of softer tempers.

His eloquence was indeed very great, and of the truest and noblest kind. He
was utterly devoid of all appearance of affectation. He seemed to be quite
unconscious of the talents he possessed. The importance of his subject, and the
regard due to his hearers, engrossed all his concern. He spoke like one who did
not seek their applause, but was concerned for their best interests, and who,
from a principle of unfeigned love, earnestly endeavored to lead them in the
right way. And the effect in some measure corresponded to the design. They did
not amuse themselves with commending his discourses; but being moved and
persuaded by what he said, entered into his views, felt his passions, and were
willing, for that time at least, to comply with all his requests. This was
especially remarkable at his charity sermons Which he preached for a great many
others, beside his own orphans in Georgia. See his life.
, when the worldly-minded were made to part with their money in so generous a
manner, that when they returned to their former temper, they were ready to
think that it had been conjured from them by some inexplicable charm. The
charm, however, was nothing else than the power of his irresistible eloquence,
in which respect it is not easy to say, whether he was ever excelled either in
ancient or modern times.

He had a strong and musical voice, and a wonderful command of it. His
pronunciation was not only proper, but manly and graceful. Nor was he ever at a
loss for the most natural and strong expressions. Yet these in him were but
lower qualities. The grand sources of his eloquence were an exceeding lively
imagination, which made people think they saw what he described; and action
still more lively if possible, by which, while every accent of his voice spoke
to the ear, every feature of his face, every motion of his hands, and every
gesture spoke to the eye; so that the most dissipated and thoughtless found
their attention involuntarily fixed, and the dullest and most ignorant could
not but understand. He had likewise a certain elevation of mind, which raised
him equally above praise and censure, and added great authority to whatever he
said. The natural language of this christian fortitude was, The Lord only knows
how he will be pleased to dispose of me; great afflictions I am sure of having;
and a sudden death, blessed be God, will not be terrible. I know that my
Redeemer lives. I every day long to see Him, that I may be free from the
remainder of sin, and enjoy Him without interruption, forever Letter CCLXXXIII.
.

But what was perhaps the most important of all, he had a heart deeply
exercised in all the social, as well as the pious and religious affections, and
was at the same time most remarkably communicative, by which means he was
peculiarly fitted to awaken like feelings in others, and so sympathize with
every one that had them.

This last, some have thought was the distinguishing part of his character. It
was certainly, however, an eminent part of it. In his journals and letters, an
impartial reader will find instances thereof almost in every page: such as,
lively gratitude to God in the first place, and to all whom God had used as
instruments of good to him: sincere love in dealing so plainly with his
correspondents about the interest of their souls See particularly Letter CXVIII.
: frequent and particular intercession for his friends, his enemies, and all
mankind: great delight in the society of christian acquaintance: many very
sorrowful partings, and joyful meetings with his friends: tender heartedness to
the afflicted: the pleasure in procuring and administering seasonable supply to
the indi^nt: and condescension to people of the lowest rank, to instruct and
converse with them for their good, in as kind and sociable a manner, as if he
had been their brother or intimate friend. These are manifest proofs that he
had a heart easily suseptible of every humane, tender, and compassionate
feeling. And this was certainly a great mean of enabling him so strongly to
affect the hearts of others.

Had his natural talents for oratory been employed in secular affairs, and been
somewhat more improved by the refinements of art, and the embellishments of
erudition, it is probable they would soon have advanced him to distinguished
wealth and renown. But his sole ambition was to serve a crucified Savior, in
the ministry of the Gospel. And being early convinced of the great hurt that
has been done to christianity, by a bigoted spirit, he insisted not upon the
peculiar "I love all that love our Lord Jesus Christ." Letter LVIII.

Oh how do I long to see bigotry and party-zeal taken away, and all the Lord's
servants more knit together. Letter LXVIII.

I wish all names among the saints of God, were swallowed up in that none of
Christian. Letter CXX.

And to the same purpose in many other places.


tenets of a party, but upon the universally-interesting doctrines of Holy
Scripture, concerning the ruin of mankind by sin, and their recovery by divine
Grace; doctrines, the truth of which, he himself had deeply felt. To make men
sensible of the misery of their alienation from God, and of the necessity of
justification by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, of regeneration by the Holy
Spirit, and of a life of devotedness to God, was the principal aim of all his
discourses. "The only Methodism, I desire to know," says he, Preface to the
Journals, in the edition of 1756.
is a holy method of dying to ourselves, and of living to God. By this
description, he was far from intending to confine true religion to the
exercises of devotion. By "living to God" he meant a constant endeavor after
conformity to the Divine Will in all things. For, says he, in another Journals,
May 1739.
place, It is a great mistake to suppose religion consists only in saying our
prayers. Every christian lies under a necessity to have some particular calling
whereby he may be a us^l member of the society to which he belongs. A man is no
farther holy than he is relatively holy: and he only will adorn the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ in all things, who is careful to perform all the civil
offices of life, with a single eye to God's glory, and from a principle of
lively faith in Jesus Christ our Savior. This is the morality which we preach.
He used also to give this definition of true religion, that it is a universal
morality founded upon love of God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Licentiousness and luxury, and all sorts of time-wasting and dissipating
amusements, how fashionable soever, he constantly inveighed against. These were
the topics on which he employed his eloquence.

But not to dwell any longer on his accomplishments as an orator, and the
excellent purposes to which, through the grace of God, he devoted them; one
thing remains to be mentioned, of an infinite higher order than any human
powers whatever: and that is, the power of God, which so remarkably accompanied
the labors of his servant, and without which both Scripture and experience
teach us, that all external means, however excellent, are ineffectual and vain.
It is here Mr. Whitefield is most to be envied, were it lawful to envy any man.
When we consider the multitudes that were not only awakened, but brought under
lasting religious impressions by his ministry; and the multitudes that were
wrought upon in the same manner by the ministry of others excited by his See
Hist. Coll. of the su^ (...) the Gospel. vol. II.
example, both in Great Britain and America, we are naturally led into the same
sentiments with Mr. Wesley in his funeral sermon, What an honor has it
pleased God to put upon his faithful servant! Have we read or heard of any
person since the Apostles, who testified the Gospel of the grace of God,
through so widely extended a space, through so large a part of the habitable
world? Have we read or heard of any person, who called so many thousands, so
many myriads of sinners to repentance. Above all, have we read or heard of any
who has been a blessed instrument in his hand of bringing so many sinners from
darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God?

This excellent character joined to talents so extraordinary, and to labors,
which God was pleased to bless with almost unequalled success, was shaded with
some infirmities. And what else could be expected in the present conditions of
humanity? These have been sufficiently laid open in the preceding Narrative of
his Life. And it ought to be observed, that as there was something very amiable
in the frankness and unreservedness which prevented his concealing them; so
through his openness to conviction, his teachableness, May God reward you for
watching over my soul. It is difficult, I believe, to go through the fiery
trial of popularity and applause, untainted. Letter LXI.

When I am unwilling to be told of my faults, correspond with me no more. If I
know any thing of my heart, I love those most who are most faithful to me in
this respect. Henceforward, dear Sir, I beseech you by the mercies of God in
Christ Jesus, spare me not. Letter LXXXV.

We must be helps to each other on this side eternity. Nothing gives me more
comfort, next to assurance of the eternal continuance of God's love, than the
pleasing reflection of having so many christian friends to watch with my soul.
I wish they would smite me friendly, and reprove me oftener than they do.
Letter CIII.

I rejoice that you begin to know yourself. If possible, satan will make us
think more highly of ourselves than we ought to think. I can tell this by fatal
experience. It is not sudden flashes of joy, but having the humility of Christ
Jesus, that must denominate us christians. If we hate reproof, we are so far
from being true followers of the Lamb of God, that in the opinion of the wisest
of men we are brutish. Letter CXII.

O my dear brother, still continue faithful to my soul; do not hate me in your
heart; in any wise reprove me. Letter CCIV.

You need make no apology for your plain dealing. I love those best who deal
most sincerely with me. Whatever errors I have been, or shall be guilty of in
my ministry, I hope the Lord will show me, and give me grace to amend. Letter
CCXCVIII. See also Letter DCXL.


and his readiness to confess and correct his mistakes, they became still fewer
and smaller, and decreased continually as he advanced in knowledge and
experience.

It would be unjust to his memory not to take notice upon this occasion of that
uniformity of sentiment which runs through all his sermons and writings, after
he was thoroughly enlightened in the truth. Indeed, when he first set out in
the ministry, his youth and inexperience led him into many expressions which
were contrary to sound doctrine, which made many of the sermons he first
printed justly exceptionable; but reading, experience, and a deeper knowledge
of his own heart, convinced him of his errors, and upon all occasions he avowed
his belief of the 39 articles of the Church of England, and the standards of
the Church of Scotland, as expressly founded on the word of God. He loved his
friend, but he would not part with a grain of sacred truth for the brother of
his heart. Thus we see him constrained to write and print against the Arminian
tenets of Mr. John Wesley, whom he loved in the bowels of Christ Jesus. And it
appears from several other tracts in the 4th vol. in his works, that he
neglected no opportunity of stepping forth as a bold champion, in defense of
that faith which was once delivered to the saints.

EXTRACTS from some of the FUNERAL SERMONS which were preached on the Occasion
of his DEATH.
MANY Sermons were preached upon occasion of his death, both in America and
England. From these, though they contain nothing materially different from the
above accounts, yet the reader will probably not be displeased to see the
following extracts; as they not only set the character of Mr. Whitefield in a
variety of lights, but are so many testimonies to it, by witnesses of undoubted
credit, in different parts of the world.

The first was preached by Mr. Parsons, the very day on which he died, Early
next morning Mr. Sherburn of Portsmouth, sent Squire Clarkson and Dr. Haven,
with a message to Mr. Parsons, desiring Mr. Whitefield's remains might be
buried in his own new tomb, at his own expense: and in the evening several
Gentlemen from Boston came to Mr. Parsons, desiring the body might be carried
there. But as Mr. Whitefield had repeatedly desired he might be buried before
Mr. Parsons's pulpit, if he died at Newbury-Port, Mr. Parsons thought himself
obliged to deny both of these requests. The following account of his interment,
is subjoined to his sermon, viz. "October 2, 1770. At one o'clock all the bells
in town were tolled for half an hour, and all the vessels in the harbor gave
their proper signals of mourning. At two o'clock the bells tolled a second
time. At three the bells called to attend the funeral. The Rev. Dr. Samuel
Haven of Portsmouth, the Rev. Messieurs Daniel Rogers of Exeter, Jedediah
Jewet, and James Chandler of Rowley, Moses Parsons of Newbury, and Edward Bass
of Newbury-Port, were pall-bearers. The procession was from the Rev. Mr.
Parsons's of Newbury-Port, where Mr. Whitefield died. Mr. Parsons and his
family together with many other respectable persons followed the corpse in
mourning. The procession was only one mile, and then the corpse was carried
into the Presbyterian church, and placed on the bier in the broad-alley, when
the Rev. Mr. Rogers made a very suitable prayer in the presence of about six
thousand persons, within the walls of the church, while many thousands were on
the outside, not being able to find admittance. Then, the third hymn of the
second book of Dr. Watts's Spiritual Songs was sung by the congregation. After
this, the corpse was put into a new tomb, before Mr. Parsons's pulpit, which
the Gentlemen of the congregation had prepared for that purpose; and before it
was sealed, the Rev. Mr. Jewet gave a suitable exhortation, etc."

In Reverendum Virum GEORGIUM WHITEFIELD, Laboribus sacris olim abundantem;
nunc vero, ut been speratur coelestem et immortalem vitam cum Christo agentem,

EPITAPHIUM. (Auctore Thoma Gibbons, S. T. P.)
Electum et divinum vas, WHITEFIELDE, fuisti
Ingenio pollens, divitiisque sacris:
His opibus populo ^^nge lateque tributis,
Tandem perfrueris laetitia superum
Inque hanc intrasti, Domino plaudente ministrum:
Expertum in multis, assiduumque bonum:
Ecce mei portus, et clara palatia coeli
Deliciis plenis omnia aperta tibi.
Dum matutinam Stellam, quam dulce rubentem!
Vivificos roresque ossa sepulta manent.
ENGLISHED THUS:
"A vessel chosen and divine, replete
"With Nature's gifts and Grace's richer stores,
"Thou Whitefield wast: these through the world dispensed
"In long laborious travels, thou at length
"Have reached the realms of rest, to which thy Lord
"Has welcomed thee with his immense applause.
"All hail, my servant, in thy various trusts
"Found vigilant and faithful: See the ports,
"See the eternal kingdoms of the skies,
"With all their boundless glory, boundless joy
"Opened for thy reception, and thy bliss.
"Mean time, the body in its peaceful cell
"Reposing from its toils, awaits the Star,
"Whose living lustres lead that promised morn,
"Whose vivifying dews thy moulder'd corse
"Shall visit, and immortal life inspire."

from Phil. i. 21. "To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain." And this is
the character he gives of his departed friend.

"Christ became a principle of spiritual life in his soul, while he was an
under-graduate at the University in Oxford. Before his conversion he was a
Pharisee of the Pharisees, as strict as ever Paul was, before God met him on
his way to Damascus, according to his own declaration in his last sermon, which
I heard him preach at Exeter, yesterday. He was, by means of reading, a very
searching, puritanical writer, convinced of the rottenness of all the duties he
had done, and the danger of a self-righteous foundation of hope. When he heard
Christ speak to him in the Gospel, he cried, 'Lord what will thou have me to
do?' And it seems as if, at that time, it had been made known to him that he
was a chosen vessel, to bear the name of Christ Jesus through the British
Nation and her Colonies: to stand before Kings and Nobles, and all sorts of
people, to preach Christ, and him crucified. From that time the dawns of
salvation had living power in his heart, and he had an ardent desire to furnish
himself for the Gospel ministry. To this end, besides the usual studies at the
college, he gave himself to reading the Holy Scriptures, to meditation and
prayer; and particularly, he read Mr. Henry's Annotations on the Bible, upon
his knees before God.

"Since my first acquaintance with him, which is about thirty years ago, I have
highly esteemed him, as an excellent Christian, and an eminent Minister of the
Gospel. An heart so bent for Christ, with such a sprightly active genius, could
not admit of his stated fixed residence, in one place, as the pastor of a
particular congregation; and therefore, he chose to itinerate from place to
place, and from one country to another; which indeed was much better suited to
his talents, than a fixed abode would have been. I often considered him as an
angel flying through the midst of heaven, with the everlasting Gospel, to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth; for he preached the uncorrupted word
of God, and gave solemn warnings against all corruptions of the Gospel of
Christ. When he came the first time to Boston, the venerable Dr. Coleman, (with
whom I had a small acquaintance) condescended to write to me, "That the
wonderful man was come, and they had had a week of Sabbaths; that his zeal for
Christ was extraordinary; and yet he recommended himself to his many thousand
hearers, by his engagedness for holiness and souls." I soon had opportunity to
observe that wherever he flew, like a flame of fire, his ministry gave a
general alarm to all sorts of people, though before, they had, for a long time,
been amazingly sunk down into dead formality. It was then a time in
New England, that real Christians generally had slackened their zeal for
Christ, and fallen into a remiss and careless frame of spirit: and hypocritical
professors were sunk into a deep sleep of carnal security. Ministers and their
congregations, seemed to be at ease. But his preaching appeared to be from the
heart, though too many, who spoke the same things, preached as if it were
indifferent, whether they were received or rejected. We are convinced that he
believed the message he brought us, to be of the last importance. Nevertheless,
as soon as there was time for reflection, the enemies of Christ began to cavil,
and hold up some of his sallies, as if they were unpardonable faults. By such
means he met with a storm as tempestuous as the troubled sea, that casts up
mire and dirt. Some of every station were too fond of their old way of
formality, to part with it, for such a despised cause as living religion. But
the Spirit of Christ set home the message of the Lord upon the consciences of
some, and shook them off from their false hopes: but many began to find fault,
and some to write against his evangelizing through the country, while others
threatened firebrarnds, arrows, and death. Yet God gave room for his intense
zeal to operate, and sit objects appeared, wherever he went, to engage him in
preaching Christ, and him crucified.

"In his repeated visits to America, when his services had almost exhausted his
animal spirits, and his friends were ready to cry, Spare thyself, his hope of
serving Christ, and winning souls to him, animated and engaged him to run
almost any risque. Neither did he ever cross the Atlantic on an itinerating
visitation, without visiting his numerous brethren here, to see how religion
prospered among them: and we know that his labors have been unwearied among
us, and to the applause of all his hearers; and, through the infinite mercy of
God, his labors have sometimes been crowned with great success, in the
conversion of sinners, and the edification of saints. And though he often
returned from the pulpit very feeble after public preaching, yet his engaging
sweetness of conversation, changed the suspicions of many, into passionate love
and friendship.

"In many things his example is worthy of imitation; and, if in any thing he
exceeded, or came short, his integrity, zeal for God, and love to Christ and
his Gospel, rendered him, in extensive usefulness, more than equal to any of
his brethren. In preaching here, and through most parts of America, he has been
in labors more abundant, approving himself a Minister of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by the Holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as having
nothing, yet possessing all things. And God that comforted those that are cast
down, has often comforted us by his coming; and not by his coming only, but by
the consolation wherewith he was comforted in us, so that we could rejoice the
more.

"His popularity exceeded all that ever I knew; and, though the asthma was
sometimes an obstruction to him, his delivery and entertaining method was so
inviting to the last, that it would command the attention of the vast
multitudes of his hearers. An apprehension of his concern to serve the Lord
Jesus Christ, and do good to the souls of men, drew many thousands after him,
who never embraced the doctrines he taught. He had something peculiar in his
manner, expressive of sincerity in all he delivered, that it constrained the
most abandoned to think, he believed what he said was not only true, but of the
last importance to souls; and by adapted texts adduced, and instances of the
grace of God related agreeable thereto, he often surprised his most judicious
hearers.

"His labors extended not only to New England, and many other colonies in
British America, but were eminent and more abundant in Great Britain. Many
thousands at his Chapel and Tabernacle in London, and in other places, were
witnesses that he faithfully endeavored to restore the doctrines of the
Reformation, and the purity of the church to its primitive glory. Some among
the learned, some of the mighty and noble have been called, by his ministry, to
testify for the Gospel of the grace of God. The force of his reasonings against
corrupt principles, and the easy method he had in exposing the danger of them,
have astonished the most that heard him, in all places where he preached. How
did he lament and withstand the modern, unscriptural notions of religion and
salvation, that were palmed upon the churches of every denomination! The
affecting change from primitive purity to fatal heresy, together with the sad
effects of it in mere formality and open wickedness, would often make him cry,
as the Prophet did in another case, "How is the gold become dim, and the most
fine gold changed! How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud,
in his anger, and cast down from heaven to earth the beauty of Israel"

"It is no wonder that this man of God should meet with enemies, and with great
opposition to his ministry; for hell trembled before him. It is no more than
may be always expected of the devil, that he should stir up his servants, to
load the most eminent Ministers of Christ with calumny, and most impudent lies;
and represent them as the filth and offscouring of all things. All this may
be, and often has been done, under a pretense of great concern for the honor
of Christ, and the preservation of Gospel Order. When satan's kingdom totters
and begins to fall, he can find men enough to cry, The Church is in danger; and
that, he knows, is sufficient with many, to hide his cloven foot, and make him
appear as an angel of light.

"Through a variety of such labors and trials, our worthy friend, and
extensively useful servant of Christ, Mr. Whitefield, passed, both in England
and Ameca: but the Lord was his sun to guide and animate him, and his shield to
defend and help him unto the end: neither did he count his own life dear, so
that he might finish his course with joy, and the ministry that he had received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. The last sermon
that he preached, though under the disadvantage of a stage in the open air, was
delivered with such clearness, pathos, and eloquence, as to please and surprise
the surrounding thousands. And as he had been confirmed by the grace of God,
many years before, and had been waiting and hoping for his last change, he then
declared, that he hoped it was the last time he should ever preach. Doubtless,
he then had such clear views of the blessedness of open vision, and the
comcomplete fruition of God in Christ, that he felt the pleasures of heaven in
his raptured soul, which made his countenance shine like the unclouded sun."

The next sermon was preached by Dr. Pemberton of The following lines are part
of a poem on Mr. Whitefield, which is published along with this sermon, written
by a Negro servant-girl of 17 years of age; and who has been but nine years
from Africa, belonging to Mr. J. Wheatly of Boston.

"He prayed that grace in every heart might dwell;
He longed to see America excel;
He charged its youth to let the grace divine
Arise, and in their future actions shine.
He offered That he did himself receive,
A greater gift not GOD himself can give.
He urged the need of Him to every one;
It was no less than God's coequal Son.
Take Him ye wretched for your only good;
Take Him ye starving souls to be your food.
Ye thirsty, come to this life-giving stream;
Ye preachers, take Him for your joyful theme.
Take Him, my dear Americans, he said,
Be your complaints in his kind bosom laid.
Take him, ye Africans: he longs for you;
Impartial Savior is his title due.
If you will choose to walk in grace's road,
You shall be Sons, and Kings, and Priests, to GOD.
Great Countess! we Americans revere
Thy name, and thus condole thy grief sincere.
New England, sure does feel; the Orphan's smart
Reveals the true sensations of his heart. --
His lonely Tabernacle sees no more
A Whitefield landing on the British shore.
Then let us view him in yon azure skies,
Let every mind with this loved object rise.
Thou tomb, shall safe retain thy sacred trust,
Till life divine re-animates his dust."

Boston, October 11, 1770, upon 1 Peter i. 4. "To an inheritance -- reserved in
heaven for you." In which he says:

"I am not fond of funeral panegyrics. -- But where persons have been
distinguishingly honored by heaven, and employed to do uncommon service for
God's church upon earth, it would be criminal ingratitude to suffer them to
drop into the dust without the most respectful notice. The memory of the just
is blessed! Posterity will view Mr. Whitefield in many respects, as one of the
most extraordinary characters of the present age. His zealous, incessant, and
successful labors, in Europe and America, are without a parallel.

"Devoted early to God, he took orders as soon as the constitution of the
established Church in England allowed. His first appearance in the work of the
ministry was attended with surprising success. The largest churches in London
were not able to contain the numbers that perpetually flocked to hear his
awakening discourses. The crowds daily increased. He was soon forced into the
fields, followed by multitudes, who hung with silent attention upon his lips,
and with avidity received the word of life. The Spirit of God, in uncommon
measure, descended upon the hearers. The secure were awakened to a salutary
fear of divine wrath; and inquiring minds were directed to Jesus, the only
Savior of a revolted world. The vicious were visibly reclaimed, and those who
had hitherto rested in a form of godliness, were made acquainted with the power
of a divine life. The people of God were refreshed with the consolation of the
blessed Spirit, and rejoiced to see their exalted Master, going on from
conquering to conquer; and sinners of all orders and characters, bowing to the
scepter of a crucified Savior.

"His zeal could not be confined within the British islands. His ardent desire
for the welfare of immortal souls, conveyed him to the distant shores of
America. We beheld a new star arise in the hemisphere of these western
churches; and its salutary influences were diffused through a great part of the
British settlements in these remote regions. We heard with pleasure, from a
Divine of the Episcopal communion, those great doctrines of the Gospel, which
our venerable ancestors brought with them from their native country. With a
soul elevated, above a fond attachment to forms and ceremonies, he inculcated
that pure and unadulterated religion, for the preservation of which our fathers
banished themselves into an uncultivated desert. In his repeated progresses
through the Colonies, he was favored with the same success which attended him
on the other side of the Atlantic. He preached from day to day in thronged
assemblies; yet his hearers never discovered the least weariness, but always
followed him with increasing ardour. When in the pulpit, every eye was fixed
upon his expressive countenance; every ear was charmed with his melodious
voice, all sorts of persons were captivated with the propriety and beauty of
his address.

"But it is not the fine speaker, the accomplished orator, that we are to
celebrate from the sacred desk: these engaging qualities, if not sanctified by
divine grace, and consecrated to the service of heaven, are as the sounding
brass, and the tinkling cymbal. When misimproved, instead of conveying
happiness to mankind, they render us more illustriously miserable.

"The gifts of nature, the acquisitions of art, which adorned the character of
Mr. Whitefield, were devoted to the honor of God, and the enlargement of the
kingdom of our divine Redeemer. While he preached the Gospel, the Holy Ghost
was sent down to apply it to the consciences of the hearers; the eyes of the
blind were opened, to behold the glories of the compassionate Savior; the ears
of the deaf were unstopped, to attend to the invitations of incarnate love; the
dead were animated with a divine principle of life; many in all parts of the
land, were turned from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God.
These doctrines which we had been instructed in from our infancy by our
faithful Pastors, seemed to acquire new force, and were attended with uncommon
success when delivered by him. His discourses were not trifling speculations,
but contained the most interesting truths; they were not an empty play of wit,
but solemn addresses to the hearts of men.

"To convince sinners that they were by nature children of wrath; by practice,
transgressors of the divine law; and in consequence of this, exposed to the
vengeance of offended heaven; to display the transcendent excellency of a
Savior, and persuade awakened minds to confide in his merits and
righteousness, as the only hope of a guilty world; to impress upon the
professors of the Gospel the necessity, not only of an outward reformation, but
an internal change, by the powerful influences of the Spirit; to lead the
faithful to a zealous practice of the various duties of the Christian life,
that they may evidence the sincerity of their faith, and adorn the doctrine of
God their Savior; these were the reigning subjects of his pulpit discourses.

If sinners were converted; if saints were built up in faith, holiness, and
comfort, he attained his utmost aim.

"He was no contracted bigot, but embraced christians of every denomination in
the arms of his charity, and acknowledged them to be children of the same
Father, servants of the same Master, heirs of the same undefiled inheritance.

"That I am not complimenting the dead, but speaking the words of truth and
soberness, I am persuaded I have many witnesses in this assembly.

"He was always received by multitudes with pleasure, when he favored these
parts with his labors; but he never had a more obliging reception than in his
last visit. Men of the first distinction in the province, not only attended his
ministry, but gave him the highest marks of their respect. With what
faithfulness did he declare unto us the whole counsel of God? With what
solemnity did he reprove us for our increasing degeneracy? With what zeal did
he exhort us, to remember from whence we were fallen, and repent and do our
first works, lest God should come and remove our candlestick out of its place?

"Animated with a Godlike design of promoting the temporal and spiritual
happiness of mankind, after the example of his Divine Master, he went about
doing good. In this he persevered with unremitting ardour and assiduity, till
death removed him to that rest which remains for the people of God. Perhaps no
man, since the apostolic age, preached oftener or with greater success.

"If we view his private character, he will appear in a most amiable point of
light. The polite Gentleman; the faithful friend; the engaging companion; above
all, the sincere Christian, were visible in the whole of his deportment.

"With large opportunities of accumulating wealth, he never discovered the
least tincture of avarice. What he received from the kindness of his friends,
he generously employed in offices of piety and charity. His benevolent mind was
perpetually forming plans of extensive usefulness. The Orphan-house, which many
years ago he erected in Georgia, and the College he was founding in that
province at the time of his death, will be lasting monuments of his care, that
religion and learning might be propagated to future generations.

"I have not, my brethren, drawn an imaginary portrait, but described a
character exhibited in real life. I have not mentioned his natural abilities,
which were vastly above the common standard. I consider him principally in the
light of a Christian, and a Minister of Jesus Christ, in which he shone with a
peculiar luster, as a star of the first magnitude.

"After all, I am not representing a perfect man; there are spots in the most
shining characters upon earth. But this may be said of Mr. Whitefield with
justice, that after the most public appearances for above thirty years, and the
most critical examination of his conduct, no other blemish could be fixed upon
him, than what arose from the common frailties of human nature, and the
peculiar circumstances which attended his first entrance into public life.

"The imprudencies of unexperienced youth, he frequently acknowledged from the
pulpit with a frankness which will for ever do honor to his memory. He took
care to prevent any bad consequences that might flow from his unguarded
censures in the early days of his ministry. The longer he lived, the more he
evidently increased in purity of doctrine, in humility, meekness, prudence,
patience, and the other amiable virtues of the christian life."

Another Funeral Sermon on Mr. Whitefield was preached by Mr. Ellington, at
Savannah in Georgia, Nov. 11, 1770, upon Heb. xi. 26. "Esteeming the reproach
of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward." In which are the following passages "Savannah
church was decently hung with mourning, by the legislative body of the
province."

The same public marks of regard were shown at one of the churches in
Philadelphia, of which Mr. Sprout is pastor, which by desire of the session and
committee, was put into mourning. Also, at their desire and expense the bells
of Christ-Church, in that city were rung muffled.


.

"The receiving the melancholy news of the much lamented death of a particular
friend to this province, a person who was once Minister of this church, is the
reason of this discourse; and my choice of this subject before us, is to pay my
grateful respect to the memory of this well-known able Minister of the New
Testament, and faithful servant of the most high God, the Rev. George
Whitefield; whose life was justly esteemed, and whose death will be greatly
regretted, by the sincerely religious part of mankind of all denominations, as
long as there is one remaining on earth, who knew him, to recollect the fervor
of spirit, and holy zeal with which he spoke, when preaching the everlasting
Gospel; and every other part of his disinterested conduct, consistent with the
ministerial character in life and conversation. Mr. Whitefield's works praise
him loud enough; I am not able to say any thing that can add greater luster to
them. May every one that ministers in holy things, and all who partake of their
ministrations, have equal right to the characteristic in the text as he had.

"It is the ruling opinion of many, that the offense of the cross is long since
ceased, and that whatever evil treatment some of a singular turn may meet with,
it is only the fruit of their own doings, and the reward of their own work,
whereby they raise the resentment of mankind against them for uncharitable
slander, and spiritual abuse. But whoever knows any thing of the Gospel, and
has experienced it to be the power of God unto salvation, knows this is the
language of persons who are unacquainted with the depravity of their nature,
and through the degeneracy of their hearts, are unwilling to be disturbed;
therefore are saying to the Ministers of Christ, "Prophecy unto us smooth
things." But the Ministers of the Gospel are to be sons of thunder, and so to
utter their voice, and conduct their lives, as to prove the nature of their
work.

"Our dear and reverend friend was highly honored for many years, in being an
happy instrument to do this successfully. With what a holy zeal he proceeded,
long before he was publicly ordained to the sacred office, has been long
attested; and no person has been able to contradict the testimony. No sooner
did he appear in the work of the sanctuary, but he soon convinced his numerous
auditories, that his Almighty Lord, who had given him the commission, had by
his grace wrought him for the self-same thing; and through the Holy Spirit,
attending his endeavors, made him a workman that needed not to be ashamed. One
would think his great success in his public labors, the frequent opportunities
he embraced of doing good, by the relief of people in distressing
circumstances, every occasion he took to use his influence for the good of
mankind, and the whole of his behavior through a life of fifty-six years,
being (so far as the frailty of our present state will admit) unblameable and
unreproveable, should have exempted him from contempt and reproach. But quite
the contrary, there was so near a resemblance with his blessed Master, that
obliged him to bear his reproach. He has suffered with him on earth, and he is
now glorified with him in heaven. He has labored abundantly, and he has been
as liberally reproached and maligned from every quarter. Clergy and laity have
whet their tongues like a sword against him, and bent their bows to shoot their
arrows; but the Lord, amongst all, has known and approved his righteous
servant. Though it is well known he has had opportunity long since to enjoy
episcopal emolument, yet, in his opinion (and it will be found he judged like a
wise man in the end) sinners through his instrumentality, being turned unto the
Lord, and becoming his joy, and crown of rejoicing, in the day of our Lord
Jesus, was esteemed a greater honor than any this world could afford him. His
longing desire for the salvation of immortal souls, would not admit of his
being confined within the district of any walls; though it must be ackowledged,
he never thought of commencing field-preacher, till his invidious enemies
refused him church-pulpits, with indignation of spirit unbecoming the lowest
and vulgar class of mankind, much less men professing themselves preachers of
godliness. Though he has, throughout the whole course of his ministry, given
sufficient proof of his inviolable attachment to our happy establishment, he
was desirous to countenance the image of Christ wherever he saw it, well
knowing, that political institutions in any nation whatever, should not destroy
the blessed union, or prevent the communion which ought to subsist throughout
the Holy Catholic Church, between real and sincere christians of all
denominations. Some people may retain such a veneration for apostolic phrases
as to suppose they ought not to be applied to other persons; sorry am I to
observe, that few deserve the application of them. But of Mr. Whitefield we may
say with the strictest truth, in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in
perils of robbers, in perils of his own countrymen, in perils in the city, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren,
in weariness and painfulness, he has approved himself a Minister of God. All
who knew and were acquainted with him, soon discovered in him every ma^k of
good sense and good manners; his company and conversation was so enlivening and
entertaining, and at the same time so instructive and edifying, that no person
with the least degree of common sense, could behave improperly in his presence.
In him met (which do not often meet in one person) the finished and complete
Gentleman, and the real and true Christian. Why then did he take pleasure in
reproaches, and submit to the taunts and insults both of the vulgar and politer
part of mankind? He had respect to the recompense of reward. Though the
believer's work will never entitle him to a reward of debt, yet the reward of
grace will always excite a holy desire to render something unto the Lord: What
would thou have me do? is the incessant inquiry of that soul, who by the
merits of the Redeemer's death, and the virtue of his precious blood, is
redeemed from sin, and made a partaker of the inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away. Faith operates by good works: and let all
the men of the world say to the contrary, or to put ever so base a construction
upon our doctrine, it will evidence itself by these good fruits. It was from
these principles that Mr. Whitefield acted, and they were productive of the
desired effects; not only in alms giving, this was but a small matter, when
compared with the happier and more important attempt which he made for the good
of mankind, at the hazard of his life, and the expense of an unblemished
character. How he has preached with showers of stones, and many other
instruments of malice and revenge about his ears, many of his surviving friends
can witness; but having the salvation of sinners at heart, and a great desire
to rescue them from the power of eternal death; he resolved to spend and be
spent for the service of precious and immortal souls; and spared no pains, and
refused no labor, so that he might but administer to their real and eternal
good: And glory be to our good God, he has persevered and endured to the end
of his life, having respect unto the recompense of the reward. Surely nothing
else could support him under such a weight of care, and enable him, amidst it
all, for so many years, to bear it with so much cheerfulness. The worthy
inhabitants of this Province do not want my attestation, either to the loss the
province has sustained, or to the desire he has had for its prosperity. His
indefatigable endeavors to promote it, and the many fervent prayers he has
night and day offered for it, speak loud enough. Happy omens we would hope in
favor of it, both as to its temporal increase, and spiritual prosperity. May
God raise up some useful men to supply his place, and carry on unto perfection
what he has so disinterestedly begun, that the institution he has founded in
this province may be of public utility to the latest posterity! As to his
death, little more can be said of it, than has been communicated to the public
already. He died like a hero in the field of battle; he has been fighting the
battles of the Lords of Hosts upwards of thirty years, against the world, sin,
and satan; and he has been a conqueror, he has fought successfully; many,
very many, converted sinners are the trophies of his victory: but now his
warfare is accomplished, the Captain of his salvation has granted him a
discharge, he is entered into his everlasting rest, and is reaping the benefits
of a life sincerely dedicated to the service of the once crucified, but now
exalted Jesus. He preached the day before his decease: though his death was
sudden he was not surprised; the morning of his departure not many hours before
his spirit took its flight to the regions of bliss, he prayed to the God of his
salvation, and committed his departing soul into his hands, as his faithful
Creator and all merciful Redeemer. Soon after he said, I am near my end, then
fell asleep; he fainted, and died; not one sigh, or groan; the Lord heard his
prayer and granted him his request, and gave him an easy dismission out of time
into eternity: sudden death was his desire, and sudden death was to him sudden
glory. He has fought the good fight; few, if any, since the Apostles, has been
more extensively useful or labored more abundantly. Thousands I believe I may
with propriety say, in England, Scotland, and America, have great reason to
bless God for his ministrations; for he has traveled far and wide proclaiming
the glad tidings of salvation, through faith in a crucified Savior. Adorable
Emmanuel, make thou up the loss of him to thy church and people! Let a double
portion of thy Spirit be poured out upon the remaining Ministers! Let that holy
fire which burnt so bright in thy departed servant, warm each of their hearts!
And, O thou Lord of the harvest, send forth more such true and faithful
laborers into thy harvest!"

A number of Funeral Sermons were preached for him in England as well as in
America. In one by Mr. D. Edwards, Nov. 11, 1770, upon Heb. xi. 4. By it he
being dead, yet speaks, we have the following character of Mr. Whitefield.

"1. The ardent love he bore to the Lord Jesus Christ was remarkable. This
divine principle constrained him to an unwearied application to the service of
the Gospel, and transported him at times, in the eyes of some, beyond the
bounds of sober reason. He was content to be a fool for Christ's sake; to be
despised, so Christ might be honored; to be nothing, that Jesus might be all
in all. He had such a sense of the incomparable excellence of the person of
Christ, of his adorable condescension in taking our nature upon him, and
enduring the curses of the holy law; his complete suitableness and sufficiency;
as the wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption of his people, that
he could never say enough of him. He was so convinced of the happy tendency and
efficacy of this principle in his own mind, that he made use of it, and
proposed it to others, in the room of a thousand arguments, whenever he would
inculcate the most unreserved obedience to the whole will of God, or stir up
believers to a holy diligence in adorning the doctrine of God our Savior in
all things; inspired by this principle, nothing frighted or flattered him from
his duty.

"2. Another pleasing ingredient in his character, and a sure evidence of the
former, was love to the souls of mankind. He rejoiced in their prosperity as
one that had found great spoil; and with St. Paul was willing to spend and be
spent in promoting their happiness. He loved all who loved Jesus Christ in
sincerity, however they might differ in some circumstantials. He embraced all
opportunities to expose the malignant leaven of a party, and to remove
prejudices and misapprehensions which good people too often entertain of one
another, when under the influence of a sectarian humor.

"3. His attachment to the great doctrines of the Gospel was inflexible; having
known their worth, and experienced their power in his own heart, he plainly
saw, that though they were unacceptable to the carnal heart, yet they bore the
plain impress of the infinite wisdom of God. Those important truths, which tend
to humble the sinner, to exalt Christ, and promote holiness in heart and life,
were his darling subjects. He did not disguise Gospel Truths by some artful
sweetening, or render them more palatable to men of corrupt minds: he studied
to preach the word in its purity, plainness and simplicity. The warmth of his
zeal disgusted many who make a mighty outcry about candor and charity, and are
willing to extend it to every sentiment, except the truths in which the
Apostles gloried. It was his love to the truths of God, and the souls of men,
that led him to expose those who plead for the rectitude and excellency of
human nature; deny the proper Godhead of Jesus Christ, justification by faith
in his righteousness imputed, or the New Birth, and the absolute necessity of
the operations of the Holy Ghost. Faith and holiness were ever united together
in his system, in opposition to those who pretend to faith without obedience to
the law of God as the rule of life. He knew errors in the great truths of the
Gospel are not indifferent, but dreadful and fatal; he knew it was not candor
and charity to say that errors in judgment are not hurtful, but the greatest
unmercifulness and cruelty; therefore he often reproved such sharply.

"Although he was so tenacious of the foundation-truths of the Gospel, yet none
more candid in things that are not essential; herein he was full of gentleness
and forbearance. In things indifferent he became all things to all men As to
the difference between essentials and non-essentials in religion, Mr. Edwards
refers to the Rev. Mr. Newton's "Review of Ecclesiastical History, so far as it
concerns the progress, decl^nsions, and revivals of Evangelical doctrine and
practice."
.

"4. To the foregoing particulars in Mr. Whitefield's character, I may add his
zeal. His christian zeal was like the light of the sun, which did warm, shine
and cherish, but knew not to destroy; full of generous philanthropy and
benevolence, his zeal made him exceeding earnest and importunate in his
addresses to saints and sinners. His zeal returned blessings for curses, and
prayers for ill treatment: it kindled in him a becoming indignation against the
errors, follies, and sins of the times: it led him to weep bitterly over those
who would not be persuaded to fly from the wrath to come: it made him bold and
intrepid in the cause of God, and kept him from that flatness and deadness
which is too visible in some good Ministers. In these things he was an example
to Ministers of every denomination: and, if the limits of my discourse would
admit, I could mention many things, as to his great charity to the poor, his
humility, etc."

On Sunday, Nov. 18, 1770, a Sermon was preached on his death at the Chapel in
Tottenham-Court-Road, and at the Tabernacle near Moorfields, by the Rev. Mr.
John Wesley. The text was, Number. xxiii. 10. Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his. And in the sermon, after giving
some particulars of his life and death, Mr. Wesley says,

"1. We are next to take some view of his character, A little sketch of this
was soon after his death, published in the Boston Gazette: an extract of which
is subjoined: 'Little can be said of him, but what every friend to vital
christianity, who has sat under his ministry, will attest. In his public
labors he has for many years astonished the world with his eloquence and
devotion. With what divine pathos did he persuade the impenitent sinner to
embrace the practice of piety and virtue: filled with the spirit of grace, he
spoke from the heart, and with a fervency of zeal, perhaps unequalled, since
the days of the Apostles, adorned the truths he delivered with the most
graceful charms of rhetoric and oratory. From the pulpit he was unrivalled in
the command of an ever crowded auditory. Nor was he less agreeable and
instructive in his private conversation: happy in a remarkable ease of address,
willing to communicate, studious to edify; may the rising generation catch a
spark of that flame which shone with such distinguished luster in the spirit
and practice of this faithful servant of the most high God.'

"2. A more particular and equally just character of him, has appeared in one
of the English papers London Chronicle, November 8, 1770.
. It may not be disagreeable to you to add the substance of this likewise: 'The
character of this truly pious person, must be deeply impressed on the heart of
every friend to vital religion. In spite of a tender and delicate constitution,
he continued to the last day of his life, preaching with a frequency and a
fervor that seemed to exceed the natural strength of the most robust. Being
called to the exercise of his function at an age, when most young men are only
beginning to qualify themselves for it, he had not time to make a very
considerable progress in the learned languages: but this defect was amply
supplied by a lively and fertile genius, by fervent zeal, and by a forcible and
most persuasive delivery. And though in the pulpit he often found it needful,
by the terrors of the Lord, to persuade men, he had nothing gloomy in his
nature, being singularly cheerful, as well as charitable and tender hearted. He
was as ready to relieve the bodily as the spiritual necessities of those that
applied to him. It ought also to be observed, that he constantly enforced upon
his audience every moral duty, particularly industry in their several callings,
and obedience to their superiors. He endeavored by the most extraordinary
efforts of preaching in different places, and even in the open fields, to rouse
the lower class of people from the last degree of inattention and ignorance, to
a sense of religion. For this and his other labors, the name of George
Whitefield will long be remembered with esteem and veneration.'

"3. That both these accounts are just and impartial, will readily be allowed;
that is, as far as they go: but they go little farther than the outsides of his
character: they show you the preacher, but not the man, the christian, the
saint of God. May I be permitted to add a little on this head, from a personal
knowledge of near forty years? Indeed, I am thoroughly sensible how difficult
it is to speak on so delicate a subject; what prudence is required to avoid
both extremes, to say neither too little, nor too much? Nay, I know it is
impossible to speak at all, to say either less or more, without incurring from
some the former, from others the latter censure. Some will seriously think that
too little is said; and others, that it is too much: but without attending to
this, I will speak just what I know, before Him to whom we are all to give an
account.

"4. Mention has already been made of his unparalleled zeal, his indefatigable
activity, his tender-heartedness to the afflicted, and charitableness toward
the poor. But should we not likewise mention his deep gratitude to all whom God
had used as instruments of good to him? Of whom he did not cease to speak in
the most respectful manner, even to his dying day. Should we not mention that
he had an heart susceptitible of the most generous and the most tender
friendship? I have frequently thought, that this, of all others, was the
distinguishing part of his character. How few have we known of so kind a
temper, of such large and flowing affections. Was it not principally by this,
that the hearts of others were so strangely drawn and knit to him? Can any
thing but love beget love? This shone in his very countenance, and continually
breathed in all his words, whether in public or private. Was it not this,
which, quick and penetrating as lightning, flew from heart to heart? Which gave
that life to his sermons, his conversations, his letters? Ye are witnesses.

"5. But away with the vile misconstruction of men of corrupt minds, who know
of no love, but what is earthly and sensual. Be it remembered, at the same
time, that he was endued with the most nice and unblemished modesty. His office
called him to converse very frequently and largely with women as well as men,
and those of every age and condition. But his whole behavior toward them, was
a practical comment on that advice of St. Paul to Timothy, "Entreat the elder
women as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all purity."

"6. Mean time, how suitable to the friendliness of his spirit, was the
frankness and openness of his conversation? Although it was as far removed from
rudeness on the one hand, as from guile and disguise on the other. Was not his
frankness at once a fruit and a proof of his courage and intrepidity? Armed
with these, he feared not the faces of men, but used great plainness of speech
to persons of every rank and condition, high and low, rich and poor;
endeavoring only by manifestation of the truth, to commend himself to every
man's conscience in the sight of God.

"7. Neither was he afraid of labor or pain, any more than of what man could
do unto him, being equally, 'Patient in bearing ill and doing well.' And this
appeared in the steadiness wherewith he pursued whatever he undertook, for his
Master's sake: witness one instance for all, the Orphan-house in Georgia, which
he began and perfected, in spite of all discouragements. Indeed, in whatever
concerned himself, he was pliant and flexible: in this case he was easy to be
entreated, easy to be either convinced or persuaded; but he was immovable in
the things of God, or wherever his conscience was concerned. None could
persuade any more than affright him to vary in the least point from that
integrity, which was inseparable from his whole character, and regulated all
his words and actions. Herein he did 'Stand as an iron pillar strong
'And steadfast as a wall of brass.'


"8. If it be enquired, what was the foundation of this integrity, of his
sincerity, courage, patience, and every other valuable and amiable quality; it
is easy to give the answer. It was not the excellency of his natural temper;
not the strength of his understanding: it was not the force of education: no,
nor the advice of his friends. It was no other than faith in a bleeding Lord;
faith of the operation of God. It was a lively hope of an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away. It was the love of God shed
abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost, which was given unto him, filling his
soul with tender, disinterested love to every child of man. From this source
arose that torrent of eloquence which frequently bore down all before it. From
this, that astonishing force of persuasion, which the most hardened sinners
could not resist. This it was, which often made his head as waters, and his
eyes a fountain of tears. This it was which enabled him to pour out his soul in
prayer, in a manner peculiar to himself, with such fullness and ease united
together, with such strength and variety both of sentiment and expression.

"9. I may close this head with observing, what an honor it pleased God to put
upon his faithful servant, by allowing him to declare his everlasting Gospel,
in so many various countries, to such numbers of people, and with so great an
effect, on so many of their precious souls! Have we read or heard of any person
since the Apostles, etc." (See the conclusion of this paragraph in pages 263,
264, immediately before the quotations from Funeral Sermons.)

AN HYMN.
1.
"Servant of God, well done!
"Thy glorious warfare's past.
"The battle's fought, the race is won,
"And thou art crowned at last;
"Of all thy heart's desire
"Triumphantly possessed,
"Lodged by the ministerial quire
"In thy Redeemer's breast.
2.
"In condescending love
"Thy ceaseless prayer he heard,
"And bade this suddenly remove
"To thy complete reward:
"Ready to bring thee peace,
"Thy beauteous feet were shod,
"When mercy signed thy soul's release
"And caught thee up to God.
3.
"With saints enthroned on high
"Thou do thy Lord proclaim,
"And still to God salvation cry,
"Salvation to the Lamb!
"O happy, happy soul,
"In ecstasies of praise,
"Long as eternal ages roll,
"Thou see thy Savior's face,
4.
"Redeemed from earth and pain,
"Ah! when shall we ascend,
"And all in Jesus' presence reign
"With our translated friend!
"Come, Lord, and quickly come!
"And when in Thee complete,
"Receive thy longing servants home,
"To triumph at thy feet!"

On the same day (November 18, 1770) the Rev. Mr. Venn preached at the Countess
of Huntingdon's Chapel at Bath, on Isaiah viii. 18. "Behold I, and the children
whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel; from the
Lord of Hosts, which dwells in Mount Zion." And of Mr. Whitefield he says,
"Though the children of Christ are all for signs and for wonders in Israel, yet
do they differ as one star differs from another star in glory. Talents, grace,
and zeal, eminently dignify some; and draw the eyes of men upon them. In the
foremost of this rank, doubtless, is the Rev. Mr. Whitefield to be placed; for
his doctrine was the doctrine of the Reformers, of the Apostles, and of Christ:
it was the doctrine of free grace, of God's everlasting love. Through Jesus he
preached the forgiveness of sins, and perseverance in holy living, through his
faithfulness and power engaged to his people. And the doctrine which he
preached he eminently adorned by his zeal, and by his works. For if the
greatness, extent, success, and disinterestedness of a man's labor can give
him distinction amongst the children of Christ, we are warranted to affirm,
that scarce any one of his Ministers since the Apostles days, has exceeded;
scarce any one has equalled Mr. Whitefield.

"What a sign and wonder was this man of God in the greatness of his labors!
One cannot but stand amazed that his mortal frame could for the space of near
thirty years, without interruption, sustain the weight of them. For what is so
trying to the human frame, in youth especially, as long-continued, frequent and
violent straining of the lungs? Who, that knows their structure, would think it
possible, that a person, little above the age of manhood, should speak in the
compass of a single week (and that for years) in general, forty hours, and in
very many weeks, sixty, and that to thousands; and after his labor, instead of
taking any rest, should be offering up prayers, intercessions, with hymns and
spiritual songs, as his manner was in every house to which he was invited. The
history of the Church of Christ affords but very few instances of men thus
incessantly employing their whole strength, and as it were, every breath they
drew, in the business of their sacred function. And the truth is, that, in
point of labor, this extraordinary servant of God did as much in a few weeks,
as most of those who exert themselves are able to do in the space of a year.
Thus laboring not by fits and starts, but with constancy and perseverance, and
ardour unabated, his mortal frame, about nine years since, began to sink under
the weight of so much work. If, with the length and frequency of Mr.
Whitefield's preaching, we consider the intenseness of voice and spirit with
which he spoke, the greatness of his labors will appear perfectly astonishing:
he knew not how to speak with less zeal, in his whole manner, than became the
subjects of his discourse. The total ruin of the human race by the fall; the
complete recovery of believers in Christ, his dying love, and the unsearchable
riches of his grace, to be known experimentally in this life, though fully to
be displayed in the next: and the infatuation of sinners, led captive by their
lusts down to the chambers of death: these grand truths, of more weight than
words can paint, fired his whole soul; they transported him as much as earthly
spirits are transported into vehemence, when they contend personally for their
own property; he cried out therefore, as his dear Lord was wont to do, with a
voice audible to an amazing distance: hence in a thousand instances, where the
cause of God more coolly pleaded, would have been neglected, he gained it a
hearing, and carried the day: for the unusual earnestness of the speaker roused
the most stupid and lethargic: it compelled them to feel; the matter must be
momentous indeed, which the speaker was urging as a man would plead for his own
life. Early and often his body suffered for this very violent exertion of his
strength: early and often his inside has bled a considerable quantity, and
cried out, spare thyself: but, prodigal of life, in the best of causes, he
would give himself no rest; expecting very soon to finish his course, and
infinitely desirous to save the souls condemned to die; he perished. Though
this may be blamed as an excess, it was an excess far above the reach of a
selfish mind, or an ordinary faith.

"Equal to the greatness and intenseness of his labors, was their extent. The
abilities and grace of most teachers, have full employ in a small district, nor
have common men talents for more. But when God lights up in the breast, an
apostolic zeal for his own glory, an apostolic love for the souls of men, it
seems reasonable to conclude, such an instrument is designed for the most
extensive usefulness.

"Accordingly the compass of Mr. Whitefield's labors, exceeds any thing that
others can pretend to. Not only in the south, the west, and north of England,
did he lift up his voice, saying, "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is come:"
but in Wales, in Scotland, in Ireland, and America, from Georgia to Boston,
vast multitudes in each country were witnesses of his zeal for the salvation of
souls.

"And to crown all, he was abundantly successful in his vast labors, and
disinterested too. The seals to his ministry, from first to last, I am
persuaded, are more than would be credited, could the number be fixed. This is
certain, his amazing popularity was only from his usefulness; for he no sooner
opened his mouth as a preacher, than God commanded an extraordinary blessing
upon his word. The people were so deeply impressed with the sense of divine
things from what he delivered, that, to his own great surprise they followed
him from church to church, until the largest churches in London could no longer
contain a fourth part of the crowds, which pressed to hear the word of God from
his lips.

"Should any one say, few in comparison, besides the low, ignorant, common
people were his followers; I would answer, the souls of the poor and ignorant,
are to the full as precious as those of the rich and learned: and the mob have
shown the justest discernment, and have received the truth; whilst men of
wealth, and learning, and education, have trampled it under their feet. Witness
the chief Scribes and Pharisees, who rejected both the Baptist and the Savior,
when the common people justified God, and gave them both the honor of being
sent from him. Indeed in every age, we see the Scripture fulfilled, not many
rich, not many mighty, not many wise men after the flesh are called; but God
has chosen the poor, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom.

"However, when the fierceness of prejudice was worn off, numbers, who at first
despised him, taught to do so by gross slanders, were happy under his ministry.
And this honor was put upon him even to the last. He had a much larger
audience statedly to hear him, than any man in the whole kingdom, perhaps in
all Christendom.

"And that this vast multitude of people were gathered, just as the primitive
churches of Christ, by the truth they heard, and the spiritual benefit they
received under his word, is evident beyond a reasonable doubt. For if you trace
his progress through the various cities and countries where he preached the
Gospel, you will find as the case was with St. Paul, so it was with this
servant of Christ. Many were turned by him from darkness to light, from the
power of satan unto God, receiving remission of their sins, and an inheritance
among those that are sanctified, through faith in Christ. Enquire of the
effects of his labors, from the only proper judges, those who live in the
religious world, and they will aver, that many within their own knowledge,
small as that circle must be, confess they owe their own selves to this
faithful witness for his Lord. Add to this, that the letters he received of
grateful acknowledgment from persons of all ages and conditions in life, for
the spiritual blessings he had conveyed to them, would fill whole volumes. Nay,
it is a well-known fact, that the conversion of mens' souls has been the fruit
of a single sermon from his lips; so eminently was he made of God, a fisher of
men. But he was not more successful than he was disinterested in his labors;
for though a vast multitude, (which must ever be the case with those whom God
is pleased remarkably to own) followed him, he had still no ambition to stand
as the head of a party. His great object was to exalt Christ crucified; and
when his hearers were brought to the knowledge of salvation, his point was
gained, and his soul was satisfied. Hence neither in his sermons, nor more
private exhortations, did he cast disparaging reflections upon other preachers
of Christ. No base suggestion dropped from his mouth, as if to differ from him
must be owing to blindness in the judgment, or coldness of the heart for the
interests of holiness. Truly cordial and catholic in his love for all who
appeared to love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, he never desired to see his
congregation increased by those who had evangelical pastors of their own.
Further, in proof of his disinterestedness, consider what he gained by his
labors. The scourge of the tongue was let loose upon him, and his name was
loaded with the foulest calumnies; he was often in tumults, and more than once
in danger of his life, by the rage of the people; he wore himself away in the
service of souls; and when he died, he died quite exhausted by much speaking;
but in his death, he received an immediate answer to his own prayer, 'That if
it were consistent with the Divine Will, he might finish that day his Master's
work.'

"For such a life, and such a death, (though in tears under our great loss) we
must yet thank God. And though we are allowed to sorrow, because we shall never
see or hear him again, we must rejoice that millions have heard him so long, so
often, and to such good effect; that out of this mass of people, multitudes are
gone before him, we doubt not, to hail his entrance into the world of glory;
and that in every period of life, from childhood to hoary age, many of his
children in the Lord are still to follow; all to be his crown of rejoicing: the
only effectual, everlasting confutation of his adversaries; that he ran not in
vain, nor labored in vain."

There were many other sermons preached on occasion of Mr. Whitefield's death,
in which the descriptions of his character are the same in substance, with
those already given Such as, by the Rev. Mess. Whitaker and Smith of
Charlestown; Sprout of Philadelphia; Langford, Elliot, W. M. and probably
others, which have not come to the Compiler's knowledge.

The Rev. Mr. De Courcy also wrote some Elegiac lines, among which are the
following: "Soon as the Spirit's unction from above,
Throughout his soul diffused the Savior's love,
A fire enkindled in his eager breast,
With pity burned to sinners lost --
Straight, like a trumpet, he his voice did raise,
The wonders of redeeming love to praise;
Of health regardless, all things did forego,
That sinners Jesus' boundless grace may know;
Wherever he preached, attentive crowds were seen,
Astonished at his youth and zealous mein:
Let Kennington, Blackheath, Moorfields declare,
How often the Gospel trumpet sounded there.
Nor could his zeal the vast Atlantic bound --
Throughout the western world he Christ displays,
And joyful news to Georgia's coast conveys.
There orphans yet unborn, shall weeping tell
How mourned, the founder of Bethesda fell --
The love of Jesus was his darling theme;
An heaven he felt in that dear precious name:
Hence when his heart with sacred ardor glowed,
His tongue in promptest elocution flowed.
With what compassion, energy and fire,
Would he the guilty heart for Christ require!
Often while his Master's glorious grace he showed,
An arrow dipped in Jesus' precious blood,
The aspiring sinner in the dust brought low,
And forced him at the bleeding cross to bow --
Whenever he meant the power of sin to kill,
And carnal hearts with purest love to fill,
Transgressors he to Calvary's summit led,
Where Jesus, spotless victim, bowed his head.
But, as a glass, the sinner's guilt to show,
The Law he brought with all its curse and woe,
The conscience wounded with this flaming sword,
While Sinai seemed to thunder in his word.
But -- whilst each terror of the Lord and threat,
With zeal and faithfulness he did repeat,
He all dissolved in sorrow would appear,
While plenteous flowed the sympathetic tear;
Like Jesus, who over bloody Salem mourned,
While wrath divine against it vengeful burned --
In prayer, with a peculiar gift endowed,
Reverent before the throne of grace he bowed;
In tears, like Jacob, with the Angel strove,
Prevailed like Israel, with the God of love. --
For all he prayed -- and all in love received,
With heart capacious, who in Christ believed.
"In him there dwelt a spirit generous, bold,
Unawed by threatenings, unallur'd by gold.
Preferments, honors, ease, he deemed but loss,
Vile and contemptible for Jesus' cross. --
Enured to scandal, injuries, and pain,
To him to live was Christ; to die was gain."


In a note upon the last paragraph, the author says, "Whoever is acquainted
with Mr. Whitefield's life, well knows that I have not exaggerated matters. For
in a visit to Ireland, he was solicited by the Primate of that kingdom, to
accept of some considerable church preferment; but declined the offer, because
he looked upon himself as called to an itinerant life; and what makes this
circumstance the more remarkable, is, that Mr. Whitefield, at that time, had no
prospect whatever, as to temporals."


.

To be the subject of so many funeral sermons, both at home and abroad, is
something singular; though quite suitable to his extraordinary manner of life.
But it was still more singular, to have a sermon preached upon his personal and
ministerial character, in his own lifetime, and when he was but twenty-six
years of age. This sermon was preached by the Rev. Mr. Josiah Smith of
Charlestown, South Carolina, and was published at Boston, with a recommendatory
preface by the Rev. Dr. Colm^n and Mr. Cooper, in the year 1740. Of this it is
worth while to make a short extract, after all that has been said; that by
comparing it with the funeral sermons, the reader may see how consistent and
uniform Mr. Whitefield's conduct was, from that early period of his ministry,
till his death.

After speaking of his doctrine concerning Original Sin -- Justification by
faith alone -- Regeneration -- The inward feelings of the Spirit -- Mr. Smith
adds, "As to the manner of his preaching -- With what a flow of words did he
speak to us, upon the great concern of our souls! In what a flaming light did
he set out eternity before us! How earnestly did he press Christ upon us! How
close, strong, and pungent were his applications to the conscience; mingling
light and heat; pointing the arrows of the Almighty at the heart of sinners,
while he poured in the balm on the wounds of the contrite! How bold and
courageous did he look? He was no flatterer. He taught the way of God in truth,
and regarded not the persons of men. The politest and most modish of our vices
he struck at, the most fashionable entertainments; regardless of every ones
presence, but His in whose name he spoke.

"As to his personal character, while he preaches up faith alone in our
justification before God, he is careful to maintain good works. These things
the grace of God teaches us. And how much of this doctrine has he transcribed
into his life! How rich has he been in all good works! What an eminent pattern
of piety toward God! How holy and unblameable in all conversation and
godliness! How seasoned, how much to the use of edifying all his discourses!
How naturally does he turn them to religion? How much is he given to devotion
himself, and how does he labor to excite it in others!

"He affects no party in religion, nor sets himself at the head of any. He is
not bigoted to the lesser rites and forms of religion, while zealous enough in
all its essentials. He professes love to good men of every denomination. His
heart seems set upon doing good. He goes about his great Master's work with
diligence and application, and with such cheerfulness as would make one in love
with a life of religion. He is proof against reproach and invective. When he is
reviled, he revile^h not again; but prays heartily for all his enemies.

"He renders to all their due. While zealous for the things of God, is a friend
to Caesar. And for charity, as it consists in compassion and acts of
beneficence, we have few men like minded. Had he been under any criminal
influence of a mercenary temper; had he collected moneys for himself in his
journeys, under pretext of doing it for the poor, as he was slanderously
reported, he had certainly a fair opportunity to enrich himself. But we have
seen; and plain fact cannot be denied; that he casts all into the Treasury, and
serves the tables of the poor with it. Strolling and vagabond orphans, without
father, and without mother, without purse, and without friend, he seeks out,
picks up, and adopts into his family. He is now building accommodations, and
laying the best foundation for their support and maintenance." Thus far Mr. J.
Smith, who had the pleasure of seeing this character of his friend verified in
the whole of his future life; and who, in his Funeral Sermon upon him at
Charlestown, Oct. 28, 1770, has this remarkable expression, concerning a visit
he made to Mr. Whitefield at his Orphan-house: "It was a scene that made me
think I was in heaven."

By a paper, written with Mr. Whitefield's own hand, of the contents of his
imperfect manuscript, frequently quoted in the above account of his life, it
appears, that if he had lived to finish it, the conclusion would have been,
"Reflections upon the whole, containing arguments to prove the divinity of the
work; and answers to objections against Fleid-preaching -- Lay-preaching --
Irregularities -- And the blemishes that have attended it."

As he did not live to execute this design, the reader is referred to what has
been published upon the subject by the Rev. Mess. Jonathan Edwards, Hobby,
Shurtliff, etc. The Rev. Mr. Newton preached a sermon at Olney, Nov. 11, 1770,
on John v. 35. He was a burning, and a shining light. In which he speaks of Mr.
Whitefield; an extract of which follows: "Some Ministers are burning and
shining lights in a peculiar and eminent degree. Such a one, I doubt not, was
the servant of God whose death we now lament. I have had some opportunities of
looking over the History of the Church in past ages, and I am not backward to
say, that I have not read or heard of any person since the Apostle's days, of
whom it may more emphatically be said, "He was a burning and a shining light,"
than the late Mr. Whitefield, whether we consider the warmth of his zeal, the
greatness of his ^isterial talents, or the extensive usefulness with which the
Lord honored him. I do not mean to praise the man, but the Lord who furnished
him, and made him what he was. He was raised up to shine in a dark place. The
state of religion, when he first appeared in public, was very low, in our
established church. I speak the truth, though to some it may be an offensive
truth. The doctrines of Grace, were seldom heard from the pulpit, and the life
and power of godliness were little known. Many of the most spiritual among the
Dissenters, were mourning under the sense of a great spreading declension on
their side* what a change has taken place throughout the land within a little
more than thirty years, that is, since the time when the first set of despised
Ministers came from Oxford! and how much of this change has been owing to God's
blessing on Mr. Whitefield's labors, is well known to many who have lived
through this period; and can hardly be denied by those who are least willing to
allow it. First, He was a burning light. He had an ardent zeal for God, an
enflamed desire for the salvation of sinners. So that no labors could weary
him, no difficulties or opposition discourage him, hardly any limits could
confine him; not content with the bounds of a county, or a kingdom, this
messenger of good tidings preached the everlasting Gospel in almost every
considerable place in England, Scotland and Ireland, and throughout the British
empire in America, which is an extent of more than a thousand miles. Most of
these places he visited again and again; nor did he confine his attention to
places of note, but in the former part of his ministry, was ready to preach to
few, as well as to many, wherever a door was opened; though in the latter part
of his life, his frequent illness, and the necessity of his more immediate
charge, confined him more at home. In some of his most early excursions, the
good Providence of God led him here, and many, I trust, were made willing to
rejoice in his light, and have reason to bless God, that ever they saw and
heard him. 2dly, He was a shining light: his zeal was not like wildfire, but
directed by sound principles, and a sound judgment. In this part of his
character, I would observe, 1st, Though he was very young when he came out, the
Lord soon gave him a very clear view of the Gospel. In the sermons he published
soon after his first appearance, there is the same evangelical strain
observeable, as in those which he preached in his advanced years. Time and
observation, what he felt, and what he saw, enlarged his experience, and gave
his preaching an increasing ripeness and savor, as he grew older in the work;
but from first to last he preached the same Gospel, and was determined to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 2dly, His steadiness and
perseverance in the truth was the more remarkable, considering the difficulties
and snares he was sometimes beset with. But the Lord kept him steady, so that
neither the example, nor friendship, nor importunity of those he dearly loved,
were capable of moving him.

3dly, The Lord gave him a manner of preaching, which was peculiarly his own.
He copied from none, and I never met any one who could imitate him with
success. They who attempted generally made themselves disagreeble. His familiar
address, the power of his action, his mavelous talent in fixing the attention
even of the most careless, I need not describe to those who have heard him, and
to those who have not, the attempt would be vain. Other Ministers could,
perhaps, preach the Gospel as clearly, and in general say the same things; but,
I believe, no man living could say them in his way. Here I always thought him
unequalled, and I hardly expect to see his equal while I live.

"4th, But that which finished his character as a shining light, and is now his
crown of rejoicing, was the singular success which the Lord was pleased to give
him in winning souls; what numbers entered the kingdom of glory before him, and
what numbers are now lamenting his loss, who were awakened by his ministry. It
seemed as if he never preached in vain. Perhaps there is hardly a place, in all
the extensive compass of his labors, where some may not yet be found who
thankfully acknowledge him as their spiritual father. Nor was he an awakening
preacher only wherever he came; if he preached but a single discourse, he
usually brought a season of refreshment and revival with him, to those who had
already received the truth. Great as his immediate and personal usefulness was,
his occasional usefulness (if I may so call it) was perhaps much greater. Many
have cause to be thankful for him, who never saw or heard him. I have already
observed, that there was a something peculiar in his manner of preaching, in
which no person of sound judgment would venture to imitate him. But
notwithstanding this, he was, in other respects, a signal and happy pattern and
model (...) preachers. He introduced a way of close and lively application to
the conscience, for which I believe many of the most admired and eminent
preachers now living will not be ashamed, or unwilling to acknowledge
themselves his debtors."

There was also a Sermon preached on the occasion by the Rev. Mr. Samuel
Brewer, of Stepney, London, which his modesty would not permit him to print.
And many others of the Ministers, both of the Church, and among the Dissenters
in England, in their sermons and prayers upon the news of Mr. Whitefield's
death, bewailed the loss of so great a man, and so faithful and successful a
servant of Christ; among these were the Rev. Mr. Roman, Mr. Madan, Dr.
Gibbons, and Dr. Trotter.

On the 6th of February 1771, the executors having received the probat of Mr.
Whitefield's Will, Mr. Keen, who was perfectly acquainted with every particular
of his temporal affairs, immediately published it, with the following preamble:

As we make no doubt the numerous friends of the late Rev. Mr. George
Whitefield will be glad of an opportunity of seeing a genuine copy of his last
Will and Testament; his Executors have favored us with a copy of the same,
transmitted to them from the Orphan-house in Georgia, and which they have
proved in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. And as it was Mr. Whitefield's
constant declaration he never meant to raise either a purse or a party, it is
to be remarked, that almost the whole money he died possessed of, came to him
within two or three years of his death in the following manner, viz. Mrs.
Thomson of Tower Hill, bequeathed him L. 500. By the death of his wife,
including a bond of L. 300 he got L. 700. Mr. Whitmore bequeathed him L. 100
and Mr. Winder L. 100; and it is highly probable, that had he lived to reach
Georgia from his late northern tour, he would have much lessened the above
sums, by disposing of them in the same noble and disinterested manner that all
the public or private sums he has been entrusted with, have been.

GEORGIA.
By his Excellency James Wright, Esquire Captain General, Governor and Commander in
Chief of his Majesty's said Province of Georgia, Chancellor and Vice Admiral of
the same.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, greeting: Know ye, that Thomas
Moodie, who has certified the annexed copy from the original, in the
Secretary's Office, is Deputy-Secretary of the said Province, and therefore all
due faith and credit is, and ought to be, had and given to such his certificate.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the Great Seal
of this his Majesty's said Province to be put and affixed, dated at Savannah
the tenth day of December, in the year of our Lord 1770, and in the eleventh
year of the reign of his Majesty King George the Third.

By his Excellency's command, J. WRIGHT.
THO. MOODIE, D. Secretary.


IN the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons but one God: I,
George Whitefield, Clerk, at present residing at the Orphan-house Academy, in
the Province of Georgia, in North America, being through infinite mercy in more
than ordinarily bodily health, and a perfectly sound and composed mind, knowing
the certainty of death, and yet the uncertainty of the time I shall be called
by it to my long wished-for home, to make this my last Will and Testament, in
manner and form following, viz. Imprimis, In sure and certain hope of a
resurrection to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, I commit my body
to the dust, to be buried in the most plain and decent manner; and knowing in
whom I have believed, and being persuaded that he will keep that which I have
committed unto him, in the fullest assurance of faith I commend my soul into
the hands of the ever-loving, altogether lovely, never-failing Jesus, on whose
complete and everlasting righteousness I entirely depend, for the justification
of my person and acceptance of my poor, worthless, though, I trust, sincere
performances, at that day when he shall come in the glory of his Father, his
own glory, and the glory of his holy angels, to judge both the quick and dead.
In respect to my outward American concerns which I have engaged in simply and
solely for his great name's sake, I leave that building, commonly called the
Orphan-house, at Bethesda, in the Province of Georgia, together with all the
other buildings lately erected thereon, and likewise all other buildings,
lands, negroes, books, furniture, and every other thing whatsoever which I now
stand possessed of in the Province of Georgia aforesaid, to that elect Lady,
that mother in Israel, that mirror of true and undefiled religion, the Right
Honorable Selina, Countess Dowager of Huntingdon; desiring, that as soon as
may be after my decease, the plan of the intended Orphan-house, Bethesda
College, may be prosecuted, or, if not practicable, or eligible, to pursue the
present plan of the Orphan-house Academy, on its old foundation and usual
channel; but if her Ladyship should be called to enter into her glorious rest
before my decease, I bequeath all the buildings, lands, negroes, and every
thing before mentioned which I now stand possessed of in the Province of
Georgia aforeseid, to my dear first fellow-traveller, and faithful, invariable
friend, the Honorable James Habersham, Esquire President of his Majesty's
Honorable Council: and should he survive her Ladyship, I earnestly recommend
him as the most proper person to succeed her Ladyship, or to act for her during
her Ladyship's lifetime, in the affairs of the Orphan-house Academy. With
regard to my outward affairs in England; whereas there is a building commonly
called the Tabernacle, set apart many years ago for Divine Worship, I give and
bequeath the said Tabernacle, with the ajacent house in which I usually reside,
when in London, with the stable and coach-house in the yard adjoining, together
with all books, furniture, and every thing else whatsoever that shall be found
in the house and premises aforesaid; and also the building commonly called
Tottenham-Court Chapel, together with all the other buildings, houses, stable,
coach-house, and every thing else whatsoever which I stand possessed of in that
part of the town, to my worthy, trusty, tried friends, Daniel West, Esquire in
Churchstreet, Spitalfields, and Mr. Robert Keen, Woolen-Draper, in the
Minories, or the longer survivor of the two. As to the moneys, which a kind
Providence, especially of late, in a most unexpected way, and unthought of
means, has vouchsafed to entrust me with; I give and bequeath the sum of one
hundred pounds sterling to the Right Honorable Countess Dowager of Huntingdon
aforesaid, humbly beseeching her Ladyship's acceptance of so small a mite, as a
pepper-corn of acknowledgment for the undeserved, unsought-for honor her
Ladyship conferred upon me, less than the least of all, to be one of her
Ladyship's Domestic Chaplains. Item, I give and bequeath to my dearly beloved
friend, the Honorable James Habersham aforesaid, my late wife's gold watch,
and ten pounds for mourning; to my dear old friend, Gabriel Harris, Esquire of the
city of Gloucester, who received and boarded me in his house when when I was
helpless and destitute, above thirty-five years ago, I give and bequeath the
sum of fifty pounds; to my humble faithful servant and friend, Mr. Ambrose
Wright, if in my service and employ, either in England or America, or
elsewhere, at the time of my decease, I give and bequeath the sum of five
hundred pounds; to my brother, Mr. Richard Whitefield, give and bequeath the
sum of fifty pounds; to my brother, Mr. Thomas Whitefield, I give and bequeath
the sum of fifty pounds, to be given him at the discretion of Mr. Robert Keen;
to my brother-in-law Mr. James Smith, Hosier, in the city of Bristol, I give
and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds, and thirty pounds also for family
mourning; to my niece, Mrs. Frances Hartford of Bath, I give and bequeath the
sum of fifty pounds, and twenty pounds for family mourning; to Mr. J. Crane,
now a faithful steward at the Orphan-house Academy, I give and bequeath the sum
of forty pounds; to Mr. Benjamin Stirk, as an acknowledgment of his past
service at Bethesda, I give and bequeath the sum of ten pounds for mourning; to
Peter Edwards, now at the Orphan-house Academy, I give and bequeath the sum of
fifty pounds; to William Trigg, at the same place, I give and bequeath the sum
of fifty pounds; both the sums aforesaid to be laid out, or laid up for them,
at the discretion of Mr. Ambrose Wright: to Mr. Thomas Adams, of Rodbourough in
Gloucestershire, my only surviving first fellow laborer, and beloved much in
the Lord, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds; to the Rev. Mr. Howel
Davis, of Pembrokeshire, in South Wales, that good soldier of Jesus Christ; to
Mr. Torial Joss, Mr. Cornelius Winter, and all my other dearly beloved present
stated assistant-preachers at the Tabernacle and Tottenham-Court Chapel, I give
and bequeath ten pounds each for mourning; to the three brothers of Mr. Ambrose
Wright, and the wife of his brother Mr. Robert Wright, now faithfully and
skilfully laboring and serving at the Orphan-house Academy, I give and
bequeath the sum of ten pounds each for mourning; to Mr. Richard Smith, now a
diligent attendant on me, I give and bequeath the sum of fifty pounds, and all
my wearing apparel which I shall have with me in my journey through America, or
on my voyage to England, if it should please an all-wise God to shorten my days
in either of those situations. Finally, I give and bequeath the sum of one
hundred pounds, to be distributed at the discretion of my executors, herein
after-mentioned, for mourning among my old London servants, the poor widows at
Tottenham-Court Chapel, and the Tabernacle poor, especially my old trusty,
disinterested friend and servant, Mrs. Elizabeth Wood. All the other residue,
if there be any residue, of moneys, goods, and chattels, or whatever profits
may arise from the sale of my books, or any manuscripts that I may leave
behind, I give and bequeath to the Right Honorable the Countess Dowager of
Huntingdon, or, in case of her Ladyship's being deceased at the time of my
departure, to the Honorable James Habersham, Esquire beforementioned, after my
funeral expenses and just debts are discharged, toward paying off my arrears
that may be due on the account of the Orphan-house Academy, or for annual
prizes as a reward for the best three orations that shall be made in English on
the subjects mentioned in a paper annexed this my will. And I do hereby appoint
the Honorable James Habersham, Esquire aforesaid, to be my executor in respect to
my affairs in the Province of Georgia, and my trusty tried dearly beloved
friends Charles Hardy, Esquire Daniel West, Esquire and Mr. Robert Keen, to be
executors of this my last Will and Testament, in respect of my affairs in
England, begging each to accept of a mourning ring. To all my other christian
benefactors, and more intimate acquaintance, I leave my most hearty thanks and
blessing, assuring them that I am more and more convinced of the undoubted
reality, and infinite importance of the grand Gospel truths which I have from
time to time delivered; and am so far from repenting my delivering them in an
itinerant way, that had I strength equal to my inclination, I would preach them
from pole to pole, not only because I have found them to be the power of God to
the salvation of my own soul, but because I am as much assured that the Great
Head of the Church has called me by his word, providence and spirit, to act in
this way, as that the sun shines at noon day. As for my enemies, and
misjudging, mistaken friends, I most freely and heartily forgive them, and can
only add, that the last tremendous day will soon discover what I have been,
what I am, and what I shall be, when time itself shall be no more; and
therefore, from my inmost soul, I close all, by crying, Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly; even so Lord Jesus, Amen and Amen.

GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
This was written with the Testator's own hand, and at his desire, and in his
presence, sealed, signed, and delivered, at the Orphan-house Academy, in the
Province of Georgia, before us witnesses, Anno Domini, March the twenty second,
one thousand seven hundred and seventy.

Signed, ROBERT BOLTON, THOMAS DIXON, CORNELIUS WINTER.



N. B. I also leave a mourning ring to my honored and dear friends and
disinterested fellow laborers, the Rev. Messrs. John and Charles Wesley, in
token of my indissoluble union with them, in heart and christian affection,
notwithstanding our difference in judgment about some particular points of
doctrine. -- Grace be with all them, of whatever denomination, that love our
Lord Jesus, our common Lord, in sincerity.



GEORGIA, Secretary's Office.
A true copy, taken from the original in this Office, examined and certified;
and I do further certify that the same was duly proved; and the Honorable
James Habersham, Esquire one of the executors therein named, was duly qualified
executor before his Excellency lency James Wright, Esquire Governor and Ordinary of
the said Province, this 10th day of December, 1770.

THO. MOODIE, D. Sec.

Concerning the manner in which Mr. Whitefield's Tabernacle and Chapel are at
present supplied, the compiler has received the following information.:

HAVING by his Will left both of his places of worship, his houses, library,
and all things appertaining thereto, to two of his executors in survivorship,
they have been enabled, through the abundant goodness of God, to carry on the
work in the same manner as in Mr. Whitefield's lifetime, without the least
diminution either of largeness of the congregations, or the visible power of
God attending the ministry ther^. And as neither of them are Ministers, but
engaged in extensive business, it appears the more wonderful, and shows the
work to be begun and carried on by the power of God alone; and it is their
earnest prayer and study that it may be transmitted down, and faithful
Ministers and upright persons raised to carry it on when their heads are laid
in the dust. Two of his fellow laborers were taken off by death, whilst he was
last abroad, viz. the Rev. Mr. Howel Davie^* a Clergyman, and Mr. Thomas Adams,
a layman; and a little before, Mr. Middleton, all tried and faithful Ministers;
but the Lord has wonderfully raised up others in their stead. The present
Ministers are chiefly these, the Rev. Mr. Kinsman of Plymouth, the Rev. Mr.
Edwards of Leeds, the Rev. Mr. Knight of Hallifax, and the Rev. Mr. Ashburner,
of Pool in Dortsetshire; these visit London once, and if wrote for, twice a
year. The constant ones upon the spot are, Mr. Joss and Mr. Brooksbanks. The
Rev. Mr. De Courcy, and the Rev. Mr. Piercy, and other Clergymen, have often
assisted. Besides these, the proprietors have been favored with the occasional
labors of Mr. Rowland Hill, and Mr. Heath of Plymouth: also of many worthy
Clergymen and Dissenting Ministers from the country, who esteemed it their
privilege to preach to very large, serious, and attentive congregations, whose
hearts have been filled with thankfulness, and at the same time engaged in
prayer for every such Minister; and an unusual blessing has commonly attended
both sowers and reapers; and it is the earnest desire of the proprietors, that
the pleasure of the Lord may thus prosper in their hands. They purpose, through
the blessing of God, to let the pulpits be open to every disinterested Minister
that may occasionally come to town, of good moral character, sound in the
faith, of moderate Calvinistical principles, without distinction of parties or
denominations, whose talents are suitable to preach with life and power to
large congregations. And hope for the concurrence of all well-wishers to the
prosperity of Zion.

THE END.
LONDON, July 2, 1772.
SINCE this work was finished, the following particulars have come to the
Editor's knowledge, viz. That Mrs. Rachel Wells of Philadelphia, famous in
America for her ingenious performances in wax-work, made a w^ ^ge of Mr.
Whitefield, as large as life, properly dre^^^d, before Mr. Whitefield died: and
(from her regard to the memory of that great and good man) soon a^r his death,
carried it, at her own expense, to Georgia, (upwards of nine hundred miles) and
made a present of it to Bethesda College. The likeness is said to be so
striking, that it astonishes all who have seen it. Her sister, Mrs. Wright of
New York, who possesses the same uncommon genius for wax-work, is lately
arrived in London, and has brought over with her several of her performances:
among them is a wax image of Mr. Whitefield, dressed in his own wig, band, etc.
so like the original, that all who have seen it, have in the strongest terms
expressed their approbation. It is said she is come over, at the desire of some
Gentlemen in New York, to take off some of the capital characters in England,
viz. Lord Chatham, Mrs. Macaulay, Mr. Garrick, etc. and from the specimen she
has given of her abilities in Mr. Whitefield's image, will no doubt meet with
encouragement suitable to her merit.


