POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, etc.
After treating of our duty to the Gods, it is proper to teach that which we
owe to our Country. For our Country is, as it were, a secondary God, and the
first and greatest Parent. -- It is to be preferred to Parents, Wives,
Children, Friends, and all things, the Gods only excepted. -- And if our
Country perishes, it is as impossible to save an Individual, as to preserve one
of the fingers of a mortified hand. HIEROCLES. VOL. 1.

Philadelphia, May 30, 1775.
The following PROPOSALS, are laid before those Gentlemen, who choose to
promote SCIENCE in America, for sPRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION, SKETCHES OF THE
HISTORY OF MAN. IN FOUR VOLUMES.
By HENRY HOME, LORD KAIMS. Author of Elements of Criticism, etc. CONDITIONS.
I. The American Edition of Lord KAIMS's SKETCHES OF THE HISTORY OF MAN will be
printed in four volumes, on the same paper and type with the specimen, (which
is given gratis at BELL'S in Third-street, WOODHOUSE'S, and AITKEN'S in
Front-street) and the Book will be neatly bound and lettered in two octavo
volumes.

II. The price to subscribers will be Twenty-four Shillings Pennsylvania
currency, although the English Edition is sold at Four Pounds Four Shillings.
No Money expected until the delivery of the book.

III. When one hundred encouragers are pleased to approve of these conditions
by the favor of subscribing their names, the work will be immediately carried
into execution, and finished with proper expedition.

SUBSCRIPTIONS are gratefully received by ROBERT BELL, in Third-street; WILLIAM
WOODHOUSE, and R. AITKEN, in Front-street; and by all, who are pleased to lend
their helping hand toward the promotion of American Manufactures.

POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS; OR, An ENQUIRY into public ERRORS, DEFECTS, and
ABUSES. Illustrated by, and established upon FACTS and REMARKS, extracted from
a Variety of AUTHORS, Ancient and Modern.

CALCULATED To draw the timely ATTENTION of GOVERNMENT and PEOPLE, to a due
Consideration of the Necessity, and the Means, of REFORMING those ERRORS,
DEFECTS, and ABUSES; of RESTORING the CONSTITUTION, and SAVING the STATE.

By J. BURGH, GENTLEMAN; Author of the DIGNITY of HUMAN NATURE, and other Works.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street; and WILLIAM
WOODHOUSE, in Front-Street. M, DCC, LXXV.

GENERAL PREFACE.
EVE^ (...) I have been of age to distinguish between good and evil, I have
observed, that, in this blessed country of ours, the men in power have pursued
one uniform track of taxing and corrupting the people, and increasing
court-influence in parliament, while the pretended patriots have exclaimed
against those measures, at least till themselves got into power, and had an
opportunity of carrying on the same plan of government; which they seldom
failed to do, while the constitution was drawing nearer to its ruin, and our
country lay bleeding.

I was sure, there was a right and a wrong in government, as in other things. I
knew, that the spirit of the constitution, and the interest of the nation are
fixed things, not to be altered backward and forward according as a Harley, a
Walpole, or a Pelham, was in, or out of place. I saw much quibbling and fallacy
in our party-squabbles, while I was certain, that there was a true and a false
in politics, as in all other objects of human understanding.

I determined to take the sense of mankind on the great and interesting points
of government; and to see what experience teaches to expect from wise and
upright, as well as from blundering and corrupt administration.

I applied the leisure hours of many years to the perusal of the best
historical and political books, ancient and modern, and made collections to the
quantity of many folio volumes.

I considered, that history is the inexhaustible mine, out of which political
knowledge is to be brought up. This was observed by Plato, and in consequence
he wrote his REPUBLIC, and other political works. Aristotle's POLITICA are full
of wise remarks, drawn chiefly from history. MONTESQUIEU has collected his
admirable work, L'ESPRIT DES LOIX, in great measure, from history. Montague's
excellent book on ANCIENT REPUBLICS is wholly made out of the same materials.
The abbe de St. Pierre labors in many parts of his Ouvrages Politiques
(particularly in his Essay, entitled, Observations pour render, etc. Remarks
for rendering the Perusal of Plutarch's Lives more agreeable, and more
profitable) to show, that there are no means so effectual for communicating the
most useful instructions to the minds of men, as making observations upon the
facts recorded in history. Alphonsus V. king of Arragon, was wont to say, the
dead were the best counselors. Rollin wrote his ANCIENT and ROMAN HISTORIES on
purpose that he might have an opportunity of making useful moral and political
remarks upon the (...) he was (...) relate. Our incomparable female historian
(Mrs. MA^AULY) has given the public a new history of the Stuarts, for the
purpose of inculcating on the people of Britain the love of liberty and their
country.

That no important historical fact, nor valuable political remark, or as few as
possible, might escape me, I went through a ^eneral course of such reading;
particularly the following, viz. UNIVERSAL HISTORY, ANCIENT and MODERN, 68
volumes, besides several of the Greek and Latin originals; Rapin's, and two or
three other English histories; MAGAZINES of the last 10 years; PARLIAMENTORY
HISTORY, 24 volumes; DEBATES of the Lords and Commons, 30 volumes; Ancient and
Modern Republics, 27 volumes; the Harleian MISCELLANY, 8 volumes; Somers's
Tracts, 16 volumes; the political writings of Sidney, Lock, Harrington,
Gordon, Trenchard, Bolingbroke, St. Pierre, Hume, Montesquieu, Blackstone,
Montague, Rymer's FOEDERA, STATUTES at LARGE, STATE PAPERS, etc. And it is my
purpose to apply what may remain to me of life and leisure to the same study:
and if I find any new matter interesting to my country, which I cannot insert
in the body of this work, it shall be given the public in a supplemental volume.

Most writers have a set of doctrines they would lay before the public, and
they peruse authors on the same subject, in order to strengthen their own
assertions by the authority of established writers. But I read in order to
observe what the best historical and political writers have said, and to lay
that before the public, as decisive. And as I did not, in collecting my
materials, trust to indexes; but turned over, page by page, many hundreds of
volumes, the matter I collected came at last to such a prodigious heap, ( --
rudis indigestaque moles,
-- congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
OVID.) that I foresaw, I should have no small difficulty in arranging this
chaos into a system. Nor have I been able to please myself at last in this
respect. For many articles are, I doubt, not referred to the heads, to which
they most properly belong; and many articles relate to several heads. I hope,
however, by means of a table at the end of the whole, to make up for this
deficiency.

I have every where referred to the volume and page of my authors, with as much
correctness as I could, that my readers may satisfy themselves; and, if they
think fit, may peruse what I have not quoted. Where I have put turned commas, I
quote verbatim; and where I translate* or abridge the sense of my authors, I
believe the reader will find I give it gen^ine. When I insert short remarks of
my own in the midst of other matter, I enclose them with brackets for
distinction's sake.

The political authors I quote are not all of (...) authority. To most of them
I appeal on account of the weight, which their opinion has justly obtained;
others I introduce because they have expressed the sentiment I would inculcate,
with such clearness and strength as must convince every reasonable reader. In
cases where it may be supposed a writer may be partial to a particular
sentiment, it is an advantage to give his reader the same sentiment in the
words of another, rather than in his own, though the author quoted may not be
of the first rank for merit and weight.

I do not pretend to have extracted from my authors, or to have applied all
that may be found in them interesting to this country. But the number of facts
and remarks I have extracted and applied, is so considerable, that I think the
collection must be valuable, as tending to save gentlemen, who would improve
themselves in political knowledge, a great deal of time and labor, and as
serving to bring together a multitude of useful historical precedents, and of
wise reflections, scattered in many hundred volumes; upon which materials
alone it is possible to found any solid political principles.

Every body has observed, that, on political subjects, the opinions of men are
peculiarly vague, unsettled, and contradictory, because all men will, and in a
free country, ought to judge of politics. There are indeed many particulars to
be attended to, various views of things to be taken, and many comparisons to be
made, in order to form just and steady principles of politics. And these
employments of the mind requiring leisure, thought, and labor, it is not to be
wondered, that few ever come to deserve, in a general and extensive manner, the
character of sound politicians; though it is certain that every man of common
sense may, if unbiassed, very clearly see wherein his country's great interest
consists.

The same observation may be made on politics as one of the fathers has made on
holy Scripture; The lamb may wade in them, and the elephant swim.

The science of politics [extensively considered] is as much superior to all
others, says S. Pierre, as the whole is superior to a part. For it comprehends
all human knowledge, and, to be a good politician, a man must have a general
knowledge of all arts and sciences S. Pierre, OUVR. POLIT. VI.14.
. On the other hand, it is observed by Lock, That politics [in the common and
confined sense] are only common sense applied to national, instead of private
concerns.

Some thing ^re right in theory, for instance, but not in practice, and
contrariwise. Hereditary succession to regal power applied to the test of
reason, appears, a priori, consummately absurd. But elective monarchy, if we
judge of it from its effects in Poland, is an inexhaustible fountain of
mischief to a country. Some measures a^e in general salutary; but pursued at
particular times, would ruin all. In distinguishing wisely lies the superiority
of genius in statesmen.

There are no such mighty talents necessary for government as some, who pretend
to them, without possessing them, would make us believe. Honest affections, and
common qualifications, are sufficient, and the administration has always been
best executed, and the public liberty best preserved, near the origin and rise
of states, when plain sense, and common honesty alone governed public affairs,
and the morals of men were not corrupted by riches and luxury, nor their
understanding perverted by subtleties and distinctions. Great abilities have
generally, if not always, been employed to mislead the honest unwary multitude,
and draw them out of the plain paths of public virtue and public good CATO'S
LET. I.178.
.

In a country which pretends to be free, and where, consequently, the people
ought to have weight in the government, it is peculiarly necessary that the
people be possessed of just notions of the interest of their country, and be
qualified to distinguish between those who are faithful to them, and those who
betray them.

It must, I think, fill every generous mind with indignation, to see our
good-natured countrymen abused over and over, from generation to generation, by
the same stale dog-tricks repeatedly played upon them, by a succession of
pretended patriots, who, by these means, have screwed out their predecessors,
and wormed themselves into their places. To teach the people a set of solid
political principles, the knowledge of which may make them proof against such
gross abuse, is one great object of this publication.

If the people do not look with an eye of severe and unremitting jealousy,
after their own great and weighty concerns, in whose hands must they leave
them? The answer is, In those of a ministry. And what hope is there, that in
such hands they will be safe? In these collections, under the article
MINISTERS, it will too plainly appear, from history, that ministers have
generally been a set of ambitious, or avarcious grandees, who have, by all the
worst kinds of arts, thrust themselves into power, in order to raise (as they
call it) themselves and their families, and to fill their pockets. Entering
into public stations with such views, it is to be supposed, that they would
form to themselves an interest totally separate and diametrically contrary to
that of the people, and that they would debauch ^he house of commons to join
them against their constituents. And is it not then necessary, that the people
should be qualified, and disposed to take care of their own interests, and
secure themselves against so formidable a set of internal enemies?

None can be said to know things well, who do not know them in their
beginnings, says Sir W. Temple Pref. to HIST. EN^.
.

All ought to know what is right, and what is wrong in public affairs, says St.
Amand Pref. to HIST. PARL.
.

Not only the people, but our statesmen and legislators, may from the following
collections gain lights, and meet with hints, which, if properly pursued, may
lead them to measures of a more generous kind, than that series of poor and
temporary expedients, by which they have long made a shift to patch up matters,
and barely keep the machine of government from bursting in ruins about them,
while the efficiency of the constitution (as will too clearly appear in the
sequel) is annihilated.

The ablest politicians have always been the most desirous of information. The
great Colbert used to declare, that he thought his time well spent in perusing
an hundred proposals for advancing the wealth, the commerce, and the glory of
France, if but one of them deserved to be encouraged Postlethw. BRIT. TRUE
SYSTEM, XLV.
.

If, on the contrary, any Leviathan of power shows himself bent on other
objects, than the public good, and with a brutal effrontery presumes publicly
to turn into ridicule all that tends to national benefit, and to declare, as
some statesmen have been known to do, That he knows of only one engine of
government, viz. Finding every man's price, and giving it to him; it is to be
hoped, that the independent people will find a hook for his jaws, and be able
to drag him out of that sea of power, in which he wallows, that the vessel of
the state may sail in safety. To point out those enemies of mankind, and to
animate the independent people against them, is as great a service as can be
done the public. Whether these collections will, in any degree, produce this
effect, remains to be seen.

Some courtly readers may think I have put too much gall into my ink, when
describing the political abuses, which disgrace our country: But Mr. Gordon
CATO'S LET. II.49.
says, No man can be too desirous of the glory and security of his country, nor
too angry at its ill usage, nor too revengeful against those, who abuse and
betray it.

When Sir I. Barnard, A. D. 1740, was censured in the house of commons by Sir
W. Young, for calling the seamens bill by its proper name, he answered as
follows.

I have always heard it represented as an instance of integrity when the tongue
and heart move in concert, when the words are representations of the
sentiments; and have therefore hitherto endeavored to explain my arguments
with perspicuity, and to impress my sentiments with force. I have thought it
hypocrisy to treat stupidity with reverence, or honor nonsense with the
ceremony of confutation. As knavery, so folly, that is not reclaimable, is to
be speedily dispatched, business is to be freed from obstruction, and society
from nuisance. Now, Sir, when I am censured by those whom I may offend by the
use of terms correspondent with my ideas, I will not, by a tame and silent
submission, give reason to suspect, that I am conscious of a fault, but will
treat the accusation with open contempt, and show no greater regard to the
abettors than to the authors of absurdity. That decency is of great use in
public debates, I shall readily allow; it may sometimes shelter folly from
ridicule, and preserve villainy from public detection; nor is it ever more
carefully supported than when measures are promoted, which nothing can preserve
from contempt but the solemnity with which they are established. Decency is a
proper circumcumstance; but liberty is the essence of parliamentary
disquisitions. Liberty is the parent of truth: but truth and decency are
sometimes at variance: all men and all propositions are to be treated here as
they deserve; and there are many who have no claim either to respect or
decency.and

I expect the sons of slavery to cry out, The author is a republican, a
discontented party-man, a jacobite, a papist. So the Jews stigmatized the
primitive christians, and the papists to this day the protestants with the
odious appellation of heretics. The court-sycophants in Charles I's times
called the friends of liberty puritans, and the Walpolians called the opposers
of that arch-corrupter disaffected. But wisdom is justified of her children.
Let our courtiers overthrow the facts and the reasonings in the following
pages. If they cannot, they are to yield to truth, were it delivered to them
even by a papist.

I would wish the reader to think I write in the spirit of a true independent
whig, whose character Mr. Gordon describes as follows.

An independent whig scorns all implicit faith in the state, as well as the
church. The authority of names is nothing to him; he judges all men by their
actions and behavior, and hates a knave of his own party as much as he
despises a fool of another. He consents not that any man or body of men shall
do what they please. He claims a right of examining all public measures, and if
they deserve it, of censuring them. As he never saw much power possessed
without some abuse, he takes upon him to watch those that have it; and to
acquit, or expose them, according as they apply it to the good of their
country, or their own crooked purposes Gord. TRACTS, I.311.
.

Others may allege, that a private gentleman, who has never been employed in
the state, is less likely to be of service to the public by writing on
political subjects. Let Harrington answer them.

It was in the time of Alexander, the greatest prince and commander of his age,
that Aristotle, with scarce inferior applause and equal fame, being a private
man, wrote that excellent piece of prudence in his cabinet, which is called his
Politics, going upon far other principles than those of Alexander's government,
which it has long outlived. The like did Titus Livius in the time of Augustus,
Sir Thomas More in the time of Hen. VIII. and Machiavel when Italy was under
princes that afforded him not the ear. These works nevertheless are all of the
most esteemed and applauded in this kind; nor have I found any man whose like
endeavors have been persecuted since Plato by Dionysius. I study not without
great examples, nor out of my calling; either arms, or this art, being the
proper trade of a gentleman. A man may be entrusted with a ship, and a good
pilot too, yet not understand how to make sea charts. To say that a man may not
write of government, except he be a magistrate, is as absurd as to say, that a
man may not make a sea chart, unless he be a pilot. It is known, that
Christopher Columbus made a chart in his cabinet, that found out the Indies.
The magistrate, that was good at his steerage, never took it ill of him that
brought him a chart, seeing whether he would use it or no, was at his own
choice; and if flatterers, being the worst sort of crows, did not pick out the
eyes of the living, the ship of government at this day throughout Christendom
had not struck so often as she has done. To treat of affairs, says Machiavel,
which as to the conduct of them appertain to others, may be thought a great
boldness; but if I commit errors in writing, these may be known without danger;
whereas, if they commit errors in acting, such come not otherwise to be known
than in the ruin of the commonwealth OCEANA, p. 235.
.

I do not pretend to enter far into political controversy. Life is not long
enough to dispute all that is disputable in so boundless a subject as politics,
or to give the pro and con of all controverted points.

If I sufficiently prove a point, as, That a standing army is dangerous to
liberty, That placemen in the house of commons are inconsistent with the
necessary independence of the representative body, etc. it signifies little
what may be urged in defense of those abuses. For though, Audi alteram partem,
Hear both sides, is a good maxim in law, yet there are cases, when that is
needless. If there be sufficient positive proof, that the accused was at
Edinburgh at the hour, in which a murdered person was killed at London, it can
signify little to hear presumptions of his guilt, unless it were to give a
declaimer an opportunity of shining.

As to the article of style, I am in hopes, every candid reader will allow,
that the collector of such a variety of matter could not well spend time in
gathering the flowers of Parnassus. Such a work as this, adorned with the
flights of rhetoric, would resemble an anchor (would to God this work might
prove an anchor to the tempest-tossed state!) ornamented with carving and
gilding. And I cannot help remarking here, that, of late years, we seem to have
passed from too great a negligence of style to an excess on the labored and
finical side. I have, in what of the following is written by me, aimed at
perspicuity.

The worthlessness of the great is often not less ridiculous than it is odious.
In remarking upon it, I have sometimes been forced to laugh, though with a
heavy heart. This, as I indulge it but seldom, I hope the reader will excuse.

Pascal, a grave author, if ever there was one, recommends the use of ridicule
in opposing opinions too absurd to bear reasoning PROVINC. LETTERS, Let. XI.
.

Shaftsbury carries this point so far as to set up (very erroneously in my
opinion) ridicule for a test of truth, instead of truth for a test of ridicule.
Even the inspired writers have not disdained the use of ridicule See I KINGS,
XVIII.
.

-- ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat?
-- ridiculum acri
Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat res.
HOR. Though the subject of the intended subsequent volumes be the continuation
of what is treated in this first, viz. an enquiry into public abuses, and means
of correcting them; it is my intention, that this and every succeeding volume,
be, in such a manner complete and independent, as to be fit to stand by itself
without any of the others; as if each volume was a different book.

In this volume, for instance, I have endeavored to show, that our parliaments
are, at present, upon such a foot, as to the inadequate state of
representation, the enormous length of their period, and ministerial influence
prevailing in them, that their efficiency for the good of the people is nearly
annihilated, and the subversion of the constitution, and ruin of the state is
(without timely reformation of these abuses) the consequence unavoid^bly to be
expected.

If the candid reader finds, that all this is but too effectually proved in
this first volume, then may this first volume be properly said to be complete,
and independent on those intended to follow.

Those minute critics, whom Mr. Pope dignifies and distinguishes by the title
of Haberdashers of small wares, may plume themselves upon finding some errors
and inaccuracies in this work. In the list of boroughs, for instance, which
send in the majority of the house of commons, two or three places are said to
send 2 members each, whereas they send only one each. But in that calculation
an error of 1000, or 10,000 voters is nothing toward invalidating the assertion
to be proved: And the case will be the same in many other instances. If any
mistakes of importance are pointed out to the author, he will thankfully
acknowledge them. And if he should have occasion to publish a new edition,
corrected, or improved, he will take care, that the first purchasers have the
corrections and improvements gratis.

It never was my design to form a system of politics; therefore I did not hold
myself obliged to treat of all political subjects.

On land war I have collected little, besides considerations, showing, that we
have hardly ever had any occasion to entangle ourselves with the disputes
between the powers on the continent, unless where we could employ our naval
force with success.

Commerce is an immense field, into which, I seldom enter; the comprehensive
Dictionary on that subject by Mr. Postlethwayte, and History by my late
esteemed friend Mr. Anderson, having superseded my labor. In these two books,
and the original authors quoted in them, is contained a treasure of valuable
remarks on that most interesting subject, to which every public-spirited person
in the kingdom ought to attend.

The subjects treated of in this volume are drawn out in the following table of
contents. If the public shows a disposition to receive favorably the remainder
of what I have collected, it shall be published with all convenient speed; as
there is but little wanting to fit it for the press. For the remaining volumes,
I have by me large collections on the following heads, viz.

Of corruption in general; of degeneracy in this country; of manners,
education, luxury, adultery, duelling, etc. of liberty in general; of various
forms of government, their respective advantages and disadvantages; of British
liberty; danger of the loss of liberty, and consequences; of juries, advantages
and disadvantages; of law, and its grievances; of colonies, and the proper
methods for encouraging them; of the army, and dangers from it; advantages of a
militia; the ruinous effects of continental connexions; the importance of the
navy; the conduct of finances, comprehending taxes, customs, excises, national
debt, stock-jobbing, etc.; a view of the arts of wicked ministers, and
favorites; character and conduct of kings; and of lords; a display of
priestcraft; importance of population, comprehending observations on
provisions, monopolies, cultivation of land, etc.; of redress by the people,
when government refuses it; of party; of patriotism, true and false; of
national prejudice, and many other articles.

The subject of these collections, though political, goes beyond mere temporal
concerns. It takes in education, manners, and characters, public and private.
Those are but shallow politics, which do not comprehend sound morals; and the
consequences of the moral characters of men reach into the unseen world.

Long Prefaces are seldom acceptable to readers. I shall therefore beg leave to
break off here for the present, and to leave before the impartial tribunal of
the public my following labors, not doubting but they will be in general
received with the candor, which their intention, more than their merit, may
claim.

BOOKS quoted or referred to, in this First Volume.
A
ARISTOTELIS Politica. Appiani Opera. Antonius Thysius, De Republica
Atheniensi. Ancient Universal History. Almon's Debates of the House of Commons.
Acta Regia. Articuli Cleri. Amand (S.) History of Parliament.
B
Bible. Burnet's History of his Own Times. Brady's History of England.
Blackstone's Commentaries on the English Law. Bohun's Right of Election.
Bor^ase's Natural History of Cornwall. Bacon's (Nathan.) Discourses on the
Government of England. Boswel's Account of Corsica. Bolingbroke's Remarks on
English History.
C
Caesaris Commentarii. Carte's History of England. Coke's Institutes. Cicero de
Legibus. Cole's Memoirs. Cato's Letters. Considerations on the Causes of the
present Discontents. Czarina's Instructions for a Code of Laws.
D
Dionysii Halicarnassensis Opera. Dionis Cassii Historia. Davenant's Works.
Dissertation upon Parties. Dalrymple's Memoirs. Doddridge on Parliaments.
Debates of the Lords. -- of the Commons.
E
Emmii (Ubbonis) Respublicae Vete^ Elsynge on Parliaments.
F
Faction detected by facts.
G
Gordon's Tracts. Grotius, De Antiquitate Reipubl. Batav.
H
Harrington's Oceana. Hakewell's Modus tenendi Parliamentum. Hale's Power of
Parliament. Hume's History, and Essays. Horatii Opera. Historical Essays on the
English Constitution. Harleian Miscellany.
I
Ianicon, Etat present des Provinces Unies.
K
Krzistanowic, Poloniae Descriptio.
L
Livii Historia Romana. Lucani Pharsalia. Lock on Government. Laet (De)
Hispaniae Descriptio. Ludlow's Memoirs.
M
Modern Universal History. Montesquieu L'Esprit des Loix. Magazines. Macaulay's
History of England. Milton's Paradise Lost, Eikonoclastes, etc. Machiavel's
Political Works. Mirror of Justices, by Andrew Horn. Murray (Alex.) Esquire.
Pamph.
N
Nepos (Corn.) Vitae. Newspapers. Nalson's Collections.
P
Platonis Opera. Plutarchi Vitae. Postlethwayte's Dictionary of Commerce;
Britain's True System, etc. Parliamentary History. (Polybius) Preface to a
Fragment from. Pierre (S.) Ouvrages De. Petyt's Miscellania Parliamentaria.
R
Rapin's History of England. Richelieu's Testam. Polit. Review of the
Place-Bill. Reynel's (Abbe) History of English Parl. Retz (Cardinal de)
Memoirs. Rushworth's Collections.
S
Statutes at large. Salust. Historia. Somers's (Lord) Tracts. Steel (Sir
Rich.) Englishman and Crisis. Suetonii Caesares. Simleri Helvetiae Descriptio.
Sidney on Government. Smith's (Sir Thomas) Commonwealth of Engl. State Tracts
written in the time of k. William.
T
Taciti Annal. et Histor. Tindal's Continuation of Rapin's History. Temple's
(Sir William) Works.
V
Velleius Paterculus. Voltaire Essais sur l'Histoire. Virgil. Aeneid.
Verstegan's English Antiquities. Use and Abuse of Parliaments.
W
Willis's Notitia Parliamentaria. Whitelocke's Memoirs. Whitehead's Manners.
CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Of Government Briefly.
CHAP. I. Page 1. Government by Laws and Sanctions, why necessary. CHAP. II.
Page 3. The People the Fountain of Authority, the Object of Government, and
last Resource. CHAP. III. Page 5. Of Government by Representation. CHAP. IV.
Page 6. Advantages of Parliamentary Government, which have recommended it to
many Nations.
BOOK II. Of Parliaments.
CHAP. I. Page 22. Parliaments irregular and deficient, 1, By establishment. 2,
By Abuse. By Establishment they are an inadequate Representation of the People,
and their Period is too long. By Abuse they are corrupt. CHAP. II. Page 24.
Inadequate Representation, its Disadvantages. CHAP. III. Page 36. What would be
adequate Parliamentary Representation. CHAP. IV. Pape 39. View of the present
State of Parliamentary Representation. CHAP. V. Page 55. How Parliamentary
Representation came to be thus inadequate. CHAP. VI. Page 62. Evil of the
Boroughs having so disproportionate a Share in Parliamentary Representation.
CHAP. VII. Page 72. Inadequate Representation universally complained of
Proposals by various Persons for redressing this Irregularity.
BOOK III. Of the second Constitutional Irregularity in our Parliaments, viz.
The excessive Length of their Period.
CHAP. I. Page 83. Parliaments were originally annual. CHAP. II. Page 87. Brief
History of the lengthening and shortening Parliament. CHAP. III. Page 95.
Example of several Nations, who have shown a Fear of inveterate Power. CHAP.
IV. Page 104. Example of the English, in some Ins^ances, shows an Apprehension
of Danger from inveterate Power. CHAP. V. Page 106. Sense of Mankind on
inveterate Power; or, Arguments for short Parliaments. CHAP VI. Page 173. Of
Exclusion by Rotation. CHAP. VII. Page 176. Of Electing by Ballot.
BOOK. IV. Effects of the above Irregularities.
CHAP. I. Page 180. Members of Parliament no longer hold themselves responsible
to the People. CHAP. II. Page 186. The Denial of Responsibility is a novel
Doctrine. CHAP. III. Page 199. Arguments for Responsibility of Members to the
People. CHAP. IV. Page 205. Unwarrantable Privileges assumed by the House of
Commons, in Consequence of inadequate Representation, and too long Parliaments.
CHAP. V. Page 236. Parliamentary Privileges and Prosecutions have been too
generally frivolous and unjust. CHAP. VI. Page 256. Of excluding the people
from the House of Commons, and punishing those who publish the Speeches made
there. CHAP. VII. Page 262. Of Absentes from the House, and Members neglecting
Parliamentary Business.
BOOK V. Of Parliamentary Corruption.
CHAP. I. Page 267. Of the Origin, Funds and Materials of Corruption. CHAP. II.
Page 278. Of Corruption in Elections. CHAP. III. Page 345. Statutes,
Resolutions, etc. against corrupt Proceedings at Elections. CHAP. IV. Page 359.
Of Ministerial Influence in the House.
POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, etc.
BOOK I. Of Government, briefly.
CHAP. I. Government by Laws and Sanctions, why necessary.
IF there be, in any region of the universe, an order of moral agents living in
society, whose reason is strong, whose passions and inclinations are moderate,
and whose dispositions are turned to virtue, to such an order of happy beings,
legislation, administration, and police, with the endlessly various and
complicated apparatus of politics, must be in a great measure superfluous. Did
reason govern mankind, there would be little occasion for any other government,
either monarchical, aristocratical, democratical, or mixed. But man, whom we
dignify with the honorable title of Rational, being much more frequently
influenced, in his proceedings, by supposed interest, by passion, by sensual
appetite, by caprice, by any thing, by nothing, than by reason; it has, in all
civilized ages and countries, been found proper to frame laws and statutes
fortified by sanctions, and to establish orders of men invested with authority
to execute those laws, and inflict the deserved punishments upon the violators
of them. By such means only has it been found possible to preserve the general
peace and tranquillity. But, such is the perverse disposition of man, the most
unruly of all animals, that this most useful institution has been generally
debauched into an engine of oppression and tyranny over those, whom it was
expressly and solely established to defend. And to such a degree has this evil
prevailed, that in almost every age and country, the government has been the
principal grievance of the people, as appears too dreadfully manifest, from the
bloody and deformed page of history. For what is general history, but a view of
the abuses of power committed by those, who have got it into their hands, to
the subjugation, and destruction of the human species, to the ruin of the
general peace and happiness, and turning the Almighty's fair and good world
into a butchery of its inhabitants, for the gratification of the unbounded
ambition of a few, who, in overthrowing the felicity of their fellow creatures,
have confounded their own?

That government only can be pronounced consistent with the design of all
government, which allows to the governed the liberty of doing what,
consistently with the general good, they may desire to do, and which only
forbids their doing the contrary. Liberty does not exclude restraint; it only
excludes unreasonable restraint. To determine precisely how far personal
liberty is compatible with the general good, and of the propriety of social
conduct in all cases, is a matter of great extent, and demands the united
wisdom of a whole people. And the consent of the whole people, as far as it can
be obtained, is indispensably necessary to every law, by which the whole people
are to be bound; else the whole people are enslaved to the one, or the few, who
frame the laws for them.

Were a colony to emigrate from their native land, and settle in a new country,
on what would they propose to bestow their chief attention? On securing the
happiness of the whole? or on the aggrandizement of the governor? If the
latter, all mankind would pronounce those colonists void of common sense. But
in every absolute monarchy, the aggrandizement of the governor is the supreme
object; and the happiness of the people is to yield to it. Were only a handful
of friends to form themselves into one of those little societies we call clubs;
what would be their object? The advantage of the company, or the power of the
chairman?

Very shrewd was Rumbald's saying in Charles II's. time, viz. He did not
imagine, the Almighty intended, that the greatest part of mankind should come
into the world with saddles on their backs, and bridles in their mouths, and a
few ready booted and spurred to ride the rest to death Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES,
II.316.
.

CHAP. II. The People the Fountain of Authority, the Object of Government, and
last Resource.
ALL lawful authority, legislative, and executive, originates from the people.
Power in the people is like light in the sun, native, original, inherent, and
unlimited by any thing human. In governors, it may be compared to the reflected
light of the moon; for it is only borrowed, delegated, and limited by the
intention of the people, whose it is, and to whom governors are to consider
themselves as responsible, while the people are answerable only to God;
themselves being the losers, if they pursue a false scheme of politics. Of
which more hereafter.

As the people are the fountain of power, so are they the object of government,
in such manner, that where the people are safe, the ends of government are
answered, and where the people are sufferers by their governors, those
governors have failed of the main design of their institution, and it is of no
importance what other ends they may have answered.

As the people are the fountain of power, and object of government, so are they
the last resource, when governors betray their trust. And happy is that people,
who have originally so principled their constitution, that they themselves can
without violence to it, lay hold of its power, wield it as they please, and
turn it, when necessary, against those to whom it was entrusted, and who have
exerted it to the prejudice of its original proprietors. Of all which more
copiously hereafter.

Legem majestatis reduxerat, etc. says Tacitus. The ancient lex majestatis
among the Romans was intended against those who injured the state; and the
majesty, in defense of which it was made, was the majesty of the people. But
Tiberius perverted that salutary law into a protection for tyrants. So our
court-sycophants cry out, on every remonstrance against misgovern^^^^ Treason!
The king is betrayed; the nation (...), while nobody but themselves has the
least (...) of hurting the king, nor of ruining any thing, (...) which, if let
alone, will ruin the nation.

CHAP. III. Of Government by Representation.
GOVERNMENT naturally divides itself into legislative and executive. No degree
of wisdom is more than sufficient for the former. For the latter, nothing but
well regulated force is wanted. To compose a system of wise and good laws is
the utmost effort of human sagacity. To carry on the affairs of a nation, in a
long-beaten track, requires only common sense and common diligence.

The most natural and simple idea of government is that of the people's
assembling together in their own persons, for consulting, debating, enacting
laws, and forming regulations, according to which all are to conduct
themselves, and by which the general liberty, property and safety are provided
for. Accordingly this is the plan of government among the Indians in America,
and other simple and uncultivated people; and is described by Caesar, Tacitus,
etc. as having been that of the ancient Gauls, and Germans.

But such a scheme of government is thought only compatible with a small
dominion. In great and populous countries, it being supposed impossible to
assemble together, in a deliberative capacity, the whole body of the people, or
even all the men of property, so as to avoid confusion, and to obtain the
unconstrained opinion of a majority, it is thought necessary to have recourse
to an adequate and freely elected representation.

It may be said, Why might not (in Britain for instance) the inhabitants of
single counties meet together to deliberate on those subjects, which are now
debated in parliament, and afterward communicate the result of their
consultation to a grand national assembly? The answer is, This would still be
government by representation; because the national assembly must be the elected
representatives of the people. Of all which more hereafter.

In planning a government by representation, the people ought to provide
against their own annihilation. They ought to establish a regular and
constitutional method of acting by and from themselves, without, or even in
opposition to their representatives, if necessary. Our ancestors therefore were
provident; but not provident enough. They set up parliaments, as a curb on
kings and ministers; but they neglected to reserve to themselves a regular and
constitutional method of exerting their power in curbing parliaments, when
necessary. Of which I shall have occasion to treat more fully in the sequel.

CHAP. IV. Advantages of parliamentary Government, which have recommended it to
many nations.
THERE is no advantage within the reach of a particular people, that may not be
obtained by parliamentary government in as effectual a manner, as if every
inhabitant of the country were to deliberate and vote in person. But this
supposes parliament free from all indirect influence, and to have no interest
separate from the general good of the commonwealth.

In a country, like Britain, where a parliament is constitutionally the last
resort, and where there lies no regular appeal to the people, the perversion of
parliament from its original intention may prove utter ruin, as leaving no
constitutional means of redress, and compelling the people to take into their
own hands the dangerous work of vindicating their liberties by force; which, in
the concusion of jarring parties, may produce anarchy and end in tyranny. Of
which more hereafter.

Nothing can be imagined more august than a numerous set of wise, free, and
honest men sitting in consultation upon the means for securing the happiness of
a whole people. Such was that most venerable ancient assembly of the
Amphictyons, which was the general tribunal of Greece for judging and deciding
all controversies among the several states. So great was the respect in which
the decisions of that council were held, that their sentences were seldom, or
never, disputed, and that grievous wars were often terminated by their
arbitration. The several states of Greece, in number about twelve, sent each to
this grand court one, two, or three delegates, according to their respective
importance Ubb. EMM. II.277.
.

The Panaetolium of the ancient Aetolians seems to have been an assembly very
much upon the plan of our house of commons. This convention met annually, or
oftener, if necessity required. Representatives were sent to this assembly from
all quarters, with instructions, from which they were not to deviate. In this
Panaetolium resided the whole majesty of the state. In it laws were made and
repealed, alliances formed and renounced, peace and war declared, magistrates
appointed, particularly the chief commander, for every year, etc Ibid. II.251.
.

The ancient Achaia was a confederacy of states, like our modern Holland or
Swisserland Ibid. II.228.
. Each of those little states had its possessions, territories, and boundaries;
each had its senate, or assembly, its magistrates and judges; and every state
sent deputies to the general convention, and had equal weight in all
determinations Ubb. EMM. II.230.
. And most of the neighboring states, which, moved by fear of danger, acceded
to this confederacy, had reason to felicitate themselves.

The government of the ancient commonwealths of Italy, before the Roman was
formed, was much upon a free or parliamentary plan.

The Israelitish government was of the free, or parliamentary kind. The
people's demanding a change of the form of their government into monarchical,
was directly opposite to their constitution, and to the divine intention.
Which, by the bye, shows the absurdity of the doctrine of regal government's
being of divine original. Of which more elsewhere.

The republic of Lycia was a confederacy of towns, which they ranged into three
classes according to their respective importance. To the cities of the first
rank they allowed three votes each in the general council; to those of the
second two, and to those of the third one. For reason taught them, that they,
who have the most at stake, ought to have the greatest weight in all
consultations concerning the common good Ibid. II.300.
.

Sparta, as modelled by the good and wise Lycurgus, was a republican, or
parliamentary government, though of a mixed kind; for there were kings, a
senate elected by the people, and an assembly of the people, the consent of
which last was necessary to the establishment of a law, says Plutarch VIT.
LYCURG. sub init.
. Nor Nor was this mixture an objection against the Spartan government's being
of the free, or parliamentary kind. The Theban, the Dutch, the English, and
other free, or parliamentary governments have all been of the mixed sort,
having admitted kings, or stadtholders, or other chiefs. There has indeed
hardly ever been known a pure commonwealth; though many an unmixed monarchy, or
tyranny. The English republic, which was demolished by the villainous Cromwell,
was one of the most unmixed, that ever was known. It was a true government by
representation; of which more hereafter. In the mean while, now I am mentioning
republican government, I take this opportunity of entering an express caveat
against all accusations of a desire to establish republican principles. I do
not think a friend to this nation is obliged to promote a change in the
constitution. The present form of government by king, lords, and commons, if it
could be restored to its true spirit and efficiency, might be made to yield all
the liberty, and all the happiness, of which a great and good people are
capable in this world. Therefore I do not think it worth while to hazard any
considerable commotion for the sake merely of changing the constitution from
limited monarchy to republican government, though I hardly know the risque it
would not be worth while to run for the sake of changing our government from
corrupt to incorrupt. But to return.

Athens, as reformed by Solon, was a free, or parliamentary state, consisting
of a senate of 400 elected by the people, besides the court of Areopagus. The
poorest of the people had a right of speaking and voting in the assembly of the
people, or, if you please, house of commons. The people indeed possessed, by
this means, a degree of power above the reach of such as the vulgar were in
those ancient unimproved ages, before the art of printing had made knowledge
universal as in our times. The errors in the Athenian state were in the first
concoction. Had Solon been concerned in the original framing of it, that state
would have been longer-lived. He confessed, that all he could do was, To give
the Athenians the best laws their degeneracy could bear Plut. VIT. SOLON.
.

Athens consisted, says Harrington OCEANA, 51.
, of the senate of the bean proposing, of the church or assembly of the people
resolving, and too often debating, which was the ruin of it; as also of the
senate of the Areopagites, the 9 archons, with diverse other magistrates,
executing. Lacedaemon consisted of the senate proposing, of the church or
congregation of the people resolving only, and never debating, which was the
long life of it; and of the two kings, the court of the ephori, with diverse
other magistrates, executing. Carthage consisted of the senate proposing, and
sometimes resolving; of the people resolving, and sometimes debating too; for
which fault she was reprehended by Aristotle, and she had her suffetes, and her
hundred men, with other magistrates, executing. Rome consisted of the senate
proposing, the concio or people resolving, and too oftent debating, which
caused her storms; as also of the consuls, censors, aediles, tribunes,
praetors, quaestors, and other magistrates, executing. Venice consists of the
senate or pregati proposing, and sometimes resolving too; of the great council,
or assembly of the people, in whom the result is constitutively, as also of the
doge, the signory, the censors, the dieci, the quazancies, and other
magistrates, executing. The proceeding of the commonwealths of Switzerland and
Holland is of a like nature, though after a more obscure manner: for the
soverainties, whether cantons, provinces, or cities, which are the people, send
their deputies commissioned and instructed by themselves (wherein they reserve
the result in their own power) to the provincial or general convention or
senate, when the deputies debate, but have no other power of result than what
was conferred upon them by the people, or is farther conferred by the same upon
farther occasion. And for the executive part they have magistrates or judges in
every canton, province, or city, besides those which are more public and relate
to the league, as for adjusting controversies between one canton, province, or
city, and another; or the like between such persons as are not of the same
canton, province, or city.

Thebes, in Boeotia, anciently a monarchy, was afterward changed to a
republic, and was a free or parliamentary government in the times of Pelopidas
and Epaminondas, who raised it to great eminence among the states of those
times, and at whose demise it sunk again into its former obscurity Corn, Nepos.
VIT. PELOP. et EPAMIN. Plut. in PELOP.
.

Carthage was undoubtedly a free, or parliamentary state, without a king;
though I do not know, that we have a particular account of its constitution
from any ancient author, Greek, or Latin; for of the country itself we have not
so much as the name of a writer. We read of their having a senate, and of a
fatal division among the people by the Hannonian faction, which ruined
Hannibal's schemes, and prevented his making a total conquest of Rome after the
battle of Cannae See the Roman Historians of that period.
.

The Roman government down to Julius Caesar was parliamentary. Their senate may
be compared to our house of peers, as the senators sat for life, and in their
own right. And though the Romans had nothing of representation comparable to
our house of commons, supposing our house of commons incorrupt and independent;
yet representation, or giving the people their weight in government, was what
they intended by their tribunes of the people, and by dividing the people into
curiae, comitia, tribes, etc. The Roman republic was but half-formed, and the
formed part was the least valuable. We read often of the tribunes sending the
consuls to prison; and, we find the senate depriving the tribunes of their
office ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII. p. 143.
. This shows the Roman republic to have been miserably ill-balanced, when the
senate was sometimes above the tribunes, and the tribunes sometimes above the
consuls. Romulus had originally divided the people into three tribes, and each
of these into ten curiae. He chose one senator himself, and ordered each of the
tribes, and curiae to choose three, which amounted to 100 in all. None but
patricians could be senators. Thus 99 of the 100 senators owed their seats to
the people. When the 100 Sabines were added, they were all patricians, and all
chosen by the people. When Tarquinius Priscus, to ingratiate himself with the
people at his accession, chose 100 senators out of their body; he enobled them
first* The number of the senators probably continued to be about 300 till the
time of Sylla, 530 years from Tarquinius Priscus. Sylla probably increased the
number (by bringing in men for his purpose, to above 400. But these additional
senators were still chosen by the people. Caesar, to strenthen his party,
increased the senate to 900, introducing all sorts of men, as new-made
citizens, half barbarous Gauls, soldiers, and sons of freed-men. It would be a
ridiculous to think of the people's having any hand in this transaction. For in
Caesar's time the army ruled all. And lastly the triumvirs increased the senate
to above 1000. In the imperial times it is of no consequence what the number of
the senate was; because all power was then engrossed by the emperors, and the
senate was an empty name; that mighty senate, of which Cineas Pyrrhus's
ambassador, said, it seemed to him an assembly of kings; that senate, which was
for ages the scourge of tyrants, was then become a mere ergastulum of slaves,
the drudges, the flatterers, and supporters of tyrants.

After Coriolianus's time, A. U. C. 263, the plebeians became eligible, without
being ennobled, into the senate. And those magistrates, who were called curule,
had the privilege, during a certain time, of giving their votes in the senate,
though they were not senators.

The Roman senators voted either by a general Aye or No, sitting in their
places, or by separately declaring each his sententia, as the censors called
their names; or by dividing, those for the question going to one side of the
house, and those against it to the other, which they called, ire pedibus in
sententiam tuam, etc. and those senators, who only divided, without giving
their reasons, were called senatoris pedarii Dion. Halic. Dion. Cass. Live*
Appian. Vell. Paterc. Sueton. Pass.
.

The Roman republic was indeed never finished. For the caprice of the multitude
was left to operate at random. So that every popular demagogue had it in his
power to spirit up the multitude to whatever pitch of madness might suit his
ambitious, or interested views. Nor was the general sense of the Roman people
known by the fluctuating violence of the mob of the capital, who were often
deceived, and often influenced, by largesses of corn, or by shows of
gladiators; but who had more weight in the government, than the consuls,
senate, and all the citizens of Italy and the other Roman dominions. The error
consisted in the want of a regular subdivision, and representation of the
people. The body of the people of property ought to have in their own hands the
government of themselves. But the multitude in one great and debauched city
ought not to be considered as the body of the people. The tribunitial power was
too great. The appeals to the people at large, and their voting at large, (...)
what first opened a door for the contests of Sylla and Marini, and of Caesar
and Pompey, which overset liberty.

The great error in the Roman republic was, That the people, or plebeians were
not represented, but voted in a collective body; which occasioned continual
tumult and confusion. They assembled in innumerable multitudes, and forced
their tribunes upon whatever their licentious fancy dictated. They had no
reading; consequently were very ignorant; and often chose the worst measure,
when the senators, if left to themselves, would have chosen much better for
them.

The Gauls to Pharamond's time, who died A. D. 428, managed all affairs in the
assembly of the people, where they set up and dethroned their kings at their
pleasure.

The power of the French kings was anciently restrained within very narrow
limits. Liberty was the same in France, as in all the Gothic states. The power
was in the assembly of the states. The frequent calling of general assemblies
was thought inconvenient. Therefore they had standing committees, which gave
(...) to the parliaments of France. The parliament of Paris first attended the
king, then was fixed to Paris, for convenience. They formerly judged the Peers
and great men of the kingdom, over whom the king had no power, because they
were to be tried by their peers. All the great officers of state took their
oaths in parliament; not bound personally to the king, but in his political
capacity. Laws had no force, unless they regestered them. The efficiency of all
those checks is now lost. No assembly of the states now heard of. Parliaments
are only the shadow of what they were. Their tyrant has the liberties of the
subject entirely at his mercy; imprisons whom he pleases; sets up what judges
he pleases, to try whom he pleases, and convict them of what crime he pleases.
The great officers take the oaths to him, and are responsible to him, and not
at all, as formerly, to the people.

This is the work of Richeliu MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLIII. p. 413.
.

Advices from France, Ian. 1773, signify, that the princes of the blood have
yielded to the court, and that the parliaments of France will be abolished to
the very name: the thing has long been lost. This abolition has accordingly
taken place since.

The three estates of France, in their times of freedom, were, 1. The clergy
(they will always be uppermost.) 2. The nobility. 3. The deputies of the
provinces.

According to the original system of the Franks, every free subject was
entitled to some share in government, either in person, or by representation
MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIII.396.
.

Frequent conventions of the states of Denmark, when that country was free,
were a fundamental article of the Danish constitution. They consulted
concerning matters of government, laws, peace and (...) taxes, and promotions
to offices Ibid. XXXII.18.


The Swedish government has always been upon a parliamentary, or free plan. In
that country, till the revolution in 1772, four estates made the laws, viz.
1000 noblesse, 100 ecclesiastics (just 100 too many) 150 citizens, and about
250 peasants Volt. ESS. SUR. l'HIST. IV.241.
. They had no nobility before A. D. 1560. Voltair observes, that Charles XI.
was the first absolute prince in Sweden, and Charles XII. his grandson, the
last.

In Sweden, the supreme power is vested, not in the king, but the senate, which
is no other than a committee of twelve chosen out of the estates, or parliament
of the kingdom, to control the king in all actions, which they dislike
Clutterbuck's Speech, Tind. CONTIN. VIII.215.
.

The Bolognese, A. D. 1200, had lively ideas of the Roman republic. They had
consuls, whose powers were like those of Rome; and many inferior magistrates,
whom they seldom suffered to continue in power above a year MOD UNIV. HIST.
XXXVII.3.
. In a time of public danger they continued them several years, if they thought
them wise and faithful Ibid. 14.
.

Marseilles, like Holland, was a free republic planted by a set of brave people
flying from slavery Ubb. EMM. II.285.
.

Grotius DE ANTIQU. REIP. BATAV. cap. 11.
celebrates the Dutch, for that, like the ancient Romans, they have always been
against kingly government. That in the times of Caesar, the commands of the
people had as much power over the principes, or elected chiefs, as theirs over
the people, Non minus in ipsos juris, etc. Caes. BELL. GALL. V.
. Grotius quotes Tacitus DE MORI^. GERM.
, who observes, that all the Germans were for liberty, and that by liberty the
Romans meant republican government, is evident from Tacitus's expre^^ion, Urbem
Romam a principio, etc. Rome was originally under kingly government. Liberty'
(in opposition to monarchy) and the consular power were established by Brutus;
and from Lucan PHARS. VII.
, Libertas ultra Tanaim, etc. Liberty' (after the decisive battle) fled beyond
the Don and the Rhine; and what is now possessed by the German and Scythian, so
often obtained at the expense of our blood, is denied to us.

The Spanish cortes were much the same as our parliaments, composed of
prelates, masters of the military orders, nobles, and representatives sent from
the cities, and towns (no mention of counties). No act could pass unless they
were unanimous as our juries. And the acts must be confirmed by the king. They
were assembled by summons from the king and privy council, and dissolved by
order of the president of the council. But a committee of eight sat still. They
have been rarely called since 1647. Their last sitting was in 1713. They were
laid aside by Charles V. because they would grant no money, and because he
found he could raise money without them. The Visigoths governed in Spain about
350 years, terminating about A. D. 700. During that period, Spain was very
respectable. Her government was free; her church more pure than others, from
popish superstition, rejecting the pope's supremacy. Her monarchs, elective and
limited, as in almost all the Gothic states, commanded the army, called general
councils, proposed the subjects to be considered, gave their sanction to laws,
gave out edicts merely executive, coined money, gave employments, conferred
honors; but all under correction of the general council, who could set aside
any of the king's acts MOD. UNIV. HIST. XIX, 480, 482, 484, 486.
. All the northern nations had such a mixed form of government, in which no
money could be raised, nor laws made, or repealed, but with their consent.
Spain is now under absolute government, occasioned by the timidity of the
Castilians, who finally gave up the cause of liberty on a defeat in war,
between them and Charles V. which lasted only two years (the Dutch fought for
liberty 70 years). Charles told the cortes, he wanted them to grant him
supplies first, and then he would pass their bills. The wretched Castilians
gave up the point, and voted their tyrant, whom they ought to have destroyed,
almost half a million sterling. Such is the inertia of mankind MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XLIII.365.
.

The cortes of Portugal have long since sold to the crown their part in the
legislature. Their government, which was once free and parliamentary, is now
unmixed despotism, and their cortes like the parliaments of France Ibid. 389.
. The ceremony of giving Don Alonzo I. of Portugal the kingdom, by the public
approbation of the people, A. D. 1140, exhibited a glorious spirit in both king
and people Ibid. XXII.25.
.

The Helvetic confederacy is the most considerable republican or parliamentary
government, after the Venetian Simleri, HELV. DESCR. p. 25.
. The Swiss cantons are not, properly speaking, a republic, but an union of
several republics. But they have a common assembly, in which all matters
interesting to the whole community are debated; whatever is there determined by
the majority, binds the whole; they all agree in making peace, and declaring
war; and the laws and customs, which prevail throughout the Swiss cantons, are
(excepting the difference in religion between the protestant and popish
provinces) nearly the same Ibid. 27.
. There are, indeed, some differences both in constitution and administration.
But so are there differences between the three kingdoms, and the numerous
colonies, which compose the British dominion; nay there are differences between
the customs in the several counties of England. All this shows, contrary to a
common prejudice, that the largest dominions, as well as the smallest, may be
administered in the republican form with as much success as in the monarchical.
The Roman republic took in a much greater extent of dominion than many modern
kingdoms put together; and was, with all its imperfections, as well
administered, to say the least, as most monarchies have been. But this is
matter of speculation merely.

The diet of Poland is constitutionally composed of king, senate, bishops, and
deputies of the landholders of every palatinate. Every owner of three acres of
land has a vote for a member. And the majority carries every point. But in the
general diet, unanimity is necessary. Every palatinate (without regard to the
towns in it) sends three members. The indigent gentry are always directed by
some person of superior fortune, influence, or ability. The diet of Poland
consists of an upper and lower house. The upper house contains the senate, the
superior clergy, and the great officers; the lower the representatives of the
palatinates MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIV.10.
. An edict by king Iagellon, who reigned in the 16th century, found contrary to
his coronation oath, was hewn in pieces before his face by the Polish ^abres
Ibid. 523.
. The Polish nobility will not give up the privilege of electing their kings,
though they always elect the hereditary successor Stanisl. Krzislanowic, POLON.
DESCR. p. 27.
. By this they impress their Kings with the idea of obligation to their
subjects; and at the same time, the heir to the crown is properly educated.

When liberty began to dawn (says Voltaire) ES^. SUR. l'HIST. II.189.
about A. D. 1300, the states general of France, the parliament of England, the
states of Arragon and Hungary, and the diets of the German empire were all
nearly on the same foot, as to the privileges and consequence of the third
estate. [We have seen some difference arise since the above period. Let Britain
take care, lest she come into the condition, into which those states are
fallen.]

France (says the same author) Ibid. 128.
was once governed as England is now. The kings assembled the states. In the
year 1355, they made their king John sign a charter much like the Magna Charta
of England.

There was scarce an absolute prince in Europe, about the 13th century. But the
nobles were tyrants, and the feudal tenures universal MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XLIII.521.
In short, to use the words of the great Alg. Sidney ON GOV. p. 378.
, In Germany, France, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia,
Scotland, England, and generally all the nations, that have lived under the
gothic polity, this supreme power has been in their general assemblies under
the name of diets, cortes, senates, parliaments, etc.

BOOK II. Of Parliaments.
CHAP. I. Parliaments irregular and deficient, 1, By Establishment. 2, By
Abuse. By Establishment they are an inadequate Representation of the People,
and their Period is too long. By Abuse they are corrupt.
PARLIAMENTS in England have been of very fluctuating importance in different
ages. It was long before they got to what might be called a bearing* And even
now, there is in them infinitely more wrong than right, as will too manifestly
appear by what follows.

Parliaments are irregular and deficient, 1, by establishment; and 2, by abuse.
When I distinguish between the irregularities and deficiencies in our
parliaments by establishment, and by abuse, I mean by the former such
irregularities and deficiencies* as are known and avowed, as their too great
length, their being an inadequate representation, etc. By the latter, I mean
those which have insensibly crept in, and prevail through connivance, as
corruption at elections, and in the house, etc.

It is justly remarked by Mr. Hume, That whatever, in government, is publicly
allowed at any particular period, may be said to be constitutional at that
period, especially (it may be added) if it has been regularly and openly
introduced and established by approbation of the majority of those, who have
the power of establishing (...)*

The lengthening of parliaments from annual to triennial, and from triennial to
septennial, is undoubtedly an abuse (of which more hereafter) but being
avowedly effected at first, and allowed since, this abuse becomes
constitutional.

But the buying of boroughs, and of votes in the house of commons, was never
fairly established, nor openly avowed as a regular proceeding, and is therefore
a mere abuse, and not a constitutional error.

Almost all political establishments have been the creatur^s of chance rather
than of wisdom. There are few instances of a people forming for themselves a
constitution from the foundation. Therefore it is impossible to say what would
be the effect of a perfect commonwealth; there being no example of such a
phenomenon. The common course of those matters has been, that either a people
have emigrated from an old established government, and have wrought into their
new system of politics the errors and deficiencies, which had crept into the
old; or a few wise and good men have undertaken to repair and patch up a crazy
constitution; and then, like Solon, they found themselves obliged to be content
with as good a constition as the people would bear, instead of such an one as a
wise legislator could frame. And in establishing this constitution, they have
been obliged to yield to the violence of party, and the blindness of prejudice,
and to suffer various particulars to be established contrary to their own
better judgment. So that the machine of government being pushed one way by one
party, and the contrary by another, is at last pushed into a bog, or set on the
edge of a precipice, and left out of the perpendicular, like the hanging tower
of Pisa, to be propped and shored up by posterity. This is in part the case of
our own constitution, especially with respect to the commons house of
parliament. If there be in a ship at sea ten leaks, to stop nine of them will
not put the crew in a state of safety; though they must perhaps be stopped one
after another, they must all be stopped, else the consequence is obvious;
Accipient inimicum imbrem, etc.

VIRG. There are several frightful leaks in the great vessel of the British
state, which, if they be not all stopped, must sink it.

The grievances requiring redress, which respect parliament, are chiefly these:
1. By establishment they are in no respect a representation of the property of
the people. 2. Their period is, likewise by establishment, of an enormous
length. 3. They are, by abuse, corrupt, or fallen under an undue influence both
as to the election of members, and their voting in the house.

CHAP. II. Inadequate Representation, its Disadvantages.
WHEN our ancestors first proposed government by representation, it is certain,
they intended adequate representation; for no other deserves the name, or
answers the end.

Every Englishman (says Sir Thomas Smith COM. WEALTH OF ENG. 37.
) is intended to be present in parliament, either in person, or by procuration
and attorney, of what preeminence, state, dignity, or quality soever he be,
from the prince to the lowest person of England. And the consent of the
parliament is taken to be every man's consent.

In a free state (says judge Blackstone Blackst. COMM. I.158.
) every man, who is supposed a free agent' (that is, not through poverty,
absolutely dependent on the will of another) ought to be, in some measure, his
own governor, and therefore a branch, at least, of the legislative power ought
to reside in the whole body of the people.

It is evident, that inadequate representation in parliament is utterly
inconsistent with the idea of free government. For a people governed contrary
to their inclination, or by persons, to whom they have given no commission for
that purpose, are, in the properest sense of the phrase, an enslaved people, if
ever there was an enslaved people.

Il est essentiel de fixer, etc. It is necessary (says the excellent
Montesquieu Montesq. L' ESPR. DES. LOIX. I.13.
) to fix the number of citizens who are to vote; otherwise it is uncertain
whether the people, or only a part of the people, have given their sense. (We
know full well, that it is but a very small part of the people of England whose
votes fill the house of representatives, and that the votes of both electors
and members are most barefacedly influenced.) At Sparta, the sense of the
people was collected from a suffrage of 10,000. At Rome, this was neglected;
which was one great cause of its ruin.

To compare great things with small, could the East India company be said to be
established on a proper foot, if 100 proprietors, whose stock amounted in all
to 5,000 l. had the power of choosing the court of directors against the votes
of 5000 proprietors, whose stock was worth 5,000,000 l, and if the court of
directors, when chosen, possessed absolute power without a peal, and thought
themselves responsible to no set of men upon earth? Or if a friendly society
consisting of 100 members found that the whole power of the society was
engrossed by 3 members; and that the others could obtain nothing they wanted,
or in the manner they wished to have it; could this society be, with any shadow
of propriety, called free? That parliamentary representation on its present
foot, is as inconsistent with liberty, will appear but too clearly in the
sequel.

That a part of the people, a small part of the people, and the most needy and
dependent part of the people, should engross the power of electing legislators,
and deprive the majority, and the independent part of the people of their
right, which is, to choose legislators for themselves and the minority and
dependent part of the people, is the grossest injustice that can be imagined.

Every government, to have a reasonable expectation of permanency, ought to be
founded in truth, justice, and the reason of things. Our admirable
constitution, the envy of Europe, is founded in injustice. Eight hundred
individuals rule all, themselves accountable to none. Of these about 300 are
born rulers, whether qualified or not. Of the others, a great many are said to
be elected by a handful of beggars instead of the number and property, who have
the right to be the electors. And of these pretended electors, the greatest
part are obliged to choose the person nominated by some lord, or by the
minister. Instead of the power's returning annually into the hands of the
people, or, to speak properly of the boroughs, the lengthening of parliament to
septennial, has deprived them of six parts in seven of their power; and if the
power returned annually, as it ought, all the people would still have reason to
complain, but the handful, who vote the members into the house.

In consequence of the inadequate state of representation, the sense of the
people may be grossly misapprehended, or misrepresented, and it may turn out to
be of very little consequence, that members were willing to obey the
instructions of their constiuents; because that would not be obeying the
general sense of the people. For the people are not their constituents. The
people of England are the innumerable multitude which fills, like one continued
city, a great part of Middlesex, Kent and Surry; the countless inhabitants of
the vast ridings of Yorkshire, the multitudes, who swarm in the cities and
great towns of Bristol, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Ely, and others;
some of which places have no representatives at all, and the rest are unequally
represented. These places comprehend the greatest part of the people. Whereas
the instructions would be sent from the hungry boroughs of Cornwall, Devonshire,
etc. In short, the sense of the constituents would be, at best, only the sense
of a few thousands; whereas it ought to be that of several hundreds of
thousands, as will be very clearly made out by and by.

Neither in Scotland nor England (says Rapin Rapin, II.583.
) are are resolutions of parliament to be always considered as the sense of the
nation. It is a defect of the constitution of both houses, that the members of
parliament receive no instructions from their electors. The moment they are
met, they become masters and sovereigns of those by whom they are chosen, and
palm upon the nation their own decisions for those of the public, though they
are often contrary to the sentiments and interests of the people they
represent. Instances are so frequent, that I need not stay to prove what I
advance. It must not be imagined (says he Ibid. II.9.
) that then, (in the times of Henry VIII.) any more than at this day, whatever
the parliament did was agreeable to the general opinion of the nation. The
representative was chosen as at present, without any instruction concerning the
points to be debated in parliament, nay without the people's knowing any thing
of them. Thus the house of commons had, as I may say, an unlimited power to
determine by a majority of votes, with the concurrence of the lords and assent
of the king, what they deemed proper for the welfare of the kingdom. [In our
times (the present always excepted) what they deem proper for the welfare of
the junto.] There was no necessity therefore, in order to obtain what the court
desired, of having the consent of the people, but only the majority of voices
in both houses. Hence it is easy to conceive, that the court used all
imaginable means to cause such members to be elected, as were in their
sentiments. This is now, and ever will be practiced, till some cure is found
for this inconvenience. I call it an inconvenience, because it happens
sometimes that the parliament passes acts contrary to the general opinion of
the nation.

Under a whig ministry (says the same author Rapin, II.806.
) we see a whig parliament chosen, under a tory ministry a tory parliament. It
has frequently happened, that the resolutions of the lower house have been
directly contrary to the sentiments of the people, whom they represented. So it
is not the people, or commons of England that share the legislative power with
the king and peers; but the representatives, who enjoy a privilege, which
belongs only to the people in general, to whom however they are not accountable
for their conduct. All they can suffer, if they have acted in parliament
contrary to the sense of their county, or borough, is not to be elected again
Ibid.
.

Parliament under Henry VIII. confirmed the demolition of the papal power over
England, and the dissolution of the religious houses; under Edward VI.
demolished popery; under Mary, set it up again; under Elizabeth, overthrew it a
second time. So we have seen parliament stamp the Americans, then unstamp them,
and then tax them in a new manner. Parliament has not, in these sudden doings
and undoings, followed the sense of the people. The unsteady people are not so
unsteady as this comes to. In former times, parliament was too much overawed by
the authority of kings: in latter times, too much swayed by ministerial
influence; and all this in consequence of its being in no respect a just and
accountable representative of the people.

In former ages (says Mr. Cornwall Alm. DEB. COM. II.192.
, in the house, A. D. 1685.) the complexion of this house might have been
depended on as a true representation of the inclinations of the people; but by
whatever magic art it has been brought about, the case is now directly
contrary. The complexion of this assembly is always the same with that of our
ministers. We adopt all their measures. We applaud every step of their conduct.
We are angry with those they happen to be angry with. We enquire when they set
us on; and we stop when they say, You have gone far enough. Sir, we have had
for many years past a course of most excellent ministers, or this house has by
some magic art been rendered blind to their failings. I say some magic art, for
if by any art we have been rendered remiss in our duty, it must have been by
some art of the Devil permitted by God Almighty for the punishment of our sins;
and if so, I hope he will dispell the enchantment, before we have blindly run
ourselves into irrecoverable perdition.

The nation in general disapproved of the proceedings of the tory commons, A.
D. 1701, and the justices of peace, grand jury, freeholders, etc. of Kent
presented a petition, lamenting the divisions in the kingdom, and the
reflections cast upon the king (by the commons) recommending union, attention to
the sense of the people, supplies, etc. The house votes it scandalous,
insolent, seditious, tending to destroy the constitution of parliament, and to
subvert the established government of these realms. They ordered the gentlemen,
who presented it, to be taken into custody. One escaped. It was apprehended
that force would be used to rescue the others. The house orders them to the
gatehouse, and addresses the king to issue his proclamation for apprehending
Colepepper again, and for putting out of the commission of the peace and
lieutenancy such of the petitioners as were in them. Then the legion letter was
sent to the speaker, which begun thus, Gentlemen, it were to be wished you were
men of that temper, and possessed of so much honor, as to bear with the truth,
though it be against you, especially from us, who have so much right to tell it
to you: But since even petitions to you from your masters (for such are the
people who choose you (are so haughtily received as with the committing the
authors to illegal custody; you must give us leave to give you this fair notice
of your misbehaviour. If you think fit to rectify your errors, you will do
well, and possibly may hear no more of us; but if not, assure yourselves the
nation will not long hide their resentments. And though there are no stated
proceedings to bring you to your duty, yet the great law of reason says, and
all nations allow, that whatever power is above law, is burdensome and
tyrannical, and may be reduced by extra-judicial methods. You are not above the
people's resentment; they that made you members may reduce you to the same rank
from whence they chose you, and may give you a taste of their abused kindness
in terms you may not be pleased with, etc. DEB. COM. III.142. Burn. HIST. OWN
TIMES, III.381.


The imprisoning of the Kentish petitioners was afterward condemned in
parliament. Yet the commons condemned the petition itself, and resolved, that
to assert, that the house of commons is not the only representative of the
commons of England, or that the commons have no power of commitment* but over
their own members, or to reflect on the proceedings of the house, or of any
member in the house, are high violations of the privileges of the house of
commons Tind. CONTIN. I.503.
. All this is the height of despotism, and is indeed inconsistent with itself.

Queen Anne, in her answer to the parliament's address, A. D. 1714, says, She
esteems the address and approbation of the peace of Utrecht, the undoubted
voice of her people^ But the lords in their first address to George I. say, It
was by no means to be imputed to the nation in general. And the commons in less
than a year afterward, said, As that dishonor cannot in justice be imputed to
the whole nation, etc. All this shows that a parliament may have one interest,
and the nation another. This could not be, if parliaments were really what it
is pretended they are Ibid. II.356.
.

The treaty of Utrecht (says the duke of Argyle DEB. LORDS, VI.332.
, in the house of peers, A. D. 1739) was approved of by a majority in both
houses of parliament. I remember, I then disapproved of it, and gave my
sentiments very freely in this house against it; and I remember the reward I
met with for so doing. That very treaty was in a following parliament, so
highly disapproved of, that some of those who had the chief hand in making it,
were punished by parliament; and others had perhaps been more severely punished
if they had not fled from justice. This my lords, may perhaps be the fate of
the convention in some future parliament, though the father of it seems now
extremely fond of his child: for I cannot but look upon his majesty's speech
and the address now proposed as a second approbation of that convention. I must
think them designed as a new triumph over those that opposed it, which can give
no great joy to the nation, whatever it may do to the father of the convention;
and therefore I wish that in order to make his country rejoice as well as
himself, he would hereafter take as much care to triumph over those that oppose
it.

When the bill for searching houses in quest of sailors was before the commons,
A. D. 1739, it was found to be very unpopular, and the people of Glocestershire
petitioned against it in a very high style, That it would, as the petitioners
apprehend, impose hardships upon the people too heavy to be borne, and excite
discontents in the minds of his majesty's subjects; would subvert all the
rights and privileges of a Briton, and overturn Magna Charta itself, the basis
on which they are built; and by these means destroy that very liberty, for the
preservation of which the present royal family was established upon the throne
of Great Britain; for which reasons such a law could never be obeyed, or much
blood would be shed in consequence of it. The house took ^^ch offense at this
petition, that they voted, 196 to 144, it should not lie upon their table DEB.
LORDS, VI.289.
.

Hear Mr. Pit on this subject, A. D. 1741. The misfortune is, that gentlemen
who are in office, seldom converse with any but such as are in office, and such
men, let them think what they will, always applaud the conduct of their
superiors; consequently, gentlemen who are in the administration, or in any
office under it, can rarely know what is the voice of the people. The voice of
this house was formerly, I shall grant, and always ought to be the voice of the
people. If new parliaments were more frequent, and few placemen and no
pensioners admitted, it would be so still; but if long parliaments be
continued, and a corrupt influence should prevail, not only at elections, but
in this house, the voice of the house will generally be very different, nay
often directly contrary to the voice of the people DEB. COM. XIII.172.
. So that gentlemen thought 30 years ago, and to the same purpose, a few years
since, on the stamp act, he charged the house of commons with an unlimited
compliance with the demands of the ministry.

In the case of Ashby and White, the resolutions of the commons were directly
contrary to the sense of the people. The people's universal opinion was, that
the commons took too much upon them; and that any person may, and ought to
appeal to the courts of justice and the law of the land, when he thinks himself
deprived of his right as an elector; the resolutions of a house of commons
being unsteady and vague, while the law of the land is notorious and permanent.
Of which more hereafter.

We have, in our own times, seen a most remarkable instance of disagreement
between the sense of the people, and that of parliament. We have seen
parliament repeatedly expel Mr. Wilkes. And we have seen the people so highly
offended at this proceeding, that 60,000 of them have petitioned the king to
dissolve this parliament. In consequence of which numerous petitions, it was to
be expected, that some notice would be taken in the king's, that is the
minister's speech, next ensuing. Instead of which (so low, is the people's
importance sunk, and so little regard shown to their opinion) the laughter of
all Europe was excited by a few frivolous paragraphs about a pretended sickness
among the horned cattle, of which no body had heard any thing before as then
existing in England, nor has any one since. It was moved in the house of
commons, that, in their address, in answer to the above profound speech, the
house should declare their intention of enquiring into the causes of the
present discontents. Several of the courtly members gravely denied that there
was any discontent in the kingdom, though they knew that 60,000 had subscribed
petitions for a dissolution of parliament. They might have argued more
plausibly, that there was no parliament then existing. For it will appear
presently, that a tenth part of the above number sends in the majority of the
house. And if the voluntary petition of 60,000 deserves no regard, surely the
bought votes of 5000 ought to go for nothing. Others of the opposers of the
motion said, The affair did not come regularly before them; as if they had
declared, that the house of commons, the grand inquest of the nation, the
representatives of the people of England, are not obliged to enquire into a
matter of such consequence in the opinion of the people, that 60,000 of them
had thought it necessary to complain to the sovereign; or as if they so wholly
disregarded the opinion of ten times the number of the electors of the majority
of their house, concerning their own conduct, that they did not think it worth
while to enquire what had so grievously offended so great a number of their
constituents, as to provoke them to the unusual measure of petitioning the king
for their dissolution. Others of the courtly gentlemen, in imitation of
Walpole, said, the petitioners were base-born. But surely they could not be
more base-born, than the beggars, who send in the majority of the house of
commons.

The ministerial party, however, carried it against the motion See LAND. MAG.
1770, p. 32.
.

CHAP. III. What would be adequate Parliamentary Representation.
FIVE millions, according to the estimate of my incomparable friend Dr. Price,
and our best modern calculators, is nearest to the true number of the people of
England. The males between 6 and 56 in 5 millions are 1,250,000, or a fourth
part of the whole. As youth at 16 are of an age too immature to be capable of
voting, so are many on the contrary capable of voting beyond the age of 56; and
one may be supposed to make up for the other. It is commonly insisted on, that
persons in servitude to others, and those who receive alms, ought not to be
admitted to vote for members of parliament, because it is supposed, that their
votes will be influenced by those, on whom they depend.

But the objection from influence would fall to the ground, if the state were
on a right foot, and parliament free from court-influence. Supposing half the
constitution in disorder, it is not easy to determine what would be best for
the other half. My purpose is, to point out all the defects. And if the people
will correct all I shall point out, I will then answer, that all shall go well;
but not if they amend by halves. -- To return, --

Every man has what may be called property, and unalienable property. Every man
has a life, a personal liberty, a character, a right to his earnings, a right
to a religious profession and worship according to his conscience, etc. and
many men, who are in a state of dependence upon others, and who receive
charity, have wives and children, in whom they have a right. Thus the poor are
in danger of being injured by the government in a variety of ways. But,
according to the commonly received doctrine, that servants, and those who
receive alms, have no right to vote for members of parliament, an immense
multitude of the people are utterly deprived of all power in determining who
shall be the protectors of their lives, their personal liberty, their little
property (which though singly considered is of small value, yet is upon the
whole a very great object) and the chastity of their wives and daughters, etc.
What is particularly hard upon the poor in this case is, that though they have
no sha^e in determining who shall be the lawgivers of their country, they have
a very heavy share in raising the taxes which support government. The taxes on
malt, beer, leather, soap, candles, and other articles, which are paid chiefly
by the poor, who are allowed no votes for members of parliament, amount to as
much as a heavy land tax. The landed interest would complain grievously, if
they had no power of electing representatives. And it is an established maxim
in free states, that whoever contributes to the expenses of government ought to
be satisfied concerning the application of the money contributed by them;
consequently ought to have a share in electing those, who have the power of
applying their money. Nor has the receiving of alms been always held a
sufficient reason for refusing the privilege of voting, as appears by the
following; Resolved, A. D. 1690, That the free men of the port of Sandwich,
inhabiting within the said borough, (although they receive alms) have a right
to vote in electing barons to serve in parliament. Bohun's RIGHT OF ELECT. p.
257. from the JOURNAL OF THE HOUSE OF COM.
Query, Whether there be not other instances of persons receiving alms, having
a right to vote for members.

But, giving up the point, concerning the right of the poor to vote for members
of parliament, the present state of parliamentary representation will still
appear to be inadequate beyond all proportion. Of the 1,250,000, the whole
number of males in England, we may well suppose that at least one third, or
about 416,000 are housekeepers, and independent on alms Divide this number by
513, the number of members for England, the quotient is 799 and a fraction, the
round number is 800, which shows, that no member of parliament ought to carry
his election against a competitor by fewer than 401 votes, that being a
majority of 800, who have the right of voting, exclusive of the poor and
dependent. If we allow them the privilege of choosing representatives, which I
see no argument against, the number will be much greater, viz. about 1200, a
majority of which is 601.

Mr. Postlethwayte reckons 639,000 taxable persons in England, excluding Wales
BRIT. TRUE SYST. 313.
. And every person, who pays tax, ought to have a vote. Calculators did
formerly reckon above 6,000,000 of souls in England and Wales. And Dr. Price
shows, that there is great reason to apprehend (with much concern I write it)
that we have lost a fourth part of our people. Supposing Postlethwayte's number
of taxable persons in England and Wales together to be 630,000; dividing this
number by 513 shows, that no member ought to be voted into the house by fewer
than the majority of 1200; for 1200 have a right, and 601 ought to be the
smallest number of votes actually given to him who gains his election against a
competitor. Or if we calculate by counties, the present state of representation
will appear enormously absurd. The most adequate plan for forming an assembly
of representatives, would be, for every county, including the cities, boroughs,
cinque ports, or universities it happens to contain, to send in a proportion of
the 513 answering to its contribution to the public expense. Were that the
plan, we should, in the same manner, see no member sent into the house by fewer
than several hundreds of voters. Of which hereafter.

CHAP. IV. View of the present State of Parliamentary Representation.
LET the reader judge for himself of the monstrous irregularity of
parliamentary representation, from the following view of it by the learned and
indefatigably laborious Brown Willis, Esquire in his NOTIT. PARLIAM.

In the following extract, I have stated the majority as the only electors in
each place; which they really are, the votes of the minority being inefficient.
I have given to Wallingford, for instance, 76, the majority of 150 electors,
which latter is the whole number of voters in that borough; so that no member
for Wallingford can be elected by more than 76 efficient votes; and he, who has
76 votes, is as effectually elected as if he had the whole 150. And I have
computed the number of votes, which elect the majority of the house, as the
majority is the same, to all intents and purposes of legislation, with the
whole 558, nem. con.

WALLINGFORD sends 2 members chosen by 76, the majority of 150. Agmondesham --
2 -- -- -- -- 66. Wendover -- 2 -- -- -- -- 81. Marlow -- 2 -- -- -- -- 76.
Leskeard -- 2 -- -- -- -- 51. Lestwithiel -- 2 -- -- -- -- 13. Truro -- 2 -- --
-- -- 14. Bodmin -- 2 -- -- -- -- 19. Helston -- 2 -- -- -- -- 34. Saltash -- 2
-- -- -- -- 15. Camelford -- 2 -- -- -- -- 10. Westlaw -- 2 -- -- -- -- 40.
Grampound -- 2 -- -- -- -- 5. Carried over 26 500.

The right of election at Grampound is in the corporation of nine men, and
burgesses made by them, which burgesses, therefore, are not to be accounted as
free electors, being made for the purpose of the election. This is the case in
other places, which I have not noted.

Brought over 26 500 Eastlow sends 2 Members chosen by 25 Penryn -- 2 -- 51
Tregoney -- 2 -- 51 Bossiney -- 2 -- 11 St. Ives -- 2 -- 76 Fowey -- 2 -- 26
St. Germains -- 2 -- 26 St. Michael -- 2 -- 14 Newport -- 2 -- 31 St. Mawes --
2 -- 16 Kellington -- 2 -- 51 Cockermouth -- 2 -- 101 Totness -- 2 -- 54
Plimpton -- 2 -- 101 Honyton -- 2 -- 101 Tavistock -- 2 -- 56 Ashburton -- 2 --
101 Clifton, Devonshire -- 2 -- 50 Bereaston -- 2 -- 36 Tiverton -- 2 -- 14
Pool, Dorsetshire -- 2 -- 51 Lyme, ditto. -- 2 -- 26 Bridport -- 2 -- 61
Wareham -- 2 -- 76 Corfe-Castle -- 2 -- 71 Maldon, Essex -- 2 -- 14 Harwich --
2 -- 17 Weobly, Herefordsh. -- 2 -- 43 Huntingdon -- 2 -- 101 Queenborough,
Kent -- 2 -- 36 Newton, Lancashire -- 2 -- 31 Carried over 88 2019

Brought over 88 2019 Wigan sends 2 members chosen by 101 Clithero -- 2 -- 46
Boston, Lincolnshire -- 2 -- 101 Grimsby -- 2 -- 41 Thetford, Norfolk -- 2 --
17 Castle Rising -- 2 -- 16 Brackley, Northampt. -- 2 -- 17 Higham Ferrers -- 1
-- 51 Morpeth, Northumberl. -- 2 -- 101 East Retford, Nottingh. -- 2 -- 76
Banbury, Oxfordshire -- 1 -- 10 Wenlock Magna, Salop -- 2 -- 51 Bishop's Castle
-- 2 -- 51 Bath Somersetshire -- 2 -- 17 Min^head -- 2 -- 81 Ilchester -- 2 --
61 Melborne -- 2 -- 26 Winchester -- 2 -- 51 Southampton -- 2 -- 51 Yarmouth,
Wight -- 2 -- 26 Petersfield -- 2 -- 78 Newport, Wight -- 2 -- 13 Stockbridge
-- 2 -- 26 Newton, Wight -- 2 -- 1

The lord of this borough appoints a mayor and twelve burgesses, who choose the
members.

Christchurch, Hampsh. -- 2 -- 7

Here likewise the corporation of 13 make the burgesses as they please.
Therefore the corporation only are to be reckoned the electors.

carried over 138 3136

Brought over 138 3136 Lymington sends 2 members chosen by 41 Whitchurch -- 2
-- 21

The freeholders are the electors, who cannot be above 40, as there are but 100
houses in the town.

Andover -- 2 -- 13

Yet there are 600 houses in the town.

Dunwich -- 2 -- 21 Orford -- 2 -- 41 Aldborough -- 2 -- 43 Eye -- 2 -- 101 St.
Edmondsbury -- 2 -- 20 Bletchingley, Surry -- 2 -- 46 Ryegate -- 2 -- 101
Gatton -- 2 -- 11 Haslemere -- 2 -- ^1 Horsham -- 2 -- 33 Midhurst -- 2 -- 56
New Shoreham -- 2 -- 36 Brambe^ -- 2 -- 8

Willis says, there are not above 20 houses, and that the members are elected
by the burgh-holders.

East Grinsted -- 2 -- 19 Arundel Suffolk -- 2 -- 54 Appleby, Westmoreland -- 2
-- ^1 New Sarum -- 2 -- 29 Wilton -- 2 -- 41 Downton -- 2 -- 31 Hindon -- 2 --
31 Heytesbury -- 2 -- 26 Westbury -- 2 -- 26 Calne -- 2 -- 18 Carried over 190
4085

Brought over 190 4085 Chippenham sends 2 members chosen by 76 Malmsbury -- 2
-- 7 Cricklade -- 2 -- 81 Bedwin -- 2 -- 41 Ludgershal -- 2 -- 36 Old Sarum --
2 -- 1

Here is but one house, says Willis, A. D. 1750. I have been told that now
there is no house. I was therefore going to charge the two Old Sarum senators
to nobody. But as Willis says, the lord of the borough appoints a bailiff and
six burgesses, to whom he give his conge d'elire. I have called them his
representatives. And surely he, and the lord of the borough of Newton, in the
isle of Wight, ought to be contented with the representation they have in
parliament.

Bewdley -- 1 -- 8

I state Bewdley at 8, the majority of 14, as the other 20 are appointed by the
14.

Knaresborough, Yorksh. -- 2 -- 26 Scarborough -- 2 -- 20 Rippon -- 2 -- 101
Heydon -- 2 -- 42 Boroughbridge -- 2 -- 33 New Malton -- 2 -- 51 Thirske -- 2
-- 23 Aldborough -- 2 -- 38

This town and Boroughbridge are both in one parish, the only single parish in
England that sends 4 members.

North Allerton -- 2 -- 91 Hastings, cinq. port -- 2 -- 101 Carried over 224
4861

Brought over 224 4861 Hythe, cinq. port sends 2 members chosen by 26 New
Romney, ditto. -- 2 -- 17 Rye -- 2 -- 51 Winchelsea -- 2 -- 21 Seaford, cinq.
port -- 2 -- 21 Beaumaurice, Wales -- 1 -- 13 Montgomery -- 1 -- 41 Steyning --
2 -- 41 Devises -- 2 -- 72

The corporation consists of 36, who make what burgesses they please. They
being probably at the command of the corporation, are hardly to be accounted
free electors. Let us, however add 36 to the corporation, which will make the
majority of electors 72.

Wotton Basset -- 2 -- 76 Shaftesbury -- 2 -- 151 Marlborough -- 2 -- 2

The members are elected by the corporation only, which are a mayor and two
bailiffs.

Droitwich -- 2 -- 21 Newark -- 2 -- 151 Buckingham -- 2 -- 7 Barnstaple -- 2
-- 151 254 5723

From this extract we see, that 254 members are actually elected by 5723 votes;
now the most numerous meeting of the commons ever known, was on occasion of the
debate about Walpole, A. D. 1741. There were then 502 in the house. Therefore
254 comes very near a majority of the house, or the whole acting and efficient
number. And the greatest part of these illustrious, 5723, who have the power of
constituting lawgivers over the property of the nation, are themselves persons
of no property.

In North Britain the number of souls is about 1,5000,000. The males between 16
and 56 are 300,000. Allowing one third part to be their ow^ masters, and to be
above receiving charity, no Scotch member ought to be elected by fewer than a
majority of 2000 votes. But there are many instances of members elected in
North Britain by almost as small a number as in England. The truth of the
matter is, that in North Britain, though the country be nothing as to riches,
compared with England, yet there are fewer beggars. Almost all are
housekeepers, though a great number of those houses are wretched hovels. So
that almost all adult males ought to be voters in North Britain.

Lord Talbot DEB. LORDS, VI.345.
, in his speech in the house of peers, A. D. 1739, supposes, that 50,000 elect
the majority of the house. And he justly exclaims against that number, as
utterly disproportionate, which it undoubtedly is, if the due number be 416,000
or 639,000. What would his lordship have said, had he known that little more
than a tenth part of his 50,000 send in the majority of our lawmakers?

Taking the whole representative for South and North Britain, the members for
counties are only 131 of the 558, of which 131,42 are for Scotland and Wales.
DEB. COM. XIII.13.
. The members, therefore, for the boroughs and cinque ports, which ought not to
be one in ten, compared with those for the counties, are 382, above four times
as many. So that for one member, who may be supposed to come fairly into the
house, four (if we except a few for the great cities) are sent by the poorest
of the people, directed by court-influence.

We have seen above, p. 38, that, dividing the right of voting as it ought to
be, no member should be elected by fewer than the majority of 800 votes. But we
find, that not one member of all these 254 is elected by a number so high as
300; and a multitude by a number below 20.

If we take the places, where a majority of the electors comes below 20, it is
shameful what a proportion of the 513 is sent into the house by a handful, and
that handful mostly people in low circumstances, and therefore obnoxious to
bribery, or under the power of their superiors.

LESTWITHIE^ sends 2 members chosen by 13 Truro -- 2 -- 1^ Bodmin -- 2 -- 19
Saltash -- 2 -- 15 Camelford -- 2 -- 10 Bossiney -- 2 -- 11 St. Michael -- 2 --
14 St. Mawes -- 2 -- 16 Tiverton -- 2 -- 14 Maldon -- 2 -- 14 Harwich -- 2 --
17 Thetford -- 2 -- 17 Brackley -- 2 -- 17 Banbury -- 2 -- 11 Bath -- 2 -- 17
Newport, Wight -- 2 -- 13 Newton, ditto. -- 2 -- 1 Andover -- 2 -- 13 Carried
over 36 ^^6

Brought over 36 246 Gatton sends 2 members chosen by 11 Bramber -- 2 -- 8 East
Grinstead -- 2 -- 19 Calne -- 2 -- 18 Malmsbury -- 2 -- 7 Old Sarum -- 2 -- 1
Bewdley -- 2 -- 18 New Romney -- 2 -- 17 Marlborough -- 2 -- 2 Buckingham -- 2
-- 7 56 364

Here we see 56 members (about a ninth part of the whole for England) are sent
into the house of commons by 364 votes, which number ought not to send in one
member. For no member ought to be elected by fewer than the majority of 800,
upon the most moderate calculation, according to Dr. Price, in order to give
410,000 voters their due and equally distributed share of legislative power,
without which equal distribution the majority of the men of property are
enslaved to the handful of beggars, who, by electing the majority of the house
of commons, have so great an overbalance of power over them, as to be able to
carry every point in direct opposition to their opinion, and to their interest.

Here we see (monstrum horrendum, ingens!) two persons, the lord of the pitiful
town of Newton, in the isle of Wight, and him of Old Sarum, Wiltshire, where
there is not a house, send in as many members as the inestimable wealth of the
city of London, in which the livery, who are the legal electors, are 8,000; and
the persons, who ought to have votes are probably 20,000, and upwards. Here to
individuals have equal weight in the state with 30,000!

The following counties, A. D. 1693 to 1697 on an average, paid annually as
follows, each respectively so many parts in 513 of the land tax and subsidy;
and sent members as follows Postlethwayte's DICT. Word PARL.
.

Land Tax. Subsidy. Members. Cumberland 1 1 6. Dorset 9 6 20. Westmoreland 1 1
4. Cornwall 8 5 44. Middlesex 80 185 8.

According to this estimate, Middlesex, with its towns, contributes of land tax
and subsidy together 265 parts of 513. Therefore Middlesex ought to be
represented by 265 members. And Cornwall contributes of land tax and subsidy
together 13 parts of 513. Therefore Cornwall ought to send 13 members.

Men of large property ought likewise to have more votes, than those, who have
less to secure. Property ought in all states to have its proportional weight
and consequence.

In the East India act of 1773, which was heavily complained of for its
injustice, there is yet one very equitable regulation, and worthy of imitation,
viz. That every proprietor of 3000 l. stock shall have two votes; of 6000 l. 3;
and of 10,000 l. 4 votes at elections of directors WHITEH. EV. POST, June 16,
1773.
.

The British government, therefore, taking it according to its avowed state, is
neither absolute monarchy nor limited monarchy, nor aristocracy, nor democracy,
nor a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy; but may be called a
ptochocracy (the reader will pardon a new word) or government of beggars. For a
few beggarly boroughs do avowedly elect the most important part of the
government, the part which commands the purse. It is true this is only the
ostensible state of things. The British government is really a juntocracy (I
doubt the reader will now think I presume upon his good nature) or government
by a minister and his crew. For the court directs the ^eggars whom to choose.

Is this the universally admired and universally envied British constitution?

How much more proper would a petition have been, from the friends of liberty
to the king, to set himself at the head of a plan for restoring independency to
parliament, than petitioning him to dissolve that which was then sitting. What
point could have been gained by that measure? It is a handful of beggars,
bribed, or awed, by the court, or the grandees, that sends the majority of the
members into the house. Would not they have sent back the same men? Did they
dare to send any others? If it be said, that the dissolution of the parliament
then sitting would have redressed all grievances, it must follow, that a new
parliament would; but how many new parliaments have we seen since the
revolution? Yet we have now standing armies, septennial parliaments, rotten
boroughs, placemen in the house, excises, etc.

Though I have not the least idea of wishing so great a change in the
constitution, as would exclude king and lords from parliament; yet I may, I
think, be allowed just to mention, that the great power by our constitution
vested in a small number of individuals, which will always make an inequality,
and an unbalancing, ought to make us the more desirous of reducing, if
possible, one of our three estates at least, to somewhat a little nearer to
adequate, than it is at present. But of this more hereafter.

Representation in the house of commons is inadequate in other respects besides
those already mentioned.

In ancient times, when parliaments were first established, there was no
property, but that of land. Therefore all powers, and all honors, were heaped
on the landed men. The consequence was, that the landed interest was too well
represented, to the detriment (in our times) of the mercantile and monied. This
is an occasion of various evils. For many of our country-gentlemen are but bad
judges of the importance of the mercantile interest, and do not wisely consult
it in their bills and acts. Of this kind are the game-act, the dog-act, and
taxes on every necessary of life, which give our rivals in trade a great
advantage over us. And ministers, to curry favor with the house of commons,
are tempted to burden commerce with taxes for the sake of easing the landed
interest. See the art of Walpole DEB. COM. VII.285.
to this purpose, by proposing to ease the land of one shilling in the pound,
and laying a duty on salt for three years, to make up the deficiency. It was
objected to this proposal, That the salt-duty was always reckoned a grievous
burden upon the manufacturing poor, and was therefore taken off; and that it
was a strange paradox, that the landed gentlemen were poorer than the poor, and
therefore in more need of relief from a heavy tax.

It is the overbalance of the power in the hands of the landed men, that has
produced the bounty on exportation of corn (of which more fully hereafter)
which increases the manufacturer's expense of living, and discourages the
exportation of our manufactures. This is, in the end, hurtful to the landed
interest. But short-sighted and selfish men do not see it in that light; nor
will seem to understand, that the land tax, while nominally three shillings in
the pound, is not really nine-pence. The time was, when land in England might
have been purchased for a 50th part of its present value. What has given it the
49 parts additional worth? Can any one imagine, the difference is owing to any
thing, but our trade and manufactures?

A. D. 1373, a parliament being called, it was expressly mentioned in the writ,
that from every burgh there should be sent two burgesses, the most discreet and
sufficient, who had the greatest skill in shipping and merchandising Brady,
III.296.
.

There was a clause in the election-bill in king William's time for rendering
merchants eligible into parliament, making oath, that they were worth 5000 l.
DEB. COM. III.70.


When the young nobility and gentry (says Davenant) employ their time and
thoughts carefully to inspect and consider the kingdom's foreign traffic, they
will evidently see how much their landed interest depends upon it; they will
find that as trade brought land from 12 to 25, the general rental from 6 to 14
millions, and the kingdom's capital from 72 to 252 millions, reckoning lands,
tenements, hereditaments, and personal estates, 18 years purchase at a medium;
so it may bring land from 25 to 50 years purchase, and lands, tenements,
hereditaments, etc. from 18 to 26 years purchase, the general rental from 14
millions to 28 millions, and the kingdom's capital from 252 to above 1000
millions, if by industry and prudent management it can be rendered more
extensive. But the mutual dependence between land and trade, we hope, has been
sufficiently made out in the series of these discourses Davon. II.81.
.

It was owing to a want of merchants in the house, that the bill for
restraining paper-credit in America was brought in. And it was no small
disgrace to the house, that there were petitions against it presented from most
of the agents for the colonies, as an imprudent and hurtful scheme.
Postlethwayte, in his DICT. OF COMM. and BRIT. TRUE SYST. has made many remarks
on the advantage of merchants in the house of commons; to whom I must refer the
reader.

Is not an aristocracy a government in the hands of a few, or of one class, or
one interest, excluding the body of the people of property from their due
weight in government? Is not our house of peers wholly, and our house of
commons chiefly filled with men, whose property is land? Is not therefore the
government of this mercantile and manufacturing country in the hands of the
landed interest to the exclusion of the mercantile and manufactural? Does not
then the government of this country tend too much to aristocracy?

The eldest sons of Scotch peers are declared incapable of sitting in the house
of commons DEB. COM. IV.105.
. But the sons of English peers may sit, so that ten individuals out of one
family may be legislators. Is not this too aristocratical?

It is said, property in land is more capable of being proved, than in
merchandise, manufactures, or stocks. But this is frivolous; for any man,
though possessed of an ostensible land-estate, may be in debt to more than the
value of his estate; and where is then his qualification?

The interest of merchants is so much the interest of the nation, that there
can hardly be too many merchants in parliament. The London members almost
always vote on the side of liberty. It is objected, that each merchant will
probably vote in parliament for what is most for the advantage of his own
particular branch. True. Therefore let a considerable number of merchants
always have seats in the house, and then all different interests will be
consulted. It has likewise been argued, that merchants are bad members, because
they are liable to be influenced in favor of the court by government
contracts. But here again comes in my observation concerning partial
reformations. Correct all the other abuses, and court-influence will become
impossible. Then will appear the advantage of merchants in the house of
commons. Of all which more hereafter.

As to the monied interest, if the public debts are not to be paid, or some
substantial security found for them, it would be very proper, that the monied
interest (as such) should have representation in parliament. Else what security
have we, that a profligate court will not shut up the exchequer, as Charles II.
did, and obtain, by corrupt means, the sanction of parliament for the measure?
It is indeed alleged, that the mercantile, manufactural, and monied interests
are represented by the members for the cities, and boroughs. But this is
nothing to the purpose. Because the qualification required is always to be in
land.

CHAP. V. How parliamentary representation came to be thus inadequate.
REpresentation in the commons house of parliament came to be thus out of all
proportion inadequate, in much the same manner as cities come to be built in
defience of all plan or regularity by every land-proprietor's humouring his own
caprice in building upon his own ground. Our kings and our queens gave and took
away the privilege of sending members, as pleased their fancy without all
regard to justice, or proportion.

Mr. Carte Quoted PARL. HIST. XXI.212.
alleges, that the lawyers, in the puritan times, in order to strengthen their
own party, searched old records, and found, that many towns of the king's
demesne had been summoned once or twice by Edward I. to send representatives;
and on this founded a pretense, that these were in all times parliament-towns.
Thus (says he) the puritans got the ascendency in the house; and thus was an
unreasonable disproportion in the representation of the kingdom introduced to
the infinite prejudice of the constitution.

Mr. Carte shows, that the mode of representation established in ancient times
was tolerably adequate; but that the case is now vastly altered. There is no
longer any just or reasonable proportion in the representation. For, whilst all
the landed interest is represented by 92 members, and the trading or monied
interest This is not just. For the members sent by cities and great towns are
commonly landed gentlemen, as much as the others, and do not consider
themselves as particularly obliged to take care of the trading, much less of
the monied interest.
by about 100 deputies of cities and great towns, there are above 300
representatives of small, inconsiderable, and many of these beggarly boroughs,
who by a majority of 3 to 2, are able to dispose of the property of all the
landed and opulent men in the kingdom in despite of their unanimous dissent.
These have long been considered as the rotten part of our constiution, and
being venal as well as poor, they have been the chief source of the corruption
complained of in modern parliaments.

Foreigners, who know and reflect on this inequality in our representation,
which they cannot reconcile to common sense, stand amazed at hearing us brag of
the excellency of our constitution, while it labors under so fundamental a
defect, and are apt to doubt, whether the sense of parliament is really the
sense of the nation, etc.

According to Borlase, author of the NATURAL HISTORY OF CORNWALL, only 5
boroughs of that county sent 10 members, and the county 2, 23 Edw. I. and
Lestwithiel sent 2 more, 33 Edw. I. Thus it remained, excepting one change, to
6 Edw. VI. when 7 other boroughs were allowed to send 2 members each. 1 Mary,
another was added, and 4 and 5 of the same reign, another. 1 Eliz. another; 5
of the same reign, 2 others; 13 of the same queen, 2 others; and 27, another;
in all 21 boroughs, PARL. HIST. XXI.213.
which, with the county, make up 44 members. The cause of this partiality for
Cornwall, he thinks, was that dutchy's being in the crown, and yielding a
greater royal revenue, than any other county, all which was very convenient for
our kings and queens, as the places were poor, and consequently dependent. So
that probably the very design of giving this privilege to these paltry boroughs
was, to obtain for the court an undue influence in parliament. And ought they
then to be allowed a privilege, unjust in itself and given with unjust views?
Towns came to be burghs (that is, privileged within themselves, and freed from
certain taxes and tallages) by charters of lords or kings Brady, 1. Of BURGHS,
43.
. It was originally left to the sheriff of each county to name the burghs,
which should send members Ibid. 52.
. The oldest returns extant of knights, citizens, and burgesses, are 26 Edward
I. viz. 2 knights for Wiltshire, 2 citizens for New Sarum, 2 burgesses for
Dounton, 2 for Devizes, 2 for Chippenham, 2 for Malmesbury Ibid. 52.
. But afterward, 12 Edw. III. there were returned only 2 knights for the
county, 2 citizens for Sarum, 2 for Wilton, 2 for Dounton, and 2 for Merleberg,
[Marlborough Ibid.
.] Brady mentions many instances of places discontinuing to send members, and
then beginning again, and discontinuing again, for 100 to 300 years, etc. And,
which is extraordinary, the returning officer would often return, Nulla est
alia, etc. There are no more cities, nor burghs in my bailywick, though more
cities and burghs in the same bailywick, or county, had formerly sent members
Ibid. et pass.
. He meant, There is no other city or burgh, fit to send members; for the
sheriff, at his pleasure, often spared the decayed burghs the expen^e of
sending members, though there was a law, 5 Rich. II. c. 4. for punishing
sheriffs, who failed in this respect. The sheriffs, in their returns, still
extant, often mention, that there are no other places in the county, now able
to send members Brady, 1. Of BURGHS, 52 et pass.
. There is no instance (says Brady Ibid 59.
) of any burgh's complaining of its not being represented. But there are
instances of their petitioning to be excused sending members.

Mr. Willis thinks, there were before Edw. VI. about 130 cities and boroughs,
in all, that returned members to parliament NOT. PARL. I. Pref. vii.
, and that the original number was not considerably increased till the time of
Henry VIII. but continued from the middle of Edward III. much the same, (not 30
new boroughs being created between Edw. I. and Edw. VI.) excepting that some
boroughs intermitted sending for some time as ^0, 100, to 400 years, and
afterward begun again. In several parliaments, as 18 Edw. III. etc. the
records say, In hoc parl. etc. In this parliament there were no brie^s [or
writs] sent to any city or burgh, but to the counties only Ibid. xlii.
. There were likewise councils, or parliaments, in which were only members from
trading towns, and no knights of shires Ibid. ix.
. There were 17 places made burghs, with privilege of sending members, by Henry
VI Ibid. xiv.
. The cinque ports are now 8; though the very name shows, that they were
originally but 5 Ibid.
. Prynne says Wales sent 48 members, temp. Edward II. But Henry VIII. summoned
only 12 knights and 12 burgesses NOT. PARL. I. Pref. XV.
. Some trading places sent representatives, upon occasional summonses to
councils for regulating trade. Mr. Willis likewise gives a list of burghs,
which formerly returned members, and which if restored (says he Ibid. XXX.
) would constitute a parliament near half as numerous, as the representative of
burghs was before Edward VI. The county-palatine of Chester, and city of the
same, sent no members before Edward VI. Ibid. I.197.
. Nor Durham county-palatine and city besor 25 Car. II. Ibid. II.510.
The small boroughs, to which the privilege of sending members had been granted
for the support of ministerial influence, and corruption, were deprived of
their right of election,' A. D. 1654, under the usurpation of Cromwell Ma^aul..
HIST. V.140.
. In former times, the king's learned council, the civilians, masters in
chancery, were summoned to attend parliament, but without voices, as now the
judges; and the bishops were to bring with them their dean and chapter, their
archdeacon, and all the clergy, [ totumque clerum] of their diocese, by their
representatives [ procuratores] to agree [ ad consentiendum] to the things
which shall be ordained Coke's INSTIT. V.4.
. This last [ ad consentiendum] seems to imply, that all these holy men had
suffrage in parliament. But lord Coke expressly affirms the contrary, and
indeed it is not probable that they had, though they were in those times held
in high veneration. There were 33 abbots summoned to parliament 4 Edward III.
and in the parliament writs 6 Edward III.23 others, besides 4 priors, and the
master of the order of Semplingham, who were not usually in parliament. [I have
forgot, in copying this out, to set down from whence I took it.] Four knights
for every county, and two men for every city, burgh, and market town, were
summonded to parliament, A. D. 1283. temp. Edward I. Brady, III.10.
Near the end of Edward I. writs were issued out for all the counties,
excepting Cheshire and Durham PARL. HIST. I.131.
. A. D. 1446, 24 Henry VI. there were 74 knights in parliament from 37
counties; one of which is Wigorn, and several counties are left out. There were
200 burgesses; so that the whole house of commons consisted of 274 members, now
513, for England. [I have forgot, in extracting this paragraph, to mark from
whence I took it.] According to Blackstone COMM. I.174.
, there were only 300 members in the commons house of parliament in the time of
Henry VI. DRB. LORDS, I 398.
Therefore the number of the house commons is almost doubled in about 300 years
by our kings and queens giving privileges of election to new places.

There was in the time of Henry V. a debate about the surrender of
corporations. Baeda (Qu.) and Newbury surrendered their corporations to the
king. It was questioned, Whether a corporation can surrender its charter, which
is robbing posterity. And the commons called upon those towns to send members,
notwithstanding the surrender. The house however excused their sending members
on their pleading inability, and they sent none since DRB. LORDS, I 398.
. An act passed 1690, to declare the right and freedom of election for the
cinque ports. Before this bill the wardens of the cinque ports claimed a right
of nominating to each cinque-port one person to serve as baron or member of
parliament Tind. CONTIN. I.132.
.

In Henry VIIIth's first parliament there were 148 counties and boroughs, which
sent members; and the whole number of the commons was 298. Durham and Chester
were not in the list. The 6 boroughs of Cornwall, and the county, probably sent
only 14 members, where now they send 44. No members then for Westminster.
Wiltshire, with its cities and boroughs, sent 34. Henry gave, or restored,
privilege of sending members to 14 counties, chiefly Welsh, and to 17 towns in
England and Wales, and to Calais in France; in all 32 counties and boroughs,
which sent to parliament 38 members. Edward VI. gave privilege to 22 boroughs
(no counties) and they sent 44 members. Queen Mary, to 14 boroughs, which sent
25 members. Elizabeth to 31 boroughs, which sent 62 members. James I. to 14
boroughs, which sent 27 members. [I have forgot to mark whence I took this
paragraph.] February 15, 1640, The commons ordered that Cockermouth should be
restored to its former privilege of sending members COMMONS JOURN. XXIII.
. November 26, That the towns of Ashperton and Honiton should likewise send
members Ibid. XXV.
. Oakhampton had no members since 7 Edward II. It was restored at the beginning
of this parliament. We^bly had sent no members since Edward I. It was restored
1640. Milborn-port sent none since 35 Edward I. 'till required in 1640. The
commons, in the same year, ordered that Malton, Allerton, and Seaford should be
restored to their former privileges.

Under James II. the power of electing members of parliament was in many places
transferred from the inhabitants in general to the magistrates; because they
were likely to be more within the reach of bribery Hume's HIST. Stuarts, II.404.
.

The borough of Stockbridge, A. D. 1689, for bribery, narrowly escaped being
disfranchised, and incapacitated for ever for sending members, and instead of
its 2 members, an addition was proposed to be made of 2 more knights of the
shire for the county of Southampton Bohnu's RIGHT OF ELECTION, p. 275.
.

CHAP. VI. Evil of the Boroughs having so disproportionate a Share in
Parliamentary Representation.
MEMBERS of parliament have the properties, liberties, and lives of the nation
in their hands, and hold themselves accountable to no man, or set of men, for
the laws they make. Ought the trustees of so great a charge to be men capable
of giving or receiving base bribes? Members of parliament ought to be men of
good natural parts, education, and character, sound reasoners, graceful
speakers, knowing in the three interests, viz. the landed, the commercial, and
the monied, in general history, law, and politics, and in the history, laws,
and politics of Britain, learned in human nature, and masters of the spirit and
disposition of the inhabitants of the three kingdoms, and of the colonies. Is
it to be conceived, that the inhabitants of a set of miserable Cornish boroughs
are judges of such high accomplishments as these? Were election of members of
parliament upon its proper foot, every county, including its cities and towns,
would elect a set of gentlemen to be its representatives. This would concentre
the wisdom of the whole county, and not leave it, as at present, in the power
of a dozen silly fellows to set up a lawmaker, capable or incapable, over their
country.

Here I must hint to the reader, that, though I have stated the accomplishments
of a member pretty high, I am sensible, that lower, with integrity, will
suffice, or at least would, if parliament were upon the proper foot as to
independency. But the lamentable part of the case is at present, that by far
the greatest part of our electors are wholly incapable of distinguishing, and
must be supposed often to choose the worst qualified of the candidates, and
reject the best.

We often see, before a general election, many flaming harangues addressed to
the people, showing them the importance of choosing proper persons for so
momentous a trust. I have wondered in myself how any man of sense could waste
his paper and ink so fruitlessly as in giving people advice, which no man, who
knows human nature, can expect them to take. The plain English of those
harangues is as follows. Illustrious beggars of the Cornish boroughs!

Your country expects of you at the approaching election, what every
considerate person must conclude to be wholly out of your reach, viz. That you
will wisely and honestly consider the importance of the trust reposed in you,
of sending into the legislative assembly of the nation so great a proportion of
the members. It is expected, that you are well qualified, without having ever
had the means for being qualified to judge of the fitness of candidates; that
you, who have neither knowledge of books, nor of the world, should judge
unerringly of the capacities and dispositions of persons, who offer themselves
as candidates for your favor. It is likewise expected, illustrious beggars,
that you, whose circumstances are, in the most miserable degree, dependent,
should be, in your principles and dispositions, independent patriots. As we
require a qualification in members of parliament, of several hundreds a year,
that they may be above temptation, ^o we expect of you, who are in continual
want, that you defy temptation. Do not, patriotic electors, regard the threats
of your landlords, when they tell you, they will turn you out of your dwelling.
Remember what you never learned in Horace, Dulce et decorum est pro patria
mori. It requires no fortitude above whatever gross unprincipled fellow is
master of, to die in a ditch for your country, with her wives and children
about you.

Legislation (says Blackstone COMM. I.46.
) is the greatest act of superiority, that can be exercised by one being over
another. How few then can be supposed qualified for such a momentous trust! But
we put this trust in the hands of any man, however worthless, or incapable, who
is able and willing to lay out a few thousands in the purchase of a borough.

James I. before a general election, directs, that there be not chosen any
persons banqueroutes, or outlawed; but men of known good behavior, and
sufficient livelihood, -- nothing being more absurd in any commonwealth, than
to permit those to have free voices for law-making, who, by their own acts, are
exempted from the laws protection PARL. HIST. V.7.
. None were to be eligible to parliament in Cromwell's time, but persons of
known integrity, fearing God and of good conversation; no common scoffer or
reviler of Religion; none who denies the scripture to be the word of God; no
common profaner of the Lord's day; no professed swearer or curser; no drunkard,
haunter of taverns, alehouses, or brothels, nor that shall hereafter drink
healths, or be guilty of adultery, fornication, extortion, bribery, perju^y,
forgery, etc PARL. HIST. XX.386
. Here was such an exclusion-bill, as, if it had been put in force in our
times, would have left St. Stephen's Chapel miserably depopulated. But how
should the house be filled with proper members by improper electors? The lords
rejected, A. D. 1702, after a second reading, a bill to provide, that no person
be chosen a member of the commons, who has not a sufficient real estate. A
great many lords protested against the rejection of so good a bill; because the
design of it was, to prevent foreigners, and men of no property, from having
the power of taxing the property of Englishmen DEB. LORDS, II.48.
. But men of no property have now the power of taxing the property of
Englishmen. For the members for the boroughs are four times as numerous as
those for the counties.

There was much debating in the house of commons, A. D. 1770, upon a bill for
settling what offenses should be punished by incapacitation to sit in the
house. If what judge Blackstone affirms, as above, be unquestionably true, it
is a matter of supreme consequence, that only men of unquestionable characters
be legislators. For my part, I should think a law for incapacitating every man
of an ambiguous character, highly proper and necessary. We know how exact in
that respect the ancient heathens were. And it were a shame, that the
professors of the purest of all religions should be more lax in principle then
they. But how is it to be expected, that any particular regarding elections
should be properly managed by such weak and influenced men as those, who send
in the majority of the house?

Kings may make lords, and corporations, which corporations may send their
burgesses to parliament, says N. Bacon DISC. GOV. ENGL. Part II. p. 76.
. The annotator observes, on this, Though the King can make corporations, yet he
cannot give them a right to be represented in parliament without the commons
assent. I believe Henry VIII. and his termagant daughter did not ask the
consent of the house of commons, when they gave to so many places the power of
sending members to parliament. And if not, according to this author, those
places have no legal right to send members. The miserable village of Bossiney
was made a free borough neither by king nor queen, but by Richard earl of
Cornwall, brother to Henry III. It sent members for the first time under Edward
VI. DEB. COM. XIII.50.
Surely we have no occasion to be encumbered by this paltry place, and its
venal members. If a king's brother, if even a sheriff of the county, See above,
p. 58.
, can give privilege of sending members, surely a king can take away that mock
privilege. Or if kings, and brothers of kings can give privilege to paltry
boroughs in one age, then kings and their brothers can, in another more
enlightened age, give privilege to respectable counties and great cities, to
send up that number of representatives, which is found to be adequate to their
respective contributions to the public expense. Our good king George I^I. (whom
God preserve!) has as good a right, at least in foro conscientiae, to give
London 100 additional members, to give Bristol 20 additional, 20 to the county
of York, etc. as our Mary's, our Elizabeth's, and our Henry's, had to give a set
of rotten boroughs the privilege of sending three times their adequate number.
If a king has power in the 15th or 16th century, to do wrong, surely a king has
power in the 18th to redress that wrong.

Suppose, for the experiment's sake, the cities of London and Westminster, and
county of Middlesex, should join in a decent petition to the legislature,
requesting, that the excessive number of members, which represents the county
of Cornwall, may be transferred to the service of the inestimable opulent
metropolitan cities and county, and their miserably inadequate representation
to the inconsiderable county of Cornwall; or, in other words, that London and
Westminster, and Middlesex may, for the future, be represented by 44 members
(not half the adequate number) and Cornwall by 10. Suppose Cornwall to petition,
that nothing may be changed. Here would be two counter petitions before the
legislature; one, of the most respectable property, that sends representatives
to parliament, requesting what they have an undoubted title to; the other of a
comparatively inconsiderable property, insisting to keep what undoubtedly they
have no right to, have obtained in a surreptitious manner, and have kept a
great deal too long. Would the legislature listen to the latter, and reject the
former?

James I. forbids sending members from such ruinous places, as have not
sufficient resyantes [inhabitants] to make such choice PARL. HIST V.7.
.

Were the privilege of election taken from the boroughs, there would be less
occasion for a place-bill. For large bodies of the independent people would not
elect, or re-elect place-men.

Most of the great counties and chief cities chose men who were zealous for the
king and government, A. D. 1701, but the rotten parts of our constitution, as
an eminent author styles the small boroughs, were in many places wrought on to
choose bad men Tind. CONTIN. I.497.
.

Before bribery, or meat, drink, insinuation, and artifice prompted to the mean
and poor sorts of burgesses a right, which anciently they never dreamed of,
there were no contests between them and the communities or commonalties, that
is, the governing part of cities and burghs, about the election of citizens and
burgesses to represent them in parliament, seeing, when they received wages, it
was a burden to those, who chose and sent them. And it is not easily to be
imagined, that poor and ordinary men would contend for a burden, or a trouble.
-- There was then no striving for votes, or making parties to be elected Brady,
I. Of BURGHS, 75.
. No invention could have been thought of more favorable to court-influence in
parliament, than giving so great importance to the beggarly boroughs. They are
the creatures of the court. That is, they receive their privilege from kings;
and the burgage tenures in them generally belong to men of fortune, who have
power to oblige the inhabitants of these burgage-houses to elect whom they
please. And the court having great funds at its disposal, ambitious and
avaritious men are thereby drawn to the court-side in promoting the election of
courtly men. But above all, the easiness of bribing a small handful of voters,
who have the privilege of sending two members, is ruinous to the independency
of the house of commons.

In the year 1742, there came before the lords a bill for quieting
corporations, occasioned by an appeal to them from the violence used by
Walpole, in order to compel the election of some of his creatures for Weymouth.
That arch-corrupter had endeavored to intimidate the corporation by
threatening their charter. A minister cannot by any such means influence a
county, or a great city. Many of our boroughs (says my lord Chesterfield in
speaking on that subject) are now so much the creatures of the crown, that they
are generally called court-boroughs, and very properly they are called so. For
our ministers for the time being have always the nomination of their
representatives, and make such an arbitrary use of it, that they often order
them to choose gentlemen, whom they never saw, nor heard of, perhaps, till they
saw their names on the minister's order for choosing them. These orders they
always punctually obey, and would, I suppose, obey them, were the person named
in them the minister's footman, then actually wearing his livery. For they
have, we know, chosen men, who have but very lately thrown the livery off from
their backs; but never can throw it off from their minds DEB. LORDS, VIII.529.
.

March 18, 1742, a bill for regulating elections for cities, and boroughs, was
put off for a month DEB. COM. XIV 258.
. The author of FACTION DETECTED BY FACTS, thus accounts for the loss of this
popular bill: The true reason why this bill was not passed was one, which
equally affected all parties, and which will everlastingly prevent an effectual
bill of this kind; and this arises from the various rights of election, which
are so numerous, that they distract and confound the different interests of
gentlemen, which, to speak fairly on all sides, induces them, by one plausible
pretense or other, for their private regard, to oppose or to propose, so many
different clauses, that such bills become at last impracticable and unpalatable
to all. -- The burgage-tenures too, which gentlemen will neither part with, nor
can tell how to regulate, are another invincible obstruction; and the powers
and the penalties create farther difficulties, which no human wisdom has yet
been able to surmount. The plain English of all this is, that a majority of the
members of both houses were, thirty years ago (not in our golden days) so
sordidly selfish in their dispositions, that rather than lose a trifling
privilege or profit, they would suffer their country to sink in a quick-sand of
corruption. It is to be hoped, that this shocking account of the state of
patriotism thirty years ago, was not true. But however the truth may have been,
it is particularly remarkable, that an author, who wrote on purpose to show,
that the clamor of the people was groundless, should incautiously confess,
that the majority of the legislature was so execrably corrupt, that there was
great and weighty ground for clamor.

Lord North and Gray was against the union, because Scotland was to have twice
the number of representatives, and to pay only half the tax paid by Wales,
though Wales was as poor, and much less in extent. Lord Hallifax answered, that
Cornwall did not pay above one fifth of what Glocestershire did, and sent five
times as many members DEB. LORDS, II.173.
.

A state or commonwealth, says Milton EIKONCL. 135.
is a society sufficient of itself in all things conducible to well-being and
commodious life. Will this definition answer to Britain as parliaments now are?
when all depends on a set of men authorized by a very small minority both as to
numbers and property?

It is a common maxim in politics, that in every state there must be some where
an absolute and irresistible power over the people. But this is to be rightly
understood, or it will lead to mistakes. In a monarchy, as France, the whole
power is in the king against all other voice. This is proper tyranny. At Venice
it is in the nobles exclusively. This is proper aristocracy, or oligarchy. In
Holland (excepting some errors and deviations) the whole power is in the
states, that is, or should be, the people; but it does not descend low enough,
and leaves the bourgeoisie considerably enslaved. In England the whole power is
in king, lords, and commons. Therefore in monarchies the people, the chief
object, have no share of power. In oligarchies the people have as little. In
republics the people have a share of power. But in our mixed government the
people are swallowed up in king, lords, and commons. To say, therefore, that
there must be in every country an absolute power somewhere over the people, and
in which they are to have no share, is making the people mere beasts of burden,
instead of what they are, viz. the original of power, the object of government,
and last resource. Our courtly people, therefore, to quiet our minds on this
subject, tell us, we have a very great share in governing ourselves, as we
elect our lawmakers. We have seen, what this amounts to. And if any Englishman
is satisfied with the view I have given of parliamentary representation, I can
only say, he is thankful for small mercies.

There will be occasion to exhibit much more on this subject in the following
chapters on Corruption, etc.

CHAP. VII. Inadequate Representation universally complained of. Proposals by
various Persons for redressing this Irregularity.
THE monstrous inequality of parliamentary representation has not escaped
unobserved. And there have been attempts made to reform it.

To what gross absurdities, (says Mr. Lock On GOVERNMENT, chap. XIII. 157.
) the following of custom, when reason has left it, may lead, we may be
satisfied, when we see the bare name of a town, of which there remains not so
much as the ruins, where scarce so much housing as a sheep-cot, or more
inhabitants than a shepherd, are to be found, send as many representatives to
the grand assembly of lawmakers, as a whole county numerous in people, and
powerful in riches. He afterward shows (contrary to the common objection, That
this deviation must not be corrected, because such correction would produce a
violation of the constitution) that restoring adequate representation, would be
precisely what is wanted toward establishing the constitution on its true and
original principles. This irregularity of representation strangers stand amazed
at, and every one must confess, needs a remedy, though most think it hard to
find one, because the constitution of the legislative being the original and
supreme act of the society antecedent to all positive laws in it, and,
depending wholly upon the people, no inferior power can alter it; and therefore
the people, when the legislative is once constituted, having, in such a
government as we have been speaking of, no power to act, as long as that
government stands; this inconvenience is thought incapable of a remedy.

Salus populi suprema lex, is certainly so just and fundamental a rule, that
who sincerely follows it cannot dangerously err. If therefore the executive,
who has the power of convoking the legislative, observing rather the true
proportion, than the fashion of representation, regulates, not by old custom,
but true proportion, the number of members in all places, that have a right to
be distinctly represented, which no part of the people, however incorporated,
can pretend to, but in proportion to the assistance it affords to the public;
it cannot be judged to have set up a new legislative, but to have restored the
old and true one, and to have rectified the disorders, which the succession of
time had insensibly, as well as inevitably introduced. For it being the
interest, as well as the intention of the people, to have a fair and equal
representative, whoever brings it nearest to that, is an undoubted friend to,
and establisher of the government, and cannot miss the consent and approbation
of the community. Prerogative being nothing but a power in the hands of the
prince to provide for the public good in such cases, which depending upon
unforeseen and uncertain occurrences certain and unalterable laws could not
safely direct; whatsoever shall be done manifestly for the good of the people,
and establishing the gover^^ent on its true foundation, is, and always will be,
true and just prerogative. The power of erecting new corporations, and
therewith new representatives, carries with it a supposition, that, in time,
the measures of representation might vary, and those places have a just right
to be represented, which before had none, and by the same reason, those cease
to have a right, and become too inconsiderable for such a privilege, which
before had it. It is not a change from the present state, which perhaps
corruption, or decay, has introduced, that makes an inroad upon government; but
its tendency to injure and oppress the people, and to set up one part, or
party, with a distinction from, and unequal subjection to the rest. Whatsoever
cannot but be acknowledged to be of advantage to the society and people in
general, upon just and lasting measures, will always, when done, justify
itself, and whenever the people shall choose their representatives upon just and
undoubtedly equal measures, suitable to the original frame of the government,
it cannot be doubted to be the will and act of the society, whoever permitted
or caused them to do it Lock on GOVERNMENT, fol. edit. p. 220.
.

Mr. Lock hints, in this passage, the propriety of our kings applying their
prerogative to the restoring of a more adequate representation. Nor is there
any thing unreasonable in the proposal; since it is notorious, that a great
part of the monstrous disproportion of representation in parliament, is owing
to the caprice of our crowned heads in opening the house of commons to numbers,
who had no original right to enter it. And if, in order to restore the balance,
we were to disfranchise 50 or 60 of the beggarly boroughs, we should do nothing
unprecedented. For Willis NOT. Parl. III.81.
gives an account of above 60 disused or obsolete boroughs and towns, which
were anciently summoned to send members to parliament, viz. Donestable,
Newbury, Ely, etc. Where are now the members for those places? They would have
made, he says Pref. p. XXX.
, a parliament near half as numerous as the representative of the burghs was
before Edward VI. If our former kings and queens filled and emptied the house
of commons at their pleasure, why should not our modern crowned heads have
power to set right what they set wrong, either by diminishing (with consent of
parliament) the exorbitant number of borough members, or increasing the
representation of the counties, adding members to London, Westminster, and
Southwark, to Bristol, to Liverpool, etc. or by some means, or other, take
legislation out of the hands of the beggars, and put it into those of men of
property.

It is plausibly urged, says a speaker in the house of commons LAND. MAG. June,
1771, p. 287.
, that the voice of the nation is only to be heard in this assembly [the house
of commons]; but plausibility is one thing, and truth another. This assembly
does not constitute a real representative of the kingdom. The metropolis, for
instance, which contains at least a 6th part of the people, sends to parliament
only 8 members, and many of the principle trading towns send none.

A great inconvenience springs from the constitution of the boroughs, (says a
writer in the time of K. William STATE TRACTS, time of K. William, I.161.
) which elect not by virtue of their wealth, dignity, or number of inhabitants,
but by the borough-houses, in which they live; these only (which perhaps are
the most inconsiderable part of the borough) having in them the electing power
exclusive of the rest. This qualification makes such houses sell better to a
purchaser, than any others in the town; and it is customary for gentlemen, who
are desirous of a seat in parliament, to lay out their money in such bargains,
and though it costs them dear, yet, if it be possible, they will be landlords
of a sufficient number of these borough-houses (in the purchase whereof some
friend's name is mostly made use of in trust) that thereby they may command an
election either for themselves, or their assigns, at pleasure. And what is this
less than buying of votes with money? This is what is called the rotten part of
the constitution. It cannot continue the century. If it does not drop, it must
be amputated, said lord Chatham, in his speech on the stamp act.

Cromwell's plan of a parliament Whitelocke's MEMOIRS, 552.
was briefly as follows: The period triennial; the whole number of members to
be 400 for England and Wales; 30 for Scotland. and 30 for Ireland. The number
of members for some of the most remarkable places was as follows; Cornwall 12,
Devonshire 20, York 22, Essex 16, Kent 18, Middlesez 6; London 6, Bristol 2. He
also intended members for several places, which now send none, as Manchester,
etc. Every reader will observe, that this scheme was far from being an adequate
representation, though much preferable to the present. Of the 400 English
members, 270 were county-members; which gave the counties the advantage they
ought to have over the boroughs; whereas in our times the borough members
out-number those for the counties 4 times over. Every person worth 200 l. real
or personal was to have right of voting; whereas in our times, hardly any, but
beggars, have weight in appointing the representative. Fairfax in his scheme
for settling the nation, proposes adequate representation by counties PARL.
HIST. XVI.205.
. Lord Chatham has proposed, that a third member be added to the representation
for each county. This would be of service; but would not redress the evil. For
representation would be still out of proportion, as the borough members would
still out-number those for the counties. Lord Molesworth is for transferring
the members for the mean boroughs to the great places. Mr. Hume proposes
ESSAYS, II.375.
, as an improvement of the British constitution, the restoration of the plan of
the republican parliament, and allowing no person to vote, who did not possess
a property [he does not confine it to land] of 200 l. value. Mr. Carte
proposes, for equalling representation, to give all persons possessed of
property within the hundred, in which is a small borough (which now of itself
sends two members) a right of voting equally with the men of the borough; and
to make the steward, or judge of the hundred court a joint returning officer
with the present borough-officer. This would render bribery more difficult,
than it is, but would not make parliamentary representation adequate.

On this subject the author of the DISSERT. UPON PARTIES P. 218.
, reasons as follows: `At the settling of the revolution, those persons, who
had exclaimed so loudly against placemen and pensioners in the reign of Charles
II. and who complained at that instant so bitterly of the undue influence that
had been employed in small boroughs, chiefly to promote the elections of the
parliament which sat in the reign of James II. ought to have been attentive,
one would think, to take the glorious opportunity, that was furnished them by a
new settlement of the crown, and of the constitution, to secure the
independency of parliaments effectually for the future. Machiavel observes, and
makes it the title of one of his discourses, That a free government, in order
to maintain itself free, has need every day of some new provisions in favor
of liberty. The truth of this observation, and the reasons that support ^t, are
obvious. But as every day may not furnish opportunities of making some of these
new and necessary provisions, no day, that does furnish the opportunity, ought
to be neglected. The Romans had been so liberal in bestowing the right of
citizens on strangers, that the power of their elections began to fall into
such hands as the constitution had not intended to trust with them. Quintus
Fabius saw the growing evil; and being censor, he took the opportunity;
confined all these new el^^tors into four tribes, put it out of their power to
turn the elections, as they had done whilst their numbers were divided among
all the tribes; freed his country from this danger; restored the constitution
according to the true intent and meaning of it; and obtained, by universal
suffrage, the title of Maximus. If a spirit like this had prevailed among us at
the time we speak of, something like this would have been done; and surely
something like it ought to have been done, for the revolution was in many
instances, and it ought to have been so in all, one of those renovations of our
constitution which we have often mentioned. If it had been such with respect to
the electing of members to serve in parliament, these elections might have been
drawn back to the ancient principle, on which they had been established; and
the rule of property, which was followed anciently, and was perverted by
innumerable changes which length of time produced, might have been restored, by
which the communities, to whom the right of electing was trusted, as well as
the qualifications of the electors and the elected, might have been settled in
propor^^on to the then present state of things. Such a remedy might have
wrought a radical cure of the evil which threatens our constitution; whereas it
is much to be apprehended, even from experience, that all others are merely
palliative.

Brady 1. OF BURGS, 60.
mentions resolutions of the house of commons, That in all places, where there
is neither charter, nor immemorial custom, to the contrary, every ^^useholder
has a right to vote for members. In some instances, prescription for confining
the right of election to the bailiffs and capital burgesses, excluding
householders in general, have been disallowed by the house Brady, 1. OF BURGHS,
60.
. But the resolutions of the house on this, as on many other points, are often
inconsistent. Brady (who shows great fear lest the people should have any
liberty, or power) thinks the commons founded this resolution so favorable to
the people, on a mistake as to the sense of the phrase, communitas civitatum et
burgorum; which meant, he thinks, the governing part of cities and burghs, not
the householders in general. But surely it is more for the advantage of liberty,
that election be in many, than few, hands; as it is harder to bribe many than a
few.

We see what light this grievance of inadequate parliamentary representation
has been viewed in by the best politicians. If therefore judge Blackstone did,
at the time he wrote the 172d page of the first vol. of his COMMENTARIES,
recollect the miserable state of representation in our times, it is
inconceivable how he could bring himself to write as he has done. Only such are
entirely excluded, from voting for members, says he, as can have no will o^
their own [meaning poor and dependent people without property]. There is hardly
a free agent to be found, but what is entitled to a vote in some place or
other in the kingdom. Did the learned judge consider, what he himself has
observed, that the borough-members are four times as numerous, as the
county-members; that a few thousands of electors send in the majority of the
house; that in many places a handful of beggars sends in as many members as the
great and rich county of York, or city of Bristol? Did the learned judge
consider these shocking absurdities, and monstrous disproportions, or did he
consider the alarming influence the court has in parliament, when he wrote what
follows, viz. If any alteration might be wished, or suggested in the present
frame of parliaments, it should be in favor of a more complete representation
of the people. What! are we to be put off with a cold If, in a case where our
country lies bleeding to death? If any alteration might be wished -- Let us go
on then, and say, If the deliverance of ourselves and our posterity from
destruction might be wished; if any alteration of what must bring us to ruin
might be wished -- any alteration from a mockery rather than the reality of
representation -- any alteration from 300 placemen and pensioners sitting in
the house of commons -- any ^^^^ration from a corrupt court's commanding the
ma^^rity of the elections into the house, and of the votes, when in it -- any
alteration from the parliament's becoming a mere outwork of the court -- If it
is, at last to be doubted, whether the saving of our country is to be wished,
what must become of us? Had a hackneyed court-hireling written in this manner,
it had been no matter of wonder. But if the most intelligent men in the nation
are to endeavor to persuade the people that there is hardly room for a wish;
that there is scarce any thing capable of alteration for the better, (the
judges four volumes are a continued panegyric) at the very time when there is
hardly any thing in the condition, it ought to be in, at the time when we have
upon us every symptom of a declining state, when we are sinking in a bottomless
gulf of debt and corruption, the spirit of the constitution gone, the
foundations of public security shaken, and the whole fabric ready to come down
in ruins upon our heads -- if they who ought to be the watchmen of the public
weal are thus to damp all proposals for redress of grievances -- Quo res summa
loco? In what condition is this once free and virtuous kingdom likely soon to
be?

BOOK III. Of the second Constitutional Irregularity in our Parliaments, viz.
The excessive Length* of their Period.
CHAP. I. Parliaments were originally annual.
WHERE annual election ends, slavery begins, says the author of HISTOR. ESS. ON
THE BRIT. CONSTABLE. A maxim of equal solidity in politics with that of my late
amiable friend Dr. Foster in divinity, viz. Where mystery begins, religion
ends. Long parliaments are incompatible with liberty. To give a set of men
power for a long period of time, is giving them the hint, that they may make
themselves despots, if they please. Kings and grandees are tyrants only because
they know they have their power during life. But of the danger of inveterate
power I shall have occasion to treat more fully hereafter.

Parliaments, according to Postlethwayte DICT. II.413.
, were originally annual; and anciently all the people voted at elections, till
Henry VI. enacted, that only freeholders residing in the country, and who had
an income of 40 s. a year, should vote. That parliaments were formerly chosen
fresh and fresh, is evident; since there be writs extant for new elections for
80 years successively; says the learned writer of a piece entitled, LIMITATIONS
FOR THE SUCCESSOR, etc. STATE TRACTS, Time of K. Will. III.386.


In the Saxon times it cannot well be supposed, that parliaments could be
longer than annual, were it only for one reason, viz. That the members of their
wittena gemots, or parliaments, were mayors, or officers, who held their
offices only one year, at the end of which they were obliged to divest
themselves of all power, and to assemble the people for new election. It was
agreed, that a parliament should be held twice every year at London, and this
continued from king Alfred's time to that of Edward II. as appears by Horn's
MIRR. OF JUST. chap. 1. sect. 2. Ibid. I.163.
' A. D. 1378, a parliament was called, because, among other reasons, it was
constitutional, that parliaments should be held annually PARL. HIST. I.370.
. The commons, A. D. 1940, regret, they had not made parliaments annual,
instead of triennial. By two statutes, they say, they found parliaments once a
year still in force Rap. 11.394.
. When the triennial bill was established, in the time of Charles I. after an
intermission of 12 years, the king, in the genuine spirit of a Stuart, made a
merit of his agreeing to the bill. The commons would not allow it; but
insisted, that there were then in force two statutes for annual elections. The
bill for triennial parliaments, says Milton Milt. EIKON. 64.
, was but the third part of one good step toward that which in times past was
our annual right. Milton EIKON. 65.
says this triennial bill of which Charles made a great merit, was much less
than two statutes yet in force of Edward III. Nay, in a book, entitled, THE
RIGHTS OF THE KINGDOM, the MIRROR OF JUSTICES is quoted, that parliaments by
the old laws, ought to be held twice a year. If so, we are deprived of 13 parts
in 14 of our ancient privilege.

Sir William Wyndham, in the debate on the repeal of the septennial act, A. D.
1734, gives the true acoount of this matter. At the time of the revolution,
says he, nay at the present time, at all times, the word parliament in the
common way of speaking comprehends all the sessions from one election to
another. That this is the common meaning of the word, I appeal to every
gentleman in this house; and for this reason those patriots, who drew up our
CLAIM OF RIGHTS, could not imagine that it was necessary to put in the word
new; they could not so much as dream that the two words, frequent parliaments,
would afterward be interpreted to mean frequent sessions of parliament, but
the lawyers, who are accustomed to confound the sense of the plainest words,
immediately found out that a session of parliament was a parliament; meant only
frequent sessions. This quirk the lawyers found out immediately after the
revolution; this quirk the courtiers at that time caught hold of; and this set
the people anew upon the vindication of their rights, which they obtained by
the triennial bill. By that bill the right of the people to frequent new
parliaments was established in such clear terms, as not to be misunderstood,
and God forgive them who consented to the giving it up. DEB. COM. VIII.190.


The answer given by the king (that is, the minister) to the remonstrances
requesting the dissolution of a supposed corrupt parliament, A. D. 1770, was,
That the remonstrances were disrespectful to his majesty, injurious to
parliament, and irreconcilable with the principles of the constitution.' It
were to be wished, that the public had been better satisfied of the justness of
this answer. Does not the very idea of petitioning imply acknowledgment of
superiority in the person addressed to? Were not the remonstrances addressed to
the king by his titles of sovereignty? Was not an appeal to the sovereign from
a supposed corrupt ministry and parliament doing honor, nay, was it not doing
the highest honor in the power of the remonstrants, to the throne, and to the
person of the king, as supposing, that from him alone there was hope of
redress? Again, what injury to parliaments in general was done by requesting
the dissolution of a particular parliament? If the members had acted uprightly,
it was to be expected, that their constituents (if free) would immediately
re-elect them, which instead of disgrace, would have reflected the highest
honor upon them. If indeed it had been confessed, that many members, from a
consciousness of their corrupt practices, had reason to fear the loss of their
seats, the case was otherwise: but this was too shameful to confess. Or if it
had been said, that a majority of the electors, being dependent on their
members, or obnoxious to bribery, would of course have re-chosen the same men,
at worst the dissolution of the parliament would have been nugatory. But it
would have showed the people, that the king was willing to listen to the
request of 60,000 of his subjects. Lastly, as to the remonstrances being
irreconcilable with the principles of the constitution; it is strange that
there should be any thing unconstitutional in requesting the king to do what
the constitution gives him a power to do at any time; what William III. did in
compliance with a petition from one county; what George II. did without
solicitation, and without blame, when he dissolved one of his parliaments at
the end of the 6th session, with the view, according to some, of preventing the
irregularities of a long electioneering time. It is strange that there should
be any thing unconstitutional in the king's dissolving a parliament at the
request of 6 times the number and 60 times the property that made them a
parliament. It is strange, that there should be any thing unconstitutional in
dissolving a parliament which had sat several years, when we know, that the
length of parliaments is one of our greatest grievances, and that our kings
could not any way more effectually show themselves to be the friends of the
constitution, than by regularly dissolving every parliament at the end of the
first session.

CHAP. II. Brief History of the lengthening and shortening of Parliament.
PARLIAMENTS seldom sat, in former times, many months. In one year there were
sometimes 2, sometimes 3 parliaments, says Sir Simon Dewes on the poll-tax
before the lords in 1641 PARL. HIST. IX.439.
. The longest parliament ever yet held, viz. almost a whole year, under Hen.
IV. was three times prorogued, which was then an innovation Ibid. II.107.
. An act was made 4 Edw. III. cap. 14. for holding parliaments yearly, or
oftener, if necessary. Again by 36 Edw. III. cap. 10 STAT. AT LARGE, I.196,
292. PARL. HIST. I.314.
. `They knew not, in those days, the fashion of prorogations. Therefore
parliaments then were annual. The unthinking people of Charles II's. time were
contented if there was no interruption of parliaments, longer than for three
years. Henry VIths reign was the first in which prorogations began to be made
for any time, and they were but very little used till Hen. VIIIths time. The
usual way formerly was to call a parliament at least once a year, and as soon
as the business was done, to dissolve them See REASONS FOR ANNUAL PARL. ST.
TRACTS, time of K. William, III.290.
. Henry VIII. first lengthened parliament beyond three years, as the most
effectual means for rendering the members obedient to his will. Annual
parliaments were restored by Philip and Mary, after an intermission of two
years PARL. HIST. III.341, 349.
.

Charles, A. D. 1640, makes a mighty merit of giving his assent to the bill for
triennial parliaments, before any subsidy granted to him Hume's HIST. Stuarts,
I.259. PARL. HIST. IX.218.
. Great joy, and both houses waited on the king with thanks PARL. HIST. IX.220.
. This salutary law was repealed 16 Car. II. therefore is not in the STATUTES
AT LARGE. The purport of it is to restore the laws by which parliaments ought
to be held annually. It enacts, that if the chancellor does not issue out
writs, any 12 peers shall in the king's name; failing them, the sheriffs,
mayors, bailiffs, etc. shall cause elections to be made; they neglecting, the
electors shall proceed as if writs had been regularly issued. It had been happy
if the people had been constituted with authority to make laws, when the
legislature did not their duty. The preamble to the repeal of this salutary
law, puts it upon the derogation it is from the king's prerogative. As if the
salus populi were not of infinitely more consequence than the king's
prerogative, whose only value is its usefulness to the people.

The army demanded, A.D. 1647, that parliaments should be triennial, and the
dissolution of them not in the king's power. A representative according to the
contributions respectively paid to the public by counties; and that improper
members be expelled Macaul. IV.329.
. The army at this time seem to have been the most reasonable set of men in the
nation. Before Charles Ist's time the members of the house of commons never
dreamed of their having power to continue themselves in office one hour beyond
the time limited by their constituents.

The author of HISTOR. ESSAYS ON THE ENGL. CONSTIT. is too severe against the
long parliament which opposed Charles I. They certainly meant honestly, having
no bias to draw them from the public interest, though they sat too long,
fearing, perhaps, that their successors might not be as faithful as themselves.
It was much more clearly disinterested than the protracting of parliament from
triennial to septennial for the pretended fear of a jacobite parliament. He
says it was madness in the people to rejoice upon the king's consenting, for
600,000 l. raised for him, not to dissolve parliament without their own
consent. This was the first protraction of the period of parliament, and taught
ill-designing ministers to imitate it. It is an evil of kingly government, that
through fear of tyranny, well meaning people have often consented to what was
unconstitutional. So in the alteration from triennial to septennial,
jacobitism, or an attachment to a race of kings, was the cause of the
irregularity.

The triennial bill was repealed, A. D. 1664. and instead of it a law to
prevent parliaments having vacations of more than three years Rapin, II.635.
DEB. LORDS, I.66.
. One would think all memory of James I. and Charles I. was miraculously
obliterated out of the minds of the people of England. It was but 15 years
before that Charles I. was beheaded; and the people (or the parliament at
least) were for trusting their all again to kings. The long, or pensioned
parliament meets 1661, agreeable to the court, and says Rapin, without doubt by
the influence of the court. Great part were high church men and royalists.
Pensioning begun afterward, though at the beginning of this parliament they
showed a great partiality for the king Rapin, II.625.
. The commons threw out a bill for shortening parliaments. The lords send down
another: Rejected likewise, A. D. 1693 Tind. CONTIN. I.249.
. Parliaments were made triennial by 6 William III. cap. 2. STAT. AT LARGE,
III.173.
In that reign they were often dissolved at the end of the first session. 2
George I. they were made septennial. The pretense was, the danger of a Jacobite
house of commons: The real reason, that they, who were in power, chose to
continue in power. The triennial bill receives the royal assent, A. D. 1694
Tind. CONTIN. I.260^
. And the historian observes, that if our good king had not done it that day
(queen Mary just taken ill of the smallpox, of which she died) it is probable
he never would have given it the royal assent. So indifferent are even our best
kings about bills tending to the enlargement of the people's liberty. At the
same time, it must be owned, William had some reason to dread a change of
parliaments. The abbe Reynel tells us HIST. PARL. ENGL. 272.
, that when this triennial bill was under consideration, queen Mary desired
lord Bellamont, her treasurer, to oppose it. He refused. He was desired only to
be neutral. He proved, on the contrary, very active in promoting the bill. The
queen dismissed him from his post. He retired to privacy and frugality. The
queen, overcome by his obstinate virtue, offered him a pension. He declined it,
saying, He had no right to a reward, as he did no service. It is wonderful,
that George I. should so easily obtain the repeal of so favorite an act. A
strong clause was added by the lords to the bill of rights, excluding
effectually all popish successors to the throne. Passed easily by the commons,
which looks as if the tory and popish parties had not been so strong in the
house and kingdom as those who brought in the septennial bill pretended. This
was A. D. 1689, and septennial parliaments were established A. D. 1716 Tind.
CONTIN. I.55.
. It is hardly to be imagined that there should be more danger from Jacobitism
in 1716 than in 1689, the very year after James's abdication. All this shows
how flimzy the pretenses are for what is big with so much evil. So Julius
Caesar was appointed, by the senate and people of Rome, dictator for 6 months.
He made himself perpetual dictator. All the world condemns this tyrannical
proceeding. The house of commons, 2 George I. was elected, as usual, for three
years. They elected themselves for four years more, without leave of their
constituents, given, or even asked! O! but the danger of a Jacobite parliament,
if a new election was brought on! True. And in the same manner Caesar, in his
civil war, tells us, he feared Pompey's tyranny; if he himself resigned the
dictatorial power. Some authors tell us, the septennial act was made on purpose
to save an odius ministry, who dreaded a new and incorrupt parliament. Thirty
lords (even lords!) protested against the septennial act. And Mr. Snell told
the house of commons, they might as well make themselves perpetual at once, as
continue themselves one month beyond the time, for which they were elected.

It was a singular modesty in the lords to originate in their house an act
relating to the commons. Therefore lord Guernsey moved the commons, to throw it
out of the house, without reading it. It was answered, That the triennial act
had originated in the house of peers. [But if they were allowed to make a
salutary proposal concerning what they had nothing to do with, it does not
follow, that they are to be suffered to go out of their way to do mischief Deb.
COM. VI.68.
.] Carried 276 to 156 for a second reading, the Tuesday after. Petitions were
sent from many towns against it. And when this self-prolonged parliament
(which, says the author of the USE and ABUSE OF PARLIAMENT I.251.
, went farther in impoverishing and enslaving their fellow subjects, than all
their predecessors from the restoration,) came at last to be dissolved, the
cities of London and Westminster, with bells, bonfires, illuminations, and
every other demonstration of joy, celebrated its demise, as a deliverance from
their worst enemies.

The motion for repealing the septennial act, A. D. 1742, was opposed by
Pultney and Sandys. (I suppose the patriots were afraid a new parliament might
not be so staunch against Sir Robert.) Rejected, 204 against 184. The proposal
was made by Sir John Barnard, which gives me a better opinion of him, than of
Pultney and Sandys DEB. COM. XIII.219.
.

A. D. 1744, a motion was made for annual parliaments Alm. DEB. COM. II.1 -- 63.
. Passed in the negative 145 to 113. Therefore 113 thought it right. Let not
then the proposal of annual parliaments be thought romantic.

A motion was made, A. D. 1747, for leave to bring in a bill for shortening the
term and duration of future parliaments: a measure truly patriotic, against
which no substantial argument could be produced, although the motion was
rejected by the majority, on the pretense that whilst the nation was engaged in
such a dangerous and expensive war, it would be improper to think of
introducing such an alteration in the form of government Ibid. V.221.
. This was setting common sense upon its head. The danger of the times is the
very best reason for making salutary al^^rations, and abolishing dangerous
abuses.

Parliament was dissolved at the end of the 6th session, 1747, for a whimsical
reason, according to some, viz. because the Dutch were in doubt, whether
Britain would persevere in her schemes, which were favorable to them, if the
same parliament continued to sit. I should have thought the danger of a change
of counsels was in case of a change of parliament Alm. DEB. COM. III.52.
. Some said, as above observed, it was done to shorten the time, and lessen the
mischiefs of electioneering. The king in his speech pretends that he dissolved
the parliament to show his entire confidence in the affections of his people,
and that he did not depend merely on a particular set of men in the house of
commons Ibid. 54.
.

Thus it appears that parliaments were originally renewed every year, and that
a parliament and a session were the same thing. That they held on in this way
with little variation, to the times of Henry VIII. That annual parliaments were
restored under Philip and Mary. That they were made triennial, A. D. 1640. That
in the time of the troubles under Charles I. they were very irregular, and
protracted to an enormous length; the house of peers abolished, and the rump,
or remainder of the commons, kicked out by Cromwell. That under Charles II. A.
D. 1664, the triennial bill was repealed, and the period of parliaments left to
the arbitrary pleasure of the prince. That his long, or pensioned parliament
met, A. D. 1661, and sat above 18 years. That the period of parliament was
reduced back to triennial 6 William III. A. D. 1694 STAT. AT LARGE, IV.675.
. And that, A. D. 1716, 2 George I. they were protracted to septennial, at
which period they have continued ever since, in spite of innumerable
remonstrances against a grievance so universally confessed, and so notoriously
mischievous. Of which more fully elsewhere.

CHAP. III. Example of several Nations, who have shown a fear of inveterate
Power.
SOME few nations have shown some small degree of apprehension from power
continued in the same hands, knowing, that there can be no liberty, unless
they, who make the laws, be well assured that they shall come, by and by, to be
subject to their own laws.

Aristotle POLIT. V.8.
mentions, as the chief cause of the subversion of free states, their deviating
from the principles, on which they were originally constituted. He tells us,
the Thurians had a salutary law, by which the same person could not be twice
praetor without an intermission of five years. They suffered this law to be
abrogated. Their state, from that fatal time, declined to its ruin Ibid.


The Athenians finding that their kings, trusting to the perpetuity of their
power, began to stretch prerogative, abolished the regal office, and set up
archons, who were to reign 10 years, and then to be subjects. But the people
finding even this period [which is not much beyond that of our parliaments] too
long, changed their plan of government, and appointed 9 archons, to reign one
year Ubb. Emm. DE REP. ATHEN. I.16.
: The Athenian epistates, the chief of the prytanes, was in office only one
day, and never more than once Ant. ^hys. DE REP. ATHEN. 251.
The 10 cosmi, or supreme magistrates of the Cretans, were annual Ubb. Emm.
II.63.
. All the magistrates of the Aetolians were annual Ubb. Emm. II.251.
. The king and people of Epirus, during the age of their liberty, were
accustomed to meet once in the year, the king to renew his coronation oath, and
the people their allegiance Ibid. II.276.
. The Carthaginian suffetes, or chief magistrates, held their power only one
year Ibid. II.4.
. Livy tells us, that the Carthaginians found two years too long a period for
their praetors to have power. They therefore made that office annual. The
Corinthian prytanes were annual magistrates Ibid. II 102.
.

Three brothers having enjoyed the consulship seven years successivly, a
regulation was made, that neither consul nor tribune should be in office above
one year ANT. UNIV. HIST. XI.466.
. In England, a great family commands the elections of members for one or
several boroughs, from generation to generation. The Romans never chose a
dictator, but in extreme danger, and when expeditious measures alone could save
the state, and only for six months. They appointed several times a dictator to
drive an expiatory nail into the wall of Jupiter's temple. But he held his
office only one day. The wise Romans would trust power no longer than was
necessary. The authors of the ANT. UNIV. HIST. give the following account of
the office of dictator among the Romans; This supreme officer was called
dictator, either because he was dictus, that is named by the consul, or from
his dictating and commanding what should be done. No one could be created
dictator till he had been consul. The time assigned for the duration of the
office was the space of six months. As to the perpetual dictatorships of Sylla
and Julius Caesar, they were notorious usurpations, and violations of the laws
of their country. The dictator was not allowed to march out of Italy, lest he
should take advantage of the distance of the place to attempt something against
the common liberty. He was always to march on foot, except in case of a tedious
and sudden expedition, and then he formally asked leave of the people to ride.
In all other things his power was absolute and uncontrouled. He might proclaim
war, levy forces, lead them out, disband them, etc. without consulting the
senate. He could punish as he pleased; and from his judgment lay no appeal. To
make his authority more aweful, he had always twenty-four fasces with axes
carried before him, if we believe Plutarch, and Polybius. Livy ascribes the
first rise of this custom to Sylla. The authority of all other magistrates
ceased, or was subordinate to him. He had the naming of the general of the
horse, who was wholly at his command. When his authority expired, he was not
obliged* to give an account of any thing he had done during his administration.
[And we know accordingly what tyrants the dictators proved.] In short, the
dictatorship was a kind of absolute monarchy, though not durable, and was
looked upon as the only refuge of the commonwealth in time of danger, till
Sylla and Caesar converting it into a tyranny, rendered the name of dictator
odious, insomuch that, upon the fall of the latter, a decree passed in the
senate, forbidding the use of that dignity upon any account whatsoever for the
future.

The greater the power is, says Livy, the shorter ought to be the time of
holding it. Nothing is more advantageous for a state, says Seneca, than that
great power be short. When the Carthaginian judges were found to have made a
bad use of their power, which was for life, Hannibal obtained a regulation,
reducing it to annual.

The Romans, in their best times, jealous of those who assumed power, had
almost condemned Marcius to death for assuming the title of propraetor given
him by the army, but without authority of the senate, though he had just then
gained a glorious victory in Spain ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.295.
.

Cicero in his book, DE LEGIB. says, the following was an express law among the
Romans, Eundem magistratum, etc. Let no man bear the same office in the
republic twice without an interval of 10 years between. It is true the people
often broke through this wise regulation, and suffered power to be too often,
and to continue too long, in the same person, or family, as in the case of
Rutil. Censorius created censor twice together, and of Fabius's son made
consul, after that authority had been often conferred on the father, so that he
himself declared against the people's partiality for his family. The last Roman
decemviri, though chosen by their country but for a year, prolonged their term
by their own act, and retained the power they had usurped, till the people
forced it out of their hands, and punished them severely for their usurpation.
Their memory stands branded in history with all the infamy it deserves; while
the names of Valerius and Horatius, under whose conduct the people recovered
their right of electing annual magistrates, are celebrated by their historians
with all the praises that gratitude can yield, or merit claim, monuments more
lasting than brass or marble PREP. FRAGM. POLYB. xvi.
.

Quinctius foresaw the bad consequences of suffering power to continue long in
the same hands. Therefore he refused to be continued in the consulship beyond
his year. In consequence of too long a continuance of power in the same hands,
Sylla and Marius attached to themselves the army in such a manner as grievously
disturbed, and Caesar as ruined Rome.

Agustus, at the point of death, gave his will to his colleague in the
consulship. And some supposed, he intended to restore the republican
government. But recovering he went on as before, like presumptuous sinners, who
escaping from illness, soon forget their sickbed repentance ANT. UNIV. HIST.
ZIII.496.
.

Observe the consequence of a contrary conduct. The Romans in their degenerate
times became fearless of the loss of liberty. Though Sylla foretold, that
Julius would be found to have many M^riuses within him; though Caesar openly
bribed for the office of pontifex maximus, or chief priest, or, if you please,
pope of Rome; though he defended Cataline the conspirator and his crew, (with
whom he was accused of being an accomplice) till a band of equestrians drew
their swords upon him, and had almost killed him; though he was accused of a
conspiracy with Crassus, P. Sulla, and Autronius, to murder those senators, who
opposed their ambitious views, and to seize the consulship for Crassus, and the
command of the horse for himself; though he was accused of another plot with
Piso; though he behaved so ill in his praetorship, that the senators thought it
necessary to take his office from him; though he refused to abdicate in
obedience to the decr^e of the fathers, till he saw, that he would be driven
from the bench by force; though he treated Bibulus, his colleague in the
consulship, with such rudeness that he forced that meek spirited man to retire,
after which he reigned alone as absolutely as any tyrant, imprisoning the best
men of Rome, as Cato, and others, whenever they opposed his tyranny; though
Julius, I say, thus gave innumerable proofs of that lawless ambition, which
afterward overthrew the liberties of his country, yet the too credulous people
advanced this apparently dangerous citizen to the highest honors, and, giving
him the province of Gaul for five years, and the command of the army, with
their own hands put into his the sword with which he stabbed liberty to the
heart. Even after the consul Marcellus faithfully warned the senate, that it
was hazarding all that was valuable, to continue him in his command; and that
it was absolutely necessary for the public safety, that the formidable army
should be disbanded; there were still Romans (degenerate Romans!) treacherous
enough, and slavish enough, to support the man who, they knew, or ought to have
known, was laying measures for subduing their country SUETON. IN. JUL.. 28, 29.
.

The people of Taprobane, supposed to be Ceylon in India, chose for their king
a person who had no children, and if he happened to have children afterward,
they deposed him, lest the crown should become hereditary, and power become
inveterate in one family ANT. UNIV. HIST. XX.103.
. The officer, who had in his custody the seals, and keys of the citadel and
treasury, held his place but one day.

The ancient brave and free Arragonians, justly fearing the encroachment of
kingly power, appointed a magistrate called, in modern times, the justizia of
Arragon, who was to come between the king and the people, and to whom the
subjects might appeal, when injured by the king. This magistrate was to be the
ablest lawyer in the country. And a king, who opposed his explanation of the
sense of the law, was to be looked upon as a lawless tyrant. But about A. D.
1467, the justizia himself was found to have abused his power. The Arragonians
therefore found it necessary to put his decisions under the examination of 17
men chosen out of the four orders of the kingdom De Laet, HISP. DESCR. 127.
. It may, I believe, be safely affirmed, that all the free states of antiquity,
in their free times, made a point of giving no longer than annual authority to
their magistrates.

At Venice, A. D. 1298, an act passed in the great council, which till then was
annually chosen by the people, That all those of which it was that year
composed, or who had been members of it for the four last years, should, upon
their obtaining twelve voices in the council of forty, be themselves, and their
posterity for ever after, members of it; and that all the other citizens should
be for ever excluded from the administration of public-affairs. From this time
the people of Venice, like all others under the same circumstances, have found
how dangerous it is to be useless, and that to have no share in the government
is to be a prey to those who have PREF. FRAGM. POLYB. xvi.
.

The Florentines, offended at the long continuance of power in the Medici
family, insisted that it was necessary to restore the constitution to its first
principles, by restoring the magistrates to their regular functions in the
government MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.307.
.

No president could be chosen at Florence in less than three years from his
last service MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.45.
. By this means posts of honor were attainable by most of the citizens, and no
man or party could become inveterate in power, and responsibility was still in
view.

The Florentines ordered, about the beginning of the 16th century, that the
office of gonfalonier or chief magistrate should from that time be annual, and
that the council should be enlarged by the addition of all who had gone through
the great offices of state, either at home or abroad; the number before was but
18 Ibid. 433.
. Power should be widely diffused, and continually shifting from hand to hand.

Cardinal Richelieu, in his TESTAM. POLIT. condemns the custom in France, of
appointing the governors of provinces for life S. Pierre, OUVR. POLIT. XVI.25.
.

At Venice the doge, not being an absolute sovereign, has not power to take
off, or put on his ducal crown when he pleases. The consiglieri, or counselors
of Venice, are chosen for 8 months. The capi di quaranta, or heads of the
courts of 40 judges, are chosen by the senate for two months. The savii del
consiglio, or sages of the council, serve 3 months; the savii di terra firma,
or sages of the continent, 6 months. Five savii agli ordini, or sages of order,
are likewise chosen by ballot in the senate for 6 months each Cole's MEM. 16.
.

The khalif Omar would not nominate his son for his successor, nor even suffer
him to have a vote for the successor. It was enough, he said, for one family to
have one in the important office of khalif MOD. UNIV. HIST. I.516.
.

A doge of Lucca cannot be re-elected in less than 7 years. The senators are
elected every two months. The great council of 130 nobles and 10 burghers hold
their places 2 years. Their police is very attentive to the suppression of
luxury. MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLIII.445.


There is, says my honored friend Mr. Boswel, in the government of Corsica a
gradual progression of power flowing from the people, which they can dispose
of, and resume at their pleasure at the end of every year; so that no
magistrate, or servant of the public, of whatever degree, will venture, for so
short a time, to encroach upon his constituents, knowing, that he must soon
give an account of his administration, and if he should augment the authority
of his office, he knows, he is only wreathing a yoke for his own neck, as he is
immediately to return to the situation of an ordinary subject. Boswel's ACCOUNT
OF CORSICA, p. 154.


When the throne of Poland becomes vacant, the primate archbishop of Gnesna,
obtains a greater power than the king had; but this gives no jealousy, because
he has no time, before a king be chosen, to make himself formidable MOD. UNIV.
HIST. XLIII.526.
. The Parmesans used to change their podesta twice a year Ibid. XXXVII.124.
The directors of the Dutch East India company are obliged every third year, to
give an account to the states general of their whole proceedings Ibid. X.571.
.

A noble stand was made by the citizens of Dublin See WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, May
27, 1766.
, for obtaining a limitation of the period of their parliaments. They have
accordingly, viz. A. D. 1768, obtained a restriction of them to eight years.
Some of the candidates they obliged to swear, that they would vote for this
abridgment, before they elected them.

CHAP. IV. Example of the English in some Instances, shows an Apprehension of
danger from inveterate Power.
EVEN the English, who are described by a humorous author, as a people of great
faith and little wit, that is, fore thought, have occasionally shown some
little fear of the mischief to be expected from power inveterating in the same
hands.

For the general government of the country, the ancient Saxons [our ancestors]
ordained 12 noblemen chosen from among others for their worthiness and
sufficiency. These in the time of peace, rode their several circuits, to see
justice, and good customs observed, and they often of course, at appointed
times, met altogether to consult and give order in public affairs; but ever in
time of war one of these twelve was chosen to be king, and to remain so long
only as the war lasted; and that being ended, his name and dignity of king also
ceased, and he became as before; and this custom continued among them until the
time of their wars with the emperor Charles the Great. At which time,
Wittekind, one of these twelve, a nobleman of Angria in Westphalia, bore over
the rest the name and authority of king; and he being afterward, by means of
the said emperor, converted to the faith of Christ, had by him his mutable
title of king turned into the enduring title and honor of duke, and the eleven
others were in a like manner by the said emperor advanced to the honorable
titles of earls and lords, with establishment for the continual remaining of
these titles, and dignities unto them, and their heirs: of whose descents are
since issued, the greatest princes in Germany Verstegan's ENGL. ANTIQ. 62.
.

The 24 barons, who were to redress grievances in the time of Henry III. proved
24 tyrants; the consequence of trusting power in the hands of a few.
Accordingly the knights of the shires were obliged to curb the tyranny of the
reforming barons.

Enacted 1 Henry V. that no sheriff be again sheriff in less than three years
PARL. HIST. II.132.
. By 1 Henry V. cap. 4. sheriffs bailiffs shall not be in the same office in
three years after STAT. AT LARGE, I.450.
. By 28 Edward III. no sheriff shall continue in his office above one year
Ibid. 266.
. And by 1 Rich. II. none that has been sheriff, shall be so again within
three years Ibid. 314.
. Enacted, A. D. 1444, that to prevent oppression and exactions, no man shall
be sheriff or undersheriff of a county, above one year at most, on pain of
forfeiting 200 l. Rapin, I.569.


Our ancestors were cautious of allowing power to remain too long even in the
hands of searchers, gaugers, aulnegers [public measurers of manufactures,]
customers [custom-house-officers] etc. See 17 RICH. II. cap. 5. STAT. AT LARGE,
I.387.
A searcher, gauger, etc. shall have no assured estate in his office.

In the commission for the admiralty and navy, it was provided, that no
chairman continue in office above a fortnight together, and all commanders to
take their turns PARL HIST. XXII.65.
.

Even the king-killing parliament were sensible of the evil of too long
parliaments. To prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising from the
long continuance of the same persons in supreme authority, resolved, That this
present parliament dissolve upon, or before the last day of April, 1649. And
their self-denying ordinance shows that the general opinion of those times was
for a place-bill. And the same of adequate representation Ibid XVIII.526.
.

CHAP. V. Sense of Mankind on inveterate Power; or Arguments for short
Parliaments.
I Will throw together in this chapter some of the best arguments for short
parliaments, that have occured to me in the course of my reading. I hope the
reader will excuse any deficiencies he may find in the arrangement of them.

To take the character of man from history, he is a creature capable of any
thing the most infernally cruel and horrid, when actuated by interest, or what
is more powerful than interest, passion, and not in immediate fear of
punishment from his fellow creatures; for damnation lies out of sight. Who
would trust such a mischievous monkey with superfluous power?

Simia quam similis turpissima bestia nobis!

OVID. The love of power is natural; it is insatiable; it is whetted, not
cloyed, by possession. All men possessed of power may be expected to endeavor
to prolong it beyond the due time, and to increase it beyond the due bounds;
neither of which can be attempted without danger to liberty. Therefore
government (by such frail and imperfect creatures as men) is impossible without
continual danger to liberty See Bolingbr. REM. HIST. ENGL. 9.
. Yet we find that men in all ages and nations have shown an astonishing
credulity in their faithless fellow creatures; they have hoped against hope;
they have believed against the sight of their own eyes.

Were any foreigner of good understanding to be asked, what he thought would,
be the consequence of our commons being elected by so small a number of the
people, and of their sitting for seven years, he would answer, that without a
reformation of these irregularities, the British government must unavoidably
run into an aristocracy, or tyranny of a few, the most odius of all forms of
government. Yet the good people of England sleep very sound; and foreigners
admire and envy our form of government. The truth is, that neither foreigners
nor English consider much besides the theory of our constitution. They admire
what it ought to be, and would be, if we had the true spirit of it, while they
have reason to execrate it as it is in our times, and to look forward with
horror on what it is like to end in.

We know by infinite examples and experience, says the excellent Gordon, that
men possessed of power rather than part with it, will do any thing, even the
worst and the blackest, to keep it; and scarce ever any man upon earth went out
of it as long as he could carry every thing his own way in it; and only when he
could not, he resigned; I doubt that there is not one exception in the world to
this rule; and that Dioclesian, Charles the Vth, and even Sy^la, laid down
their power out of pique and discontent, and from opposition and
disappointment; this seems certain, that the good of the world or of their
people, was not one of their motives either for continuing in power, or for
quitting it. It is the nature of power to be ever incroaching, and converting
every extraordinary power, granted at particular times, and upon particular
occasions, into an ordinary power to be used at all times, and when there is no
occasion; nor does it ever part willingly with any advantage. From this spirit
it is, that occasional commissions have grown sometimes perpetual; that three
years have been improved into seven, and one into twenty; and that when the
people have done with their magistrates, their magistrates will not have done
with the people CATO'S LET. IV.82.
.

It is justly observed by judge Blackstone, that the greatest superiority any
man can obtain over another, is to make laws, by which he shall be bound. And
surely the greater the power, the greater danger of its becoming inveterate in
the same hands.

A wise people will not suffer combinations of great families. The monopally of
power is the most dangerous of all monopolies. An Athenian was banished by the
ostracism, if 6000 citizens all of at least 60 years of age agreed, that it was
necessary. Nor was it inflicted or suffered as a punishment, but was understood
as a wise precaution, for the good of the whole, against the exorbitant
popularity, and dangerous power of a few.

No body is willing to part with power, and all are for increasing what they
have. The prince of Orange (afterward king William III.) shows great anxiety
about James IId's being limited. It was, he said, of bad example, and subjects
might think of limiting protestant kings, if they begun with popish. Dal^ymp.
MEM. II.307.
.

The following, to the end of this paragraph, is chiefly abridged from REASONS
FOR ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS. For the amending, strengthening, and preserving of the
laws, parliaments ought to be held frequently. Words of the act for declaring
the rights of the subject at the beginning of the revolution. Frequent
parliaments must mean frequent elections; for frequent meetings of parliament
without new elections would be an evil, rather than an advantage. Alfred MIRROR
OF JUSTICES. chap. I. sect. 3.
ordered, that parliament should meet twice a year or oftener. There are
statutes three times in the reign of Edward III. that parliament should be held
once a year or oftener. To the same purpose, in the time of Rich. II.
Prorogations of parliament were then unknown. They began under Henry VI. Little
used till Hen. VIII. Will. III. was blamed for so many officers in parliament.
The king has power to choose his officers and servants; but the servants and
representatives of the people ought not to be the king's servants: who can
serve too masters? If votes are purchased by places, and members are more than
reimbursed their own shares of the public taxes, they become interested to load
the people, in order to fill their own pockets. Accordingly let it be
considered what a load might now be taken off from the people by annihilating
useless places and corrupt pensions. A man may at one time be fit for being a
representative, who is not so at another. He may go into the house in
independent circum^tances. In three years, extravagance learned at London may
beggar him. Were parliaments annual* the chance of this would be as 1 to 7. By
a few men's m^^opolizing legislative power, 6 times the number 5^8, or 3,34^ are
in every parliament excluded from practically learning parliamentary knowledge,
and understanding the ^nterests of their country, besides their being exclu^e^
(...) what they have an equal natural right to, with the 558, who were chosen,
i. e. who bought their seats.

Short parliaments would give the people an opportunity of knowing more of the
state of things both at home and abroad, than long ones. 558 gentlemen do not
know so much as seven times that number, or three times that number. Long
parliaments are particularly favorable to corruption. A virtu^us man could not
be debauched in a year's (...) in St. Stephen's chapel. Nemo repent fuit
^urpisimus. Vice is a monster of such frightful mein, etc.

POPE. Length of parliaments destroys all responsibility, makes our delegates
our masters, and erects them into an august assembly, whom we must not approach
but in the humble guise of petition. Short parliaments would be clear of
suspicion, and nothing would more promote confidence between king and people
than freedom from suspicion of court influence. If our kings are indifferent
about the people's confidence, we are in the case of the people of France, whom
the king can plunder at will. Can the people be fre^ from suspicion, when they
see some hundreds of placemen in the house? They must be a nation of idiots, if
they were. With what honest views can the court desire long parliaments?
Parliamentary slavery is flower, but surer than quo warrantos, and the other
oppressive acts of tyranny, which alarm the people and defeat themselves. So
Cha. II had almost ruined all by his long pensioned parliament, whose very
length qualified it for pensi^ning. All wise nations, and all good princes have
approved of frequent meetings with their parliaments and di^ts. Our Edwards and
Henry's often put a stop to the course of their victories to meet parliament.
The Spaniards were peculiarly cautious about the frequency of their state
meetings. Their Sanchos, Henry's, Ferdinands, and Charles's were very careful
of this. Under Charles, who was particularly exact in this respect, the Spanish
monarchy was most flourishing. His son Philip pursued a contrary plan of
encroachment on the people, and first eclipsed the glory of the monarchy. In
France, under Clovis, Pepin, Charlemagne, Capet, and his successors for ages,
the meetings of the states were cherished. Lewis XI. and most of his successors
have promoted the contrary scheme of government, without the people. The
consequences have been continual insurrections, tumults, and leagues. The
subjects have often returned with interest on the heads of their ambitious
princes, the damages they have suffered at their hands, which has reduced the
kingdom to extreme distress. The struggles of the parliament of Paris, and
people of France, during the minority of this present king, to recover their
lost liberties, show the precarious state of despotic monarchs. When Germany
was exposed to unspeakable miseries from the Hungarians, Sclavonians, Vandals
and Danes, the remedy was establishing frequent and annual diets by the golden
bull, under Charles IV, wherein the imperial cities and Hanse towns took care
to send new deputies to every new diet, lest they should be bribed by the
imperial ministers. Holland, and Switzerland, though improveable in many
points, are very careful on this head, and by the frequency of the assemblies
of their states, have been secure.

Harrington labors to show, that all well-conducted states have avoided the
error of suffering power to continue too long in the same hands And he quotes
Machiavel, who ascribes the ruin of the Roman commonwealth, to the want of an
agrarian law, and the damage, which accrued from the prolongation of power in
the same hands OCEANA, p. 318*
.

Dr. South gave out his text, The word of the Devil, which I would recommend to
your serious attention at this time, is written in the IId chapter of Job, and
the 4th verse, "All that a man has will he give for his life," etc. The
jacobites moved, A. D. 1693, for a place-bill, and short parliaments. And there
were men, who, in the apostle Paul's time, preached Christ from contention. But
truth is truth, if the Devil had spoke it, and christianity is a good religion,
though some have preached it from contention. So a place-bill, and short
parliaments are salutary measures, though the jacobites proposed them from
party-views. The former was passed by the commons, but rejected by the lords;
the latter passed both houses, but was denied the royal assent. The lords threw
out the bill for incapacitating placemen from sitting in the house, because it
would seem too great a restraint on the people's liberty of choice. But this is
a frivolous objection. For as the law stands now, the people are restrained
from choosing persons unqualified as to fortune, and those who hold certain
places; and all the evil is, that the people are not more restrained in their
choice of improper persons.

Acts of parliament derogatory from the power of subsequent parliaments, bind
not, says Blackstone COMM. I.90.
. Therefore short parliaments are desirable. It is impossible, in many cases,
to foresee what the effect and operation of an act of parliament will prove.
And if a bad law must continue in force seven years (the same parliament will
not perhaps like to repeal its own law) the subjects may be heavy sufferers.

The length of parliaments dejects the spirits of the few patriots who are
still left. At the sitting down of a new parliament they lose all hope of
redress, for many years. And the depression of their courage is the triumph of
the court, and gives them opportunity for rivetting the chain.

If our parliaments were annual, it might be as well, that our ministries, and
the rest of the executive, were more permanent. For an honest parliament (and
an annual parliament, with exclusion by rotation, could have no interest to be
other than honest) would oblige the executive to act according to justice, and
the public interest, which would secure the public safety. The reducing our
parliaments to independency on the court, would confound the enemies of this
country. For it would show the world, that the court had no indirect designs.
And no nation can hope to injure Britain, if her government is true to her.

Walpole, A. D. 1735, when the house was moved about shortening parliaments
said, It would be dangerous; for that it would make the government democratical
by giving factious men too much game to play. This was truly Walpolian, that is
jesuitical, reasoning. In whose hands ought the power to be? In those of a
corrupt court? will it be safer there than in the hands of the original
proprietors, I mean the people? Is the court likely to consult the people's
interest with more diligence and fidelity than the people themselves? The court
may be rich, though the nation be ruined. But if the nation be ruined, what is
to become of the people?

The unembarrassed modesty of a thorough-paced courtier sticks at nothing.
Pelham formally sets himself DEB. COM. XII.86.
to prove (in opposition to the sense of all that ever thought, spoke, or wrote
upon government) that it is an advantage of our constitution, that a person,
may be in a station of power his whole life, because the attachment of the
people to their king and royal family, will always prevent any bad effects from
his ambition, and the control of a master, or sovereign, [however
ill-disposed, or however misled, the sovereign may be] as well as of two
houses of parliament, [however corrupt the parliament may be] will always
prevent his being guilty of very enormous practices, or will, at all times,
even when he is in the zenith of his power, be able to discover and punish
them, if he should.' But wise founders of states have generally thought
prevention preferable to punishment; and have, therefore, made regulations for
preventing the continuance of power too long in the same hands. And in spite of
their utmost precaution, wicked ministers have often escaped.

It is observed, that the members are particularly careful of their conduct
toward the end of a parliament, with a view to their being re-elected. Does not
this show the advantage of short parliaments, and the frequent return of power
into the hands of the people? If it be said, upon the plan of exclusion by
rotation, and an effectual place-bill, gentlemen would not want to be
re-elected, and therefore the shortening of parliaments would not make them at
all the more careful of their conduct; this is confessing all that is wanted,
viz. That, if parliaments were upon a right foot, there would be no bias upon
the minds of the members, to draw them away from their country's interest;
which they would naturally pursue, because their own is involved in it.

The place-bill has been repeatedly passed by the commons in consideration of
an approaching general election, which shows plainly the advantage of short
parliaments See REV. PLACE-BILL.
.

A motion was made, A. D. 1713, to address the queen that she would desire the
duke of Lorrain to remove the pretender out of his dominions. Sir William
Whitlocke observed, that there was such an address presented to Cromwell about
the removing of Charles Stuart out of France, who was afterward restored to
the throne. Being near the end of a parliament, and the members fearing for
their election, it was resolved nem. con DEB. COM. V.47.
. This shows the advantage of short parliaments. For the jacobite interest was
at that time thought to be strong in the house.

In the Devonshire instructions, A. D. 1741, which were admired for their
conciseness and sense, is the following, restore triennial parliaments, the
best security for British liberty DEB. COM. XIII.116.
.

In governments, where the legislature is one lasting assembly, there is
danger, that the members of such assembly think they have an interest distinct
from that of the community Lock on GOVERN. II.214.
. In England, while parliaments are septennial, it may happen, that many
hundreds of individuals may be legislators the greatest part of their lives.
Accordingly it was found, in the year 1766, that 64 members had served in a
parliaments, 31 in 5, 16 in 6, 3 in 7, 2 in 8, 1 in 9, and 1 in 10. LAND. MAG.
1766, p. 489.


Many writers lay great stress upon I know not what imaginary danger from
unbalancing the power of the three estates. For my part, I own I am so dull,
that I can see but one danger respecting the interior of the kingdom, viz. The
danger of the people's being enslaved by the servants of the crown. Suppose the
power of king and lords diminished to what degree the reader pleases; if the
people of property in general were free and happy, could the king and lords be
unhappy? Would the king and the lords have just reason to complain, if they
were happy? Does any friend to his fellow creatures wish the king and lords to
possess power for any other purpose, than the general happiness? Can we not
imagine a state, in which the people might be very happy, in which king and
lords possessed much less power than they do in this country? Can we not
imagine a very happy state, in which there was neither king nor lords? What is
the necessity of a check on the power of the commons by king and lords? Is
there any fear, that the commons be too free to consult the general good? Must
the representatives of the people be checked and clogged in promoting the
interest of their constituents? If there be not some necessity for this (which
to me seems as rational as to say, there ought to be a check to prevent
individuals from being too healthy, or too virtuous) I cannot see the solidity
of that reasoning, which lays so much stress on the necessity of a balance, or
equality of power among the three estates, or indeed (speculatively, or
theoretically speaking) of a necessity of any more estates than one, viz. An
adequate representation of the people, unchecked and uninfluenced by any thing,
but the common interest; and that they appoint responsible men for the
execution of the laws made by them with the general approbation. Yet some
writers of no small note effect to regret the supposed weakness of the crown
and house of lords, when set against the commons, because the latter commands
the purse. The king's legislative power, says my esteemed friend Mr. Hume, is
no check to that of the commons. And why, I pray you, should it be a check?
Again, Though the king has a negative in the passing of laws, yet this, in
fact, is esteemed o^ so little moment, that whateve^ is voted by the two houses
is sure Queen Elizabeth rejected 40 bills, and king William III. one, if not
more.
to be passed into a law, and the royal assent is little better than a mere
form. What would this gentleman have? Ought a king, a single individual, or a
handful of lords, to have the power of stopping the business of the whole
British empire according to their caprice, or their interested views, whose
interest may often be imagined (by themselves at least) to lie very wide of the
general weal? I can see very clearly the use of a check upon the power of a
king or lords; but I own I have no conception of the advantage of a check upon
the power of the people, or their incorrupt and unbyassed representatives. The
same eminent writer seems to think a certain competent degree of
court-influence, by offices, necessary. For my part, I look upon every degree,
great or small, of ministerial power in parliament as a deadly poison in the
vitals of the constitution, which must bring on its destruction.

The opposers of annual parliaments say, Every thing will be fluctuating under
them, and no nation will treat with you; no war can be prosecuted with success.
etc. Have they then forgot, that the treaties of Bretigny and Troyes were
concluded, and the victories of Crecy and Agincourt gained, under the auspices
of annual parliaments? On the contrary, it is thought by many (says the author
of PREF. TO FRAGM. POLIB. P xii.
) that the septennial act, A. D. 1716, was the severest stab, the liberties of
the people of England ever received.

A standing parliament, or the same parliament long continued, changes the very
nature of our constitution in the fundamental article, on which the
preservation of our whole liberty depends DISSERT ON PARTIES* p ^7
.' The security of our liberty does not consist only in frequent sessions of
parliament, but in frequent new parliaments Ibid. 12^.
.

The ancient custom (says Davenant DAVEN. II.60.
) in the mixed governments formed in these northern countries (which will be
the best model for them to follow) was, That national assemblies should be
frequently called, and sent home as soon as the nation's business was
dispatched. The wisdom of old times did never think it convenient that one and
the same assembly should sit many years brooding of faction. For it is in these
continued sessions, where the skill is learnt of guiding, and being guided,
where the youth is depraved, and old sinners hardened, where those parties are
formed that give the cunning speakers so much weight and value, and where they
can bring their subtlety and eloquence to market. And in former reigns, the
departing from a principle so essential in its constitution, had like to have
changed the whole face of the English government; for leeches and other
blood-sucking worms are ingendered in standing pools; flowing waters do not
corrupt or breed so many insects. The keeping a national assembly long sitting
debauches the gentry of a kingdom, and opens a way to offices of trust, not
known among their ancestors; but when such assemblies are called together to
consult upon the difficulties of state, and are dissolved as soon as the public
business is dispatched, the measures of the false politicians become presently
quite altered. They, who design to rise, must mount by other steps than
formerly. Intriguing, heading* parties, running into factions, and sudden
changing of sides will avail the busy men but little. A year or two is not
sufficient to mould and fashion an assembly to their designs; every new
sessions young gentlemen are sent up whom it is not so easy to corrupt; they
can fix nothing where there is a perpetual flux and reflux of matter; it is
like building on a quick sand. When such as intend to advance themselves in the
world see all this, and that these assemblies are no more the field in which
they can exercise their wicked arts with any advantage, they naturally fall
into other methods, and are honest of course, when it is no longer their
interest to be otherwise. In such a constitution there is no need to silence
troublesome and perplexing rhetoric with some good office, nor to buy off and
reconcile at any rate, men of turbulent and ambitious spirits; and when it is
not needful to hire people to save their own country, how much cheaper and more
easy is government rendered to princes, who then have a free choice among their
subjects to call whom they please into the service of the state? whereas
otherwise their favors are confined to one narrow sphere; and as thereby their
goodness is made more extensive, so the stations requiring abilities and
experience must be better filled, when a court has not the necessity upon it to
find out places for men rather than men that are fit for the places. In
countries where this post, so essential to liberty, is thus preserved from
corruption, all matters relating either to war or peace, public revenues, or
trade, will go on prosperously; and a national assembly so constituted will
always produce wholesome laws, right administration, and a perpetual race of
honest and able ministers.

Charles II. governed, by his long or pensioned-parliament in much the same
arbitrary manner as William the Bastard did without a parliament. For, as the
people had in both cases lost the exercise of their annual power of election,
with that they had lost the remedy for all their grievances. And under this
mode of things may be observed all the marks of tyranny that can be found under
the despotic government of one man. The laws were no longer any protection to
the innocent. Judgment and justice were directed by court-policy; severity and
cruelty took the place of mercy and moderation; slitting of noses, cutting of
ears, whipping, pillorying, branding, fining, imprisoning, hanging, and
beheading, were the constant lot of those who had virtue enough to speak, write
or act in defense of constitutional liberty. And so far was the house of
commons from relieving the people under this dreadful distress, that they
contributed all in their power to prevent even their cries and prayers from
either approaching the throne or themselves. They passed a law, by which no man
durst ask his neighbor to join him in a petition for relief to the king or
either house of parliament. It was a melancholy consideration to see the people
refused the benefit of prayers and tears for relief against their own infamous
deputies HIST. ESS. ENGL. CONSTABLE. 120.
.

Nothing could make it safe (says the author of DISSERT. ON PARTIES P. 129.
) nor therefore reasonable, to repose in any set of men whatsoever so great a
trust as the collective body delegates on the representative in this kingdom,
except the shortness of the term for which this trust is delegated. Therefore
every prolongation of this term is in its degree unsafe for the people; it
weakens their security, and endangers liberty by the very powers given for its
preservation. Such prolongations expose the nation, in the possible case of
having a corrupt parliament, to lose the great advantage which our constitution
has provided of curing the evil before it grows confirmed and desperate, by
the gentle method of choosing a new representative, and reduces the people by
consequence to have no other alternative than that of submitting or resisting,
though submitting will be a^ grievous, and resistance much more difficult, when
the legislature betrays its trust, than when the king alone abuses his power.
-- These reflections, are sufficient to prove these propositions; and these
propositions set before us in a very strong light, the necessity of using our
utmost efforts that the true design of our constitution my be pursued as
closely as possible by the re-establishment of annual, or at least triennial
parliaments.

The author of a piece entitled A Discourse between a Yeomen of Kent, and a
Knight of a Shire upon the Prorogation of the Parliament to May 2, 1693 STATE
TRACTS, time of king William, II.330.
, writes as follows.

The king had rejected the bill for securing the foundations of the civil
government, by such a constant succession of new-chosen parliaments, that their
deputies, by their long continuance in that trust* may not be in danger to be
corrupted by offices o^ private interest. The speakers in the dialogue remark,
that the mischiefs of Charles IId's and James IId's reign were occasioned, in
great measure, by their refusing to call successive parliaments, and by
continuing the same parliament for many years, to form them to a compliance
with their designs of despotic power. They observe, That from king William's
solemn and repeated assurances that he would put a stop to the arbitrary power
exercised over the people, and parliament, and from his request to parliament,
that they would make such an effectual provision for their fundamental laws and
liberties, that they might never hereafter be in danger to be again invaded;
there was reason to expect, that the ancient, legal course of annually-chosen
parliaments would have been immediately restored, and the strongest fence made
for that constitution, that the wisdom of the kingdom could have invented. But
the promoters of the revolution lost the opportunity.

Politicians have laid down for a maxim, That if kings were republican in their
measures of administration, subjects would be royalists in their obedience. Our
kings have it in their own absolute power to do the nation a prodigious
service. The king can dissolve every parliament at the end of the first
session; which would make parliaments annual. But this would be applying
prerogative to the advantage of the people; whereas kings generally think it is
intended for their advantage, and to keep the people down. Yet even the army
(not generally friendly to liberty) proposed, A. D. 1647, biennial parliaments
Rapin. II.537,
; that the counties should elect members according to the respective rates they
bore in the common charges and burdens of the kingdom, and that the election of
burgesses for poor declined or inconside^able towns be taken off Ibid. 538.
. And general Fairfax, in his proposals for peace in Charles Ist's time, makes
the reduction of the period of parliament to two years, an essential article
PARL. HIST. XVI.205.
.

If it should ever happen, says the author of PREF. TO FRAGM. POLYB. P. xiv.
that the representatives, encouraged by long independence on the people,
should instead of reforming grievances, increase their number, and become
themselves the greatest grievance; the people will, in that case, have no legal
remedy, which is in itself contrary to the nature of government; it being
ridiculous to imagine that the same law, which provides a remedy for every
private wrong, should provide none for these of the public, or that the whole
body of the people, for whose sake the law itself was instituted, should ever
find themselves in such circumstances, as to lose the benefit of it. Yet this
must happen if it be received as a standing maxim of law and justice, that
their representatives when once chosen for any number of years, have,
notwithstanding the grossest misbehaviour, still a right to sit out their term,
and what is worse to extend it as far as the affairs of the nation, or their
own, may seem to require. If this be adm^^ed, then no term can by law be
prescribed to their sitting; because they have still a power by law of
extending that term, and consequently of perpetuating themselves. This, however
improbable, must, upon a supposition of the legality of the first extension of
the original term, be allowed to be equally legal. From hence it appears how
dangerous it is to remove the corner stones of government; and that whenever
they have been removed through necessity, the first opportunity ought to be
laid hold of to restore them to their former situation.

Lord Digby, in his speech, A. D. 1640, says, The safety of the state consists
in frequent parliaments. They are the unum necessarium. The long intermission
of parliaments has always produced bad effects.' He observes, that the
oppressions of ship money, and the rest in Charles Ist's time, were worse than
all the grievances from Magna Charta down, and that the intermission of
parliaments was the primary cause of the ministry's daring to oppress the
subject. [He had no idea of a bribed parliament's seconding the views of a
villainous court.] A parliament, he says, is the only security against a bad
ministry. [But what security against a bad parliament?] For a ministry will
always aim at an enlargement of power, and a parliament only can curb them. No
state can wisely be confident of a minister's being good longer than the rod is
held over him PARL. HIST. IX.197.
. He mentions Nov as once a great patriot and promoter of the petition of
right; afterward, when made attorney general, the very inventor of ship money.
He calls Wentworth also a shameful apostate. He is for triennial parliaments.
There were no places nor money to bribe with then. But even triennial
parliaments now would be too long.

Had we had frequent parliaments, says Sir W. Drake, A. D. 1641, we should have
given a timely stop to mischiefs, and never have suffered them to break in upon
us with such an inundation of distempers, that without prevention, may yet
swallow us up Ibid. X.37.
.

The act, A. D. 1641, for securing parliament against dissolution by the king,
without its own consent, was dangerous, as it left parliament at liberty to sit
as long as they pleased. But it was thought safe, because there was then no
considerable number of places, pensions, or contracts, and the people had
therefore an unreserved confidence in parliament. It set, however, a very bad
example for corrupt times. The people thought it a glorious victory over the
tyrant, the only object of their fear; little apprehending, that ever a time
would come, when they should have reason to dread an excessive power in
parliament^* Yet they ought to have known, that it is never (...) that power be
so far out of the people's reach, th^^ they cannot resume it, whenever they see
it abused* either by kings, or parliaments. And they ought to have remembered,
that (such is the disposition of the human mind) to give independent power to
any set of men whatever, is giving them the watchword to erect themselves into
tyrants. The proceedings of that very parliament exhibited a striking proof of
the justness of this remark, and the independency on their constituents, still
arrogated by many of our members of parliament, confirms it. Were our
parliaments annual, we should see our members as ready to acknowledge their
responsibility to their constituents, (...) now our overseers of the poor are
to submit their accounts to the examination of the parish.

The triennial bill under king William III. was received, says Burnet HIST. OWN
TIMES, III.183.
, with great joy; many fancying, that all their other laws and liberties were
now the more secure, since this was passed into a law. Time must tell what
effects it will produc^^ whether it will put an end to the great corruption,
with which elections were formerly managed, and to all those other practices,
which accompany them. Men, who intended to sell their own votes within doors,
spared no cost, to buy the votes of others in elections. But now it was hoped,
we should see a golden age, wherein the characters men were in, and the
reputation they had, would be the prevailing considerations in elections. And
by this means it was hoped, that our constitution, in particular that part of
it, which related to the house of commons, would again recover its strength and
reputation, which were now very much sunk. For corruption was so generally
spread, that it was believed, every thing was carried by that method.

To these observations of the good bishop, I will add, That it is at no time
easy to say what effect a partial reformation of abuses will produce. And the
mere reducing of parliaments to triennial is surely a very partial correction.
It is only stopping one leak in ten. For supposing parliaments were triennial,
so long as a few thousands (instead of many hundred thousands) have the power
of sending in a majority of the house, it will be in the power of the treasury
to influence elections. And, so long as there is no penalty for sitting in the
house of commons, and, at the same time, enjoying a place, or pension, so long
there will be danger lost the votes of the members be influenced by a corrupt
court. And so long as the same individuals may be returned again and again,
without necessity of exclusion by rotation, so long it will be worth the
ministry's while to influence them, and worth their while to bribe their
electors. But, if parliaments were annual, with exclusion by rotation; if the
power of electing were equally distributed, as it ought to be, among men of
property, so that no one member could be elected by fewer than a majority of
800 votes; and if no member could hold a place, or pension, while he sat in the
house of commons, under a severe penalty -- if all these restorations of the
constitution were brought about, I will engage, that court-influence in
parliament shall be impossible; and then we shall see the golden days mentioned
by the bishop.

Concerning triennial parliaments it was argued, A. D. 1693, That long
parliaments might prove dangerous either to king or people; to the former by
their obtaining great influence among the people, and retrenching too much the
power of the crown. But this I think frivolous, because history has no example
of a crown, whose power was too much retrenched. And besides it is most likely
that a short parliament will retrench prerogative. That long parliaments may be
likely to prove dangerous to the people, is extremely natural. For power
becoming inveterate in the hands of any set of men is always dangerous. When a
court knows, that the same set of men are likely to be in parliament for seven,
fourteen, or twenty one years, it becomes worth while to practice upon them;
and a wicked court may influence a corrupt parliament to give up, says Burnet
HIST. OWN TIMES, III.147.
, all the money and all the liberties of England, when they are to have a large
share of the money, and are to be made instruments of tyranny.' Frequent
parliaments would likewise, says the same author, put an end to the great
expense, candidates put themselves to in elections, and would oblige the
members to behave themselves so well, both with relation to the public, and in
their private deportment, as to recommend them to their electors at the three
years end; whereas, when a parliament is to fit many years, the members covered
with privileges, are apt to take great liberties, to forget, that they
represent others, and to take care only of themselves. Burnet mentions some
objectio^s then made to frequent elections, as, That they would make the
freeholders proud, and insolent, when they knew, that application must be made
to them at the end of three years. This would establish a faction in every body
of men, who had a right to election; and whereas now an election puts men to a
great charge all at once, then the charge must be perpetual all the three
years, in laying in for a new election, when it was known, how soon it would
come round. But surely we cannot do much, if we cannot get over such frivolous
objections as these. As to the pride and insolence, which the power of frequent
elections would produce in the freeholders, it is nothing to the purpose. We
are not to deprive the freeholders of what is otherwise their just right,
because their possessing of it may make them proud. On that principle, they
must not have their estates, at least none must have considerable estates. And,
above all, we must have no bishops, peers, or kings. And as to faction's being
likely to be increased by shortening parliaments, it is more likely to confound
faction. The very support of faction is power continued long in the same hands.
And as to the increase of expense to members in consequence of short
parliaments, it is an objection set upon its head. For, if parliaments were
annual, with exclusion of two thirds for three years by rotation, there would
be at once an end put to packing, bribing, canvassing, electioneering, placing,
and pensioning of parliament men; because the parliament, never consisting
wholly of the same men for two years together, it would not be worth while for
the court to get their iniquitous schemes carried in parliament, only to remain
for one year, and be overthrown the next; and whenever a seat in the house came
to be no longer a matter of emolument, the contest would be (as now with
respect to parish-officers in England, and seats in the assemblies in America)
how to avoid being elected.

The people's right of annually electing deputies to represent them in
parliament was, at the time of the triennial act, as much a part of their
birthright, as the freedom of their persons. They had enjoyed it longer than
Magna Charta, without violation, till the times of Charles I. It was therefore
no more in the power of any single king and parliament to deprive the people of
this right, than of Magna Charta. And the people have now a right, at any time,
to resume their original power, and to elect only for one year, declaring, that
they will not yield obedience to one act made in a second year of the same
parliament.

The only plausible pretense for septennial parliaments, viz. the danger of a
jacobite parliament's being chosen, never was solid; because, on that
principle, parliaments should have been still longer than septennial, that is,
there should have been no new parliament called, while there was a considerable
body of jacobites in the nation. But if the pretense for septennial parliaments
had been ever so plausible, at the time of that fatal innovation, in the name
of common sense, what has that to do with our times?

It was proposed to address for frequent new parliaments, A. D. 1675, in the
house of peers. It was urged that parliaments both before and long after the
conquest, were held 3 times a year, viz. at Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas,
8 days, each time DEB. Lords, I.175.
. This continued with some variations till Edward III. Then parliaments were
appointed to be annual, or oftener, if need be, and prorogations were not then,
nor till late times, unknown Deb. LORDS, I.176.
. It was unreasonable, that the same man should engross legislative power, and
exclude so many others equally entitiled. Change of hands was useful to keep
those entrusted to their duty. A member may be chosen when in good
circumstances. He may ruin himself with gaming, etc. Then he becomes obnoxious
to bribery. Then he taxes the people, to enable the court to bribe him, and the
rest of the venal crew. At any rate a place-man is not as free as he who has
nothing from the court. Honores mutant mores. The commons are now become judges
of their own privileges, condemning and imprisoning their fellow subjects
[their constituents, their masters] at pleasure, and without oath; they are
judges of all elections, by which means very often they, and not the people,
choose their fellow members. This is owing to the length of parliaments. Long
parliaments give time for settling cabals and schemes of corruption. The nation
was therefore much obliged to the long pensioned parliament for not enslaving
it. How easily this may be done in future ages, under such princes and long
parliaments, may easily be conjectured Ibid. 180.
. Lately there have been given 1500 l. 2000 l. and 7000 l. to be elected. There
is a scurvy proverb, That men, who buy dear, cannot live by selling cheap. The
address was however carried in the negative. Several lords protested, and the
king came to prorogue the house before all the lords who intended to join in
the protest, were come to the house Ibid. 175.
.

It cannot be unknown to king William, (says the judicious author of REASONS
FOR ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS STATE TRACTS, time of K. William. III.290.
) how much he has been libelled, because so many of his officers were in the
house. -- I am desirous that it should be made apparent, for the future, in
every parliament, that there is no likelihood of its being debauched, and that
will be made apparent by establishing annual parliaments Ibid.
. He then goes on to show, that, as members are delegated by electors, to
supply their places, and do their business for them, they ought not to be
continued longer than a year; because circumstances may so change in a year,
that a member who was fit for the business in agitation, when he was chosen,
may be found very ill qualified for judging of what comes before parliament,
the following sessions; yet the electors have no opportunity of changing him
for a more proper deputy. Again he shows, that the continuing the same members
for several years is overthrowing the people's privilege of delegation, and
giving their delegates a power of becoming their masters, and the creatures of
the court, from which, and not the people, they receive their commissions upon
every new prorogation. If short parliaments be the most effectual means for
preventing bribery, short parliaments are eminently desirable; for bribery is
more dangerous than quo warrantos. He then goes on Ibid. 291.
to show, that frequent new parliaments were the custom under our Henry's and
Edwards. That the best kings of Spain, and of France, and the best German
emperors were most desirous of frequent meetings with their people in their
general cortes, parliaments, and diets.

When the septennial bill was proposed, A. D. 1716, it was pretended, that the
people were very generally disaffected, though the rebellion was quelled; and
that the hopes of the jacobites were founded on a new parliament. It was
proposed first, to suspend the triennial act for once, which would have
continued the parliament three years longer. It was questioned whether the
septennial bill should be set on foot in the house of lords or commons. It was
thought best it should be started in the lords house, where the triennial
originated; that the odium might not fall upon the commons so as to hinder
their elections. Triennial elections (they said) keep up party divisions, raise
animosities in families, occasion ruinous expenses, etc. The only pretense for
lengthening parliaments, was the jacobitism of the people, which was owing to
the mad cry of The church in danger, set up by the bigoted priesthood. Tantum
relligio potuit suadere malorum. Could they not see that the contest about
elections was owing to the posts and places? Why did they not abolish them, as
in Holland? The whigs made a point of carrying the bill, and every opposer of
it was to be set down for a tory. The triennial act, when passed, was looked
upon by the people as their great security. Why therefore did the people's
deputies dare to mention the repeal of it? It had made king William supremely
popular. The septennial bill was taking the election from the people, and
electing themselves for four years. Parliaments ought not to be altered from
what was the known intention of the electors, without new authority obtained
from the electors. But that they did not ask; well knowing they should not
obtain it. The expense of frequent elections was no argument, because these
expenses are voluntary. Frequent elections, it was said, produced corruption,
[the contrary is the truth, their consciences told them] and corruption
produced the parliament which approved the peace of Utrecht. [If corruption
does mischief, the business is to remove the materials of corruption. The cause
abolished, the effects will cease of course.] Lord Trevor said, the shortest
parliaments were the best, and that annual was the constitutional period. That
parliaments were longest in the worst times, and when the revolution came in,
which brought liberty, with it came short parliaments. It was very necessary,
he said, to make regulations for preventing parliaments making encroachments on
the constitution, as well as for restraining ministerial encroachments. If the
people were disaffected and discontented, whether would the lengthening of
parliaments conciliate, or widen the breach? There is no representative of the
people but a house, of their own making. Every election, supposing
representation adequate, and places out of the way, throws the government again
into the hands of the people, where it must always be safe. It is absurd to
allege, that foreign states could not trust us, if our parliaments were
shortened. What more permanent than the French court? But who trusts the French
court? Let property govern, and all will be safe, and universal confidence will
follow. A long parliament made Charles II. indifferent about the affections of
his people. The lengthening of parliaments tended to produce faction in foreign
states, when they saw how easily the British constitution might be broke into.
It was therefore observed in the house of peers, that to publish the prevalency
of a popish faction in Britain, and to tell foreigners, that the people were
not to be trusted with themselves, was confounding all confidence of foreign
states in this nation. Articles in the lords protest against committing, were,
That frequent new parliaments are required by the constitution of this kingom,
and the practice of many ages evidences this to be the constitution. That long
parliaments naturally increase corruption. The longer the time, the more worth
a corrupt minister's while to bribe, and the more worth a candidate's to get
into the house. Thirty lords protested against committing the bill, and
afterward 24 against passing it. Petitions were presented to the commons
against it from Hastings, Marlborough, Cambridge, and Abingdon. Tind. I* 490.


In the same debate in the house of peers, the duke of Devonshire, in favor of
the bill, labored to set forth the inconveniences attending triennial
parliaments, that they served to produce feuds, animosities, party-divisions,
expensive elections,' with the other trite stuff commonly urged on that side of
the question. On the contrary, lord Abingdon said, the people looked upon the
triennial act, as the great security of their rights and liberties; that if the
bill passed the commons, it would be looked upon by those they represented, as
a breach of trust. The duke of Kingstone denied the last part of this
assertion, and urged that the business of the legislature was to rectify old
laws, as well as to make new ones. Lord Paulet said, he did not think it for
the king's service, and interest; but before they went any farther, they ought
to know the sentiments of the people. His lordship urged that the bill showed a
distrust of the affections of the people, without which no king could be safe
or happy; that king William had gained the hearts of his people by the
triennial act; and it would look somewhat strange, that the most popular of our
laws should be repealed in a year after the protestant succession took place.

The earl of Peterborough said, He wished he could give his vote for the bill;
but that he could not be for a remedy that might cause a greater evil; and that
if this present parliament continued beyond the time for which they were
chosen, he knew not how to express the manner of their existence, (unless
begging leave of the venerable bench, turning to the bishops) he had recourse
to the distinction used in the Athanasian creed, for they would neither be made
nor created, but proceeding.

The earl of Nottingham was against the bill, because he thought it would
rather exasperate, than quiet the minds of the people; and that though he could
not assign the true cause of the people's dissatisfaction* yet there must have
been some secret cause for it: That he hoped people's discontent was not so
great, as had been represented; that this bill seemed to imply that the
affections of the people were confined to so small a number as the present
house of commons; that whatever reasons may be given for continuing this
parliament for four years longer, would be at least as strong, (and by the
conduct of the ministry might be made much stronger) for continuing it still
longer, and even for perpetuating it; which would be an absolute subversion of
the third estate of the realm. He then hinted at the danger of enlarging the
prerogative, and instanced in the precedent of Henry VIII. who persuaded his
parliament to give him the abbey-lands under pretense that they would bear part
of his expenses, which would ease them of taxes, and improve trade; but that
soon after he demanded, and obtained, great subsidies, and made use of those
lands to enslave the people.

The duke of Argyle said, that designs had been laid to bring in the pretender,
long before the king's happy accession to the throne; and that if the
conspirators had improved the ferment, at the election of the last parliament,
it was probable their wicked schemes for setting aside the protestant
succession had taken place.

The bishop of London said, he was confounded between danger and inconveniences
on one side, and destruction on the other. After a debate of five hours the
question being put, it was carried in the affirmative, 24 lords protesting
against passing the bill, Because frequent parliaments were the fundamental
constitution of the kingdom* Because the house of commons ought to be chosen by
the people; and when continued for a longer time, than they were chosen for,
they were then chosen by the parliament, and not by the people. They conceived
that the bill, so far from preventing corruption, would rather increase it; for
the longer a parliament was to last, the more valuable, to corruptors, would be
the purchase. And that all the reasons that had been given for long
parliaments, might be given for making them perpetual, which would be an
absolute subversion of the third estate DEB. LORDS, III.27.
.

In the same debate in the house of commons the court-members said, the
septennial bill would strengthen the hands of the king; settle and maintain the
protestant succession; encourage our allies to depend upon us, that what shall
hereafter be stipulated shall be performed; would break our parties and
divisions, and lay a solid foundation for future happiness. And since the
present parliament have exerted themselves for the public good, why should they
not continue longer together, that they may finish what is so happily begun?

The opposition denied that the people were disaffected, said the parliament,
that had done so great things, were but little more than a year old, and that
nobody could imagine that discontents (if there were any) would last the
remainder of their term, under so wise, so unerring, so pacific an
administration as they then enjoyed. Was the frame of our constitution to be
altered, before our allies would favor us with their friendship? That was an
argument very improper to be urged in a British parliament. It was
acknowledging, that the king dares not trust the people in a new choice. It is
a dishonor to this house; for it supposes that another house of commons would
act differently from the present, which is to confess, that this house does not
truly represent the people. The trust, they said, was triennial; and if it was
continued longer, from that instant they ceased to be the trustees of the
people, from that instant they acted by an assumed power and erected a new
constitution; and though it is a received maxim, That the supreme legislature
cannot be bound, yet it must be understood that it was restrained from
subverting the foundations on which itself stood. And now after above an
hundred millions given by the people, in order to preserve their old form of
government, a bill is sent from the lords, which if it passes, must expose us
again to the greatest of dangers, which is that of a long parliament. In the
pensioned parliament, the means of temptation in the minister's hands were not
so great as they now are; the civil list nigh double to what it then was; and
the dependence on the crown greatly enlarged by reason of the increase of
officers for managing the public funds. What influence these may have upon an
exhausted nation, under the terror which 40,000 regular troops carry with them,
is easily foreseen. Can the lords think us so ungrateful, as to join in the
destruction of the power that raised us; and why cannot we content ourselves
with proceeding in the common methods, which the usage of many ages justifies?

It was resolved however, 284 against 162, that the bill be committed.

What follows is taken from Hutcheson's speeches on the same occasion DEB. COM.
VI. Append. 1 -- 32.
. If we should give our consent to the passing of the bill before us into a
law, we should be guilty of a most notorious breach of the trust reposed in us,
by those who sent us hither, and should make a very dangerous step toward the
undermining of that constitution, which our ancestors have been so careful to
preserve, and thought no expense either of blood or treasure too much for that
purpose, and under which we do yet enjoy those privileges and advantages, which
no other nation in the world can at this day boast of. It must be agreed, that
before the reign of Henry VIII. there was no single instance of a prorogation
of parliament. That parliaments had only one session, and those generally very
short ones, none of which ever lasted a year. That to prevent the mischief of
long intervals of parliament, it was enacted, in the 4th of Edward III. that
parliaments should be holden annually; and this was confirmed by subsequent
acts of parliament. And therefore I may venture to affirm, that by the ancient
constitution, parliaments were to be holden frequently, and to be of the
continuance only of one session, and that there was no right or power in the
crown to prorogue the same. I wish gentlemen would as generally concur that the
other part which I have mentioned, and I think have made appear to have been
our ancient constitution, is as absolutely necessary to the preservation of our
liberties, I mean parliaments of one session, not only frequent parliaments,
but frequent new parliaments. The thing indeed appears very evident to me, so
evident that in my opinion our liberties would not be more, nay not so
precarious under an absolute monarch, as with a house of commons who had a
right to sit either for many years together, or without any limitation of time.
For it is certain that a prince, who had stood only on the bottom of his own
absolute authority, supported by a few ministers, and some troops, would still
think himself pr^tty much upon his good behavior toward the united body of
his people; and would probably be cautious of exerting his power in such a
manner as to give a just provocation to a general revolt, and setting up
another in his stead; but a prince, with a parliament at his devotion, would be
infinitely more terrible, and with much greater security might give a loose to
every extravagancy of power; for when the representatives of the people, who
are chosen by them to be the guardians of their liberties, can be prevailed on,
for little advantages to themselves, to betray their trust, and come into all
the measures of a designing ministry; it is then, indeed, that the liberties of
a people are in the most imminent danger; and surely there is great reason to
apprehend that a house of commons might soon become very obsequious to a
minister, if they were to sit for a long period, or without limitation, and
that there were in view no near day of a new election, when the conduct of
gentlemen in this place would be inquired into in their respective countries. I
remember very well, what an outcry was rais^d against the last parliament, on
suspicion only that a repeal of the triennial act was intended; and the
arguments against it without doors, were then the very same with those which
are now urged against it within: what an inconsistency must it then appear to
see those very gentlemen, who were then the most zealous opposers of such an
attempt, become now the most violent advocates for it! And will it not also in
some measure affect their integrity, publicly to own that the arguments they
pretended to be then influenced by, had not the least weight with them; and
that the thing in itself was very desirable when there should be a good
ministry and parliament in being, and pernicious only in the then situation of
affairs? It was not certainly from this consideration that the late ministry
and parliament were diverted from the attempt: they doubtless had a very good
opinion of themselves, and were confirmed therein by the voice of a great
majority of the people; and which, by a most strange and unaccountable
witchcraft, still continues in their favor; if I may depend upon what several
who have argued for the bill seem to have agreed to DEB. COM. VI. Append. V.
.

An attempt was made in the year 1734, for shortening parliaments. On which
occasion Mr. Plummer spoke as follows.

I wish we would take an example from the crown in one thing. We may observe,
that the crown never gives a place or employment for life, or for a long term
of years, except such as cannot be otherwise disposed of, and the reason is
plain: were these places given for life, the grantee would then be out of the
power of the crown, and consequently would not have such a dependence on it, as
those persons must have who enjoy their places during pleasure only. -- In this
the crown acts wisely, and I wish we would follow the example: when I say we, I
speak of the gentlemen present, not as members of this house, but as a part of
the people of Great Britain: it would certainly be the height of wisdom in the
people to keep those they trust and employ in their service as much in their
power as possible. If those, the people choose to represent them in this house,
were to continue in that station only during the pleasure of the people, the
representatives would, I believe, have a proper regard for the interests of the
people, and would never think of throwing off all dependence upon them DEB.
COM. VIII.175.
.

As bribery and corruption, says Mr. Win, in the same debate, is a natural
consequence of long parliaments, as it must always increase in proportion as
the term for the parliament's continuance is prolonged, I am persuaded that all
those who are against bribery and corruption will join with me in voting for
the restitution of triennial parliaments. It is not the expense of an election
that country gentlemen are to be afraid of; the most extravagant
entertainments, that a stranger in the country could give, would have but
little weight, if to these he did not add downright bribery; and even then
bribes must be so high as to overballance the natural interest of the country
gentlemen, as well as the honesty of the greatest part of the electors: as
these bribes cannot be made so high for a triennial parliament, as they may for
a septennial, they cannot be so prevalent among the electors; and therefore a
gentleman, who depends upon nothing but his natural interest, will always have
a better chance for representing his country in a triennial parliament than he
can have in one which is to continue for seven years; for which reason I cannot
but think that any gentleman who has a mind that his posterity shall depend for
their seats in parliament upon the natural interest they may have in their
respective countries, and not upon the frowns or the favors of the ministers
for the time being, must necessarily be for our returning to our former
constitution in this respect. This, Sir, is in my opinion absolutely necessary;
and it must be done soon, otherwise country gentlemen, tired out with
contending against those who purchase their elections, perhaps with the very
money which the country gentlemen are obliged to pay out of their estates in
public duties and taxes, will at last have nothing to do but to sit down and
bemoan the fate of their country: but the complaints will then be to very
little purpose: for the doors of that place where the groans of the people
ought to be heard, will then be shut against them: we may depend on it, that
those who obtain their seats in this house by ministerial influence, will,
while here, be directed in all their proceedings by the same sort of influence,
and by none other DEB. COM. VIII.169.
.

Ever since we have had septennial parliaments, our elections have been
generally attended with distractions and confusions; but I cannot allow, that
this would be the case if they were annual, or even triennial: and I would
gladly ask gentlemen, if before that time it was ever known that the
solicitations and contentions about elections began two years before the
choosing of a new parliament, which is known to be the case at present over the
whole kingdom, and which always must necessarily be the case; it being natural
for men to contend with more vigor and heat for a post either of honor or
profit, that is to be enjoyed for seven years, than for one that is to be held
but for one, or for three. Then, Sir, as to the bribery and corruption at
elections, I am sure it has very much increased since the septennial law took
place. It is a natural consequence of lengthening the time of a parliament's
continuance; a consequence so natural, that I am surprised to find it so much
mistaken as it seems to be by some gentlemen who have spoken upon the other
side of the question. It is certain, Sir, that bribery will never be made use
of at any election, but by a man who has not a sufficient natural interest in
the place where he declares himself a candidate; and by such we may expect it
will always be made use of, as far as it can be done with safety, if the
candidate has but the least hopes of succeeding by such dishonorable means.
Where there happens a competition, every elector has a natural bias to vote
for one man rather than another. And every elector will vote according to his
natural bias, if he is not bought off. Whoever endeavors to buy him off, must
certainly come up to his price; and this price will be higher or lower
according to the elector's honor and circumstances, and the natural bias he
has for the other candidate. A great many men may be perhaps bought off with
100 or 1000 guineas, who if half that sum were offered would spurn it away with
an honest disdain. I hope, Sir, there are a great many electors in this
kingdom, whose honor upon such occasions, is above the power of any such
corrupt temptations: but that there are likewise a great many who may be
bought, is a fact which I believe no gentleman in this house will dispute; and
in this view let us examine the difference between triennial and septennial
parliaments. Give me leave then to suppose two gentlemen set up in opposition
to each other for representing one of our little boroughs in parliament; one of
them a country gentleman of a great natural interest in the place; the other a
citizen of London, or a placeman not near equal to him in interest; but
depending entirely upon the money he is able to lay out. Suppose the citizen or
placeman comes to a calculation, and finds that it will cost him at least 3000
l. to buy the country gentleman out of his interest in that borough; if the
parliament were to continue but for three years, he would very probably resolve
not to be at such an expense, and so would refrain from being guilty of the
crime of corrupting his countrymen; but when the parliament is to continue for
seven years, he may as probably resolve to be at that charge. Thus by
corruption he may get a seat in this house, and it is to be feared that he, who
comes in by corruption, will not walk out with clean hands. Gentlemen are very
much mistaken if they imagine that the price of an elector depends upon the
duration of a parliament, or that a man who sells his vote for 100 guineas at
an election for a septennial parliament, would sell his vote for the half of
that sum, if the parliament to be chosen were to continue only for three years.
No, Sir, there are very few of this sort of electors who think of futurity; the
present offer is the temptation, and the only temptation which can be of any
weight with them. Besides, they cannot depend upon having the like offer made
them at the next election; and 50 guineas ready money with an. uncertain hope
of having 50 more three years hence, is not surely, so great a price, as 100
guineas ready down. The natural interest of the country gentleman, and the
honor of the electors, are what the dealers in corruption have to contend
with; and against these a small price cannot be so prevalent as one a little
higher. Some may perhaps be corrupted by a small price; but certainly the
higher it is, the greater will the numbers be that are tempted to yield to it;
and as a man may give a higher price at the election for a septennial
parliament than he can do at one for an annual or triennial, therefore the
greater the numbers will be of those who yield to his temptation, the more he
may depend upon corruption; and the more it is to be depended on, the more
general and the more frequent will it certainly be. From hence it appears
evident, that the increase of bribery and corruption is as natural a
consequence of septennial parliaments, as any one thing can be conceived to be
the consequence of another. There is no way, Sir, of effectually preventing
corruption, but by putting it out of the power of any man to corrupt: there is
no corrupting any man but by coming up to his price; therefore the only way of
putting it out of the power of any man to corrupt, is to put it out of the
power of any man to come up to the price of any number of electors; and this
can only be done by making our elections frequent: the more frequent, the
better. It is certain, a gentleman, who enjoys a good pension for seven years,
is more able to give a high price, than if he had enjoyed that pension but for
one year or even for three; and he will more willingly give a high price, when
he is thereby to purchase the continuance of the pension for seven, than for
one, or for three. This, Sir, is so evident, that I am astonished to hear it
controverted within these walls. If our parliaments were annual, it would be
impossible for place-men or pensioners to save as much yearly as would be
sufficient to bribe country gentlemen out of their interest, and the electors
out of their honesty, which I am afraid is a practice now too frequent in many
parts of this kingdom. How can it otherwise be imagined, the people would choose
persons they never saw, persons they perhaps never heard of, in opposition to
gentlemen who live in the neighborhood; gentlemen who give them daily
employment, by buying in their shops and markets all the manufactures and
provisions they have use for in their families, and gentlemen whose ancestors
have perhaps often represented that very place in parliament with great honor
and universal approbation?

Sir William Wyndham, in the same debate, shows the evil of long parliaments in
one view as follows. Let us suppose a gentleman at the head of the
administration, whose only safety depends upon corrupting the members of this
house. This may now be only a supposition, but it is certainly such a one as
may happen; and if ever it should, let us see whether such a minister might not
promise himself more success in a septennial than he could in a triennial
parliament. It is an old maxim, That every man has his price, if you can but
come up to it. This I hope does not hold true of every man; but I am afraid it
too generally holds true; and that of a great many it may hold true, is what I
believe was never doubted of; though I don't know but it may now be denied:
however let us suppose this distressed minister applying to one of those men
who has a price, and is a member of this house. In order to engage this member
to vote as he shall direct him, he offers him a pension of 1000 l. a year: if
it be but a triennial parliament, will not the member immediately consider thus
within himself, if I accept of this pension, and vote according to direction, I
shall lose my character in the country; I shall lose my seat in parliament the
next election, and my pension will then of course be at an end; so that by
turning rogue I shall get but 3000 l. This is not worth my while. And so the
minister must either offer him perhaps the double of that sum, or otherwise he
will probably determine against being corrupted. But if the parliament were
septennial, the same man might perhaps say within himself, I am now in for
seven years. By accepting of this pension I shall have at least 7000 l. This
will set me above contempt; and If I am turned out at next election, I do not
value it. I Will take the money in the mean time. Is it not very natural to
suppose all this, Sir? And does not this evidently show that a wicked minister
cannot corrupt a triennial parliament with the same money as he may a
septennial? Again, suppose this minister applies to a gentleman who has
purchased, and thereby made himself member for a borough at the rate of perhaps
1500 l. besides traveling charges and other little expenses: suppose the
minister offers him a pension of 500 l. a year to engage his vote; will not he
naturally consider if it be a triennial parliament, that if he cannot get a
higher pension, he will lose money by being a member; and surely if he be a
right burgess, he will resolve not to sell at all, rather than sell his
commodity for less than it cost him; and if he finds he cannot sell at all, he
will probably give over standing a candidate again upon such a footing; by
which not only he but many others will be induced to give over dealing in
corrupting the electors at the next election. But if it be a septennial
parliament, will he not then probably accept of the 500 l. pension, if he be
one of those men that has a price? Will he not conclude, that for 1500 l. All
articles are enhanced in their prices. There are no boroughs to be had for 1500
l. in our times.
he may always secure his election, and every parliament will put near 2000 l.
in his pocket, besides reimbursing him all his charges.

After viewing the present question in this light, is it possible, Sir, not to
conclude that septennial parliaments, as well as the elections for them, must
always be much more liable to be influenced by corruption, than triennial, or
the elections for them, etc.' Afterward he goes on as follows:

Suppose, Sir, that the generality of the electors in England have virtue
enough to withstand a temptation of 5 guineas each, but not enough to resist
the force of 10 guineas, one with another: is it not then much more probable
that the gentlemen who deal in corruption may be able to raise as much money
once every seven years as will be sufficient to give 10 guineas each one with
another to the generality of the electors, than that they will be able to raise
such a sum once in every three years. And is it not from thence certain, that
the virtue of the people in general is in greater danger of being destroyed by
septennial than by triennial parliaments? To suppose, Sir, that every man's
vote at an election is like a commodity, which must be sold at the marketprice,
is really to suppose that no man has any virtue at all: for I will aver, that
when once a man resolves to sell his vote at any rate, he has then no virtue
left; which I hope is not the case of many of our electors; and therefore the
only thing we are to apprehend is lest so high a price should be offered as may
tempt thousands to sell who had never before any thoughts of carrying such a
commodity to market. This, Sir, is the fatal event we are to dread, and is much
more to be dreaded from septennial than from triennial parliaments. If we have
therefore any desire to preserve the virtue of our people; if we have any
desire to preserve our constitution; if we have any desire to preserve our
liberties, our properties, and every thing that can be dear to a free people,
we ought to restore the triennial law; and if that be found too insignificant*
we ought to abolish prorogations, and return to annual elections. -- Afterward
he adds what follows;

The crown, either by ill management or by prodigality and profuseness to its
favorites, has spent or granted away all its estates, and the public expense
is so much enlarged, that the crown must have annual supplies, and is therefore
under a necessity of having the parliament meet every year; but as new
elections are always dangerous, as well as troublesome to the ministers of
state, they are for having them as seldom as possible; so that the complaint is
not now for want of frequent meetings or sessions of parliament, but against
having the same parliament continued too long. This is the grievance now
complained of; this is what the people want redressed; it is what they have a
right to have redressed. The members of parliament may for one year be looked
on as the real and true representatives of the people; but when a minister has
seven years to practice upon them, and to feel their pulses, they may be
induced to forget whose representatives they are; they may throw of all
dependence upon their electors, and may become dependants upon the crown, or
rather upon the minister for the time being DEB. COM. VIII.193.
.

Sir I. St. Aubyn observed, in the same debate, that parliaments were generally
annual, but never longer than triennial, till Hen. VIII. (an obstinate tyrant,
who broke through all the laws of God and man, when they stood in the way of
his ambition, avarice, or lust) introduced long parliaments, as proper means
for enslaving the nation. Sir John gives an account much too favorable of Chapter
Ist's character, and of his hatred to parliaments. Chapter II. would have laid
parliaments aside; but could not. Therefore he contrived to debauch them. And
his long pensioned-parliament will be infamous through all ages. It was the
model, says Sir John, from which, I believe, some later parliaments have been
exactly copied.' At the revolution, the people claimed their ancient right. The
triennial law was then estalished. The septennial law was intended only as a
preservative against a temporary inconvenience. The inconvenience being
removed, the remedy, which was itself an evil, and a violation of the
constitution, ought to be removed, and the constitution restored. Long
parliaments become independent on the people, and dependent on the court. If
the members are to deny all power in the people to instruct them, and are to
sit seven years together voting as they please, in spite of the people, how are
they a representative of the people? And if they may sit seven years, though
the people have commissioned them only for three, why may they not make
themselves perpetual, like the lords, and set the people aside? The power of
the crown is always increasing. Therefore members ought to come frequently into
the power of their constituents, that they may be kept under the constant awe
of acting contrary to their interest. Dangerous attempts on liberty have been
prevented by the approach of a general election. Which shows the advantage of
short parliaments, which would occasion general elections to be always near.
Long parliaments are an unjust exclusion of a great number of gentlemen of
property, who ought to have their turn in serving their country. Frequent new
parliaments would be great advantage to our kings. Were parliaments annual, a
king might, in the course of 28 years, have the advice of 28 gentlemen, where
now he has only that of four. Short parliaments have always been less corrupt
than long ones; because a minister must have time to lay his plans of
operation, and erect his batteries against the virtue of the members, and men
are not immediately debauched. Besides, the shorter parliaments are, the less
it is worth a minister's while to bribe the members, for votes in the house;
because the shorter time his iniquitous schemes can stand securely if he gains
them. And this must of course lessen the expenses, the animosities, and the
corrupt proceedin^s of elections. Long parliaments first introduced bribery
because they we^e worth purchasing at any rate; country gentlemen who have only
their private fortunes to rely upon, and have no mercenary ends to serve, are
unable to oppose corruption, especially if at any time the public treasure
shall be unfaithfully squandered away to corrupt their boroughs. Country
gentlemen, indeed, may make some weak efforts; but as they generally prove
unsuccessful, and the time of a fresh ^truggle is at so great a distance, they
at last grow faint in the dispute, give up their country for lost, and retire
in despair. Despair naturally produces indolence, and that is the proper
disposition for slavery. Ministers of state understand this very well, and are
therefore unwilling to awaken the nation out of its lethargy by frequent
elections. They know that the spirit o^ liberty, like every other virtue of the
mind, is to be kept alive only by constant action; that it is impossible to
enslave the nation, while it is perpetually upon its guard. Let country
gentlemen then, by having frequent opportunities of exerting themselves, be
k^pt warm and active in their contention for the public good. This will raise
that zeal and indignation which will at last get the better of these undue
influences, by which the officers of the crown, though unknown to the several
boroughs, have been able to supplant country g^ntlemen of great character and
fortune who live in their neighborhood. I do not say this upon idle
speculation only. I live in a country where it is too well known, and I will
appeal to many gentlemen in the house, to more out of it) and who for this very
reason are out of it) for the truth of my assertion. It is a sore which has
been long eating into the most vital parts of our constitution, and I hope the
time will come when you will probe it to the bottom. For if a minister should
ever gain a corrupt familiarity with our boroughs, if he should keep a register
of them in his closet, and by sending down his treasury mandates should procure
a spurious representation of the people, the offspring of his corruption, who
will be at all times ready to reconcile and justify the most contradictory
measures of his administration, and even to vote every crude undigested dream
of their patron into a law; if the maintenance of his power should become the
sole object of their attention, and they should be guilty of the most violent
breach of parliamentary trust, by giving the king a discretionary liberty of
taxing the people without restraint or control; the last fatal compliment they
can pay to the crown; -- if this should ever be the unhappy circumstance of
this nation, the people indeed may complain to the crown, but the doors of that
place where their complaints should be heard, will be for ever shut against
them DEB. COM. VIII.141.
.

In the same debate, Sir I. Hind Cotton observed, that the worst of our laws
have been made by septennial parliaments; as the septennial act itself; the law
of treason, by which a supposed traitor might be tried in any part of the
country at the greatest distance from his friends and acquaintance; the
riot-act; the S. S. act; the plague-act; the excise scheme) which indeed proved
abortive); to which add the smuggling-act, the gin-act; the marriage-act; the
stamp act, etc. etc. etc.

Long parliaments (says Mr. Bromley, in the same debate) have in former reigns
proved the unhappy cause of great calamities to this nation, and have been at
all times declared an innovation upon our constitution. The people looked upon
the septennial bill as a dangerous infringement upon their liberties,
notwithstanding the pretense alleged in the preamble to the act, which seemed
at that time to carry some weight with it. -- That in former times prorogations
were unknown, and that as soon as the business of a parliament was over, it was
dissolved, and a new one called the next year. -- That the bill of rights
declares, that frequent and new parliaments tend very much to the happy union
and good agreement between king and people. -- That the septennial act in its
preamble complains of the expense and trouble of triennial parliaments, and
therefore, very absurdly, instead of proposing what would have produced a cure,
viz. the reduction of parliaments to annual, proposes to aggravate the evil by
lengthening their period. -- That the multiplicity of places held by members,
is a principal cause of contests and expenses about elections. -- That long
parliaments are as demonstrably to the people's disadvantage, as it is
demonstrably advantageous to have an annuity for 7 years, rather than for one
DEB. COM. VIII.137.
.

It has been observed by some defenders of long parliaments, that even the long
pensioned parliament under Chapter II. became more faithful to the interest of the
people, and more intractable to the court, at last, than at first. Sir I.
Barnard gives a very satisfactory answer to this in the same debate DEB. COM.
VIII.181.
. As to the long parliament in king Charles's time, though they did not toward
the end show the same servile compliance that they had done many years before,
yet it is plain that the crown thought that parliament fitter for the purposes
of the court, at that time, than they could expect any new parliament chosen by
the people to be; otherwise, as the king had it in his power, he would have
certainly dissolved them much sooner: and if that long parliament really
deserved the name usually given to it, we must conclude that their
noncompliance at last was not owing to their virtue, or a want of inclination
to receive, but to a want of power in the crown to give. The people were not
then accustomed to bear such heavy burdens as they do at present, the revenues
of the crown were not so large, nor the posts and places, at the disposal of
the crown, so numerous; there was not such a formidable standing army, to
support the parliament, in case they had gone on in the same servile method.
And as the complaints of the people grew loud and clamorous, as there was
little to be got and a great deal to be apprehended, by the continuance of a
servile compliance with the courts measures, it is very probable that these
were the true reasons of that parliament's becoming at last so restive. If the
nation was now in the same state it was at that time, I should not be half so
much afraid of septennial parliaments as I think I have now good reason to be.

Sir I. Barnard gives a very good answer to the trite and disingenous objection
against short parliaments, which our courtiers are always playing off upon us.
The animosities, disputes, and divisions about elections, says he, have been
set in the most dreadful light, and have been represented as so great an
inconvenience, that we ought to run the risk of having our constitution
overturned rather than submit to it. But, Sir, can it be imagined that there
would be the same contention for a seat in parliament which was to continue but
for one year, or even for three, that there is for one which is to continue for
seven? The example of the city of London plainly shows us the contrary. As the
common council-men and a great many other officers in the city are chosen
annually, I have had occasion to be often present at the^e annual elections,
and never could find, that they were attended with any great heats and
animosit^es, or with any inconvenience; for after the election is over, the
contending parties go home and live in the same friendship they did before. And
I am convinced the case would be the very same, if annual elections for members
of this house were restored. The same man might perhaps be contitinued and
rechosen every year for many years together, probably without any dispute or
opposition; but his being liable every year to be turned out, would be a
continual check upon his behavior, and would make him study the interests of
the people, instead of pursuing only some private and selfish views of his own.
Even as elections stand at present, the^e would be no such contentions, nor any
such heats and animosities as we hear of if they were entirely le^t to
gentlemen who have a natural interest in the place: in such case, if a
candidate found himself defeated by fair means only, and merely by the superior
interest of his antagonist, it would not raise his indignation; it would
occasion no heats or animosities; he would wait with patience for a new
opportunity, and in the mean time would endeavor to recommend himself to his
country by acts of hospitality and benevolence. It is ministers of state
intermeddling in elections; it is election-brokers and such dealers in
corruption, that occasion (...) the heats and animosities we have: for when a
gentleman of a great natural interest in a place sees his electors obliged by
power, or bribed by money, to vote against him, perhaps in favor of an utter
stranger; it cannot but raise his indignation; it may indeed be expected to
raise his utmost fury and revenge. It is certain, Sir, that if the people were
entirely left to themselves, they would without much contention always choose
those gentlemen, who, by having large properties of their own, might be
reasonably supposed to be such as would take the best care of the properties of
their fellow subjects: but if the people should ever begin to see their
representatives making their seats in parliament places of profit, and
bartering their votes and their behavior in parliament for posts, places, and
pensions; the people will soon follow the example of their representatives, and
will insist upon sharing with them in the profits. Thus, by degrees, the minds
of the people will be debauched; they will be brought to think, that the
selling their votes at elections is no crime; the representatives, who buy
their seats, must sell their votes; and at last all regard for the public good
will be generally laid aside by all sorts of men. The only effectual method,
Sir, of preventing this fatal effect is to restore annual elections; for then
it would be impossible even for the treasury itself, if ever the public money
should come to be so misapplied, to issue yearly sums of money sufficient to
get the better of the natural interest, which country-gentlemen always have in
the places where they and their families have perhaps for many generations
resided. The consequence of which will be, that none but country gentlemen, and
those who have a natural interest in the place, will ever appear as candidates.
And thus neither the morals of the people will be debauched, nor their
properties plundered, nor their liberties destroyed, by those election-brokers
and ministerial agents, or their candidates, who never can be employed or set
up but for such base purposes. As for our credit abroad, which it is pretended
septennial parliaments very much contribute to, I think it is evident that it
has been sinking ever since the septennial law took place; which confirms what
was justly observed by an honorable gentleman, That the credit of the nation
among foreigners does not depend upon the length or shortness of our
parliaments, but upon that correspondence and confidence which ought always to
be kept up between the king and his people. I will not say, that this decay of
our credit abroad has been altogether owing to the septennial law, but I dare
say, if our parliaments had not been septennial, they would probably before now
have enquired into the conduct of those who have been the causes of this decay;
and whatever reasons the decay of our credit among foreigners may have been
owing to, it is now come to so low an ebb, that we really seem to have almost
none to lose. And as I think nothing can so effectually restore our credit
abroad as the restoring our constitution at home, I shall therefore give my
vote for the question DEB. COMM VIII.181.
.

The sense of the city of London on long parliaments; is manifest from the
following instruction to their members, A. D. 1741.

When we reflect on the danger of entrusting power too long in the same hands;
when we consider how often in former times the liberty of this country has been
sacrificed and sold by long continued parliaments; and that a frequent recourse
to their constituents, the people, is a certain and necessary check to bad
measures and worse intentions; we require you to prosecute in the most vigorous
manner a repeal of the septennial act, and to restore the salutary form of
triennial parliaments, as the principal means of securing the rights, and
supporting the dignity of a free nation Ibid. XIII.16.
.

In the debate on the motion for annual parliaments, A. D. 1744 Mr. Thomas
Carew argued as follows;

Sir, the members of this house are the great and general inquest of the
nation. We are to take notice of, and to take proper methods for redressing all
the grievances that occur, whether they be such as relate to the kingdom in
general, or such as relate to the particular counties, cities, or boroughs we
represent. Now as grievances are almost annually occurring, and as some
grievances are the more difficult to be removed, the longer they continue;
therefore it is necessary we should visit our constituents at least once a
year, to know their sentiments, and to examine, upon the spot, the grievances
they complain of. But this is not to be expected, unless you make the elections
annual; for we find by experience that after gentlemen are once chosen for a
long term of years, they fix their abode in this city, and seldom revisit their
constituents, till it becomes necessary for them to go down to solicit their
votes at a new election. Nay, since the establishment of septennial
parliaments, we have often had gentlemen in this house* who never saw the
borough that sent them hither, nor knew any thing of its constitution or
interest; perhaps could not recollect its name, till they looked into the
printed lists of parliament for their own name, and there found they
represented such a borough. Another part of our business, Sir, is to represent
to our sovereign the sentiments of our constituents with regard to the measures
he is advised by his ministers to pursue, as well as the persons he employs in
the executive part of government. If we ever think of doing this faithfully and
sincerely, we must visit our constituents at least once a year, because every
year produces some new measure, and every year some new persons are introduced
into public business. This I say is another part of our duty, and when it is
faithfully and sincerely performed, it is of great advantage to the prince upon
the throne, because it prevents his being led on in a track of unpopular
measures, till both he and his ministers are overwhelmed in the torrent of
popular resentment, which often happens in arbitrary countries, where the
prince is tumbled headlong from his throne, before he knows any thing of his
having pursued unpopular or wrong measures; whereas, had he had timely
information, he might have restored himself to the love and affection of his
subjects, by making a just sacrifice of his wicked counselors to the
resentment of his oppressed people. As the prince can have no interest,
separate from his people; his interest, if he rightly considers, must lead him
to gain the love and esteem of his people, and to avoid every thing that may
give them discontent, It is therefore his interest to have always a house of
commons, that knows, and will faithfully and speedily represent to him the
complaints and grievances of his people. But this is directly opposite to the
interest of his ministers. In all countries, and in this as much as any other,
ministers have an interest separate from that of the people. They are for
enriching themselves, their families, tools and sycophants, at the expense of
the people; and it is their business to keep all the avenues to the throne shut
up against the complaints of the people, lest the prince should, as every wise
one will, sacrifice them to his own security. Ministers must therefore be for
having always a house of commons, that either does not know, or will not
faithfully represent to their sovereign, the complaints and grievances of the
people; and as we are much more affected with what we see than with what we
hear of, it is the business of a minister to prevent the members of this house,
if possible, from ever seeing their constituents; because the less we are
affected with, the more easily we may be prevailed on to conceal from our
sovereign, or even to misrepresent to him the complaints of the people. Thus,
Sir, it is apparently the interest of the king, it is apparently the interest
of the country, to have short parliaments and frequent general elections; but
it is apparently the interest of ministers, especially wicked ministers, to
have parliaments as long and general elections as seldom as possible a.

It was argued by Mr. Carew, in the same debate, that it would be very
imprudent for a private person to give a power of attorney for a long time,
when he might for a short; that it is equally imprudent for the people to give
parliament a power of attorney for 7 years, when they may restrict it to three,
or to one Alm. DEB. COM. II.1.
.

Mr. Sydenham, in the same debate, shows, that long parliaments produce and
increase corruption of manners in the people. That the virtues of both
patriotic and military courage are overlooked and unrewarded by a corrupt
ministry, and parliamentary interest, and usefulness in carrying on their dirty
schemes, only taken notice of at court; [so that the way to our modern temple
of honor is through the temple of corruption.] That the old English
hospitality is destroyed by gentlemen's taking up their residence at London,
where they are in the way of hanging upon the minister, and waiting at the
catch for places as they fall. That their country seats are thus left desolate,
and the land is become a desert. That long parliaments, and consequent
corruption, strike at the very root of moral honesty. For what is soliciting
for a vote, but gravely proposing to a man to declare himself a rascal? And
what is a man without probity, or a woman without chastity? Whoever has
forfeited his or her character in these cardinal articles, we naturally suppose
capable of every species of vice. That electioneering destroys all frugality
and industry in the people, and makes them neglect their lawful employments to
go a madding; which would not be, if parliaments were shortened, because it
would not be worth while to make a contest about an election, etc.

Lord Hillsborough, in the debate on the regency-bill, A. D, 1751, in which it
was proposed, that the parliament which should be sitting at the demise of Geo.
II. should sit three years after the accession of his present majesty, spoke,
on that clause, as followe^ It is a measure at no time eligible; in the present
time it may be dangerous. It has been advanced* that parliaments have a power
and right to prolong their duration, and that the salus popuili frequently
requires it. But I do absolutely deny that a parliament has any legal power, or
right, to prolong the time limited by law without the consent of the electors,
or people, who sent them to parliament, and whose representatives they are; and
I do say, and do insist upon it, that whenever parliaments do take upon
themselves to prolong the time of their duration, such prolongation is an
infringement of the liberty of the electors in a most essential part, and tends
to destroy that freedom which they were chosen to defend. For liberty never
was, nor ever will be, preserved, unless those who have the powers of the
people delegated to them be frequently removed. It was by the frequent rotation
and change of magistracy in all countries of the world, that freedom and
independency has been preserved. -- It is upon this principle we find the
people of England at all times crying out for frequent parliaments. And I am
sure if ever frequent parliaments were necessary, they are essentially so in
the present times Alm. DEB. COM. 14.357.
.

In the year 1759, it was moved, that leave be given to bring in a bill for
shortening the term and duration of parliament LAND. MAG. May, 1759, p. 236.
, The motion was rejected, because it was a time of war. A frivolous reason.
All times are proper for doing what is proper. If a nation is at peace,
establish that peace, by redressing grievances. If the times are troublesome,
nothing will contribute more to quiet them, than correcting abuses. It must be
granted) says a member of the commons on that occasion) that bribery and
corruption in elections must always be the necessary consequences of long
parliaments, and that if bribery and corruption in elections be not put an end
to, they will put an end to our constitution, and establish in this nation the
very worst sort of government that was ever in any country established. For
gentlemen will soon find out, if they have not found it out already, that it
can signify nothing to stand candidates for members of parliament in opposition
to the ministers for the time being; because, though a few of them by their
popularity, their hospitality, and their great expense at the time of the
elections, may get themselves chosen, yet the ministers, by bribery and
corruption, will always procure a majority of their friends to be elected, or
at least returned, for the next ensuing parliament, so that no man, who sets up
upon a truly patriotic scheme, can thereby propose to do his country any real
service. And when this comes to be the general opinion, no man, who is governed
singly by a sincere love for his country, will ever think of standing a
candidate at any election. On the contrary, such men will always avoid being
chosen, that they may not expose themselves to the resentment of the court,
without being thereby able to serve their country. Contested elections may
sometimes happen; but it will never be about who shall serve, but about who
shall sell, their country. Consequently it is evident, that bribery and
corruption at elections must at last bring on bribery and corruption in the
house. Can we expect that a corrupt parliament will ever refuse to grant the
crown what number of standing forces, or what public revenue, the ministers for
the time being may please to insist on? Thus we shall at last be brought under
that very form of government which was established at Rome under their first
emperors, that is to say, an absolute monarchy supported by a corrupt
parliament and a mercenary army; and the history of the Roman empire, from its
first establishment to its utter extinction, must convince us, that it is the
very worst form of government that ever was invented; for from thence we may
learn that such monarchs as the Roman emperors may sacrifice the public
interest to their private passions more openly, and may commit more whimsical
cruelties under the form of law, than any arbitrary monarch dare venture upon;
and that such a parliament will always be more factious under a good prince
than under a wicked and tyrannical one; because the former will disdain to
sacrifice the public service solely to parliamentary merit, or to squander the
public money in bribing the electors or the members, both which the latter will
always do without measure or reserve. Such a form of government must
necessarily be the most oppressive upon the poor, the most inconsistent with
trade and commerce, and of the most pernicious consequence to the religion,
morals, and courage of the people. I say first, that such a form of government
must be the most oppressive upon the poor, because taxes must be imposed for
the support of the government and as the rich must have always a great
influence in parliament, they will in the methods of taxation take as much care
as they can of themselves. Therefore they will choose to supply the public
revenue by taxes upon the necessaries and conveniences of life, because to
every such tax a poor man, who lives comfortably by his labor, pays as much as
the richest man in the kingdom. And such taxes the ministers of the crown will
always be most fond of, because of the multitude of officers that must be
employed in the collection. In the next place I say that such a form of
government must be the most inconsistent with trade and commerce, which must be
evident from what I have just mentioned; for taxes upon the necessaries and
conveniences of life must raise the price of labor. This must raise the price
of every sort of manufacture; and this must diminish, if not totally prevent,
their sale at any foreign market. And, lastly, I say that such a form of
government must be of the most pernicious consequence to the religion, morals,
and courage of the people. For as to the religion and morals of the people, it
is evident the more profligate the people generally are as to every principle
of religion, morality, or politics; bribery and corruption will, both in
parliament and at elections, have the greater and the more certain effect. In
such a form of government therefore the governing powers will take every method
they can contrive for subduing and rooting out of the human mind every passion,
every affection, but the desire of sensual pleasure and its constant attendant,
a boundless love of money. In all assemblies the members will harangue and vote
not for the sake of gaining esteem or of serving their country; but for the
sake of raising their price; in the church the clergy will study and preach,
not for the sake of religion, but of getting better benefices. At the bar, the
lawyers will plead not for the sake of justice, but of increasing the number or
the value of their fees; and in the wars, either by land or sea, the soldiers
will fight not for the sake of glory or the honor of their country, but of
plunder or prizes. Thus the love of money will become the sole governing
principle among the people; and whilst the government can, by taxes or
otherwise, get money enough to answer this popular passion of its own creating,
it will continue absolute and undisturbed; but the moment it ceases to be able
to do so, faction will ensue in their assemblies, and mutiny in their fleets
and armies. Then as to the courage of the people, in such a form of government,
it is certain that the governing powers will take every possible method to
render the people in general cowardly, undisciplined and unarmed; because the
more they are so, the more easily they may be overawed by a mercenary standing
army, the more impossible it will be for any great and ancient family to defend
themselves by an insurrection of the people in their favor against the most
unjust and cruel oppression. Even as to those of the standing army, courage, as
well as every other sort of virtuous merit, will be neglected, or at least not
duly rewarded; because all public rewards will, and indeed must, be applied by
the governing powers toward gaining and securing those who are rich enough to
be assisting to the government in bribing and corrupting the people at
elections, and base enough to vote constantly in parliament as directed by the
ministers for the time being.

April 26, 1771, Mr. Sawbridge made a motion for leave to bring in a bill to
shorten the duration of parliaments. He showed, that this branch of the
constitution had been established by our Saxon ancestors, at which time they
had only been annual; that they were set aside 140 years by the Normans; that
on their revival they had continued of short duration (mostly annual) till the
reign of Hen. VIII. whose tyranny was never complete till established by that
long parliament; that the next long parliament was that commonly so called of
1641. The pensionary parliament in the reign of Cha. II. was productive of the
worst consequences to the constitution; to remedy which the triennial bill was
passed, forbidding parliament to sit more than three years. This was overturned
by that breach into the constitution in the reign of Geo. I. the passing of the
septennial bill. Though perhaps the particular necessities of the times might
render such an act at that day useful, (a rebellion just crushed, and a
pretender to the throne, making it improper to call the people together at that
time) yet that necessity was now at an end, none of those dangers now hanging
over us. That the length of parliaments gave up that power which the
constituents ought to have over their representatives, viz of frequent
examination into their conduct, and rejection of them if they thought them
unworthy. That long parliaments gave an opportuni^y to an intimacy between the
ministers and the members, always dangerous and destructive to the
constitution; that in shortening the duration of parliaments he should incline
to annual, as subject to fewer objections, in his opinion, than triennial, but
that must be the subject of future debates. Mess. Townsend, Dempster, Turner,
Bar, etc. supported this measure: they frequently called on administration to
show any reasons why a bill should not be brought in. But to the amazement of
most members, not one word was uttered by them; the most contemptuous silence
was observed. On this great national question the short appeal was to the
numbers at the command of the minister, and the only declared reasons were 105
to 54 Alm DEB. COM. IX.298.
.

Mr. Sawbridge, A. D. 1773, moved the house of commons again for shortening
parliament. He observed, that in the Saxon times, for above 500 years, the
period of parliaments was short, to the great advantage of the constitution;
that from the Norman invasion to Hen. III. parliaments were either
discontinued, or had lost their former efficiency; that after a struggle of
half a century, this valuable acquisition was recovered, and the constitution
brought back to its first principles; that from thence to Hen. VIII.
parliaments were frequent, and their happy consequence notorious; that during
the reign of that arch tyrant, they were for the first time lengthened, on
which the corruption of our representatives, and the bloody acts of that
monster of cruelty are the best comment; that from his demise to the rump
parliament, we were happily freed from the bane of English liberty, to which
suceeded the long pension-parliament of Chapter II. which is too well known to need
any comment; that after the revolution many brave independent men endeavored
to put it out of the power of bad princes, or corrupt ministers, to undermine
the constitution, while the forms of it remained, and at length prevailed so
far as to obtain the triennial bill; but all those advantages were again lost,
A. D. 1716, by the septennial bill. That he thought it was better the
revolution had never happened, than that septennial parliaments should be fixed
upon us. He expected his motion to be opposed by the enthusiastic sticklers for
old customs, and by all ministerial men, etc. The treasury bench, as before,
sat speechless. The question was put. Carried against the motion 133 to 45
WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, Ian. 26, 1773.
.

Mr. Oliver, in support of Mr. Sawbridge's motion, observed, among other
particulars, That the king, according to the original constitution, has the
executive power wholly in his own hands; but that parliament of late years has
encroached upon the king's prerogative. That parliament, instead of itself
governing, is appointed to be a check upon government, to watch over the king
and the courts of justice, to guard the rights and privileges of the people,
and in their name, and by their direction, to grant occasional national
supplies for national purposes. -- That long parliaments tend naturally to make
the members forget and neglect the very ends of their institution, and to
consider themselves, not as mere delegates and attorneys of the people, but as
persons chosen to be the absolute governors of the country. He observed, that
parliament, which was appointed to watch over administration, is become itself
the administration; and that for the faithful shepherds dogs of former times,
we have now, by an unnatural copulation, a breed of wolves to guard the flock.
He reasons, he says, not by inference and probable conclusions; but from
experience. He then mentions a motion lately made, for inquiry into the conduct
of the courts of justice; which motion was rejected; and a late demand of half
a million for the civil list, which was immediately granted, without any
inquiry into the causes of a deficiency, or into the application of such
prodigious sums. Whenever a supply is moved for, (says he) however enormous the
sum, it is readily granted; for the administration, who receive the money, sit
upon these benches. Whenever an effectual inquiry into the application of money
is moved for, it is as readily refused; for the administration, who apply it,
sit upon these benches. The proceeddings of the courts of justice, and the
application of of public money were formerly the great objects of parliamentary
inquiry. Now parliament is only a check upon hackney-coachmen, etc. WHITEHALL
EVEN. POST, Ian. 30, 1773.


A. D. 1773, the livery of London came to a resolution, which they ordered to
be published, That they will vote for no candidate at an election of member for
the city, till he has signed a solemn engagement to promote, by every means in
his power, either in or out of the house, a perpetual act for shortening the
duration of parliaments See the Newspapers of March 11. etc.
.

At a numerous meeting of freeholders of Middlesex, at Mile-End, A. D. 1773,
Resolved, That it is the opinion of the freeholders of the county of Middlesex,
that a return to the ancient mode of representation in short parliaments, and a
bill for the exclusion of placemen and pensioners from the house of commons, is
the most likely method of obtaining a redress of the various grievances under
which the subjects of this kingdom labor WHITEHALL EVEN, POST, Thursday April
29. 1773.
.

A noisy declaimer in the house of commons, on what is called the patriotic
side, published a thing a few years ago, entitled, if I forget not,
Considerations on the causes of the present Discontents; in which he fairly
declared, he did not think shortening parliaments, or excluding placemen would
answer. He said the grievances were only remedied by I know not what public
men, who were to be responsible. But most people thought this a very gross
confession, that he did not mean the public advantage; but that he wanted to be
one of the public responsible men See Mrs. Macaulay's shrewd Answer to this
piece.
.

CHAP. VI. Of Exclusion by Rotation.
THE shortening of parliaments alone, without exclusion by rotation, would
prove only a palliation, not a radical cure. It would, if I may so suddenly
change the metophor, be stopping some, but not all the leaks. Suppose
parliaments reduced to annual, might not a court candidate bribe his electors
with a seventh part of what he now gives for his borough? And might not the
minister bribe the corrupt member's vote in the house with a seventh part of
what he now gives? I do not ferget what is observed on this by Sir W. Wyndham,
in his speech above quoted, p. 148. viz. That a seventh part of a sum would
make so poor a figure, that it would hardly prove a temptation. That though an
elector might think it worth while to be damned for 20 or 21 guineas, he might
grudge to hazard his soul for the scurvy price of three, as he might die before
next election; and that a member, who might be expected to sell himself to the
devil and the minister for a pension of 700 l. a year, would despise a single
hundred. Allowing all this its due weight, it is still true' that a member
chosen annually for seven years together, has at the end of the seven years sat
as long in the house as if he had been chosen for seven years at once; and how
far rogues might have an understanding between themselves, so as to elude this
salutary regulation, an honest man cannot guess. It is a common electioneering
trick in our times, for the candidate to lend the electors small sums upon
their notes of hand; those notes understood to be void if the elector votes
right. Might not the same game be played between the elector and the candidate,
and between the member and the minister, if the period of parliament were
reduced to annual? This could certainly not be, if it were certain, that the
very next session two thirds of the members must be excluded by rotation;
because whatever was by the corrupt set voted, might be unvoted the very next
session, and then -- Omnis labor effusus; the money would be all thrown away;
the prospect of which would effectually prevent the minister's hazarding it.
Besides, it would be impossible to find a sufficient number of places. As the
period of parliament is at present, if the minister can, by all his corrupt
arts, aided by the hopes and fears of members, influence 255 of the house of
commons, he is secure for seven years. But if two thirds of the house were to
be changed every year, he must find means for attaching to his party seven
times that number, or 1785, in every seven years, which would considerably clog
the progress of court-influence in parliament. I mention two thirds of the
house, and not the whole, because it is pretended by the court-party, that it
is necessary to keep in the house some of the great officers of (...) state,
and that a whole house of unexperienced members would be at a loss about the
forms, etc.. As the shameful injustice done by long parliaments to gentlemen,
who have a right to be in authority some part of their lives, is a strong
argument against their continuance; so it is to be remembered, that without
exclusion by rotation, the mere shortening of parliaments even to annual would
not redress this grievance. If the majority of the house be not changed every
other year, the same men may be re-elected for 20 years together; and if a
place bill should be passed, tricks may be played by riding or splitting of
places, unless a rotation bill is like wise passed. The city of London, or
county of York, cannot be bribed, but their members may. Therefore there is no
security without exclusion by rotation. But with that regulation and the
others, bribery might easily be rendered impracticable.

Harrington proposes, that every domestic officer, magistrate, representative,
etc. be excluded from his place of power and trust for a term equal to that of
his employment OCEANA, 537.
, and that a third part of the house of commons be chosen annually; and a third
part, viz. those who have sat full three years, give place to the newly
elected. Such a rotation would give all persons of consequence their turns in
the government OCEANA, 54.
.

CHAP. VII. Of electing by Ballot.
THE electing of members by ballot would likewise be a check on court influence
in parliament. There ought to be no voting viva voce, where balloting would
better prevent influence, caballing, animosity, or resentment. Therefore all
elections for members of parliament ought, as things are now, to be by ballot.
Courts of directors, members of the commons in their house, and all those, who
are liable to be called to account for their transactions (which peers,
electors, jurymen, etc. are not) ought to vote with an audible voice.

But let it be observed here, that making parliamentary representation adequate
would supersede the necessity of balloting at elections. For court influence,
and whatever could bias electors, would be then utterly cut up by the roots,
when many thousands of votes were necessary to send in the members for any one
county, comprehending its towns. To set about bribing 401 electors in order to
gain one member, or 202, 104 electors to secure a majority in the house, a
minister must be lord of the mines of Potosi.

It is thought by some authors, that the Athenians chose their 9 archons by
ballot for 160 years Ubb. Emm. DE REP. ATH. I.24.
. Their senate of 400, and the prytanes were chosen by lot Ibid 36, 37.
.

Balloting was used in some cases at Rome. And when, through the prevalence of
corruption, that free manner of voting went into desuetude, it was restored by
the lex Papiria and the lex Gabinia.

The Roman senate did not vote by ballot; but the people did. Salust (if he be
the author of the FRAGM. TO CAESAR) and Cicero, in CORNEL. express their wish,
that balloting were used in the senate.

Elections of magistrates being troublesome, causing heats, and dissensions
among the people of Florence, it was agreed that the electors, who consisted of
the president and members of the college [should have been all people of
property] should write on tickets, and enclose in a chest, the names of such
citizens, as they thought fit to be in the magistracy; and that when the day of
election came, a set of those names should be taken out, after shaking the
chest, and the names first drawn should be the magistrates elect, and to
continue three years and a half MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.77.
. This method was kept up at Florence, while the republican government
continued. Aretin disapproves it, but we know not why.

At Venice all elections are made by ballot, and all voting in the great
council, the college, the senate, and all the courts of judicature is done by
ballot, without any mistake, or any sort of confusion, or disturbance, which
prevents bribery, faction, animosities, and all bad consequences Cole's Mem. p.
16.
.

A motion made in the house of commons, A. D. 1707, that all election questions
be decided by balloting, was rejected. To be heard and determined at the bar of
the house DEB. COM. IV.103.
.

It was again proposed, A. D. 1708, that questions concerning elections should
(if either competitor desired) be decided by ballot. Carried in the negative. I
suppose they thought balloting dangerous, when there were so many jacobites
Tind. CONTIN. II.108.
.

A bill for electing the Scotch peers by ballot was moved in the house of
peers, A. D. 1734. Miscarried. Many lords protested, because balloting is the
freest manner of electing, and the most likely to defeat ministerial influence,
which was to be feared in a matter of such consequence.

The method of voting by ballot, say they, appears to us infinitely preferable
on many accounts; for as it is well known, there are several alliances among
that body of nobility, many of the peers may be put under great difficulties,
their alliances drawing them one way, and their opinion and inclination another
way. It is also possible, that by pensions from the crown, or by civil or
military preferments, some of them may lie under obligations to a court, and be
reduced to the hard necessity (under the power of an arbitrary minister) either
of losing their employments, or of voting against their nearest relations, and
their own opinion also. We apprehend that no election can be called perfectly
free, where any number of the electors are under any influence whatsoever, by
which they may be biassed in the freedom of their choice Deb. LORDS, IV.220.
.

Judge Blackstone is against voting by ballot in the house of commons. because
the conduct of every member is subject to the future censure of his
constituents, and therefore should be openly submitted to their inspection COM.
I.181.
. Upon what principle is it then, that the house, from time to time, orders the
galleries to be cleared? Is it that their constituents may not see, nor know,
nor consequently be able to censure their conduct in the house? Of which more
fully in the sequel.

Harrington is for balloting on all occasions See OCEANA, p. 85, et secq. 537.
.

Balloting is used in many cases, as in the elections in the India-house, the
Royal society, etc. but it is not practiced where, above all, it ought (while
things continue on their present foot) to be used, viz. in the election of
members of parliament.

It is customary in the borough of Limmington in Hampshire, to elect by ballot
[the manner of which the writer there describes.] This method I know to be of
great advantage where it is made use of. It prevents animosity and distaste,
and very much assists that freedom, which ought to be in elections. No man, in
this way, need fear the disobliging of his landlord, customer, or benefactor
STATE TRACTS, time of K. William, ^.161.
.

BOOK IV. Effects of the above Irregularities.
CHAP. I. Members of Parliament no longer hold themselves responsible to the
People.
FROM the inadequate state of representation in parliament, and the enormous
length of their period, have arisen several most fatal consequences. The first
I shall mention is, That members, being generally elected by handfuls of
persons, possessed of little property, and less knowledge of the interest of
their country, and empowered as lawmakers for seven years, have given up all
thought of being accountable to any set of men upon earth for their proceedings
in parliament. And it must be allowed, that on the present ludicrous foot on
which representation stands, it would be disgracing a gentleman beyond
sufferance, to call him to the bar of a set of poor unlettered Cornish
burghers, and to expect him to answer the silly questions they would put to him
concerning his conduct in the house, of which they cannot be supposed competent
judges, any more than they are of the qualifications of a legislator, which
shows the absurdity of their having the power of making legislators, not for
themselves only, but for the nation in general. Were parliamentary
representation upon its proper foot, no member would be sent into the house by
a puny burgh; but all would be county-members, and every member would have, to
his admission as a lawmakers, the sanction of the majority of the inhabitants
of a county, comprehending the cities and towns in it. From such a respectable
body as this, it would be an honor to gentlemen to receive instructions; and
to be responsible to them, would not be beneath the dignity of any person
whatever.

It is notorious, that the right of constituents to instruct their members, and
the consequent duty of members to obey instructions, is in our times questioned
by many, and by many given up. Yet it is certain, first, that no harm could
come from the members of parliament being obliged to wait for instructions from
their constituents, supposing the constituents what they ought to be, because
legislation is, the least of any thing, a matter of haste; and the executive is
not in the parliament.

There seems to be a palpable inconsistency in the courtly doctrine, That the
people are wholly unqualified for judging of political matters, and that
therefore their sense in petitions, remonstrances, and instructions, is not to
be regarded. If so, why is the choice of members of parliament left to the
people? Why should not the ministry nominate them at once? If the people are
incapable of judging of politics, they are incapable of judging of the
qualifications of members. But to set this absurdity in its full light, it is
to be observed, that the courtiers, at the same time they argue for the
incapacity of the people in general, insist that the election of legislators is
best trusted to the most incapable part of the people. Similar to which
ingenious reasoning is their plea, when they tell us, The people are in fault,
why do they let themselves be bribed by the court? So every town-rake cries out
against the frailty of women (himself the cause of the failure of female
virtue.) And because the people are liable to be corrupted, our courtiers
insist, that the election of lawmakers is best in the hands of that part of
the people who are most liable to be corrupted. Into such absurdities do men
plunge themselves, when they undertake the defense of what their understandings
and consciences revolt against!

In the remarkable answer of lord Percival, member for Westminster, to
instructions sent him by his constituents DEB. COM. XIV.30.
, we have that gentleman's notion of the duty of representatives in respect of
instructions. And he speaks the sense of too many.

Gentlemen, you are welcome upon all occasions, and I look upon this
application as a fresh instance of your friendship -- As I never concealed my
principles from you, so I will never depart from them. The only motives that
direct my conduct are the preservation of the constitution of my country, the
security of the present royal family upon the throne, and the common liberty of
Europe. -- These views I shall always think inseparable. -- In the prosecution
of them, my judgment sometimes may, my heart shall never fail me. -- I remember
on my part, that to your independent voice, I owe my seat in parliament: -- on
yours, you will not forget that I ought to be independent there. [True, my good
lord, you ought to be independent on a court; but not on 10,000 people of
property who sent you to parliament on purpose to do their business.] When I
differ from your sentiments, I shall do it with great reluctance, and then only
when I am convinced, that your true interest must extort it from me.' [Of which
true interest your lordship, of your great modesty, holds yourself a better
judge than the many thousands who employ you as their agent. How would your
good lordship take such language from your steward? In such a case the crime is
equal to flatter popularity, [to do your constituents business, as they choose,
is to flatter popularity,] or to court power. It becomes me to respect both;
but it is my duty to follow neither beyond those limits, which the
circumstances of time, prudence, necessity, and the public safety can alone
determine. So the French king, or the grand Turk, might be expected to silence
the petitions of their subjects, by telling them, that the prince is the only
judge of the circumstances, of time, prudence, and necessity.

Some argue, that members of parliament are not obliged to obey instructions of
their constituents, because the constituents do not hear the debates, and
therefore cannot be supposed judges of the matter to be voted. But the lords
may send votes by proxy, though they do not hear the debates. The very truth is,
that the members have no opportunity of being at all better judges of most
matters to be voted i^ parliament than men of understanding and reading, w^o
never sat in the house. So that the hearing of the debates gives no such mighty
advantage to the members above the constituents. Besides, there is nothing to
hinder a member's informing his constituents of the reasons (occurring in the
course of the debate) why he intends to vote so, or so. If they allow them, all
is well. If he votes contrary to their direction, tho^^h he means their real
interest, he only shows himself a wrong-headed agent, who will act according to
his own opinion in spite of his masters; and ought, besides being immediately
turned out of his office, to be answerable for all damages.

The excellent Davenant, it is true, lays no great stress on responsibility in
members of parliament. But this is only because in his times they had few
examples of parliaments so corrupted as to come to have an interest different
from that of their constituents. But in our degenerate times, when we know,
that parliaments may be effectually drawn away from consulting the interest of
their representatives, it is strange that judge Blackstone (who writes what I
have quoted from him above, p. 179) should write as follows:

A member of parliament is not bound, like a deputy in the United Provinces, to
consult with, or take the advice of his constituents upon any particular point,
unless he himself thinks it proper, or prudent so to do Blackst. COM. I.159.
.

Suppose then a majority of the house of commmons, corrupted by a villainous
court, should propose to lay an exorbitant tax upon the people. Suppose the
majority of the constituents, and people of England, should instruct the
majority of the members against this tax, could the act establishing this tax,
passed in direct opposition to the mind of the people of England, (which judge
Blackstone's doctrine allows) be said to be, in any sense, constitutional, or
parliamentary, or in any degree more tolerable to a free people, than if the
king in council had pretended to impose the tax? If the votes of the electors
be the whole and sole foundation of the authority, the members have to sit, and
to make laws, can it be conceived, that the electors gave this authority on
purpose to plunder themselves?

If the members of the house of commons are not obliged to regard the
instructions of their constituents; the people of this country choose a set of
despots every seven years, and are as perfect slaves as the Turks, excepting
the few months of a general election. And it is the trumping up of this
doctrine, that gave Voltaire the hint to write, that the English are only free
once in seven years, and then they have not the sense to make the proper use of
their freedom. Pudet haec approbria, etc. That a Frenchman should have it in
his power to turn English liberty thus to ridicule, is mortifying enough; but
that an English judge should support his contempt of our liberty, is still more
humiliating.

But how could the spirit of liberty be expected to breathe in the works of a
gentleman, who speaking of the just vengeance, which a frantic tyrant, the
destroyer of liberty, and butcher of his subjects, brought upon himself, uses
such expression as -- the infamous and unparalleled trial of king Charles I.
COM. I.191.
And again Ibid, p. 210.
, the fatal catastrophe of that pious and unfortunate prince;' and who
apologizes for his rapacious proceedings, by telling us, he gave up the right
to tonnage and poundage (after keeping it for fifteen years, in spite of the
continual remonstrances of parliament) when he found he could keep it no
longer; which the judge calls giving the nation ample sati^faction Ibid. 316.
. Let the reader peruse the incomparable Mrs. Macaulay's history of his horrid
reign, or indeed any, even that of his professed apologist Clarendon, and
determine whether exempting him from the guilt of tyranny, it is possible to
fix it on any prince that ever disgraced a throne, or filled a kingdom with
confusion and bloodshed. As a friend to human nature, I cannot help declaring
my opinion, that had he been guilty of no crime besides his offering the Scotch
army a bribe of four counties, and the plunder of London, to invade England See
Ludlow's MEM.
, or had he been guilty of no instance of tyranny besides his fighting and
slaughtering his subjects about his over-strained prerogative -- had he had as
many heads as the Lernean hydra, he ought to have lost them all. Nor can I, in
reading judge Blackstone's Commentaries, help lamenting, that a writer, whose
admirable work will be read as long as England, its laws, and language remain,
should be so sparingly tinctured with the true and generous principles of
liberty, on the support and prevalency of which, the glory of the British
empire depends.

CHAP. II. The Denial of Responsibility is a novel Doctrine.
THE doctrine so much preached of late, by our speech-makers and courtly
writers, that members of parliament are not obliged to regard the instructions
of their constituents, is a mere innovation. In former times their receiving
wages supposed an obligation to do the business of those who paid them, and
that they were to do it in the manner their employers chose it should be done.
And their constant language in the house is, We dare not grant any more
subsidies. Who sent us hither? Whose business are we doing? How shall we answer
this to the people? What will the people of England say to this? etc. PARL.
HIST. pass.


The very nature of the house of commons is changed,' (says the duke of
Buckingham in the house of peers, A. D. 1677.) They do not now think they are
an assembly of men, that are to return to their own homes, and become private
men again (as by the laws of the land and constitution of parliaments, they
ought to be) but look upon themselves as a standing senate, as men picked out
to be legislators for the rest of their lives DEB. LORDS, I.189.
.

Our ancestors showed themselves to be constituents, by finding, imprisoning,
and incapacitating their members, when they acted contrary to their intention.
Absentees were fined 20 l. a large sum in those days PARL. HIST. I.396.IX.298.
. Our members are our masters, and insist on a dictatorial independency on us
for 7 years, and to give no account of their conduct at the 7 years end, nor
have we any power over them, but that of not re-electing them to a new
parliament, if they have betrayed us in the last. Nay, the majority of the
members command their own election, and fit in parliament, as the peers, for
life. And yet we are a free people. Well may the neighboring nations admire so
mysterious a system.

The abbe Reynel P. 275.
thinks, the ancient custom of the king's giving out, in the summonses to
parliament, the business, for which it was to meet, was very useful, because
the constituents could then instruct their members how to vote; whereas now,
says he, the people are obliged to give their representatives an unlimited
power, which they use as they think proper. The knights hesitated about
granting Edw III. supplies, till they had the consent of their constituents
Hume's HIST. II.176.
. The barons agreed. There is no mention of the burgesses. They desired, that
there might be a new parliament summoned, which might come prepared with
authority from their constituents. The commons did not presume to grant Edw.
III. any tax, till they consulted their constituents PARL. HIST. III.247.
. The commons, in the time of Rich. II. being desired to grant a subsidy, soon
after Tyler's insurrection, answered, that by reason of the evil heats and
rancour of the people throughout the whole realm, they neither durst, nor would
grant any manner of tallage PARL. HIST. I.390.
. Here the sense of the responsibility to the people operated properly. Elsynge
P. 72.
says, When the commons gave their answer touching the subsidy demanded for the
wars, they desired leave to return into the country to confer with their
neighbors, promising their endeavors for the same at next parliament.

Some of our principal law books tell us, that in ancient times, this house has
often refused to agree to propositions made by the court for this reason only,
That they could not, till they went home, and consulted with their
constituents. The words of Mr. Plummer's speech on the motion for repealing the
septennial act, A. D. 1734 DEB. COM. VIII.175.
.

We shall have little thanks for our labor, when we go home, said Wentworth,
in the debate in parliament about a saving clause in the petition of right
PARL. HIST, VIII.120.
. In those days, the members considered what thank they were likly to have
from their constituents. In ours, they consider what thanks they are likely to
have from the treasury.

It was enacted 1 Hen. V. at the petition of the commons, that none, but
residents in the places they represented, should be chosen knights, citizens or
burgesses Elsynge, 75.
. They had not then invented the refinements of our times, that the members are
representatives for the whole kingdom, and from the moment of their election,
are alike independent on their particular constituents, and on the whole body
of electors through the kingdom.

H. B. (supposed Boscawen) in his speech on rejection of the exclusion bill,
says, That those who sent us here, may see, we have done what we can, let us
make such votes as may be serviceable to our country. DEB. COM. II.80.
.

I have heard, (says Sir R. Clayton in the debate on the exclusion-bill, A. D.
1681.) that it has been an ancient usage, that members have consulted their
cities, boroughs, and counties in any thing of weight, as well as giving money,
before they resolved it. The practice was good, and I wish it was continued. We
can discharge ou^ ^rust no better than in observing the direction of those who
sent us hither. What the people choose is right, because they choose it. He
himself had been instructed by the city of London to promote the
exclusion-bill. So said lord Russel Ibid. II.115.
.

Our constituents,' says Sir Edw. Deering Rap. II.383.
, A. D. 1641.) sent us hither as their trustees to make and unmake laws. They
did not send us to rule them by arbitrary, disputable, and revocable
ordinances' (meaning ordinances of the commons.)

The style of former times was, The commons desired certain lords to confer
with them about their charge Brady, III.356. et pass.
, In those days the commons thought they had a charge, for which they were
answerable.

Our constant practice (since A. D. 1681.) of printing the votes of the house
of commons, is an acknowledgment of the importance of the people, and the
propriety of giving them satisfaction. The occasion of first publishing the
votes was the exclusion bill Rap. II.722.
.

The commons in the time of Chapter I. directed the judges to inform the people in
all the counties they should come into in their circuits, that they (the
commons) had abolished, or regulated all the oppressive courts, etc. This
shows, that the commons of those times thought themselves responsible. PARL.
HIST. XIV.474.


Lord Digby, member for Dorset, and Sir I. Colepepper, from Kent, inform the
house, A. D. 1640, that they had in charge seven articles of grievances, to
which they add some remarks of their own Ibid. IX.125.
. Do our members make conscience of carrying to the house the complaints of
their constituents?

The following phrases in Cromwell's summonses to sheriffs for parliament
electi^^s, show, that responsibility was in those days thought the duty of
members. -- So that the said knights severally may have full and sufficient
power for themselves, and the people of that county, to do and consent unto
those things which then and there by common consent of the said parliament
shall be ordered,' etc. Ibid. XX.292.


By the strain of the Romanstrance Sommer's TRACTS, VI.256.
of the Commons of England to the house of commons, in the republican times, we
see how this matter appeared to our ancestors of last century.

We must desire you to call to your remembrance, that we are still the body of
the commons of England, you but the representatives; that we have not so
delegated the power to you, as to make you the governors of us and our estates.
You are in truth but our procurators to speak for us in the great council. That
of right we ought to have access to those, whom we have thus chosen, and to the
house, as there shall be cause to impart our desires to you, and you ought not
to refuse us. That by involving our votes in yours, we had no purpose to make
you perpetual dectators.

Members of parliament, says the excellent Sydney DISC. GOV. 423.
, do not act by a power derived from kings, but from those who choose them. And
those who give power, do not give an unreserved power. Members of parliament
are therefore accountable to their constituents. It is true, the constituents
do not call them to an account, otherwise than by not electing them again, if
they have disapproved of their conduct. [This proves in fact a very inadequate
punishment, because the right of election comes so seldom into the hands of the
people, and because (in all, but the present incorrupt times) by far the
greatest part of the members have been imposed upon their constituents by power
or by bribery.] Many members, he says afterward Ibid. 424.
, in all ages, and sometimes the whole body of the commons, have refused to
vote, till they consulted those who sent them. The houses have been often
adjourned, to give them time to do this; and if this were done more frequently,
or if towns, cities, and counties, had on some occasions, given instructions to
their deputies, matters would probably have gone better in parliament than they
have often done.

That stern old patriot, in his XLIVth sect. DISC. GOV. 450.
overthrows the doctrine of absolute power delegated to the members of the
house of commons by their constituents. He considers members of parliament as
the servants of the public. I take, says he, what servant I please, and when I
have taken him, I must, according to this doctrine, suffer him to do what he
pleases. But from whence should this necessity arise? Why may I not take one to
be my groom, another to be my cook, and keep them both to the offices, for
which I ^ook them? And if I am free, in my private capacity, to regulate my
particular affairs according to my own discretion, and to allot to each servant
(...) proper work, why have not I, with my associ^^^ the freemen of England,
the like liberty of directing and limiting the powers of the servants we employ
in our public affairs?

Milton and Lock bring very substantial arguments for calling even kings, with
all their sacred majesty, their jure divino, and their impeccability (kings can
do no wrong) to account, if they govern in any manner inconsistent with the
good of the people. How much more lords, or commons, who have never even
challenged to themselves any divine atributes? James I. owned himself to be the
great servant of the state.

Who, says Lock, shall be judge, whether his trustee, or his deputy [are not
members of the house of commons trustees and deputies in the strictest sense of
the word?] acts well, and according to the trust reposed in him, but he, who
deputes him, and must, by having deputed him, have still power to discard him,
when he fails in his trust? If this be reason in particular cases of private
men, why should it be otherwise in cases of the greatest moment, where the
welfare of millions is concerned!

The qualifications of a member of parliament, according to the author of an
excellent tract published in the beginning of this century, entitled, REASONS
FOR ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS, are sense, courage, and integrity. By sense, he means
chiefly knowledge of the interests of England (though classical learning and
fluency in haranguing are in our times essentially necessary) commerce,
manufactures, liberty, securities and violations of the people, and redress;
resources for war and peace, and connections with other states, balance of
power, etc. Courage against the encroachments of a court, against
solicitations, places, preferments, threats, cabals, etc. Integrity not merely
to the whigs, or to the minority, but to the nation. No man ought to be chosen,
that will not receive instruction. There are no counties and few towns that do
not understand the interest of their country enough to give general
instructions. You have a right to instruct your members. It was the custom
formerly to instruct all the members, and the nature of deputation shows that
the custom was well grounded REASONS FOR ANNUAL PARL.
. N. B. This was written 1702, when the people were not so knowing, and
consequently not so well qualified for instructing, as now. He insists, that
parliament be instructed to promote a militia, and to encourage the use of
firelocks among the populace, to increase the navy, and reduce our wars to
naval wholly.

I have met, says queen Anne, with so many expressions of joy and satisfaction
in all the counties through which I have had occasion to pass, that I cannot
but look upon them, as true measures of the duty and affection of all my
subjects DEB. COM. III.203.
. Queen Anne thought the sense of the people might be collected otherwise than
from parliament. The commons answered, It is great condescension in your
majesty to take notice in so public a manner of the expressions of joy and
satisfaction, etc. Ibid. 204.
Thus we spoil our kings and queens. It was not the least condescension. It is
the duty of every sovereign to pay the most profound the most sacred attention
to the sense of the people, for whose benefit alone he is endowed with power.

The collectors of the debates of the commons hold it to be scarce a disputable
point, Whether the representatives of a people are accountable to their
constituents, or whether it ought to be deemed an offense to lay the
proceedings of our representatives before those whom they represent Ibid. I.1.
.

I hope, your indulgence to an old servant will pardon this omission; says Mr.
Cook, member for Middlesex, in his address to the electors, March 26, 1768.
What sort of a servant must he be, who is not responsible to his master?

If parliament (says Sir I. Barnard in the debate on the convention, A. D.
1739.) should begin to refuse giving satisfaction to the people, the people
will begin to refuse putting any confidence in parliaments; and if this should
ever come to be the case, the [parliaments] not only may, but they ought to be
laid aside. I do not know that the character of parliament ever received a
deeper stab than it did at the seeming approbation of the convention in last
sessions of parliament; and if we should in this so far screen the contrivers
of that convention as to refuse to let the people know whether they were to
blame or not; I say, if we should do this now, that the chief argument advanced
last year in favor of that convention appears to have been without foundation,
it will, I fear; be a mortal blow DEB. COM. XI.375.
.

We find in our histories nothing more frequent than instructions from
constituent bodies to their representatives in parliament, which shows, that
the people (whose opinion, indeed in modern times, is little regarded by their
governors, whereas it ought to be followed implicitly) think they have a right
to instruct, and that their representatives ought to regard their instructions.

The city of London sent instructions to her members, 33 Chapter II. requiring them
to insist on the passing of the exclusion-bill. And Sir Rob. Clayton gave it as
one reason in his speech on that occasion, That his duty to his electors
obliged him to vote for the bill Ibid. XIV.7.
.

In many places, it was given, as an instruction to members [at the election in
1681] to stick to the exclusion Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, II.136.
. And see the judicious instructions by the borough of Southwark, A. D. 1701,
on the treachery of the French king Tind. CONTIN. I.497.
. Many places instructed their members, A. D. 1714, particularly London. We
desire and expect that you will enquire by whose counsel, etc. the separate
peace was made Ibid I.415.
.

See the very judicious instructions given by the citizens of London to their
members, A. D. 1741, against standing armies; extension of excise laws;
septennial parliaments; placemen in the house of commons; recommending strict
enquiry into the expenditure of public moneys; cautioning against a
dishonorable peace with Spain, etc. The preamble runs as follows; We the
citizens of London who have cheerfully elected you to serve us in parliament,
and thereby committed to your trust the safety, liberty, property, and
privileges of ourselves and posterity, think it our duty, as it is our
undoubted right, to acquaint you with what we desire and expect from you in
discharge of the great trust we repose in you, and what we take to be your duty
as our representatives, etc. DEB. COM. XIII 15


There were sent up instructions from all parts, in the same year, for an
effectual place and pension-bill, and for short parliaments, and against a
standing army, and all needless expenses, by which taxes were increased See the
histories of the times.
.

In the year 1742, the lord mayor and corporation of London instructed their
members DEB. COM. XIV.2.
(on occasion of a disappointment ^^om some pretended patriots) requiring their
faithful attention to the prosecution of whatever might give hopes of redress.
These instructions were followed by others to the same purpose from
We^^minster, Bristol, Edinburgh, York, Worcester, and other places.

The city of London instructed their representatives, A. D. 1769, to endeavor
to prevent all attempts to the disadvantage of trial by jury; to watch over the
observance of the Habeas Corpus act; the application of the public money to
bribery or electioneering; to oppose the dangerous doctrine of constructive
treasons, the garbling of petitions, and turning them into accusations; the use
of military force on pretense of keeping the peace; to oppose the
indiscriminate demands of ministers on pretense of paying civil list debts; to
promote an effectual place-bill; to propose laws for preventing the influence
of peers in elections, and for subjecting the candidate, as well as the
elector, to the bribery oath; and to endeavor to obtain short parliments and
election by ballot, etc. MAG. of 1769.


The instructions of your constituents (says a sensible writer LAND. MAG. July,
1771, p. 334.
) you should always be ready to obey. But you have inverted the maxim of the
Gospel, and made the servants greater than their masters. You, who are only
deputies and factors, have usurped a power not only superior to your creators,
but destructive of the very rights, by which they exist as freemen, and by
which you yourselves exist as representatives. In the gulf of your privilege
you have swallowed up the birthright of the people, who are ultimately
paramount to all the three branches of the legislature. [Of as much more
consequence, he might have said, (allowing for difference in property) as 12
millions are more in number than 800 individuals.] Had you been as tenacious of
your duty, as of your interest, you would have first provided for the safety of
the people's rights, and then entered upon a discussion of your own privilege.

Mr. Beckford, late lord mayor of London, seems to have had a proper notion of
instructions, viz. That they are to be followed implicitly, after the member
has respectfully given his constituents his opinion of them. Far be it from me,
says he, to oppose my judgment to that of 6000 of my fellow-citizen LAND. MAG.
1769. p. 96.
.

I ever thought myself happy (says Sir Ellis Cunliffe, in his letter to the
mayor of Liverpool) in obeying all the commands of my constituents, whether of
a public or private nature; [desiring, on account of illness, to be excused
serving any longer in parliament Ibid. 1767. p. 308.
.]

I cannot think it consistent with the honor and dignity of this house, (says
Mr. Plumer in the debate on the Spanish war, A. D. 1738.) to give people
without doors any shadow of reason for suspecting, that the resolutions of this
house are dictated by our ministers of state; for, in all our resolutions, we
ought to speak our own sense, the sense of those we represent, the sense of the
nation, and not the sense of ministers DEB. COM. X.234.
.

When king William, A. D. 1694, refused the royal assent to the famous bill for
free and impartial proceedings in parliament, the commons remonstrated, and the
committee proposed, among other particulars, to address the following to his
majesty: We beg, Sir, you will be pleased to consider us as ANSWERABLE TO THOSE
WE REPRESENT. And it is from your goodness we must expect arguments to soften
to them in some measure the necessary hardships they are forced to undergo in
this present conjuncture Ibid. II.432.
.

CHAP. III. Arguments for Responsibility of Members to the People.
IN the debate upon the motion for repealing the septennial act, A. D. 1734,
Sir W. Wyndham opposed Sir W. Young, who had endeavored to depriciate the
necessity of responsibility.

The gentleman [meaning Sir William] said, that we were to have no dependence
upon our constituents; he went further; he said it was a dangerous dependence;
nay, he went further still, and said it was more dangerous than a dependence on
the crown. This my worthy friend took notice of, and, with his usual modesty,
called it a new doctrine. It is, Sir, not only a new doctrine, but is the most
monstrous, the most slavish doctrine was ever heard; and such a doctrine as I
hope no man will ever dare to support within these walls. I am persuaded, Sir,
the learned gentleman did not mean what the words he happened to make use of
may seem to import; for though the people of a county, city, or borough, may be
misled, and may be induced to give instructions which are contrary to the true
interest of their country, yet I hope he will allow, that in times past the
crown has been oftener misled; and consequently we must conclude that it is
more apt to be misled in time to come than we can suppose the people to be DEB.
COM. VIII.189.
.

Though it should be affirmed, that a member of parliament is not responsible
to his own constituents, yet it would be strange to assert, that all the
members may neglect the remonstrance of all the constituents in England to the
same purpose. In that case, the members could not be said to be representatives
of the people of England, but must be considered as a set of absolute despots,
acting for their own private interest. But this is inconsistent with the very
idea of election, or of delegated power. And if one member is not responsible,
neither is another. If one is responsible, all are. If revolution-principles
are justifiable, that is, if the people may take the power out of the hands of
a king, or government, when they abuse it, it follows, that the king and
government are in all cases responsible to the people, and that a majority of
the people can at any time change the government. This is not denying the
danger and trouble of revolutions, nor the difficulty of determining what is
the sense of the majority of the people. But if members of parliament are not
obliged to regard instructions from their constituents, what is to become of a
poor town, or country-place, unable to bear a tax no way grievous to other
wealthier places? The house receives no petitions upon money-bills; because
every place either sends a member or members of its own, or is represented by
the county-members. But, if the house is neither to be informed by petition nor
by instruction, how is it to be informed? This leaves an open door for the most
cruel oppression.

Lord Coke says, It is the custom of parliament when any new device is moved
for in parliament on the king's behalf for his aid, or the like, [as a little
demand of half a million to pay civil-list debts that the commons may answer,
They dare not agree to it without conference with their countries. He gives an
instance of this 9 Edw. III. which is applied by Mr. Pulteney in the debate on
the excise-scheme, A. D. 1733. And Mr. Pulteney adds, that the abhorrence shown
by the people against that scheme, was a sufficient reason for rejecting it.

So far from questioning the responsibility of members, I should think it
reasonable and proper to demand an oath of the members at their taking their
seats, besides the usual oaths; I mean an oath of fidelity to their
constituents, by which they should declare before God and men, that they come
into the house by the free and uninfluenced choice of a true majority of those,
who by law have the right of choice; and that they will, in all their speeches
and votes, faithfully and zealously pursue their country's good, in spite of
all temptation to the contrary. The most incorrupt parliament ought not to
refuse giving their constituents all the security in their power. An honest man
does not refuse to give his bond. The most virtuous are the most desirous of
avoiding suspicion, and the most anxious about standing in a clear light before
the world.

No single man, or set of men, ought to be trusted with power without account
to the people, the original proprietors of power. There is not upon earth (says
the excellent Gordon) a nation, which having had unaccountable magistrates, has
not felt them to be crying and consuming mischiefs. In truth, where they are
most limited, it has been often as much as a whole people could do to restrain
them to their trust, and to keep them from violence; and such frequently has
been their propensity to be lawless, that nothing but a violent death could
cure them of their violence. This evil has its root in human nature; men will
never think they have enough, whilst they can take more; nor be content with a
part, when they can seize the whole CATO'S LET. III.78.
.

The history of mankind for two or three thousand years backwards (which is as
far backwards as history goes) is a sermon upon this text, Nothing more
dangerous than power without responsibility. But the species resembles an
individual. As the father's experience does not make the son wiser, so neither
does the history of the sufferings of former generations teach the succeeding
to secure themselves against the mischiefs of unaccountable power.

When we elect persons to represent us in parliament (says a judicious writer
LAND MAG. Ian. 1760, p. 33.
) we must not be supposed to depart from the smallest right which we have
deposited with them. We make a lodgment, not a gift; we entrust, but part with
nothing. And, were it possible, that they should attempt to destroy that
constitution which we had appointed them to maintain, they can no more be held
in the rank of representatives than a factor, turned pirate, can continue to be
called the factor of those merchants whose goods he had plundered, and whose
confidence he had betrayed. The men, whom we thus depute to parliament, are not
the bare likeness or reflection of us their constituents; they actually contain
our powers and privileges, and are, as it were, the very persons of the people
they represent. We are the parliament in them; we speak and act by them. We
have, therefore, a right to know what they are saying and doing. And should
they contradict our sense, or swerve from our interests, we have a right to
remonstrate, inform, and direct them. By which means, we become the regulators
of our own conduct, and the institutors of our own laws, and nothing material
can be done but by our authority and consent.

The tyranny of the East India governors MOD. UNIV. HIST. X.144.
, who, on account of the distance of their situation from the seat of
government, think themselves in a manner out of its reach; shows how dangerous
it is to trust power without responsibility.

A few years ago, the wise justices of Westminster gave for one night a
discretionary power to the constables to apprehend and secure all
street-walking women. What was the consequence? Those imperious brutes took up
a number of industrious washer-women going to their business before daylight,
crammed them into a place of confinement like the black hole at Calcutta, in
which one, or more, were fairly suffocated, and found dead next morning.

See a British house of commons plundering the people of above half a million
to pay court-debts, A. D. 1773, at the same time examining with great severity
into the plunderings committed in Asia by the East India company's servants;
the accusars and the accused alike guilty, because alike secure, as they
imagined, from question. Thus the poet of nature represents lady Macbeth
encouraging her husband to murder his sovereign under his own roof, by the
consideration, that there was no body who dared to call them to account.

In other countries, we find a connection held between representation and
responsibility.

The tribunes of the people, in the times of the commonwealth of Rome, had no
will of their own. They were the mere speaking-trumpet of the people. And had
the people been regularly formed into districts, in such manner as to prevent
the corrupt populace of that great city from carrying every point by mobbing,
all would have been well.

The deputies from the Swiss cantons to the general diet, receive instructions
from their constituents, and think themselves obliged to conform to them
Simleri, HELV, DESCR. p. 276. -- 310.
.

The Procuradores, or members for Castile, in the corte held at Madrid, in the
beginning of Charles V. excused themselves from granting the supplies he
desired, because they had received no orders from their constituents; and
afterward receiving express orders not to do it, they gave Charles a flat
denial.

The same was the custom in France, before that country was enslaved. The
general assemblies being laid aside, the same custom is still [latter end of
the 17th century] used in the lesser assemblies of the states in Languedo^ and
Bretagne. The same is observed by the deputies of the cities of Germany to the
diets STATE TRACTS, Time of K. Will. III.282.
.

The deputies or members of the parliament of Paris, when all France was like
to be ruined by the confusions in the minority of Lewis XIV. were afraid to
sign a compromise for restoring the public quiet, lest their constituents
should not approve of the terms MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXV.40.
. Our deputies are not afraid to approve the measures of the court, though they
know them to be the execration of their constituents.

Before the people of Ireland obtained a limitation of the time of their
parliaments, they instructed their members, and many places went so far as to
demand of them, before election, an oath, that they would vote for the measure
LAND. MAG. 1768, p. 131.
.

The deputies sent by each of the United Provinces to the States General are
responsible only to the respective provinces which send them, and not to the
States General Ianicon, I.78.
. In England our members do not hold themselves responsible to their
constituents, but to the house, and the house to the prime minister. Thus the
people, who ought to be all, are nothing. The sagacious Dutch have guarded
against the danger of lodging too irresponsible a power in the hands of their
supreme assembly, or giving their deputies leave to sell them. The States
General cannot, without the unanimous consent of all the provinces (who are too
numerous to be bribed) make peace, nor war, nor raise troops, nor make laws
affecting the whole republic. Nor can they repeal an ancient statute or
regulation, nor elect a stadholder, otherwise than at the risque of their
heads, which they accordingly hazarded for the public good, A. D. 1668, when,
to check the growing power of Lewis XIV. at the instance of Sir W. Temple, they
signed the triple alliance, and elected the prince of Orange stadtholder,
through fear of danger from slow counsels ETAT. PRES, par Ianicon, i.85. Rap.
II.650.
.

The people of New England keep up the right of instructing their members LAND.
CHRON. NO. 1505.
.

CHAP. IV. Unwarrantable Privileges assumed by the House of Commons, in
consequence of inadequate Representation, and too long Parliaments.
IN consequence of the inadequate state of parliamentary representation, the
house of commons has assumed such a superiority over its constituents (and
indeed, the burgesses of the meaner boroughs, who, as has been seen, have the
credit of electing the majority of the house, are a set of very contemptible
people, scarce capable of electing, or of instructing) that, despising the
thought of being answerable to them, they arrogate certain privileges never
granted by the people, and assume the power of protecting, excluding, expelling
their own members, of deciding their own causes, prosecuting, arresting,
imprisoning, reprimanding, and fining their employers at their arbitrary
pleasure, and according to I know not what lex et consuetuo^ parliamenti, which
tramples on Magna Charta, and the Bill of Rights.

Sir William Jones indeed argues strongly, that the law of parliament is the
law of the land. But in the prosecution of Clarendon DEB. COM. I.104.
it being uncertain at first, which way they should proceed, precedents were
searched, and Sir Thomas Littleton reported, that the committee had found
various proceedings in different parliaments. What is then the consuetudo
parliamenti?

Privilege and pre-emminence of every kind is invidious, and odious to the
people. Whoever wanted to excite the Roman people against the senate, never
failed to mention the law forbidding marriage between the patricians and
plebeians. Even where privilege is bestowed in consequence of merit, it is but
aukwardly brooked. Why must Aristides be honored with the title of The Just,
more than others? said the Athenian, and voted his banishment on that account
Plut. in ARIST. Corn. Ne^. in (...)
.

All privilege is a nuisance, whose extent is unknown; because the subject is
thereby in danger of falling into undesigned offense. But it has always been
made a point to keep the extent of parliamentary privilege, prerogative royal,
ministerial power, etc. profound secrets. These are the arcana imperii, in
English, tricks of state. But does the concealment of what may be dangerus to
the people, show, in government, a paternal tenderness for the people? And is
that government any thing better than a tyranny, which shows a want of paternal
tenderness for the people? The truth is, our ministers choose to secure a small
convenience to themselves (the convenience of keeping the people in fear of
them) though at the risque of great loss to the subjects.

I would wish (says James I. in his speech, March, 1609 HARL MISCEL. I.12.
) that the law were written in our vulgar tongue. -- Every subject ought to
understand the law, [and, among other laws, the parliament law] under which he
lives -- that the excuse of ignorance may be taken away from those, who do not
conform themselves to them.

In contending for the privilege of parliament, says a writer on general
warrants Alm. DEB. COM. VI.288.
, I desire to be understood to mean, not that insolent abuse of privilege,
which has made its name odious, and its existence intolerable; by which members
of parliament have usurped a power of making themselves judges in their own
cause, and avengers of their own quarrels; by which the course of law and
justice has been obstructed, just debts withheld from many an unhappy
creditor, and property detained from its true inheritor. I beg leave to mark
out a distinction between the privilege and the prerogative of parliament,
defining the one to be the exercise of a tyrannous and oppressive jurisdiction
over the rest of the subjects; the other to consist in that protection which
secures the representatives of the people from the power of the crown. On
keeping this privilege sacred and inviolate depends the freedom of parliament,
and of consequence the being of our constitution.

The only use of parliamentary privilege from arrest, is to prevent a tyrant,
or a corrupt court, from imprisoning, on pretense of debt, or distressing, such
members as opposed their measures. But this might have been sufficiently
provided against, without carrying privilege to such an unreasonable length,
that there should be no time of the year, when a member, and his dependents,
should be obliged to pay their debts.

It is well observed by an eminent lawyer in his speech in parliament LON^,
MAG, June, 1771, p. 288.
, That the privileges of the members of the house of commons might be said to
be those of the people, if the members of the house of commons had no interest
different from that of the people, which he affirms, is the very contrary of
the truth.

Mark, how sublime the style of the following.

Resolved (by the commons, A. D. 1699) That to assert, that the house of
commons have no power of commitment, but of their own members, tends to the
subversion of the constitution of the house of commons.

We will allow the house of commons to have much higher powers. But let them be
powers fit for a house of commons to have. Every puny justice has power of
commitment. Again,

Resolved, That to print or publish any books, or libels, reflecting upon the
proceedings of the house of commons, or of any member thereof, for, or relating
to his service therein, is a high violation of the rights and privileges of the
house of commons.

This resolution puts an end to all enquiry into the behavior of our trustees,
and makes it impossible for us to call them to account, or to know, whether it
will be safe to re-elect them or not. There is somewhat particularly gross and
mean-spirited in stopping enquiry. It always suggests the idea of somewhat,
which will not bear enquiring into. I care not, says the honest old
philosopher, if there were a window in my breast, that any body might look in
and see what is passing in my thoughts. Felony, breach of the peace, and
treason, deprive a member of his privilege Blackst. COM. I.166.
. And the commons lately gave up privilege in case of seditious libels. Thus we
see them magnifying privilege against the people, and lowering it in servile
complaisance to the court; directly contrary to what the spirit of liberty
would dictate.

Sir Charles Sedley observes, in his speech, A. D. 1699 that when complaint was
made, that great part of the revenue remained unaccounted for, in the hands of
the receivers, a member answered, It could not be helped; for that those
receivers were members, and stood upon their privilege DEB. COM. III.195.
. Nor is it to be wondered that they should; since every 100,000 l. of the
public money kept back, yields 4000 l. a year interest; and a great officer of
the state, whose department lies among the finances, may keep in his own hands
many such sums for many years. But this is pocketing what belongs to the
public, and is as honest as it would be to steal sixpence a-piece out of
100,000 pockets.

There seems to be a small inconsistency between the qualification act and the
privilege of members against arrest for debt. The former says, No man shall be
member for a county, if he has not 600 l. a year clear, nor for a city or
borough, unless he has 300 l. But the privilege supposes, that a member may be
unable to pay his debts; and, in that case, provides against his being
arrested, to the great inconvenience and loss of those, who have trusted
members. Now, if it be improper that a needy man be a member of the house of
commons, why must this needy man be privileged against arrests? Why should not
the bailiffs have him, and another be elected in his room? If it be said, the
arrest may be litigious; it may be the contrivance of a villainous minister, to
put a friend to liberty out of the way on a critical occasion; the answer is
short. Let the house of commons bail the arrested member, if they understand
this to be the case; if not, let him be given up to his creditors. This would
equally secure the member against ministerial tricks, and the creditor against
abuse of privilege. It is criminal in any man to contract debts, which it is
improbable he should ever be able to pay. It is criminal to protect such a
debtor. Which doctrine, by the way, condemns all our too daring merchants,
bankers, etc. who take whatever credit they can have in consequence of the too
easy credulity of mankind, and extend their adventures, by which only
themselves can be gainers, at the peril of hundreds, who may be undone by them.
But a member of parliament, a legislator, ought not to be supposed capable of
ever coming into such circumstances, as to be liable to arrest for a just debt;
or if he does, he ought to be left to the same law with other bankrupts. Where
then is the honest use of this parliamentary screen? For it is to be observed,
that privilege screens a member 40 days before and 40 days after the sitting of
the house, against arrest for the most just debt, and for all sorts of
offenses, that do not come up to felony, breach of the peace, treason, or
seditious libels.

A. D. 1541, the commons begun privileging from arrest for debt by writ from
the speaker. In former times, it was done by writ from the chancellor Hume's
HIST. TUD. II.249.
.

It is plain, that all the privileges assumed by members of parliament are not
necessary for the pubilc service, whatever they may be for their pride; for
they have often been dispensed with. An act was made, A. D. 1641, for laying
down the privileges of parliament for a session, because the citizens
complained that they lost money by them PARL. HIST. X*50.
.

The freemen and citizens of London, in their petitition to parliament, A. D.
1646, complain of many members, who stand upon privilege, and refuse to pay
their debts Ibid. XV.233.
.

An order was made, A. D. 1647, that no persons under authority of parliament,
but the members, shall have protection or immunity by reason of privilege, nor
any member be free from action or prosecution, but obliged to answer. Only
their persons not liable to arrest Ibid. XVI.486.


In the year 1647, the commons ordered, that from January 20th of that year,
none but members should, during that session, have protection by privilege of
the house, in any suit; and that the estates of members be liable for debt,
etc. And the same year, the (...) gave up those lords, who by reason of their
offenses, had not liberty to sit in parliament, to be prosecuted by suits of
law, and likewise their attendents, as if there were no parliament Whitelock's
MEM. 287, 290.
.

Privilege of members, as to person and estate, was taken off, A. D. 1649 PARL.
HIST. XIX.98.
.

The lord mayor, aldermen, and commons, A. D. 1646, complained to parliament,
that many were sufferers by protection of privilege; they complained of
jealousies fomented between parliament and city, and their mayor suspended;
desire that the debts due by parliament to the city may be put in course of
payment Ibid XIV.421.
. The Lords answer with great acknowledgements of the important services of the
city, which they promise never to forget; and to do every thing in their power
for redressing the complaints of the citizens, and particularly of the lord
mayor, of whom they speak very highly. Commons give it a very cold reception.
Ludlow, in his MEMOIRS, calls the petition an insolent address, and the
commons' answer, a declaration that they would preserve their authority and not
be dictated to.

A standing order of the house was published, A. D. 1739, against members
giving protections DEB. COM. XI.321.
.

The commons, A. D. 1678, put a stop to all protections granted by members to
any but menial servants actually in service. A great grievance by abuse of
privilege Ibid. I.276.
.

A good act was made, A. D. 1701, for explaining parliamentary privilege, which
was a great nuisance, obstructing the course of justice, and preventing the
demand of just debts from year to year; for the sessions of parliament being
prorog^ed from period to period, the whole year round was a time of privilege.
So natural is it to overstretch power in our own favor. Dodderidge traces
privilege for the servants of members back to 8 He^. VI. PREF.


A D. 1707, Asgill, a member, was in debt. His creditors petitioned the house,
that he may not be defended by privilege from paying a just debt. It happened
that Asgill had written a silly pamphlet about the possibility of going to
heaven without dying. The house took the opportunity of this pamphlet to expel
him, on the statute of blasphemy, I suppose, without either violating
privilege* or screening a bad man from paying his just debts DEB. COM. IV.73.
. Why should not all privileges both of lords and commons, be put on this
footing, that no member of either house be liable to arrest, but with consent
of the house, and the house always to consent, unless when the cause is
litigious or unjust?

When it was moved, that letters of members go fr^e during the sitting of the
house, Sir Heneage Finch said it was a beggarly proposal. The lords left out
the provision, and the commons agreed PARL. HIST. XXIII.56, 63.
.

A. D 1690, Mr. Montague was charged in execution for 507^ l. He was at the
same time elected member. The house of commons was puzzled, whether he could be
received. But they found precedents in the preceding parliament, and that lord
Coke, INST. 3. affirms, that all persons are eligible, except aliens, minors,
and persons attainted of treason or felony Bohun's RIGHT OF ELECT. 276.
. It is, however to be remembered, that noblemen, clergymen, women, lunatics,
commissioners of customs, and several other placemen, are not eligible; and
that ^ member for a county must have a qulification of 600 l. a year, and for a
city or borough 300 l. a year. But the Scotch, and universities are exempted
from qualifications.

Sir Thomas Shirley, a member, was imprisoned for debt in the time of Iam. I.
The sergeant at arms was sent to the Fleet by the house to demand him. The
warden refuses: The commons send for the warden, and commit him to the Tower. A
dispute arose, whether the house's imprisoning the warden, could indemnify him,
in case of his prisoner's escaping, during his absence. Some proposed to send,
and break open the prison, and bring away Sir Thomas by force. [A whimsical
application, surely, of legislative power.] The speaker overruled this motion;
telling the house, that it would be actionable. After much debating, they sent
for the warden again, and put him into the dungeon called Little ease. The
warden offers to release Sir Thomas if two members will be security for the
debt. The house refuses. At last they privately desire the king to order the
warden, on his allegiance, to release Sir Thomas PARL. HIST, V.113.
.

Mr. Ferrers, member for Plymouth, was arrested for debt, A. D. 1542, going to
parliament, and carried to the Counter. The sergeant of the commons was sent to
the Counter to fetch him. The people at the counter resisted the sergeant, who
complained to the sheriffs. They took part with their officers. The sergeant
returned to the house, and informed them. The commons resent highly. They rose,
and went to the house of lords, to whom they related the affair. The lords and
judges declared the contempt very atrocious, and referred the punishment to the
commons, who returned to their house, and sent their sergeant to the sheriffs
with his mace, without a writ, though the chancellor offered them one. In the
mean while the sheriffs resolved to change their scheme, and deliver up Mr.
Ferrers to the sergeant. The commons ordered the sheriffs to attend them, with
the clerks and officers of the Counter. They likewise ordered their sergeant to
take into custody White, the person who had arrested him. The sheriffs and
White were sent to the Tower, the clerk of the Counter to a place, in the same
prison, called Little ease, and the officer, who arrested Mr. Ferrers, and four
others, to Newgate, who were not set at liberty, till the lord mayor petitioned
for them Petyt's MISCEL. PARL. I.
. Was this contest suitable to the dignity of the house of commons? A battle
between the gaolers of the Counter, and the representatives (such they ought to
be) of the greatest people in Europe!

It is notorious, that from time immemorial, the house of commons has assumed
to itself a power of trying, condemning, and punishing, in cases, where itself
is the offended party, and often in a very arbitrary manner, and without due
regard to the standing laws of the land. An assembly of representatives elected
in an adequate manner, and holding their power a competent time, and upon the
foundation of responsibility to constituents, would not have fallen into this
error.

The MIRROR OF JUSTICE says, Parliaments were ordered to hear and determine all
complaints of wrongful acts done by the king, queen, or their children, and
some others, against whom common right cannot be had elsewhere DEB. LORDS,
I.296.
. Therefore offending sub^ects are to be tried at law, and not by parliament.
It is not by a power of apprehending and imprisoning, that the dignity of
parliament is to be kept up, any more than the credit of religion by fire and
faggot. On the contrary, these violences necessarily bring both into contempt,
because they suppose, that they are not sufficient for their own support
without these unnatural helps. Let your religion be rational, and your
parliament incorrupt, and they will defy abuse. Who ever heard of the venerable
court of Areopagus, or the more venerable one of the Amphictyons, sending out
their sergeant at arms to apprehend the writers of pamphlets against them?

It seems strange, that a part of the legislature should show so little respect
for the laws, as to set up its own unknown and hasty resolutions as a better
rule of conduct for judges, etc. than the known solemn acts of the whole
parliament. Yet we often see them doing so. Sir Francis Pemberton, judge of the
court of kings' bench, had overruled a plea of an order of the house of
commons, A. D. 1689, for arresting certain persons, and defended his
proceeding; for that it was according to law DEB. COM. II.339.
. Resolved, That the judgments given by Pemberton, Jones, etc. are illegal, and
a violation of the rights of parliament, and that a bill be brought in to
reverse those judgments. Another case of the same kind relating to a judgment
of the court of king's bench on information against Williams, speaker of the
house of commons, for matters done by order of the house, was resolved illegal,
and against the freedom of parliament, and that a bill be brought in to reverse
it DEB. COM. II.339.341.
. Pembe^^^n and Jones were examined again, and put in custody of the sergeant
at arms Ibid. p. 345.
. Judge Berkley was taken off of his bench in Westminster Hall, A.D. 1640, by
the usher of the black rod, to the great terror of his brethren PARL. HIST.
IX.94.
. In those days the house of commons was venerable, as being known to act
according to the general sense of the people. Therefore the people did not
grudge them any degree of power. In corrupt times, when the people see their
pretended representatives acting constantly in obedience to a designing court;
they wish their power retrenched, though the retrenching of the power of the
house of commons is not the proper means for redressing the evil; but cutting
off the communication between it and the court; of which more in the sequel.

The following instances show what power has been formerly allowed our
parliaments, when the people had a confidence in them. A. D. 1680, Scroggs was
impeached of ^^eason. Great question was made, whether he could be accused of
treason, or of high crimes and mi^demeaners only. It was argued, that
parliament may punish as treason any crime tending to the destruction of the
nation, though not declared to be treason by 25 Edw. III. Tresilian and his
accomplices were condemned in parliament for crimes not before declared felony,
by any promulgated law. Empsom and Dudley the same. Finch and Berkley were
condemned by parliament of treason for the same crimes as those charged on
Scroggs, etc. The judges in Richard II.'s time were condemned for giving
extrajudicial opinions. A knight of Cheshire was condemned for conspiring the
death of the king's uncle. An earl of Northumberland for giving liveri^^ to so
many that they were thought a little army. None of these were declared felony
by any previous statute DEB. COM. II.59.
.

The commons, however, made a bad use of the people's confidence, and began to
use their power in a tyrannical and oppressive manner. Accordingly the
judicious writer of a piece, entitled, The Subjects Right of Petitioning STATE
TRACTS, time of K. William, III.26^.
(which was written on occasion of the commons imprisioning the Kentish
petitioners, A. D. 1701) observes, that great numbers of other subjects had
been imprisoned by them the same session, to the horror and amazement of all
those, who knew the rights and liberties of the people of England; and
therefore could not but be concerned to see them so miserably infringed; and
that it was necessary, in order to prevent such acts of power for the future,
to show, that they were mere acts of power, and manifest encroachments on the
rights and liberties of the people. He shows, that the common law was formerly
so tender of the subject's liberty, that it suffered none to be imprisoned, but
for violence and breach of the peace. The lords brought in the custom of
imprisoning 35 Hen. III. by the STAT. MARL^R. for obliging bailiffs, or
collectors of rents, to make up their accounts. Afterward, 23 Edw. III. it was
enacted, that debtors should be compelled by imprisonment to pay their debts.
But if a debtor died in prison, the debt was paid. And by 1 Edw. II. no one was
to be punished for breaking prison, forasmuch as one is warranted to do it by
the law of nature, says the MIRROR. By Magna Charta, no free man shall be
taken, or imprisoned, but by judgment of his peers, or the law of the land;
which is explained by 25 Edw. III. to be a security against imprisonment by
petition or suggestion to the king or his council, or in any other way than due
course of law [no mention of a vote of the House of Commons.] It is certain,
says that writer, that men, imprisoned by the commons, underwent no judgment of
their peers, were not committed by any legal process, or by any law, that we
know in this land STATE TRACTS, time of king William, III.267.
. He insists, that the commons have no right to imprison any, but their own
members, and that only when absolutely necessary. The members know this power
of the house, and voluntarily expose themselves to it, by going into the house;
which other subjects do not; but claim the privilege given them by Magna
Charta. He owns, likewise, that there may be some pretense for imprisoning
persons not members, when guilty of breach of privilege, or contempt. [In which
I think he makes too large a concession. I see not the justice, nor even the
common decency of any set of men whatever (I am of opinion the two houses of
parliament are but men) punishing any offense against themselves. There is no
possible case, in which a jury may not decide.] Confinement by the commons
alone, he observes, is an encroachment on the legislature, which consists of
king, lords, and commons Ibid. 268.
. The commons sending the subjects to prison, even though guilty, is assuming
the office of the executive, which belongs to the king, the commons being of
the legisllative only. A power in the commons of imprisoning is a mockery, he
thinks, of the people's liberty; because a free people ought to be liable to no
punishment, but in consequence of some known standing law. Judges, and justices
of the peace have a power of imprisoning in consequence of their being
empowered by the king to execute the laws, which the commons are not. The
commons have no need of a power to punish, because they may apply to the
executive whenever a known law is violated. [Even the sovereign cannot punish
an offense against himself. The offender is tried, and condemned by indifferent
persons, viz. judges and juries.] The house of commons has no power to decide
concerning property; how then, he says, can it take away personal liberty,
which is more valuable? He says, the power of imprisoning was but just then
assumed by the commons, and could not plead custom, or prescription. Too great
a power in the house of commons, he says, may produce great mischief many ways;
particularly by disgusting the people against parliamentary government, and
driving them to such a proceeding as that of the Danes, who, to be free from
the tyranny of their lords, made themselves slaves to their king. When there is
reason, he says, to suspect a great prevalency of bribery and corruption in the
house of commons, it is time for the people to see to the retrenching of their
power; [the cutting off of court influence, he should have said] for that a
corrupt house of commons may be expected to make themselves formidable to the
people, in order to be of consequence to the court, and to deserve the more
liberal pay STATE TRACTS, time of king William, III.270.
.

No set of men empowered only to make laws, can, without an express commission
from the people, alter the constitution, because it is only upon the principles
of the constitution, that they had their power entrusted to them; and the
principles of the constitution will never bear them out in overthrowing the
constitution. The people, whose original and inherent power established the
constitution, may change the constitution, or empower a set of men to change it.

Writers on the side of this assumed boundless parliamentary privilege, by
accustoming themselves to think of the house of commons as the representative
of the people, fall into the mistake, that whatever is right for the one is
right for the other likewise, and that whatever the people's power reaches to,
is likewise within the reach of the assembly of representatives. And this is,
generally speaking, true. But there is a distinction to be made. The people
have certain incommunicable powers, which their representatives can upon no
occasion challenge to themselves. The people alone can elect representatives.
The whole body of representatives have not in themselves the power to take
into, to exclude, or to expel from their house one single member, otherwise
than according to notorious and stated laws made by the whole legislative
power, and assented to by the people. This may be explained by comparing it
with the king's power of commissioning ambassadors for foreign courts; which
power is incommunicably inherent in him, in such manner, that all the
ambassadors employed by the king cannot by any power of their own send an
ambassador to, or dismiss, or expel one from the most inconsiderable court. Yet
every ambassador, when furnished with his credentials, has the power of
representing the king his master's person at the court to which he is sent, in
all those matters and things which enter into the function of an ambassador.
Again, the people alone have the power of determining for how long a period
they will continue their representatives in office. The assembly of
representatives have not power to continue their own authority one day beyond
the time, for which they were elected. If they have, they may, at any time,
erect themselves into peers, and insist on keeping their seats for life. Again,
an assembly of representatives have no power to assume to themselves any
unprecedented privilege; but the people have power to confer on their
representatives what privileges they please, to limit them as they please, and
even to new-model the whole government.

In the case of a court of directors, established by a trading company, it is
universally understood, that the directors, when once established by the
proprietors, have power to do whatever the proprietors could do for the common
advantage of the company, this power being still left to the explication and
limitation of the proprietors. But, when a director dies, or resigns, the court
of directors cannot put another in his place. This is the incommunicable
privilege of the proprietors. Nor can the directors lengthen, beyond the
intention of their constituents, the time for which they were appointed. Nor
can they assume to themselves any one power or privilege, different from those
given them by the proprietors. Nor can they refuse a duly elected director, nor
take in one of their own choosing, nor expel one chosen by the proprietors,
otherwise than according to the laws of the company, and the powers orginally
reposed in them. Nor can they alter any thing fundamental in the constitution
of the company; but the proprietors can; so far as to the total dissolution of
the incorporate body. Therefore, when Mr. Prynne was threatened by Sir H. Van^
and Sir A. Haselrig, to be voted out of the house of commons, A. D. 1659, he
answ^red, He knew of no one in the house who had a right to vote him out, being
equally entrusted with themselves for the whole nation, and those he
represented PARL. HIST. xxi.395.
.

As to the power assumed by the house, of sending for persons, papers, and
records, and of reprimanding fining, imprisoning offenders, it has long been
questioned, and never rightly established. Burnet writes of it as follows; The
commons could not receive an information upon oath, nor proceed against those
who refused Burnet's HIST. OWN TIMES, II.121.
. Their right of imprisoning any besides their own members, was inquired into,
and it was found to be built on no law, nor practice, older than queen
Elizabeth. Several people therefore, when sent for in custody of the sergeant
at arms, refused to attend Ibid.
.

When the commons, in the th^rd parliament under Chapter II. imprisoned, too
arbitrarily, many of the abhorrers, or court party, the clamor turned against
them, and one Stowel stood on the defensive against the sergeant, when he came
to apprehend him, saying, The commons had no law for imprisoning. He got the
better. And the commons, to save their authority, dropped the matter, and
granted Stowel a month to recover from an indisposition, which he had not
Hume's HIST. STUARTS, II.310.
.

It is manifestly an irregularity for the house of commons, which is only a
third part of the legislature, to take to itself singly the executive power.
The house of commons has no more power to administer an oath than to cut (...)
a head, says Charles I PARL. HIST. XII.66.
The power of the house (as being no court of judicature (to examine witnesses,
was questione^ by the lords, A. D. 1732. Though the commons had always claimed
that power, yet it was a point still in dispute between the two houses. It was
argued, that the commons had delegated that power to their committees. That
members, who were justices of the peace, could administer the oath to the
witnesses, for which their was precedent. That that house was a court of
record, and as such they certainly had a power to administer an oath, in any
affair that came properly before them. But being unwilling to have any dispute
with the lords, the debate was dropped DEB. COM. VII.242.
. There is no statute law, by which a constitutional power is given to the
house of commons to order a paper to be burnt, and the sheriffs to attend and
see it done. That they have assumed this power from time immemorial, is
undoubted Ibid. 247.
.

It was resolved by the commons, A. D. 1689, that bailing by the court of
king's bench, persons committed by this house, is a crime, for which the
advisers may justly be excepted out of the indemnification Ibid. II 321.
. The king's bench goes on, however, the same year, bailing by Habeas Corpus,
persons obnoxious to the commons. The commons order the governor of the Tower
to bring before them in custody of their sergeant at arms, Sir Thomas Ienner
and others, though bailed before the warrant could reach them. Not giving
satisfaction, on their examination before the house, a committee is appointed
to prepare a charge against them. The governor of the Tower is ordered to bring
before the commons several lords, and others. The commons prepare impeachments
against them. They order several others into custody DEB. COM. XI.356.
. At the same time that the commons consulted safety, they punished cruelty.
They ordered Richardson, keeper of Newgate, to be prosecuted for cruelty to his
prisoners Ibid. 357.
.

In the affair of the printers in 1770, it was argued in the house of commons,
that the power of summoning persons before them, and punishing for refusal, is
necessary for preserving the purity of elections; because, if every returning
officer may proceed as he pleases, and laugh at the house of commons, there
must be an end of all due election and return. But we know that many matters
relating to elections are now allowed to be cognizable in the courts of law.
Why should not all? Why should the house of commons concern themselves with any
thing, but their great obj^cts, viz. legislation, raising supplies, and
enquiring into the conduct of ministers? One thing we all know, relating to
this affair, viz. That if the commons would go on with their own business, and
leave the decision of elections, and breaches of their own privileges, to the
inferior courts, magnanimously declining to be judges in their own cause, and
having nothing to do with any man, till he comes to take his seat, and has
satisfied the house, that either his election was never questioned, or if
questioned, was legally decided, as any other difference between man and man;
it is, I say, notorious, that if this was the lexet consuetudo parliamenti,
there would be no opportunity for the reflections now so commonly cast upon our
house of commons, as deciding elections too much in favor of the
court-candidate, and as taking upon themselves the inconsistent offices of
plaintiffs, judges, and juries.

Judge Blackstone, in his account of the unknown and unlimited power and
privileges of parliament COM. I 161, et seq.
, seems to forget, that the safety of the people limits all free governments.
It is true that the people of England, not being accustomed, till lately, to
apprehend danger from any quarter, but the throne (tyranny having been an old
trick among kings from Nimrod's time down) have all along encouraged and
supported their parliaments in extending their power, as the only sure bulwark
against regal encroachments. But latter ages have taught us the necessity of
looking out for security against parliamentary encroachments. And, the method
is not by lessening the power of parliament, but by lessening the power of the
court over the parliament. For a parliament is not (as a king) naturally
hostile to liberty. If ever a parliament comes to oppose, or injure the people,
it must be in consequence of an unnatural influence acting in it. Therefore our
modern malcontents seem to be in a wrong pursuit. To retrench the power of
their representatives, would be lessening their own power. To break through the
corrupt influence of the court over their representatives, would be making them
truly their representatives. Take away court-influence, and the 558 will of
course pursue the interest of their country, as any other set of gentlemen men
would do, because their own will be involved in it, when they have no places or
pensions to indemnify them. At the same time it cannot be denied, that for a
house of commons, though ever so incorrupt and uninfluenced by the court, to be
ever grasping at new privileges, and assuming new powers, descending from the
dignity of representatives of the majesty of the people of Britain, taking upon
themselves the office of the justices, prosecuting, imprisoning, and fining, a
set of printers and booksellers, depriving the subjects of his trial by jury,
and employing their time in hunting out small offenders, while they should be
battling the gigantic enemies of liberty and virtue, and planning measures for
making unborn millions happy; it cannot be denied, I say, that such proceedings
as these are infinitely beneath the attention of a house of commons, though it
should be granted, that the power of the house of commons, being the power of
the people, ought not to be limited. All thing are lawful for them; but all
things are not expedient. The truth of the matter is, That if our houses of
commons had kept to their proper sphere, we should never have seen any libels
against them, nor any occasion for prosecuting, imprisoning, and fining; or if
there had, the courts of king's bench and common pleas were open.

The following passages from the Magazines show how these assumptions of the
house of commons appear to the people.

It is not more known, than lamented, what an authority the house of commons
has claimed over the liberty of the subject; and how numerous the instances are
in our history, where, without the specification of any crime, or the execution
of any warrant, they have voted a freeman of England into prison, and kept him
closely confined for weeks, nay months, to the irreparable injury, perhaps, of
him and his family. To aggravate the cruelty of the procedure, they have even
voted every body who offered to procure him the least justice, an enemy to his
country; and deemed it to the last degree unpardonable, that he should have
recourse to those very laws, for satisfaction, which they themselves had
established for his redress. The privilege thus claimed by the house of commons
is no less repugnant to the laws of this kingdom, than it is opposite to reason
and nature: if then we are desirous of restraining the servants of the crown
from the exercise of an arbitrary authority, whence comes it that we have never
endeavored to restrain our own immediate servants from the exercise of a
tyranny practiced a thousand times more frequen^ly, and infinitely more replete
with slavery and destruction LAND. MAG. Sept. 1765, p. 481.
? Perhaps it may be said, There is no likelihood that the house of commons will
resign any part of their privileges. What is this, but saying, that the august
assembly in question, will not adopt a measure highly beneficial to the freedom
and happiness of their country? What is it, but saying, that they are fond of a
power to treat those very people as the most abject set of slaves, whose
liberties they have solemnly sworn to defend? And what is it but a positive
implication, that they are the greatest of all enemies to that very national
welfare, which they profess so tenderly to cherish and befriend Ibid. 482.
?

Suppose a man had personally offended the majority of the individuals, who
happen to compose a jury, that is to try him. Would not every body acknowledge,
it would be great severity to refuse him the usual liberty of objecting to his
jury? But suppose twe^ve men to commence a prosecution against one; and that
those very individuals are immediately, in the very rage of their resentment,
enclosed to pass a verdict, and determine of a punishment for an offense
against themselves. Would this have the smallest semblance of justice? On the
contrary, is it not the very design of law, to take out of the hands of the
off^nded, the trial and punishment of the offenders, and put it into those of
indifferent persons? But, when either house of parliament, or a court of
justice punishes for breach of privilege, or contempt of court, the persons
offended are the judges, and inflict the punishment.

If it be objected, that it is beneath the dignity of the august house of
commons to submit their complaints against those who have been guilty of breach
of their privileges, to the decision of a court of law (which the sovereign
himself must do) let it be remembered, that, according to the present monstrous
state of representation, a gentleman of 5000 l. a year, by sitting in the house
of commons, in consequence of the votes of 10 beggars, acknowledges a
superiority in those 10 men; for he could not have sat, if they had not
empowered him. If now he should submit to those 10 constituents his part of a
dispute between the house of commons and an author, or printer, or between the
house, and a member who has affronted them by accusing them of corruption, I
should be glad to know, whether he would do a meaner thing than he has already
done in submitting to those 10 worthies, whether he shall sit in the house or
not.

It is the natural disposition of man, to overstretch whatever power he gets
into his hands. It is the same incroaching disposition, that puts kings upon
decision by arms, rather than by arbitration, which puts lords upon rejecting
the most salutary bills, which puts them and commons upon punishing supposed
offenses against themselves, and which puts inferior courts upon punishing what
they call contempt. And it is easy to find somewhat plausible to say in support
of an unjust claim. But after all is said, it will still be true, that a king's
choosing the brutal decision of arms, rather than the rational one of
arbitration by neutral powers, that a house of lords or commons, taking into
their own hands the punishment of supposed offenses against themselves, instead
of referring them to indifferent persons, and a court of law or justice
punishing whatever it pleases to call contempt against itself, instead of
leaving the matter to a jury of the supposed offender's peers, without which
every punishment is irregular; -- there is no doubt, I say, that all such
proceedings as these are inconsistent, not only with justice and liberty, but
with civilization and police, and are the very evils complained of under
tyrannical governments, and among savages, not yet regulated by government.

The legislative authority which has power to abrogate all laws now in being,
cannot be tied to any rules of human prescription, but there are eternal rules
of equity and justice, right reason, and conscience, and these are unalterable,
and never to be swerved from. Words of Sir Godfrey Copley, concerning the house
of commons trying Sir John Fenwick for treason in an unprecedented way.

Lord Coke INST. V.15.
, and many other writers, make a great matter of the houses of parliament being
the sole judges of whatever concerns their own houses respectively, because
they are the supreme court, and no other court can intermeddle with their
affairs. And it is, by the same able writer, and others, taken for granted,
that every court is to be sole judge of its own privileges, and of offenses
committed against itself.

There is no doubt concerning the supremacy of parliament, and that therefore
no inferior court can, of its own authority, claim the decision of d^fferences
between the houses, or between one house and a supposed offender, or offenders
against that house. But there is certainly a power in either house to refer to
the decision of others any matter, wherein the house is itself a party. And it
will then become lawful for those, to whom the reference is made, to decide.

It does not appear to me, that there is any thing humiliating in submitting to
the decision, or arbitration, of a set of men, whether in or out of parliament,
or that it necessarily implies acknowledging a superiority in those men. In a
dispute between the king and a merchant, neither one nor the other thinks
himself degraded by having the cause tried by the court of King's Bench, and
the point determined by a jury. The cause must be tried in that court first,
and cannot come before the lords, but by appeal. And even when it is finally
determined by the lords, is the sovereign degraded by submitting to the
decision of his inferiors? The lords are as much his inferiors after, as
before. What could be nobler, than to see a man of high rank and large fortune
decline to pronounce in a dispute between himself and one of his domestics, and
leaving the matter to arbitration of his other domestics?

Supposing the house of commons elected in an adequate manner, that is, every
member by about 400 men of property, I say that in submitting to their
arbitration, a member would submit to his undoubted superiors in every respect.
If every member submits, the house submits to their constituents. And surely it
could be no degradation for them to submit a point of honor or ceremony, a
matter of no national consequence, to their political creators, from whom they
derive their very existence as a house.

Supposing it granted, that there is a difficulty either way, viz. Whether
parliament takes into its own hands the punishment of offenses against itself,
or leaves it to arbitration by others, will any man pretend, that the
difficulties are equal on both sides? Nay, will not any man acknowledge that in
declining to be judges in their own cause, there is magnanimity; as on the
contrary (in all private disputes at least) there is much selfishness and
arrogance in claiming to decide our own quarrels.

It is usually said, there are customs of parliament and other courts, which
themselves only understand. Are then the customs of parliament and other courts
only to be explained by algebra, fluxions, or the higher geometry? Or are they
matters of plain common sense? If they be not, the most innocent and
uprightly-intentioned subject may fall into the great and dangerous guilt of
offending against those inexplicable customs and privileges, and may find
himself suddenly in the same condition with the unfortunate sailor dashed on
unseen breakers in an open sea, swallowed up and lost.

A. D. 1704, the lords, in their judicial capacity, determined, that a person's
right to vote for a member might be tried at law, and that the commons have
nothing to do with that point, and that, by their vote to the contrary, they
had struck at the liberties of the people, the law of England, and the judicial
power of the house of lords Burnet's HIST. OWN TIMES, III.39.
. This was taking the protection of corrupt returning officers out of the hands
of the house of commons. Even lord Coke, who magnifies the power of parliament
as much as any writer whatever, observes, that parliaments may do wrong, of
which he gives several instances. He quotes one mischievous act with a
flattering preamble INST. V.39.
, by pretext of which, Empson and Dudley committed innumerable oppressions upon
the subjects, and the act was accordingly repealed the first parliament after
the death of Hen. VII. in whose time it was made. A good caveat, says he, to
parliament, to leave all causes to be measured by the golden and (...) metwand
of the law, and not by the uncertain and crooked cord of discretion.

The popish party blamed parliament for taking into custody some of the
abhorrers. They said it was a matter which had no relation to privilege of
parliament, signifying, that if it had, there had been no harm DEB. LORDS,
I.276.
. We now question the ^^ctrine of a power in the commons of imprisoning for any
thing, but what stops proceedings of the house, and is done in the house.
Instances were brought by Sir William Jones, of commitments of persons not
members for faults not breaches of privilege, as for exercising patents
condemned by the commons, and for faults in preaching and catechizing. There
would be no end, says he, of giving instances of such commitments which may be
observed in almost every parliament. This however was all wrong, as superseding
law DEB. LORDS, I, 277.
. Parliaments were listened to, and thanked for detecting wicked favorites by
Edw. I. Hen. II. IV. V. and Elizabeth. The contrary by Hen. III. and VI. and
Edw. II. and Rich. II. This was the proper business of parliament, the other of
the courts of law.

The power of the house of commons to send even their own members (much more
other subjects) to prison without trial by jury, is to the last degree
dangerous. For a house of commons may become, through court-influence, so
generally corrupt, that they may see it proper to send every honest member to
the tower, the moment he opens his mouth against their traitorous measures, and
in favor of his country. This could not be, if every person, whether member or
not, offending, or supposed to offend, against the orders of the house, were to
be tried, before he could be committed, by a jury of those, who are in every
respect equal to the members, I mean the people, the constituents of the
members.

There is an act 1 Iam. I. cap. 16. entitled, An act for new execution against
any who shall be hereafter delivered out of prison, by privilege of parliament,
and for discharge of them, out of whose custody such prisoners shall be
delivered Hakew. MOD. TENEND. PARL. 65.
. This shows, that privilege was not originally intended for oppression of the
subject. But judge Hales collects many instances of privilege allowed to
members and the servants of members upon very frivolous pretenses, and to the
great loss of their just creditors Hale's POW. OF PARL. 164.
. By 4 Edw. III. ROT. PARL. NO. 6.
it was enacted, that though the lords and peers of the realm in presence of
the king had taken upon them to give judgment in cases of treason and felony of
such as were no peers of the realm, hereafter no peer shall be driven to give
judgment on any other than their peers according to law Hale's POW. OF PARL. 26.
. Why did not the commons come to the same resolution? See Ibid. 173.
many instances of punishments inflicted upon persons not members, for
pretended breach of privilege, which would have come much more decently from
the court of King's Bench, even though justly inflicted, which was not always
the case.

Judge Hales says, both lords and commons independently have power of
judicature Ibid. 25.
. Yet he says an ordinance, or resolution of one house, binds not in
succession Ibid. 26, 31.
, unless it afterward receive the sanction of the other branch, or branches of
the legislature.

A. D. 1584, Dr. Parry, for speaking freely in the house against a bill, was
committed to the sergeant, brought to the bar, and obliged on his knees to
confess his fault, and ask pardon, etc. Hake^el, MOD. TENEND. PARL. 75.
But by 4 Hen. VIII. cap. 8. it is enacted, That all suits, fines, punishments,
corrections, etc. to be put or had upon any member, for speaking, reasoning, or
declaring of any matters concerning parliament to be commenced, or treated of,
be utterly void, and of none effect. This act is declaratory of the ancient law
and custom of parliament Hale's POW. OF PARL. 8.
.

CHAP. V. Parliamentary Privileges and Prosecutions have been too generally
frivolous and unjust.
TO prove that parliamentary privileges and prosecutions are grievances, I will
add here a few, out of a great many instances I had collected in the course of
my reading, of parliamentary prosecutions, very much unworthy the dignity of
parliament, which will show, that it is not easy for men going out of their
proper sphere to act suitably, nor to exclude passion and prejudice from their
decisions in their own cause.

In fact, the liberty and property of freeborn Englishmen are things of too
sacred a nature to lie open to invasion, from the sudden resolutions of any set
of men whatever. And yet greater depredations have not been committed, than
those which the liberty and property of Englishmen have suffered, at the hands
of kings and ministers, who have been artful enough to prevail with parliaments
(naturally friendly to liberty) to become the instruments of their tyranny.

Some members of parliament, in the time of Philip and Mary, A. D. 1555, made a
secession. Some were indicted and fined; others traversed; but the point was
not decided, when the queen died.

Mr. Tailor, barrister at law, a member, was brought on his knees in the house,
A. D. 1631, for saying, that the parliament had committed murder with the sword
of justice, in the case of Strafford. He was expelled the house, and voted
incapable of ever sitting more. He was committed to the Tower during pleasure
of the house; and afterward carried to Windsor to make his recantation
Hakewel, MOD. TENEND. PARL. 80.
.

In the time of Iam. I. the year not mentioned, a member, for seeming to
reflect on another member, as puritanical and factious, was called to the bar,
and on his knees discharged the service of the house, with an intimation, that
his sentence was very merciful, because they might have imprisoned him besides
Ibid. 79.
.

The commons, afraid of Lilburn's party and the levellers, made them close
prisoners in the Tower; but this severe order was countermanded afterward
PARL. HIST. XIX.121.
. His printed papers were ordered to be burnt by the hangman; the sheriff to
protect him: the gentleman usher of the house to search for papers of the same
kind, and bring them before the house Ibid. XV.25.
.

There have been no cases harder than those, in which king, lords, and commons
have concurred; as that of Cromwell, earl of Essex, who was attainted, and not
suffered to come from the Tower to be heard DEB. COM. II.405.
.

Hen. Marten, esquire. was disabled, A. D. 1643, and committed to the Tower by the
house of commons, for reflecting on the king and royal family, but afterward
restored, and the sentence erased from the Journals. Several were disabled for
having been in the kings's quarters PARL. HIST. IX.15, et seq.
. One suspended for writing a book against the Trinity. Recants, and is
restored; but afterward disabled for the same offense Ibid. 27.
. Coningsby expelled for being a monopolist Ibid. 28.
. Commons exclude all those members who voted for treating with the king; it is
plain they thought they had power of exclusion and incapacitation. However, the
people seemed pleased, for there came multitudes of addresses from all quarters
approving of their proceedings Parl. HIST. XVIII.548.
.

Cranfield was fined 500 l. each to four members whom he had slandered Ibid.
XIV.22.
.

Lord Saville was committed to the Tower, for refusing to name the person who
had written a letter to him, which parliament had thought treacherous Ibid.
XIII.509.
.

An order, A. D. 1647, for several members of the house to take some of the
deputies of the sergeant at arms, and to break open doors, and seize trunks and
papers of one captain Vernon, was much opposed by some members, as altogether
illegal Whitelocke's MEM. 277.
.

Doctor Carry was brought to the bar of the house of peers, A. D. 1677, and
examined concerning a MS. carried by him to the press, on the illegality of the
prorogation; because he would not answer certain interrogatories, he was fined
1000 l. and kept in prison till he paid the money DEB. LORDS, I 196.
. Aaron Smith being accused of seditious words to the same purpose, and
absconding, the house addressed for a proclamation to apprehend him, which the
king granted accordingly Ibid.
.

Even the punishments inflicted by the house of peers, though undoubtedly a
court, will not be submitted to without discontent, when ordered in this
arbitrary manner.

Sir I. Maynard, A. D. 1647, treats the house of lords with contempt. Is fined
5000 l. and sent to the Tower PARL. HIST, XVI.517.
. Wanted to be tried by a jury. Nor will the subjects, while a spark of liberty
remains, be reconciled to any other form of trial.

The commons took too much upon them, A. D. 1681, when they passed the vote,
that the laws against recusants ought to be only put in execution against
papist, and not against protestant dissenters. Their design was right, so far
as they meant to favor protestant dissenters; but no single branch of the
legislature has power to dispense with laws made by the united authority of all
the three. They are to be regularly repealed by the same authority which made
them Burnet's HIST. OWN TIMES, II.135.


When the bill to prevent double returns passed, A. D. 1695, some lords
protested, because the commons took too much upon them, when they pretended to
settle the course of elections and returns by their vote, excluding the other
house, which was making themselves, contrary to the constitution and sense of
the public in all ages, a court of judicature DEB. LORDS, I.459
.

John Biddle, a schoolmaster, was examined, A. D. 1654, for an Arian book. The
book was burnt by the hands of the hangman. He was committed to the Gate House,
without pen, ink, or paper. Seems to have been a man of no depth. He was
confined afterward in Newgate, and then banished to the isle of Scilly PARL.
HIST. XX.398.
.

Parliament, A. D. 1650, takes up the office of criminal judges, and sentences
several persons to the pillory for forgery Ibid. IX.255.
.

A. D. 1680, one Sherridan, in custody of the sergeant at arms by order of the
house, had moved for his habeas corpus. Refused by judge Raymond, because
committed by order of the house, though moved in behalf of Raymond. Sir William
Jones is against bailing in case of commitment by the commons. Says the house
of commons is a court of itself, and part of the highest court in the nation,
superior to those in Westminster hall, and the laws made in it, are to bind the
inferior courts, but cannot be understood to bind themselves. That it is
dangerous to hinder the power of parliament (in those days the house of commons
was the people). A commitment by the house is a judgment, and was never allowed
to be bailable. I^ persons committed by the house on any account may be bailed,
they may be bailed even though committed for breach of privilege, and then the
house is disarmed of its necessary power. Thinks it improper to make any
resolution, or give any answer to the motion in behalf of Raymond; but to leave
the judges at their peril to bail persons committed by the house DEB. COM.
II.60.
.

The highest court is to govern according to the laws, as well as the lowest
Ibid. I.124.
. The words of the duke of Buckingham, 1668, 20 Car. II. speaking of the house
of peers, directed to the commons in a conference on the affair of Skinner. He
goes on, I suppose none will make a question, but that every man and every
cause is to be tried by Magna Charta, i. e. by his peers, or according to the
law of the land. As if he had meant, that parliamentary trials are not
according to Magna Charta and the law of the land.

The good old rules of the law are the best security; and let not men have so
much cause to fear, that the settlements they make of their estates shall be
too easily unsettled, when they are dead, by the power of parliament Charles
IId's speech, 1662. DEB. COM. I.56.
.

Our judges and ministers of justice, neither can nor ought, in reverence to
the votes of either or both houses, to break the oath they have taken, for the
due and impartial execution of our laws, which by experience have been found to
be the best support both of the protestant interest and of the peace of the
kingdom. Charles IId's words in his proclamation, A. D. 1681, and apology for
dissolving his parliament, premises very just, though ill applied DEB. LORDS.
262.
.

In the case of lord Banbury, the chief justice Holt disregardeed a vote of the
house of peers; and in that of Ashby and White, the courts of law took no
notice of a vote of the house of commons Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.150.
.

The Lord chief justice Holt was very learned in the law, and had on great
occasions showed an intrepid zeal in asserting its authority. For he ventured
on the indignation of both houses of parliament by turns, when he thought the
law was with him Tind. CONTIN. I.156.
.

Imprisonment by mere order of council was, in the time of Charles I. found to
be illegal, and contrary to Magna Charta, and is likewise inconsistent with six
statutes in favor of liberty made since Hume's HIST. STUARTS, I.151.
. By the same rule, imprisonment as a punishment, inflic^^^ by any order
whatever, without trial per pares, is illegal. This was the very tyranny of the
star chamber and high commission-courts.

There was an order for a reward of 50 l. etc. A. D. 1677, for apprehending
Andrew Marvel for publishing against the government DEB. LORDS, I.202
.

Shaftesbury, after many months confinement in the Tower, had recourse to the
court of king's bench. Obtains no redress. Obliged to ask pardon of the house
in terms dictated for him. Released after 13 months confinemement Ibid.
.

Several people were taken into custody for speaking disrespectfully of the
house, A. D. 1697 DEB. COM. III.72.
.

Charles Caesar, Esquire was committed to the Tower, for saying, the queen did
nothing without a certain lord, who in the late reign was known to keep a
constant correspondence with the court of St. Germains Tind. CONTIN. I.729.
.

Articles against Sir Edward Dering, A. D. 1642, were, That he had encouraged a
petition derogatory from the authority of parliament; in which petition it was
requested, that no member should be expelled without showing cause; that the
subjects should not be bound by any order of either house singly, particularly
that no order concerning the militia from the commons only should be binding.
All this they declared wicked and seditious; and his having said, the delivery
of the petition should be by 40,000 people, and his using means to raise (...)
insurrection for that purpose PARL. HIST. X.454.
. Declared a breach of privilege of parliament. He flies from justice. Summoned
to answer before the parliament. Some of the men of Kent come to the parliament
with their petition, though before burnt by the hangman. Some of them were
committed, the rest dismissed Ibid. 472.
.

Candles called for, A. D. 1641, opposed by the majority. The sergeant by
mistake brings them in. Widdrington and Herbert, members, take them away
without orders of the house: great disturbance ensues. They are called to the
bar. Are ordered to kneel. They refuse; and are sent to the Tower PARL. HIST.
IX.372.
.

It was debated, A. D. 1696, whether the mace should lie on the table, as
usual, while Sir I. Fenwick was under examination before the commons, and
whether the sheriffs of London could have him in custody before the house. It
was determined, that the mace should be held by the sergeant at arms at the bar
by Sir John. He got his trial put off on false pretenses, for which the commons
meant to have him attainted, convicted, and executed, as a traitor for eluding
justice; upon the same principle as people are outlawed, who fly from trial, or
bankrupts are made felons, who do not appear to be examined, or culprits are
pressed to death, who will not plead either guilty, or not guilty. A bill of
attainder, a member said on that occasion, is an extraordinary thing, and never
used, but upon extraordinary occasions -- Parliament may declare that to be a
crime, which was deemed no crime before it was committed, and surely they may
determine what they will admit as evidence of a crime. Another said, It is
lodged with the legislature to judge of those crimes, which are sheltered from
the law; and he thought never any attainder was brought in upon a juster
occasion than this DEB. COM. III.33.
. It was alleged, that attainders are suspicious ways of proceeding, and
dangerous in corrupt times. They who spoke for the bill, represented the
parliament as possessed of a dictatorial power to take care, ne quid detrimenti
capiat respublica, and to convict dangerous men upon such evidence, as to them
might seem satisfactory, though not the formal evidence, required by law, and
which inferior courts are obliged to follow. If all this be true, there is,
surely, the utmost necessity for an incorrupt, for an unsuspected parliament.
Attainders, it was said by others, were only to be had recourse to, against
those, who were not forthcoming: but Sir John was in the house. The whole was
a party-affair between the whigs and the tories, and the former were desirous
of mortifying the latter. Several lords protested against his attainder,
because bills of attainder against persons in prison, and who are therefore to
be tried by law, are of dangerous consequence to the subjects and constitution;
because the evidence of grand jurymen and petty jurymen, not given before the
peers, was admitted, though they disagreed in their test; because information
in writing was received, which prevents the witness being cross examined;
because Fenwick was cast by one witness only, and him a doubtful one; and
because Fenwick was not considerable enough to be proceeded against in so
extraordinary and irregular a manner, justifiable only in cases of great
danger. Fenwick, however, was beheaded on Tower Hill, denying to the last, all
concern in the assassination plot, though he owned himself a jacobite DEB.
LORDS, I.465.
.

Manley, a member of the cmmons, was sent to the Tower, A. D. 1696, for saying,
It is not the first time there has been reason to repent men's making their
court to the government at the hazard of the people's liberties DEB. COM.
III.32.
.

Buckley, printer, ordered into custody of the sergeant for printing Memorial
of the States General, reflecting on the proceedings of the house, 1712 DEB.
COM. IV.297.
. Resolved, That the great liberty of the press is very prejudicial, etc. That
all printing presses be registered with the names and places of residence of
the owners, and that the authors, printers, and publishers names be put to
every publication. This, however, did not pass into a law; but instead of it, a
heavy duty on newspapers and pamphlets, was afterward proposed Ibid. 298.
.

Complaint made to the house, A. D. 1712, of a preface to some sermons of Dr.
Houdley, bishop of St. Asaph Ibid. 319.
. Ordered to be burnt by the hangman Ibid. 322.
. The worst thing in the preface is, the good bishop's expressing his
apprehensions, and those of all the wise and good of those times, concerning
the danger in which the nation was involved from a jacobite ministry.

When the tory parliament of A. D. 1701, imprisoned the Kentish petitioners,
many thought it to be the greatest outrage upon the people's liberties,
alleging, it was their undoubted right to petition; that it were better to be
under the oppression of one, than of many. What avails (said they) the Habeas
Corpus act. It looked (they said) as if the nation was betrayed, and Englishmen
bought and sold See a larger account of this affair in the sequel.
.

Certain letters of Mr. Chivers, a member, were complained of, A. D. 1699, in
the house of commons, as reflecting on, and misrepresenting several members.
The house was so irritated, that it was carried 119 to 83, that he attend the
house, (though indisposed) and not obeying, it was moved, that he be brought by
the sergeant at arms. This, however, was overruled. But they resolved, That
publishing the names of members, reflecting upon them, and misrepresenting
their proceedings in parliament, is a breach of privilege, and destructive of
the freedam of parliament DEB. COM. III.104.
.

Here follow several instances of punishments and censures inflicted by the
commons on irregular proceedings in elections. Dr. Harris, for preaching about
elections, was called before the house of commons, and on his knees ordered to
confess his fault, and in the quarter sessions, and in his own pulpit before
sermon. Ingrey, undersheriff of Cambridge, for refusing the poll, was
committed to the sergeant at arms, and was ordered to confess his fault there,
and at the quarter sessions. The mayor of Arundel for putting the town to great
charges, not giving due and general warning, and for packing elections, was
sent for by warrant, and ordered to pay the charges. Sir William Wrey, and
others, deputy lieutenants of Cornwall, for assuming to themselves a power to
make whom they pleased members, and defaming certain candidates; sending for
train bands to be at the election, and menacing the court, under pretense of
the king's pleasure, were committed to the Tower, to acknowledge their offense
at the bar, and at the assize in Cornwall Ibid. III.317, 318.
. Yet seizing and searching the papers of members of parliament was resolved to
be breach of privilege, A. D. 1641 Macaul. HIST. ENGL. III.19.
.

Mr. (afterward Sir Richard) Steel, was expelled the house, A. D. 1713, for
reflections on the jacobite ministry in his Englishman and Crisis DEB. COM.
V.17.
. All the wisest and best men in the house defended Steel. But he was
expelled, because he had insinuated (what no body then alive doubted) that the
protestant succession was in danger from the ministry. This prosecution,
however, hurt the ministers greatly, and occasioned a great deal of searching
Ibid.
. But ministers have great power in bringing vengeance on their enemies. And
parliaments have been too busy in humouring the views of ministers. Mazarine
boasted (says cardinal de Retz) that if he had but two lines of any man's
writing, he could cut off his head DEB. LORDS, III.^82.
. But to return to the proceedings against Steel: He owned he wrote what he
was charged with, and with the same cheerfulness as he had abjured the
pretender. Blamed for the Crisis containing several paragraphs tending to
sedition, and reflecting on the queen and government. Not allowed to defend
what he had written paragraph by paragraph, but generally. Nothing could be
done more arbitrary in the court of inquisition. Defends himself with great
address. Foley, instead of answering paragraph by paragraph, Steele's defense,
contented himself with saying it was plain to every body that the writings
complained of were seditious, scandalous, and every thing bad. Walpole defends
him, and shows that there was great reason to be alarmed Ibid.
.

There never was perhaps an instance of so trifling an affair producing such
weighty consequences, as that of Sacheverel, A. D. 1709. One would have
imagined, that twenty silly bigots might have preached twenty capucinades each,
and this great kingdom have remained in the same condition, as if they had
never climbed their tubs. It was the fatal and ill-advised measure of solemnly
impeaching the insignificant cushion-thumper (contrary to the better advice of
the the^ attorney general Air, who was for burning his sermon, and imprisoning
him, and even that would have been doing him too much honor) that produced the
mischief, and set all England in a flame. For the good-natured people always
pity the person, who is punished, however atrocious his guilt.

A wise government will always consider maturely, which of two measures, is
likely to produce the greatest good, and the least harm. But surely this
thought never once entered the heads of the then ministry. For, it was
manifest, on one hand, that Sacheverel's sermon was too mean a performance to
produce, of itself, any effect. And what probable advantage could be expected
from prosecuting, and raising to importance, the author of a production, which
did not deserve the attention of any person whatever, much less of government
Burn. IV.277.
?

Whitehead's poem, Manners, was complained of by lord Delawar DEB. LORDS, VI.16.
, and unanimously voted a libel, etc. A. D. 17^9. The author absconded; but
Do^sley appeared. Moved, that he be taken into custody of black rod. Lord
Carteret pleads for him, in consideration of his surrendering, and because the
author was known. Other lords spoke bitterly against both author and publisher.
The chancellor (Hardwicke) explains the liberty of the press. He says, it meant
originally the liberty of printing, instead of transcribing. Says, there are
severe statutes, unrepealed, against publishing defamatory libels in writing,
before printing was discovered. Lord Talbot answered, that then the right way
was, That any lord who thought himself injured, should prosecute Whitehead,
before a court of justice. Let not, says he, such a charge lie against us, that
we were judges, jury, and parties in the same cause DEB. LORDS, VI.23.
. Dodsley was, however, taken into custody of black rod.

A paper entitled, Constitutional Queries, was sent, A. D. 1751, to most
persons of rank Alm. DEB. COM. IV.218, 219.
. and left upon the tables of most coffee-houses, insinuating designs against
Frederic prince of Wales, and the protestant succession. It was censured by
both houses, as malicious, false, etc. and the king was requested to give
orders for prosecuting the author, etc. But no author was ever found out.

In the hon. Alex. Murray's trial, the same year, (who had been ordered by the
commons to come to the bar of their house to receive upon his knees, his
sentence of imprisonment in Newgate for breach of privilege, etc. Mr. Murray
not thinking his crime worthy of a chance of catching the gaol-distemper, and
losing his life about a matter of privilege, had prudently kept out of the way)
in the debate on this affair, I say, it was observed, that the commons, in such
cases, assumed a privilege, which the king has not, ( viz. of punishing a
subject without legal trial) excepting in the peculiar case of suspending the
Habeas Corpus act, when there is an actual rebellion in the country. There was
a pamphlet published, giving a full account of his case. It was read in the
house of commons, and the usual black epithets of malicious, seditious,
scandalous, etc. heaped upon it. A noble duke, who happened to be present, was
so ashamed of the picture drawn of him in the pamphlet, that he made his escape
out of the house. The commons addressed the king to prosecute the author,
printer, etc. But an independent English jury brought in a verdict, Not guilty
Alm. DEB. COM. V.6.
.

Mr. Wilkes's prosecution does not properly belong to this chapter, having been
carried on by the secretaries of state. Of his repeated expulsion by the house
of commons, inspite of his re-election by a great majority of the freeholders
of Middlesex, see the sequel. I will only observe here, that in the year 1773,
of 352 members, all but 50 were for reversing the determination of the
Middlesex election by a bill to regulate the rights of election WHITEHALL.
EVEN. POST. Apr. 24, 1773.
.

The mention of Mr. Wilkes's expulsion and re-election, calls up that of Mr.
Adams, a member of the assembly of Barbados, who, A. D. 1762, was prosecuted,
fined, and imprisoned for resisting the sheriff in the execution of his duty.
The assembly expelled him. He was re-elected -- re-expelled. His electors
insisted, that they, and not the assembly were the judges of the fitness of
persons to represent them; and there was no law, by which Mr. Adams was
disqualified for a representative merely for his having resisted the sheriff,
though there was for punishing him otherwise, which punishment accordingly he
had suffered. Mr. Adams was then formally disqualified by act of governor,
council, and assembly. He appealed to the king. His disqualification was
reversed, with a declaration, that it was arbitrary, and contrary to the spirit
of the British constitution LAND. MAG. 1769. p. 133.
. But this by the way. To return: In the case of the printers, who published
the debates of the house of commons, A. D. 1771, and were proceeded against by
that house, it did not appear, that they had any legal authority for
apprehending, or committing; for, though they obtained a royal proclamation
against the offenders, they could not, or, however, did not oblige them to
appear before them. On the contrary, the lord mayor and aldermen of London
protected the printers, and obliged the person, who apprehended them, to find
securities to answer for his offense. And the printers continued to publish the
debates. One of the aldermen wrote to the secretary of state an account of his
proceeding. And the accused printer sent the speaker the opinion of council
upon the house's proceeding and the royal proclamation, viz. That both were
illegal, unconstitutional, and void. On that occasion, authorities were brought
from history and law in justification of what was done by the lord mayor and
aldermen in opposition to the house of commons as follows.

Burnet, in his HISTORY of his OWN TIMES, relates, That the commons sent their
sergeant to bring before them many of the abhorrers; which brought their
authority for punishing any others besides their own members, into question,
because they cannot receive an information upon oath, nor proceed against
those, who refuse to appear before them. Many refused to obey their summons; it
being found, that the practice was no older than the days of queen Elizabeth.
Again, the oath of every alderman obliges him to keep up the franchises of the
city; one of which, granted by Edw. III. in parliament is, That ^o summons,
attachment, or execution be made in the liberty of the city, by any king's
officers [consequently, I suppose, much less by the officers of the lower house
of parliament] but only by ministers [officers] of the city.' The charter of
Edw. IV. gives to the corporation of London, the whole and exclusive execution
of all warrants, with the return of the same, by such their minister, or
deputy, whom they shall thereunto use. And by 2 Will. and Mary the corporation
of London is confirmed in all its privileges and franchises; of which it is
not, on any pretense whatever, to be deprived, etc. LAND. MAG. March, 1771, p.
159.
.

Why does not the house of commons let the people know their privileges? Why
are not those privileges established by law? When they think themselves
offended, why do they not prosecute the offender in a legal and constitutional
way, which would stop all reflection upon them? The king's causes are tried in
the courts of justice by judge and jury, who are indifferent persons. Why is
any individual, or any assembly of men whatever to be judge, jury, and
executioners in their own cause?

The lord mayor and alderman Oliver were afterward committed to the Tower by
the house of commons, who refused to hear their defense by council. Alderman
Wilkes was ordered to attend the house, but he sent the speaker a direct
refusal, because he was not summoned as a member, to answer in his place.

This whole proceeding of the house of commons, was condemned by many both
within and without doors. And it may be affirmed, that the people of England
will never, while a spark of the fire of liberty remains, be reconciled to an
assumed power in representatives to imprison their constituents without trial
by jury.

It has been said, How are the commons to obtain the informations necessary for
making laws, or enquiring into the conduct of ministers, if they cannot oblige
persons to attend? The answer is, They certainly cannot, and therefore ought to
have a power of compelling attendance as the courts have. But this has nothing
to do with their assuming a power of imprisoning those who do attend, or would
if their attendance was required for any other purpose than that of punishing
them. In fact, no inconvenience could arise, but, on the contrary, great
advantage, from every court's giving up what the king must give up, viz. The
claim of judging and punishing pretended contempts, or other offenses, against
themselves. It is a whimsical part of our political economy, that, if any
person, or body of the subjects offends the house of commons, they take the
matter into their own hands, and punish with fine and imprisonment. But if a
minister has offended against the people, the commons can only impeach him
before the upper house. The commons themselves punish offenses against
themselves; which one would rather suppose they would refer to others; and they
refer to others the punishment of offenders against the people, whose guardians
they are, which one would rather suppose they would keep in their own hands.
The truth is, the proper function of the house of commons is twofold, viz.
Inquisitorial, and legislative; but they are ever running into the executive,
which is no part of their office.

It was argued, in defense of the lord mayor, on the same occasion, That the
courts of law have power to enquire into the acts of the highest authority. If
the king himself exercises any act of power not conformable to law, the courts
will remedy it. Lord chief justice Holt, on another occasion of the same kind,
insisted, That if what the house of commons called a contempt, was not really
such, the person committed must be discharged by the court of king's bench or
common pleas; and in this opinion he was supported by the lords. The same
celebrated judge held, that the vote of the house of commons forbidding any one
to seek a legal remedy against their orders, was illegal, and he accordingly
discharged the persons committed for contempt of that order See LONDON MAG.
April, 1771.
.

Hakewel MOD. TENEND. PARL. 88.
brings many instances of persons punished for serving members with subpoenas,
writs, etc. while the house was sitting. Prosecutions against members were
commonly stopped by letters issued from the house. Members were by privilege
exempted from serving as jurymen. He brings also a multitude of instances of
members servants, etc. being set at liberty from arrests Ibid. 97.
. A. D. 1640, the time of privilege was 16 days exclusive before parliament,
and 15 days inclusive after Ibid. 109.
.

Privilege of parliament extended not only to the persons of members, but to
their cattle and other goods Hales's POWER OF PARL. 28.
.

Mr. Arthur Hall, A. D. 1580, was committed to custody of the sergeant, for
publishing conferences of the house; and afterward to the Tower for 6 months,
expelled the house, and fined 500 l. Hakewel, MOD. TENEND. PARL. 72.
He refused to retract, and was for ever disabled to sit in parliament.

I am afraid of tiring the reader by enumerating instances of such
parliamentary prosecutions, as may be said to be frivolous, or arbitrary. A
well constituted and upright parliament will have but little occasion to
prosecute for disrespectful speeches; for no body will speak disrespectfully of
an assembly of men, who show themselves solely and sincerely attached to the
public good. Or if any persons should be so rash and malignant, the general
hatred o^ contempt, which they will certainly draw down upon their own heads,
will supersede all use of prosecution by the offended persons. Or if
prosecutions be necessary, ^et prosecution be commenced (as when offense or
injury are committed against the king) in the courts of law; and let the
accused be tried according to the known laws of his country, and be acquitted
or condemned by the verdict of a jury. All other modes of trial are violations
of the constitution.

The collection made by Petyt, in his MISCEL. PARL. of parliamentary
prosecutions on account of disrespectful speeches, makes our ancestors appear
mean-spirited. John such-a-one wished that the devil would take the parliament.
Thomas-such another said, the parliament was carrying on works of darkness. A
third said, he was not afraid of the pillory. What then? Was it not infinitely
beneath the magnanimity of a supreme legislature to take notice of such
trifles? This recals to my memory an old presentment by an inquest; We sayen,
that John Stevens is a man, we cannot tell what to make of him; and he has
books, we do not understand them.

CHAP. VI. Of excluding the People from the house of Commons, and punishing
those who publish the Speeches made there.
ANOTHER consequence of the inadequate state of parliamentary representation,
and of too long parliaments, is a dangerous power assumed by the commons, of
clearing their house, and excluding their constituents from the satisfaction of
knowing how their deputies behave themselves, and whether they consult the
public interest, or play the game into the hands of the ministry. Upon the same
principle they found the practice of punishing all persons, who publish any
speeches made in their house.

As to the house of lords, supposing it once granted, that it is wise to allow
any set of men a power of consulting for themselves, without regard to the
public, and putting a negative upon the most salutary national proposals, if
thought by them likely to entrench upon their particular privileges (a point,
the proof of which I should be sorry to have imposed on me) supposing, I say, a
house of lords upon the foot of the British, it follows, that they have a right
to exclude all, but peers, from their deleberations; because they are doing
their own business, and not the public; they are acting for themselves, and are
principals, and not deputies.

But surely the faithful representatives of the people, cannot dread the
people's knowledge of their proceedings in the house. An aristocracy of
persons, whose interest may be different from that of the people, a court of
inquisition, or a Venetian council of Ten, might be expected to shut themselves
from the sight of the people, but not a house of representatives assembled, by
the people's order, to do the people's business. How are the people to know
which of their delegates are faithful, and ought to be trusted again, or which
otherwise, if they are to be excluded the house?

Even in the house of peers, this custom has been blamed.

It is not, my lords, said the earl of Chesterfield on this subject, A. D.
1740, by excluding all sorts of strangers that you are to preserve the ancient
dignity of this assembly: it is by excluding all manner of quibbling,
impertinence, deceit, weakness, and corruption. These, I hope, are strangers
here: I hope your lordships will take care never to admit any one of them
within these walls; but by excluding other strangers, when you have nothing of
a secret nature under consideration you will only raise a jealousy of the
dignity of your proceedings; and if this jealousy should become general,
without doors, you will in vain seek for respect among the people DEB. LORDS,
VII.590.
.

There were many strangers in the gallery of the house of peers, on occasion of
the enquiry into lord Peterborough's conduct in Spain, A. D. 1711. A motion was
made to clear the gallery. But the duke of Buckingham opposed it, and they were
suffered to stay Ibid. II.283.
.

The commons, A. D. 1714, having cleared their house of all strangers, not
excepting peers, it was moved in the house of peers, that the house be cleared
of all strangers, not excepting members of the house of commons. The duke of
Argyle opposed the shutting of the house of peers, and said, it was for the
honor of that august assembly, to show that they were better bred than the
commons Tind. CONTIN. I.345.
.

Hakewel says Hakewel. MOD. TENEND. PARL. 86.
, the commons finding persons in their house who had no right to be there, have
obliged them to take an oath, that they would keep secret what they had heard.

Of right the door of the parliament ought not to be shut, but to be kept by
porters, or king's sergeants at arms, to prevent tumults at the door, by which
the parliament might be hindered Ibid. p. 23.
.

It was common in former times for the members themselves to publish their
speeches made in the house. Accordingly there are extant to this day, many of
them in pamphlets of those times, and in Rushworth's, Nals^n's, and other
collections. In our times it is punishable to publish any of their doings,
though they do not themselves publish them, and the very gallery is cleared,
that we may not know which of our deputies is faithful to us, nor which betrays
us.

The order of the house of commons against printing the speeches was made, A.
D. 1641 Alm. DEB. COM. IX.274.
, in times which our courtly men will hardly allow to be of good authority. The
order itself is not justifiable upon any principles of liberty, or of
representation, unless the debates were regularly published by the members. For
published they ought undoubtedly to be; if delegates ought to be responsible to
their constituents. My lord mayor, therefore, and Mr. alderman Oliver were
severely dealt with in being sent to the Tower, A. D. 1771, for defending the
printers in doing only what ought to have been done by the members.

Sir Edward Dering's speeches were published by himself, A. D. 1641.

Resolved, That they are against the privilege of the house, and shall be burnt
by the hangman in Westminster, Cheapside, and Smithfield; himself disabled
during the parliament, and to be imprisoned in the Tower, during the pleasure
of the house. He was released, however, in a few days a.

A. D. 1720, the proprietors of the redeemable funds being discontented,
petitioned to be heard by council against a bill then before the house. They
went in considerable numbers to the lobby, to wait the event. The justices were
ordered to clear the passages. They read the riot-act. On which occasion, some
of the petitioners said, It seemed to them a strange proceeding, to treat a set
of peaceable subjects, people of property, who attended the house to complain
of grievances, as a riotous mob; and that the commons first picked their
pockets, and then sent them to jail for complaining.

Whatever has been advanced in support of printing the Votes and Journals, is
equally strong against clearing the house. The house of commons is the people's
house, where the people's deputies meet to do the people's business. For the
people's deputies, therefore, to shut the people out of their own house, is a
rebellion of the servants against their masters. That the members of parliament
are, according to the constitution, servants, is manifest from the notorious
fact of their constantly receiving wages for many centuries together, which
members, accordingly, forfeited by absence, neglect, etc. Who sent us hither?
(says Sir F. Winnington, in the debate upon this subject, A. D. 1681.) The
privy council is constituted by the king; but the house of commons by the
choice of the people. I think it not natural, nor rational, that the people who
sent us hither, should not be informed of our actions. DEB. COM. II.105.
Suppose the directors of the East India company were to shut out the
proprietors from their house, and then dispose of their property at their
pleasure, defying all responsibility, how would this be taken by the
proprietors? The excluding the people from the house of commons, and punishing
the publishers of their speeches, is precisely the same incroachment on the
people's rights; only so much the more atrocious in consideration of there
being no regular appeal from parliament, whereas there is from the directors of
a trading company.

Sir John Hartop moved, A. D. 1681, that the votes might continue to be printed
Ibid. 104.
. A motion for printing the votes, A. D. 1688, passed in the negative Ibid. 201.
. The votes of the commons were ordered to be printed, A. D. 1690 Ibid. 375.
. The gallery and speaker's chamber were cleared of strangers, on occasion of
the prosecution of Mr. (afterward Sir Richard Steel, A. D. 1713 Ibid. V.67.
. Resolutions were made, A. D. 1742, to print the journals of the house of
commons, which begin with Edw. VI. Ibid. XIII.264.
, to the number of 30 volumes, 1000 copies; which is done accordingly; I know
not whether begun at that time, or afterward. For A.D. 1752, the house came to
a resolution to print their Journals, which had hitherto been in manuscript.
Alm. DEB. COM. V.3^.


There was a long debate about printing the proceedings and debates of the
house, A. D. 1738, in which it was observed, that it is a hardship for members
to have their sentiments misrepresented and falsified in Newspapers and
Magazines, etc. But Mr. Pulteny said, Parliaments, when they do any thing
amiss, will be talked of with the same freedom as any other set of men
whatever. This parliament, I hope, will never deserve it; but, if it did, I
should be very sorry, that any resolutions were entered into, in order to
prevent its being represented in the present, or the next age, in its proper
colors. Whatever the other house may do, I hope, we shall never stretch our
privilege so far, as to cramp the freedom of writing on public affairs DEB.
COM. X.278 -- 287.
.

There was a pamphlet at this time ascribed to Walpole, which contained a
history of queen Anne's tory parliament. This publication Walpole defended,
because that parliament deserved to be disgraced. But who shall decide which
parliament deserves to be disgraced, and which to be honored. The sure way, in
all events, is, to admit as many strangers as the galleries will conveniently
hold; that the members order genuine copies of their speechs to be published;
of which authenticity the hearers in the galleries will be able to judge; and
then no spurious, or unauthenticated publications of speeches will be received
by the people; because they will certainly choose to read those whose
authenticity is established by a cloud of witnesses.

CHAP. VII. Of Absentees from the House, and Members neglecting Parliamentary
Business.
ANOTHER evil arising from the miserably inadequate state of representation and
consequent contempt, which members acquire for their constituents, is, their
taking the liberty of absenting themselves for frivolous or no reasons, and of
attending very carelessly to the business of the nation, when they come to the
house. Did a gentleman recollect, that at his election he received an aweful
charge from an august meeting of 5000 of his countrymen, and gave a solemn
promise sealed with the religion of an oath to be diligent and faithful in
discharging the momentous trust then committed to him, and did he know, that
those who employed him, would censure him publicly, if they found, that he did
any body's business in parliament but theirs; he would tremble at the thought
of trifling with so sacred a function. But when a youth just come from Oxford,
remembers, that he was elected (as it is called) by a few drunken idiots in a
paltry borough, and carried round the town in an old oaken chair, and that he
has his place as he has his estate, or that he gave every voter five guineas;
it is no wonder, that he considers the whole as a very paltry farce, which he
may attend to, or neglect, as he pleases.

It is supposed that members of parliament have often done the business of a
corrupt court by seasonably playing truant. Those gentlemen show themselves not
abandoned to all sense of shame. When the public has been betrayed by a
villainous vote for an augmentation of the army, or an extension of the excise
laws, they did not vote worng, they cry; they were not there. But why were they
not there, to vote right, and endeavor to make others vote right? Why were
they not upon duty, taking care of their country? Ah! if a man loves his young
and beautiful wife, and regards his honor, he will not leave her in the hands
of a known rake; or if he loves his money, he will not leave his strong box
open to a thievish servant See CATO'S LET. No. 99.
. No more will a gentleman, who loves his country, leave her in the hands of
unknown persons, who may betray her. Do gentlemen consisider of what
consequence a few votes may be?

The oath in favor of passive obedience and non-resistence was rejected by
only three votes. The bill, A. D. 1692, for totally disqualifying placemen for
sitting in the house of commons (the best bill, surely, as to its object, that
ever was brought into the house) was rejected by only two votes. The famous
amendment by the lords to the bill of Ian. 27. 1702, by which amendment it was
made high treason to attempt to set aside the protestant succession in the
house of Hanover in case of queen Anne's leaving no posterity, was carried by
only one vote, 118 to 117 DEB. COM. V. Append. 110.
. I have been told, that a member of that parliament, who was infirm and gouty,
but proved faithful to his country in attending at the hazard of his life,
often mentioned his own proceeding on that occasion with pleasure, and
particularly on his deathbed.

The ruinous act in favor of the French trade, A. D. 1713, was thrown out by
only nine votes, viz. 194* against 185 Ibid. V.40.
. Only 9 true Englishmen in the house!

In the end of queen Anne's reign, a place bill was lost in the house of peers
for want of one vote, while one of the lords, who had too proxies in his
pocket, was buying a penknife.

The act A. D. 1728. by which a fine of 500 l. is enacted for asking, or
receiving, by himself, or another, money, or other reward, by way of gift,
loan, or device, etc. for voting, or declining to vote at elections of members
of parliament, was carried by only two votes, viz. 91 to 89.

The motion A. D. 1741, for enquiring into the conduct of affairs in Walpole's
20 years reign, was carried in the negative by two votes, 244 to 242.

How often, while the merits of a contested election have been trying within
these walls, have the benches been almost empty? But the moment the question
approached, how have we seen the members eagarly crowd to their seats, and then
confidently pronounce upon a subject, on which they had not heard a syllable,
but in private from the parties Speech of a member, LO^D. MAG. May, 1770, p.
180.
. To such a mockery have been reduced the most important of all earthly things,
I mean parliaments. After turning them in this manner, to a farce, after laying
aside all that was useful to the people in them, what step are we most likely
to take next, but to lay parliaments themselves aside?

Our ancestors were sensible of the evil of absenting, and therefore they made
laws for punishing delinquent members by mulct PARL. HIST. I.396.
. So among the Romans, absentees from the senate, without sufficient cause
shown, were fineable, and obliged to give security for payment Cic. DE LEGIB.
III. Live. III.38.
. By 7 Edw. I. stat. 1. To all parliaments and treatises [treaties, or meetings
for public business] every man shall come without force of arms STAT, AT LARGE,
I.82.
. See the 5th stat. Rich. II. cap. 4. That every one, to whom it appertains,
shall, upon summons, come to the parliament Ibid. 333.
. By 7 Hen. VIII. cap. 16. No knights of shires, nor burgesses shall depart
before the end of parliament Ibid. 698.
. [N. B. We should say, before the end of the session. But in those times every
session was a parliament.] The penalty was loss of wages. A call of the house,
A D. 1641, with severe penalties for absentees. Orders and resolutions for
putting the kingdom in a state of defense PARL. HIST. IX.298.
. A call of both houses, A. D. 1647, 240 commoners were absent Ibid. XVI.317.
. A fine of 20 l. set on those whose excuse was not allowed by the house.
Resolved, A. D. 1709, that such members as absent themselves without leave, be
reputed desert^rs of their trust, and neglectors of the duty they owe to the
house and to their country DEB. COM. IV.139.
.

Thus we see, inadequate representation, and long parliaments produce in our
members of parliament a contempt for the people; neglect of instructions, and
refusal of responsibility; put families upon setting up for legislators from
generation to generation, so that ten persons in one family may be members at
the same time, and it has been found, that individuals have sat 30, 40, and 50
years in the house. Inadequate representation is one cause, why the members
cannot be supposed even to know the sense of the people, as they are not chosen
by the generality of the people; but by a handful. Inadequate representation
deprives the greatest part of the people, both in number and property, of their
weight in legislation, and gives it up, as a monopoly, into the hands of a few.
It is the original cause of the commons assuming exorbitant privileges to the
disadvantage of the people; of their prosecuting and imprisoning their
constituents; of concealing from the people, their creators, the transactions
of their house; of their absenting themselves and neglecting the business of
the nation, etc.

BOOK V. Of Parliamentary Corruption.
CHAP. I. Of the Origin, Funds, and Materials of Corruption.
TWO weaknesses in human nature have produced bribery, corruption, and many
other wicked arts; I mean, the love of power, and the love of money. In ancient
times men in superior stations were drawn into many of their bad practices by
the former. The latter is our disease, and a lousy disease (I ask the reader's
pardon) it is. For if there be a vice incompatible with any degree of
magnanimity, greediness of money is that vice.

It is difficult to exclude corruption. Where there is any thing worth striving
about, such creatures as men commonly are, will use indirect means for
attaining it.

Undue influence in elections for offices prevailed at Rome so early as the
458th year from the building of the city ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.44, 114.
. Which occasioned the making a law to prohibit canvassing for votes.

But the difficulty of excluding corruption is no reason for giving over all
endeavors to abolish it; any more than the difficulty of living a virtuous
life amidst the various temptations, to which our frail nature is exposed, is a
reason for our giving over all endeavors to regulate our conduct by the strict
laws of morality. On the contrary, we must resolve to live a life of virtue,
however difficult it may be, or we are undone as individuals; and we must root
corruption out of the state, or we are undone as a nation.

Aristotle POLIT. V.8.
observes, That men in low circumstances d^d not, in his time, aspire after
places of power and trust, because they were unprofitable, and they could not
afford to neglect their own private affairs, to attend on the public; and that
men of fortune only could properly fi^l those employments, because they were
under no temptation to plunder their country. In our times, who have no idea of
serving the public for naught, we see all men, rich and indigent, striving who
shall obtain the greatest share of the public offices, because they are all
lucrative, and those whose fortunes are the largest, find them still too small
for their extravagance, which produces the continual scramb^e we see.

The Polish noblesse consider their votes, for king, in the same manner as the
inhabitants of our rotten boroughs do theirs for members of parliament, that
(...), as part of their fortune. But the wickedness of our electioneering is
tenfold beyond that of the Poles. For it is no great matter who is king of
Poland; because he has no power to do mischief; whereas our parliament has a
power so transcendent, says judge Blackstone, that it is impossible to fix its
limits. Therefore, to vote for a candidate, who gives a bribe, is selling our
country to a man, who has proved himself a knave, and giving him power to do
infinite mischief, for which he is not responsible or punishable.

Bad ministers, in our times, thrust themselves into power chiefly with a
design o^ filling their pockets, and advancing their families and friends. And
it is much to be lamented, that there is such ample opportunity for them to
gratify their exorbitant desires. It is universally allowed, that a British
ministry has the disposal of several millions annually of the public money. And
the reader may judge what opportunity there must be for them to chip off
fragments and corners from such prodigious masses, without the public's being
ever acquainted with facts in so particular a manner as to convict a minister,
or his tools, of the plunder they have committed.

As parliament is the natural check upon the wicked measures of kings and
courts, parliaments must be managed to obtain their connivance at the
proceedings of kings and courts. Therefore in former times the court not being
possessed of the necessary funds, wheedled, or bullied them; now they make use
of (what they think the surer means, viz.) bribing and buying them. And our
ministers, since the revolulution, have carried this liberal art so far, as to
study no other system of politics, or government, than finding out proper men
for their purpose, and filling the house of commons with them; and the whole
difference between one ministry and another, is that one junto has a better
knack at managing parliaments than another.

The chief materials, by which a minister keeps up an ascendency in parliament,
are, 1. The prodigious sums of public money, of which he has the disposal. 2.
The innumerable places in the customs, excise, salt-duty, etc. and in the navy,
army and church, the greatest part of which are at the disposal of the minister.

Latter times have thrown into the ministerial scale a weight unknown to former
ages; I mean the national debt. The anixety of the public creditors, the
proprietors of the funds, about public credit, is a powerful cause of their
showing a reluctance against all proposals for salutary alterations, or
restorations. But their reasonings on this subject are not sounder than it
would be for the inhabitant of a crazy building to oppose all repairs, and to
insist, that the best way for preventing his mansion from coming in ruins upon
his head, is to let it fall. Of which more fully hereafter.

The revenue of the civil list, which is nominally 800,000 l. per annum, but,
by means of a demand from time to time of half a million to pay off its
pretended deficiencies or debts, is really near a million (in the last reign it
often exceeded a million) must throw a prodigious power into the hands of those
who have the disposal of it.

A million per annum would maintain 200 dukes, at 5000 l. a year each, or 250
earls at 4000 a year each, or 1000 gentlemen at 1000 l. a year each. It would
support arts, manufactures, and commerce to the inconceivable advantage of the
public, etc.

But the civil list revenue is not reckoned above one third part of what a
minister has in his disposal. It is not therefore to be wondered, that a
minister has great influence in parliament. If one considers into how many
purses, of 100 guineas each, the prodigious sum of three millions may be
divided, at first glance one would conclude, that a minister could give such a
purse to every man upon the island.

The royal prerogative has been greatly curtailed since 3 Car. I. the date of
the petition of right. Star Chamber, and high commission court abolished, with
martial law, and the prince's power of levying taxes without parliament; disuse
of the forest laws; abolition of military tenures, purveyance, and preemption;
the establishment of the habeas corpus act; the act for frequent parliaments;
the assertion of the liberties of the people by the bill of rights, and act of
settlement; the exclusion of certain dependents on the crown from seats in
parliament; the independency of the judges; the restraining of the king's
pardon from being pleaded to parliamentary impeachments; the dependency of the
crown on parliament, by its being stripped of its ancient properties, etc. --
these, and other entrenchments on the regal power and prerogative would seem
sufficient to clip the wings of kings and ministers, and to secure the state
against the innumerable evils of corruption. But what avail these seeming
enlargements of our liberties, if we consider (as even judge Blackstone COM.
I.334.
himself, no unreasonable complainer, observes) that though the appearance of
court-power is taken away, the reality remains, and is perhaps greater than
under Iam. I. only it shows itself now in the milder and less startling shape
of influence, instead of that odious and formidable one, of prerogative; -- an
influence, however, to considerate minds not the less dreaded on account of its
apparent gentleness. Let it be considered, that our monarch's revenues being
settled for life, a rapacious and corrupt court (for what do men generally
propose by going into court, but filling their pockets? has the disposing of
the greatest part of a million a year, civil list revenue. Let it be
considered, what a multitude of officers created by, and removeable at the
pleasure of the court, are employed in raising 10 millions a year in taxes,
customs, excises; commissioners, and innumerable officers in every port of the
kingdom, nay at every creek into which a smuggling boat can be thrust;
commissioners of excise, and their numerous subalterns, in every inland
district; postmasters, and their servants in every town, and upon every public
road; commissioners of stamps, and distributors; officers of the salt-duty;
surveyors of houses and windows; receivers of land tax; managers of lotteries;
commissioners of hackney-coaches; besides frequent accidental opportunities of
conferring favors, as by preference in loans, subscriptions, tickets,
remittance of public money, etc. which attaches those most, whose attachment is
the most desirable to the court, I mean, the opulent, and leading part of the
people; to which add the prodigious influence the court gains by having the
power of officering an army of above forty thousand men; to say nothing of the
formidable force of such a body of disciplined men against a flock of sheep, I
mean the helpless people. This dreadful army, the court-sycophants pretend is
kept up only from year to year: but it is universally looked upon as on a
footing equally certain with the army in France. Accordingly gentlemen bring up
their sons as regularly to the army, as to the church. These forty thousand men
are paid by the court, raised by the court, officered by the court, commanded
by the court. Add to all this, that the court must have innumerable ways of
misapplying the public money to the purposes of gaining undue influence, which
even the most faithful and upright parliament could not detect. And what then
must be the case, if we suppose parliament itself (the only constitutional
check on a corrupt court) a sharer in the plunder of the people, and therefore;
interested to conceal, or connive at the ravages made by a profligate court.

As we have annually increased our funds and our taxes, we have annually
increased the power of the crown, and these funds and taxes being established
and laid for perpetuity, or for terms equivalent to perpetuity in the sense
here intended, this increase of power must not only continue, but still
increase, as long as this system of economy subsists. How this increase of
power arises from the increase of funds and taxes, and the influence of the
crown grows in proportion to the burden on the people, heavier; has been
explained so much in the debates on a late detestable occasion [ Walpole's
excise scheme] that the less needs to be said on the subject here. If we
consider in the increase of taxes, first, the increase of officers, by which a
vast number of new dependants on the crown are erected in every part of the
kingdom, (dependants as numerous, and certainly more prevalent, than all the
tenants and wards of the crown were anciently) and, secondly, the power given
to the treasury and other inferior officers, on account of these taxes, which
are at least as great and as grievous in this free government of ours, as any
that are exercised in the most arbitrary government on the same occasions; if
we consider this alone, we shall find reason sufficient to conclude that,
although the power of prerogative was more open and more noisy in its
operations, yet the power thus acquired is more real and may prove more
dangerous, for this very reason, because it is more covered and more silent.
That men began to see, very soon after the revolution, the danger arising from
hence to our constitution, as I said above, is most certain. No less than seven
acts were made in king William's reign to prevent undue influence on elections;
and one of the acts, as I remember, for I have it not before me, is grounded on
this fact, that the officers of the excise had frequently, by threats and
promises, prevailed on electors, and absolutely debarred them of the freedom of
voting. What has been done, or attempted, since that time, in the same views,
and what has been done, or attempted, both in the reign of king Will. and
since, to prevent an undue influence on the elected, as well as on the
electors, I need not recapitulate. They are matters of fresh date, and enough
known. Upon the whole, this change in the state and property of the public
revenue has made a change in our constitution not yet, perhaps, attended to
sufficiently; but such an one, however, as deserves our utmost attention, since
it gives a power unknown in former times to one of the three estates, and since
public liberty is not guarded against the dangers that may arise from this
power, as it was, and now is more than ever, against the dangers which arise
from the powers formerly possessed or claimed by the crown DISSERT. ON PA^^IES,
223.
.

That the business of most kingdoms has been ill managed, proceeds from this;
it imports the lower rank of men only, and the people (whose cries seldom reach
the prince, till it is too late, and till all is past remedy) that matters
should be frugally ordered, because taxes must arise from their swe^t and
labor. But the great ones, who heretofore have had the prince's ear and
favor, or who hoped to have him in their possession, were swayed by another
sort of interest; they like profusion, as having had a prospect to be gainers
by it, they can easily set their account even with the state; a small charge
upon their land is mo^e than balanced by a great place, or a large pension
Daven. II.262.
.

See the lord keeper North's account of abuses in the conduct and disposal of
the public money in the time of king Chapter II Dalrymp. MEM. II.84.
. Those who, in our times, are the conductors of the same kind of dirty work,
may compare the modern ingenious ways and means with those of their worthy
predecessors.

Among other pretended want of money in the treasury, in order to have a
pretense for giving an exorbitant price for necessaries. Lending the crown at 8
per Cent. money which was raised at 5 and 6. Paying with the public money,
pretending it to be private, and taking interest. Depreciating the public debts
and funds, buying them of the holders at half their worth, and afterward by
interest getting them paid in full. Pretending to give up all power in
recommending to places for a consideration, and then insisting on recommending
still, and so getting both ways. Rolling over losses upon the crown, or public,
while the gain was to sink into private pockets. A father stopping a large sum
in his own hand, which was to have been paid the public creditors. Before he
can be brought to account, he dies. The money sinks into the pocket of his
heir. He obtains a pardon of all his father's debts. Gross frauds in office
found out. Then new offices and salaries set up as checks. The new prove as
great knaves as the old, and form a scheme of collusion and mutual
understanding. But the public pays for all, and the power of the court is
strengthened. An old placeman begs leave to sell. Pockets the money, and by and
by, through interest, gets a new place gratis. Extravagant men squander their
own money in their public employments of ambassadors, governors, etc. and
charge the public with more than they have really spent, while what they really
spent was 10 times more than necessary. The business of old offices transferred
to new: but the profits of the old still kept up, though become sinecures. An
old servant of the public retires upon a pension. He who succeeds him, by
interest, gets it continued to him. Another gets an addition to his salary, and
then sells his place for a great deal more than it cost him, and so an
additional load is laid on the public: for the addition must be continued,
because the place was bought. An annual sum is granted by the public for a
public use, as keeping up a harbor, or the like. A private man, by interest,
gets a grant of the jobb; the public concern is neglected, and the public
pocket picked. Crown lands perpetually begged and given away to strengthen the
court interest. The crown constantly kept in debt, and parliament solicited to
pay those debts occasioned merely by the voracity of the court. Commanders of
fleets order a superfluous quantity of stores. By collusion between them and
the store-masters, this superfluous quantity is sold again to the king, and the
money sunk in their pockets. Sometimes the store-masters gave receipts fore
more than was received into the king's stores, and the money was divided among
the plunderers. The king's works done by the day, whereas it would have been
cheaper by the great. Money pretended to be coined gratis. Lists of large sums
newly coined produced. But the contrivance was to make the pieces unequal, and
then the too heavy pieces were carried back to the mint, and the profit sunk in
private pockets, etc.

Secret service is a huge cloak thrown over an immense scene of corruption; and
under this cloak we must not peep. Our court-men tell us, there must be large
sums expended in this way, and those, sums cannot be accounted for; because the
services done for them must never be known. But we find, that the commons, A. D
1708, addressed queen Anne for accounts of pensions paid for secret service to
members of parliament, or to any persons in trust for them; and that the queen
ordered said account to be laid before the house DEB. COM. IV.119.
.

Contracts are a great fund of ministerial influence. It is well known, that
our ministry do not accept the most reasonable offer; but the offer which is
made by those, who have the greatest parliamentary interest; and that in war
time, every man, who furnishes for the government, is enriched; in France the
contrary; which shows, that we manage our public money much worse than the
French ministry do theirs. In the late war it is notorious, that several of our
purveyors and commissaries got estates sufficient to set them up for earls and
dukes. But as Burnet HIST. OWN TIMES, III.279.
says, the regard, that is shown to members of parliament among us, causes that
few abuses can be inquired into, or discovered.

As to lotteries if a minister has it in his power to give the subscription of
4 or 500 lottery tickets every year to single members, he has an annual means
of bribing the house without danger of detection DEB. COM. IX.282.
. It was alleged in the house of commons by Mr. Seymour, that in the lottery
of 1769, 20,000 tickets had been disposed of to members of parliament, which
sold for near 2 l. premium each DEB. COM. IX.292.
. This was a scramble of 40,000 l among the members at one dash. We need not
wonder, that lotteries are a favorite species of ways and means. Mr. Seymour,
A. D. 1771, moved, that the names of the subscribers to the then present
lottery should be laid before the house.

In a committee on the lottery bill, Mr Cornwall moved for leave to bring in a
bill to prevent any member's having more than 20 tickets, in his own name; and
that those, who had subscribed for more, should refund into the exchequer the
sums so gained by them Ibid. 299.
. He observed, that 200 annual tickets put 400 l. a year into the pocket of a
member, which is better than 800 l. a year by a place; because it did not
expose him to the expense of being re-elected, nor to expense, or duty,
attending the place [for some places are not sinecures].

CHAP. II. Of Corruption in Elections.
OUR courtly gentlemen labor to persuade us, that parliamentary corruption has
never been that formidable evil our patriots have represented it. Facts are
stubborn. They will speak; and they will not always speak as our sleek
courtiers would wish them. If they will speak, let them speak. Magna veritas,
et praevalebit.

Ministerial artifice, for corrupting parliaments, has been applied in too
ways, 1 To overruling elections, and 2. To byassing the votes of members in
the house.

To show the good people of Britain how their great and weighty concerns are
managed, I will give a brief acco^nt of some remarkable controverted elections,
and facts relating to that subject, which have occurred to me in the course of
my reading, with reflections.

The duty of a member of parliament (says the brave Lucas of Ireland) is
infinitely the most important that can devolve upon a subject LAND. MAG. 1767,
p. 565.
. Mr. Lock On GOV. p. 2. 222.
ranks it among those breaches of trust in the executive magistrate, which
amount to a dissolution of government, if he employs the force, treasure, and
offices of the society to corrupt the representatives, or openly to pre-engage
the electors, and prescribe what manner of persons shall be chosen. To regulate
candidates and electors, and new model the ways of election, what is it, but to
cut up the government by the roots, and poison the very fountain of public
security.

'Some call the attendance in parliament a burden, says Sir Thomas Littleton
DEB. COM. III.381.
. If it be a burden, it is such a burden as some men spend a great part of
their estates for, as if it was a privilege.

In modern times, every body is rushing into the house of commons. In former
days, it was a privilege to be exempted from the burden of being elected, or
contributing to the wages of members See Elsy^^ge. 79.
, Does not this fact alone demonstrate, that those who strive to get into the
house, intend the filling of their pockets merely? It was as much, and more, an
honor to be in parliament in former times, than in ours; but it was not so
lucrative. Does any man buy without a view of selling? And how are the buyers
of seats in parliament to re-imburse themselves; but out of the plunder of a
wretched and almost bankrupt nation? D -- n you and your instructions too,
(said a worthy member in answer to his constituents recommending to his
attention the public interest) I have bought you, and I will sell you by G --.

Candidates for seats in the house of commons pretend that they lay out their
thousands in electioneering, in order to obtain -- not a place or a pension --
but honor, and an opportunity of serving their country. But do they seriously
expect any man to believe this, who sees them trampling upon honor and
honesty, bribing, gambling, rooking? Is that honor worthy of the name, which
is got by the most dishonorable means? Is it serving our count^y to debauch
our country? When those men get into the assembly of legislators, what do they
for their country? What grievances have been redressed by the innumerable
multitude of members of parliament, who have, since the revolution, obtained
seats in the house by unwarrantable means? What greater grievance can be
imagined than the continuance of this ruinous practice? I say nothing of
damnation, as a consequence of debauching a whole people, and promoting the
inter^st of the enemy of mankind in the world; though I might say, that our
bribing candidates ought, upon every prudential principle, to be absolutely
certain that no such consequence can follow; and that either there is no future
state, or that men are not accountable for their actions, and that their moral
characters are (as Epicurus and Lucretius teach) entirely indifferent to the
Supreme Governor of the universe. But of this more hereafter.

James I. at his accession proposed, that undue elections and returns should be
punished by fine. For gross and wilful neglect, the place to forfeit its
liberties to the crown; and every person sitting contrary to law, to be fined
and imprisoned PARL. HIST. V.8.
. He directs the electors what sort of members to choose, and threatens them
with loss of their privileges in case of disobedience. Never done before ACT.
REG. IV.210.
. He advises the electo^s of the counties for the new parliament, A. D. 1620,
to choose only such gentlemen as are guides and lights of their own countries;
men, who led honest and exemplary lives; no b^^krupts, or discontented persons,
who want to fish in troubled waters. The bad effect of choosing unfit persons,
he says, is visible, as bankrupt and needy men will desire long parliaments for
their own protection PARL. HIST. V.310.
.

In the directions to the electors of the times of Charles I. there are some
very good advices, and useful for all times, as to choose men of parts, courage,
and expression, professors of religion, exact in all duties, holy toward God,
and just toward all men, free from covetousness, oppression, and partiality*
not dependent: for such cannot be theirs ^arther than another will permit. To
choose such as have estates in their counties, not such as are to get estates by
their country's ruin; such as have been oppose^s of illegal taxes, not those
who have recived the public money, and given no account; to judge of candidates
by their lives and practices, etc. PARL. HIST. XIV.307.


However the Walpole family has acted, Mr. Horace Walpole writes well on this
subject, as follows: I hear, that dissatisfaction and dissentions have arisen
among you, and that a warm contest is expected, and I dread to see in the
incorrupted town of Lynne what has spread too fatally in other places, and what
I fear will end in the ruin of this constitution and country, etc. And
afterward, My votes have neither been dictated by favor nor influence, but by
the principles on which the revolution was founded -- the principles to which
the town of Lynne has ever adhered, and by which my father commenced and closed
his venerable life Let. from Mr. Horace Walpole, Son to Sir Robert Walpole.
LAND. MAG. 1767, p. 282.
.

The Irish parliament has lately, A. D. 1768, made some good resolutions, such
as, That the election-oath ought to be administered to the candidate, not the
elector; and that there ought to be no guzzling at elections.

Judge Blackstone very justly regrets the ignorance of the common law, which
appears in many members of parliament. Men are prepared for all other
employments by being previously qualified; but a country fox-hunter thrusts
himself into the house of commons in puris naturalibus. He knows, that,
generally speaking, there will be nothing required of him, but to take care,
that he do not (like Sir Francis Wronghead in the play) cry No, when he should
have cried Aye.

Let it ever be remembered, and seriously considered, that every county, or
borough, when they choose their members, put into their hands no less than the
keys of all their treasure; and not all their treasure only, but the property
of every man in the British empire; out of which they can take what they will,
and when they will, and as such are a very desirable partnership for a king
HIST. ESS. ENG. CONSTABLE.
.

A humourous writer in one of the newspapers proposed, at the commencement of
the last general election, that as it is vain to think of excluding bribery, it
might be a considerable improvement, if we were to lay aside, at every general
election, all canvassing, eating, drinking, kissing voters wives and daughters,
quarrelling and idleness, and that the people should go on with their business
as usual, till the very day came. That an act should be made abolishing all the
laws in being against corruption at elections, and that from and after such a
day, it should be lawful for the contesting candidates to go to the place of
election with purses of guineas in their hands and fairly purchase the voters,
openly bidding against each other as at an auction.

We have an election-oath, by which every elector if called upon, is obliged to
swear, that he has received nothing for his vote. But the intention of it
(though it were likely to be atherwise useful) is most commonly defeated by the
candidates agreeing to wave the ceremony. Who can give a reason why every
member is not at his first entrance into the house obliged, at the hazard of
the punishment of perjury, ^o swear, that he has taken no illegal steps to gain
his election, and at the end of every session, that he has not been influenced
by the court or ministry in any one vote he has given?

In the year 1754, Sir I. Barnard moved the house of commons for a repeal of
the law, which obliges electors to take the bribery-oath. Experience proves, he
said, the inutility of the oath, for preventing bribery, and shows, that it
only opens a door for perjury. The motion was overruled T^nd. IX.484.
.

It is supposed, that many prime ministers, lords, and others, desirous of
having influence in the house of commons, have, to evade the act 9 Anne,
furnished candidates with mock qualifications to be returned after their
election. And those wretches have solemnly sworn, upon the strength of a bit of
paper to be given up next day, that they were possessed of estates of 600 l. a
year for life, clear of all encumbrance, while they were many hundreds, perhaps
thousands of pounds, worse than nothing, and only hoped to repair their ruined
fortunes by prostituting their votes to a villainous minister.

If a borough choose him, not undone.

POPE. We find, the mystery of iniquity began early to work. Edw. III. crowned,
A. D. 1327, endeavored to pack the parliament, that he might obtain the larger
supplies. He puts the sheriffs and other place-men upon influencing elections.
The knights of the shires insist, that this abuse be redressed Hume's HIST.
II.176.
.

Sheriffs were tampered with to make false returns of members, under Rich. II.
PARL. HIST. I.426.
. The commons begun to be of consequence. And the king's having few places,
pensions, contracts, lotteries, military offices, etc. to bestow, they had no
bias to draw them aside from their country's interest, and therefore ^ere
troublesome to the court.

Rich. II. changed all the sheriffs in the kingdom to have a parliament to his
mind, and the mayors and magistrates in cities and boroughs Hume, II.261.
. Such is the fatal power of kings! It is erroneously remarked by historians,
that this was the first instance of the court's tampering with elections, and
proved Richard's ruin. It could not have been done by direct bribery in those
times, when there were few places, etc. And the grants of forfeited estates,
crown lands, purses of money, etc. would go but a short way. It is impossible
(says Rapin I.468.
) that a free spirited nation should see their liberties in the hands of a set
of men, whom themselves have not freely chosen, without desiring to be freed
from such an oppression.

The court proposed to call a parliament, A. D. 1387, the election whereof
should be so managed, that the members should be all at the king's [ Rich. II.]
direction.' But, in those days they had not the means of electioneering.
Accordingly little or nothing was done Rapin, I.464.
.

Rich. II. and all our tyrants (I wish I could say only tyrants) since, have
broke into the freedom of election, and of voting. If this does not show the
importance of an independent parliament, nothing will.

A sheriff was fined and imprisoned, A. D. 1401, for a false return of a member
for Rutland PARL. HIST. II.82.
.

Hen. VIII. was freed from the debt of a loan, without payment made, by a bill
in parliament, which bill is said, by Hall, to have been obtained by corrupt
means. and it is affirmed, that art was used in making elections for
parliament, in order to obtain a confirmation of Henry's divorce.

A speaker of the commons, whose name is not mentioned PARL. HIST. IV.134,
, takes notice of a certain duke's having endeavored to influence an election,
before the time of Phil. and Mary, and of a counselor at law in their time,
who had made an attempt of the same kind; but was disappointed. He wishes all
the electors of his time ( A. D. 1571.) were as staunch.

In the worst times, parliamentary corruption has prevailed the most. All sorts
of artifices, frauds, and violences were used in queen Mary's reign, for making
parliaments. All the magistrates in cities and counties were changed from
protestant to popish. False returns made, and allowed by a popish parliament
Ibid. III.285.
. Queen Mary expressly ordered the sheriffs to return papists Ibid. 311.
.

Tho. Long, returned member for Westbury, Wilts, A. D. 1571, was so weak a man,
that the house, wondering, how he came to be elected, questioned him upon it;
and found, that he had been guilty of the foul fact; having bribed the mayor of
the town, and one Watts, with no less a sum than 4 l. The house ordered Mess.
mayor and Watts to be sent for in custody, and to return the wages of iniquity,
like honest men; and fined the corporation 20 l. but we hear no more of the
matter afterward Ibid. IV.154.
.

A. D. 1604, under Iam. I. there was a famous contested election between
Goodwin and Fortescue, for the county of Bucks. Goodwin was declared, in the
house of commone, duly elected. The lords desired a conference. The commons
were startled at this interposition. The lords laid it upon the king. The
commons begged the king to be tender of their privileges. The king insists on
their holding a conference with the judges, if they would not with the lords.
The commons remonstrate. The king proves (in character) obstinate. The commons,
with much reluctance, yield. Goodwin shows himself willing to drop his
pretensions. His election was held void by the clerk of the crown, because he
was an outlaw. The commons decline giving the lords any account of their
proceedings, but proposed to send messages to the king; who, in fact, had no
more to do with the matter, than the lords PARL. HIST. V.60.
. The commons said, the proceedings could not now be reversed. They produced a
precedent, 27 Eliz. of a bill brought down from the lords, and rejected at the
first reading. The lords asked why the determination of the house could not be
reversed. The commons did not hold themselves obliged to answer that question;
which was the reason of their refusing the conference; though they declared
themselves ready to confer with the lords on any proper subject which might
arise, where their privilege was not concerned. The lords sent again to the
house, that the king thouht himself concerned, that there should be a
conference. The reason of the king's interesting himself so particularly in
this election, was, his thinking his direction (which he had no right to give
in an authoritative manner, though undoubtedly it was found advice) not to
elect any outlaw, was despised, in the house's declaring Goodwin duly elected.
The commons, startled at the king's insisting, consult what is to be done. At
last they propose to wait on the king next day. Accordingly the speaker, and
many members, attend the king. The speaker informs the king, that Goodwin's
election was duly carried on, and consequently Fortescue's void. That the
outlawries against Goodwin were only for debt; and that he had sat unquestioned
in several parliaments since the outlawry had passed upon him; and that,
besides, it was not strictly pleadable, because of deficiencies in formality.
they mention Smith, 1 Eliz. Vaughan, 22 Eliz. three others 35 Eliz. Killigree,
who had 52 outlawries against him, and Harcourt, who had 18; who were all
admitted to privelige. The king holds all these precedents for nothing. The
house, he said, derived its privilege from him, which therefore ought not to be
turned against him. He pretended, that the court of chancery ought to judge of
elections and returns. Quoted a precedent of 35 Hen. VI. when all the judges
agreed, that outlawry is a cause of expulsion from the house. The king still
insists on a conference between the commons and judges, and that the house
report the result to the privy council. The commons propose to make a law, that
no outlawed person hereafter sit in the house, and to confer with the judges,
not to reverse what they had done, but that they might profit by the judges
learning, and that they might satisfy the king. It was said, that there was no
precedent of a member's being deprived of privilege on account of outlawry.
Others of the commons were strong against all conference. That parliament had
contradicted the opinions of the judges concerning outlaws, since the time of
Hen. VI. They sent the king their reasons against all conference. They
insisted, that till 7 Hen. IV. the writs for election were returned to
parliament, not to chancery, and that the power of hearing and determining
concerning elections was always supposed to be exclusively in the house Of
which they brought many precedents, and alleged, that if the chancery were to
judge concerning elections, they would soon be masters of the commons. They
made apologies abundantly for offending the king. Not doubting, say they,
though we were but a part of a body, as to the making of new laws, yet for any
matter of privileges of our own house, that we are, and ever have been, a court
of ourselves, of sufficient power to discern and determine without their
lordships, as their lordships have always used to do for theirs without us
PARL. HIST. V.76.
. The king still objects to the absurdity of giving legislative power to an
outlaw. They answer, that, notwithstanding precedents for outlaws sitting in
the house, they were determined, in compliance with his majesty's sense, to
make a law for preventing it for the future; but that this law cannot operate
against Goodwin, being ex post facto; besides the want of formality in his
outlawry, which rendered it null and void, and its being only upon mean
process, and two general pardons issuing since it passed upon him, which, at
any rate, would have cleared him. The commons meanly request the intercession
of the lords with the king, as having nearer access to his person; and send a
committee of their house to them with their apology to the king. The lords ask
the committee, if they may read the paper? The committee agrees. The lords ask,
if they may amplify, explain, or debate, concerning any doubtful point? The
committee answer, They have no warrant from the house for that. The paper is
read. The speaker attends the king at 8 in the morning. Obliged to wait till
10. He reports to the house, that the king protested, he had the greatest
desire to support their privileges. That the king desired and commanded, as an
absolute prince, that there might be a conference between the commons and
judges, in presence of his council; not as umpires, but to report to him the
issue of the conference. The house is amazed. It was proposed by some, to
petition the king to be present himself, and judge. A committee is appointed.
The house orders, that the committee shall only insist on the support, and
explication of the reasons already given, and not proceed to any other
argument, or answer. Sir Francis Bacon, in his report, flatters the king's
wisdom shamefully. It was observed, that there had been no such concession made
by the commons, to any king since the conquest. It was disputed, Whether the
house of commons could properly be called a court of record. The king proposes,
that neither Goodwin nor Fortescue sit in the house. It was accordingly
resolved, that both be set aside, and a new writ issued for Bucks. Goodwin
voluntarily gives up his claim by letter to the speaker. The mean-spirited
commons send a committee to thank the king for his decision. They flatter him
indecently, and he swallows all with greediness. Thus ended this famous affair.

The commons, A. D. 1641, says Mrs. Macaulay HIST. III.194.
, had passed a vote, that they had sufficient cause to accuse the duke of
Richmond as one of the malignant party, and an evil counselor to the king for
these reasons. That he endeavored to have such members chosen as he should
name. The interposal of peers in the election of commoners had been by several
resolutions of the lower house, declared a breach of privilege; and continues,
says Mr. Hume Vol. I. p. 312.
, to be condemned by the votes of the commons, and universally practiced
throughout the nation.

In the time of Charles I. Wray, Langton and 2 Trelawnies were committed by the
commons for corrupt proceedings at elections (...). 105.
.

There was great corruption in the court for packing the parliament, A. D.
1658. 80 letters were written from Whitehall. One Howard, a papist, brother to
the earl of Arundel, boasted that he had sent 24 members to parliament. Tables
were kept at Whitehall at the public charge by order of Richard Cromwell, says
Whitlocke PARL. HIST. XXI.289. William, I.340.
. 14,000 l. spent by the court at the election for Northamptonshire in the time
of Charles II STATE TRACTS, time of king
.

The case of Denzil Onslow DEB. COM. III.313.
, tried at the assizes at Kingston, Surry, A. D. 1681, before the lord chief
justice Pemberton, was remarkable. He had brought his action in the court of
common pleas, complaining that another was returned instead of himself to
parliament, 31 Car. II. after the returning officer had returned him as duly
elected. The officer's plea for making a second return, was, that a person
elected must be ^ree, resiant, and dwelling within the borough. But the court
set that good a^cient statute aside, because the universal corrupt practice had
been otherwise, and because, if none but resiants [inhabitants] could be
chosen, the house would be filled with men below the employment. [This by the
bye, sh^ws the absurdity of the beggarly boroughs having representatives,
because a representative ought certainly to be resident, and there cannot be
found in such places men fit to sit in parliament.] Then the returning officer
insist^ that some of Mr. Onslow's votes were bad. But this was not allowed.
Others had received their burgage tenures, on the strength of which they voted,
by fraudulent means, and only for the sake of the election. The jury gave 50 l
damages DEB. COM. III 317.
.

There was hardly a worse charge against James II. than his influencing
elections See ST. TRACTS, time of K. William, I.221. et passim.
. Mr. Lock accuses him of a design to overturn the constitution, because he
influenced elections. On this principle, how many hundreds of our peers might
have been impeached of treason against the constitution; as it is well known,
that they not only influence, but absolutely overruled the elections in the
greatest part of the boroughs; and it is notorious, that a very great m^jority
of the house of commons is sent in by the boroughs. What can be imagined
dangerous to liberty, if this dreadful growing, aristocratical power be not?

Abominable were the proceedings at elections A. D. 1685. The new corporation
charters had taken the election out of the hands of the inhabitants, and put it
in those of the corporation exclusively, as a few are more obvious to bribery,
than a great number. Thus arbitrary is the footing on which election has been
put by kings Rapin, II.745.
. Accordingly this parliament did almost whatever the king desired. They gave
him a revenue of 2 millions, some say 2 and a half annually for life; by which
he was enabled to set parliaments at defiance; and crush all who opposed him
Ibid. 742.
.

Shaftesbury, one of Chapter II's tools, renewed the exploded practice of the
chancellor's issuing out writs to supply the vacancies in the house of commons
Hume's HIST. STUARTS, II.228.
. But it was voted that the writs were irregular, and the members elected were
expelled DEB. COM. I.166.
.

The borough of Stockbridge was convicted, A. D. 1693, of corruption at an
election. A bill was brought in to disfranchise the borough Ibid. II.438.
.

We have been six days upon the Westminster poll, which is like to last as many
more, says secretary Vernon, in his letter of Ian. 13, 1701, to the earl of
Manchester Cole's MEM. p. 283.
. The house of commons (says the same gentleman) has been taken up these three
days with Sheppard's corrupting several boroughs for procuring elections Ibid.
345.
.

There was much gross corruption practiced in the year 1701, says Burnet HIST.
OWN TIMES, III.358.
. Some of the contested elections were brought before the house of commons.
Some of the persons elected were imprisoned and afterward expelled. In these
proceedings great partiality appeared, [a majority in the house being tories]
for when, in some cases, corruption was clearly proved against those of the
tory party, and but doubtfully against those of the contrary side, that which
was voted corruption in the latter [the whigs] was called giving of alms in
those of the former sort. Thus, for some weeks, the house seemed to have forgot
all the concerns of Europe, and was wholly employed in the weakening of one
side, and in fortifying the other.

The borough of Hindon was disfranchised, A. D. 1702, for bribery at an
election, but no individual punished, because the damning bribe was given by a
worthy tory Tind. CONTIN. I.574.
.

Sir Simon Harcourt complains sadly of ill usage, in his election for Abingdon,
A. D. 1708, reflecting severely on the house, and the wick^d arts used against
him, insisting to the last, that he was the legal member, by a clear majority,
by the most fair estimation DEB. COM. IV.111.
.

Bewdley controverted election. The commons resolve to petition the queen, A.
D. 1710, for the several papers relating to the charter of that borough Ibid.
172.
. Sir John (Packington) informs the commons that the queen had given orders for
repealing Bewdley charter, and to lay before them an account of the
prosecutions ordered by, or carried on at the desire of the crown, as requested
by the house Ibid. 176.
.

Bribery and corruption in elections of all kinds, says a lord in the house of
peers, A. D. 1734, are now so universally complained of, that it is become
highly necessary for this house to come to some vigorous resolutions against
it, in order to convince the world that it has not as yet got within these
walls. It has already, I am afraid, got too firm a footing in some other parts
of our constitution; what is now proposed will not, I am afraid, be a
sufficient barrier, but I am very sure, if something is not very speedily done,
if some effectual mea^ures are not soon taken against that deadly f^e to our
constitution, I say, I am sure that in a short time corruption will become so
general that no man will be afraid to corrupt, no man will be ashamed of being
corrupted DEB. LORDS, IV.223.
.

In the year 1711, happened the famous dirty affair of Walpole's expulsion for
alienating 500 l. of the public money (of which more fully elsewhere.) His seat
was declared vacant, because expelled the house for breach of trust, and
notorious corruption, when secretary at war. And it was resolved, that he was
and is incapable of being elected a member to serve in parliament. His
antagonist, Tailor, was not allowed to be duly elected. The election for Lynn
was therefore declared void DEB. COM. IV.275.
. It was thought a stretch of power, because Walpole was a staunch whig, and
the tories were at that time very strong in the house. But they showed modesty
in refusing Tailor, elected by a minority. We have seen a parliament proceed in
a different manner in the case of Wilkes and Lutterel; of which elsewhere.

At the election for the borough of Berealston in the county of Devon, A. D.
1721, Elliot, a commissioner of excise, had taken upon himself to be the
returning officer, contrary to law, which forbids any person belonging to the
excise to meddle with elections. A motion made to address the king to turn him
out, was put off. Ibid. VI.245.


Sir John Cope, A. D. 1722, charged Sir Francis Page, a baron of the exchequer,
with corrupting the borough of Banbury, in Oxfordshire Ibid. 275.
.' Page appears clearly to have been guilty; but it was carried by a majority
of 4, that he was immaculate Ibid. 278.
.

There were seventy one contested elections the beginning of this parliament,
A. D. 1734 Ibid. IX.X.
.

The house of commons made a resolution to hear no more contested elections, A.
D. 1742. The number was so great, that the examining them was endless Ibid.
XIII.184.
. So that any man might be a member of that parliament without having been
either elected, or returned.

A. D. 1722, several lords protested on rejecting the bill for securing the
freedom of election. Because the methods of corruption made use of in elections
were grown to an height beyond the example of preceding times; as it was a
blemish to the constitution, it deserved a parliamentary cure; and because the
commons complained of this evil and desired their assistance, to point out
proper remedies. because a new election was coming, and those chosen might sit
seven years; and the septennial act took* its rise in that house. Because it
was admitted in the debate, that the public money had been used, to influence
elections; and example set by men in high office would spread its influence
through all ranks; and that if gentlemen were to get into parliament by
bribery, it must prove fatal to the liberties of the people.

Lord Sunderland said, he had not intimated that the present public money had
been used to influence elections. What he meant was only in king Charles's, and
king James's time DEB. LORDS, III.227.
.

It was ordered, said protest should be expunged. Some lords protested against
expunging it; and gave the following reasons. That they were desirous that
their reasonings on the mischiefs of bribery and corruption, might appear to
posterity. That the practice of expunging reasons was not ancient. That
expunging many reasons, under one general head, was unfair, and not
countenanced but by one precedent on their books Ibid. 231.
.

Mr. Hutcheson, in his speech on the bill for securing freedom of elections, A.
D. 1722 DEB. COM. VI.272.
, has the following passages.

It is too notorious, what attempts are now carrying on to invade the freedom
of your approaching elections; in some places by threats, to fill and overawe
them with the quartering of troops, if they do not comply; in others by the
corrupt solicitations of agents and undertakers employed by those, who from
the incredible sums which are dispersed, one must imagine, have more than
private purses at their command. But what, in God's name, can all this tend to?
What other construction can any man, in common sense, put upon all these
things, but that there seems to have been formed a design, by violence and
oppression, first to humble you, and to make your necks pliable to the yoke
that is designed for you, and then to finish the work by tempting the poverty
and necessities of the people to sell themselves into the most abject and
detestable slavery, for that very money, which had been either unnecessarily
raised, or mercilesly and unjustly plundered and torn from their very bowels?
And thus you may be in a fair way of being subdued by your own weapons. Nor can
I imagine what inducement men can have who run from borough to borough, and
purchase their elections at such extravagant rates, unless it be from a strong
expectation of being well repaid for their votes, and of receiving ample
recompense and rewards for the secret services they h^ve covenanted to perform
here. In this situation it is high time for gentlemen to put themselves upon
their guard, and if it be not already too late, to endeavor to put a stop to
the course of those evils, which are otherwise likely so soon to overtake them.
It is for these purposes that this bill is now before you, and I hope it either
is, or by your assistance will be made, such as may fully answer the ends for
which you were pleased to order it to be brought in. -- We know, that persons
heretofore have not only bribed the returning officer, but have even
indemnified him against the whole penalty of 500 l. rather than not get the
return, right or wrong, in favor of themselves; depending. I suppose, upon the
strength and partiality of their friends to maintain them at any rate in the
unjustifiable possession of a seat here; this has been practiced upon former
occasions, and therefore there are always just grounds to suspect it will be
attempted again. And it is now come to such a pass, that if you were even to
double that penalty, without doing something else, I am afraid it would have
little or no effect. But when all these bonds of indemnity are declared null
and void, when the securities usually given and taken upon these occasions are
withdrawn, they may then perhaps be deterred, at least from so barefaced a
practice of these arbitrary and illegal proceedings for the future.

Mr. Hutcheson afterward shows, that the qualification-act was very deficient.
What dependence, says he, for instance, can you have upon a man who has no more
than three hundred pounds a year in land, or perhaps, only an annuity of that
value for life, and has at the same time thirty or forty thousand pounds in the
funds, or an employment of two or three thousand pounds a year, civil or
military, from the crown? And even that small qualification is no otherwise
obligatory upon him, than merely to enable him to swear to his having it, if it
be required at the time of his election; for though he sells it, or otherwise
divests himself of it immediately after, yet it remains a doubt, whether by so
doing he shall vacate his seat in parliament. This is certainly such an
omission as requires to be better regulated and explained. There is likewise a
saving in that act in favor of eldest sons of peers, and the same for those of
commoners of six hundred pounds a year; but I confess I am at a loss to find
out upon wh^t grounds the latter was inserted, unless care had been taken at
the same time to oblige the father or the son to prove the possession of such
an estate; for at present, let the circumstances of the family be what they
will, if the eldest son can procure himself to be elected, I cannot see but he
is entitled to a seat here, without any farther examination whatever. This is
another defect so gross in your former act, and opens a back door to so many
persons, so entirely contrary to the intent and meaning of it, that it very
well justifies the repeal of it by this bill, I mean so far only as it relates
to the eldest sons of commoners DEB. COM. VI.272, seq.
.

A petition of the right hon. Charles Sackville, commonly called earl of
Middlesex, and the hon. William Hall Gage, Esquire was presented to the house, A.
D. 1747, and read, setting forth, That at the last election of barons to serve
in this present parliament for the town and port of Seaford, in the county of
Sussex, the petitioners, together with the right hon. William Pit. Esquire and
William Hay Esquire were candidates. That on the day before the said el^^tion, a
noble peer of this re^lm did invite to, and entertain at his house most of the
voters of the said town and port; and in the room where they were assembled,
spoke to them one by one, and did solicit and influence them, with respect to
giving their votes at the said election; by means whereof several persons who
had promised to vote, and would have voted for the petitioners, were prevailed
upon by the said noble peer to vote for the said Mr. Pit, and Mr. Hay. Which
proceeding the petitioners conceive is a high i^fringement of the liberties and
privileges of the commons of Great Britain. That on the day of election, in
order to awe and influence the voters in favor of the sitting members, and
deter them from voting for the petitioners, the said noble peer came into the
court, accompanied by other peers of the realm; and being seated near to the
returning officer, did continue there until the poll was closed;
notwithstanding the presence of him, and the said other peers was objected to
by one of the petitioners, and the returning officer applied to by him not to
take the poll while the said peers remained present in the court. In all which
the said petitioner thought himself fully justified, as he apprehended their
presence obstructed the freedom of the election, and from the several declared
re^olutions of the house of commons, was a violation of the rights and
privileges of the commons of Great Britain; and that by these and other illegal
practices the petiti^ners lost a great number of votes, which would otherwise
have been given for the petitioners: And therefore praying the house to take
the premises into consideration, and to grant the petition^^s such relief as to
the house shall seem meet. The house was moved, That the resolution of the 16^h
day of this instant, November, That it is an high infringement of the liberties
and privileges of the commons of Great Britain, for any lord of parliament, or
any lord lieutenant of any county to concern themselves in election of members
to serve for the commons in parliament, might be read. And the same was read
accordingly. A motion was made, and the question being put, That the matter of
the said petition be heard at the bar of this house: Upon which a debate arose.
In this debate, Mr. Pit, one of the sitting members, treated the petition with
great contempt, and turned it into a mere jest.

On this occasion, Mr. Potter (son of the archbishop) spoke as follows: Mr.
Speaker, I rise-up to do myself justice: For as I look upon the matter
contained in this petition to be of the utmost importance to the honor of the
house, and even to the existence o^ parliament; and as to my very great
amazement, I see this question treated with the greatest contempt and ridicule
by an hon. gentleman, whose weight may perhaps persuade a majority to be of his
opinion, I think I owe it to myself to declare my sentiments on this great
occasion by something more than the vote which I shall give. I hope, Sir,
things are not yet come to such a pass, as to make it necessary for any man to
go about to prove that the constitution is destroyed, whenever this house shall
lose its independency. After all the noble struggles made in the house by great
patriots, after all the laws passed by the legislature to preserve that
independency, I should hope, that out of decency, as well as out of regard to
truth, I may be allowed to a^gue upon that as upon an indubitable maxim. The
representatives of the people, when they are chosen to that office, have been
said to be independent, even on their constituents; how necessary then, Sir, is
it for this house to take care that there be no other improper, or corrupt
dependency? But, Sir, if the ministers are to be allowed to nominate to the
burghs the persons who shall be their representatives, how are we to expect an
independent parliament? That ministers may endeavor to subvert this
independency, that they may think it even necessary to their own security, to
corrupt parliament, we have too much reason to know. But, Sir, whatever pains
former ministers may have taken for this purpose, what undue methods soever
they may have used to gain to themselves a corrupt majority in this house, I
believe history is not able to produce a^ instance equal to the present of a
wise and great statesman taking upon himself the honorable employment of being
an agent at a burgh. It was not enough signify his commands by his underlings;
it was not enough to solicit votes in his own person. The voters, it seems,
could not be trusted out of his presence, and therefore, they were to be
attended even to the poll. But, Sir, this great humility and condescension in a
minister, would, in former times, have been construed a most notorious invasion
of the rights of the people, and of the privileges of this house. And, Sir,
what will the people say to us? Or what will they think of our independency, if
we are not as jealous of their rights, and as tenacious of our own privileges
as any of our predecessors have been? What will they think, Sir, if after
seeing one parliament dissolved in a new unprecedented, I had almost said an
unconstitutional manner, they shall be told, that the ministers have been
nominating their representatives in the next even without the ceremony of a
conge d'elire? But, Sir, still farther; What will they think, if they shall be
told that this proceeding of the minister has been laid before the house of
commons, and that the house of commons will not, or dare not censure him? There
have been times when no man was thought too great to be accountable to this
house for his conduct; and I could give an instance even in my own memory of a
great and able statesman, whose long administration was an honor and benefit
to his county, and whose conduct this house thought fit to enquire into by the
most severe scrutiny -- When I first heard the petition read at your table, I
could hardly believe it possible that the allegations it contained were founded
upon truth. I expected to have heard the friends of the noble person who is the
object of it, boldly denying the charge, and calling loudly upon the accusers
to justify it; I was determined not to believe it, unless supported by the
strongest proof. But, Sir, how great was my amazement when I heard an
honorable gentleman, [ W. Pit, Esquire.] who was privy to the whole transaction,
not only admitting every fact alleged to be true, but openly avowing and
attempting to justify them? In what light they may appear to him, Sir, he can
best tell you. But to me it seems most manifest, that as the conduct complained
of was the greatest injury that could be done to our privileges, the attempt to
justify it is the greatest insult upon our understanding. In what other light,
Sir, can it appear to us, than as the last and utmost effort of one who was
determined at any rate to procure a majority in this house of persons attached
to himself, his own creatures, the tools of his power? I wish to God, Sir,
nothing may happen today to give the people room to suspect that he has been
too successful. What more could he have done? Or what greater insult is it
possible for him to offer, unless he should come even within the walls of this
house to direct our determinations? After what he has done -- I should not
wonder, Sir, if he did come and take that chair, and tell you, as we were told
formerly, that your mace was a bauble, and that you should keep it only while
you please him. Your mace, Sir, is a bauble, and so is every other ensign of
authority, unless you can preserve your independency. A dependence upon the
crown, ^ir, would in the end prove fatal to our liberties; but a dependence
upon the minister, as it is infinitely more dishonorable, is infinitely more
dangerous. One might suppose, Sir, some security to a people from the honor of
a crowned head, and from the solid compacts that are made between the people
and their sovereign. I know of no compacts that are or can be made between a
minister and the people. I can suppose too, Sir, that in some future time a
minister may arise profligate enough to carry his views s^ high as to attempt
to make both king and people subservient to his own ambition. I can imagine
such a one, Sir, taking advantage of some general calamity or time of general
confusion, by a corrupt parliamentary influence oppressing even the king upon
his throne, and making the crowned head a prisoner in his closet. I can imagine
him, Sir, so blown up with folly and self-conceit, as to become a competitor
even with those who shall be of royal blood for posts of dignity or titles of
honor; and he may, Sir, (it is hardly possible indeed) but he may even
prostitute the name of the crown to support his pretensions. This, Sir, I say
is a picture which I can draw in my own mind of the miserable situation of this
country if ever the parliament should become dependent on a minister. But as
this can never happen but in some time of general infatuation or general
corruption, the wisdom and virtue of the present age scarce secure us from
seeing it otherwise than in imagination: but, Sir, whatever I see, or whatever
I feel, God forbid that by an act or vote of mine, I should make the way easy
for such miseries to overwhelm any future generation. The honorable gentleman
was pleased to say that this was a new case, and that there was no precedent
upon our journals to guide our proceedings: but let it be remembered, that this
can never be the case again, since the vote of today will remain upon our
books an eternal precedent to posterity, and a law to this house for the
future. For God's sake then, Sir, let us consider a little what sort of a law
we are going to make; let us remember that if the present transaction passes
uncensured, and is declared free from guilt, we may hereafter see every peer of
parliament, every secretary and other officer of state, every chancellor of the
exchequer, with his treasury bags under his arm, attending and soliciting
elections; and when they shall be called upon in this house to justify their
proceedings, they shall tell you, they have done nothing but what they had a
right to do, and that such was the opinion of this wise, this independent, this
freely elected parliament. Sir, I am not one of those persons, who will ever be
for extending the privileges of this house to any ridiculous or romantic
degree: if I could but persuade myself that there was the least room to doubt
upon this occasion, I should think that humanity obliged me to put the mildest
construction. But really, Sir, I think the insult offered to the house is of so
flagrant a nature, I think the precedent must prove so dangerous to the honor
and independency of parliament, I think the consequences must be so destructive
to the constitution as to deserve and demand the severest animadversion. The
honorable gentleman was pleased to ask, What is the object of the petition?
Sir, I will tell him what the object is; it is the security, the freedom of
parliaments, and protecting the privileges of the commons of Great Britain.
Surely, Sir, from this house the commons of Great Britain have a right to
expect justice. Their most valuable privileges have been trampled upon and
insulted, and they come now by this petiton to demand justice: Justice, Sir,
they will receive, and I hope now. But of one thing I am sure, that, sooner or
later, they will have it. [the petition was dismissed by 247 against 96 Alm.
DEB. COM. III.77.
).

The case of a double return from the borough of Milborn-Port came under
consideration, A. D. 1747. Michael Harvey and Ieffry French, Esqrs. and Thomas
Medlycott and Charles Churchill, Esqrs. were returned. This being a borough by
prescription, according to the ancient usage and custom thereof, there have
always been in it nine capital bailiffs, who hold their respective offices by
virtue of deputations granted by the proprietors of nine ancient parcels of
borough lands. Two of them preside yearly by rotation as head officers; and
these two presiding capital bailiffs may, if they please, (at a court leet,
held in October yearly) appoint substitutes to execute the menial offices of
the borough, who are called sub-bailiffs. This borough discontinued sending
members to parliament for many years; but was restored to its ancient
privileges, 4 Charles I. Since which time, it has continued to send two members
to every parliament, and the sheriff's precept for choosing members is always
directed to the bailiffs thereof. For several years after the borough was
restored to its privileges, the two presiding capital bailiffs when present, or
one of them when the other was absent, enjoyed the sole right of making the
return to the sheriff's precept, that is to say, of returning the members they
thought legally chosen. But since the restoration, these nine ancient parcels
of borough lands having been all engrossed, and become the property of two
neighboring gentlemen, by agreement between themselves, they, or some of their
friends were generally chosen and returned without opposition; and as it often
happened that neither of the capital presiding bailiffs were present, the
return was often made by their substitutes, or sub-bailiffs: but sometimes by
the capital bailiff or bailiffs, and most frequently by the baliffs and
burgesses of the said borough. This was the constitution of the said borough at
the time of the last election, when Thomas Medlycott, Esquire and William Bishop,
were the presiding capital bailiffs, and one Arthur Ansty (said to be a common
day-labourer and servant to the said Thomas Medlycott) was the sub-bailiff
appointed by the said Medlycott. The candidates were Michael Harvey and Ieffry
French, Esqrs. on one side, and the said Thomas Medlycott and Charles
Churchill, Esqrs. on the other; and when the election was over, a return of the
too former was made to the sheriff by the said William Bishop, which he
accepted and annexed to his precept; but some days after another return of the
two latter was made to the sheriff by the said Arthur Ansty, which he likewise
accepted, and annexed to his precept, so that his writ was returned with a
double return for the said borough, and which was the legal return was the
question, and the only question that by order came to be determined on Thursday
the 1st of December last. As to the return made by William Bishop, it was
objected, first, That the sub-bailiffs and not the capital bailiffs were by the
custom of that borough the returning officers: and secondly, That the said
William Bishop was not properly qualified to act, because he had not previously
taken an oath of office. To the first objection it was answered, that by the
custom of the borough the sub-bailiffs never acted but in the absence, or by
the orders or permission of their principals; and when either of the capital
bailiffs was present, neither of the sub-bailiffs could act as a principal; the
capital bailiff present being then the sol^ presiding officer. To the second
objection it was answered, That William Bishop had taken all the oaths
requisite by law, but that on oath of office was not r^quisite either by law or
the custom of that borough, as had been admitted by the said Thomas Medlycott
himself. Then as to the return made by Arthur Ansty, it was objected, 1st, That
as he was only a sub-bailiff, and both the capital presiding bailiffs not only
present, but acting as presiding officers, he could not act as a presiding
officer in any affair whatsoever; much less in such a principal one as that of
returning members to parliament. And 2dly, That the return made by the said
Arthur Ansty was void by virtue of a resolution of that house of the 2d of
June, 1685, by which it was resolved, That no mayor, bailiff, or other officer,
to whom the precept ought to be directed, is capable of being elected to serve
in parliamenr for the same borough of which he is mayor, bailiff, or officer at
the time of election. And as the return made by the said Arthur Ansty must be
supposed to be a return made by the said Thomas Medlycott, whose substitute and
servant he was, according to the axiom in law, qui facit per alium facit per
se; therefore by this resolution it ought to be void. To the first objection it
was answered, That by the custom of the borough the sub-bailiffs were the only
proper returning officers, consequently the return made by Arthur Ansty was the
only legal return; and to the 2d it was answered, That if the axiom of law were
to be applied to the election for this borough, neither of the two proprietors
of the nine ancient parcels of borough lands could ever be chosen or returned
as representatives for this borough, because both the capital and sub-bailiffs
are but their deputies; and as this would be inconsistent with common sense, as
well as contrary to the custom of the borough, ever since the abovementioned
resolution, it could not be supposed, that the house thereby intended to render
the sub-bailiffs of this borough incapable of returning either their immediate
principals, the capital bailiffs, or their remote principals, the proprietors
of these ancient parcels of borough lands. Upon the whole, the house, after
having spent two days in hearing counsel, reading former returns, etc. and
examining witnesses, came to a resolution, that the execution of a precept for
electing burgess^s to serve in parliament for the borough of Milborn Port and
the making of the return thereof, are only in the two sub-bailiffs of the said
borough, or in one sub-bailiff, if there are not two, [ one sub-bailiff is
undoubtedly more like to be bribed, than two capital bailiffs] in consequence
of which the clerk of the crown, by order, took off the file the return made by
William Bishop, and the said Thomas Medlycott and Charles Churchill, Esqrs.
became thereby the only sitting Members Alm. DEB. COM. III.83.
.

The duke of Bedford, in the year 1735, presented a petition to the lords from
the dukes of Hamilton, Queensberry and Montrose, and the earls of Dundonald,
Marchmont and Stair, complaining, That, at the election of the sixteen Scotch
peers, several undue methods and illegal practices were used, of which they
could bring proofs, and praying that the house of lords would allow them to be
laid before them DEB. LORDS, IV.360.
. The petitioners were persons of the highest rank and most respectable
personal characters. The matter of their petition was of supreme consequence,
affecting the very existence of the house of lords.

Some of the court-lords were against making any enquiry into the matter of it;
fearing, that some things might come out, which would not be much for their
honor. The earl of Chesterfield and lord Bathurst said, it was very
extraordinary, that any hesitation should be made in the house of lords whether
they should listen to a complaint of so high an enormity made by persons of
such rank. When the matter came before the house, the dukes of Athol and
Buccleugh observed, that the terms of the petition were vague and indefinite.
It was remarked, that two Scotch peers speaking against the petition was rather
indelicate. It was likewise observed, that the house of peers is not, like the
courts below, confined to forms; but may proceed to the general issue and
merits of the cause in the most natural way. It was moved, That the petitioning
lords should be desired to declare, whether they intended to controvert the
late election Ibid. 366.
. The petitioning lords declared, they did not intend to controvert the
election or return of the sixteen peers from Scotland, but only to lay before
the house certain proceedings at the election, which they thought dangerous to
the constitution, and which might affect future elections. A multitude of
difficulties were started about such an enquiry's drawing imputations on
certain characters; but it was rightly observed, that the lords would do well
to consider, whether throwing impediments in the way of a due enquiry into the
matter of the petition, would not draw imputations upon the house of peers.

The petitioning lords made a renewed application to the house of peers,
signifying, besides what they had said in their first representation, that they
could not, in the matter of their petition, act both as prosecutors and
witnesses; that though their informations were sufficiently certain as to the
fact, that there had been undue proceedings at the election of Scotch peers,
yet their informers might not have thought proper to give in names, and may
avoid doing so, till brought before the house of peers. Then they added DEB.
LORDS, IV.395.
as follows; Though the opening the particulars of the facts to be proved may
necessarily produce such a discovery of evidence before examination as is
usually thought dangerous even in course of ordinary trials, and may be much
more so in the case of a parliamentary enquiry: Yet nevertheless, in
consequence of your lordship's order, as far as we are able from the nature of
the thing, we do humbly acquaint your lordship's, that we laid the petition
before you upon information that the list of sixteen peers for Scotland had
been framed by persons in high trust under the crown, long previous to the
election itself; and that this list was shown to peers as a list approved of by
the crown, and was called the king's list; from which there was to be no
variation, unless it was to make way for one or two particular peers, on
condition that they should go along with the measure. That peers were solicited
to vote for the list, called the crown-list, without the liberty of making any
alterations. That endeavors were used to engage peers to vote for this list by
promise of pensions, and offices civil and military, to themselves and near
relations; and by actual promise and offers of sums of money. That sums of
money were actually given to or for the use of some peers to engage them to
concur in the voting for this list. That annual pensions were promised to be
paid to peers, if they concurred in the voting for this list; some of them to
be on a regular establishment, and others to be paid without any establishment
at all. That about the time of this election, numbers of pensions, office (of
which some were nominal) and releases of debts owing to the crown, were granted
to peers, who concurred in voting for this list, and to their near relations.
That on the day of election, a battalion of his maj^sty's forces was drawn up
in the Abbey court, at Edinburgh, and three companies of it were marched from
Leith (a place at one mile's distance) to join the rest of the battalion, and
kept under arms from nine in the morning till nine at night, when the election
was ended, contrary to custom at elections, and without any cause or occasi^n,
that your petitioners could foresee, other than the overawing of the election.
These instances of undue practices we now humbly mention, which, we hope, will
satisfy your lordships, that we have just reason to pray your lordships to take
this matter into your serious consideration, and to provide such a remedy as
may be effectual for preserving the right and freedom of elections, this being
the only right that now remains with the peers of Scotland in lieu of a
constant and hereditary seat in parliament.

All this however, went for nothing with many of their good lordships. It was
not sufficiently particular to be taken notice of by the house. Direct bribery
was not a sufficiently particular instance of illegal practices; nor were the
different species of it, particularized by the petitioning lords, particular
enough. The demurring lords were even so hard put to it, that they blamed the
petitoning lords for not mentioning the name of the officer, who commanded the
regiment, which was appointed to overawe the election. But nothing would have
been more trifling, than their naming him, because he was not guilty; but was
obliged to obey his superior officer.

If a coroner, my lords, (says one of the right honorable speakers) should be
informed that a person had been murdered, the body buried, and the murderer
concealed; but that if he would examine such witnesses as his informers should
direct him to, the murder might be discovered, and the persons guilty
apprehended and brought to condign punishment; surely the coroner would be very
deficient in his duty if he should neglect or refuse enquiring into the affair,
because his informers, could not, or perhaps would not, declare to him the
persons guilty and the particular manner in which the murder was committed.
Surely, my lords, if his informers were men of any character or credit, if they
were persons upon whose information he could have the least dependence, he
would immediately order the body to be taken up and examined, and would
examine, in the strictest manner, every witness hi^ informers could direct him
to. The case before us is the very same. If your lordships can have any
dependence upon the character or credit of the petitioners, you must suspect
that a most horrid murder has been committed. An election there has bee^*
whether it was a fair election, your lordships are to enqui^^; for if it was
carried on by undue methods, and illegal practices, the right of the peerage of
Scotland has been murdered, our constitution has got, I am afraid, a mortal
stab. I am persuaded none of your lordships is of opinion that the petitioners
are persons, whose information is not in the least to be depended on, and in
such a case, upon such an information will your lordships refuse to make an
enquiry, because they cannot inform you of the particular persons concerned in
the murder, and of all the particular circumstances how it was committed? For
God's sake, my lords, consider what an injury will be done, by such a refusal,
to the nation in general; and what a public slur will be thrown upon the honor
of this house, and upon the justice of our proceedings. In short, my lords, the
honor of this house, as well as the independency of parliament, is, in my
opinion, so much concerned in the affair now before us, the complaint is so
well supported, the grievance so fully and so particularly set forth, and a
redress so loudly and so generally as well as particularly called for, that if
we do not enquire strictly into this affair, I shall hardly expect that this
house will ever for the future, enquire into the complaints of any subject, or
of any number of subjects; and if the other house follow the example of this,
where then shall the subjects go to complain* No where can they go, my lords,
but to the foot of the throne, which they cannot approach, but when the
ministers please to give them leave, and then, I am sure, it must be granted
that the subjects of this once happy and free nation will be reduced to the
same state with those of the most absolute, the most slavish monarchy upon
earth.

The ministerial lords made a handle of the circumstance, that the petitioning
lords did not comply with their order, and send the names of the offenders. A
gross proof of partiality against the matter of the petition* For the
petitioning lords did not know all their names; and petitioned the house
expressly for the purpose of finding out the guilty persons; which the
petitioning lords themselves could not do. Besides that the naming, before
examination, of the suspected persons was the sure way to defeat the
examination by putting them upon absconding, or running away, and securing
their betters from discovery. One would almost imagine, their tender hearted
lordships meant this in pure compassion to the poor innocents, who had
unthinkingly stabbed the liberties of their country* At any rate, there was one
obvious advantage, of which the lords disappointed the nation, viz. The
legislatures finding means for preventing (if they wished to prevent) such
corrupt practices for the future. We cannot conceive (said the protesting
lords) that an innocent person, who should happen to be named in the course of
such an examination, can possibly be deprived of the means of making his
innocence appear. But we can well foresee, that guilty persons (and these
probably of the highest rank^* may escape by such a method; which imposing an
impossibility on the informants, must, as we apprehend, serve to defeat all
parliamentary enquiries, and therefore could not be, in our opinion, within the
intention of the order. The protesting lords add, We apprehend, that pinning
down the petitioning lords to the precise words of the order, may be attended
with this fatal consequence, that all parliamentary enquiries may be rendered
much more difficult hereafter, which may probably give such encouragement to
corrupt ministers, that they may be prompted to make the most dangerous
attempts upon the constitution, and hope to come off with impunity. Such
apprehensions naturally suggest the melancholy reflection that our posterity
may see the time when some of those lords who sit upon a more precarious foot
than the rest of the house, having through motives of virtue and honor,
opposed the evil designs of some future minister, for that, and that alone, may
be excluded at an ensuing election; and though the whole world may be sensible
of the cause of their exclusion, no remedy may be found, but their case may
become a subject of national concern, indignation, and resentment. It was then
moved, that the petition should be dismissed. And it was urged ( gravely I will
not say; for I should think hardly even a court-lord could so effectually
command his countenance) that it was a priori, and from the nature of the
thing, improbable ( geometrically demonstrable, they should have said) that any
such practices were made use of at the late election. Because the elected
lords, were good men DEB. LORDS, IV.413.
. If this be not demonstration. let the reader judge. It was observed, on the
part of the petition, that if such a petition was dismissed, it would naturally
be concluded, That the house of peers was never to enquire into any illegal
practices, if by such enquiry an impeachment, or any other parliamentary
proceeding, might become necessary for punishment. It was said, That even
common fame, or a general clamor was not only a foundation for an enquiry, but
such a foundation as the house of peers is obliged, both in honor and duty, to
lay hold of; that the guilty, if any such are found and convicted, may be
brought to condign punishment; or, if otherwise, that the slanderers may be
punished. General clamours ought never to be contemned, the people ought to be
satisfied. It is one of the chief ends of our meeting in this house, and in
such cases there is no way of satisfying the people, but by a strict enquiry,
and a severe punishment upon the guilty; for guilty persons there must
necessarily be upon all such occasions, either on one side or the other. And if
a general clamor is a sufficient cause for parliamentary enquiry, how much
more a petition from six noblemen formally complaining of injury done
themselves and their country? To say nothing of the duke of Hamilton, the first
nobleman of the ancient kingdom of Scotland. or of any of the other four, who
subscribed the petition, the venerable name of the earl of Stair was alone
sufficient to sanctify whatever it appeared affixed to, and to secure it from
the neglect of any, bu^ a set of men, who had long set shame and decency at
defiance.

The affair of the South Sea directors, and of the charitable corporation, and
of the York-Buildings company, were mentioned on the part of the petition, into
which an enquiry was made, though (...) few particulars previously specified as
in the prese^^ case. These were all set on foot in consequence (...) petitions
from the injured, as in the present case* But, (say the lords on the side of
the petition was it ever before desired, or insisted on that the petitioners
should give particular instances of the frauds or illegal practices they
complained of? Was (...) ever insisted on that they should give the names of
the particular persons they supposed to be guilty? N^y my lords, it never was.
And shall the petitioners in the present case, because they are men of as high
quality, and as much injured as any that ever pre^en^ed a petition to
parliament, because the injury they complain of is of as high and as dangerous
a nature (...) any that was ever complained of to parliament; and because the
practices they complain of are as generally believed, and as much exclaimed
against, as ever any practices were in this or any other nation; shall they, I
say, for these reasons be obliged to do more than was ever desired of any
petitioners? Shall their petition be rejected, unless they will subject
themselves to the trouble, the expense, and the danger of becoming the actual
accusers of those they suspect to be guilty?

It was observed, that even in private life, if a gentleman should relate a
fact, and say he had it from such authority as he could depend on, it would not
be consistent with common decency, to tell him, I can give no credit to what
you relate; nay, I will not so much as be at the pains to enquire into the
truth of it, unl^ss you give me your authority. Consider, my lords, what are
the authorities that can be given. The noble lords the petitioners have told
us, that they have certain information of undue and illegal practices made use
of toward engaging peers to vote for a list at the last election. The only
authority they can give for this allegation is, that of the persons who told
them so, and these are the very persons they desire to have examined at your
lordships bar. Surely your lordships would not have them to give you that
authority at present; you would not have them now to give you the names of
their informers; that would indeed be a discovery of evidence, the most open
that ever was made, and more open than was ever desired from any plaintiff in
this world. This therefore is not surely what the noble lords would have
toward assisting them to form a judgment of their own in the present case; and
yet if this be not what they want, I really cannot comprehend what they would
have.

If we look back upon all former elections in parliament, (says a nameless
speaker in the debate) we must think it very strange that the sixteen peer^
chosen have always been of a ministerial complexion almost without exception;
and if the complexion of any of them altered during the continuance of the
parliament, we have always found them left out at the next election; nay, upon
all changes of ministers, we have found the election of peers in Scotland take
a new and a general turn. This could not, in my opinion, have happened without
something of a very extraordinary ministerial influence on that election; and
this extraordinary influence cannot be obtained without some undue methods and
illegal practices; nay, it is natural to suppose, that if he is not a man of
more virtue than ministers usually have, a minister will always make use of the
power and the favors of the crown which are at his disposal, to get such a set
of peers returned from Scotland as he shall approve of; so that from the nature
of the thing, as well as from past experience, we have all the reason in the
world to believe there have been some illegal practices made use of at the last
election; and as the honor of this house, as well as the preservation of the
constitution, is deeply concerned in preventing such practices, as such
practices cannot be prevented by our ordinary courts of law, an enquiry into
this affair i^ now, I think, become absolutely necessary. -- Custom, my lords,
is of a mighty prevalent nature. Even virtue itself owes its respect in a great
measure to custom; and vice, by being openly and avowed^y practiced, soon comes
to disguise itself, to conceal its deformity, and at length to assume the habit
of virtue. If ministerial influence, if private and selfish vie^^ should once
come to be the sole directors in voting at the election of the sixteen peers
for Scotland, the practice would soon get even into this house itself; and a^
inferiors are always apt to imitate their superiors, it would from thence
descend to every election, and to every assembly in Great Britain. Corruption
would then come to be openly and generally avowed; it would assume the habit of
virtue; the sacrificing our country, the sacrificing of all the ties of honor,
friendship, and blood, to any personal advantage or preferment, would be called
prudence and good sense, and every contra^y behavior would be called madness
and folly. Then indeed if there were a man of virtue left in the nation, he
might have reason to cry out with the celebrated Roman patriot, O virtue I have
followed thee as a real good; but now I find thou art nothing but an empty
name. It was, my lords, the general corruption he found in his country that led
that great man into such an expression. He died in the defense of liberty and
virtue; and with him expired the last remains of the liberty and virtue of his
country; for virtue and liberty always go hand in hand; wherever one is, there
likewise is the other, and from every country they take their flight together.

It had been said on this occasion, that the enquiry proposed by the
petitioners would put the nation in a ferment. To this it was replied DEB.
LORDS, IV.422.
, As to the putting the nation in a ferment, I am sure in the present case our
going upon an enquiry will put the nation into no ferment; but our refusing to
make any enpuiry will certainly put the whole nation, and particularly
Scotland, into a very great ferment. We ought to consider, my lords, the danger
the whole nation was exposed to by a most unjust rebellion raised in that
country against his late majesty; but if the peerage of that country should
find themselves oppressed by a minister, and should find that no justice is to
be expected from this house, it may raise another rebellion, or rather an
insurrection, in that country; and as they would then have truth and justice on
their side, it would naturally procure them the hearts of all the people of
England, and I am afraid most of their hands.

The petition being dismissed, a protest was entered on the journals, in which
are the following nervous passages, viz.

When we consider the first particular in the answer of the lords petitioners,
viz. That the list of sixteen peers for Scotland had been framed by persons in
high trust under the crown, being previous to the election itself, and that the
list was shown to peers, as a list approved of by the crown, and was called the
king's list; we are filled with indignation to see that great name indecently
blended with the tricks of ministers, and profaned and prostituted to the worst
purposes, to purposes that must necessarily tend to the subversion of our
constitution, which we know it is his majesty's glory and desire to preserve.
Such a criminal attempt to screen or facilitate a ministerial nomination by the
interposition (equally false and illegal) of his majesty's name, calls, in our
opinion, not only for the strictest enquiry and the severest punishment upon
the authors of the fact, if it be proved, or the assertors of it, if it be not;
but it is in our opinion no way to be dropped unexamined and unenquired into;
such a precedent may in future times encourage the worst of ministers to load
with his guilt the best of princes; the borrowed name of his sovereign may at
once become his weapon and his shield, and the constitution may owe its danger,
and he his defense to the abuse of his prince's name after a long abuse of his
power. -- We dissent, because we think the promises of pensions and offices,
civil and military,' [and the other abovementioned bribes offered to the
peers, who should vote for the ministerial list] seem in the highest degree to
affect the honor and dignity of this house; since untroubled streams can
hardly be expected to flow from a corrupted source: and if the election of
sixteen peers for Scotland should ever by the foul arts of corruption dwindle
into a ministerial nomination, instead of persons of the first rank, greatest
merit, and most considerable property, we may expect in future parliaments, to
see such only returned, who, owing their election to the nomination of the
minister, may purchase the continuance of their precarious seats by a fatal and
unanimous submission to his di^ta^es. Such persons can never be impartial
judges of his conduct, should it ever be brought in judgment before this great
tribunal.

Thus far this shameless affair was carried; and then it was voted to adjourn;
on which 32 lords dissented. Their protest concl^des with the following words,
viz. We have reason to apprehend that posterity upon the perusal of the journal
of this day, may be induced to think that this house was not inclined to permit
the transactions of the late election in Scotland to be brought under
examination in any shape whatsoever: the method proposed being, as we conceive,
-- clear of all the objections which were made in relation to the petition.

On occasion of the controverted election for Yorkshire, A. D. 1736, the
commons allowed parol-evidence to be a sufficient proof, that a particular
voter was not a freeholder, who had made affidavit, that he was. Yet we do not
hear, that the man was punished for perjury. DEB. COM. IX.148.
And afterward Ibid. 151.
, The house having reassumed the hearing of the petitions relating to an undue
election for the county of York, the counsel for the petitioners examined
Ioshuah Wilson, in order to disqualify John Maken, as having had no freehold at
the time of the said election in the place where he then swore, that his
freehold did lie; and the said Wilson beginning to give evidence of that
disqualification, by relating the confession of the said John Maken, he was
interrupted by the counsel for the sitting member, who said, that as the house
would not admit of a man's confession even before them, as an evidence against
what he had sworn at the time of an election, they would not surely admit of a
man's private confession to a neighbor in the country as an evidence against
what he had sworn at the time of an election. Upon this the counsel on both
sides were heard, and several journals read, particularly the resolution of
that house of the 12th of February then last, in the case of the election for
the borough of Southwark against admitting the petitioners counsel to examine
Thomas Garman in contradiction to his oath at that election: And then the
following question was proposed, viz. That the counsel for the petitioners be
admitted to give evidence as to what a voter confessed, of his having no
freehold, who, at the time of the election, swore he had. Upon this motion
there was also a debate; but upon the question's being put, it was carried in
the affirmative by 181 to 132.

In the year 1739, complaint was made of an undue election for Plymouth. The
last determination of the house, viz. A. D. 1660, had settled, that the right
of election was in the mayor, and commonalty. The petitioner's counsel
insisted, that the word commonalty signifies freemen only, excluding
freeholders. The house resolved the same. The sitting member, who was elected
by a majority of freemen and freeholders, was turned out, and the petitioner,
who was elected by a majority of freemen only, was received DEB. COM. XI.199.
.

How necessary ministers think it for them to have power in elections, appears
from the following; which shows, that the then reigning junto were willing to
sa^rifice, to this great object, the liberty and happi^^^s of every British
subject.

A. D. 1739, the ministry, on pretense of manning the navy, proposed an act, by
which constables should have power, by a warrant from justices, to enter and
search private houses at all hours, for concealed sailors. In the debate in the
house of commons, an annonymous member spoke as follows DEB. COM. XII.418.
.

I am surprised, to find gentlemen express so much impatience, as some begin to
show in this debate. I hope no gentleman comes here with a resolution to give
his vote upon either side of any question, that may be started, till he has
heard what may be said for or against it; and therefore in a question which so
nearly concerns the liberties of this country, I cannot but be surprised at
seeing gentlemen express an unwillingness to hear the argument fully discussed.
If they will not be at the pains to let us hear their sentiments upon it in any
other way than by their Aye or No, they ought to attend particularly to those
that will; for though these monosyllables may determine the question, I am sure
neither of them will convince any reasonable man in the kingdom. The question
now before us is not simply, Whether we shall agree to this clause or not. It
is, Whether we shall agree to put an end to our constitution, and make slaves
of ourselves, our constituents and posterity? For this, in my opinion, will be
the certain consequence of our agreeing to this clause, however amended. That
our liberties, nay and our properties too, depend upon the freedom of our
elections, is a maxim which I believe no man will contest. A corrupt parliament
may for a time support an oppressive and wicked minister; but a parliament is
but the stream: Our elections for parliament men are the fountain head, and as
long as they are left free and uncorrupted, the stream will of course refine,
and will at last become as pure as the fountain from whence it flows. But this
clause, Sir, seems to be contrived for poisoning the fountain itself, and for
rendering all the elections in the kingdom dependent upon the will of every
future minister. Let us consider, Sir, that the freedom of a man's vote at any
election may be taken away, not only by an immediate bribe in ready money, or
bank notes, but by the hopes of being rewarded for his compliances, or the
fears of being made to suffer for his stubbornness; and if we consider how much
a minister has it already in his power to make use of every one of those
methods, we shall be extremely cautious of making any new additions to that
power. That our ministers have now a much greater command of ready money, than
they formerly used to have, can be denied by no man who considers the late
increase of the civil list revenue, the great sums of late years allowed, even
in time of peace, for secret service money, and the savings that may be made
out of the vast sums now granted for the current service. I believe, Sir, it
will be as little contested, that our ministers have now a much greater number
of lucrative posts and employments at their disposal, than any former ministers
ever had in this kingdom. These, Sir, are a two edged sword in the hands of a
minister; they serve not only for cultivating the hopes of the compliant, but
for increasing the fears of the stubborn at elections; and by our late practice
they are now become more useful in both these respects than ever they were
before. It is now become a general and an established opinion, that no man is
to expect or to hold any post or employment in the government* unless he, and
all those over whom he has any influence, take care to vote at every election
according to the directions of the minister. What an effect this must have at
all elections, gentlemen may easily imagine. If an elector has any thing
mercenary in his temper, he will certainly vote according to court directions
at every election, in hopes that he, his son, his brother, or some near
relation, may get a post or a preferment in the service of the government; and
it is a great hardship upon honest men, I mean those who vote upon all
occasions according to conscience, to find themselves excluded from all the
benefits that are to be reaped by serving their country in a public capacity.
Whether it is so or not, I shall not pretend to say; but I am sure it is
generally thought, that no man is now deemed capable to serve his country,
unless he be ready upon all occasions to sacrifice the liberties of his country
to the dictates of those who have the disposal of our public employments; and
this of itself would in most countries be sufficient for establishing arbitrary
power. -- He goes on afterward as follows. -- In a country where there is a
multitude of penal laws, and especially when those laws not only punish, but
create crimes, innocence can be no protection against the malice or revenge of
those who are entrusted with the executive part of the government. A man may
without knowing it, be guilty of a breach of such intricate laws; and even when
he is guilty of no breach, he may be plagued and harrassed out of his life, or
at least out of his business, by the governments officers. In such
circumstances he must not only be a very honest, but a very brave and resolute
man, who will dare to vote at any election contrary to these menaces that are
whispered to him by the tools of a minister* and if we consider what numbers of
electors are already brought into such circumstances by the many penal laws
lately enacted, we shall have more reason to wonder at any elections being
carried against the court interest, than at the minister's having the direction
of most of the elections in the kingdom. When our liberties are in so great
danger, when there is so much reason to apprehend the prevalence of court
influence upon every election in the kingdom, shall we pass a law, which will
enable a minister to distress every man in the kingdom, who shall dare to
disobey his orders at any election? I say, Sir, every man in the kingdom; for
this law will enable a minister to distress not only our seamen, but every man
in the kingdom that has a house over his head. Such a law as this will have a
most fatal effect upon the freedom of our elections, not only with regard to
all such as are, or have ever been at sea, or in any business upon the water,
but with regard to every other man in the kingdom, that happens to be a
housekeeper. Quiet and security at home, is an advantage which every man must
desire, and consequently being disturbed by unwelcome guests, or at
unseasonable hours, is a danger every man must dread. By this law you are to
put it in the power of a minister to disturb any housekeeper in the kingdom as
often, and at such hours as he thinks fit; and consequently every housekeeper
in the kingdom must be under a continual terror of doing any thing that may
provoke the minister to make use of this power against him. The interposition
of an information upon oath, will be no restraint upon this power; because
ministers are generally well provided with informers of all kinds, and the more
wicked and oppressive a minister is, the more of these vermin he always has
about him, and the more profligate they are. In my opinion it will be so far
from diminishing, that it will increase the danger of this clause, because
justices are to be not only empowered, but required to grant their warrant, and
constables are obliged to execute the warrant of the justices. If you leave it
as it stands at present, the execution of the law must be regulated, or at
least it ought, I think, to be regulated by the present practice in the case of
vagrants. When the justices grant their warrant for a general search after
vagrants and other idle and disorderly persons, the constables are not to
search every house in the district; they are to search no where but in night
houses, or houses of ill repute; and if they should disturb houses of good
character, by virtue of such a warrant, they might be prosecuted, and would be
punished; and therefore as this law now stands, the constables could, in my
opinion, search no where but in houses reputed to be harbourers of absconding
seamen. This, I say, is my opinion, but if the clause should be passed into a
law, I shall not say that my opinion would be asked or followed; and therefore
I do not think we should agree to a law, which by too extensive an
interpretation might be made of the most dangerous consequence both to the
liberties of our country, and to the property of every subject. But, Sir, if
you make the amendment proposed; if you require the justice to grant his
warrant upon the oath of any informer, you will make the evil cons^quences of
this law certain and unavoidable. The justice must then grant his warrant, and
the house must be searched, let the character of the house be ever so good, let
the character of the informer be ever so bad. This, Sir, is more than is done
even in the case of felony; a justice is empowered to grant his warrant to
search a house upon information on oath, that there is cause to suspect stolen
goods being concealed in that house; but he is not required so to do. He may,
and ought to refuse granting his warrant, if the informer be a mean person, or
one of a bad character; and if, upon searching, no such goods be found, the
informer would be made answerable for all damages sustained by such search. Nay
the justice himself would be made answerable, if it should appear that he had
granted his warrant upon the information of an insufficient person. I therefore
wish, Sir, that the honorable gentlemen employed in drawing up this bill had
considered a little better the constitution and the laws of their country; for
from the bill, as it stands at present, the people without doors will be apt to
imagine they have very little regard to the liberties, the properties, or the
ease of the subject, provided they can but increase the power and influence of
the crown. -- Afterward he adds what follows; -- Upon this subject, Sir, I
cannot pass, unobserved, the late famous gin-act. By the established law of the
land, before that act was passed or thought of, no person could sell beer, ale,
or spiritous liquors, by retail, without a license from the justices of peace.
The justices had a power to refuse their license, or to recall it, when they
pleased; and if any one sold such liquors without a license, he was by law made
liable to severe penalties. Besides this, there were severe laws against all
such as allowed drunkeness or tippling in their houses; and moreover there were
several of our gin shops that might, I believe, have been indicted as a public
nuisance. By a neglect of all these remedies, tippling and drunkenness in
gin-shops and alehouses, came to a monstrous height, and was generally
complained of, and often presented by our grand inquest without any redress,
because our justices of peace, who are entirely under the direction of our
ministers, would not put the laws in execution against these enormities. At
last, when the people were worked up to a sufficient rage against these
enormities we were told, that the laws in being were not sufficient for
preventing them; and though every one that understood the law, knew the
contrary, we were prevailed on to agree to a new law, by which a very great
addition was made to the civil list revenue, and every vintner, innkeeper,
ale-house-keeper, victualler, coffee-house, and brandy-shop in the kingdom,
brought under a most slavish dependence upon our justices of the peace and
commissioners of excise. That these were the effects of the gin-act must be
apparent, Sir, to every one who considers that the great increase of the civil
list revenue pretended to arise from its share of the duties upon spirituous
liquors, was owing to the enormities complained of, which were, perhaps, for
that very reason indulged; and for the same reason, perhaps, it was pretended,
that no stop could be put to them by the laws in being, because if a stop had
been put to them that way, the increase, which had arisen to the civil list
revenue by indulging those enormities, would have been annihilated without any
recompense from the aggregate fund. And if we consider the necessity every
keeper of a public house is under of selling spirituous liquors in small
quantities to his customers, the high penalties he is, by that act, subjected
to, if he does so, and the power given to the commissioners of excise and
justices of the peace, to mitigate those penalties; we may see, that the keeper
of every public house must be under a slavish dependence upon our commissioners
of excise and justices of the peace, and consequently that he must expect to be
ruined, should he give his vote against a court-candidate. Thus we may see,
Sir, that from all the inconveniences that arose either from a deficiency in
our laws or from a neglect in the execution of them, an advantage is taken for
introducing some new regulation, by which the power and influence of the crown
may be increased. This has so constantly, in all ages, been the practice of our
ministers, that one may from thence conclude, that every man, as soon as he
bec^mes a minister, or as he calls himself, a servant of the crown, begins to
think himself in duty bound to use every art he can think of for destroying the
liberties of the subject. This, I say, seems to have been the way of thinking
among ministers in all ages, and I am sure in no age more apparently than in
this. Shall we then upon this, or any other oc^asion, throw aside our
jealousies and fears? Shall we put a trust in those, who by their practices
have given us so good reason to be convinced of their having a design to betray
us? If we are under any present inconvenience, if we are under present
difficulties with regard to the manning of our fleet, let us examine whether
they proceed from the neglect or misconduct of those concerned in the executive
part of our government, or from any real defect in our constitution. If from
the former, let us remove those who have run us into such difficulties; and if
from the latter, let us consider our constitution, and apply those remedies
that are most consistent with its security and preservation; but let us not
plunge into the pit, which our enemies have dug for us on one hand, for fear of
tumbling over the imaginary precipice which they frighten us with on the other.
I am far from thinking we can be under any difficulty in manning all the ships
we have occasion for in the present war; but suppose we were, there are many
other remedies, besides that now proposed. -- This remedy now under our
consideration is the very worst that could be thought of. It is publishing our
distress to the world, and giving our enemies a just caus^ to triumph over us.
If the French or Spaniards owed us a grudge, they could in no way so
effectually punish us, as by forcing us to destroy our constitution, and give
up our liberties, for the sake of defending ourselves against them. Our passing
such a bill would give great joy to every Frenchman ^r Spaniard that
understands any thing of our constitut^on; and as I am against making a holiday
either in France or Spain, I must be against agreeing to th^s c^ause DEB. COM.
XII.418.
.

A. D. 1741, the house proceeded to the hearing the merits of the Denbighshire
election, and, the counsel on both sides being withdrawn, William Middleton,
Esquire high sheriff of the said county at the last election, was called in and
heard, and being withdrawn, it was resolved, that the majority of the votes
upon the poll was for the petitioner, Sir Watkin Williams Win, bart. and was
so declared by the high sheriff at the close of the poll, and no alteration was
made in the said poll, until after the high sheriff had made the return. Also
that John Middleton, Esquire was not duly returned, and that Sir Watkin Williams
Win, bart. ought to have been a knight of the shire for the said county, and
the clerk of the crown was ordered to amend the said return. Then it was
further resolved, that William Middleton, Esquire high sheriff of the county of
Denbigh, at the last election for a knight of the shire, having taken upon
himself to return John Middleton, Esquire contrary to the majority of votes
received by him upon the poll, and to his own declaration of the numbers at the
close of the poll, without any public subsequent examination into the rights of
the voters previous to such return, and having afterward presumed to alter the
said poll in order to give color to such return, has acted partially,
arbitrarily and illegally, in defiance of the laws, in manifest violation of
the rights of the freeholders of the said county, and in breach of the
privilege of the house; and that he be for his said offense committed prisoner
to Newgate. The house also voted an address to his majesty to remove the said
William Middleton from being receiver general of the land-revenue in North
Wales, and also from being one of his majesty's justices of the peace for the
counties of Denbigh and Flint DEB. COM. XIII.133.
.

As the election for Westminster, A. D. 1741, makes a considerable article in
the business of this session, it ^ay be proper to observe, that a great
disturbance having enfused about taking the poll; a party of foot soldiers were
sent for by order of three of the justices of peace. These proceedings gave
rise to the following remarkable presentment of the grand jury of Middlesex to
the court of king's bench on the 17th of June following.

Middlesex. We, the grand jury of and for the body of the county of Middlesex,
do apprehend, that among the many enormities and offenses committed against the
public, none deserve our observation and censure more than those which tend to
the subversion of the ancient rights of the people to a free election of their
representatives in parliament, in whom they repose their undoubted share in the
government as well as constitute them guardians of their liberties and
properties. For we cannot but apprehend, that whenever the people shall lose
the right of election, or, which is the same thing, the freedom of election,
and shall be obliged to choose their representatives, under the awe, dread, or
influence of any other power, there must be an end of parliaments, or at least
of the people's interest and share therein. Wherefore, being sworn to enquire
for our sovereign lord the king, and the body of this county, we upon our oaths
present, That on Friday the 8th day of May last, while the election for members
of parliament for the city and liberty of Westminster was depending, and before
the declaration thereof was made, a body of foot guards or soldiers, to the
number of fifty or upwards, headed by officers, did in the afternoon, in a
military manner, march up near the place of polling, which practice may be of
the most dangerous consequence to the liberties of the people, as contrary to
law, and a restraint on the freedom of elections. We, therefore being affected
and alarmed with a due sense and dread of so daring a violation and insult on
our freedom and liberties, and the dangerous consequence of military power
exercised in civil affairs, do recommend it to this honorable court to give
such order and direction for preventing and discouraging the like heinous
offenses for the future, as they shall judge most proper and convenient DEB.
COM. XIII.14.
.

A.D. 1754, four members for Oxfordshire were returned by the sheriff, instead
of too. Therefore there was no sitting member for the county Alm. DEB. COM.
V.153.
Any member might have moved the house upon this the very first day of the
session; and the sheriff might have been ordered to attend, and give an account
of his proceeding. However, no notice was taken till November 18: So that the
house was not legally such till the county of Oxford was represented, though it
met on the 14th, and did business. All the four candidates petitioned, viz.
lord Parker (now earl of Macclesfield) and Sir Edward Turner on the court side;
and lord Wenman and Sir James Dashwood on that of the opposition. The friends
of the two former moved, that the matter of the petitions should be heard
immediately; but those on the other insisted, that the merits of the return
ought to be first heard and determined Ibid. 153.
; which was certainly reasonable. They therefore moved for the previous
question, whether the question upon this motion should be now put. Because if
the privious question had been carried in the negative, they would have had an
opportunity to move for appointing a short day to consider of the return, and
for ordering the high sheriff to attend. But this the court party were against,
and carried their point, that the matter of the petition should be heard on the
3d of December following. Afterward it was moved by the opposition, that the
high sheriff should attend on the day of hearing. But this was carried in the
negative Alm. DEB. COM. V.154.
. It appeared, that the sheriff had given a very unfair advantage to the court
gentlemen, by allowing them to make their objections to all the voters through
the whole poll, before the opposition-gentlemen should object to one
individual; of which it was impossible to go through half before the end of the
month, when the writ was returnable Ibid. 156.
. The latter therefore insisted, that they were fairly elected, because they
had an acknowleged majority, which could not be set aside by such an unfinished
scrutiny, in which scrutiny, besides, they had not had an equal chance. It was
therefore incumbent on the court-gentlemen's counsel to endeavor to overthrow
the majority claimed by their antagonists. It was carried, that the
opposition-counsel should proceed to show the general merits of their cause.
They did so, and proposed to disqualify no less than 540 voters for the
court-gentlemen. Then witnesses were examined for proving the partiality of the
sheriff, and for proving lord Parker and Sir Edward Turner, and their agents,
guilty of bribery; for which purpose, they likewise produced letters, which
they proved to be the handwriting of the said two gentlemen Ibid. 157.
. Nine days were spent in proving voters on the court-side disqualified. Lord
Parker and Sir Edward Turner answered objections against the sheriff, and
endeavored to clear themselves of the accusation of bribery, which they
retorted upon their antagonists. They spent ten days in endeavoring to clear
their voters. Then they proposed to set aside 522 of the opposite voters, in
which they spent eleven days.' Then the opposition-counsel spent nine days in
their reply. Many separate questions were debated, most, if not all, of which
were determined by a great majority in favor of lord Parker and Sir Edward
Turner,' the court-gentlemen Alm. DEB. COM. V.158.
. A motion was made by the opposition, That all copyholders, holding by
court-roll, and not at the will of the lord, have right of voting for
county-members. This motion was made on purpose to have a negative put upon it;
but it was set aside by the previous question. Lord Parker and Sir Edward
Turner were declared duly elected Ibid. 159.
.

It is a common trick of our ministers to put a multitude of persons upon
taking up their freedom in boroughs and cities before an election, with a view
to their votes, every one of which may be supposed to be bought. Corporations
have sometimes manfully refused to grant freedoms for such purposes; as that of
Gloucester did about 1767. I took this fact from a Magazine, but have not
quoted it rightly.

The number of petitions complaining of undue elections and returns was so
great in the first sessions of the present parliament, that the house of
commons must have employed one long session only in settling controverted
elections, without bringing in any one bill, public or private. Therefore they
thought it necessary to put off all those petitions to next session. How many
gentlemen may be supposed to have sat and voted during that session, who had no
right to be there, and whose illegal votes did in fact render the acts made in
that session null and void. See the Magazines, etc. of the times.

Could a more solemn farce be acted, than that of a certain A. D. which shall
be nameless, when the magistrates of a certain famous city were gravely
reprimanded by the speaker of the house of commons, because they had proposed
to their then present members to re-elect them, if they would advance a sum,
not to be sunk in private pockets, but toward relieving the city from some of
its debts? How the speaker could help laughing in the midst of his speech, when
he reflected, that at least two-thirds of the house had obtained their seats by
more corrupt means, is not easy to understand. I should have been strongly
tempted, had I been one of those reprimanded citizens, to answer his reprimand
as follows: None of your grimaces, pray good Mr. speaker. You have caught us,
and you have pounded us, and there is an end of the matter. But look around
you, and think what lungs you must have to reprimand all who have given and
received money for seats and votes in this house.

There is nothing new under the sun. There was a contested election between Mr.
Trenchard and Mr. Bertie in Charles II's pensioned parliament. It was carried
for Bertie. Lord O'Brian, a relation of the lord treasurers, went to him in
triumph with the news, and told him, they had fairly voted 13 more than 21
STATE TRACTS, time of king William, II.476.
. So in the late Midd^esex election the commons fairly voted 296 more than
1143. It is true, that Mr. Wilkes was known to have no real qualification. For
there was at that very time a subscription carrying on, to enable him to pay
his debts. And (to say nothing of any objections against that gentleman's
character rendering him unfit to be a legislator) it was certainly not in
character for persons assuming to be the assertors of the constitution, to do
so unconstitutional a thing, as promoting an unqualified person's election into
parliament. At the same time, this does not justify the commons in their
proceeding on that occasion; upon which I will add here, as a comment, the
substance of a protest by several lords, as follows;

That the proceeding of the house of commons on that occasion was
unconstitutional. That the house ought not to make law concerning elections;
but only to declare it as it is already made. That election is in the hands of
the constituents, not of the house. That otherwise the house may come to be
self-created, and the constituents thrown out of all power. That there is no
precedent for making expulsion imply incapacitation. Walpole was re-elected by
the people, after he was expelled by the house, which shows the sense of the
people to be, that expulsion does not incapacitate; but only gives the people
leave to re-elect the expelled person, if they please. That according to this
way of proceeding, electors may hereafter be obliged to choose only court-tools,
or not choose at all, if the house may expel and incapacitate arbitraily. That
if the house have, in their own breast, the power of expulsion and
incapacitation, they may, in corrupt times, expel and incapacitate every honest
man. That the house of peers, though they ought not to interfere in the proper
and exclusive business of the other house, yet must interfere, when they see
designs carrying on, for overturning the whole parliament. For the peers cannot
make a parliament without a legal house of commons, any more than without a
legal prince. That silence in such a case would be approbation. That the peers
are trustees for the people, and must be faithful, else the people are left at
the mercy of the house of commons, without relief from the other house. That
the peers are the ancient constitutional counselors of the crown, and must
give the king good counsel, even against the house of commons, if that house
acts wrong. The lords conclude with the following words.

And here we solemnly pledge ourselves to the public, that we will persevere in
availing ourselves, as far as in us lies, of every right, and of every power,
with which the constitution has armed us, for the good of the whole, in order
to obtain full relief for the injured electors of Great Britain, and security
for the future, against the most dangerous usurpation upon the rights of the
people, which, by sapping the fundamental principles of this government,
threatens its total dissolution.

The affair appeared to the opposition in the house of commons so gross, that
they rose as one man, and left the house Alm, DEB. COM. VIII.189.
.

At this period it may be said the house of commons arrived at the height of
despotism. They set themselves in the place of the whole legislature, and dared
by a resolution to determine the right of the subject contrary to the known
laws of the land, and the liberty and property of every subject in it. It is
agreed, that every society has a right to determine on its own members; but it
must be a society of that nature, which by mutual agreement, constitutes
itself: but if such society derives its right from the deputation of others, to
determine the rights of their own members, would be to determine the right of
the constituents, which no body of deputies can do; nor can a society framed by
the inherent right of each individual, be a judge of its own members: a bishop,
for instance, or a lord of parliament, cannot have his right of voting in the
house of peers taken away by a vote of the house of peers: a judge by a vote of
the other judges, or a justice of peace by a vote of the bench of justices at a
quarter sessions. -- If the right of a member of any society is therefore
inherent, or deputed, the society, of which he is a member, has no right to
eject him from such society, for a longer time than till the opinion of those
whose representative he is, can judge whether the crime for which he is ejected
is of that nature to disqualify him from such service Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.133.
.

A. D. 1771, it was found, and represented to the house of commons, that a
majority of the freemen of the town of Shoreham in Kent had formed themselves
into a club, which they profanely called the Christian Club. That the members
of this club had entered into bonds to stand by one another at all elections,
and to make the most lucrative bargains they could with candidates Ibid.
IX.106, 113.
. That they took the bribery-oath without hesitation, and after the election
was over, they received every man his penny, which the successful candidate
paid to a committee of the club who did not vote, nor take the bribery-oath. So
they pretended to defeat damnation. The members of this club were disfranchised
by parliament Alm. DEB. COM. IX.148.
.

In this month of November, 1773, Mr. Kelly gave up the contest for Worcester,
publicly declaring, that the expense was so great, he could not pretend to keep
pace with his antagonist, though possessed of a large fortune. According to the
constitution, and laws, every shilling laid out toward gaining an election is
criminal; according to the practice of the times, a gentleman of ample fortune
must lay out more than he can afford (without beggaring his family to be
elected; that is, in order to have a seat among the legislators, a man must do
the most lawless thing any subject can do; or, in other words, a candidate
endeavors to obtain favor with his constituents by showing them, that he is
capable of violating the laws, and destroying the constitution, before he has
an opportunity of convincing them, that he is qualified, by abilities and
disposition, for making laws, and supporting the constitution See the News
papers of N^v. 1773.
.

Ministers of state (says Sir William Wyndham, in the debate on the repeal of
the septennial act, A. D. 1734) know well how unequal the contention is between
a country gentleman who has nothing but his own estate (greatly exhausted by
the many taxes he pays) to depend upon, and ministerial election-mongers
supplied by gentlemen in office, who have for seven years been heaping up money
for that purpose, or perhaps have been supplied even by the public treasure of
the nation; and the sooner this contention begins, the greater disadvantage the
country gentleman labors under, the more time those tools of corruption have
to practice upon the electors, and to discover where that money may be placed
to the best advantage, which is offered for corrupting the people and
overturning the constitution. From hence it is obvious who have been and who
will always be the beginners of such contentions DEB. COM. VIII.189.
.

Bohun's RIGHT OF ELECTION, a small folio, contains little besides accounts of
bribery and corruption at elections, and he takes in only last century, when
corruption was young. All the while the court has not the shadow, of a pretense
for interfering in elections. The people may always be entrusted with the care
of their own affairs; and whoever endeavors to influence them may mis-lead
them; but certainly will not direct them better, than they will direct
themselves. There was an instance in the election, A. D. 1681. Many places
followed the example of London, and in most places the electors treated the
candidates, instead of the common contrary custom, o^ they bore their own
charges bid. II.99.
. There was likewise a parliament in Mr. Pelham's time, which was reckoned to
have been elected in a very free manner. And I find in my common-place-book the
following, copied from some history of the times. The court did not meddle in
the election, A. D., yet there was a very good parliament chosen. I have
omitted adding my authority.

CHAP. III. Statutes, Resolutions, etc. against corrupt proceedings at
Elections.
THERE have been various laws and regulations made to prevent, and punish
corrupt proceedings at elections. So early as the time of Edw. II. who was
crowned A. D. 1307, we find laws against soliciting votes and elections ART.
CLER. cap. XIV. STAT. WESTMINSTER. cap. V. STAT. 7. Hen. IV.
.

See 7 Hen. IV. cap. 15. The manner of election of knights of shires for
parliament STAT. AT LARGE, I.438.
. And Ibid. 442.
the penalty on a sheriff for making an untrue return of the election of the
knights of parliament. It was enacted (says Elsynge 74. Rapin, I.498.
, speaking of this statute) at the petition of the commons, that proclamation
be first made in the next county court, after the sheriff has received the
writ, of election to be made, etc. that the election be in full county, wherein
they shall proceed freely and indifferently, notwithstanding any prayer, or
commandment, to the contrary. And four years afterward a fine of 100 l. was
laid on all sheriffs making returns contrary to the above statute, and the
knight so elected to lose his wages. The writ of return to be signed by all the
voters.

By 11 Hen. IV. cap. 1. the justices of assize were to make enquiry and
determine concerning irregular elections and returns; and to punish sheriffs,
or others offending, And by 6 Hen. VI. cap. 4, persons claiming to have been
duly elected, and sheriffs, pleading innocence, may traverse the sentence, and
have trial, and not be punishable, but upon regular conviction at common law
STAT. AT LARGE, I.498, 571.
. By 1 Hen. V. cap. 1. Ibid. 499.
never repealed, no man can be member for a shire, city, or borough, unless he
has property in it, and unless it be his usual residence. According to these
statutes, not one member in twenty ought to sit in the house, who have, of late
times, had seats in it. We see every day, some old law against the people
trumped up. Why should not those in favor of liberty be enforced?

By 3 Edw. I. cap. 5. there shall be no disturbance of free elections Ibid. 48.
. Elections here are not to be understood of elections of members of parliament
only.

Though elections for parliament are the chief, and of such importance, that
infringing their freedom is alone an irremediable poison to liberty Rapin,
I.551.
. By sundry statutes of Hen. VI. etc. members falsely returned are to lose
their wages, and sheriffs making false returns are fineable 100 l. STAT. AT
LARGE, 1504* et pass.
.

In ancient times, it is probable, that all the inhabitants of counties had
privilege of voting for members (in those times almost any body might sit in
parliament in his own right) but this number was thought too unwieldy.
Therefore, in the beginning of Hen. VI. the right of voting was limited to
landholders of 40 shillings per ann. and 10 Hen. VI. it was det^^mined that the
40 shillings should be freehold. A. D. 1659, under the commonwealth, a bill was
brought in, by which any person giving an entertainment to any elector, was
incapable of sitting in the house Maccaul. HIST. V.314.
.

The famous qualification-act, 1659, disqualifies, among others, deists,
blasphemers, profaners of the Lord's day, professed cursers and swearers,
drunkards, and those who have given any conditional promise or entertainment,
or bribe to electors, with heavy penalty ^n both member and elector PARL. HIST.
XXII.131.
.

Resolved, A. D. 1685, that no mayor can duly return himself a burgess, to
serve in parliament for the borough of which he is mayor, at the time of his
election DEB. COM. II.172.
.

Resolutions were made, A. D. 1678, against bribery at elections, that if any
man gives victuals above 10 l. value, after the test of the writ of election,
or after a place becomes vacant, any where but in his own house, or who makes
any promise or declaration before an election, it shall be punishable as
bribery, the election void, and the candidate incapable of sitting by that
election. To be a standing order of the house Ibid. I.284.
. It was moved to have enquiry made concerning pensions charged on the revenue;
privy seals issued for that purpose since 1677; a test concerning bribery and
corruption in elections; or to carry causes or bills in parliament Ibid. 286.
.

A. D. 1679, a bill was brought in, that when a member takes a place of profit,
a new writ is to be issued Rap. II.706.
. See the draught of a bill for regulating the abuses of elections, which was
twice read, and committed, by the commons, Apr. 5, 1679, and afterward
published Sommers's TRACTS, I.63.
, forbidding minors, and persons of no property, or not resident for a year, to
vote for members; forbidding all manner of treating, feasting, bribing,
promissing, etc. on penalty of heavy fines, etc.

Bill to regulate elections passed, A. D. 1690. DEB. COM. II.381.
Bill for free and impartial elections passed, A. D. 1693. Ibid. 421.
A bill was brought in, and passed, A. D. 1695, for voiding all elections,
where members had been at any expense for victuals, drink, or money, to procure
votes. It was very strictly penned (says Burnet HIST. OWN TIMES. III.222.
) but time must show, whether any evasions can be found out to avoid it.
Certainly, if it has the desired effect, it would prove one of the best laws
ever made in England; for abuses in elections were grown to most intolerable
excesses, which threatened even the ruin of the nation.

An act was passed, A. D. 1696, by which all returns were to be made according
to the last determination of the house of commons Tind. CONTIN. I.323.
. The famous bill for regulating elections was rejected the same year by the
king. The commons were offended. The question was put That the king's advisers
were enemies to their country. Overruled by the previous question; but the
first question was printed in the votes, and names on both sides Ibid.
.

By 7 and 8 Will. III. cap. 3, it is enacted, That candidates after the test of
the writ, or after a place becomes vacant, giving or promising any present, or
reward, to any person having vote, for being elected; shall be incapable of
serving in parliament STAT. AT LARGE, III 199.
. And by the same, cap. 7. false and double returns are prohibited on penalty
Ibid. 201.
. And by the same, cap. 25, many regulations are enacted for preventing
irregularities at elections Ibid. 234.
. And by 10 and 11 Will. III. sundry regulations are enacted relating to the
proceedings of sheriffs, and to returns, etc. Ibid. 414.


An act was made 7 Will. against multiplying voices to vote in the elections of
members to serve in parliament DEB. COM. IV.258.
And by the same, no person is to give money, promise, or entertainment to a
voter, after the place becomes vacant, on pain of incapacitation. False, or
double returns, or attempts to procure them are, punishable. Unnecessary delay
of elections, adjournment to unusual, or inconvenient places. Splitting of
possessions, to multiply votes. A mortgagee, if the equity of redemption is in
another, shall not be qualified, unless the mortgagee has been in possession 7
years before the election. Candidates refusing to take the oath concerning
their qualification, are to void their elections. By the same act, fraudulent
conveyances, in order to multiply votes at elections, are forbidden. The same
by 10 Anne, cap. 23. STAT. AT LARGE, IV.483.
The same is explained, 12 Anne, cap. 5. Ibid 526. In the same page, see an act
for regulating elections in Scotland.
And 12 Anne, cap. 25. Ibid. 541.
is an act for making perpetual that of 7 Will. III. against fraudulent
conveyances. See 9 Anne, cap. 5, an act for securing the freedom of parliament,
by further qualifying the members to sit in the house of commons STAT. AT
LARGE, IV.299.
. A bill was brought in A. D. 1711, for preventing fraudulent conveyances, in
order to multiply votes DEB. COM. IV.258.
. An act against fraudulent conveyances for multiplying votes, A. D. 1712, was
passed by the Tories Ibid. 309.
.

The qualification for county members, 600 l. a year clear, for boroughs and
cities 300 l. was settled, A. D. 1710 Ibid. 187.
. (No qualification required for eldest sons, and heirs of peers, or lords of
parliament, or heirs of gentlemen of 600 l. and 300 l. a year, nor for
university members, which is very absurd; because no people are more obnoxious
to bribery, than heirs to estates, before they come into possession.) The
candidates to make oath, if required by their antagonists, of their being worth
so much money before election, or if not within three months after, to be
certified in chancery, by the sheriff, or undersheriff, on forfeiture of 100
l. Candidates refusing the oath at election time, if demanded, to void their
election Ibid. 189.
. The act was blamed on several accounts; among others, because it excluded
traders from representing the trading interest.

Inquiry was made, A. D. 1711, concerning false conveyances for multiplying
votes for county members, and a bill ordered in for checking corruption in city
and borough elections Ibid. 258.
. Carried up to the lords Ibid. 299.
A bill for preventing fraudulent conveyances for multiplying votes, was read
the first time, and ordered a second reading, A. D. 1713 DEB. Ibid. V.12.
. Act to explain a clause in the act against fraudulent conveyances and false
multiplication of votes, and others passed by commission, passed A. D. 1713
Ibid. 53.
. An act passed for regulating elections in Scotland Ibid.
. Bill for continuing an act made in the 7 Will. entitled, An act to prevent
false and double returns of members to serve in parliament, read once, A. D.
1713, and ordered a second reading Ibid. 49.
. A bill ordered in, A. D. 1713, for limiting the number of officers in the
house Ibid. 4.
.

A. D. 1713, the house in a grand committee, considered the act of the ninth
year of her majesty's reign, entitled, An act for securing the freedom of
parliaments, by the farther qualifying the members to sit in the house of
commons; and came to the following resolutions. I. That notwithstanding the
oath taken by any candidate on, or after any election, his qualifications may
be afterward examined into. II. That the person whose qualification is
expressly objected to in any petition relating to his election, shall within
fifteen days after the petition read, give to the clerk of the house of commons
a paper signed by himself, containing a rental or particular of the lands,
t^nements, or hereditaments, whereby he makes out his qualification, of which
any person concerned may have a copy. III. That of such lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, whereof the party has been in possession for three years before
the election, he shall also insert in the same paper, from what person, and by
what conveyance or act in law he claims and derives the same; and also the
consideration, if any paid, and the names and places of abode of the witnesses
to such conveyance and payment. IV. That if a sitting member shall think fit to
question the qualification of a petitioner, he shall within fifteen days after
the petition read, leave notice thereof in writing, with the clerk of the house
of commons; and the petitioner shall, in such case, within fifteen days after
such notice, leave with the said clerk of the house, the like account in
writing of his qualification, as is required from a sitting member DEB. COM.
V.62.
.

The bill for securing the freedom of elections, which passed the house of
commons, A. D. 1721, and was thrown out by the lords at the second reading (by
collusion, Mr. Gordon supposes) was to enact, that the writs be faithfully
delivered to the returning officer; that all contracts to save returning
officers harmless for making undue returns of members, be null and void, and
both parties fineable 1000 l. each, and incapacitated; that every person voting
at an election, purge himself by oath, before he votes, if required, of all due
influence; fine for refusal 40 l. perjury to be punished as usual, and with
incapacitation besides; that any person giving any of the public money to
influence an election, be fined 1000 l. and punished with incapacitation; and
that all English members, except the eldest sons of peers, or of persons
qualified for being county-members, and the members for the two universities,
be obliged before they sit, or vote, to give in to the clerk of the house of
commons, a particular of his qualification, as per 9 Anne, that there shall be
only one election-meeting for each election in Scotland.

There was a debate on a bill to secure the freedom of elections, A. D. 1722.
The bill was rejected. The only reason mentioned was, because several clauses
in it could not be put in execution, they said, without exposing the most
innocent persons to the guilt of perjury DEB. LORDS, III.227 to 232.
.

By 2 Geo. II. cap. xxiv. all electors are, if called upon, to take the bribery
oath, disclaiming their having received, or their expecting any kind of
emolument, or advantage, in consideration of their vote. The presiding officer
forfeits 50 l. if he refuses to administer the oath, and the returning officer
100 l. for admitting any person to poll without taking the oath, if demanded.
The returning officer is likewise to purge himself by oath, on the common
penalty, if convicted of perjury, with incapacity of voting ever after. The
last determination of the house of commons is to decide finally what votes are
legal in every city, or burgh. Persons convicted of taking money, or reward,
for voting, to be fined 500 l. and incapacitated for ever; if prosecuted within
2 years. But offenders discovering, within one year, others equally guilty, are
indemnified STAT. AT LARGE, VI.123. DEB. COM. VII.43. DEB. LORDS, IV.15. Tind.
VIII.46,
.

A bill for regulating elections was brought in, A. D. 1735, and some progress
made in it DEB. COM. IX.39.
. Put off. By 8 Geo. II. cap. xxx. no military force to be nearer than two
miles to any place, where there is an election STAT. AT LARGE, VII.50.
. By 13 Geo. II. (which refers back to 10 Anne, cap. 23.) several regulations
are made respecting qualification of voters Ibid. 372.
.

The Duke of Argyle proposed, A. D. 1739, that it should be made penal to offer
a bribe, as well as to receive it; which would have made bribing difficult and
dangerous DEB. LORDS, VI.398.
.

Read a second time, A. D. 1739, a bill to prevent collusive qualifications of
persons to vote as freeholders DEB. COM. XI.320.
. Passed Ibid. 322.
. A bill for regulating the proceedings of returning officers at elections was
ordered in, A. D. 1741. Ibid. XIII.271.
It was passed by the commons, 93 to 92, and afterward engrossed, sent to the
lords, and there lost Ibid. 135.
. Another for disabling pensioners to sit Ibid.
, was read once Ibid. 136.
.

By 16 Geo. II. cap. 11. regulations are made respecting elections in North
Britain STAT. AT LARGE, VIII.41.
. By 18 Geo. II. cap. 18. the laws relating to the election of knights of the
shire in England are explained and amended Ibid. 154.
. By 19 Geo. II. cap. 28. various regulations are made respecting elections of
members for such cities as are counties of themselves Ibid. 217.
.

A.D. 1742, three bills were ordered into the house of commons for regulating
elections DEB. COM. xiv.195.
. The same year the bill for regulating elections in North Britain passed Ibid.
212.
. And another relating to county elections in England Ibid. 218.
.

Several bills for quieting corporations, and regulating their elections, were
read by the peers, A. D. 1742. DEB. LORDS, VIII.482, et passim,
Read a 1st time, A. D. 1742, a bill for explaining and amending the election
laws, and for restraining the partiality and regulating the conduct of
returning officers Ibid. 208.
. Too good a bill to come to a 2d reading. A bill passed the commons, A. D.
1742, relating to county elections in England, to prevent the bad effects of
partiality in returning officers DEB. COM. XIV.218.
.

A. D. 1745, was passed the act for regulating elections for shires in England
Alm. DEB. COM. II.313.
. An act passed, A. D. 1757, prohibiting on penalty, all persons voting at
elections who hold estates by copy of court roll Ibid. V.222.
.

According to law, there must be no feasting, or other electioneering work,
after the writs are out. Mr. Beckford, late lord mayor of London, moved the
house of commons, for leave to bring in a bill to stop feasting and
electioneering at all times, and to oblige the candidate to take an oath, that
he has not bribed, as well as the elector, that he has not been bribed. The
motion was overruled. It was feared, It would pinch too close.

A. D. 1760, a motion was made in the house of commons for an instruction to a
committee, that they have power to receive a clause, or clauses, for
restraining the judges from taking fees, gifts, entertainments, etc. from any
city, borough, sheriff, undersheriff, etc. on their circuits, and from
officers in the courts of law. The motion was overruled. See 20 Edw. III. chapter
1. and 13 and 14 Chapter II.21. sect. 1, 2. Another motion was at the same time
made, That it be an instruction to the said committee, that they have power to
receive clauses for restraining judges, barons, justices, etc. from interfering
otherwise than by giving their own votes in elections for members of
parliament. This motion was likewise rejected LAND. MAG. April, 1760, p. 177.
.

A. D. 1773, a motion was made for leave to bring in a bill for preventing the
gross abuse of occasional voters in places where all the inhabitants have right
of voting. The motion was, through fear of its success, withdrawn See the
Newspapers of March, 1773.
. Elections have been stopped to wait the arrival of wagons filled with
occasional voters.

Mr. Hutcheson had proposed, A. D. 1722, that the committee for privileges and
elections be select, consisting of 36, and to have power to hear and determine
all matters without bringing contested elections before the house DEB. COM.
VI.285.
. It was observed, that this was the practice both before and after Queen Eliz.
and was only broken off in the long parliament 1641, when all things went into
confusion. The motion was dropped. But, A. D. 1770, Mr. Grenville moved the
house of commons that a remedy should be provided for the infamous manner in
which the house evercised its jurisdiction on elections. That it was the
constant barefaced procedure of every petitioner to solicit the attendance of
each member. At first he would only ask you to attend to his merits; but if you
promised that, h^ would ask, Well, but will you attend for me? -- And Mr.
Grenville was sorry to say, that even this request was too frequently granted
on all sides -- nay, that in every election-cause, a few members were dignified
with the appellation of managers; a very proper appellation for those, who
immediately after were to be made judges. That it was also the custom for the
benches to be exceeding thin, when the cause was to be tried, but before the
question was put, the house became exceeding full, as the members, who had thus
promised their attendance, looked on nothing more as necessary than to give
their votes. At dinner time, many made no scruple, though the cause was not
determined, of pairing off, as it is called; some paired off for every question
in the election, others for a day, or a few hours only -- It was even got to so
notorious a point, that at the beginning of every election-cause, some question
was brought on, to try their strength, as it is called, and the party, who are
the weakest in numbers, though often the contrary in merits, are forced to give
up to a cold and fruitless expense. -- In short, he appealed to the consciences
of every gentleman in the house, whether any of them would choose to determine
their property before the house of commons, if a jury of porters, or chairmen,
could be obtained for that purpose. That he mentioned this as a grievance very
proper to be redressed, and that if the house was of his opinion, he would name
a day when he would make a motion for leave to bring in a bill for that
purpose.' The notoriety of the affair made the whole house concur in his
sentiments, and a day was appointed for a motion to be made -- every gentleman
who spoke on the subject, adding some fresh reasons to show the necessity of
such a motion Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.240.
. He observed, that when contested elections were tried before the house, or a
committee of the whole house, matters were very superficially examined;
gentlemen having no particular tie of oath or honor upon them, contented
themselves with giving their vote without examining as they ought, sheltering
themselves under the numbers who did the same. [That is, in plain English,
gentlemen, in order to avoid a little trouble, betrayed the interest of their
country, excusing this shameless practice by the numbers who are guilty of it.]
He observed, that in former times, down to the revolution, tryers of petitions
were appointed, from among the most respectable of the lords. Afterward
petitions were heard by the whole house of peers. Then the chancellor taking
too much upon him, the house of commons appointed a committee of 200. But in
the speaker Onslow's time, petitioners were, on account of his known ability
and impartiality, desirous of having their causes heard before the house rather
than before a commmittee. But this could not be general. Therefore Mr.
Grenville proposed, that all complaints of undue elections should be tried by a
small number of the members drawn by ballot, and sworn in the manner of a jury;
their decision to be final, excepting in disputes concerning right of election,
which should be referred to the house, and decided according to prescription;
no member to be twice drawn, but by his own consent, etc. It passed into a law,
to be in force seven years; and may perhaps be of some service, though it can
do but little toward a radical cure of the evil. For, supposing the generality
of a house of commons to be under corrupt influence, the majority of any
committee drawn from thence by ballot, or any how, will be under the same
influence. These partial reformations amuse the people, and by disappointing
their ill-founded expectations, discourage them against such proposals, as
would prove effectual. This is the fatal effect of letting abuses alone so
long, till becoming inveterate, and seizing the vitals of the constitution,
they are not to be removed but by methods too rough as well as too operose for
the inertia of the people, who will let themselves be totally enslaved, rather
than engage in such a scheme for redress, as may be attended with some
difficulty and danger; as a corpulent, lethargic patient, who chooses rather to
die of a complication, than enter upon a course of rough and searching remedies.

CHAP. IV. Of Ministerial Influence in the House.
TO endeavor to gain an undue influence over the members of the house of
commons, is an old trick of our worst kings and ministers. It is true, they
often carried things with a high hand, secure of what parliament should take
well or ill. But violent measures are always dangerous, and it was uncertain
how far the people's patience would bear. What was done under the umbrage of
parliament had the appearance of just and constitutional government, and was
likely to hold the longest. Our crafty statesmen, therefore, chose to have
parliament with them as much as they could.

We think ourselves safe, says Nedham, because we have parliaments; but we do
not consider, that we may be as effectually ruined by corrupt parliaments as by
ambitious tyrants. And corruption long established becomes a part of the
constitution, and grows more and more difficult to eradicate. We understand our
constitution to be in danger, not only when it is attacked, but as soon as a
breach is made, by which it may be attacked; and we understand this danger to
be greater or less in proportion to the breach that is made, and without any
regard to the probability or improbability of an attack. This explanation of
our meaning is the better founded, because the nation has an undoubted right
to preserve the constitution not only inviolate, but secure from violations
DISSERT. ON PARTIES, 215.
.

If (says Voltaire ESS. SUR. l'HIST. II.187.
) in Holland and England, the states had consisted only of nobles and clergy
[without an assembly of deputies] the balance of Europe had not been in their
hands in the year 1701. And if the house of commons of England comes to be,
through the influence of corruption, so enslaved to the court as to have no
will of its own, -- need I to add the consequence? If parliaments be good for
any thing, independent parliaments are alone good for any thing. Suppose a
parliament dependent on the court; and you make it a licensed tyranny, instead
of a free government; a burden and an encumbrance, instead of an advantage. If
elections into the house, and votes in it, are good for any thing, free
elections and votes are alone good for any thing. In an influenced election, or
dictated vote, the influencing minister is the nominator of the member, and the
sole legislator.

By 2 Geo. II. cap. 24. the last determination of the house of commons is to
decide finally what votes shall be legal in every city, or burgh. But a corrupt
house of commons will naturally throw the votes into the hands of the
corporation, rather than of the inhabitants at large, because it is easier to
bribe a few than many, this power is therefore lodged in wrong hands,
considering the character of our modern houses of commons.

If a resolution of the house of commons is thus to determine who has right of
voting, surely the independency of the house of commons is a matter of infinite
consequence. For a corrupt house may, by a resolution, reduce the 5700 voters,
who now send in the majority of the members for England, to 1000. They may
throw the power of sending the members into the hands of the king and council,
and deprive the people of even the mockery of choosing representatives; which is
all they have at present.

Parliamentaria comitia veteres, etc. Parliament has power to repeal old laws,
and to establish new; to make regulations for times present and future.
Parliament can decide all matters of property; it can give legitimacy to the
spurious; it establishes public worship; appoints weights and measures;
determines the succession to the crown; decides all controversies without
appeal, where there is no law by which to judge; it lays on taxes; it pardons
offenses; it supports the oppressed and punishes the oppressor; it has power of
life and death; it has, in short, the power of doing whatever could be done by
the comitia centuriata, or tribunitie, that is to say, by the whole people of
Rome Thom. Smith. De REPUBL. AN^L, 167.
.

The house of commons claims to itself, as we have seen above, many important
and interesting privileges, and runs far into the executive, inflicting, in
consequence, not of the known laws of the land, but of the undetermined lex et
consuetudo parliamenti, various pains and penalties upon the subjects, its
creators. It is therefore of great consequence to the people, that this
irresistible assembly be as little as possible obnoxious to every evil bias
and influence.

The sycophants, who surround our kings, tell them, all is well. Here is a
parliament regularly assembled every year. And every thing of consequence is
carried on according to the letter of the (...), and the customs of our
ancestors. The same might have been said in the time of Augustus, and all the
best of the Roman emperors. There were consuls, senators, tribunes, praetors,
as in the republican times. But the efficiency was all in the emperor and his
court, and army Tacit. ANN. pass.
. So, in our times (the present always excepted) we have seen parliaments
regularly chosen -- by bought votes, and court-influence; and regularly
proceeding in the house -- according to the orders of the ministry.

A writer ST. TRACTS, time of king William, II.646.
. in king William's time states the matter fairly. The corrupting of
parliaments (says he) defeats all our hopes, poisons us in our mother's milk,
murders us by the hands of our parents, infects the only cordial, that can
preserve our being, makes us accessory to our own fate, betrays us by the hands
of those, whom we choose to represent us, makes us slaves to our protectors, etc.

A little matter wrong in a thing of such consequence as a parliament, may do
great mischief. A ministerial speaker of the house of commons may throw the
whole debate into the hands of his own party, if a resolution be carried, That
the member, to whom the speaker points, shall be heard. And there is nothing to
hinder the passing of such a resolution in a ministerial house of commons. The
custom has been for the house to decide, when a debate arose, which member was
up first, unless they chose to leave it to the speaker. Attempts have lately
been made to change this custom Alm. DEB. COM. IX.233.
.

Foreign nations say, and say truly, that a king of England, in conjunction
with his parliament, is as great and dreadful a prince as any in Europe.
Chancellor Finch's speech at the opening of Charles II.'s third parliament. But
this is supposing the parliament honest to the people DEB. COM. I.320.
.

The corruption of governments (says the czari^a INSTR. 190.
) generally begins by the corruption of its principles. The principle of
government in a free state is, The people's love of their country. The
principle of the British government is, An independent house of commons. If
that be safe, all is safe. If that be violated, all is precarious.

Parliament, the fountain of justice, ought to be preserved pure from
corruption, and free from partiality, which would add not only luster,
reputation, and honor, but authority to what is done in parliament. All men's
estates and liberties are preserved under the safe custody of parliament. This
moves us to be careful of any thing that may prejudice parliament in point of
integrity Rap II.383.
.

The least appearance of corruption, where all ought to be virgin purity, is
execrable. In Parliament (according to the duke of Gloucester and bishop of Ely,
in their speeches to Rich. II. in his 12th year, at Eltham, A. D. 1389, handed
down to us by the old historian Knighton Petyt's MISCEL. PARL. 50.
) all equity ought to shine forth without the least cloud or shadow, like the
sun in his meridian glory, etc. The state is a ship, and it sails in a sea of
corruption. If there were the smallest chink in the vess^l, corruption would
flow in. But we open our lowest gun-ports, to let it in freely.

When a private man receives any advantage to betray a trust; one, or a few
persons, may suffer. If a judge be corrupted, the oppression is extended to
greater numbers. But when legislators are bribed, or, which is all one, are
under any particular engagemen^, that may influence them in their legislative
capacity, then it is, that we may expect injustice to be established by law,
and all those consequences which will inevitably follow the subversion of the
constitution, as standing armies, oppressive taxes, and slavery; whilst the
outward form only of the ancient government remains to give them authority
Fletcher, 76.
.

The government of England has all the advantages, says Voltaire ESS. SUR
l'HIST. II.113.
, of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, but it is liable to their
inconveniences; so that it cannot subsist, but under a wise prince. He had
come much nearer the truth, if he had said, it cannot subsist but with an
incorrupt house of commons.

Suppose our court should take the legislative power into its own hand^ (...)
omit calling a parliament for 7 years together. S^^^ld we not say, Chaos is
come again? What is the difference to the nation between calling no parliament
and calling a set of bribed slaves the ready tools of the court? The reader
sees, I mean no reflection on the present immaculate parliament.

If the people of England once be corrupted in that which is the fountain of
their liberties, their own representatives in parliament assembled, they must
expect nothing but the flowings forth of tyranny and mischief upon them, in and
by their very laws, and that which should be their chief and only remedy
against all other evils, would by this means become the greatest cause and
author of them. Parliament's answer, 1650, to a canting manifesto of Charles
II. in Scotland PARL. HIST. XIX.379.
.

The high court of parliament is the most certain and constant guardian of
liberty; but if it be deprived of its own liberty, it is left without life or
power to keep the liberty of others. If they should bring parliament to be
subject to the king's pleasure, to be correspondent, as they call it, to the
king's will, in the midst of such evil counselors as are now predominant,
there would little or no cure be left, for then all things that are most
mischievous would seem to be done by law and authority. Pymme's speech at
Guildhall Ibid. XII.292.
.

Our artless ancestors, on most occasions, and particularly in framing the bill
of succession, show, that they took it for granted, a parliament would never
consent to any thing wrong in compliance with the court. England shall not go
to war on account of any foreign dominion belong^^^ to any future sovereign,
without consent of parliament. The sovereign shall not quit the kingdom without
consent of parliament. etc. DEB. COM. III.130.
Little did they think of a time coming, when consent of parliament might be
obtained to any thing the ministry should ask. Quid quisque vitet nunquam
homini satis
Cautum est in horas.
HOR. Yet they seem, at some periods, to have been jealous of the encroaching
disposition of ministers, and aware of the truth of the doctrine, which this
section teaches, viz. That corrupt parliaments are slaves to ministers; for it
has been criminal formerly in a speaker of the house of commons to go to court,
says the author of considerations on the choice of a speaker, etc. ST. TRACT^,
time of ^ing William, II.651.


A ate writer says, he shall conclude the principle of parliament to be totally
corrupted, when he sees too symptoms, viz. 1. A rule of indiscriminate support
to all ministers; because this destroys the very end of parliament as a
control to ministers, and is a general previous sanction to misgovernment. 2.
The setting up of any claims adverse to free election; for this tends to
subvert the legal authority, by which they sit.' How much we want of seeing
these symptoms in their perfection, let the reader judge.

It is miserable to observe, in reading the PARLIAMENTARY HISTORY, the DEBATES
of the lords and commons, the MAGAZINES, REGISTERS, etc. that the sense and the
patrio^i^m are almost always (our own virtuous times excepted) on the side of
the protesting lords, the minority in the house of commons, and the writer of
the MAGAZINES or REGISTERS, and against the proceeding of the houses, which are
oftenest wrong headed, or wrong-intentioned. Yet our houses of parliament take
in grievous dudgeon any reflection on their wisdom or integrity* and wonder,
that the people show a want of respect for them, though the people see plainly,
that a Magazine-writer has more sense, or more integrity, than the majority of
the two houses. Which strange phenomenon can only be ascribed to ministerial
poison working in the houses.

Every body knows, that the ancient dread of this nation was of the
prerogative. Lest our princes should, like those of France, grow weary of
parliaments, and resolve to govern by will and pleasure. Every body knows
likewise, that the reason of our tender concern for, and attachment to
parliaments, was a long established persuasion, -- That by their assistance our
grievances would always be redressed; That under their umbrage, our liberties
would always be safe. But even our very princes were originally and
constitutionally no more, than the guardians of these liberties; and if they
could be capable of breach of trust, might not our parliament likewise deviate
into the same crooked road? If therefore those princes, on conviction that it
was not only vain, but a desperrate undertaking, to wrestle with parliaments,
should find it expedient to compromise the affair with them, and agree to
divide the commonwealth between them, would not parliaments themselves become a
grievance? Would not our representatives become our masters? Would not their
constituents become their slaves? Thus, if the court's governing without a
parliament was justly the object of our terror; if its governing with a
parliament was as justly the object of our wishes* its governing by a
parliament would be an infallible method not only to compass but give sanction
to our ruin. With regard to the first of these governments, our terrors have
long slumbered. For while we so freely give, why should the sovereign take? And
with regard to the last -- Hinc illae lachrymae -- We have in these papers
proof to demonstration, that from a certain period our parliaments have done
what they should have left undone, and have left undone what they should have
done: That to the calls of the crown they have always answered; That to the
cries of the people they have been always deaf; That they have purchased on one
hand only to sell on the other; That they have waved their privileges in
compliment to the prerogative, and put them to the stretch, to oppress and
subdue the subject; That instead of redressing grievances, they have authorized
them; That instead of prosecuting malefactors, they have screened them; and
that instead of protecting and defending the rights of their constituents, they
have perfidiously betrayed them. Hence it is manifest, that the constitution is
every where undermined, and at the first sound of the trumpet, like the walls
of Jericho, it will sink at once into a heap of ruins. In vain do we amuse
ourselves with the hope that some future parliament will rectify the evils
committed or connived at by the past. Had we any chance of working out our own
salvation, as it has been once already observed, it is more than probable we
should not be trusted with the opportunity. By the same violence that one
parliament, chosen but for three years, could prolong their own sitting for
seven, any other may presume to render themselves perpetual. Experience shows
us, that the writ of election to a borough, and the conge d'elire to a dean and
chapter, already operate in pretty much the same manner; That those in power
are always sure of finding or making a majority in both houses; That the
dictates of the privy council, or first minister, are uniformly received by
that majority as laws; That the grand secret of government is to fleece with
one hand and corrupt with the other; and that the sole relic of the people's
power, is the glorious privilege to sell themselves as often as they are
favored with leave to make a new election. So fatally true is the maxim of
that great statesman Burleigh, that England can never be undone but by a
parliament. In a word, so great is the influence of the crown become, so
servile the spirit of our grandees, and so depraved the hearts of the people,
that hope itself begins to sicken; and those who are disposed to go farthest in
the cause of the commonwealth, are on the point of crying out, If the people
will be enslaved let them be enslaved. Let it then be recollected in this our
day, that even the authority of parliament has a bound: That they are not
empowered to sell, but to serve, their constituents: That whoever accepts of a
trust is answerable for the exercise of it: That if the house of commons should
make ever so solemn a surrender of the public liberties into any hand whatever,
that surrender would be ipso facto void: That if the people have reason to
apprehend any such conspiracy against them, they have a right not only to put
in their protest, but to renounce the deed, and refuse obedience: That in such
a case, the delegation they had made would be dissolved: That consequently all
authority would return into the hands of those who gave it; and with one united
voice they might call on the prerogative to do them justice by dismissing such
unfaithful servants, and enabling them to make a new choice USE AND ABUSE OF
PARL. II.714.
.

So clumsy have our courtiers been as to insist openly on the propriety of
ministerial influence in the house of commons, as appears by lord Digby's words
in his speech against Walpole, A. D. 1741. 'Sir, It is a new doctrine in this
nation, and absolutely inconsistent with our constitution to tell us that his
majesty may and ought, in the disposal of offices or favors, to consider
gentlemen's behavior in this house. Let his majesty be ever so well convinced
of the wisdom and uprightness of his measures, he ought not to take the least
notice of what is said or done by any particular man in this house. He is a
traitor to our constitution that advises his majesty to do so DEB. COM.
XIII.198.
.

Nothing can be imagined more impudent, than the attempt of some among us, to
lull our jealousy, which needs all the eyes of Argus, asleep, by telling us, it
is impossible, that 800 lords and commons should ever take part with the
enemies of their country, or its liberties. Do we not know, that in the four
last years of queen Anne's reign, a majority in the house of commons, and a
very great number in the other, were in the interest of France and the
pretender, and that if that ill-advised princess had not dropped at the time
she did, the nation was in the utmost danger of being sacrificed. See all the
histories of those times.

The majority of the commons, A. D. 1709, were whigs. In the last four years
they were tories. Such is the influence of the court over the commons DEB. COM.
VI.60.
. For the court interposes both in the elections of members, and in their votes
in the house.

How therefore judge Blackstone could bring himself to write the following
sentence, is to me inconceivable. The check of parliamentary impeachment for
improper, or inglorious conduct, in beginning, conducting, or concluding a
national war, is, in general, sufficient, to restrain the ministers of the
crown from a wanton, or injurious exertion of this great prerogative. Was the
check of parliamentary impeachment sufficient to restrain the worthless
ministries, who conducted and concluded two wars in a most infamous manner, one
in the memory of some, and the other of many now living, I mean the wars, which
were terminated with the disgraceful treaties of Utrecht, and of
Aix-la-Chapelle? How could a man do his country a greater injury, than by thus
laboring, as the judge does through almost his whole book, to pursuade, that
every thing is right, when there is so much requiring redress?

As private liberty cannot be deemed secure under a government, wherein law,
the proper and sole security of it, is dependent on will, so public liberty
must be in danger, whenever a free constitution, the proper and sole security
of it, is dependent on will; and a free constitution, like ours, is dependent
on will, whenever the will of one estate can direct the conduct of all three
DISSERT. UPON PARTIES, 216.
. By the will of one estate the author means the will of the king, the court,
or the ministry; which three terms are always, in our British politics, to be
considered as exactly synonimous.

It is shocking to an Englishman to read the account given by a French author
of the state of parliamentary corruption in our country. Tell it not in Gath:
Publish it not in the streets of Askalon. No sooner, says Reynel HIST. ENGL.
PARL. 277.
, is parliament met, than the parties are formed; the canvassing begins, and
the cabals clash against one another. Those who hold the first places in the
government, endeavor to gain, by the pensions, places, and favors, which are
in their disposal, such members as they stand in need of. King William said, If
a king of England had places enough to give, the names of whig and tory would
soon be lost. Those, who are neglected, unite in violently declaiming against
such as have suffered themselves to be gained, etc. And again Ibid. 279.
, The peers, especially the bishops, have not that credit in the nation, which
they ought naturally to possess; because it is imagined, they are almost all
dependent on the court, either on account of favors received, or hoped for.

By our constitution, (says Sir William Wyndham in the debate upon the motion
for repealing the septennial act, A. D. 1734) the only legal method we have of
vindicating our rights and privileges against the encroachments of ambitious
ministers is by parliament; the only way we have of rectifying a weak or wicked
administration is by parliament; the only eff^ctual way we have of bringing
high and powerful criminals to condign punishment is by parliament. But if ever
it should come to be in the power of the administration to have a majority of
this house depending upon the crown, or to get a majority of such men returned
as the representative of the people, the parliament will then stand us in no
stead; it can answer none of these great purposes. The whole nation may be
convinc^^ of the weakness or the wickedness of those in the administration, and
yet it may be out of the nation's power in a legal way to get the fools turned
out, or the knaves hanged. This misfortune, Sir, can be brought upon us by
nothing but by bribery and corruption, and therefore there is nothing we ought
to guard more against DEB. COM. VIII.192.
.

Ask the king (for the time being) whether he thinks he should be in danger of
losing the crown of these realms, if he did not bribe. He will answer with
indignation, that his throne is established upon a much surer foundation. Ask
the ministry, whether they think they must lose their places, o^ their heads,
but for bribery. They will perhaps answer, as their betters did, when justly
charged, Man, I know not what thou say. Ask the bribing lord, who has half a
dozen rotten boroughs in his sleeve, whether he means, by giving the beggarly
perjured voters money, to biass them from electing according to their
consciences. He will answer, He had rather die, than injure his dear country.
Ask the bribing candidate, Whether, knowing himself not likely to be chosen for
his merit, he means to buy a seat. He will answer, He goes into the house
merely with the view of serving his country. Ask the venal member, Whether he
plunders his country of 500 l. a year as a reward for consulting, in every
vote, her good. He will answer, He votes spontaneously, and without any view to
the minister's approbation. Ask the Cornish elector how he answers to his
conscience the selling of his country. He will answer, He takes the money, and
votes according to his conscien^^. Thus, from our kings (who indeed have the
least hand in the plot) down to our bought borough voters, no one, of either
the givers or receivers, can give any account why any thing should be given or
received.

These men are undoubtedly guilty of treason, who, being entrusted with the
wealth, security, and ^appiness of kingdoms, do yet knowingly pervert that
trust to the undoing of that people, whom they are obliged, by all the ties of
religion, justice, honor and gratitude, to defend CATO'S LET. I 74.
. Treason equally extends to those, who would subvert either house of
parliament, or the rights and privileges of the people, as to those who attempt
to destroy the person of the king, or dethrone him. For, what could be more
absurd, than to suppose it to be the highest crime to attempt to destroy one
man because this one man is a king; and yet not to suppose it the highest crime
to destroy that people for whose benefit alone he was made king, and for whose
sake indeed there ever was such a thing, as a king, in the world.

The great corrupt the people, (says Mr. Gordon TRACTS, I, 338.
) by all manner of ways and inventions, and then reproach them for being
corrupt. A whole nation cannot be bribed: and if its representatives are, it is
not the fault but the misfortune of the nation; and if the corrupt save
themselves by corrupting others, the people who suffer by the corruptions of
both are to be pitied and not abused. Nothing can be more shameless and
provoking than to bring a nation by execrable frauds and extortions, against
its daily protestations and remonstrances, into a miserable pass, and then
father all these villainies upon the people who would have gladly hanged the
authors of them. At Rome the whole people could be entertained, feasted and
bribed; but it is not so where the people are too numerous and too far spread,
to be debauched, cajoled and purchased* and if any of their leaders are, it is
without the people's consent. There is scarce such a thing under the sun as a
corrupt people, where the government is incorrupt; it is that, and that alone
which makes them so; and to calumniate them for what they do not seek, but
suffer by, is as great impudence, as it would be to knock a man down, and then
rail at him for hurting himself.

Those, who complain of corrupt and wicked ministers, and of the mischiefs they
produce, do in fact (as observed by Mr. Hume in his IVth POLIT. ESS.) most
severely satirize the constitution. For a good constitution would effectually
exclude, or defeat, the bad effects of a corrupt administration. Is there, or
has there been, corruption in parliament? I should wonder if any man would
deny, that corruption ever prevailed in a British parliament. If it has, the
constitution must be faulty, and wants to be amended. The revolution stopped up
only some, not all the leaks in the vessel of the state.

Tindal owns that the constitution was not fully established at the revolution,
owing to contesting parties CONTIN. I.56.
.

When the ligislative and executive powers are united, there can be no public
liberty Blakstone's COM. I.146.
. They will be united in England, whenever parliaments come to be, through the
influence of corruption, at the absolute command of the court. This is the
danger of all dangers; the evil of all evils.

Nothing can be imagined more cruel, than the disappointment an unhappy subject
suffers, when he meets with injustice precisely where he had a right to expect
redress, I mean, at law; or when he finds himself oppressed by those, whom he
looked upon as his protectors, I mean, the government.

When corruption, says Davenant II.300.
, has seized upon the representatives of a people, it is like a chronicle
disease, hardly to be rooted out. When servile compliance and flattery come to
predominate, things proceed from bad to worse, till at last the government is
quite dissolved. Absolute monarchies are in danger of great convulsions, when
one man, their prince, happens to be weak or wicked; but common wealths, or
mixed constitutions, are safe till the chief part of the leading men are
debauched in principles. However, monarchy has this advantage, that the one
man, their prince, is mortal, and if bad, he may be succeeded by a better; but
a people thoroughly corrupted, never returns to right reason; and we see that
the depravity of manners, which began in Rome presently after the second Punic
war among the nobility and gentry, became every year worse and worse, till at
last Caesar destroyed the commonwealth. And after his time, under the
succeeding emperors, every senate grew more abject and complying than the
other; till in process of time the old Roman spirit was utterly extinguished,
and then that empire by degrees became a prey to barbarous nations.

Hitherto it has been thought the highest pitch of profligacy to own, instead
of concealing crimes, and to take pride in them, instead of being ashamed of
them. But in our age men have soared to a pitch still higher. The first is
common; it is the practice of numbers, and by their numbers they keep one
another in countenance. But the choice spirits of these days, the men of mode
in politics, are far from stopping where criminals of all kinds have stopped,
when they have gone even to this point; for generally the most hardened of the
inhabitants of Newgate do not go so far. The men I speak of, contend, that it
is not enough to be vicious by practice and habit, but that it is necessary, to
be so by principle. They make themselves missionaries of faction, as well as of
corruption: They recommend both; they deride all such as imagine it possible or
fit to retain truth, integrity, and a disinterested regard to the public in
public life, and pronounce every man a fool, who is not ready to act like a
knave Bolingbr. IDEA OF A PATRIOT KING. 181.
.

Corruption brings a government into contempt not only with the subjects, but
with foreigners. A. D. 1735, in Walpole's dirty administration, the French
showed such a contempt for England, that they published an edict, commanding
all English subjects in France, to quit France in a fortnight, or enlist in
their army, on pain of the galleys. To the same cause was owing the Spanish
insolence, which they carried to such a height, that when they cut off capt.
Ienkin's ear, they bid him carry it to his king, and tell him they would serve
him so, if they could. To the same cause may be ascribed the insolence of the
French, A. D. 1748, in demanding (and, O shame to Britain! obtaining) hostages
at the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle; and their violating that treaty by
hostilities, before it was well signed and sealed. Would France, or Spain, have
dared to treat England so in the days of Cromwell or of Pit? But parliament
defended Walpole and the Pelhams as strenuously as they would the wisest and
best ministers. Very different from the spirit of the following, which speaks
the sense of every free and honest man, who has ever thought on the subject.

Not only that government (says the brave Fletcher of Scotland) is tyrannical,
which is tyrannically administered, but all governments are tyrannical, which
have not, in their constitution, a sufficient security against arbitrary power
Fletch. p. 9.
. Has any man in the world the impudence to say, this nation has any
constitutional security against arbitrary power, supposing parliament by
interest attached to a corrupt court?

Sir Arnold Savage, speaker of the house of commons under Hen. IV. says, The
three estates, king, lords, and commons, are like the trinity, three in one,
and ought to be perfect in unity, or agreement PARL. HIST. II.65.
. A wise and good prince will always agree with an incorrupt parliament; and
then the nation might see, with satisfaction, Sir Arnolds whimsical idea
realized. But it is easy to imagine a condition of things, in which
Athanasianism would be as little desirable in the state as in the church. I
mean, supposing a weak, a wicked or a too ductile prince on the throne, a
designing court, and a house of lords and commons attached to its villainous
interests and views by places, pensions, bribes, contracts, lotteries, and
promises. In such a state of things, all men of honest and independent
principles will ever be professed heretics.

Setting aside the dangers, foreign and domestic, that arise from profusion in
what belongs to the public, it depraves all the different ranks of men; for, in
profuse governments it has been ever observed, that the people from bad example
have grown lazy and expensive; the court has become luxurious and mercenary;
and the camp insolent and seditious. Where waste of the public treasure has
obtained in a court, all good order is banished, because he who would promote
it and be frugal for his prince, is looked upon as a common enemy to all the
rest. Virtue is neglected, which raises men by leisurely steps; whereas vice
and flattery will, in a little time, under a ministry, who mind not what is
given away, bring a man to a great estate; nor is industry cultivated where he
does his business sufficiently, who knows which way to apply, and how to beg in
a lucky and critical moment: And at such a season, many of the people's
representatives lose their integrity, when they see others running from every
bench [the seats in the house of commons] to share in the universal plunder of
a nation Daven. III.4.
. Because, in all their doings and counsels, corrupt men have never had any
view but their own private profit, they will do their best to persuade the
world that no man acts upon principle; that all is swayed by particular malice,
and that there is not left in the kingdom any party of men which consults the
public good Ibid. 1^.
.

It is said, we have lately got a new state officer, called, The minister of
the house of commons, which, being interpreted signifies, I suppose, the
Nose-leader, of that august assembly. It is always to be understood, that I
mean no reflection upon the present times, which are always immaculate, while
they are present. But we have in the LAND. MAG. 1767, an account of this
officer, as follows; The marquis next proposed Mr. C -- nw -- y for secretary
of state, and minister of the house of commons. On which the note is, This
officer is but of modern institution, and to the inexperienced reader may
require some explanation. The first we find upon record is he, who in Nov.
1755, couched his first written instructions in the following words:

Sir, the king has declared his intention to make me secretary of state, and I
(very unworthy, as I fear I am, of such an undertaking) must take the conduct
of the house of commons; [that is, I must undertake to lead the house into all
the schemes of the court.] I cannot, therefore, well accept the office, till
after the first day's debate, which may be a warm one; [because the first day
will show the comparative strength of the court, and the opposition.] A great
attendance that day of my friends [not the friends of liberty, and the
constitution] will be of the greatest consequence to my future situation,
[because it will show the opposition, that the court is irresistable] and I
should be extremely happy if you would, for that reason, show yourself amongst
them, [not to the advantage of your country, but] to the great honor of H. F.
etc. LAND. MAG. 1767, p. 452.


The courtly gentlemen, like churchmen, are wont to stave off all proposals
for reformation, by alleging that the present is an improper time. And we have
seen parliament too ready to come into the views of the court. But Mr. Sydenham
shows in his speech, A. D. 1745, in the house of commons, that he thinks
checking corruption is at all times seasonable, even though a rebellion were
actually raging in the heart of the country. Sir, I am surprised to hear
gentlemen accused or suspected of a design to subvert the government on account
of a motion calculated, in my opinion, better than any other to reconcile the
minds of the people to our present establishment, and to induce them to join
unanimously and heartily in any measures, that may be necessary, for defeating
the present rebellion. Whatever spirit may now appear among the people, we
cannot forget, Sir, the spirit that appeared so generally amongst them, but a
little while before, against corruption, and in favor of those bills that have
already been several times offered to parliament for preventing it. -- And
afterward -- We are not to suppose, Sir, that the people have f^rgot their
complaints, because they have not renewed them upon this occasion. They have so
long complained in vain, and have lately been so much disappointed by those
upon whom they chiefly relied, that I am afraid, their not renewing their
instructions to their members, proceeds from their despair of ever meeting with
redress from parliament. But will this remove or diminish their discontent? On
the contrary, we have more reason to dread their silence, than we ever had to
dread their murmurs; for mankind resemble, in this, that animal which is their
most faithful servant; while they bark they never bite. Have they ceased
complaining? As they have yet received no satisfaction, we have, from the
nature of mankind, just reason to presume, that they have begun to think of
acting; and this, at such a dangerous conjuncture, we ought to prevent, by
giving them, as soon as possible, an assurance that they may expect redress
from this session of parliament. -- Afterward he goes on -- The hon. gentleman
says, he should be against the introducing of such bills while there is a
rebellion raging in the kingdom, because he thinks, we may have an opportunity
to get them passed after the rebellion is entirely extinguished. If I thought
so, Sir, I should be very willing to have them deferred till the next session;
but if we do not catch this opportunity, when some gentleman's personal safety
may prevent their opposition, I am, both from reason and experience, convinced,
we shall never be able, in a peaceable manner, to get any such bill passed into
a law. The set of gentlemen I have mentioned, will always oppose such bills,
because it is their interest not only to support, but to propagate corruption;
and from experience, I am convinced, that they will always have so much
influence as to get a majority in this house for preventing any such bill's
being brought in, or a majority in the other house for having it rejected. This
I am the more convinced of, from what the hon. gentleman, and a worthy friend
of his, have said against the amendment. There is a thing called proper or
seasonable opportunity, that will always furnish a man with a pretense for
opposing, when a minister, those bills and motions, which he patronized, when a
country gentleman; and I have now several gentlemen in my eye, who, I believe,
will always declare themselves zealous for preventing a corrupt influence in
parliament, or at elections, but will never, as long as they continue
ministers, or the favorites of ministers, find a seasonable opportuntiy for
bringing in an effectual bill for that purpose. Such gentlemen may perhaps
consider the dangerous consequence of throwing out a popular bill at this
juncture, therefore, though they know it will breed them a great deal of trouble
hereafter, they may for their immediate safety, agree to its being passed into
a law. If they and their friends agree to it, I will engage that no such bill
shall occasion any division or altercation amongst us; and we may with the more
freedom embrace this opportunity, because such a bill can no way prevent or
retard any thing the parliament can do for defeating the rebellion. --
Afterward he adds -- The people of Britain have been long grumbling: Give them
satisfaction. Let them see they have something to fight for, I warrant you they
will do it. But under an arbitrary government, whether established by force or
corruption, the people have neither liberty nor property; and in this age I
doubt much if they will fight obstinately for their religion, even supposing
they were all convinced of its being at stake. I therefore hope, Sir, that we
shall in this sessions (come of the rebellion what will) pass some proper bills
for preserving our constitution and liberties against corruption; and if we are
resolved to pass any such bills in this session, we ought to intimate our
resolution in our address upon this occasion, in order to encourage the people
to stand by and support the present establishment in this time of imminent
danger. -- Afterward he adds -- Does not his majesty tell us that he has
called us together, to give him our immediate advice as well as assistance with
regard to the rebellion, still continuing in Scotland? Can we give him our
advice in a more deliberate and authentic manner, than by framing and passing
such bills as we think will best induce the people to assist him heartily? We
cannot do this immediately, and therefore by way of answer to this part of his
speech, we ought to tell him immediately, that is to say by our address, that
we will do so. There is another part of his majesty's speech, Sir, which, in my
opinion, will stand without any thing like an answer, if this amendment be not
agreed to. His majesty tells us he questions not but the rebellion will end in
procuring greater strength to that excellent constitution, which it was
designed to subvert. In answer to this, is it not very proper to tell his
majesty, that we shall take care in this session to frame such bills as, if
passed into laws, will add strength to our excellent constitution. Is then any
thing more proper or necessary for adding strength to our constitution, than
that of preventing a corrupt influence in parliament or at elections? This
amendment is therefore not only a proper, but a necessary return to that part
of his majesty's speech: I say necessary, Sir, because I think it absolutely
necessary for us, in a time of such danger, to take the first opportunity to
assure the people of their having that grievance redressed, which they have
long and loudly, but vainly hitherto, complained of; and because, without this
amendment, not only our address will appear defective, but we shall appear
deficient in our duty to our sovereign, for there will be, otherwise, not a
word of answer to this material part of his majesty's speech, nor one word of
advice, or any thing that looks like it, though his majesty has, in his speech,
expressly told us, that for this very purpose he called us together sooner than
he intended. And now to conclude, Sir, as the hon. gentleman was pleased to
tell us what the world will think of those that insist upon this amendment, I
shall beg leave to tell him, what in my opinion the world will think of those
that oppose it. The world will, I am sure, generally approve of the amendment,
and all will conclude, that if it had been agreed to, it would have done great
and immediate service; therefore, every man will say that the opposers of this
amendment, notwithstanding their open pretenses, are, in secret, friends to
corruption; and that they have a greater regard to the interest and ease of
those who are now, or may hereafter be, our ministers, than they have to the
security of their sovereign, the happiness of their country, or the liberties
of their countrymen Alm. DEB. COM. II.347.
.

Sir Francis Dashwood on that occasion, proposed, that the following paragraph
should be inserted in the address of the commons; In order to the firmer
establishment of his majesty's throne on the solid and truly glorious basis of
his people's affections, it shall be our zealous and speedy care to frame such
bills as (if passed into laws) may prove most effectual for securing to his
majesty's faithful subjects the perpetual enjoyment of their undoubted right,
to be freely and fairly represented in parliaments, frequently chosen, and
exempted from undue influence of every kind; for easing their minds in time to
come, of the apprehensions they might entertain of seeing abuses in offices
rendered perpetual, without the seasonable interposition of parliament to
reform them; and for raising in every true lover of his king and country, the
pleasing hopes of beholding these realms once more restored to that happy and
flourishing state which may reflect the highest honor on his majesty's reign,
and cause posterity to look back with veneration and gratitude on the source of
their national felicity Alm. DEB. COM. II.335.
.

Many ages have passed since the first tampering with parliaments. It is not
easy to understand how a wicked court should be able to mis-lead a parliament
without money, or other baits; but we have instances of it. In ancient times
our members of the house of commons were very ignorant, poor, and brought up by
the priests with notions of slavish submission to their barons or to their
kings. The commons, therefore, too often consented to their own deception and
enslaving. In more enlightened times our parliaments have been fairly bribed
with places, pensions, contracts, lotteries, etc.

There was a villainous packed parliament under Rich. II. A. D. 1397. The king
had changed all the sheriffs, and put in wretches attached to himself. All the
public offices were put into the hands of his creatures. The king nominated the
members for each place, and the placemen supported the king's nomination. The
parliament in 1386, had obtained the removal of the villainous favorites, the
earls of Oxford, Suffolk, etc. All the acts of that upright parliament were
repealed, and every thing done to advance the prerogative above the laws. Many
brave patriots were put to death, and the barbarous king chose to be present at
some of these horrid scenes. They give up all their authority to twelve lords,
and six commoners, the most devoted to the king's will. This instance (says
Rapin AC^. REG. II.14, 17.
) shows that it is not impossibe but that the very parliament, which is
designed to maintain the privileges of the nation, may throw it into slavery,
when such assemblies are directed by popular factions, [popular factions are
always produced by ministerial oppression; the people of themselves are
inclined to be quiet] or the cabals of an ambitious prince, which, either by
running the prerogative down too low, [prerogative too low is hardly
conceivable] or screwing it up too high, has often produced disorder, and
destroyed all law, instead of procuring the welfare of the kingdom.

Enquiry was made, A. D. 1550, into the management of public money. Few
concerned (says Rapin II.20.
) but were found guilty of some misdemeanor. 400,000 l. were sent from Spain
(says Burnet. I have omitted quoting vol. and page) to bribe the parliament to
approve of queen Mary's marriage with Philip. The marriage-bill passes
immediately. And four bills against heretics in one session. Such was the power
of Spanish gold PARL. HIST. III.302, 308.
.

Philip brings part of the promised money with him. The money brought from
Spain produced such effests, that most of the representatives only wanted
occasions to signalize their zeal for the queen Rap. II.39, 40.
.

Of James Ist's time it is observed by Mr. Hume Hume's HIST. STUARTS, I.47.
, that So little skill, or so small means, had the court i^ his reign for
managing parliaments, that this house of commons showed rather a stronger
spirit of liberty than the former. What a lesson does this sentence teach! In
our times it is computed see above, p. 269, et seq.
that the court has in its disposal several millions a year. If so, our court
has great means for managing parliaments, and therefore our house of commons is
not likely to show much of the spirit of liberty.

The militia bill passed the lords, A. D. 1661, by which it is declared, that
neither lords nor commons conjunctly nor severally, nor the people severally or
representatively, have any power over the person of the king, and that the king
alone has the power of all forces by sea and land, and all ships,
fortifications, etc. exclusive of parliament. And that no war can, on any
pretense whatever, be raised against the king DEB. LORDS, I.42.
. At the same time, an oath is to be taken by all lord lieutenants, deputy
lieutenants, officers and soldiers, that it is on no pretense lawful to take
arms against the king, or those commissioned by him, which seemed (say the
collectors of the debates) to be giving up the constitution, especially when it
was declared unlawful to take arms against any person commissioned by the king.
This was debated, but it was left in the oath, because, said those slavish
peers and commoners, any person unlawfully commissioned, is not commissioned.
Thus they left the liberties of England on the precarious foundation of a
logical distinction.

The people in the time of Charles Ist's tyranny, petitioned for a parliament.
We have seen the people, in the time of George III. petition for the
dissolution of parliament. In Charles's time, the people's entire confidence
was reposed in the parliament. The influence of the court in our house of
commons has in great measure destroyed our dependence upon it. In those times
one independent parliament succeeded to another. The same spirit reigned,
though the individuals were changed. In succeeding times, one set of slaves has
followed another, and the same corrupt spirit run through parliament after
parliament See the DEBATES.
.

Charles II. is thought to be the first king, who bought the votes of members
of parliament.

What a picture does the great and good Sidney draw of the corruption
prevailing in England in the beginning of the reign of that prince, in his
letter in answer to his friends advising him to return from his voluntary
banishment on the passing of the act of ^ndemnity Somer's TRACTS, VII.81.
.

I confess (says he) we are naturally inclined to delight in our own country,
and I have a particular love to mine: I hope I have given some testimony of it;
I think that being exiled from it is a great evil, and would redeem myself from
it with the loss of a great deal of my blood. But when that country of mine,
which used to be esteemed a paradise, is now like to be made a stage of injury;
the liberty which we hoped to establish, oppressed, all manner of profaneness,
looseness, luxury, and lewdness, set up in its height; instead of the piety,
virtue, sobriety, and modesty, which we hoped God by our hands would have
introduced; the best of our nation made a prey to the worst; the parliament,
court, and army, corrupted; the people enslaved; all things vendible; and no
man safe, but by such evil and infamous means, as flattery and bribery; what
joy can I have in my own country in this condition? Is it a pleasure to see all
that I love in the world sold and destroyed? Shall I renounce all my old
principles, learn the vile court arts, and make my peace by bribing some of the
crew? Shall their corruption and vice be my safety? Ah! no; better is a life
among strangers, than in my own country upon such conditions. Whilst I live I
will endeavor to preserve my liberty; or at least not consent to the
destroying of it. I hope I shall die in the same principles in which I have
lived; and will live no longer than they can preserve me. I have in my life
been guilty of many follies, but as I think of no meanness. I will not blot and
defile that which is past, by endeavoring to provide for the future. I have
ever had in my mind, that should God cast me into such a condition, as that I
cannot save my life, but by doing an indecent thing, he shows me the time is
come wherein I should resign it; and when I cannot live in my own country, but
by such means as are worse than dying in it; I think he shows me I ought to
keep myself out of it. Let them please themselves with making the king
glorious, who think a whole people may justly be sacrificed for the interest
and pleasure of one man, and a few of his followers; let them rejoice in their
subtilty, who by betraying the former powers have gained the favor of this;
not only preserved, but advanced themselves in these dangerous changes
Nevertheless (perhaps) they may find the king's glory is their shame; his
plenty the people's misery; and that the gaining of an office, or a little
money, is a poor reward for destroying a nation, which if it were preserved in
liberty, and virtue, would truly be the most glorious in the world. And others
perhaps may find they have with much pains purchased their own shame and
misery, a dear price paid for that which is not worth keeping, nor the life
that is accompanied with it. The honor of English parliaments has ever been in
making the nation glorious and happy, not in selling and destroying the
interest of it, to satisfy the lust of one man. Miserable nation, that from so
great a height of glory is fallen into the most despicable condition in the
world, of having all its goods depending upon the breath and will of the vilest
persons in it! Cheated and sold by them they trusted! Infamous traffic, equal
almost to that of Judas! In all precedeing ages parliaments have been the
pillars of our liberty, the sure defenders of the oppressed: They, who formerly
could bridle kings, and keep the balance equal between them and the people,
are now become the instruments of our oppressions, and a sword in his hand to
destroy us: They themselves being led by a few interested persons, who are
willing to buy offices for themselves by the misery of the whole nation, and
the blood of the most worthy and eminent persons in it, etc.

The collectors of the debates of the commons have given us a curious list of
pensions, and pensioners, and their characters in the pension parliament DEB.
COM. V. Append. 15.
, from a scarce tract published at the time, entitled, A seasonable Argument to
persuade all the Grand Iuries in England, to petition for a new Parliament. Or,
A List of the principal Laborers in the great Design of Popery and arbitrary
Power, etc. A reward of 200 l. was offered by proclamation for discovering the
author. He gives an exact account of all the emoluments and advantages enjoyed
by above 200 members. His manner is whimsical enough. I will copy a few of his
articles for the reader's amusement.

Reading. Sir Francis Doleman has 200 l. per. ann. pension, and was assisted by
the court in the cheating will, by which he got Quarles's estate, valued at
1600 l. Is now clerk of the council, worth 500 l. per ann. and is promised to
be secretary of state.

Buckinghamsh. Sir Richard Temple, commissioner of the customs, worth 1200 l.
per ann.

Buckingh. town. Sir William Smith, as honest as sir Richard.

Cambridge town. William lord Allington, in debt very much, a court-pensioner,
and in hopes of a white staff. A cully.

Cheshire. Thomas Cholmondely, promised a great place at court. Not only
deceived, but laughed at. Poor gentleman!

Cornwall. Sir Jonathan Trelawney, bart. one who is known to have sworn himself
into 4000 l. at least in his account of the prize-office. Controller to the
duke, and has got, in gratuities, to the value of 10,000 l. besides what he is
promised for being an informer.

Lanceston. Sir Charles Harboard, surveyor-general. Has got 100,000 l. of the
king and kingdom. Was formerly a solicitor of Staples Inn, till his lewdness
and poverty brought him to court.

Devonsb. Sir Capelston Bamfield, bart. much addicted to tippling, presented to
the king by his pretended wife, Betty Roberts, in Pall Mall.

Honiton. Sir Peter Prideaux. Constant court-dinners, and 300 l. per ann.
pension.

Weymouth. Sir Winston Churchill -- now one of the clerks of the green cloth.
-- Preferred his own daughter to the duke of York, and has got in boons, 10,000
l. Has published in print, that the king may raise money without parliament.

Durham. John Tempest, Esquire a papist, a pensioner, and a court-dinner man. Has
got a customer's [custom-house officer's] place at Hull for his son.

Harwich. Thomas King, Esquire a pensioner for 50 l. a session, meat, drink, and
now and then a suit of clothes.

Malden. Sir Richard Wiseman, 1000 l. a year pension, and keeper of one of the
treasurer's public parliamentary tables.

Winchester. Sir Robert Holmes, first an Irish livery-boy; then a highwayman;
now bashaw of the Isle of Wight. Got in boons, and by rapine, 100,000 l. The
cursed beginner of the two Dutch wars.

Stockbridge. Sir Robert Howard, auditor of the receipts of the exchequer, 3000
l. per ann. Many great places and boons, he has had; but his wh -- Uphil spends
all, and now refuses to marry him.

Newton, in the Isle of Wight. Sir John Holmes, Sir Robert's brother, a
cowardly, baffled sea captain, twice boxed, and once whipped with a dog-whip;
chosen in the night without the head-officer of the town, and but one burgess;
yet voted, this the last session, well elected.

Weobley. Sir Thomas Williams, king's chemist. -- Has got 40,000 l. by making
provocatives for lechery -- etc.

He concludes with an apology for undervaluations, or omissions; and mentions,
that the house was lately told by some of their own members, That there were
among them several papists, fifty outlaws, and pensioners without number.

Many of Charles II's long parliamen^ were ruined in their fortunes, and lived
upon their privileges and pensions. They had got it among them for a maxim,
which contributed not a little to our preservation, while we were in such
hands, that, as they must not give the king too much at a time, lest there
should be no more use for them, so they were to take care not to starve the
court, lest they themselves should be starved by that means Burnet's HIST. OWN
TIMES, I.545.
.

Speaking of the few honest men of those times, he goes on thus. These were the
chief men [ Coventry, Birch, Waller, etc.] that preserved the nation from a
very deceitful and practicing court, and a corrupt house of commons. And by
their skill and firmness they, from a small number, who began the opposition,
grew at last to be the majority.

At first this trade (of bribing the members) was secretly carried on, but
after Clifford's advancement to the treasury, it was so openly practiced, that
men's names and prices were publicly known. No wonder the king's money went.
Bribery was not then reduced to a system; so that the king could not get a
majority in the house of commons, and his schemes were so frightful, that he
could not bribe high enough. He dissolved the pensioned parliament, and never
got one to his purpose after Rapin, II.701.
.

The judicious author of a tract entitled, DANGER OF MERCENARY PARLIAMENTS,
first printed, A. D. School, ST. TRACTS, time of king William, II.638.
ascribes to the pension-parliament under Charles II. the formidable greatness
of France; the prodigious expenses of the late feigned and collusive war; (the
money given for it being employed either in subduing the subjects at home, or
oppressing our protestant neighbors abroad) the flourishing state of the
French navy (timber, mariners, cannon, and bullets being furnished them from
the Tower, which occasioned Charles IId's boast, that he had made his brother
of France a seaman, all to please a French wh -- Querouville, afterward
duchess of Portsmouth) the attack upon the charters of cities; the death of
some of our best patriots; the encouragement of popery; the decay of trade; the
growth of arbitrary power; the ill effects of dishonorable leagues; the
shutting up of the exchequer; the progress of all sorts of debauchery; the
servile compliances at court of a rampant hierarchy; the insolent deportment of
the inferior clergy both in the universities and elsewhere; the slavish
doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance; with the almost total
extirpation of virtue and moral honesty.

A list of the pensioners in Charles IId's long parliament was extant, A. D.
1695. The sum of 252, 467 l. was given in bribes in less than 3 years; and
others were hired with dinners by Copleston, Wiseman, and others, who kept open
house for the purpose, when each worthy member found under his plate such a
parcel of guineas as it was thought his days work had merited Pref. to COLLECT.
DEB. PARL. 1694-5. ST. TRACTS, time of king William, II.475.
.

The house of commons was then divided into two parties, that of the court, and
that of the country. Of the court-party some were engaged by offices, nay a few
by bribes secretly given them; a scandalous practice first begun by Clifford
Hume's HIST. STUARTS, II.254.
.

It was found, that in Charles IId's next parliament after the long one, nine
members had received, in bribes, 3,400, and that the sum of 12,000 l. had beeen
given or lent to others Ibid. 302.
. Eighteen pensioners in last parliament, were discovered, A. D. 1679; 2 at
1000 l. a year; 6 at 500 l. 2 at 400 l. 4 at 300 l. 4 at 200 l. besides 9
others, who had received different sums of the villainous king. These were not
only to vote with the court themselves, but to use all their interest. This was
mere petty larceny compared with the wholesale dealings of modern times Rapin,
II.707.
.

It was resolved, A. D. 1675, on a report of many members of the house of
commons being pensioned, to oblige all members to take an oath disclaiming all
receipts of money from the court since Ian. 1st, 1672 II.678.
. But Rapin does not know whether the resolution was put in execution. The
member was to declare that he had no gift, place, pension, promise, etc. nor
knew of any other member's having any, but what he then gave in signed with his
name.

Great opposition is always made to every bill for obliging members of
parliament to give a test of their integrity from corruption. Yet we think
there is no dispensing with tests of our being true churchmen. Is it then of
greater consequence, that we be true to the comfortable doctrine of eternal
reprobation, than that we be true to our country?

Charles IId's first parliament seemed willing to grant him whatever he pleased
to ask. He himself owns in his speech, A. D. 1667, that never king was so much
beholden to parliaments, as he had been. And the sequel showed how judiciously
they had bestowed their kindness. They were unwilling to confine him (good
soul!) to the necessity of calling a parliament any oftener than he pleased.
Accordingly their slavish speaker, Turner, says in his speech, A. D. 1677, We
found the triennial bill derogatory to the essential privilege of the crown, of
calling, holding, and dissolving parliaments. We found it impracticable, and
only useful to teach the people to rebel, etc HIST. OWN TIMES, I.377.
. The commons granted that worthless tyrant so unmeasurably, that even the
lords were alarmed. They supported him in his villainous war against Holland,
our natural ally, in conjunction with France, our natural enemy. The church,
the ever faithful coadjutor of wicked kings and ministers, excited them to
persecute all who differed from them, and the cruel corporation and five mile
acts were made under a king who had as much religion as his horse. The oath of
passive obedience and non-resistance was thrown out by three votes only. The
long parliament has been, and will be to all ages, infamous for the notorious
pensions given by the court among its members. However even the
pension-parliament passed many good acts. They were not yet hardened in sin, as
parliaments have been since.

About 800,000 l. were passed over by parliament unaccounted for, A. D. 1669.
Every member's price was known, says Burnet HIST. OWN TIMES, I.377.
. In those times the commons gave whatever the court asked; and the money-bills
were opposed by the lords Ibid.
.

By the peace of Breda, A. D. 1667, no advantage was gained by England, says
Rapin Rapin, II.645.
, though the war cost five and a half millions, besides the ships lost in
battles and at Chatham. Yet the king had promised never to make peace till the
objects of the war were gained. However the king got large sums of money into
his hands, particularly the 1,800,000 l. and the duke of York got great
advantages as high admiral, and 120,000 l. a present from parliament. The
villainous parliament suffered all to pass unquestioned.

James II. said, the members of his only parliament, all but about 40, were men
after his own heart. The elections were made at random, any how, men of any
sort chosen, and in the most barefaced manner. Many in those days were
terrified by James's severities, into silence and compliance. The papists, who
were many, liked him, and his measures, because he was for advancing them. The
clergy are always for the reigning prince, unless he directly attacks their
spirituals, or their temporals. And there was money given to carry elections.

Seymour spoke bravely in James IId's only parliament, against corruption in
elections. Many doubt, said he, whether this is a representative of the nation.
-- Little equity is to be expected by petitioners against undue elections,
when* so many in the house are themselves too guilty to judge justly and
impartially. -- If the nation sees that no justice is to be expected from you,
other methods may be found, by which you may come to suffer that justice, which
you will not do Burnet's HIST. OWN TIMES, II.322.
. The court did not dare to censure him for his freedom.

Though Richard II. and many others of our worst kings, down to Charles II.
dabbled in corruption, it may yet be said, that the art of governing by
regularly and systematically bribing the house of commons came in at the
revolution. It was first applied for buying off the jacobites, and has been
going on ever since, till the sitting down of the present immaculate
parliament, (the present parliament is always immaculate) and has of late times
been applied to the buying off of a set of troublesome men, who would otherwise
have opposed the pious designs of the court. That this is the truth, is
demonstrable from the court's continuing the practice almost a century; which
it certainly would not do, at such an enormous expense, if it did not find its
account in the proceeding.

Votes were for the first time after the revolution, bought by Sir John Trevor,
speaker of the house of commons, a bold and dexterous man, says Burnet HIST.
OWN TIMES, III.57.
, who knew the most effectual ways of recommending himself to every government,
and had been in great favor in king James's time. Being a tory in principle,
he undertook to manage that party, provided he was furnished with such sums of
money as might purchase some votes.

This mischievous invention has cruelly reduced the value of the revolution to
the nation. Some of the worst evils of Stuart-government were the following,
viz. 1. Governing without parliaments. But is there any difference between
governing without parliament, and governing parliament itself by money? 2.
Raising ship money and other taxes without consent of the representatives of
the people. What avails the consent of a set of bribed representatives
indemnified of the general burden by places and pensions? 3. Corrupting judges.
Corrupting the house of commons is worse. It is poisoning the fountainhead. 4.
Punishing arbitrarily, and according to no written law. But may not parliaments
thoroughly enslaved to a court, be expected to make cruel laws, whenever the
court happens to be of a cruel disposition. And what difference is it to the
subject whether he is cruelly punished by Iefferies's abuse of the laws, or by
the direct injustice of the laws themselves, except, that the latter is putting
him into a more unchangeably bad situation than the former. 5. Intimidating the
members by fines, prisons, etc. The evil of this practice consists only in its
influencing the members to vote against their country. What difference does it
make to the subjects, whether parliament is influenced to their prejudice by
fear or by hope? When the Stuarts intimidated the members, that measure cost
nothing to the nation. But we are obliged to pay for bribing them, to pay for
the very rod, which is to beat ourselves. 6. Laying aside juries. We had better
lay aside juries, than lay aside the whole efficiency, of parliament. To bribe
parliament is to lay aside its whole efficiency, and make it a mere limb of the
court. Besides, a corrupt parliament may be expected to enact what our courtly
lawyers, some of them of no mean rank, are often preaching up, viz. That juries
are only to judge of the fact; the establishing of which doctrine by
parliament, would produce precisely the same effect as abolishing juries by a
statute. 7. Levying war against parliament. A corrupt parliament is government
armed against the people. 8. Seizing the 5 members. A corrupt parliament will
seize and imprison all the incorrupt members, if they find it will answer their
gracious ends. And a member had better be imprisoned by a ruffian tyrant, than
persuaded by a fawning minister to damn himself and ruin his country. 9.
Dispensing with the laws, and making laws without consent of either lords or
commons, that is, giving out proclamations, with the force of laws. But laws
made, or laws repealed, by a set of profligate court-tools in St. Stephen's
chapel, are as far from the sense of the independent people, as the Stuart's
proclamations, or dispensations. ^n fact, a corrupt court against an honest
parliament and a brave people is nothing near so formidable as a corrupt court
and parliament against a helpless people. The former case admits of a
constitutional remedy; the latter leads to violence and contest between
government and people. 10. But the Stuarts shut the exchequer. True. And our
bribing ministers have, by doling about the money which should have paid the
national debt, brought public credit to the very precipice of bankruptcy. 11.
The Stuarts intended to establish absolute power in the prince. They did so.
And our bribing courts intend to establish absolute power in a junto of
grandees, who rule elections, and direct the members when to say Aye, and when
No. 12. The Stuarts intended to re-establish popery; while our corruptors mean
only atheism. Here I own a difference; popery being the worst thing in the
universe, hell only excepted. So that upon the whole, I know of scarce any evil
we have escaped by the revolution, popery excepted, that is not in a fair way
of being brought back upon us by corruption. The Stuarts were butchers. They
attacked the good lady Britannia with slaughtering knives. Our genteeler
corruptors have endeavored her destruction by poison held out to her in a
golden cup; or, as a humorous writer (I have forgot who) states it, between two
thieves, whig and tory, the nation is crucified.

Suppose, in two suits of law, my first antagonist obliges the judge, by
threatening his life, to give sentence against me, and my second bribes him. Am
I not equally injured in both cases? The Stuarts meant a tyranny by one; the
Walpolians an aristocracy. Which is worst for England?

The corruption introduced in king William's time, on pretense of buying off
the jacobites (doing a certain evil, that an uncertain good might come,
overthrowing the virtue of the people -- to save the nation) was so openly
scandalous, that honest Burnet remonstrated to the king upon it, with almost as
much severity as the old prophet used in reproving king David for murder and
adultery. And good reason he had for using severity. A Dutchman comes over to
Britain on pretense of delivering us from slavery; and makes it one of his
first works to plunge us into the very vice which has enslaved ^ll the nations
of the world, that have ever lost their liberties. When the parliament passed a
bill for incapacitating certain persons, who might be supposed obvious to court
influence, from sitting in parliament, our glorious deliverer refused the royal
assent, which occasioned some severe resolutions against the advisers of that
refusal, and a motion for a remonstrance to the king upon it. When an enquiry
was afterward set on foot, into the venality of parliament, such a scene of
iniquity was opened, as made the pension parliament of Charles II. seem
innocent, and the court was then thought to have arrived at the ne plus ultra
of corruption USE AND ABUSE OF PARL. I.121.
. If king William had been as disinterested as he ought, and as he pretended,
he would not have closetted members, nor promoted bribery. No man will dare
damnation for the sake of doing good to others, unless he thinks to get, or
keep, some advantage to himself. May my soul stand upon a more secure
foundation at the day of reckoning, than those of the best kings.

Let the reader judge of this matter by the following extract from a writer of
those times A short state of our condition with relation to the present
parliament, printed, A. D. 1693. ST. TRACTS, time of King William, II. 369.
.

200,000 l. a year bestowed upon the parliament has already drawn out of the
subjects pockets more millions than all our kings since the conquest have had
from the nation. -- The king has about six score members, whom I can reckon,
who are in places, and are thereby so entirely at his devotion, that though
they have mortal feuds, when out of the house, though they are violently of
opposite parties in their notions of government, yet they vote as lumpingly as
the lawn sleeves, and never divide when the interest of the family, as they
call it, is concerned, that is to say, when any court-project is on foot. The
house is so officered, that by those who have places and pensions, together
with their sons, brothers, and kinsmen, and those, who are fed with the hopes
of preferment, and the too great influence, these have upon some honest
mistaken country-gentleman, (I call them mistaken, who can be persuaded that an
honest bill can at any time be out of season) the king can baffle any bill,
quash all grievances, stifle accounts, and ratify the articles of Limerick. --
I would trust an elected king a great way, if I saw he understood election to
be his title; if our generosity would engage him to reformation. But when I
see, he knows neither his own nor our interest, that he hates and nicknames as
commonwealths-men, those whose principles made them the authors of his
greatness, and those that would have him do the business, for which he came,
for which both he and we said he came; when I see him sometimes soliciting in
person in the house of lords, and sometimes by lord Portland, besides what he
does by his underofficers; when I hear, he sends commands to some lords, and
bribes to others, and turns out of his place the gallant lord Bellamount,
merely for giving his vote in the house of commons according to his conscience,
thereby intending to terrify others; when I find the money, which the nation
gives to defend our liberties from foreigners, is like to undermine them at
home; in a word, when I see neither one house nor the other can withstand the
power of gold; I say, when I perceive all this, I think it is time to look
about us ST. TRACTS, time of king William, II.369, 370.
. -- I thought we had called him over to call ministers to an account, and to
put it out of their power to abuse us hereafter unpunished. If any spirit of
liberty remains, if we are not destined to destruction, sure the nation will
take some way to let the king and both houses know, that they expect, they
should not only provide for a campaign in Flanders, but for our security even
against our own victories, and such laws as may make it worth while to defend
our country; I say, worth while to defend it; for if we are to be slaves, it is
no matter to whom we are so. -- Since members are retained by him with such
overgrown fees (such places and perferments) to be council on his side; how can
the people hope they will be just in their arbitration? -- If men are to make
fortunes by being of our senate house, we had better ourselves pay the
disbursements of those we send -- each particular county would find their
account in it, whilst they would preserve their members from the temptation of
being hired out of their interest, and consequently would get good laws for
what they give. -- If this [bribing of members] continues, God have mercy upon
poor England, for hitherto we have been, and are like still, for ought I see,
to be paid, for all our expense of blood and treasure, with the smoke, which
Boccalini mentions in his advices from Parnassus, whereby the enemies of the
government have but too great advantage given them to ridicule us for our
foolish credulity.

Thus far this blunt honest writer. And it must be owned, that the constitution
has long been only nominally government by king, lords, and commons, but really
a tyranny of ambitious and avaritious ministers, who have, in succession,
enslaved and blinded their royal masters, wasted the public money, plunged the
nation into inextricable debts and difficulties, multiplied places and
pensions, kept up large and expensive armies in time of peace, accumulated
excises, misapplied taxes, irritated our colonies, injured commerce, endangered
public credit, debauched the virtue of the people, established corruption, as a
necessary engine of government, overruled elections, defeated the very end of
choosing representatives, by debauching the house of commons, the people's only
Palladium against regal and ministerial tyranny, into a mere out-work of the
court, by which means the sense of the nation has been, in innumerable
instances, trampled upon by the pretended representatives of the people, whose
duty is, to follow it implicitly.

These are the triumphs of the whigs, our pretended delivers from the Stuarts
of tyrannical memory, and from popery, and slavery.

Nothing was done at the revolution (says the author of DISSERT. ON PARTIES P.
220.
) to prevent parliamentary corruption.Pleased that the open attacks on our
constitution were defeated and prevented, men entertained no thought of the
secret attacks that might be carried on against the independency of
parliaments, as if our dangers could be but of one kind, and could arise but
from one family. Soon after the revolution, indeed, men of all sides and of all
denominations (for it was not a party-cause, though there were who endeavored
to make it such) began to perceive, not only that nothing effectual had been
done to hinder the undue influence of the crown in elections, and an
overbalance of the creatures of the court in parliament, but that the means
of exercising such an influence at the will of the crown, were unawares and
insensibly increased and every day increasing. In a word, they began to see
that the foundations were laid of giving as great power to the crown
indirectly, as the prerogative, they had formerly dreaded so much, could give
directly, and of establishing universal corruption. The first has happened,
and we pray that the last never may.

King William's convention-parliament showed an unpardonable negligence in
taking no security against kingly encroachments, nor against parliamentary
corruption, nor for certain and annual redress of grievances, nor for annual
parliaments. They complimented him immediately (before they had any security
that he would not abuse so enormous a trust, and with the greatest probability
that the example would have bad effects) with the suspension of the Habeas
Corpus act, thereby laying at the feet of one individual the liberty of
millions; which was never done in the much more dangerous times of queen
Elizabeth, not in Monmouth's rebellion by the tyrant James II. They declared
the Irish rebels, for adhering to king James, when they were liable to be
hanged, if they had resisted him, and before the revolution was known in
Ireland. They humoured the Dutch demands, in complaisance to their new Dutch
king, to the prejudice of England. They entered blindfold, and rushed on to a
length beyond all reason and prudence, into William's views of humbling France
by land-war, and first entangled us in those continental connexions, which have
almost ruined us. Then parliament settled the king's revenue for life. Was that
acting like wise men, who ought at least to have read their Bible, which would
have told them, that there is no trust to be put in kings, etc.

Then came the blessed contrivance of borrowing, and spending the principal, to
the amount of 4 and 5 millions in one year, in continental wars, and loading
the trade of the nation to pay the interest. Which admirable art we have since
improved to such an height, as to raise the national debt to the frightful sum
of 140 millions, by which our trade has been loaded with a burden of 5,600,000
l. per ann.

According to Davenant, there were granted to king William by parliament,
chiefly for his continental wars, in the years 1689, 90, and so on to School, no
less than 48,000,000 l.

Parliament overlooked in king William what they severely resented in his
predecessor, the dispensing with the laws. King William, of his own authority,
granted the Irish rebels conditions, which the laws refused them.

There was undoubtedly at the restoration, as well as at the revolution, a
strong disposition both in parliament and people to humor the court. The
nation was at these two periods just escaped from a tempestuous sea of
intestine commotions, and getting into a calm harbor, was so overjoyed as to
become almost wholly thoughtless of its danger in trusting kings and courts in
so unlimited a manner. But a great part of these parliamentary concessions were
the undoubted effect of direct gross bribery. It was thought, that the best
part of 170,000 l. was given among the members of the house of commons by the
East India company, A. D. 1695, to obtain a renewal of their exclusive charter,
instead of opening the trade, which was much talked of at that time Burn. HIST
OWN TIMES, III.199.
. Twelve lords and twenty-four commoners were a committee appointed to search
into the scenes of corruption.

Whenever (says LEGION Somers's TRACTS, III.124.
) a house of commons shall part with, expose, neglect, or suffer to be
infringed, the liberties, rights, and peace of the people they represent [and
surely this they do, when they show themselves the absolute slaves of the court
by seconding the views of the ministry, right or wrong] they betray their
trust, they violate the general reason of their being chosen; their
representing power and being ceases of course, and they become, from that time
forward, an unlawful assembly, and may and ought to be deposed and dismissed by
the same laws of nature and right, by which oppressed subjects may, and in all
ages have deposed tyrannical princes. -- It cannot be just, that what our kings
have no right to take away, our repres^^^tatives may give without law, or that
the people should be obliged to endure the tyranny of 500 usurpers, more than
of one, since no number nor quality of persons can make that lawful which in
its own nature is not so. They afterward complain, that the town of Maidstone
was deprived for two sessions of its privilege of sending two members. That at
the elections for Westbury and Sudbury, the commons had given the seat to the
candidate, who had 16 votes against 22. They complain of freeholders deprived
of their right to choose members; of partiality with respect to defaulters,
punishing some and letting others escape; of resuming king William's grants,
while they allowed those of former kings, though much more infamous; of
attempts to extend the prerogative only for the sake of embroiling the royal
family with the peers. The commons were at that time disaffected, and the peers
seem to have been of a better way of thinking; which is very extraordinary.

Sad scenes of corruption were found, A. D. 1694. Several contractors for
clothing the army were examined. Refusing to satisfy the commons, they were
committed to the Tower. A bill was ordered in for punishing those, who should
refuse to answer questions asked by the house DEB. COM. II.448.
.

Mr. Cornish was expelled the house of commons, A. D. School, for acting as a
commissioner of duties upon vellum, paper, parchment, etc. while a member,
contrary to 5 and 6 William III. Bohun's RIGHT OF ELECT. 265.


From discoveries made, A. D. 1695, it was suspected, that an universal
corruption had overspread the nation, court, camp, city, and parliament. There
was a deficiency of 294,798 l. in the East India company's stock, and some of
the members were suspected of dabbling DEB. COM. II.451.
. To wipe off suspicion, a committee of the commons was appointed to inspect
the company's books, and those of the chamberlain of London. It appears that
several members were bribed, that the company might obtain a new charter. There
were likewise corrupt practices among them for procuring the orphan's bill
Ibid. 454.
. A resolution of the commons charged their speaker, Trevor, with corruption
for receiving 1000 guineas from the city of London, after passing the orphan's
bill Ibid. 456.
. He sends the mace to the house, and quits his post. Foley is chosen speaker
in his room. Resolutions followed against several members, and a bill for
obliging Sir Tho. Cook to give an account of moneys, which had passed through
his hands. The bill was rejected by the lords, and Cook suffered to escape, on
promise, that he would make discoveries. He brings in a long and black list of
those who had fingered the money, persons of noble rank, and higher than noble;
which, it was pretended, was only in consequence of ancient custom at the
renewing of charters. Sir Josiah Child deposed, that the East India company had
proposed to offer the king 50,000 l. but that Mr. Tyssen had told them, from
lord Portland, the king would have nothing to do with it DEB. COM. II.465.
. A member (anonymous) said, The house ought to provide laws, for the future,
to prevent the members taking money. There were severe reflections on the duke
of Leeds Ibid. 466.
. It was proposed to address the king to remove him, or that the house should
impeach him. Such actions as these (a member said) are a blemish, if not a
scandal to the revolution itself. Another member asked, By what law it was a
crime to take money at court? It was answered, If there was no such law, it was
time there should be one Ibid. 467.
. And it might have been added, That it is an article of the oath taken by all
privy counselors, that they will avoid corruption Blackst. COM. I.230.
. Justice is not to be sold, said another member, by common law. [We should
think that very uncommon law in our times, by which a man obtained justice
gratis, and our ministers publicly declare, they think it necessary, that the
court have influence in parliament. Is not that selling justice?] Another
member said, There are parliaments to punish such crimes, and it is to be
hoped, there will always be. [Little did that honest gentleman think the time
would come, when upwards of 200 notorious placemen and pensioners would sit in
St. Stephen's chapel without a blush on their faces.] Resolved, That Thomas
duke of Leeds, president of his majesty's most honorable privy council [a most
honorable president!] be impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors Blackst.
COM. I.467.
. The duke of Leeds went to the house of commons, made a very weak speech,
denied his receiving any money; but it appeared afterward, that this was a
mere equivocation. The impeachment, however, was sent up to the lords. They
acquaint the commons, That they had passed a bill for imprisoning Sir Tho.
Cook and others. The commons resolved, That to offer money, or other
advantage, to a member, for promoting any matter whatsoever depending in
parliament, is a high crime and misdemeanour, tending to the subversion of the
English constitution Ibid. 470.
. [There ought, therefore, since that time, to reconcile principles with
practice, to have been a resolution of the commons, that for a minister to
offer, and actually to give money, and places to 200 members, for promoting his
schemes, and to keep him in his place, is a low crime and misdemeanour, not
tending to the subversion of the English constitution.] The commons were going
on to impeach others; but were interrupted by Black Rod's calling them to
attend the king, who was come to put an end to the sessions Ibid. 471.
. [Which shows a king to be a very convenient implement for the minister's
purposes.] There were several other very reasonable bills before the house,
which could not be carried through. And the king's concluding the sessions,
while they were searching into the above horrible scene of corruption, looks
very indifferent on the part of our glorious deliverer. He pretended, the
season of the year required his going abroad. That parliament never met again;
being dissolved soon after Blackst. COM. I.471.
.

Reflections being made against the ministry by the tories, A. D. 1690, a
commission was appointed to e^quire into the laying out of the public money. A
certain number of the commons (the lords declining) were chosen by ballot, with
authority to send for persons, papers, and records, and to examine upon oath
Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, III.90.
. This might be of service in those times. But in an age, when the majority of
the commons are corrupt, the majority of every committee must be the same, if
the doctrine of chances may be depended upon.

At the same time that France was bribing Charles II.'s parliament, money for
the same purpose came over from Spain and the Emperor to gain the members to
their party Dalrymp. MEM. II.110.
.

Prodigious quantities of French gold were brought over A. D. 1701, supposed
for bribing parliament. A strong party for France in parliament Tind. CONTIN.
I.439.
.

It was resolved, A. D. 1707, that it appears to the house that of 29,395
Englishmen, who should have been at the battle of Almanza, there were but
8,660. The queen was addressed to know why DEB. COM. IV.81.
. She answers, that there could no more be sent. But I think it does not appear
very clear why they were not. Therefore it was moved to censure the neglect of
not sending troops in time. But the censure was by the court-party ov^r-ruled,
and turned into an address of thanks for the queen's care of the affairs of
Spain.

A formidable effect of ministerial power in parliament was seen in the fatal
peace of Utrecht; of which queen Anne's ministers, in the following speech,
A.D. 1713, celebrate the praises, and herald forth their triumphs over their
country. -- I hope at the next meeting the affair of commerce will be so well
understood that the advantageous conditions I have obtained from France will be
made effectual for the benefit of our trade. I cannot part with so good and so
loyal an house of commons, without expressing how sensible I am of the
affection, zeal, and duty, with which you have behaved yourselves; and I think
myself therefore obliged to take notice of those remarkable services you have
performed. At your first meeting you found a method, without farther charge to
my people, to ease them of the heavy load of more than nine millions; and the
way of doing it may bring great advantage to the nation. In this session you
have enabled me to be just in paying the debts due to my servants. And as you
furnished supplies for carrying on the war, so you have strengthened my hands
in obtaining a peace. Thus you have showed yourselves the true representatives
of my loyal commons, by the just regard you have paid to the good of your
country and my honor: these proceedings will, I doubt not, preserve the memory
of this parliament to posterity. My lords and gentlemen, At my coming to the
crown, I found a war prepared for me. God has blessed my arms with many
victories, and at last has enabled me to make them useful by a safe and
honorable peace. I heartily thank you for the assistance you have given me
therein, and I promise myself, that, with your concurrence, it will be lasting.
To this end, I recommend it to you all to make my subjects truly sensible what
they gain by the peace, and that you will endeavor to dissipate those
groundless jealousies which have been so industriously fomented amongst us,
that our unhappy divisions may not weaken, and, in some sort, endanger the
advantages I have obtained for my kingdoms. There are some (very few, I hope)
who will never be satisfied with any government; it is necessary, therefore,
that you show your love to your country, by exerting yourselves to obviate the
malice of the ill-minded, and to undeceive the deluded. Nothing can establish
peace at home, nothing can recover the disorders that have happened during so
long a war, but a steady adhering to the constitution in church and state. Such
as are true to these principles, are only to be relied on; and, as they have
the best title to my favor, so you may depend upon my having no interest nor
aim but your advantage, and the securing of our religion and liberty. I hope,
for the quiet of these nations, and the universal good, that I shall next
winter meet my parliament resolved to act upon the same principles, with the
same prudence, and with such vigor, as may enable me to support the liberties
of Europe abroad, and reduce the spirit of faction at home.

It was proposed, to take the speech into consideration. Immediately the cry
was given for an address of thanks, and no examination. They accordingly
acknowledge her great condescension in letting them know their own affair,
which they had an absolute right to know, and to determine as they pleased, as
being the representatives of the great body, the people, the principal object.
They want words to express the satisfaction with which they have received all
that her majesty was pleased to impart. Entire confidence in her. She answers,
that they shall find the good effects of their confidence -- In the blessed
peace of Utrecht DEB. COM. IV.315.
.

The bill for the French trade was proposed, A. D. 1713, to be engrossed. The
debates held from 3 till near II. Sir Thomas Hanmer said, he never would be led
by any minister (...) V.40.
. Even some of the placemen were against the bill. It was carried against its
being engrossed, 194 against 185. A frightful number of enemies to Britain and
friends to France, sitting in the assembly of British legislators.

By the treaty of Utrecht, Dunkirk was not to be demolished till an equivalent
for it was put into the hands of the French. What that was to be, the court
never explained. Cape Breton was left to France, with liberty of drying their
fish on Newfoundland. All French goods were to come into England upon the same
conditions as those of other countries, though they will hardly take any of
ours in exchange, and though our Portuguese trade (one of the most advantageous
we then had) and our silk, our linen, and paper-manufactures must have been
ruined by admitting the French, and though it was found in former times, that
our trade with France was a million a year loss to us. All trading people were
alarmed. Yet a bill for making the treaty of commerce with France effectual was
within 9 votes of being established by ministerial influence. This whole affair
was carried on in the most bare^aced manner; nothing attempted to show the
advantage of a commerce with France, though so much to demonstrate, that it
would prove ruinous to the nation Burn. IV, 389-403.
. Yet we have people among us, who cry, There is no fear that a parliament will
pursue an interest contrary to that of the nation.

In the commons' address of thanks to the queen for that hopeful treaty, are
the following. Your majesty's extensive care has not only provided for the
security, but for the honor of your kingdoms. -- The good foundation your
majesty has laid for the interest of your people in trade, by what you have
done in the treaty of navigation and commerce with France, gives us hopes of
seeing it yet farther improved to the advantage of your kingdoms. They go on
requesting that the treaty of commerce may be completed, etc D^B. COM. V.43.
. The queen thanks them for the address, which so fully expresses their
approbation of the treaties of peace and commerce with France. It was with no
small difficulty that so great advantages in trade, were obtained for my
subjects.' This cure has cost me an infinite deal of trouble, says the
mock-doctor. Was this parliament a representation of the people of England,
which approved what the whole people showed themselves so much against?

Both houses address the queen upon the safe, honorable, and advantageous
peace of Utrecht Ibid. V.127
; by which England got just nothing but 50 millions debt. They thank her for
delivering the nation from a consuming land war unequally carried on, and
become at last impracticable. She answers, that she looks upon this address as
the united voice of her affectionate and loyal subjects. It was the voice of
jacobites only, and of a parliament enslaved to a jacobite ministry, and the
ministry knew it was so. Burnet says, the lords never approved it. See his
speech prepared to have been delivered in the house of peers, in case the
ministry had moved for an act, or an address, approving the peace, after it was
published HIST. OWN TIMES, IV.397.
. The good bishop, like a faithful preacher of righteousness, inveighs heavily
against the perfidy of the court in patching up a peace without the consent and
approbation of the allies, contrary to the express words of the treaties of
alliance, upon which the war was, at the joint expense of the allies, entered
into. Swearing deceitfully, says he Ibid. 399.
, is one of the worst characters; and he, who swears to his own hurt, and
changes not, is amongst the best. It is a maxim of the wisest of kings, that
the throne is established by righteousness. Treaties are of the nature of
oaths, and when an oath is asked to confirm a treaty, it is never denied. He
goes on to show, that the popes were the first inventors of a dispensing power,
by which they taught princes to break through oaths and treaties and mentions
several shocking instances, very unfit for the imitation of a protestant court.
He says, if any of the allies were deficient, there ought to have been demands
and protestations, according to the usual forms in such cases; and that these
being wanting, he cannot see, that the public faith, was not broken first on
our side.

Let us hear the sense of Geo. I.'s ministry on that fatal transaction, in his
first speech, A. D. 1715 DEB. COM. VI.10.
, and the answer of the commons.

It were to be wished (says the king) that the unparalled successes of a war,
which was so wisely and cheerfully supported by this nation, in order to
procure a good peace, had been attended with a suitable conclusion. But it is
with concern I must tell you, that some conditions, even of this peace,
essential to the security and trade of Great Britain, are not yet duly
executed, and the performance of the whole may be looked upon as precarious,
etc. A great part of our trade is rendered impracticable, the public debts are
very great, and surprisingly increased even since the fatal cessation of arms,
etc.

And the commons in their address, express themselves as follows;

We are sensibly touched, not only with the disappointment, but with the
reproach brought upon the nation by the unsuitable conclusion of a war, which
was carried on at so vast an expense, and attended with such unparalled
successes. But as that dishonor cannot, with justice, be imputed to the whole
nation, so we firmly hope and believe, that through your majesty's great
wisdom, and the faithful endeavors of your commons, the reputation of these
your kingdoms will in due time be vindicated and restored. We are under
astonishment to find -- that care was not taken [in framing the treaty] to form
such alliances, as might have rendered that peace not precarious -- Your
commons are under the deepest concern, that a great part of our trade is
rendered impracticable, etc. So soon were all the lies bandied between the tory
ministry, and the enslaved parliament, overthrown!

All, all but truth, drops dead-born from the press;
Like the last gazette, or the last address.
POPE. A number of new writs were made out for filling vacancies made by
members accepting places DEB. COM. IV.223.
, A. D. 1711. The collectors of the debates have given us an excellent
quotation on this subject from SHORT HIST. OF THE PARL. by R. W. Esquire as follows.

It was never known, that days were set apart for rewarding members of
parliament with places and employments. He who looks upon the votes of the last
day of the first session, will find almost nothing done, but new writs ordered
in the room of parliament men, who had received their wages for their past
year's services. And to such a pitch were they come at last, that at the end of
the second session, when the queen's speech was made, and the session closed to
all other intents and purposes, both houses are ordered to adjourn themselves
for eighteen days* as if something extraordinary was still behind, that might
require the sitting of the parliament. But when the day comes, nothing is done,
but a 2d list of loyal members, preferred, is produced; and the vacancies of
patriots turned courtiers, are, by new writs, ordered to be filled up; that
these dutiful members might be ready at the beginning of next session, to serve
those, who had so well rewarded their past services.

A motion was made by Pulteney, A. D. 1712, on occasion of the inactivity of
Ormond in Flanders, that the queen be addressed to desire him to exert his
utmost efforts toward obtaining peace. St. John in the house of commons, and
Oxford in the house of peers (par nobile fratrum!) give assurances that all was
well. The motion was changed into an address of entire confidence in the queen
DEB. COM. IV.310.
.

The surest way to destroy this government has always been thought to be, by
its own hands, that is by the authority and power of parliament. For this
purpose a confederacy by which the liberties of Europe had been so long
sustained against the power of France, was broken to pieces by votes obtained
in this house in the most extraordinary manner. Lechmere's speech in the house
of commons. A. D. 1715 Ibid. VI.54.
.

Lord Stanhope, in his speech in the house of peers, A. D. 1718, ^neers at the
duke of Argyle for changing sides, according as he was in or out. The duke
answers, that he voted with the ministry, when he thought they were right, and
against them when wrong DEB. LORDS, III.76.
. If we could see our parliaments proceed in that impartial manner, we should
have a better opinion of their integrity. On the contrary, in Walpole's times
there was a set of members whose names never failed to be seen on the court
side of every vote.

Lord Chatham in his speech on the stamp act publicly accused a certain
assembly of an overruling influence; and added the following: I know not how
it is; but we observe a modesty in the house, that does not love to contradict
a minister. I wish gentlemen would get the better of this modesty. If they do
not, perhaps the collective body may begin to abate of its respect for the
representative.

When the king and his ministers, says Sir I. Packington on the peerage bill,
A. D. 1719, thought fit to enter into a strict alliance with France, A. D.
1717, and thereby to give that ancient and irreconcilable enemy of England, an
opportunity to retrieve their low and desperate affairs, the commons did not
oppose those measures. When his majesty judged it necessary either for the good
of his subjects, or to secure some acquisitions in Germany, to declare war
against Sweden, his faithful commons readily provided for those great expenses.
When afterward it was thought proper to deprive the subjects of the beneficial
trade to Spain by declaring war against that crown, and sending a fleet into
the Mediterranean, to serve as ferry-boats for the emperor's troops, the
good-natured commons approved these wise counsels DEB. COM. VI.209.
.

The famous South Sea year exhibited a shocking scene of ministerial influence
in parliament.

Knight, the villainous S. S. cashier, was suffered to escape, during his
examination, and when seized at Antwerp, again let slip, and afterward
pardoned USE AND ABUSE OF PARL. I.240.
.

It was found, that 40 lords and commoners were concerned in the S. S. scheme,
and 300,000 l. given in bribes to obtain an act of parliament allowing that
company to erect itself into a bubble Ibid.
. To sum up this whole affair in a few words (which would require a volume to
detect and expose as it deserves) Though the mischief done by this infamous
conspiracy was visible to the whole world; and no skreen whatever was broad
enough to cover the guilty from the knowledge and resentments of the public;
the public vengeance fell only upon Mr. Aislabie (who was made the scapegoat
of the ministry) upon the directors, and upon the estate of Mr. Craggs, sen.
then in his grave, in the shape of expulsions, fines, and disqualifications. As
the majority without doors had tasted of the calamity, there is but too much
reason to fear the majority within either partook of the guilt, or were
prevailed upon to join in compounding the felony: Not only court lords but
court ladies had put in for a share of the spoil; nor could hardly any
suspicion arise but what had some plausible circumstances to warrant it.

Three very salutary motions were, in the year 1728, rejected by the commons,
viz. 1. For a committee to enquire what members had (what members had not,
would have been an easier task) places holden in trust for them. 2. For
preventing the translation of bishops. 3. For an address against the 1200
Hessians in British pay. USE AND ABUSE OF PARL. II.423.
.

It has been the constant labor of ministers to persuade the people, that all
those, who endeavor to detect their villainous schemes, are disaffected, or
designing men, and that their views are not the public good; but their own
advancement on the ruins of those, whom they strive to bring into disgrace with
the public.

If (says Geo. II. that is, the minister, in his speech, A. D. 1728) among
other reasons, hopes given from hence of creating discontents and divisions
among my subjects, and a prospect of seeing difficulties arise at home, have
greatly encouraged them in their dilatory proceedings, I am persuaded that your
known affection to me, and a just regard for your own honor and the interest
and security of the nation, will determine you effectually to discourage the
unnatural and injurious practices of some few who suggest the means of
distressing their country, and afterward clamor at the inconveniences which
they themselves have occasioned. It is more than probable, that foreign courts
will wait now for the result of your deliberations, and as you may depend upon
my constancy and steadiness, that no wicked and groundless suggestions or
insinuations shall make me depart from my present purposes, so I entirely rely
upon your wisdom and unanimity, etc.

However home these reflections were upon those who opposed the court measures,
or how apparently soever tending to abridge the freedom of parliament, the
majority of both houses betrayed no resentment; but on the contrary insisted
upon thanks for and compliances with every article. When therefore, the
minority in the house of commons stickled only for the alteration of a single
word in the address, restore for secure the commerce, and supported their claim
with unanswerable reasons, drawn from notorious facts, they were defeated by
249 voices against 87. Having given this earnest of their ductility and
complaisance, we are not to wonder that the whole session was of a piece USE
AND ABUSE OF PARL. II.356.
.

Thus lord Egmon^, A. D. 1751, From what has been proposed by the two hon.
gentlemen, who made and seconded this motion, [for an address of thanks and
general approbation of all measures] I should have concluded, if they had not
told me otherwise, that they were acquainted with all the secrets of the
cabinet, and had seen all the instructions sent to our ministers at foreign
courts, as well as all the advices received from them; for without such a
thorough knowledge, no man can, in my opinion, with honor agree to what they
have proposed; and what gives me much more concern, I am afraid that such a
thorough knowledge would be so far from warranting such a plumb approbation of
all our foreign affairs, that it would furnish us with sufficient reasons for
censuring every step that has been taken for some time past. As to the
authority, which it is pretended we have from his majesty's speech from the
throne, every gentleman knows, that in this house we are always to look upon
that speech as the speech of the minister; and I have read of very few
ministers whose asseverations, though given in the most religious, as well as
solemn manner, I should depend upon with respect to any fact relating to their
own conduct. Nor can I say that I have more dependence upon the testimony of
our present ministers, than I could ever have upon that of any other. I must
even be so free as to say, that what I have heard this day renders me a little
more suspicious of their regard to truth, than I ever was heretofore. I confess
I have as little acquaintance with the affairs of the cabinet as either of the
honorable gentlemen, or, I believe, as any gentleman in the kingdom. I know
nothing of our foreign affairs, but what I have from our public gazettes, and
these I know are often cooked up in order to deceive; but suppose they were
not, and suppose we had from this news-paper-knowledge sufficient authority for
believing every thing which by this motion we are to profess we believe, would
this be an authority sufficient for this house to found any resolution upon? Is
it not inconsistent with the dignity of this house and with the uniform
practice of our ancestors to found our resolutions upon any thing but
parliamentary knowledge Alm. DEB. COM. IV.177.
?

He goes on to show, that instead of general approbation of the measures
pursued by the ministry, there was much room for censure; instead of
congratulation, much cause for condolance. Our shipping seized by the
Spaniards, our colonies attacked by the French; the continent of Europe rather
embroiled than quieted by our interposition in their quarrels; a disgraceful
treaty with Spain; the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle dishonorable and precarious;
the nation insulting England every where; settling the neutral islands in
direct violation of the treaty; imprudent and unprofitable alliances on the
continent of Europe, with subsidies of endless expense to Britain, etc.

In Walpole's, and all such dirty times, the constant endeavor of the
opposition has been to get at facts, proceedings, extracts, papers, etc. and
the part of the ministerial crew, to negative all such motions. We accordingly
find, in most sessions six or eight such motions quashed; every one of which
was highly reasonable, many of them such, that the house was obliged to proceed
in the dark for want of necessary papers, which the minister well knew to be
very unfit for public inspection. Besides, it is a general rule with all men,
who have indirect schemes in view, to conceal as many particulars as they can:
for they are aware, that the knowledge of every particular furnishes their
detectors with an advantage against them. He knew human nature well, who
observed, that those whose deeds are evil, love darkness rather than light. But
such statesmen give us authority to believe the very worst of their
proceedings. They leave it to our imaginations to paint them as black as we
please; and might as well let us know the worst; if it were not for the fear of
impeachment, from which they are safe so long as they can. keep legal proof out
of our reach, though they leave us no room to doubt of their guilt by their
care to conceal their practices from us.

When Sir Geo. Byng's instructions were called for by the opposition, A.D.
1721, and the question overruled by ministerial influence, several lords
protested, Because not finding any instance, on search of the journals, we
believe there is none wherein a motion for admirals instructions to be laid
before the house has been denied; but on the contrary, there are many
precedents of instructions of a like nature, and in stronger cases, as we
conceive* addressed for by the house, and several in point for instructions
given to admirals, particularly to Sir George Rooke, and Sir Cloudesly Shovel;
nor does it seem to us at all material, whether the conduct of such admirals
had or had not been blamed before such instructions were asked for, since the
sight of instructions may be previously and absolutely necessary to inform the
house whether their conduct be blameable or not. 2. Because we think it highly
reasonable that these instructions should be laid before this house, upon which
the action of the British against the Spanish fleet in the Mediterranean, was
founded, without any previous declaration of war, and even whilst a British
minister, a secretary of state, was amicably ^reating at Madrid, which court
might justly conclude itself secure from any hostile attack during the
continuance of such negotiations. 3. Because till we have a sight of those
instructions, and are able to judge of the reasons, on which they are founded;
the war with Spain, in which that action of our fleet involved us, does not
appear to us so justifiable as we could wish, and yet was plainly prejudicial
to the nation in sundry respects; for it occasioned an entire interruption of
our most valuable commerce with Spain, at a time when Great Britain needed all
the advantages of peace, to extricate itself from that heavy national debt it
lay under; and as it deprived us of the friendship of Spain, not easily to be
retrieved, so it gave our rivals in trade an opportunity to insinuate
themselves into their affections; and, we conceive, that to the war alone is
owing the strict union there is at present between the crowns of France and
Spain, which it was the interest of Great Britain to have kept always divided,
an union, which in its consequences may prove fatal to these kingdoms. Nor does
it appear that Great Britain has had any f^uits from this war beyond its being
restored to the same trade we had with Spain before we began it DEB. LORDS,
III.202.
.

A motion, A. D. 1732, for a committee to inquire whether any members sat
contrary to law, passes in the negative DEB. COM. VII.236.
.

Motion for admitting admiral Haddock's instructions to be laid before the
house, A. D. 1731, passes in the negative DEB. COM. X.1.
.

A motion, A. D. 1739, for an account to be laid before the house of all ships
of war built for government's service. Overruled. The people must have no
satisfaction about the laying out of their money Ibid. XI.281.
.

The escape of the French fleet from Sir I. Norris, A. D. 1744, though he was
much superior to them, was never enquired into, nor punished CONTIN. Rap.
VIII.32.
.

Several lords, A. D. 1721, move for an address to the king, that lord
Carteret's instructions for the court of Sweden, be laid before the house.
Overruled. Several lords protested. Looked ill, and as if there was somewhat
in them not fit to be seen. DEB. LORDS, III.190.


Hor. Walpole fairly opposes parliamentary enquiries into the conduct of
ministers, as never to be set on foot, but when there is an absolute and
apparent necessity for so doing' -- [which there is at all times -- ]. There
was no necessity, he thought, for any enquiry how the nation came to be, for 20
years together, insulted by a state so much inferior in power as Spain is
allowed to be. And he afterward alleges [what every boy of 10 years of age
could have confuted] that the enquiry into the conduct of the tory ministry in
the end of queen Anne's reign, was the cause of the rebellion in 1715. That
therefore all such enquiries must be allowed to be of dangerous consequence to
the tranquillity of the nation [or to the minister, and his crew; witness the
report of the secret committee] and are generally set on foot by personal
enemies to those in the administration DEB. COM. XI.334.
. Therefore, I suppose, if once a leviathan of power gets into the open sea of
administration, he is to be allowed to w^llow there as long as he pleases, and
no bold hand must attempt to harpoon him.

Mr. Waller answered him well as follows; I shall readily admit that the rights
and privileges of parliament have not of late years been so much disputed by
our ministers as they were formerly, and if it were necessary I could give a
very good reason for this complaisance on the part of our ministers; but the
acknowledging of our right to enquire, will signify but little, if it should
ever come to be in the power of ministers to prevail with a majority of this
house to put a negative upon every question that tends to an enquiry. This, I
hope, is not now our case: but I must observe, that for many years past either
our ministers have been extremely good, or our parliaments extremely
complaisant, for there has been no regular parliamentary enquiry into the
conduct of any one minister, whilst he continued to be so; and if no minister's
conduct is ever to be examined by parliament till after he is given up by the
crown, I cannot think that parliamentary enquiry will ever be of any great
service to the nation. The hon. gentleman that spoke last has been so good as
to acknowledge our right to enquire into the conduct of public affairs; but if
the arguments he has been pleased to make use of upon this occasion be allowed
to be of any weight, I am sure no parliamentary enquiry into a minister's
conduct can ever be set on foot, because they will be of equal weight against
every future enquiry, and every motion that may tend to enquiry.

The Walpolians opposed all motions for enquiries into the conduct of the
ministry during the negotiation with Spain, because such enquiries would
occasion the producing of many papers, which would widen the breach, and make a
war with Spain, unavoidable. And afterward, when war was actually declared,
and there was no longer any pretense on that account for opposing an enquiry --
then the ministerial party opposed all parliamentary enquiry, because the
consequence would be the publication of the government's plans for carrying on
the war. The plain English of all which is, None of your enquiries.

Sir John Barnard argues on the same occasion admirably as follows DEB. COM.
XI.350.
; Sir, I have always attended my duty in this house, and always shall, as long
as the people do me the honor of choosing me one of their representatives; but
if we are never to enquire into the conduct of any minister, till that
minister, or the crown, gives us leave to do so, our attending here, or our
meeting together in this house, will be of very little signification to the
people; for I may venture to prophesy that if ever we should have a house of
commons so complaisant to the crown, as not to enquire into the conduct of
ministers, without a conge for that purpose, such a house of commons will, be
as complaisant in every other respect, and will consequently agree to every law
the crown may be pleased to propose, and to every grant the crown may be
pleased to demand and insist on. Like some of the petty states in France, or
Germany, we may make humble remonstrances to our sovereign, and represent our
inability to comply with the free gift demanded of us; but when our sovereign,
or his prime minister, says it must be done, we may depend on it that such a
house of commons will always submit and agree to what is demanded of them. The
gentlemen of the other side of the question should be cautious of mentioning
any thing that has been lately done in Spain: for there are many things now
done in that kingdom which neither would or could be done if that country had
preserved their ancient freedom and independency; and if the maxims these
gentlemen have been pleased to advance upon this occasion should ever be
received in this kingdom, our parliaments will soon become as complaisant to
the crown, and of as little use to the people, as the cortez now are in Spain.
A parliamentary enquiry into a minister's conduct is, I find, very much
mistaken by the gentlemen who oppose this question. Sir, it is not a trial: It
is a sort of debt which every minister owes to the public. A minister is a sort
of agent or steward for the public; and is not every steward obliged to give an
account of his stewardship? When a lord happ^ns, upon the general view of his
affairs, to (...) perfectly satisfied with the management of his stewar^ he may
save himself the trouble of examining, or appointing others to examine,
particularly into his steward's conduct and accounts; and in the same manner,
when a nation happens, upon the general view of public affairs, to be perfectly
well satisfied with the conduct of its ministers, there is no necessity for a
particular enquiry into their conduct. But will any gentleman say this is our
case at present? Sir, our conduct, as members of this house, is not in this
case to be directed by our own opinion. This house is not the lord to whom our
ministers are to answer for their conduct. The people are the lord, to whom
they are to answer, and we are appointed by the people to examine into their
conduct and accounts. Therefore, when the people in general, or a great part of
them, seem dissatisfied with the conduct of public affairs, it is our duty,
whatever we ourselves may think, to make a strict and impartial enquiry into
the conduct of our ministers, and to call for all papers that may be necessary
for that purpose. This is not subjecting our ministers to a trial; it is only
making them give an account to the people of their stewardship, which is an
obligation they lay themselves under, when they accept of being the ministers
of the crown, and consequently the stewards of the people; and they ought to be
ready to perform the obligation when and as often as the people may please to
require it. I am sorry it is not performed much oftener than has been usual of
late years: I am sure the oftener it is performed, the more it will redound to
the honor of a good administration, the better safeguard it will be to the
people against the frauds and oppressions of a bad one.

My lords, we must enquire (says lord Carteret, in the debate on the add^ess,
A. D. 1740 DEB. LORDS, VII.472.
:) The whole kingdom expects it at our hands. If we do not, there will be ugly
insinuations made against the dignity and honor of this house both at home and
abroad. For this very reason we ought to agree to the noble duke's motion in
order to satisfy the people as soon as possible, that in this session we will
do our duty. It is a duty we owe to our sovereign as well as his people. If
this proposition is refused, or set aside by the previous question, I shall
look upon it as a refusal of any enquiry, and therefore, I must, in my own
vindication, protest. In the glorious and successful administration that has
been mentioned, though the ministers were willing, as all ministers are, to
accept of all the panegyrics the parliament was willing to bestow, yet being
conscious of their own innocence, they were too wise to oppose, or endeavor to
evade an enquiry. There was then no mutual compact between a minister and his
tools to protect one another against an impartial enquiry, and therefore in the
year 1707, when a complaint was brought into this house against the admiralty,
and an enquiry into the conduct of that board moved for, though prince George
himself was then at the head of the admiralty, the ministers were so far from
opposing, that they promoted an enquiry. A committee was accordingly appointed,
and a strict enquiry carried on. Whereupon it was found that the prince's
council had been guilty of great neglects with regard to the appointing of
cruizers and convoys for protecting our trade; for which, and for several other
neglects and misdemeanors alleged against them, they were removed from that
board, without so much as an attempt made by the ministers either to screen
them from being found guilty, or to protect them after they were.

A motion was made, A. D. 1741, after Walpole was out of power, for enquiry
into the conduct of affairs last 20 years DEB. COM. XIII.140.
. Lord Limerick, who made the motion said, It is justly suspected, that during
the last twenty years, our ministers have taken most unjustifiable methods for
gaining a corrupt influence, both at elections and in parliament. While our
constitution subsists in all its force, it is certain, that the parliament, or
at least this house of parliament, will always be of the same complexion with
the generality of the people. It is from this house, his majesty is to know the
sentiments as well as the complaints of his people; therefore, when measures
generally disliked by the people, meet with an approbation from this house, it
may be justly suspected, that some illegal methods have been taken for
obtaining that approbation; and if upon a new election a minister, who by his
crimes or imprudence has rendered himself generally obnoxious to the people,
should nevertheless get a majority of his friends, or rather creatures,
returned as members of this house, we must suppose, that some illegal methods
were taken for obtaining those returns.

A motion being made, A. D. 1741, by Mr. Pulteney, that the several papers
presented to the house on Monday, and yesterday by Mr. Comptroller, be referred
to a select committee, and that they do examine the same, and report to the
house what they find material therein, it occasioned a great debate. Mr.
Pulteney introduced his motion with the following speech. Mr. Speaker. I have
always thought, that when papers of state are called for by this house, as well
as when such papers are laid before us without being called for; it should be
with some sort of view or design. We know very well, that when treaties,
estimates, or accounts are laid before us, without being called for, it is
generally with a design to demand a sum of money, or vote of credit; and such
demands have of late years been usually complied with, I believe, by most
members of this house, without so much as looking at any one of the papers or
estimates which were laid before us as the foundation of that demand. This
practice, Sir, must be allowed to be a little extraordinary; but our late
practice with regard to those papers that are expressly called for, has been
much more surprising; for after the papers called for have been laid before us,
they have been ordered to lie upon the table, and there they have generally
lain without the least examination, as if we had no view in calling for them,
but that of increasing the bulk of our votes by long lists of letters,
instructions and memorials. Experience has shown, that when such papers are
ordered to lie upon the table for the perusal of the members, they are seldom
perused with attention by any, and when they are perused separately and
distinctly by a few particular members, none of them have authority enough to
prevail with the house to enter into a strict enquiry, or to take into
consideration the errors, mistakes, or blunders, they may from such papers have
discovered. For this reason, Sir, and that the nation may see we do not put the
administration to the trouble and expense of laying piles of state-papers
before us, without any view or design either for the service or satisfaction of
the public, I think, when we call for any papers of importance, and they are
accordingly laid before us, they ought of course to be referred to a select
committee, that they may examine them strictly, and report their remarks,
observations, or objections to the house; for the examination of such a
committee must always be more exact and full, and their report will have more
weight, than the examination or report of any single member who peruses the
papers upon our table without any direction or authority from the house DEB.
COM. XIII.70
.

The multitude of commissioners and officers of the treasury, says lord Digby
against Walpole Ibid. 200.
, notwithstanding there being too great a number of both, can no way endanger
the discovery of any misapplication of the public treasure, especially when the
first commissioner has the direction of the secretary's office in the kingdom.
The other commissioners, and the officers, either do not really know how the
money issued by them is applied, or else they will never make a discovery, as
long as they know that their first commissioner continues to be the chief
favorite of the crown. This has been the touchstone of such discoveries for
many years past, and always will be so, till we have a parliament independent
and resolute enough to pull a suspected minister even from behind the throne
itself.

I am not at all surprised, (says Mr. alderman Heathcote Alm. DEB. COM. II.268.
) to hear the prerogatives of the crown trumped up as a bar to any enquiry; for
they have always been set up by ministers against every enquiry or prosecution
that was ever proposed in parliament; but this can never be of any weight with
those who can properly distinguish between the prerogatives of the crown and
the privileges of parliament. The prerogatives of the crown, Sir, were all
established by our constitution for the public good; and when they are properly
made use of, the parliament has nothing to do with them; but when they are
made a wicked or an imprudent use of, the parliament has then a right to
interfere, and to punish those who advised the king to make such an use of the
prerogative. Thus the king has by his prerogative the sole power of appointing
all commanders both by sea and land, and while proper persons are employed, the
parliament has no right to intermeddle; but when improper persons are
appointed, and the public has suffered, or is like to suffer, the parliament
has a right to interpose, and not only to remove the worthless persons so
appointed, but to punish those who advised the appointing of such. But, says
the hon. gentleman, if we once begin to enquire into and punish those who
advised the appointing of any general or admiral, we shall of course soon begin
to assume to ourselves the power of appointing generals and admirals. I wish
the hon. gentleman would re-consider this argument. If he does, he will find it
to be in short thus. If we do what we have a right to do, we shall of course
soon begin to do what we have no right to do. This may be logic among
ministers of state; but I am sure it would not be allowed to pass for such
among the under-graduates of any of our universities. By this method of
arguing, Sir, we should put an end to one of the chief uses of parliaments,
which is to take care that none of the prerogatives of the crown, which were
all designed for the safety of the people, shall be ever turned toward their
destruction; but however much this method of arguing may prevail among
ministers of state, I hope it will never be admitted by this assembly. Here I
hope the ancient maxim of our constitution will always prevail, That the king
has many prerogatives to do good; but not so much as one to do evil Alm. DEB.
COM. II.268.
.

On a motion, A. D. 1744, for enquiring into the cause of the miscarriage at
Toulon, Mr. Cornwall complains, as follows, of the effect of ministerial
influence in parliament. Sir, My duty to my country, and my duty to my nearest
and dearest relation, force me up, to second the motion, which the worthy
gentleman behind me has so properly made you; but I must always call the day he
has mentioned cruel, as well as honorable: However, His saltem accumulem
donis, et fungar inani
Munere --
VIRG. And to say the truth, Sir, the hon. gentleman and I have frequently
before now intended to move a question of this sort, but we have as often
expected it to come from more able gentlemen now in my eye, as one condition,
sine qua non, of their change of situation. More than half of the session is
lapsed, and not one of these conditions is fulfilled, Sir, almost all the money
is given, not only all that the most believing and most sanguine country
gentleman can raise, but all that the most devoted courtier can ask: but not a
single grievance has been redressed. Should not these, Sir, and our supplies
proceed pari passu? Let us therefore for shame make a beginning with this; and
as it cannot be redressed but by enquiry, let us now exercise one of our
fundamental rights, which our infatuation, not corruption to be sure, has so
long suspended, that it is almost lost. There is not a man in the nation, who
does not know in his private capacity that there has been great misconduct, nay
cowardice somewhere or other in the commanders of this English Armada. Should
not then, Sir, even our ministers themselves have laid the whole before
parliament? But which of us in his public capacity here has heard a word of it?
Do none of our ministers recollect what was done when the duke of York
commanded in the time of king Charles IId, and admiral Russel in that of king
William? And these, Sir, were in some sort victories: for although in the
former the Dutch burnt some of our ships at Chatham; yet before they got back,
we sunk and destroyed twenty of their capital ships, though superior to us in
number; and although in the latter we destroyed sixteen of the French men of
war, for which the admiral had the thanks of both houses, and was created earl
of Torrington; yet, Sir, those princes were advised, unaddressed, to lay these
matters upon your table, and I read in your journals, that censures were passed
on particular parts of these transactions. But now, Sir, though more than a
twelve month ago forty ships of England made with a difficulty a drawn battle
against 30 of the combined fleets, yet the parliament is told nothing, nor has
asked a single question concerning it. Therefore, for God's sake, Sir, for the
sake of common sense, as well as justice and our own honor, let this enquiry
be hastened. I shall, for the sake of form, trouble you with two subsequent
motions, viz. That it may be a committee of the whole house, and that this
house do, this day fortnight resolve itself into a committee of the whole house
upon this matter. Our journals justify the form and method of proceeding; and
if any gentleman has objections to the thing, I hope I shall be permitted to
enter the lists with him; for though on any other subject I should be soon
vanquished, yet on this self-evident proposition I cannot but think of
obtaining a complete victory Alm. DEB. COM. II.177.
.

Our chief business in this house,' says Mr. Care^^, A. D. 1745, is to keep a
watchful eye over those, who, under our sovereign, are the first springs of our
government, and to make an enquiry into their conduct, as often as we find the
least reason to suspect that they have been prompted by some private view, to
do or advise any thing that was inconsistent or of dangerous consequence to the
public welfare. This, I say, is our chief business: this is our duty; and this
duty we are the more obliged to perform when it appears that our country has
suffered, or is like to suffer severely, by the misconduct or the bad advice
given by our ministers Ibid. 258.
.

It is owing to the same fatal influence in the parliament of a neighboring
kingdom, that my much-honoured friend Sir W. Main, and his worthy adherents,
have met with such opposition in their late most reasonable demand in
parliament of papers, accounts, and transactions relating to the public
concerns of that declining country See the NEWSPAPERS of Nov. 1773.
,

A. D. 1734, a message was brought to the commons from the king, desiring that
the house would enable him to augment his army [against the windmills on the
continent] if necessary, between the dissolution of that parliament and the
sitting of a new one.

Sir William Wyndham spoke on this occasion as follows: Sir, I must own my
surprise is as great as my worthy friend's, that a message of this nature
should be sent to this house so near to the close of this session; for whatever
promises were or were not made the first day of the session, I am very sure
most gentlemen expected that every thing of consequence had been over long
before this time; and upon this general presumption, a great many gentlemen who
have not the honor to be let into ministerial secrets, are gone into the
country; it being at present more necessary perhaps than usual for such
gentlemen to return to their respective countries, in order to prevent their
being bought and jobbed out of that natural interest by which only they can
expect to enjoy the honor of representing their country in parliament. But
however necessary perhaps their presence may be at this time, yet if time be
allowed them, I doubt not but most of them will think it their duty to return
to the service of their country in this house when they hear that a matter of
so very great importance is to come before us; it is I think, Sir, a matter of
the highest importance; it is as my worthy friend called it an absolute
surrender of our all, a surrender of the rights, and a delegating the power of
parliament to the crown. This absolute power, it is true, is now demanded but
till next session of parliament: but if it were not for the confidence I repose
in his present majesty, I should be much afraid the next session would never be
allowed to meet unless upon the new election a majority of the members should
appear to be such as would be ready to confirm or to renew that surrender. The
honorable gentleman on the floor has told us, that it has always been usual to
show so much respect to the crown, as to take such messages as the present into
our consideration the very next day, and that he remembers no instance to the
contrary. It is true, Sir, since I have sat in parliament I remember many, but
too many, messages something of this nature; and I believe they have always
been taken into consideration the next day; but that did not proceed so much
from the respect we owe to the crown, as from the cause of sending the message.
There never was a message of this kind sent from the crown but when the nation
was threatened with some such thing as an immediate invasion or insurrection,
which in the body of the message was expressed to be the reason or cause of
sending such a message, and as in such cases the near approach of the danger
required the immediate concerting of proper measures to prevent it, we may
suppose this was the chief reason of their being so immediately taken into
consideration by this house. But as we are generally apt to improve upon bad
precedents, I will be bold to say, that there never was such a message sent to
parliament as the present, either with respect to its nature, to the reason of
sending it, or to the time of its being sent. By no message that ever was sent
to parliament, was there an absolute and unlimited power demanded by the crown,
which, to every gentleman, must appear at first sight to be the demand now made
upon us; there was never such a message sent to parliament, but what informed
us of some immediate danger impending and just ready to fall upon the nation.
By the present message we are told of no such thing; nor do I believe that any
such thing can be pretended; and I remember no instance of a message any way
resembling this, that ever was sent to this house, the very end of a session,
and that session the last of a parliament. I cannot indeed, Sir, form to myself
a reason why any such message should have been at all sent; and much less can I
form a reason why it should have been sent at such a remarkable time;
therefore, I must think that gentlemen will certainly expect to be informed by
those who are able to inform them, what necessity there was for this message,
and from what sudden and, till now, unforeseen change in our affairs, the
sending of such a message has now become more necessary than it was at any time
during the former part of the session, etc.

Many other members spoke unanswerably on the impropriety of such a message at
such a time. But the ministry carried their point DEB. COM. VIII.212.
.

When it was determined, A. D. 1736, that, to save the destruction of the
people by spirituous liquors, certain burdens should be laid upon them, to
enhance their price, and put them out of the reach of the vulgar; the Walpolian
crew, ever attentive to money-matters, ever thirsting for the people's
lifeblood, insisted, that 70,000 l. a year should be settled on the civil
list, to make up for the deficiency, which would ensue, they said, upon the
discouragement of spirituous liquors. It was urged, that the restraint laid on
the use of spirituous liquors would improve all the revenues, and the civil
list among the rest, because it would save the lives of multitudes, and there
would be a greater consumption of beer, etc. and that, at most, parliament was
only obliged to make good 43,000 l. the sum, which the duties on spirituous
liquors were expected to raise, the 70,000 l. being a consequence of the
people's excess. But the courtiers insisted, that parliament had no business to
enquire whether the duties granted to the civil list, produced the expected sum
of 800,000 l. a year, or a million; but if they did really produce more, that
surplus was a sort of prize already granted to his majesty' [that is, to the
ministry] and parliament neither ought, nor could take any part of that surplus
from him, or make any alteration, [however necessary for the safety of the
people] by which that surplus might be diminished, without making good the loss
in some other way DEB, COM. IX, 185.
. Thus these modest gentlemen argued, that the ministry ought to have certain
revenues whole, that they might always have enough to dole away among their
crew, whether those revenues produced a million, or two millions, annually, and
that the poor people are never to be gainers by any improvement made in
revenue-matters. All the while, they showed no anxiety, whether the sinking
fund might lose. No matter what becomes of the public. This is the manner of
construing, at court, the old maxim, Salus populi suprema lex. It was carried,
however, for the 70,000 l.

A. D. 1738, the house goes up with an address of thanks for the convention,
which was so unpopular, they were ashamed to print it, in the votes, as usual.
What a state of corruption the house must have been in Ibid. X, 6.
!

Laws, being the rules of government, ought (says a Chinese emperor MOD. UNIV.
HIST. VIII.166.
,) to be faultless. By the same rule, the law-mak^rs ought to be faultless; not
to be the most lawless part of the people; not the great corruptors of the
people. It is infinitely shameful to see the parents leading the children into
wickedness.

It is a maxim, Sir, (says Sir W. Wyndham in the debate, A. D. 1738, on the
Spanish depredations) that we ought not to speak ill of the dead: but this
maxim relates to dead men, not to dead parliaments. Of parliaments we must say
nothing amiss, while they are living; but after they are dead, we are allowed
to tell the truth, and to give our sentiments of them freely. This parliament
will soon come to die as others have done before it: It can live but a very fe^
years longer; therefore let us consider what people will say of us when we are
dead, if we should give the least reason to suspect that we approved of such a
maxim. Some former parliaments seemed to speak, upon all occasions, the sense
of ministers, and their sense only. But I am sure the character now generally
given to those parliaments can be no encouragement for us to follow their
example DEB. COM. X.253.
.

The house of commons had for many years scarce any other employment than
receiving addresses and petitions concerning the Spanish depredations. -- The
arts and influence of the minister would have continued to defeat the voice of
the nation and all the independent part of the parliament that called for war,
had not the court of Spain -- baffled all the complying arts made use of by the
British minister, who would still have put off the war, had the court of Madrid
condescended even to save common appearances by seeming disposed to grant
satisfaction to the British nation. MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLI.411,
At last, the king prevailed for war sore against Walpole's inclination, who
deserved to lose his head for opposing the sense of the nation, though the
sense of the nation had been wrong.

The duke of Argyle observed, A. D. 1739, in the debate on the pension-bill,
that it was a little extraordinary, that the commons should pass the
pension-bill, and very soon after reject a place-bill DEB. COM. VI.398.
. There is no doubt, but the principle of a place-bill is the same with that of
a pension-bill; and that there could be no reason given for passing one, that
was not equally good for passing the other. But this proceeding of the commons
may be explained by supposing, that, when the place-bill was five times passed
by the commons, and thrown out by the lords, there was an understanding between
the houses, and the commons passed upon the certainty that the lords would
reject; and that when the commons rejected, they had not settled matters with
the other house. Otherwise we must look upon them as a set of drivellers acting
upon no principle whatever.

Of late years, (says Mr. Pulteney Ibid. VII.286.
) gentlemen have been led, I do not know how, into a new method of proceeding
in parliament, a method very different from what our ancestors did always
observe. In former times the general or particular grievances were first
examined, considered and redressed in parliament before they entered upon the
granting of any supplies; but lately we have been led into a method of granting
all the money necessary for the public service among the first things we do.
The malt tax bill, the land tax bill, and such bills are now in every session
the first things that appear upon the journals of this house; and when these
things are finished, the gentlemen in the administration generally look on the
whole business of the session to be over. If this house should then enter upon
any disagreeable enquiries into grievances, we might perhaps be told, that the
season was too far spent; that it was necessary for gentlemen to return home to
mind their private affairs; we might probably be obliged to defer to another
session what the welfare of this nation required to be determined in the
present. I hope gentlemen will consider this, and that they will again begin to
follow the wise method observed by our ancestors, and keep some security in our
own hands for our sitting till we have heard and redressed all the grievances
of our fellow subjects.

Whatever we may think, my lords, here at home, says lord Carteret, A. D. 1739,
I have good reason to believe that the frequency of such demands [votes of
credit, civil list debts, etc.] and the ready compliance they have all met
with, renders our constitution the common jest of every man abroad. Our
pretenses to liberty will, I fear, in a short time, become as much the ridicule
of foreigners as our late conduct has already rendered our pretenses to the
holding of the balance of power in Europe. I was confirmed in this opinion by a
question lately put to me by a French nobleman. He was a man of good sense, and
yet he one day seriously asked me what difference there was between the
parliament of England and the parliaments they have in France. I readily
answered, and I hope I had some ground for saying, that in France the king
makes their laws or edicts, and their parliaments must comply with whatever the
king desires, but in England our laws are made by king and parliament, and our
parliaments may refuse to comply with whatever the king desires. To which he as
readily replied; In your late history we read of several extraordinary messages
or demands sent by your king to his parliament, no one of which was ever
refused; and pray where is the difference between an edict made by the king,
and an edict made by king and parliament, if the parliament never refuses what
the king is pleased to demand; for our parliaments claim the privilege of
refusing as well as yours; and if a trial were to be made, such a refusal might
perhaps be found as insignificant in England as it now appears to be in France.
This I am apt to believe, my lords, is the way of thinking in other countries
as well as France; and if a general vote of credit and confidence should once
become a sort of customary compliment from the parliament to the crown, at the
end of every session, or as often as our ministers may think fit to desire it,
this may become the way of thinking at home, as well as abroad. If this should
ever come to be the case, our parliaments will of course become despicable in
the eyes of most of our own people; and when the form of an act of parliament
begins to be contemned, a proclamation may easily and safely be substituted in
its stead. It would indeed be happy for the nation it were so, for when a
parliament ceases to be a check upon ministers, it becomes an useless and
unnecessary burden upon the people. The representatives of the people in
parliament must always be paid some way or other by the people: If their wages
are not paid openly and fairly by their respective constituents, as they were
formerly, a majority of them may, in future times, be always ready to accept of
wages from the administration, which must at last come out of the pockets of
the people, and will fall with a much greater weight upon them; at the same
time that it renders their representatives of no use to them. There is no way
of preventing this, but by putting it out of the power of ministers to pay
wages either to the electors or elected; and this can be no way done, but by
strictly confining public grants to public services, according to the estimates
previously delivered into parliament.

In all cases (says Mr. Sandys in the debate on the Spanish depreciations, A.
D. 1739 DEB. COM. II.108.
) we ought to distinguish carefully between the respect due to the crown and
the regard that may be claimed by the ministers of the crown. To the crown we
owe a great and a sincere regard; but to ministers none, but what they justly
acquire by their conduct. Nay, a regard for the latter may often be
inconsistent with that regard which is due to the former. Of late years
parliaments have shown a much greater respect to the ministers of the crown,
than was usual in former ages; and I am under some apprehensions that by
continuing to show the same respect for a few years longer, we shall at last
lose all that respect which the people of this kingdom ought to have for their
parliaments. If this should ever happen to be our case, which God forbid! our
happy constitution would be at an end: Our people could not then be governed by
parliaments, or by any sort of civil government. They must be ruled by a
standing army and a military government.

Several lords protested, A. D. 1740, against addressing the king on his
speech, in particular terms. Because it was the ancient custom of the lords to
present an immediate general address of thanks only, and to take time to
consider the matters contained in the speech. That the house had then time to
form a judgment and to give their advice to the crown. That a speech from the
throne was justly considered as the act of ministers; that ecchoing back the
particulars of a speech was a modern expedient to procure a precipitate
approbation of measures that might not be approved upon better consideration.
That an enquiry into the inaction of the last year, notwithstanding the immense
expense of maintaining fleets and armies, was the proper business of that
house, and would be a means of bringing the war to a happy conclusion, etc.
DEB. LORDS, VII.48^.


I might very properly insert under this head of minist^rial influence in the
house, the greatest part of two who^e articles I have collected, viz.
Ministers, and Peculation, which together would make a volume, and shall
appear, abridged, in the sequel. But I will only* as a sample, ins^ar omnium,
give here the following charges brought against Walpole, that minister of
ministers, that corruptor of corruptors, by the lord Digby, A. D. 1741 DEB. COM
XIII.198.
.

That all the titles, honors, pensions, places and other favors of the crown,
have for twenty years past been disposed of to none but such as voted in
parliament or at elections, according to the direction of the minister: That
within these ten years several persons of high rank and great merit have been
dismissed from all the offices they held at the pleasure of the crown, for no
other known or assignable reason, but because they opposed the minister in
parliament: That officers in the army and navy, who got themselves seats in
this house, and voted as they were bid, have gained preferments out of their
rank, to the disappointment of officers of longer service and greater merit in
their military capacity: These things are known to all men both within doors
and without; and are of themselves a strong presumption, if not a certain
proof, that our minister had a formed design to overthrow our constitution by
establi^^^ng a corrupt influence in parliament.

Pelham, in defending Walpole DEB. COM. XII.84.
, alleges, that it could not be proved* that he had co^^up^e^ ^he house of
commons. He challenges any gentleman than in the house, to convict Walpole of
requesting* or tempting him, or any one else, to vote against his conscience.
But if Mr. Sandys had asked Pelham, how it came to pass, that there were in the
house ^ome hundreds of placemen; why places were given to so many
parliament men, above all other^; and why those places were taken away, when
members voted against the minister's measures; -- what would he have answered?
Had I a suit at law, and did I publicly scatter bank-notes among the (...),
would there be any need of proof, that I m^^nt to biass them? Thus clumsily do
these ministerial (...) endeavor to deceive us in a manner too gro^s to pa^^
upon children or idiots.

Observe the modesty of Walpole himself in his own defense. As for the
decla^atory excursions that have been made about the alarm given to the people
by the great number of officers civil and military, we have at present, and
about the danger our liberties and constitution may be exposed to by corrupt
practices, they may be, and I find they are introduced into every debate; but
as it would be an endless task to answer them upon every occasion, all I shall
say to them upon this is, that we are here in the proper place for enquiring
into such things: If any gentleman knows of an unnecessary of^^ce that has been
lately set up, or an unnecessary officer appointed: If any gentleman knows of
any attack that has been lately made or attempted upon our constitution; or if
any gentleman knows of any corrupt practices lately introduced, or made use of,
he may, nay, as a member of this house, which is the grand inquest of the
nation* he is in duty bound to take notice of it to the house: But then he
ought to be particular: He ought to name the office, or officers, set up or
appointed, the attack that has been attempted, or the corrupt practice that has
been made use of; and he ought to move for an enquiry into what he finds fault
with; for by thus declaiming in general, he can do no service to his country,
he can give the house no information, nor correct any abuse. He does nothing
but take up the time of this house most unnecessarily; for he cannot expect
that such general declamations, though they may please the galleries, should
have any influence upon any gentleman, who has the honor of being a member of
the house; much less can he expect their having such an influence in this
question, where the vigorous prosecution of the war is at stake, than in any
question of a different nature, that can come before us D^B. COM. XI.195.
.

A thorough-paced minister makes no more hesitation in carrying on his views at
the peril of the nation, than at the risque of a few pounds electioneering
money. An Oxford and a Bolingbroke must keep in place at all adventures. A
Walpole must not resign, be the consequences what they will. It is necessary
for me to cross the river, (says Alexander to his captains, telling him that it
was as much as his life was worth to attempt to pass the Granicus) but it is
not necessary for me to live. Many instances of this desperate tenaciousness at
the hazard of the nation will appear in the article Ministers in the sequel. At
present I only refer to one or two exhibitions of Walpolian influence of this
kind, in the matters of Hosier and Vernon, etc.

In the year 1728, the commons voted the orders given to Hosier just, prudent,
and necessary; while the nation, and all Europe knew, that the unfortunate
admiral, and his brave men, were sacrificed to the villainous schemes of a
minister USE AND. (...) OF PARL. II.362
. See the lords protest. Ibid, 3^0.


And of the affair of Vernon the authors of the MOD. UNIV. HIST. write thus.
The nation was not at this time destitute of able naval commanders, but they
were unfortunately in the interest of the minister, to whom they knew a
vigorous war would be disagreeable, and most of them being members of
parliament, had generally voted on his side. MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLI.41^*
Vernon, who was not at that time in parliament, had often spoke against the
minister and his pacific schemes, and declare that he could take Porto Belio
with 6 ships only. Therefore he was taken at his word, the minister probably
hoping, that he would have no better success than Hosier.

In the same manner, there is too much reason to conclude, that the duke of
Newcastle's sendng out the unfortunate Byng, A. D. 1756, so ^ll appointed, and
with so insufficient a fleet against the French (if it had not happened, that a
ship or two from Minorca made good a junction with Mr. Byng, his fleet had not
been equal in number with the enemy's) there is, I say, too much reason to
conclude, that this proceeding was in the confidence that cowardly ministry had
of being secured by a corrupt parliament.

The three following strokes of Walpolian parliamentary legerdemain stand
together in the USE AND ABUSE OF PARL. II.4^^.
viz. the throwing out a qualification act; qua^hing a motion for a committee
to enquire, whether any members sat in the house contrary to law; and a vote
for England's paying the deficiencies of a French subs^dy to Denmark.

Walpole was so pinched for money to gratify his harpyes, that he had nothing
to spare for war against Spain, which treated England for many years with an
insolence, that would have ill become the greatest power in Europe to the
meanest. At last, when the outcry of the nation forced him into a mockery of
war, Porto Bello and too Carraca ships were taken. Thus one man had it in his
power to make this great nation universally contemptible; at the full exertion
of whose force in the late war, all Europe even now stands aghast. Such are the
direful effects of ministerial influence in parliament. Accordingly Pelham's
chief defense of Walpole is taken from the approbation given to his measures by
parliament, at the same time that Pelham knew in his conscience, that
parliament was filled with Walpole's creatures DEB. COM. XII.80.
.

In the year 1742, the lords read, a second time DEB. LORDS, VIII.495.
, a bill for quieting corporations, by which all enquiry and prosecution
against mayors, aldermen, and other officers of towns, and their official
proceedings, were to be null and void, unless commenced within a certain
limited time. This bill was occasioned by an appeal to the lords in consequence
of violent means used by Walpole to compel the election of some of his
creatures for Weymouth Ibid. 482.
. And such was the influence of ministerial power, that the sentence of the
inferior court was confirmed, though so far from being unexceptionable, that
lord Talbot, on the occasion, expressed himself as follows.

Let us enquire, my lords, how we shall discharge the duty of judges by
confirming the sentence which is now before us; let us examine, whether we
shall act as the guardians of right, and the last resort of oppressed
privilege, or whether we shall not appear instruments of ministerial tyranny
and the mean reporters of the sentence of an inferior court. By confirming this
sentence, we shall not only deprive a magistrate of his office which he holds
by a claim, which has been thought just for more than a century, and in the
exercise of which it appears reasonable to believe that he is disturbed not for
misbehaviour, but discharging his trust; but we shall entail upon the town and
corporation perpetual confusion and disturbance, evils which government was
instituted to prevent; we shall suject them for ever to the authority of men
untryed and unexperienced; and by consequence to all the mischiefs of ignorant,
if not corrupt administration. This, my lords, is sufficient to determine my
judgment; and, I hope, it will be of equal weight in that of others. I shall
not willingly interpret a charter, which is always an act of royal favor, to
the disadvantage of them to whom it was granted; for I never heard of a charter
of corruption, or ignorance, or misery; and since it is more happy to live
without government, than to be governed ill, I cannot believe that a charter
like this, as it is now interpreted, was ever given. I therefore conclude the
judgment erroneous, and once more move that it may be reversed.

The duke of Bedford said, on this occasion a, The absurdities of this
construction' [of the charter of the town of Weymouth] have already been
explained by the noble lord, and are, indeed, such as cannot be aggravated,
extenuated, or avoided. But by admitting that sense of the charter which has
been for more than a century received, it is evident, from experience, the only
sure test in such cases, that no inconveniences will follow. This complaint of
the violation of the charter did not arise from any sense of inconveniences
which it produced, or of injuries which the inhabitants of that place imagined
themselves to receive from usurpation or tyranny; it was not promoted by any
man who thought himself unjustly debarred from authority, or by any body of men
excluded from their share in the government of the town. The prosecution, my
lords, was the effect of ministerial resentment; it was threatened to influence
the election, and was executed, not to humble the haughtiness of guilt, but to
crush the firmness of integrity; to punish those who could not be terrified,
and to obtain for those the satisfaction of revenge, who had lost the pleasure
of success. For this purpose an attorney, that was a stranger to the borough,
was employed to harass the mayor with a prosecution defeated at the assizes,
where men of plain sense were to determine the cause, but successful in the
court of King's Bench, where law and subtility were admitted. If such
proceedings, my lords, should receive a sanction from this great assembly, how
long can any corporation hope to enjoy its privileges, after having dared to
reject the overtures of the agents of a minister? Of what value will be the
immunities which our kings have bestowed upon many cities of this kingdom as
rewards of their loyalty, as encouragements to trade, as marks of honor and
distinction, or for the more easy administration of government? If prosecutions
like this be allowed, it will be at any time in the power of a subtle villain
to deprive them of their rights, to disturb the exercise of lawful authority,
to confound all subordination, to fill the courts of justice with expensive
suits, and the whole with perplexity and terror. Such, my lords, will be the
injustice of confirming this sentence, and such the miseries which that act of
injustice will bring upon us; and therefore I shall continue to oppose it; as I
hope always to appear an advocate for right, and the happiness of my country.

Lord Chesterfield in the debate on the same bill for quieting corporations
DE^. LORDS. VIII.526.
, exposes, with great humor, the craft of ministers, and ministerial tools,
which is the same with that of lawyers, and churchmen, when any reformation is
proposed. Suppose (says he) I were a minister, and was resolved to overturn the
liberties of my country, by getting into my hands the absolute direction of our
cities and boroughs, with regard to their elections, would not I oppose such a
bill as this? I certainly would, but bad politician as I am, I would not be so
very weak as to oppose it directly. No, I would ingenuously acknowledge the
danger: I would acknowledge the necessity of doing something to prevent it: I
would mourn over the dangerous state of public liberty; but then I would take
great care to raise as many objections as I could to every regulation proposed
for its defense. I would exaggerate every difficulty and inconvenience we might
be exposed to by such a regulation; and if no real dangers of this kind could
be suggested, imaginary ones would supply their place. This, my lords, has
always been, and will always be, the method taken by those who have designs
against our liberties, in order to obstruct such regulations as might defeat
their designs.

Lord Chesterfield afterward observes, that all the lords acknowledged the
usefulness of such a bill, though they seemed unwilling to do any thing in it
at present. If the bill was imperfect, it was natural to commit it for
improvement. He apprehends, the house may lose credit by throwing it out. He
shows, that the bill would not secure any magistrate of a corporation in acting
contrary to justice and the standing laws. That the worst consequence will be
an unqualified person's being chosen a magistrate, or chosen in an irregular
manner. But, if prosecution against him is commenced in due time, the bill
would not protect him. A noble lord, says he, was pleased to call our
corporations the creatures of the crown. Too many of them, my lords, are so: I
am for making them less so; and am therefore for having this bill passed into a
law; for whatever bad consequences it may be attended with, I am sure they
cannot be so bad as the consequences of our neglecting or delaying to make any
regulation for guarding against or removing the danger to which we are at
present exposed. It has been said, my lords, that no attempts have been lately
made upon the freedom of our corporations: It Is true no such violent attempts
have been lately made as were made in former reigns; but even lately, and but
very lately too, the freedom of our corporations has been nibbled at, and that
nibbling has been made so manifest by the report I have mentioned, that I am
surprised to hear the contrary asserted by any lord in this house. I must
suppose, that such lords have never read that report, and must therefore
recommend it to their serious perusal; for they will thence see not only that
corporations have been prosecuted at the expense of the crown, for the neglect
of insignificant formalities; but that the cause of the prosecution's being
brought, was expressly their refusing to choose such representatives as the
minister directed. Was not this an attempt against the freedom of our
corporations? My lords, it was an attempt not only against the freedom of that
particular corporation, but of all our corporations, because the magistrates of
every corporation in the kingdom will from thence see the consequence of their
being disobedient to the commands of a minister; and the example must
necessarily have most fatal effect, if we do not, by some new law, remove or
lessen the dread of being exposed to the same consequence. But suppose we had
no such manifest pro^f: suppose no such terrifying example had lately been
made; from the very nature of the thing, we must be convinced, that such
attempts may be made. They have been made by all ministers in time past. They
will be made by all ministers in time to come. It is natural for a minister to
wish to have his friend chosen to represent any city or borough, rather than
one he suspects to be his enemy. It is natural for him to make use of every
method he can safely practice in favor of his friend's election. Whilst a
corporation, or the magistrates of a corporation, are under apprehensions of
being prosecuted, it is natural for them to be swayed by those fears. There is
no way of preventing this practice, but by free^ng a corporation from any such
apprehensions: and as this will, in a great measure, be the effect of the bil^
now before us, after it has been properly amended in the committee, I hope your
lordships will agree to the question.

The earl of Islay, always faithful to the ministerial cause, laid great stress
on the incroachment, the bill would make upon the king's, that is, the
minister's royal prerogative; but he takes, according to his laudable custom,
particular care to show, that the subject's liberty was in no danger, and to
turn all regard to it into ridicule. As the necessity of our having some such
bill passed into a law, has been very much cried up in this debate; as this
necessity has been said to have been acknowledged by every lord who has spoke
in the debate, I must take this opportunity to declare, that I am very far from
being convinced of our being under any such necessity. I do not think the crown
has as yet such an influence over our cities and boroughs as can be of any
dangerous consequence, nor do I think a minister can with any safety endeavor
to acquire such an influence. A minister may have a personal, or a family
interest in two or three boroughs; he cannot by himself alone represent them
all; and to the borough where he does not stand himself, it is very natural for
him to recommend a friend. That friend may, perhaps, be a gentleman never
before known in the borough; but this is not peculiar to ministers: for we
often find such gentlemen chosen by boroughs upon the recommendation of those
who are known to be violent enemies to the minister. I, therefore, do not well
know what is meant by court boroughs. All boroughs are so, I believe, and all
cities and counties, as well as boroughs. The only difference is, that some
boroughs have their friends in court, and others want to have their friends in
court. This, my lords, has always been the chief ground of the dispute; and
most people are apt to think, or at least to say, the country is in danger when
their friends happen to be out of court. The cry of the church being in danger,
was formerly made the same use of; and when I was young, and attended this
house behind the throne, I remember to have heard it observed, as I thought
very justly, by the ancestor of a noble lord I have in my eye, that the only
reason he could think of for saying that the church was in danger, was, because
the earl of Rochester was out of court. If a borough therefore chooses a
courtier, it is not because it is more a court borough than any other borough,
but because its friends happen at that time to be in court; in like manner,
when a borough chooses such as are against the court, it is not because it is
more a country borough than any other, but because its friends happen then to
be out of court; and the choice made by the former may as little proceed from
any undue influence, as the choice made by the latter. But every borough that
chooses a courtier, or a friend to the minister, must, it seems, be a creature
of the crown in the sense put upon the words by the noble lord who spoke last,
in which, I must say he made a very bad use, to call it by no worse name, of an
expression dropped from a noble lord in this debate. The noble lord happened to
say that all corporations were the creatures of the crown, and when he made use
of the expression, I believe every one of your lordships understood what he
meant. He certainly meant no more than that all corporations were created by
the crown, which is true; but the noble lord who spoke last, gave it a turn as
if he had meant that all corporations are the slaves of the crown, and ready to
receive directions from the ministers of the crown, which is as far from being
true as it is far from being what he meant; for with regard to the election of
their representatives, I know of no way by which a minister can compel any one
of them to choose the candidates he recommends. I am sure that of threatening a
borough with a quo warranto, would be very far from being effectual, and it
would be very dangerous for any minister to make use of such a method;
consequently I cannot as yet see the necessity of our passing any such bill as
the present; and if I did, I should be for drop-this bill, which I think cannot
be so amended as to be of any use, in order to have a bill brought in that
might be of some service DEB. COM. II.350.
.

It was afterward ordered, that a new bill should be drawn up. Lord Romney
reported the heads of it, viz. That a reasonable period of time be fixed, after
the expiration of which the rights, franchises, and liberties of any city,
corporation, or borough, in England or Wales, or of any members of any such
city, corporation, etc. or of any person exercising any such office or
franchise, shall not be called in question by informations in nature of quo
warranto, writs o^ mandamus, or other proceedings for any informality,
irregularity, or defect in the nomination, election, admission, or swearing of
the mayor, bailiffs, or freemen, or of any other officer, or member (by what
name soever called) of any such city, corporation, etc. who now are, or at any
time hereafter, shall be in the actual possession or exercise of any such
office or franchise, nor of any forfeiture or disability arising from such
informality, irregularity or defect, unless such informality, irregularity, or
defect, or such forfeiture, or disability shall be taken advantage of by some
prosecution commenced for that purpose, within a certain time after the
commencement of the bill. And as to any such officer or member, as hereafter,
within a certain number of years to be limited in the bill, shall have been
admitted into or shall have been in the actual possession or exercise of any
such office or franchise as aforesaid; every such prosecution to be carried on
with effect and due diligence; and in case of affected or unnecessary delay on
the part of the prosecutor, to be dismissed with full costs. Such bill to
contain proper provisors to prevent its invalidating any judgment already
given, or any charter already granted and accepted, or any suit already
instituted and still depending DEB. LORDS, VIII.535.
.

Lord Romney showed the usefulness of such a bill for defeating the efforts of
ministerial power. That members of corporations are commonly men of plain
understandings, not qualified to search into the meaning of old charters; but
willing to follow preceden^; and therefore their cases are more pitiable than
blameable, when they happen to proceed in such a manner as renders them
obnoxious to the letter of the law. That the charters themselves are often,
through length of time, and change of circumstances, become unfit to be
observed. That the meaning of corporation-charters may not always be clear and
consistent. That it is difficult and expensive to solicit new charters; and
ministers are not inclinable to favor them, because, like the lawyers, they
find their advantage in the subject's uncertainty. That it is a ticklish affair
for a corporation to resign its charter, when it is unknown what sort of one it
shall have in exchange. That therefore it is natural for the members of
corporations to modify their proceedings according to what they find by
experience to be best, though in so doing they may often gradually deviate from
the letter of their charter. That it will be no more than a reasonable
indulgence to the subjects in a matter, in which the hazard is theirs, and not
the government's, to fix a time, after which custom and precedent in
corporations shall pass into establishment.

One would imagine, this was no such mighty matter of grace to confer on the
good people. But the ministerial tools have no inclination to give up any
degree of power. Therefore lord Cholmondeley, a faithful friend to court-power,
opposed the bill. The houses agreeing to it, he said, would be acting in the
dark, confirming practices, which they did not understand, and supporting
magistrates, who obtained, and executed their offices, they knew not how, etc.
[A staunch ministerial man is never for leaving any thing to the people; even
their own affairs. He will have them always feel, that they have a government,
that is, a tyranny, over them.] I am not much inclined, says he, to believe,
when I see the law broken, that the law is to be blamed. [I am sorry to differ
from his lordship; but I should be very apt to suspect the wisdom of a law, if
I saw it often broken by sober and regular people, such as the members of
corporations commonly are.] Lord Romney said, the quieting bill would be an
encouragement to transgressors. It would be confirming to the thief the
possession of the goods he had stolen. [But it is remarkable, that his good
lordship should not recollect, that by the law, as it now stands, there is a
limited time, which being elapsed, many offenses, more atrocious than violating
a borough-charter, are not to be prosecuted, or punished.]

And the good lord chancellor Hardwicke (always true to the ministry) was
afraid, the quieting bill might produce more and greater evils, than those it
was intended to cure. Whether it was a greater evil for corporations to be
secure against ministerial molestation, than their being from time to time
under prosecution, and by that means obliged to bring some grist to the
law-mill, I leave to the reader to decide. In general, we know, that lawyers
and churchmen are always against reformations. His good lordship must suppose,
that the distemper intended to be cured, or rather prevented, by the bill, was
as yet imaginary DEB. LORDS, VIII.512.
. Good men always believe the best. Therefore his good lordship believed
Walpole as innocent of molesting corporations, as of patriotism, or public
spirit. But his good chancellorship seemed in the sequel of his speech, a
little to forget his law-learning, through zeal against the bill. If, says he,
you limit the prescription to a very short time, it will be of the most
dangerous consequence; and if you fix it at a very long term, the bill could
have little or no effect. But what if we fix it at a term neither very long,
nor very short? Besides, if his lordship's reasonings be good, the laws, by
which (as above observed) a term is fixed, after which prosecutions for greater
offenses, than making free with a ^et of blind old charters granted by the
tyrannical Stuarts, are set aside; are all bad, and his lordship ought to have
moved for their repeal. But your true ministerial men, like your true
churchmen, never care how inconsistent they be with themselves, or with the
principles of common sense; so they be orthodox, that is upon the right side,
that is upon the side of power. He afterward brings the exec^able maxim,
nullum tempus occurrit regi, now abolished, in support of his doctrine, and
argues, that as no period stops the king's claim, so no period ought to tie up
the minister's hands from molesting corporations, who elect anti-ministerial
members DEB. LORDS, VIII.512.
. Then he comes to an important argument indeed. The bill might be said to be a
sort of encroachment upon the prerogatives of the crown. Hinc illae lacrymae!
The prerogatives of the crown are the ministry's Palladium; and are of
infinitely more consequence (to them) than the quiet of ten thousand
corporations. On this he argues in such a manner, that one would really think,
he had forgot, that the British government was a limited monarchy. As the king
(says he) has the sole right of establishing corporations, he likewise has a
right to take care, that the corporation, as well as every officer and
magistrate who belongs to it, shall observe the rules he has been pleased to
prescribe to them in their charter; and to limit his power of prosecuting for
any neglect, or non-observance, to a very short term, is an encroachment upon
his right. Have our limited kings any right uncontrollable by parliament to
establish, or prescribe? His lordship shines afterward more and more. I must
farther observe, my lords, that this bill is really a sort of repeal of those
laws, which have always been deemed the security of our church as by law
established. When I say this, every lord must suppose I mean the corporation
and test acts; for if this bill be passed into a law the most rigid dissenter
might get himself chosen an alderman of London, or a magistrate of some other
city or borough, without taking the oaths, or conforming to what is required by
law for the purity of our church; and if he escapes being prosecuted during the
time to be limited by this bill, he might continue in that magistracy during
life, without ever conforming himself to the established church, for the act
does not require his conforming after he is elected; and after the expiration
of that time his election could not be declared void on account of his not
having conformed within the year preceding his election; so that if this bill
was passed into a law, all the magistrates in our cities or boroughs, who are
chosen for life, might be such as openly frequented conventicles; for if they
did not go there in their habits and ensigns of magistracy, they could neither
be removed nor punished for the affront put upon the established church.

What a noble spirit of liberty, how worthy of a lord chancellor of this great
and free nation, and how suitable to the light and knowledge prevalent in this
age, does this part of his lordship's speech exhibit! Our church as by law
established! Aye -- Our church! -- our monopoly of fat livings, from which we
have by law established, that all men shall be excluded, who will not declare
assent and consent to the clear and self-consistent articles and creeds, and to
the passive-obedience homilies! And the test and corporation acts! Aye -- Those
glorious acts, which breathe such a spirit of liberty!

If this bill be passed into a law, the most rigid dissenter -- ' horrible! O
horrible! most horrible!' Shakesp. the most rigid dissenter -- ' Monstrum
horrendum ingens, avidum, orco, Hecate, atque Erebo ortum!' the most rigid
dissenter -- that tremendous being -- in comparison with whom, old Satan is a
good sort of a gentleman -- who is so ineffably wicked, that he will not say
his prayers with a book in his hand, and will disclaim the authority of men
over Christ's religion ' -- might get himself -- horresco referens! -- chosen
an alderman of London! And what greater misfortune than that, can the human
mind frame the idea of, unless a comet were to come from the most distant
regions of space, -- and set the chancellor's full-bottomed wig on fire.

Lord Sandwich then went on to show DEB. LORDS, VIII.520.
, That the worst effect of the bill would be, to oblige those who had a mind to
prosecute for irregularities in corporations, to do it within a reasonable
time, when proofs and defenses could be brought. But this did not answer the
views of ministers; their point is, to keep a rod over the people's head at all
times. Lord Sandwich afterward Ibid. 521.
puts the house in mind of what curious Walpolian proceedings had been detected
by the secret committee relating to this very corporation, on a mere
misinterpretation of their charter, or rather a different interpretation of it
from the sense put upon it by the judges, which sense had not been found in it
by the persons who first obtained it, nor by their successors, for 130 years.

A. D. 1764, it was resolved by the house of commons, and agreed to by the
house of lords, That privilege of parliament does not extend to the case of
writing and publishing seditious libels, nor ought to obstruct the ordinary
course of the laws in the speedy and effectual prosecution of so heinous and
dangerous an offense. Seventeen peers, among which number was (mirabile dictu!)
one bishop, protested, because the doctrine was new, unwarrantable, and unknown
to the most tyrannical times; the established custom being, that privilege of
parliament takes place in all cases, but treason, felony, breach of the peace,
or refusing to obey a writ of Habeas Corpus; whereas the writing or publishing
of what may be called (for any thing may be so called) a seditious libel, is
neither treason, felony, breach of peace, nor disobedience to Habeas Corpus.
The protesting peers alleged, that the resolution was sacrificing the freedom
of parliament to ministerial power. That the resolution not only infringed the
privilege of parliament but tended to the restraint of every man's personal
liberty seeing it affirms, that all men may be bound to the peace for writing
what may be called a seditious libel, by which every man's liberty is
surrendered into the hands of a secretary of state, who is hereby empowered to
pronounce any writing a seditious libel, and to imprison any person on this
account, without council, evidence, or jury, while the person oppressed by
power has no redress against the secretary of state, as he acts in the capacity
of a judge. The protesting lords conclude with the following remarkable words;
Privilege was not made to skreen criminals, but to preserve the very being and
life of parliament; for when our ancestors considered that the law had lodged
the great powers of arrest, indictment, and information in the crown, they saw
the parliament would be undone, if during the time of privilege the royal
process should be admitted in any misdemeanour whatsoever, therefore they
excepted none. Where the abuse of power would be fatal, the power ought never
to be given, because redress comes too late. A parliament under perpetual
terror of imprisonment can neither be free, nor bold, nor honest; and if this
privilege was once removed, the most important question might be irrecoverably
lost, or carried by a sudden irruption of messengers let loose against the
members half an hour before the debate. Lastly, as it has already been
observed, the case of supposed libels is, above all others, the most dangerous
and alarming to be left open to prosecution during the time of privilege. If
the severity of the law touching libels, as it has sometimes been laid down,
be duly weighed, it must strike both houses of parliament with terror and
dismay. The repetition of a libel, the delivery of it unread to another, is
said to be a publication, nay, the bare possession of it has been deemed
criminal, unless it is immediately destroyed or carried to a magistrate. Every
lord of parliament then, who has done this, who is falsely accused, nay, who
is, though without any information, named in the secretary of state's warrant,
has lost his privilege by this resolution, and lies at the mercy of that enemy
to learning and liberty, the messenger of the press. For these and many other
forcible reasons, we hold it highly unbecoming the dignity, gravity, and wisdom
of the house of peers, as well as their justice, thus judicially to explain
away and diminish the privilege of their persons, founded in the wisdom of
ages, declared with precision in our standing orders, so repeatedly confirmed
and hitherto preserved inviolable by the spirit of our ancestors, called to it
only by the other house on a particular occasion, and to serve a particular
purpose, ex post facto, ex part, et pendente lite, in the courts below Alm.
DEB. COM. A. D. 1764.
.

The brave parliament, in which sat the Hampdens and the Pyms, would not allow
this in the case of the 5 members; though the tyrant directly accused them of
high treason, which cannot by law plead privilege. Such is the difference
between an independent parliament and one ridden by a ministry.

But, mem. It was resolved in the house of commons, A. D. 1766, That seizing
the papers of the author, or supposed author, printer, or publisher of a libel
is illegal, and the seizing the papers of a member of parliament on such
pretense is likewise a breach of privilege Ibid. VII.183.
. And afterward a bill was ordered in for restraining the issuing of warrants
for seizing papers, except in the cases of treason or felony, under certain
regulations. The title of the bill was afterward altered. It miscarried in the
house of lords Ibid- 185.
.

The civil list was said to be in debt A. D. 1768, 50,000 l. A message was sent
from the king (i. e. the ministry) to the house of commons, desiring that they
would make provision accordingly. It was urged in favor of the demand, that
the king had given up to the nation his share of the captures in the late war
amounting to 700,000 l. The debates ran high; but the demand was granted LAND.
MAG. 1769, p. 656.
.

The slavish complaisance of parliament to ministers was confessed in the year
1769, when the ministry sent over to the American governors a positive promise,
that, on certain conditions, the odious taxing acts should be repealed See Alm.
DEB. COM. VIII.341. et pass.
. Such was the shameless servility of the house at that time, that when it was
moved by the opposition to resolve, That disorders had prevailed in several of
the colonies prejudicial to the commerce of the kingdom, and to the peace of
the colonies; That a principal cause of these disorders was the ill-judged and
inconsistent instructions given by persons in administration to the governors
of some of the provinces in North America; That directing the dissolution of
the assemblies of North America, upon their refusal to comply with certain
proposals of government, operated as a menace injurious to the deliberative
capacity of those assemblies, and tending to excite discontent, and produce
unjustifiable combinations; That it was inconsistent, and tended to expose his
majesty's councils to the contempt of the colonists, to dissolve the old
assemblies for not disavowi^^ certain combinations, at the same time, that new
assemblies were suffered to sit, without disavowing or discountenancing the
same combinations; That it was unwarrantable, of dangerous consequence, and a
high breach of the privilege of the house of commons, for any person in
administration to promise to the assemblies in North America, the interposition
or influence of the king or his servants with the house, in order to a repeal
of taxation-acts, or to pledge the faith of the crown to those assemblies, etc.
when these resolutions were moved by the opposition, I say, such was the
complaisance of the house for the ministry, whose conduct they would not suffer
to be blamed, that every one of them was rejected; though there was not,
probably, a man, woman, or child, in Britain who had the least doubt of their
truth and justness Alm DEB. COM. VIII.341.
.

Again in the year 1771, the house of commons* in a fit of complaisance for the
court (if that can be called a fit, from which the patient is never clear)
voted, that a member concerned in a libel should have no right to his
privilege, thereby putting the guilt of a just satire on a corrupt court upon
the same foot with that of felony, or breach of the peace, the only crimes,
which before that time deprived a member of his privilege. By this resolution,
it was observed, That any member supposed to have been concerned in composing,
printing, or publishing a supposed libel might, by a mandate from court, be
dragged from his seat LAND M^G. Nov. p. 536
. And, according to a doctrine said to have been taught by certain judges of
late, the guilt and punishment of this supposed libel, were not to come before
the jury. They were only to find, whether the accused had any con^^rn in the
supposed libel, and the judges were to pass sentence. The members, who promoted
this resolution, ought to have been more sure of the integrity of judges, than
is possible, in the present weakness of human nature. These were attacks upon
the very foundation of liberty.

The obsequiousness of parliament to the court, in the c^urse of a few years,
was shamefully gross. The nation tired out with raising money to be sunk in
German wars for the defense of Hanover, forced Mr. Pit, the great opposer of
continental connexions, into power, in spite of Geo. II. who was thought to
attend more to the interest of his pitiful electorate, than to that of the
British empire. Then the commons were for holding the purse-strings tight. The
king found means to bring over Mr. Pit to favor his continental scheme. Then
the commons raised almost 20 millions per ann. to send to Germany. Geo. III.
not being so attached to Germany as his grandfather, was desirous of restoring
peace, and stopping the life-blood-vein of the nation, before it should bleed
to death. Then the commons were as obsequious to lord Bute's pacific measures,
as they were before to Mr. Pitt's military quixotism. Grenville thought proper
to lay the stamp-tax on our American colonies. The worthy commons voted it
accordingly. Grenville's successor in power thought proper to repeal the
American stamp act. The ductile commons repealed it. Their followers thought it
necess^ry to lay taxes of other kinds upon the colonies. The obsequious commons
were still occasional conformists.

Every speech from the throne, I mean, the minister's throne, at the end of
every session, is filled with the king's entire approbation of all the
proceedings of the sessions; whilst, if you look into the debates and protests,
you see such shameful s^rvility to the ministry, as it is impossible for any
honest man to approve, say rather, to avoid execrating. And every echo of
every king's speech from the houses celebrates every step of his administration
to the skies. Look into the history of every reign, and you see innumerable
neglects and blunders (to say nothing of corrupt abuses) committed by every
succeeding administration. Thus do our superiors endeavor to persuade us, by
their words, that they are gods, while their actions show them to be generally
very silly, and very worthless mortals.

In the year 1770, there were as many compliments bandied between the court,
and parliament, as ever. Yet at that time, almost every part of the British
empire was known to be dissatisfied; the people of England enraged against
their representatives, and petitioning the king for a new parliament; the
people of Ireland offended on account of the prorogation of their parliament,
because they would support the constitutional manner of taxation, and the
colonists provoked by our legislature's taxing them as a test of their
obedience.

In that same year, Sir George Savile, no party-brawler, said in the house of
commons, This house has betrayed the rights of the people. Sir Alex. Gilmour
called him to order. General Conway said the words were reprehensible. That it
was insulting parliament, and that members had been sent to the Tower for such
words, but as he believed they were spoken in anger, he only should wish that
for the future the gentleman would be more cautious. Sir George Savile replied,
he had not spoke in anger; that he never used any other words, when he
mentioned the proceedings of the house upon the Middlesex election; and that he
would always use the same words, whenever the same question was in agitation.
Mr. ^erj. Glynn defended the words. He observed, that they were the only words
in our language proper to express the idea of the thing; that if spoken of a
thing that did not exist, no one would be more ready to vindicate the honor of
parliament, in calling to account the member who spoke them; but if they were
founded on truth, it could not be the votes of a majority which could make them
culpabl^. He then observed a good deal on what had been said the day before by
a member, (M. T. De Gray, brother to the attorney general, who abused the
petitioners in general, calling them base born mechanics, and mere rabble, not
fit to petition the throne) that he was sorry to find some gentlemen supposed
there was one law for gentlemen, and another for their inferiors. That the law
knew nothing of gentlemen; that we, who represented, were chosen by, and
derived our powers from those base born men; and that their privileges ought to
be the care of the house, for on them depended our own, -- our constitution.
Mr. Edmund Burke, likewise, with great spirit, defended Sir George Saville, and
called upon the ministry to punish Sir George, if the accusation was false; and
said, That if a false and unjust charge had been made, the gentleman who made
it oght to be sent to the Tower: but added, that the ministers were conscious
of the truth of the assertion, and therefore in a tame and cowardly manner
crouched under it. He said, the people abhorred the present ministry, and asked
the speaker if the chair did not tremble under him. Toward the conclusion of
the debate, Sir George Savile stood up again and declared, that he was as cool
as before; more so he could not be; and added from Shakespeare, Bring me to the
test, and I the matter will re-word, which madness would gambol from;
therefore, standing up in my place as member for the county of York, I do
declare, that the house of commons, has betrayed the rights of the nation. No
notice was taken of the words Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.177.
.

If opinion be the great engine, by which the few are able to govern the many,
what shall we say of the wisdom of those governors, who by the practice of
every foul and sordid art, and by openly showing a total neglect of the public
interest, teach the people to look upon their superiors as their worst enemies,
or as clumsy blockheads, who do not know the first principles of their own
posession?

However it is come to pass, the fact is certain, that in no age, or nation,
ever was the people's opinion of their governors at a lower ebb, than has been
lately seen in a certain country. In former times, when the characters of
statesmen were attacked in print, the writers used caution, and either
described them by their behavior, in such a manner as to point them out
without naming them, or if they were more particular, at most they only put
initials and finals. Now our political and satirical writers make no hesitation
in calling our highest characters to their faces, and with their names printed
at full length, rogues, and whores, corruptors, plunderers, and enemies of
their country.

This I acknowledge to be utterly inconsistent with decency. But still it marks
strongly the sentiments of the people. And it must likewise be owned, that a
great deal of the invective, that is thrown out in times of general
dissatisfaction, is always aggravated, and often wholly groundless. But had our
governors kept up a conduct venerable for integrity, and amiable for
disinterested attachment to the public good, the people would never have
thought of treating them in a manner so openly disrespectful. Even the
gross-minded mob, when wrought up to the highest rage, would avoid throwing
dirt upon a Socrates, a Cato, or a Hampden.

Tum pietate gravem ac meritis si forte virum quem
Aspexere, siient, arrectisque auribus a^stant.
VIRG. There is (to borrow the thought of our inimitable Shakespeare concerning
kings) such a majesty hems in a man of worth, as slander dares not to look upon.

Montesquieu observes from Polybius, that the Carthaginian magistrates had lost
their authority about the time of the second Punic war. Polybius gives no
reason for this. But Livy accounts for it. Hannibal, he says, when he returned
home, found, that the magistrates had been guilty of gross embezzlements of the
public money. Was it to be wondered, that they lost their authority L'ESPR. DES
LOIX. I.185.
? Corrupt parliaments will ever be odious to all, but those who earn the wages
of corruption. All kinds of duplicity are odious to the people. The prince of
Conde, and duke of Orleans, pretended (to please the parliament of Paris) to be
the implacable enemies of Mazarine, while they were carrying on a treaty with
him at St. Germains en Lay, directly contrary to the first article of their
instructions from the parliament. Mazarine detects them. They lose both court
and city. MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXV.54.


The people have already opposed us by their magistrates, (says an eminent
lawyer in the house of commons, on the lord mayor's protecting the printers
against the sergeant of the house of commons, A. D. 1770, LAND. MAG. March,
1771, p. 244.
) and they will oppose us farther by their juries; though, were we as much
respected as we are despised, as universally esteemed as we are detested, the
establishment of a tyranny in ourselves [the assumed power of imprisoning their
constituents for supposed breach of privilege] who are appointed for no
purpose, but to repel it in others, would expose us to the aborrence of every
good Englishman.

We [the house of commons] are sufficiently obnoxious, sufficiently detestable
to the nation already; and if we have no regard for the city magistrates, we
should at least have some little consideration for ourselves.' Speech of Sir
Geo. Saville on the motion for sending the lord mayor and alderman Oliver to
the Tower for protecting the printers against the sergeant of the house of
commons, A. D. 1770. LAND. MAG. March, 1771, p. 181.


Since I had the honor [says a speaker on the same occasion] I should say, the
dishonor, of sitting in this house, I have been witness to many strange, many
infamous transactions. -- What can be your intention in attacking all honor
and virtue? Do you mean to bring all men to a level with yourselves, and to
extirpate all honor and independence? Perhaps you imagine, a vote will settle
the whole controversy. Alas! you are not aware, that the manner, in which your
vote is procured, is a secret to no man. Listen. For if you are not totally
callous, if your consciences are not seared, I will speak daggers to your
souls, and wake you to all the hells of guilty recollection. I will follow you
with whips and stings, through every maze of your unexampled turpitude, and
plant thorns under the rose of ministerial approbation. -- You have flagrantly
violated justice, and the law of the land, and opened a door for anarchy and
confusion. -- After assuming an arbitrary dominion over law and justice, you
issue orders, warrants, and proclamations, against every opponent, and send
prisoners to your Bastile all those, who have the courage and virtue to defend
the freedom of their country. But it is in vain, that you hope by fear and
terror to extinguish the native British fire. The more sacrifies, the more
martyrs you make, the more numerous the sons of liberty will become. They will
multiply like the hyd^^ and hurl vengeance on your heads. Let others (...) as
they will; while I have a tongue, or an arm, they shall be free. And that I may
not be a witness of these monstrous proceedings, I will leave the house; nor do
I doubt, but every independent, every honest man, every friend to England will
follow me. These walls are unholy, baleful, deadly, while a prostitute majority
holds the bolt of parliamentary power, and hurls its vengeance only upon the
virtuous. To yourselves, therefore, I consign you. Enjoy your pandaemonium LAND.
MAG. July 1771 p. 334.
. All the gentlemen in the opposition rose, as one man, and lef^ the house.

When the duke of Richmond, A. D. 1773, moved, that a message be sent to the
house of commons, requesting them to communicate to the lords the reports, and
other materials, upon which they had proceeded in passing the East India bill,
the motion was rejected. Their lordships knew which way they were to vote,
without seeing any materials. But the directors of that great trading
corporation do not hesitate to foretell, that the bill will be the utter ruin of
the company See the NEWS PAPERS and MAGAZINES of the year.
. The same bill was carried in the house of commons, 131 against 21.

How deep the politics of the times were, may be judged by the following: A. D.
1773, it was, in the compass of only a fortnight, resolved in the house of
commons, that all acquisitions made by military force, belong to the state.
That to appropriate such acquisitions is illegal. That great sums have been, by
such means, obtained from sovereign princes in India [by lord Clive]. And, that
lord Clive, for his services in India had deserved the presents he received,
which were usual. Reconcil^^ ^^ese resolutions who can -- to any thing, but
ministerial influence.

A. D. 1771, Mr. C. Fox vindicated the sending of lists from the treasury to
their friends, directing for whom they should ballot, as necessary for
administration on all occasions Alm. DEB. ^OM. IX.306
.

Hear the sense of the city of London on the slavish complai^ance of parliament
to ministers. Representatives of the people are essential to the making of
laws; and there is a time when it is demonstrable that [the] 'men' [who sit in
the house of commons] cease to be representatives. That time is now arrived.
The present house of commons does not represent the people CITY'S REMONSTR. to
the king, A. D. 1770.
.

A remonstrance from the city was agreed on, March 11, 1773 See the NEWSPAPERS
of that date.
, complaining of the neglect of the former, Our representatives, who were
chosen to be the guardians of our rights, have invaded our most sacred
privileges. They mention the Middlesex election, the imprisoning of the lord
mayor, and alderman Oliver, for not obeying the illegal mandates of an
arbitrary house of commons, and violating the solemn oaths they had taken for
the preservation of the franchises of the capital. We recall (say they) to your
majesty's remembrance with horror, that unparalleled act of tyranny, the
erasing a judicial record, in order to stop the course of justice, to introduce
a system of power against right, etc. They pray a dissolution of parliament,
and a removal of bad ministers.

So much for a brief chronological deduction of ministerial and corrupt
influence in parliament, intended to show the necessity of a redress of this
most ruinous of all grievances.

From a due consideration of what this first volume alone exhibits, which is
but a small part of the public abuses of the times, every thoughtful reader
will see great reason for fears and apprehensions. The time to prevent public
disorders is, Now, before the disorders begin. The beginning of the public
disorders, we have reason to apprehend, will be, a diminution of the value of
Stocks. It is the interest of every man in the British empire to prevent this
diminution. The means of preventing it are, Associations for support of public
credit. A model for these associations we have by looking back to the
transactions of the year 1745. Public credit cannot sink, if the nation unites
in supporting it; and the time for this union is NOW, before it begins to
totter. Should it even be found, (which God forbid) that the usual ways and
means are likely, through failure of commerce, etc. to come short of a
sufficiency for paying the (...) creditors their full dividend, England has
still great resources untouched, as taxing all legacies left by others than
parents, husbands and wives, introducing by degrees Sir Matthew. Decker's method
of taxation, and lessening by degrees the number of our present tax-gatherers,
reducing the devouring army, taxing saddle- horses, and other articles of
luxury, and all public diversions, reducing the enormous number, and
retrenching the exorbitant incomes of places, etc. of all which more fully
hereafter.

May a beam of celestial light directed by that efficacious voice, which of old
said, Let there be light; irradiate the mind of Him, whom Divine Providence
has placed supreme in the government of this great empire; that he may see the
things, which belong to his and the nation's peace, before they be for ever hid
from his eyes. And when, guided by that heavenly light, he sets himself at the
head of a plan for reforming these, and the other abuses, which are the
disgrace, and naturally tend to bring on the ruin of the state, may he find his
people willing to second those views, the execution of which will obtain for
him the most illustrious of all titles, viz. Father of his country; and will
make Britain the glory of all lands.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
MAY 30th. 1775.
AMERICAN EDITIONS, lately published and sold by ROBERT BELL, next Door to ST.
PAUL'S Church, in Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA.
COMMENTARIES on the Laws of England, in Four Books, by Sir William Blackstone,
Knt. one of his Majesty's Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, Four Volumes.
Bound, 3 l. APPENDIX to Blackstone's Commentaries containing, 1. Priestley's
Remarks on some Paragraphs in the Fourth Volume of Blackstone's Commentaries
relating to the Dissenters. 2. Blackstone's Reply to Priestley's Remarks. 3.
Priestley's Answer to Blackstone's Reply. 4. The case of the late Elections of
the County of Middlesex considered on the Principles of the Constitution and
the Authorities of law. 5. Furneaux's Letters to the Hon. Mr. Justice
Blackstone concerning his Exposition of the Act of Toleration, and some
Positions relative to religious Liberty, in his celebrated Commentaries on the
Laws of England. 6. Authentic Copies of the Argument of the late Hon. Mr.
Justice Foster in the Court of Judges Delegates, and of the Speech of the Right
Hon. Lord Mansfield in the House of Lords, in the Cause between the City of
London and the Dissenters. Bound, 11 s. 3 d. THE HISTORY of the Reign of
Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany; and of all the Kingdoms and States in
Europe during his Age. To which is prefixed, a View of the Progress of Society
in Europe, from the Subversion of the Roman Empire, to the beginning of the
Sixteenth Century. Confirmed by historical Proofs and Illustrations. By William
Robertson, D. D. Principal of the University of Edinburgh, and Historiographer
to his Majesty for Scotland, 3 vols. Bound, 1 l. 10 s. THE HISTORY of Ireland
from the invasion of Henry II. With a preliminary Discourse on the ancient
State of that Kingdom. By Thomas Leland, D. D. Senior Fellow of Trinity
College, and Prebendary of St. Patrick's, Dublin, 4 vols. Bound, 2 l. THE
SURPRISING yet real and true Voyages and Adventures of Monsieur Pierre Viaud. A
French Sea Captain. To which is added, The Shipwreck, a Sentimental and
Descriptive Poem, in three Canto^. By Willi^m Falconer, an English Sailor.
Bound, 6 s. LECTURES on the Materia Medica, as delivered by William Cullen, M.
D. Professor of Medicine in the University of Edinburgh. Now Published by
Permission of the Author, and with many Corrections from the Collation of
different Manuscripts by the Editors. 1 l. 10 s.
A NEW VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD, in the Years 1768, 1769, 1770, and 1771;
undertaken by Order of his present Majesty, performed by Captain James Cook,
in the Ship Endeavor, drawn up from his own Journal, and from the Papers of
Joseph Banks, Esquire F. R. S. and published by the special Direction of the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Admiralty. By John Hawkesworth, L. L. D. And late
Director of the East India Company. With Cuts, and a Map of the whole
Navigation. 2 vols. Bound, Price 16s.

PROPOSALS may be had (Gratis) from said BELL, for Printing by Subscription, an
AMERICAN EDITION of SKETCHES OF THE HISTORY OF MAN.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY HENRY HOME, LORD KAIMS, Author of Elements of Criticism, etc.

The proper study of Mankind is man.

POPE. N. B. The Price of these Four Volumes neatly Bound in Two Octavos, will
be only Twenty Four Shillings to Subscriber^, although the British Edition is
sold at Four Pounds Four Shillings.

POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, etc.
After treating of our duty to the Gods, it is proper to teach that which we
owe to our Country. For our Country is, as it were, a secondary God, and the
first and greatest Parent. -- It is to be preferred to Parents, Wives,
Children, Friends, and all things, the Gods only excepted. -- And if our
Country perishes, it is as impossible to save an Individual, as to preserve one
of the fingers of a mortified hand. HIEROCLES. TO THE ENCOURAGERS OF THIS WORK.
SINCE the Proposals for printing an American Edition, of the POLITICAL
DISQUISITIONS, was laid before the Public, the AUTHOR in London, has published
another VOLUME, being the third and last, with complete INDEXES to the Whole;
which is the COMPLETION of this very useful and interesting WORK, peculiarly
necessary at this Time for all the Friends of CONSTITUTIONAL LIBERTY, whether
Britons or Americans -- To accommodate these GENTLEMEN with complete SETS, who
were pleased to encourage this EDITION by SUBSCRIPTION: -- The Publishers,
ROBERT BELL, of Third-Street; and WILLIAM WOODHOUSE, of Front-Street,
PHILADELPHIA; are determined to Print and Publish this third and last VOLUME,
at the same Price to SUBSCRIBERS, with each of the other VOLUMES, viz. TEN
SHILLINGS, Pennsylvania Currency; although the English EDITION in three Volumes
is sold at FORTY-TWO SHILLINGS.

POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS; OR, An ENQUIRY into public ERRORS, DEFECTS, and
ABUSES. Illustrated by, and established upon FACTS and REMARKS, extracted from
a Variety of AUTHORS, Ancient and Modern.

CALCULATED To draw the timely ATTENTION of GOVERNMENT and PEOPLE to a due
Consideration of the Necessity, and the Means, of REFORMING those ERRORS,
DEFECTS, and ABUSES; of RESTORING the CONSTITUTION, and SAVING the STATE.

By J. BURGH, GENTLEMAN; Author of the DIGNITY of HUMAN NATURE, and other Works.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street; and WILLIAM
WOODHOUSE, in Front-Street. M, DCC, LXXV.

PREFACE TO VOLUME THE SECOND.
I SHALL, perhaps, be accused of deviating toward superstition, if I observe,
that the favorable reception given by the public to the former volume of these
collections has the appearance of a good omen, that the people will at last
direct their attention to the important subjects treated in them, and to the
fearful and alarming condition, into which the villainous arts of a succession
of wicked ministers have brought this great empire; and that they will be no
longer abused by those at the helm; but will insist upon such a change of
measures as may save our country, if our sins have not unchangeably pointed
against us the vengeance of the supreme Governor of states and kingdoms.

I am afraid, the public has found in the former volume, and will find in this,
many inaccuracies, as well as other deficiencies, not such as the great Roman
critic comprehends under his phrase, maculae, quas incuria fudit; for indeed I
cannot accuse myself of carelessness in preparing these collections for the
public, excepting only that I have not pretended to bestow much time in
polishing and working up the style of those parts which are written by me;
because indeed, as I have hinted in the general preface, I should have thought
such labor supererogatory and impertinent in a work of this kind. The
inaccuracies I am anxious about, are those, which Horace understands by the
words immediately following the above-quoted, quas humana parum cavit natura,
those faults, to which the weakness of human nature, or of such poor abilities
as mine at least, exposes a writer, as a less advantageous disposition of the
matter, a seeming repetition of the same thoughts, and the like. My apology for
these deformities must be drawn from the vastness of the variety of the matter
I had to dispose of, which made it difficult to remember every thought and fact
I had set down, and made it almost impossible to avoid repeating some of the
same thoughts and arguments, as they occur repeatedly in the different
quotations I have collected, and I could not always leave out the part, which
was a repetition, without disfiguring the speeches in such a manner, as would
have made them incoherent, and displeasing to the reader.

The public will, I hope, agree, that it was better to insert a weighty
argument twice, than to run the hazard of leaving it out, through suspicion of
its being already inserted.

I hope it will be acknowledged, that far the greatest part of the matter I
have collected from authors and speakers in parliament, is weighty, forcible,
pertinent to the purpose for which I advance it, and decisive upon the great
political points proposed to be determined.

I beg leave just to mention, that the IId book, which treats of the COLONIES,
differs from the others, both in the former volume and this, in that there is a
great deal of the matter in it, not written by me, and yet not referred to the
respective authors, from whom I extracted it, particularly what I have
transcribed from a collection in 6 or 8 volumes 8vo. being a set of all the
best pamphlets and tracts written since the beginning of the contest between
Britain and the colonies. When I collected from those volumes, the passages,
which are inserted in the IId book of this volume, I neglected quoting the
pages of the authors, and could not afterward, without more labor than the
matter was worth, because the authority of those pamphlets and tracts is not of
great consequence, unless readers will make farther enquiry, or happen, which
is generally the case, to know that what is affirmed in them is true.

BOOKS quoted or referred to, in this Second Volume.
A
ARISTOTELIS Politica. Anderson's History of Commerce. Ancient Universal
History, 21 Volumes. Acta Regia, 4 Volumes. American Tracts, in 6 or 8 Volumes.
B
Bible. Bernard's (Governor) Letters. Bacon's (Nathan.) Discourses on the
Government of England. Blackstone's (Judge) Com^entaries on the Laws of
England. Burnet's History of his Own Times. Brady's History of England.
Bolingbroke's (Lord) Works. Bacon's (Lord) Letters. Beccaria, On Crimes and
Punishments.
C
Clarendon's History. Camden's Britannia. Cato's Letters. Ciceronis (Tullii)
Opera. Cole's Memoirs.
D
Debates ( Chandler's) of the Lords, 8 Vol. 8vo. -- of the Commons, 14 Vol.
8vo. -- ( Almon's of Lords and Commons. Davenant's (Dr.) Works. Divine Legation
(Warburton's). Dissertation on Parties, by Bolingbroke. Dalrymple's Memoirs.
E
Elsynge's Ancient Method of holding Parliaments. Epernon (Duke d') Life of.
Emmii (Ubbonis) Respublica Atheniensis.
F
Faction detected by facts. Fletcher's Works. Franklin's (Dr.) Letters.
Ferguson's History of Civil Society.
G
Guthrie's History of England. Gordon's Tracts. Grandeur et Decadence des
Romans. Gee, on Trade and Plantations.
H
Horatii Opera. Hume's History of England. Hudibras ( Butler's). Harrington's
Oceana.
I
Ianicon, Etat present de la Republique Des Provinces Unies. Iohnson's English
Dictionary.
L
Ludlow's Memoirs. Livii Historia Romana. Lipsii (Iusti.) De Magnitudine Romana
Liber. Laet (De) Persiae Descriptio. Lyttelton's (Lord) History of Hen. II.
M
Milton's Paradise Lost, and Political Works. Macaulay's History of England.
Magazines. Montalbani Rerum Turcicarum Commentarius. Magni Mogoli Commentarius
de Imperio). Montesquieu L'Esprit des Loix, 3 Tom. 8vo. Mountague on Ancient
Republics. Modern Universal History, 44 Vol. 8vo.
N
Nepos (Corn.) Vitae, etc.
P
Parliamentary History, 24 Vol. 8vo. Political Register. Pierre (St.) Ouvrages
De. Pope's Works. Plutarchi Apophthegmata, etc. Polybius (Preface to a Fragment
of). Petyt's Rights of the Commons.
R
Rapin's History of England, 2 Vol. Fol. Richelieu's Testament Politic.
Robertson's History of Chapter V. Rushworth's Collections.
S
State Tracts in the time of k. William, 3 Vol. Fol. Statutes at large.
Schooch, De Republica Achaeorum Liber. Suetonii Caesares.
T
Thurloe's State Papers. Tindal's Continuation of Rapin's History, 2 Vol. Fol.
Temple's (Sir Will.) Works. Thysii (Antonii) de Republica Atheniense Liber.
Trenchard's History of Standing Armies.
U V W
Universal History (Ancient) 21 Vol. -- Modern, 44 Vol. Valerii Maximi
Historiae. Virgilii Aeneid. Voltair's Essais sur l'Histoire. Whitehall Evening
Post. Whitelocke's Memoirs.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.
BOOK I. Of Places and Pensions.
CHAP. I. Page 1. Idea of a Parliament uninfluenced by Places and Pensions;
taken from the best historical and political Writer, etc. CHAP. II. Page 37.
Placemen and Pensioners unfit for Members of Parliament, because not likely to
be uninfluenced. CHAP. III. Page 75. That Placemen often hold a Plurality of
Employments, incompatible with one another. CHAP. IV. Page 80. Places and
Pensions not given according to Merit. CHAP. V. Page 91. Profusion in Places
and Pensions. CHAP. VI. Page 131. That Places, Pensions, Bribes, and all the
Arts of Corruption, are but false Policy, being endless and insufficient. CHAP.
VII. Pape 168. Bills, Statutes, Resolutions, etc. showing the Sense of Mankind
on the Evil of Placemen and Pensioners in Parliament. CHAP. VIII. Page 195.
Speeches on the Danger of Placemen and Pensioners in Parliament. CHAP. IX. Page
269. Of qualifications for Members of Parliament.
BOOK II. Of taxing the Colonies.
CHAP. I. Page 274. That the object, our Ministers have had in view in taxing
the Colonies, was, enlarging the Power of the Court, by increasing the Number
of Places and Pensions for their Dependents. CHAP. II. Page 281. Our Colonies
of great Advantage, and therefore deserved better Treatment. CHAP. III. Page
291. The Colonies, though so valuable to Britain, have been greatly oppressed
by the Mother Country. CHAP. IV. Page 299. Precedents respecting Colonies.
CHAP. V. Page 302. Of Taxation without Representation.
BOOK. III. Of the Army.
CHAP. I. Page 341. General Reflections on standing Armies in free Countries in
times of Peace. CHAP. II. Page 361. Facts relating to the Army. CHAP. III. Page
389. A Militia, with the Navy, the only proper Security of a free People in an
insular Situation, both against foreign Invasion and domestic Tyranny. CHAP.
IV. Page 426. Parliamentary Transactions, Speeches, etc. relating to the Army.
POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, etc.
BOOK I. Of Places and Pensions.
CHAP. I. Idea of a Parliament uninfluenced by Places and Pensions; taken from
the best historical and political Writers, etc.
AFTER wading so long in the Serbonian bog of corruption, after having, Escaped
the Stygian pool, though long detained
In that obscure sojourn, whilst in our flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes, than to the Orphean lyre
We sung of Chaos and eternal night;
MILTON. [ministerial influence in parliament will soon bring chaos and eternal
night upon England, if not dissipated by the exertion of the spirit of a brave
people] to speak plain prose; after tracing out such a multitude of foul and
shameful instances of the ascendancy obtained by fl^gitious courts over
parliament, it may be some relief (it will certainly be some instruction) to
the reader, to observe the difference between the conduct of corrupt, and that
of uninfluenced parliaments.

What a parliament completely independent would be; and what parliaments
accordingly have sometimes been, may, in some measure, be conceived from this
chapter, which he who can read, comparing the idea here given of incorrupt
parliaments with what we have seen in our debauched times; the Englishman, I
say, who can read what follows without grief and indignation, must either be
incapable of forming any judgment, wherein the interest of his country lies,
and ignorant of what intimately concerns every subject of the British empire;
or he must be void of all regard for his country, and consequently of every
virtuous attachment; or he must be attached to an interest contrary to that of
his country, by the sordid love of money, as being himself a dealer in rank
bribery and corruption.

Every free Briton has reason to wish that darkness may overshadow the
anniversary of his birth, who first introduced places and pensions into
parliament. When I have made a few observations on the complexion of
parliaments in those times, in which it is certain that the court did not,
because it could not influence them by emolumentary means, every reader who
recollects any thing of the politics of modern times (the present always
excepted) will, on making a comparison, join me in saying Hoc font derivata
clades
In patriam populumque sluxit.
HOR. From this impure fountain flows the stream, which is likely to poison our
country and posterity.

In ancient times, when the parliaments of England were unpensioned, we find
them, even in spite of Popish darkness, and of the extravagant notions of
prerogative which were the disgrace of those ages, ever faithfully laboring
for the public good, and especially seizing all opportunities for obtaining an
enlargement of liberty.

So early as 1290, we find a set of unjust judges mulcted by parliament, to the
amount of 100,000 marks. The parliament obtained of Edw. I. a promise, that he
would contrary to the usage of former times) quit all pretension to the right
of levying taxes by his own authority, and would raise none but with consent of
the archbishops, bishops, and other prelates, earls, barons, knights (of
shires), burgesses, and other freemen of this realm. The numerous confirmations
of Magna Charta were obtained by parliaments, and always with reluctance on the
part of the kings, as the first grant was extorted by the barons (which, by the
bye, shows the justness of the observation, that parliaments are as naturally
friends to liberty as kings are to prerogative.) So high was the reputation of
the commons, in the same reign, for integrity and judgment, that the barons
proposed to the king, that they should have the choice of the chancellor, chief
justice, and other great officers of state. To which that prince answered them
by asking, Why they did not demand his crown? That they chose their own
servants: Why might not he enjoy the same privilege? [not considering that the
people are deeply concerned in the choice of the king's servants; whereas no
body has any thing to do with these of a duke or an earl.] In Edw. IIId's time,
we find the commons refusing to grant an aid, till they had consulted their
constituents. [In those days, they considered themselves as responsible not to
the ministry, but the people.] In the same reign we find it recorded by
historians, That since the aids given in the last parliament were not duly
answered to the king by those who had the care thereof, certain persons were
appointed to take the accounts of William de la Pole, and others, who had
received the money, wool, [taxes were, in those days, often paid in wool] etc.
and they had a day assigned them to produce their accounts, and in the mean
time several noblemen and gentlemen of fortune became bound, etc. [This was the
true way of preventing complaints against defaulters of millions.] In the same
reign (about four hundred years ago) we find the commons refusing to grant
supplies till grievances were redressed; fixing by law what shall be deemed
treason; proposing regulations for preventing the subjects being compelled to
make loans to the king, for that it was against reason, and the franchise of
the land; making an act for holding annual parliaments [no ministerial schemes
to be gained by rewarding, with places and pensions, those who voted seven
years together as they were bid] limiting the power of the clergy and the
lawyers; preventing the union, in the same persons, of legislative power and of
court emoluments, by a law prohibiting any collector of taxes to represent any
place in parliament; [so early were our ancestors aware of the usefulness of a
place-bill, repeatedly rejected in our degenerate times.] In Rich. IId's days,
we find the commons requesting that he would inform them how the public money
was laid out, and who were to be his counselors and great officers; to which
request they insisted on, and obtained an answer. In the same reign the commons
refuse to lay any taxes on the people, because they were disgusted, as had just
before appeared by Wat Tyler's insurrection. [In those days some regard was
shown to the sense of even the lowest of the people.] The commons request the
removal of Michael de la Pole. The king gives them an answer in character, that
is, a silly one. But they insist on compliance, and after some struggles, not
only overthrow the minister, but at last dethrone the king himself. The
parliament appoints a commission of enquiry to try the favorites. They impeach
them of engaging the king to stand by them, right or wrong; of excluding all
persons without the circle of the junto; of embezzling the public money, of
laws dispensed with; of unjust punishments and pardons; of bribes taken of both
parties, etc. In consequence, the archbishop and others are declared guilty of
high treason, Michael de la Pole is impeached, the high treasurer, Tresilian,
Brembre, and many others, are hanged. [Thus in the heat of their honest zeal
for the public good, overleaping their due boundaries, as a third part only of
the legislature, and breaking into the sphere of the executive. See vol. i. p.
205. et seq.] Yet this very parliament, in the midst of severity, remembers
decency. They make an express resolution for exempting the king, and laying the
whole blame on his ministers. Happy had he stopped while his ruin might have
been prevented! They oblige him to renew his coronation oath. [Kings often want
to have their memories refreshed on this subject.] He shows a mighty desire of
holding the reins of government in his own hand. He ^o sooner gets power, than
he shows his incapacity for being trusted with it. He displaces all the
faithful servants of the state, to make room for his worthless favorites. He
seizes the charters of London, imprisons the mayor and sheriffs, fines the
city, and losing the inestimable affections of the inhabitants of the capital,
hastens his own destruction. He tries to pack parliaments, to influence
returning officers, to force elections, to raise money without parliament;
obtains, by unfair means, the opinions of his servile judges in favor of his
wicked measures; the very proceedings which afterward brought Charles I. to
the block. [If the old saying be true, experientia docet stultos, it is plain,
that kings are not fools; for experience does not teach some of them.] The
parliament impeaches him for unwarrantable liberality to worthless favorites;
encouraging a junto to take upon them parliamentary power; causing the
parliament roll to be altered and blotted at his pleasure; forbidding his
subjects to petition him; sending into the house men not elected by the people,
but nominated by himself; biassing members by threats and promises; refusing
the faithful advice of his subjects, and threatening those who offered it, etc.
The parliament formally dethrones him, as is known to every reader.

Uninfluenced parliaments, instead of giving, as we have seen, the people's
money by millions upon every call of the minister, have been remarkably
delicate upon that point.

Hen. III. A. D. 1255, demands an aid. Parliament requires two conditions, viz.
1. Observance of the two charters; and 2. That parliament have the appointing
of the justiciary, treasurer, and chancellor. Henry, instead of complying,
prologues the parliament Rapin, I.329.
.

The struggle between Chapter I. and his brave and free parliament is one of the
most striking instances in the history of the world, of the glorious effects
produced by the love of liberty and their country in the uninfluenced minds of
a set of honest and courageous representatives. Let us contemplate a few
instances of what is so much to the honor of human nature.

When that prince begun to demand money of parliament, there was great
opposition made. Pym, and the other patriots, said, the war was entered into
rashly, and therefore the nation was not obliged to support it. He demanded an
account of the money raised by James I. by resumption of crown lands, and sale
of titles and places. The commons accordingly, instead of supplies, proceeded
to the consideration of grievances PARL. HIST. VI.402.
. The king dissolves the parliament, because they would grant nothing Ibid. 403.
When he sent repeated messages to the commons, pressing them to go upon
supplies, and let grievances alone, Sir Robert Philips proposed to address the
king, and let him know what they intended to do, if he would not interrupt
them. If the king would not suffer them to go on with the public business, they
must then depart in peace, and every man betake himself to prayer, that the
confusions to be apprehended might be averted. The speaker, by the king's
order, interrupts Sir I. Elliot in his remarks on the conduct of the ministry.
Upon this, Sir Dudley Digges said, If we must not speak of these things in
parliament, let us be gone. A mournful silence, for some time, ensued. Then Sir
Nathaniel Rich observed, That it was necessary they should take care of those,
who sent them to parliament; and proposed to go to the lords, and, with them,
wait on the king. The commons resolve, that neither Sir I. Elliot (who was
interrupted by the slavish speaker) nor any other member, had spoken any thing
undutiful during that parliament. A committee is ordered to consider what may
be done for the safety of the kingdom, and that no member leave the house, on
pain of being sent to the Tower. The speaker desired to go out for half an
hour. Mr. Kirton observed, that this was unprecedented and ominous. It was
observed by Mr. Kirton (with too much goodnature) that the king was a good
prince; but persuaded by enemies to him and the nation. Let us try to discover
them, says he, and I doubt not, but God will lend us hearts, hands, and swords,
to cut all his and our enemies throats. Sir Edw. Coke observed, That greater
moderation never was known, than theirs had been, considering, that their
liberties had been so shamefully violated. That former parliaments had boldly
pointed out evil counselors about the kings. [He mentions several instances;
but, as they occur in other parts of these collections, I shall not enumerate
them here.] How shall we answer to God and men, says he, if we do not make
proper enquiry into the abuses of our times? Nothing grows to abuse, but this
house has power to treat of it. All men agree, that the duke of Buckingham is
the cause of all the evil, etc. The slavish speaker, who had stolen to the king
(which was what he meant by asking to go out for half an hour) returned, and
brought a message from the king, adjourning the house, and all committees, till
next morning PARL. HIST. VIII, 191, 192, 196.
. The speaker, by the king's command, adds, That he did not mean to restrain
them in their just privileges; but only, that they should avoid reflections [no
matter how just] on himself and his ministers Ibid. 197.
. What would have been according to this monarch's idea, restraining, if it was
not restraining, to stop the commons from enquiring into the conduct of bad
ministers? A power, which, as Sir Edw. Coke shows, had been so constantly
assumed by parliament. Which shows the common apology for Charles I. viz. That
he did not abridge liberty; but only refused to grant new privileges; to be
greatly too indulgent to the violences of that desperate tyrant.

The commons instructed their speaker to answer to one of his threatening
messages, That it is the ancient right of parliament to debate in their own
method, without interruption from the sovereign. That it is their ancient
custom to consider of grievances first, and supplies afterward. That they
thought it absolutely necessary to join with the supplies a due care of the
essentials of liberty, without which there is no government, nor any thing
great or valuable that can be done either in peace or war PARL. HIST. VII.441.
.

In one of their remonstrances to the king, A. D. 1626, they express themselves
in these words: -- Your faithful commons, who can have no private end, no
object but your majesty's service, and the good of our country Ibid. VI.467.
. [Had there been in that house of commons two or three hundred placemen, they
would not have dared to say, We can have no private end.] It has been the
ancient, constant, and undoubted right and usage of parliaments to question,
and complain of all persons, of what degree soever, who have been found
grievances to the commonwealth in abusing the power committed to them by their
sovereign -- without which liberty in parliament, the commonwealth might
languish under the pressure [of those grievances] without redress.

The intractableness of his parliaments (an honest parliament will always be
intractable, because a court will always be making exorbitant demands) made him
determine to govern without them. When he could no longer put it off, he called
one; but, says Voltaire Volt. ESS. SUR L'HIST. IV.147.
, C'etait assembler des citoyens irritez; this was calling together a set of
enraged subjects, and giving them an opportunity of consulting about the
destruction of his tyranny. For the court had not then, as now, millions to
dole away, by which to put a grumbling house of commons in good humor.

The fashion was not in those days, as we have seen it since, to stifle all
enquiries into the disposal of the public money. Therefore it was ordered, A.
D. 1648, by the house of commons, That the committee of Goldsmith's Hall do
print all their receipts for compositions, and how the moneys have been
disbursed, that aspersions upon parliament may be cleared Whitel. MEM. 308.
.

In those tyrannical times, the instruments of the tyranny were the grandees of
the court, who were gainers by it; and the vindicators of the public liberty
were the commons of England, who had no share in the spoils, but were losers,
and had nothing to make up their losses. Had the commons of those days had a
fellow-feeling with the court; had there been two or three hundred placemen in
the house of commons, would they have stood up so boldly for the interest of
their country? It was the court that imposed ship money, that condemned Prynne,
Bastwick, Burton, Leighton, etc. It was the brave commons that reversed the
cruel sentences, and cast their enemies in damages for unjust imprisonment,
tyrannical seizure of papers, exorbitant fines, cruel pilloryings and
mutilations, star chamber, court of York, etc.

Resolved, ( A D* 1647) That no member shall receive any profit of any office,
grant, or sequestration from parliament: That whatever any members have
received shall be repaid for public use, and the estates of members liable for
their debts PARL. HIST. XV.422.
. A day was appointed for hearing complaints against members, and no member to
receive any reparation for losses, till the public debts be paid. [Our gamblers
are wallowing in the public money, while the nation is in debt 130 millions.]
And though the self-denying ordinance was not strictly kept; (for Ireton,
Fleetwood, Harris, and others, were elected into the house) a few corrupt men
could carry no point; and the ordinance itself shows the sense of the times,
and of all times, and all men, who pretend to have any regard for their
country, concerning placemen in the house. And the many regulations made since
for the pretended purpose of making parliament free, though ineffectual, and
perhaps not always intended to be effectual, yet have a decent appearance, as
coinciding with the general sense of mankind on this point.

The commons under Chapter I. were almost always unanimous. No wonder: they had no
indirect interest to divide them; no places, no pensions, etc. to put them upon
opposing what was plainly for the public good. Therefore we do not find in
those times any abandoned speechifiers in the house, like our Walpoles and our
P^lhams, supporting the usefulness of court-influence in parliament, in direct
opposition to common sense and common decency.

Resolved, ( A. D. 1640) That no monopolist or patentee shall sit in the house.
Many were expelled, and new writs issued PARL. HIST. IX.148.
. Parliament, A. D. 1645, publishes a declaration, That it would be an
acceptable service, if any person would inform of any members taking bribes for
any matter depending in the house PARL. HIST. XIV.140.
. The brave commons under Chapter I. brought the lord keeper Finch upon his knees
before them, and proving inexorable, obliged him to make his escapc Hume, HIST.
STUARTS, I.244.
. They prosecuted Strafford and Laud to death, they forced Windebanke to fly.
They struck with terror all the tools of the tyrant, and punished all their
proceedings, however supported by precedent, which were not warranted by some
express law Ibid. 246.
. They condemned the monopolies restored by Charles after their being, by a
former parliament, solemnly declared illegal; and punished those concerned in
them, expelling some members of their own house on that account. They changed,
in less than a month, the face of affairs in England, from the most absolute
monarchy to a democracy, without other disturbance than a scuffle between the
king's army and the Scotch at passing the Tyne; and roused that spirit in the
nation, which brought the bloody tyrant, commonly called the blessed martyr, to
his merited end Ibid. 247.
.

Sir Harbottle Grimstone thus describes a parliament answering the design and
exhibiting the true spirit of a parliament. Of such awful predominancy is the
very name of a parliament to the nation, that it strikes with terror and
despair all evil doers, and enriches and comforts the spirits of many groaning
under the burden of oppression, inflicted on them unjustly and maliciously by
unmerciful and wicked men, who have usurped to themselves places and offices of
power and authority in church and state. It is not only the powerfullest of all
courts, but the wisest; made and compacted not only of men found in religion,
and well learned, but ripe in their judgments, selected from all parts of the
kingdom, chosen with the free consent of the whole body politic of the kingdom.
[A man must be out of his wits to describe parliaments in our times in this
manner.] This great and high council is not only of such power and wisdom, but
endowed with the greatest privileges, that not only the meanest of his
majesty's subjects, but the greatest persons of the kingdom are in danger, if
infringers of the same, to be called in question, and punished. Crimstone's
speech on occasion of Charles's demanding the five members PARL. HIST. X.180.
. He then mentions the privileges of parliament: viz. To speak or debate, vote,
impeach, condemn, acquit, protest, or remonstrate according to evidence, and
the state of things, [in (...) of ministerial, or regal interposition.] No
member to be prosecuted but by the house for things said in the house, nor to
be apprehended, his stu^y broke open, or his papers seized, but by order of the
house. To make or unmake laws, raise taxes, do what business they please first,
without superior compulsion or influence; nor to be dissolved capriciously when
they are redressing wrongs and framing good laws, or prosecuting delinquents.
To Grimstone's speech may be added the answer of the commons in their
declaration, A. D. 1642. The king pretended, that the measures he pursued, were
more for the good of the kingdom, than those, which they proposed, on which
account he rejected all their wise and pacific proposals, and was not to be
satisfied, 'till he made his country a sea of blood.

Is it likely, say they, that those, who are especially chosen [electors were
then unbribed, and unterrified by ministers or by grandees] and introduced for
the purpose, and who themselves must needs have so great a share in all
grievances of the subjects [no member had then any idea of indemnifying
himself, by a place, or a pension, of the burden he brought upon his country by
voting according to the minister's direction] should wholly cast off all care
of the public good, and the king only take it up?

Heretofore, says Mr. Holles, in his speech before the lords, A. D. 1641.
parliaments were the catholicon, the balm of Gilead which healed our wounds,
restored our spirits, and made up all breach^s of the land. Of late years they
have been without fruit, etc. Parliaments were then become ineffectual because
dissolved by the tyrant. Now we often wish them dissolved. PARL. HIST. IX.298.
.

Sir William Jones answered Chapter II's proclamation, and apology for dissolving
his parliament at Oxford in a pet, and says, inter alia, The count never
dissolved a parliament abruptly and in a heat, but they found the next
parliament more averse, and to insist on the same things with greater
eagerness, than the former. -- A parliament always participates of the present
temper of the people DEB. LORDS, I.264.
, Those times differed from ours (the present always excepted) for we have seen
the times, when the true account of the matter would have been, that parliament
is what the court (not the people) would have it to be.

When Mr. Holles impeached the nine peers before the lords PARL. HIST. XI.200.
, in his speech he showed the importance of parliaments, and that the enemies
of the public tranquillity, have always sought the destruction or diminution of
the power of parliaments. Parliament, says he, is the foundation of government;
it creates and perserves law; watches over religion [the members in those days
had some religion,] prevents licentiousness of manners; preserves the rights
and liberties of the subject; provides for common necessities; prevents public
fears; the kingdom can rest on no other foundation, than that of parliament.

It is remarkable, that, when he mentions the arts of enemies for defeating the
use of parliaments, as refusing to call them, diverting, obstructing,
interrupting, or abruptly dissolving them; he never mentions corrupting them by
places, pensions, etc. the most effectual of all means for destroying their
usefulness. What had been done in that way before those times, had answered
little purpose. Chapter IId's pension parliament was the first successful
experiment of that black art, so fatally improved since. When Chapter I. (says lord
Lyttelton, in his speech on the Spanish convention DEB. COM. XI*312.
) told the commons, who were preparing complaints against Buckingham, that he
would not allow any of his servants to be questioned in parliament, he spoke
the language of despotic power, and such as this house would never endure. But
if instead of speaking so openly, he had a little softened his style; confessed
their right to question his servants, but at the same time denied them the
means: if Buckingham himself had challenged them to examine his conduct, or the
conduct of those who acted by his instructions and under his orders; and then
refused them the sight of these instructions, and the regular methods according
to the usage of parliament of examining into these orders; the appearance
indeed would have been fairer, but the proceeding itself would have been
equally dangerous, equally fatal to the rights of this house. Sir, that
parliament would not have borne it; for it was composed of such men as had no
influence upon them to abate the spirit and zeal with which they proceeded to
enquire into and punish mal-administration: such men at their first meeting,
before they would give one penny of money to support the king in a war with
Spain which had been begun at the desire of parliament, appointed a committee
to consider of secret affairs, and another for grievances. They resolved to
enquire into the misemployment of the public treasure, and dishonor brought
upon the nation, before they voted any supply, without apprehending any
reproach of want of zeal for the king or the war; but that they might know the
true state of the nation, and carry on the war with more cheerfulness when
justice was done upon those who had involved them in so many difficulties, the
same parliament declared, and it stands uncontroverted yet upon your journals,
That common fame is a good ground of proceeding for this house either by
enquiry, or if the house find cause, by impeachment. Accordingly queries were
drawn up to enquire into the conduct of Buckingham, which were afterward
turned into articles of impeachment against him; and the king to save his
minister had no other way than dissolving that parliament; for the art of
softening them by corruption was not in use in those days. Sir, I hope I have
not misspent your time in calling back to your memory the proceedings of a
former house of commons which deserve, I think, the greatest respect, and are
mentioned with reverence by the most impartial historians. How history will
mention ours, I wish we may think worth our concern; but how the nation will
judge of them now, I am sure we ought to consider. Sir, if a king has lost the
esteem and the hearts of his people, the interposition of parliament may awaken
him to a sense of his error, and by healing counsels reconcile and restore them
again; but if parliaments themselves act so as to lose their own dignity and by
consequence the esteem and love of the people, who shall then interpose or what
mediator is left? It is such an evil as admits of no remedy: it is the worst
misfortune that can ever befall a free government. To have approved the
convention, to have rejected a motion for laying before parliament the
instructions of the minister who concluded and signed that convention, and then
to deny the means of examining into these negotiations upon which Spain grounds
these very pretensions, which we are now fighting to destroy -- these measures
will certainly do us great honor in the opinion of those who are this year to
pay four millions for supporting the war. What they will think of all this I do
not know; but I am apt to believe they will never think about it, without
having at the same time in their thoughts that the same house of commons has
three times rejected the place bill.

In the short, the too short period of the republic (for how happy had it been
for England if she had been governed by the republican parliament during the
period of her disgraces under Charles II. and James II.) in that short period
we see what may be expected from a set of un-bribed, un-biassed men assembled
together to consult for the public good, without fears, and without hopes, from
a bribing court, and free from the imcumbrances of such kings, or houses of
peers, to negative, or at least to entangle and impede their measures for the
general advantage. How unfriendly to liberty kings and lords have been, will
too plainly appear on perusing the articles Kings and Lords in the sequel. I
write in this seemingly republican strain, not that I have the least thought of
suggesting the necessity, or propriety, of changing the form of government in
Britain, from regal to republican, though the latter is undoubtedly preferable
to the former, supposing a state to be settling its form of government; but to
caution kings and lords, not to bring on, as they have formerly done by their
misbehaviour, their own exclusion. But let us hear our incomparable female
historian.

On the subject of the glory acquired by the English republic in this infant
state, we shall observe the following incautious testimonies of its inveterate
enemies. Heath, on entering into the subject of the parliament's forced
dissolution, and the ruin of the republic, breaks out in the following
exclamation. Now to the reproach of Fortune and her glorious pageant of an
English commonwealth, which she had set up for another wonder of the world, to
brave the pyramids of stone, and colossus of brass, as to the defiance of
time's injury, having subdued all likelihood of danger from without; all
princes being ready to entertain their friendship. -- Clarendon, who with a
heart replete with selfish malice, in prospective saw and sighed over the
future grandeur of his country, on speaking of the political conduct of
cardinal Mazarine, makes the following observation: After the battle of Naseby
was lost, and the king seemed so totally defeated, that he had very little hope
of appearing at the head of an army which might be able to resist the enemy,
the cardinal was awakened to new apprehensions, and saw more cause to fear the
monstrous power of the parliament, after they had totally subdued the king,
than ever he had to apprehend the excess of greatness in the crown. Treating of
the Dutch war he observes: The United Provinces now discerned, that they had
helped to r^ise an enemy which was too powerful for them, and which would not
be treated as the crown had been. Guthrie, an historian of monarchical
principle^ makes the following observation: Mazarine imagined, and that not
without good grounds, that the natural interest of France led her to wish
Cromwell to be at the head of the English, rather than it should be formed into
a republic of brave and wise patriots.

On this act of violence, [ Cromwell's turning out the republican parliament]
Coke (an enemy) exclaims, Thus fell the victorious parliament, whose mighty
actions will scarcely find belief in future generations; and to say the truth,
they were a set of men most indefatigable and industrious in business, always
seeking for men fit for it, and never preferring any from favor and
importunity. As they excelled thus in civil affairs, so it must be owned they
exercised in matters ecclesiastic no such severity as others before them, upon
such as dissented from them. Guthrie, an anti-republican, expresses the
following favorable opinion of this parliament: The English republicans by
their vigor and spirit, struck Europe with consternation; and the English flag
was such a protection to commerce, that the trade of the world seemed now to
center in Europe. Had this vast expense been drained from the sweat of the
people, the furnishing it would not have so much alarmed the Dutch: but there
had been a great reduction in taxes, the customs alone furnished 250,000 l.
clear of all deductions; the people scarce felt their burdens; and even the
greatest enemies the government had, were pleased with the figure which England
made abroad. Historians in general, estimating things by events and prejudices,
have represented the late parliament in a pitiful light, despised and
disregarded by the people, which gave Cromwell the boldness to act as he did.
But the reverse of this is true; for Cromwell dissolved them because he knew
they must in time win upon the people; that the spirit with which they
proceeded would soon render him and his army useless; and that they were
pointing toward an establishment which must check the carreer of all
inordinate ambition. This parliament (says Trenchard, in the History of
standing armies in England) made their name famous through the whole earth,
conquered their enemies in England, Scotland and Ireland; reduced the kingdom
of Portugal to their own terms, recovered our reputation at sea, overcame the
Dutch in several famous battles; secured our trade, and managed the public
expenses with so much frugality, that no estates were gained by private men
upon the public miseries, and at last were passing an act for their own
dissolution and settling the nation in a free and impartial commonwealth.
Ludlow on the praises of this renowned assembly writes. It will appear to
unprejudiced posterity that they were a disinterested and impartial parliament,
who though they had the sovereign power of the three nations in their hands for
the space of ten or twelve years, yet did not in all that time give away
amongst themselves so much as they spent for the public in three months. In a
Discourse of the national excellency of England, here is the following
honorable character given of the English government during the short time it
remained a republic. If you respect its infancy and beginning, it out went in
warlike achievement all other commonwealths. I lay before me the exploits of
Sparta, Athens, Carthage, and Venice; and know that the Venetians Switzers, and
United Provinces at this day, being contemptible for territory, are those only
that appear fittest matches for the greatest empires. I know also, that Rome,
the only mistress of the world, was justly celebrated for large conquests; and
yet none of these states gave such starts, and made such acquests at their rise
as our English commonwealth. Certainly so many advantages conduced to its
greatness and increase, and at its first appearing so large were its
territories, that it may well be affirmed, never was a commonwealth in that
respect laid on so large a foundation; and if in our conceit we should give it
an answerable growth, we could not assign it less than the whole globe at last
for its portion. At first, if you will judge by the affections of the people,
it had not the hundredth part of England itself, and was to go through
difficulties which would have confounded any but a free state; yet how quickly
had it brought the nation to somewhat a better understanding and a fair way of
settlement: so that there are some who question whether any natural prince of
England had ever been assisted on any occasion with such great forces so
suddenly and with such alacrity raised, as they were at Worcester; and on the
other side, how few went over to the king of Scots, though generally looked on
as a rightful prince, deserves consideration. It lived not out a luster; yet
conquered Scotland, (introducing more liberty and greater privileges than they
had before) Ireland, and several other smaller islands; made other nations feel
its force, as the French and Portuguese; and was going on in such a carreer of
action as was not to be stopped by human power. This government began a war
with the Dutch, which it would have ended with absolute conquest, or fallen in
the attempt; and after this probably, it would have entered on more honorable
enterprises, and not suffered the nation to grow effeminate by ease and vice.
In a word, it had brought in an instant the nation to a full glory, and such a
splendor as cast a darkness, as it is affirmed by some, on the greatest
actions of former times. This is certain, that the neighboring states trembled
at its sudden and prodigious greatness, and remote potentates did court and
seek a good understanding from its hands; and its dissolution brought no
ordinary content to those who had cause to fear it. The agent from the Stewarts
(as a late writer reports) at the first appearance of this commonwealth urged
the United Provinces, that if England were free, it would be formidable to them
not only by interrupting their fishing, and all other maritime advantages, but
by robbing them of traffic, as they had done the Venetians; and not only so,
but give law to all Christendom by reason of the commodiousness of its harbors
and the number of its ships. To the just and high elogiums which have been made
on the government of the parliament it is to be remembered, that to them is due
the singular praise of having pursued the true interest of their country, in
attending particularly to its maritime strength, and carrying on its foreign
wars by its naval powers. This example, which raised England to so great an
height of glory and prosperity, has never yet been followed, and in all
probability never will, by the succeeding monarchs. The aim of princes is to
make conquests on their subjects, not to enlarge the empire of a free people. A
standing army is a never-failing instrument of domestic triumph; and it is very
doubtful whether a naval force could be rendered useful in any capacity, but
that of extending the power and prosperity of the country Macaul. HIST. ENGL.
V.107.


If the very rump of a parliament (says a writer in STATE TRACTS, time of king
William) even in the midst of domestic discontents, and beset on all sides with
foreign assaults, and invasions at home; if that small and broken number
without any head, and under so many disadvantages, could by this only means
secure our peace, and so widely extend the repute and honor of the English
name; what country or what region could ever give limits to the unbounded
reputation of a full and legal parliament so nobly qualified? What nation could
there be so powerful as to resist our forces, or so politic as to infatuate
our counsels? There is nothing within the compass of human wishes of which we
might not assure ourselves, from the wisdom and virtue of such a disinterested
assembly STATE TRACTS, time of king William, II.644.
.

Fairfax's plan shows what an idea people had in those times, ( viz. before
parliamentary corruption prevailed) of the safety of confiding in them. He
proposes that the two houses have the supreme judgment of offenders, with power
of exposition and application of law without appeal. No state-criminal to be
pardonable by the king, without their consent. The house of peers no longer to
be alone the supreme court, grand juries to be nominated, not by the
undersheriff, but by the people of the counties mutually. Militia to be under
power of parliament for ten years, and not under the king alone. The public
treasure the same. Regulations for the militia or army to be made in
parliament. Great offices of state to be disposed of by parliament for ten
years. Afterward parliament to give in to the king three names, and he to
appoint one. No new-made peer to sit without leave of parliament. All
declarations against parliament to be void. In modern times, it is altogether
the same to the people, whether the command of the army, treasury,
state-offices* etc. be in the court, the lords, or the commons. For these three
are one.

When a reward was proposed for Mrs. Lane, for saving that blessed saint
Charles II. some of the members said, the house had no right to give away in
this manner the people's money to any but the king for public use PARL. HIST.
XXIII.59.
. On the contrary, in modern times we see our parliaments so motherly to our
ministers, they know not how to refuse them any thing they ask; at one time our
kings are to have their civil list (formerly granted annually) settled on them
for life; at another 500,000 l. voted to pay the civil list debts; at another
an account of 250,000 l. of 60,000 l. of 35,000 l. passed unexamined, because
the court gave their word of honor the money was all spent in the public
service; of which more elsewhere.

Clarendon says, Charles II. despaired of his restoration, when he heard of the
resurrection of parliament after Richard Cromwell's resignation. An incorrupt
parliament is never very courtly, and contrariwise, a corrupt one can deny
nothing to kings and courts. But if Charles had recollected, that his friend
Monk had an army at his command, he would not have despaired. Armies and kings
have a great tenderness for one another, and are particularly useful to one
another. Both depend more upon power, than upon justice; both love to rule
without control; kings love armies, because an army can support them in
tyrannical measures without the trouble of satisfying the subjects; and armies
love kings, because they are indulged by kings (on account of their usefulness)
in a different manner from what they experience under republican government.
But of this I shall have occasion to treat fully in the article Army.

There is nothing of greater importance to the safety and good of the kingdom,
(says Mr. Pymme, A. D. 1641) than that this high court of parliament, which is
the fountain of justice and government, should be kept pure, incorrupt, and
free from partiality and bye respects. This would not only add luster and
reputation, but strength and authority to all our acts. In this the lords are
specially interested, as being a third estate by inheritance and birthright.
The commons are publicly interested by representation of the whole body of the
commons of this kingdom, whose lives, fortunes, and liberties are deposited
under the custody and trust of the parliament PARL. HIST. X.13.
.

-- Least of all will it be swallowed by a parliament, says Thurloe, in one of
his letters, speaking of certain schemes proposed for keeping Cromwell in power
Macaul. HIST. V.199.
. In our times we never hear of any body afraid of parliament, but writers on
the side of the opposition.

There were not wanting court-sycophants in the time of Charles II. who
celebrated him to the skies, and justified all his ruinous proceedings. But his
parliaments did not always echo back, as in our times, the false panegyric.

Long, long, may that royal tree live and flourish, upon which those fruits do
grow! says Shaftesbury, in his speech to parliament, A. D. 1673, with a great
deal more to the same beslobbering purpose, to blind the eyes of both
parliament and people, and to incline them to be contented with the proceedings
of the times. Shaftesbury in this rhetorical flourish hits off one undoubted
property of Charles. He was so very fruitful of bastards, that the wags of the
times observed, that he might be said almost literally, as well as
figuratively, to deserve the ancie^^ most honorable title of pater patriae,
the father of his people. Both lords and commons however showed themselves very
much discontented at the continuance of the Dutch war, the exorbitant power of
France, prevalence of popish counsels, etc. which they take care to signify to
the king in an address for a fast DEB. COM. I.191.
. And the commons seeing at last his worthlessness in joining France against
Holland, and that the design of his five villainous tools, whose initials form
the famous word CABAL, was to make him absolute, oppose him openly. They
resolve, that Lauderdale, and the French alliance, are grievances. The king
prorogues them immediately. On their meeting again, they address him against
his guards; and impeach Buckingham and Arlington. Charles finding that they
were too honest to grant him further supplies for an odious war, makes peace
with the Dutch Hum^, HIST. STUARTS, II.236.
.

Were the house of commons (says a writer in the STATE TRACTS, time of king
William) a true representative, and free from external force and private
bribery, nothing could pass there, but what they thought was for the public
advantage. For their own interest is so interwoven with the people's, that if
they act for themselves (which every one of them will do as near as he can)
they must act for the common interest of England. And if a few among them
should find it their interest to abuse their power, it will be the interest of
all the rest to punish them for it: and then our government would act
mechanically, and a rogue would as naturally be hanged as a clock strikes
twelve when the hour is come. This is the fountain head from whence the people
expect all their happiness, and the redress of their grievances; and if we can
preserve them [ viz. parliaments] free from corruption, they will take care to
keep every body else so. Our constitution seems to have provided for it by
never suffering the king (till Charles Ist's reign) to have a mercenary army to
frighten them into a compliance, nor places nor revenues great enough to bribe
them into it. The places in the king's gift were but few, and most of them
patent places for life, and the rest great offices of state enjoyed by single
persons, which seldom sell to the share of the commons, such as the office of a
lord chancellor, lord treasurer, privy seal, lord high admiral, etc. and when
these office^ were possessed by the lords, the commons were severe inquisitors
into their actions. Thus the government of England continued from the time that
the Romans quitted the island to the time of Chapter I. who was the first I have
read of that made an opposition to himself in the house of commons the road to
preferment, of which the earls of Strafford and Noy were the most remarkable
instances; who from great patriots became the chief assertors of despotick
power. But this served only to exasperate the rest; for he had not places
enough for all that expected them, nor money enough to bribe them. It is true,
he raised great sums of money upon the people; but it being without authority
of parliament, and having no army to back him, it met with such difficulties in
the raising, that it did him but little good, and ended at last in his ruin;
though by the means of a long and miserable war which brought us from one
tyranny to another: for the army had got all things into their power, and
governed the nation by a council of war, which made all parties join in calling
in Chapter II. so that he came in with the general applause of the people, who in a
kind fit gave him a vast revenue for life. By this he was enabled to raise an
army, and bribe the parliament, which he did to the purpose: but being a
luxurious prince, he could not part with great sums at once. He only fed them
from hand to mouth: so that they found it necessary to keep him in a constant
dependence upon them, as they were upon him. They knew he would give them ready
money no longer than he had an absolute necessity for them, and that he had not
places enough in his disposal to secure a majority in the house: for in those
early days the art was not found out of splitting and multiplying places; as
instead of a lord treasurer, to have five lords of the treasury; instead of a
lord admiral, to have seven lords of the admiralty; to have seven commissioners
of the customs; nine of the excise; fourteen of the navy-office; ten of the
stamp-office; eight of the prize-office; sixteen commissioners of trade; two of
the post office; four of the transports; four for hackney-coaches; four for
wine-licences; four for the victualling-office, and multitudes of other offices
which are endless to enumerate. I believe the gentlemen, who have the good
fortune to be in some of those employments, will think I compliment them, if I
say, they have not been better executed since they were in so many hands than
when in fewer: and I must confess, I see no reason why they may not be made
twice as many, and so on ad infinitum (unless the number be ascertained by
parliament) and what danger this may be to our constitution I think of with
horror. For if in ages to come they should be all given to parliament men, what
will become of our so much boasted liberty? What shall be done, when the
criminal becomes the judge, and the malefactors are left to try one another
STATE TRACTS* time of king William II.6^^
?

The commons, A. D. 1673, vote in a grand committee that no more supplies ought
to be granted during a certain period, unless they see necessity, on account of
the Dutch war, and till the kingdom be secured against popery, and grievances
redressed Rapin, II.672.
.

The commons, A. D. 1678, vote supplies, but with strict limitations DEB. COM.
I.276.
.

The commons, A. D. 1678, give a direct denial to the king's request in his
speech for an additional revenue of 300,000 l. a year Ibid. 286.
.

A supply was granted, A. D. 1679, but with an appropriation to certain
purposes only, and penalty in case of misapplication DEB. COM. I.344.
.

The commons complained of unaccounted millions, A. D. 1701 Tind. CONTIN. I.479.
. Now the people complain, not the commons. Why, indeed, should the commons
complain? The court and they divide the spoil between them.

It is remarkable, how directly in the teeth of the court, the commons often
proceeded in former incorrupt, or less corrupt, times. In former times the
court and commons were generally opposite; in ours the constituents and
representatives. There was much corruption in king William's time; but we
sometimes see the stream of parliamentary proceedings in those days run very
clear. King William had given away immense grants of forfeited estates in
Ireland. The commons resolved, A. D. 1699, that a bill be brought in for
reversing every one of those grants, and applying all the forfeited estates and
interests in Ireland, to the use of the public, and that a judicatory be
erected for determining claims, and that they [the commons] will receive no
petitions concerning grants. The courtiers in the house moved, That some part
of the forfeited estates might be left in the king's disposal. It passed in the
negative; and they made a resolution condemning the advising and procuring
those grants to be passed DEB. COM. III.123.
. The commons addressed the king on these resolutions. The king answered, that
his intention in giving those grants was to reward those, who had behaved well,
particularly in the reduction of Ireland, which he thought himself in justice
obliged to do. The uncourtly commons thought he was more justly bound to pay
the just debts contracted in the late war; and they thought the forfeited
estates a very proper fund for the purpose. How did the Romans, in their best
times, reward their heroes? With a wisp of hay round their heads, or a ride
through the town, and up to the capitol. The commons, provoked at this answer,
resolved, That whoever advised it, intended to create a misunderstanding
between the king and people Ibid. 124.
.

All the proceedings were ordered to be printed, and it was resolved, That the
procuring, or passing exorbitant grants by any member of the privy council, to
his own private use, is a high crime and misdemeanor Ibid. 126.
. Those brave men were jealous even of our great deliverer, and would not bear
mis-government even by him. The lords (generally on the wrong side) oppose
these brave and wise measures. Conferences followed, and warm disputes between
the houses. At last the good king desires the lords to yield the point. Lord
Summers was found to be at the bottom of all this opposition. The commons put
the question, that the king be desired to remove him. This was not carried; but
a resolution was made, that no foreigner (except the prince of Denmark) be
admitted to his majesty's counsels in England, or Ireland. The king, to avoid
this address, prorogues, and afterward dissolves the parliament.

The commons, A. D. 1700, went upon a scheme for applying the value of
forfeited estates, granted away since 1688, to the payment of the public debts.
The value of them was thought to be almost two millions. The commons resolve,
That these grants were against the king's honor and the public good. This
resolution was presented to the king in form of an address; to which the king
gives an answer, justifying the grants, as given to deserving persons. The
commons, enraged, make a resolution against the king's advisers. They proceeded
to a bill of resumption. Thirteen trustees are appointed to hear claims, etc.
None to be trusted, who had any dependence on the king. An address proposed to
the king that he would remove lord Summers from his councils and presence,
because he had opposed the bill of resumption. The king, provoked, wants to
overset the bill. But many of the king's friends were for passing it to prevent
mischief, the commons being set upon it. The commons in those days were too
mighty for the court. It is true, that, according to Tindal CONTIN. I.399, 400.
, it was found afterward, that the bill was not well contrived, and was
therefore spontaneously dropped by the commons. But the bold opposition of the
commons to the court, so different from what we see in our times, is what I
mean to point out.

Incorrup^ parliaments, instead of being slaves to ministers, have kept
ministers in constant fear of being called to an account by them. In former
times, parliaments were every moment upon the wing, and kept this noble band
[the privy council] in awe, by taking them into their cognizance, placing, or
misplacing some, or all of them, directing, or binding them by oath, as they
saw occasion; of which the records are full N. Bacon's DISC. GOV. ENGL. P. 11.
p. 18.
.

It is observed by Mr. Kirton PARL. HIST. VIII.191.
, in his speech in the time of Chapter I. that former parliaments had boldly
pointed out evil counselors about the kings, as 30 Edw. III. John of Gaunt,
the king's son, lord Latimer, and lord Neville, who were sent to the Tower. 7
Hen. IV. and 11 Hen. IV. parliament complained of the king's council, and
obtained their removal, for besetting the king and dissuading him from the
public good. 4 Hen. III. 27 Edw. III. and 13 Rich* II. parliament moderated the
king's prerogative.

Lord Middlesex was accused, in the time of Iam. I. and convicted of gross and
sordid griping, and of procuring good regulations to be altered, as those
concerning the court of wards, etc. of extortion in creating new places, and
enhancing the perquisites of the old, etc. All the commons to a man joined in
the impeachment. Not one to stand by a public robber Ibid. VI.132, et seq.
. Hereby was fulfilled the prediction of lord Bacon, A. D. 1624, who, meeting
Middlesex soon after his advancement to the head of the treasury, congratulated
him, and wished him, and all great state-officers, always to remember, that ^
parliament will come Ibid. VI.309.
. [In our times, you may as well tell ministers of the day of judgment, as of
parliament.] To the same purpose was the saying of lord Coke, That no subject,
however potent, or subtle, ever jostled with the law, but it broke his neck.
But, in our times, it may be said, as Remus remarked to his brother Romulus,
Laws serve only as cobwebs, to catch the small flies: the great ones break
through them.

The worthy and sagacious Davenant II.308.
, in the end of last century, wrote concerning parliamentary corruption, as if
his pen had been guided by a prophetic inspiration. Our wealth and greatness,
says he, depend absolutely upon keeping the legislative power to future ages
untainted, vigilant for the public safety, jealous of the people's rights,
watchful over ministers, unawed by armies, unseduced by preferments, bribes, or
pensions. That we are safe at present; that this important post is well
secured, is granted, [some honest hearts, on reading this, and comparing the
state of things in latter times, will, perhaps, bleed for their degenerate
country] but writing for posterity, to which these papers may, peradventure, be
transmitted, I think it needful to give these cautions.

Let the injured resort to the courts of law, and if there they fail of
justice, in parliament they may be confident to receive it. Smith's speech on
the state of the nation, 1641 PARL. HIST. X.16. seq.
.

Sir Robert Naunton ascribes the happiness in Elizabeth's days, to the wisdom
and patriotism of the members of the house of commons. There was nothing then
to give them. Therefore they had nothing to draw them from the good of their
country Rap. II.155.
.

Members of parliament (says the learned judge Blackstone COMMENT. I.9.
) are not thus honorably distinguished from the rest of their fellow subjects,
merely that they may privilege their persons, their estates, or their
domestics; that they may list under party banners; may grant or withold
supplies; may vote with or against a popular or unpopular administration; but
upon considerations far more interesting and important. They are the guardians
of the English constitution, delegated to watch, to check, and to avert, every
dangerous innovation; to propose, to adopt and to cherish any solid and well
weighed improvement. Bound by every tie of nature, of honor, and of religion,
to transmit that constitution, and those laws to their posterity, amended if
possible, but at least without derogation.

Camden observes, that no tax disgusts the English which has the sanction of
parliament. This is true in general. In former times, parliaments had the
confidence of the people. Have parliaments the confidence of the people in our
times? The nation naturally loves parliamentary cures: but is jealous of all
others Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, II.113.
. If, therefore, at any time, the nation is jealous of parliament, it is to be
supposed there is reason; because the prejudice of the people is in favor of
parliament.

Colonel Lundy (though excepted out of the indemnity by the commons, A. D.
1689) desires to be examined by the commons DEB. COM. II.355.
. The commons had then the confidence of the people; as juries, or arbitrators,
have now. We have seen the times, when an honest and consequently obnoxious,
man, who would have feared nothing, if to be tried by a jury, give his cause
for lost, if ordered to appear before parliament. G. Grenville, a few years
ago, told the house of commons, their manner of deciding contested elections
was so gross, that not one of them would choose to have any part of his property
at the mercy of the house, if a jury of porters or carmen could be had.

While the commons were raising money, [ A.D. 1695] they wisely enquired into
the disposal of former taxes, and discovered so much corruption, that they
thought it was high time to punish, and prevent farther DEB. COM. II.446.
.

King William celebrates this parliament for forming the national
revolution-association; for remedying the debasement of the coin; for restoring
credit; for giving supplies for the war; for paying off debts; and for settling
the civil list Ibid. III.90.
. A great deal of business done in one parliament. We too have seen a great
deal dispatched in one parliament, but business of another sort. We have seen
in one parliament the power of election of members taken from the people, and
usurped by the commons; the colonies irritated by taxing them without
representation; the mother country so dissatisfied, that 60,000 petitioned to
have parliament dissolved; 600,000 l. of the people's money given, sorely
against their will, to pay debts, which none, but the ministry, knew to be
real, or if real, how contracted; the East India company deprived of her rights
and privileges, without pretense of transgression against government; religious
liberty refused to two different sets of petitioners humbly requesting what all
mankind have an unalienable right to enjoy, etc. of all which more fully
elsewhere.

From these few pages may be formed such an idea of what parliaments ought to
be, of what they have been, and of what, it is to be feared, we shall not
quickly see them restored to, as may incline us to adopt the ancient prophet's
complaint;

How is the gold become dim! How is the most fine gold changed! The precious
sons of Zion, comparable to vessels of fine gold, how are they esteemed as
earthen pitchers, the work of the hand of the potter LAMENT. IV.1.
!

The true value is only to be restored to our debased parliaments by putting
them into the refining furnace, and purging them of the gross alloy of places
and pensions, which have so long debauched and disgraced them.

CHAP. II. Placemen and Pensioners unfit for Members of Parliament, because not
likely to be uninfluenced.
ONE of the oldest, if not absolutely the oldest, writer in the world,
threatens a fire to consume the tabernacles of bribery JOB XV.34.
. A parliament filled with placemen and pensioners is literally a tabernacle of
bribery. For it is impossible to give an honest reason for any number of
placemen's or pensioners having suffrage in parliament. The house of commons
ought to be the people in one room. And why must the people be bribed to
consult their own interest? If indeed the court has schemes to carry, directly
opposite to the people's interest, it may be convenient for the court, that
many placemen crowd the house of commons.

It is not easy to imagine, even stretching charity till it cracks, that any
one ever seriously thought the admission of place-men, pensioners, and
officers, into the house of commons, safe, or decent; that any man of common
sense can think of it otherwise, than as an open and impudent defiance of the
sense of the whole independent people of England.

Our court advocates, however, sometimes divert themselves (on a too fatally
serious subject) by treating the independent people like children, when they
tell us, it is good policy to drop some douceurs among the members of both
houses, to attach them more closely to their country's good. As if it were
necessary to bribe mankind to consult their own interest. Take away your
douceurs, and every member's interest will be the same with the public. Suppose
I give out, that I will not eat, or drink, unless the court bribes me. Would
the court think it necessary to settle an annual pension on me, to make me eat
a dinner every day? or would it be thought proper to give me a place -- any
where, but in Bedlam? The court knows full well, that the direct contrary of
their scandalous pretense is the truth; and that the members of the legislature
would naturally consult but too well for their iniquitous purposes, their own
interest, in consulting that of their country, did not they bias them by
throwing another interest and advantage in their way; which for that reason
they accordingly do, at an immense expense to the nation.

He knew human nature well, who said, The love of money is the root of all
evil. He, who can resist the love of money, may be said to be tried as gold in
the fire.

Quisquis ingentes oculo irretorto
Spectat acervos.
HOR. But as we know, the number of men capable of standing this fiery trial,
is very small, we ought to be the more cautious of laying temptations in the
way of those, whose failure is to be apprehended, and whose failure may be of
such ruinous consequence to the public. To trust our all, without account, to a
set of frail men, and then put those men in such circumstances as are likely to
lead them to betray us -- what can be imagined more contrary to wisdom? Several
millions a year laid out in supporting the power of the court! And this not
sufficient; of such a growing nature is corruption! Nothing of this boundless
unaccountable waste could have place in a republic. I do not mention this as
any reflection on our kings. It is but a small part of this immense sum, that
is consumed by them in their propria persona, or that is laid out on their
families. But in a republic, judge Blackstone COMM. I.333.
would not have written as follows; It is impossible to support that dignity,
which a king of Great Britain should maintain, with an income in any degree
less, than what is now established by parliament. According to the learned
judge, whatever is, is right. But, surely, with all due submission, the dignity
of a British monarch does not consist in his spending large sums of his poor
people's money; but rather in his sparing their purses, and setting them an
example of frugality. With the learned judge's good leave, it is the dignity
(if dignity it may be called) of the ministry, and their crew, much more than
the king's, that devours the civil list. So that the plain English of what the
learned judge has written, will be what follows; It is impossible to support
that influence which a British ministry should maintain, with an income in any
degree less than several millions per annum: Than which I cannot conceive a
more ruinous political doctrine.

When Sir W. Temple dissuaded Chapter II. from all thoughts of making himself
absolute, he observed to him, among other things, that it would be
impracticable: for that England was quite a different sort of country from
France, where absolute government was established. That in the land of slavery
there was no such independent body as our middling gentry; and that, on the
contrary, that country was full of priests, of needy noblesse, military
officers, and revenue-men, all naturally devoted to the support of arbitrary
power, as being all interested in it themselves; that Charles had but few
places and pensions to give, and no army of considerable force Hume, HIST.
STUARTS, II.240.
. [We have now innumerable places and pensions to allure, and a formidable army
to threaten our members into court-measures.] Accordingly the pension
parliament was very compliant to the court at first; but grew more patriotic
afterward, most probably disappointed in their voracious expectations.

Chapter I. A. D. 1628, gave out, that it belongs only to the judges to declare the
meaning of the laws Rapin, II.276.
. But Rapin justly remarks, That this was making those men the interpreters of
the laws, who depended on him; for the king could then make or unmake the
judges, as he pleased; which was throwing the liberties, properties, and lives
of the subjects into the hands of the king or ministry. Is not the reasoning
the same with regard to membe^^^ (...) parliament? If they hold places, and
expect preferments from the ministry, are they not the dependents on the
ministry as much as Charles's judges were on him? And is it not as much to be
expected, that they should be slaves to the ministry?

Whitelocke, in opposing the self-denying ordinance, observes, That the Greeks
and Romans gave the greatest employments to their senators. But there is always
a great difference between a monarchy and a republic. The latter has checks for
overgrown power, which the former knows nothing of. And it is the peculiar evil
of monarchy, that ministers screen themselves behind the throne; and, as kings
are sacred characters, as our kings can do no evil, and parliaments are bribed,
ministerial crimes go unpunished. Again; Whitelocke says, the English have
always given great places to the members of both houses. But in those times,
the number of places was so small, they could seldom produce any great effect.
Accordingly we see how staunch parliaments were in Chapter Ist's time.

The proposals for more effectually putting the self-denying ordinance in force
A. D. 1648, were at that time overruled, because many of the members held very
profitable places. Yet it is certain there were not in those days places for a
majority of the house, and all depends on the majority PARL. HIST. XVII.386.
. How then came the minority to gain such a point?

This shows, that the effect of places and pensions given to parliament men
extends much wider than the places and pensions themselves reach to. There are
always in parliament a multitude of gapers, who hope to catch a sop by and by,
and are therefore ready to ^urry court-favour by showing themselves to be on
the (...) side. It is to be supposed, that was then the case.

The author of Faction detected by Facts, says, a pension-bill is impossible,
because members may take the money, and conceal their crime. But why may not
things be put on such a foot, that a minister should not know how to find money
enough to bribe 300 men of fortune every time he has an unconstitutional point
to carry? Besides, were a double penalty set upon both giver and receiver, the
frequency of detection, in consequence of party-alter^ati^n, would render
bribin^ very dangerous. And were parliaments annual, with exclusion of a
certain number by rotation for three years, as the law requires in the case of
sheriffs, it could be worth no minister's while to bribe.

Our house of commons pretends to have an absolute control over elections, to
determine who shall sit in their house, and who shall not. Why then have they
never determined, that no member shall sit, who ha^ given victua^s, or drink,
or money, to be elected? Why do they not determine that no man shall sit in
their house, who has a dependence of any kind upon the court? The answer is
plain. This would only be for the advantage of the people, and would ruin the
trade of parliamenteering; (...) courtiers and king's servants (says Whitlocke)
sit in parliament rather to promote their master's ends [and their own] than
their country's rights PARL. HIST. XIX.231.
.

On this grievous subject, cruel is the sneer of the courtiers upon us, when we
complain of placemen in the house, viz. That the people themselves are in
fault; Why do they re-elect them? -- Ah, ye traitors, who 'grin horrible a
ghastly smile,' while ye are stabbing liberty to the heart! full well do ye
know (at the very time ye are mocking us with this unjust and wicked
recrimination of a fault, which owns yourselves only for its authors) that the
wretched people re-elect upon the same principle as they elect. A handful of
beggars either tempted by a bribe, or awed by the threats of a man in power,
elect and re-elect as they are bid. And so the house comes to be filled with
the tools of a minister. Nothing can therefore be imagined more farcical, than
our pretending to make a law rendering it necessary to re-elect every member,
who has accepted a place. The only law, that could, to any purpose, have been
made, was utter disqualification.

One would imagine, there could not be much room for accusing the republican
parliament of places and pensions. Yet it appears, that reflections were even
then made upon that account, which shows the delicacy of those times. What does
the enemy say, nay what do many say, who were friends at the beginning of the
parliament? even this. That the members of both houses have got great places
and commands, and the sword into their hands, and what by interest in
parliament, what by power in the army, will purposely continue themselves in
grandeur, and not permit the war speedily to end, lest their own profit and
power should determine with it. This I speak to our own faces. It is but what
others do utter abroad behind our backs. I hope we have such true English
hearts and zealous affections toward the general weal of our mother country,
that no member of either house will scruple to deny himself and his private
interest for the public good, nor account a dishonor done to him, whatever the
parliament shall resolve upon in this weighty matter. Cromwell's speech, (the
only sensible one he ever made) which led to the self-denying ordinance PARL.
HIST. XIII.376.
.

It was reckoned, there were 232 members of the first parliament of Geo. I. who
had places, pensions, or titles, besides a great many brothers, and heirs
apparent, of the nobility, or persons otherwise likely to be under undue
influence; the number of which was not below 50, which added to the 232 makes
282 DE^. COM. VIII.210.
. A frightful majority on the side of the court. And there is no reason to
suppose the Augean stable is generally cleaner now than it was then.

Had our new barrier been well fortified, [that is, the independency of
parliament secured at the revolution] had the representative of the people been
contrived to answer to the name, all our kings had been queen Elizabeth's. But
our elections in inconsiderable boroughs, and our members being qualified to
serve two masters, were such mistakes in our fundamentals, that, as they have
produced our past misfortunes, they must produce the like under bad princes, or
evil projecting ministers. With a house of commons chosen truly by the people
incapable of pensions and places, the king and kingdom had been incapable of
misfortune: they had been out of the reach of all human power, and with due
submission, above fate; since such a government would have made us the proper
objects of divine protection, and not only have secured our greatness and
glory, but our religion and morals too, which I fear are all going together
STATE TRACTS, time of king William, II.645.
. A parliament is not necessarily a security more than a court, (as the French
king's court) against slavery James II. A. D. 1689, assembled a parliament in
Ireland. But what sort of parliament? Let Tindal CONTINUATION, I.85.
answer. Slaves to the king, packed by him, bigoted to popery, and furious
against the protestants, king William, and the revolution. Suppose a parliament
thoroughly attached to the court by bribery, the effect would be the same as if
attached by a false principle.

We have seen and heard, says lord Bolingbroke, in a nation hitherto free, such
maxims avowed and pleaded for, as are inconsistent with all the notions of
liberty. Corruption has been defended, nay recommended as a proper, a
necessary, and therefore a reasonable expedient of government; than which there
is not perhaps, any one proposition more repugnant to the common sense of
mankind and to universal experience. Both of these demonstrate corruption to be
the last deadly symptom of agonizing liberty. Both of them declare that a
people abandoned to it are abandoned to a reprobate sense, and are lost to all
hopes of political salvation. The dependence of the legislature on the
executive power has been contended for by the same persons, under the same
direction, and yet nothing surely can be more evident than this; that in a
constitution like ours, the safety of the whole depends upon the balance of
the parts, and the balance of the parts on their mutual independency on one
another; agreeably to which, Thuanus makes Ferdinand say in answer to the
Castilians, who pressed him to take away the independency of the states of
Arragon; That the public safety depends on the equal balance of the power of
the king, and of the power of the kingdom, and that if ever it should happen
that one outweigh'd the other, the ruin of one, or of both, must undoubtedly
follow Bolingbr. REM. HIST. ENGL. 29.
.

It is pleasant to observe a set of writers charging others with forming
republican schemes, when they themselves are the persons who in effect, and by
the necessary consequence of their way of reasoning, have been placing our
excellent constitution in a most ridiculous and contemptible light. According
to them it is no better than a jumble of incompatible powers, which would
separate and fall to pieces of themselves, unless restrained and upheld by such
honorable methods as those of bribery and corruption; for how is it possible
for any man under any other notion, to plead for the necessity or for the
fitness of places and pensi^ns, or any pecuniary influence among the members of
the house of commons? If any dependence or biass created by such motives were
really necessary, it would prove that the form of our government itself was
defective to a degree of ridiculousness; that it was a constitution having a
representative of the people which must be engaged not to represent them, nor
to vote and act if uninfluenced by private interest or corrupt motives. Now if
such an influence or dependence was universal and unlimited throughout the
whole house, the monarchy would be absolute; and whenever this influence
prevails in any degree, it tends to arbitrary power. For this reason the true
friends of liberty must perpetually guard against such influences, which is not
setting up a new form of government, but preserving the old Bolingbr. POLIT.
TRACTS, 251.
.

That placemen in parliament, are in our times a serious evil, appears from
this, that the minister, before he introduces a bill, can foretell, almost with
certainty, its fate in the house; and by means of the influence which he has
over the members, can command, in most cases, a majority of votes. Nor will
this influence appear in the least surprising, if we consider the great number
of lucrative places which the sovereign, that is, the minister, has to dispose
of. For though the property of the subjects be much larger than that of the
sovereign, yet is the property of this last by no means inconsiderable; and it
is well known, that much less property, in a single hand, will counterballance
a greater in several hands. According to the most exact computation, there are
near three millions at the disposal of the crown. The civil list amounts to
near a million, the collection of all taxes to another, and the employments in
the army and navy, along with ecclesiastical preferments, to above a third
million: an enormous sum, and what cannot fail to attach to the court an
immense number of dependants; and as few placemen are excluded from seats in
parliament, the sovereign [say rather the minister] must have a mighty
influence upon all the deliberations of that a^gust assembly. It ought also to
be observed, that the great increase of our dominions, and the consequent
necessity for the proportionable increase in our military establishment, [there
is no need of a military establishment, a militia is every way preferable] are
both of them pernicious to liberty; for seldom or never has it been known, that
any nation has preserved its liberty, after having greatly extended its
conquests, and still less after having established a large standing army. And
though the increase of commerce, which is likewise the consequence of extensive
dominions, be favorable in some measure to the cause of liberty, by
introducing among the people a greater degree of equality, and by drawing them
into large towns, which always breathe a republican spirit; yet does it also by
this very circumstance of drawing them into large towns, tend evidently to
corrupt their minds, and to enervate their bodies, and thus to prepare them for
the reception of that slavery, which a variety of other causes is likely to
bring upon them. With regard to the people's jealousy of the crown, which is
said to be inherent in the British constitution; this jealousy, however great,
may yet by an artful minister be laid asleep. The power of the crown is
certainly upon the increase, but it advances, at the same time, with such slow
and imperceptible steps, as not to awaken the jealousy of the public; and
before this jealousy be effectually awakened, the power of the crown may have
become so great, as to be altogether irresistible. Every new tax that is
imposed upon the people, every foot of ground that is added to our dominions,
every increase that is made in our military establishment, all conspire by
their united influence to increase the power of the crown; and if things be
suffered to proceed in their present course, and no extraordinary convulsion
happens in the state, the British liberties must at l^st be swallowed up in
absolute monarchy. Might I presume, amidst these opposite arguments, to deliver
my own sentiments, I would affirm^ that the British government tends
immediately neither to a republic, nor an absolute monarchy, but to an
aristocracy; though this last will in all probability only pave the way for the
introduction of monarchy. The very essence of our liberty consists in the
people's having the right and the power to choose their representatives in
parliament; that is in other words, in being their own legislators. But should
we ever come to have a great number of hereditary legislators, or those who are
such independent of the people's choice, and should these hereditary
legislators be possessed of the whole, or of the greatest part of the national
property, and should they, by means of that property, be able to influence the
elections, and to control the proceedings of the members of the lower house,
though we may be still amused with the pleasing sound of liberty, and though
the lower house may be permitted to subsist in its present form, the national
liberties are from that moment ruined. For it is well known, that the forms of
a constitution may long remain, after its spirit has been entirely
extinguished. How far this is our case at present, or how far it is likely to
be our case, in some not very distant period, any one may easily determine, by
considering the great number of wealthy commoners, who within this half century
past have been advanced to the peerage, and the spirit which still prevails of
advancing others to the same dignity. The moment a commoner becomes troublesome
in the lower house, if he is possessed of a competent fortune, he is
immediately transplanted to the upper, where he at once strengthens the
aristocratic, and proportionably weakens the democratic part of our government.
And how great an influence the members of the upper, have upon the elections,
and consequently upon the proceedings of those of the lower house, may be
easily collected from perusing a court calendar, where we shall see, that
almost all the noblemens sons in England, who are of a proper age, are members
of the lower house, and that many commoners have obtained their seats there, by
the interest and countenance of some powerful nobleman. In a word, we seem to
be in a fair way of becoming in a short time, a nation of great lords, and of
needy vassals; the consequence of which must infallibly be, that the people,
harrassed by the oppressions of the great, conscious that their liberties are
already ravished from them, and choosing rather to submit to one mild master,
than to two or three hundred petty tyrants, will petition the sovereign, as the
last favor he can grant them, that he will be graciously pleased to establish
an absolute monarchy. This was very lately the case in Denmark, and if nothing
extraordinary happens, it will in all probability be very soon the case in
Great Britain. How to prevent the impending calamity, or if it cannot be
prevented, how it may at least be for some time warded off, I will not take
upon me to say. A peerage bill was some years ago attempted, or an act to
confine within certain limits the number of peers. Perhaps such a scheme may
again be revived, but there seems very little likelihood in the present
disposition of parties, that it would meet with success POLIT. REGIST. quoted
LAND. MAG. 1767, p. 406.
.

No one ever knew human nature better than He, who said, No man can serve two
masters. It is a romantic expectation, and unsuitable to what we know of the
frailty of our species, to think of a placeman's or pensioner's being
altogether unbiassed in favor of the ministry, to which he owes his emolument,
and consequently of those gentlemen's consulting in their speeches and votes
the good of their country, with the same impartiality as they might be expected
to do, if wholly independent. The wife of Caesar ought to be not only innocent,
but unsuspected. Why must the wife of Caesar be more unsuspected, than a
British legislator? Could the British legislators think of passing unsuspected,
if there were in the house of commons more than two hundred notorious
dependents on the count? as we go on, this shocking sight may soon be seen.

The courtiers argue, that excluding placemen and pensioners from parliament,
would seem to establish an opposition between the crown and people; as if
those, who were employed by the one, could not be entrusted by the other. But
indeed there seems to be no occasion for mincing the matter. Let us fairly own,
that we do not think the same persons, who have the laying out, ought likewise
to have the laying on of taxes. Since it is easy to imagine, that a member, who
has a place, will be under little concern how heavily the people are taxed, as
his income indemnifies him, and the heavier the taxes, the more money there
will be for the court blood-suckers.

Chapter I. fairly declares his expectation of indirect service from his convention
parliament at Oxford, A. D. 1643. I think most of you, says he, are in my
s^rvice, either in a civil or a martial way PARL. HIST. XIII.119.
. To what purpose does he mention this, but to put them in mind, that they
ought to express their gratitude, by promoting his wicked schemes at any rate?

Whitlocke tells us MEM. 13.
, that Charles, being disappointed in his schemes, took another course to gain
eminent parliament men, who were against him, to become of his party, and to do
him service. He took Sir Tho. Wentworth and Sir Io. Saville into favor, and
made them privy-counsellors. Sir Dudley Digges was made master of the rolls;
Noy, king's attorney, and Littleton solicitor. His dependent judges declared
ship money lawful. On which occasion the pious and virtuous lady of judge Croke
(whose fame be immortal!) said to her husband, she hoped he would do nothing
against his honor, for fear of danger or loss, and that she would be content
to suffer want or misery with him, rather than be an occasion for him to do, or
say, any thing against his judgment or conscience Ibid. 24.
.

Lord Digby, in his speech, A. D. 1640, for frequent elections, mentions Noy as
once a great patriot, and promoter of the petition of right. Afterward, when
made attorney general, he proved the very inventor of ship money. He likewise
calls Wentworth a shameful apostate PARL. HIST. IX.197.
.

St. John, one of the patriots in the time of Chapter I. was made solicitor
general, and others were to be taken into places; but refused them, and stood
by the parliament. It was afterward suspected, that some, if they had accepted
places, would have done the king's cause more harm than good, by betraying the
court-schemes to the people Hume, HIST. STUARTS, I.260.
. Besides, the king had not then places enough to bribe a majority of the
commons. This, however, shows what the court then thought, as well as now, the
true means for making members knaves. And it was to take off the imputations,
under which the republican parliament fell, on account of placemen being in the
house, that the self-denying ordinance was first broached Rapin, II.515.
.

Scripture directs to shun the appearance of evil. And whoever does not fear
the appearance, is not far from the reality. On this principle the brave
commons of the republican parliament write as follows to the Scotch
commissioners.

We know your lordships can and will witness with us, that since our covenant
and treaty, we have not received any dignities or offices from the king PARL.
HIST. XV.172.
.

When members of parliament are placemen, that is, when the same men have both
legislative and executive power, how are we to expect that offenders in
administration should be punished, the criminals being the judges? Can we think
any set of men will be public spirited enough to hang themselves for their
offenses against their country Gord. TRACTS, I.61.
?

Wolsey's ambition (says Elsynge) first brought the privy counselors, and
others of the king's servants, into the house of commons; from whence they were
anciently exempted. The effects are, the commons have lost their chief jewel,
freedom of speech Elsynge's ANT. METH. HOLD. PARL. 17^*
.

It is a maxim in Richelieu's Testam. Polit. That a king, that is, a minister,
should never part with a tax he has once got established, even though he has no
use (...) the money; because by giving up the tax, he loses the officers
employed in collecting it. And these officers in parliament are sure car^s.

Hen. IV. of France gave the marshal d' Ornano a staff to turn papist, and
afterward asked him which of the two religions he thought the best. The
protestant, undoubtedly, repli^s the marshal; else your majesty would not have
given me a marshal's staff to boot, to engage me to quit it. I have forgot to
set down the original writer of this anecdote. It is told in Cato's letters,
etc.

A British minister gives places and pensions to those who vote for him.
Suppose one of those members were asked, Whether the service of his country, or
voting always with the court, is best; if he were as honest a knave as the
marshal, what could he answer, but, That certainly voting for the country's
good was preferable to slavery under a minister; else the minister had no
occasion to give him a place or pension to boot, to engage him to quit his
country's service for the minister's. And is not this giving up the point?

The Emperor, and bloody Mary gave public pensions to the members of
parliament. -- With what view? To engage them to vote for the good of their
country? No. To establish popery; To vote the queen's marriage with a papist,
Philip II. of Spain; which that venal parliament did accordingly; thereby
manifestly showing how soundly Philip and Mary judged of the effect of bribing
parliament Rapin, II.38.
. What difference does it make to me, as a subject, whether I am voted into
slavery for gold sent from the continent to bribe parliament, or for gold drawn
out of the exchequer of England? Of the two, modern bribery is the most
disgraceful. It is making us pay for the road, which is to beat us, and the
chain, that is to bind us.

Sir Chapter Wager, first lord of the admiralty, Fox, surveyor general of the
works, and Pelham (I do not recollect what place he held at that time) we^^ the
speakers against lord Limerick's motion, A. D. 1741, for an enquiry into the
conduct of affairs during Walpole's 20 years administration, which was carried
in the negative 244 against 242 DEB. COM. XIII.147.
. And it is, in general, the same in all debates of the kind. The placemen
always speak and vote in one tone; so that before you begin their speeches, you
are certain, by only reading the name of the speaker, and knowing, that he held
a place, what the strain of his speech will be.

An unpensioned subject will always give the most faithful counsel to his
prince. And it is the true interest of the prince to have about him those, who
will not flatter him, or be the slaves of his passions for the sake of his
money Bolingbr. POLIT. TRACTS, 283.
.

When Mr. Pulteney resigned his place, A. D. 1720, he said in the house, He
might now act with the freedom which became an Englishman; which implied, that
a place was incompatible with freedom DEB. COM. VI.120.
. The same gentleman was struck out of the list of privy counselors by Geo.
II. with his own hand, for his uncourtly behavior. The duke of Argyle, the
earl of Stair, Mr. Pit, Mr. Leg, and many more, have been disgraced and
displaced on the same account; which shows what courts expect of placemen. And
are placemen then fit to be members of parliament?

An omrah of Shaw Iekan's army having presumed to fit in his presence, the
prince deprived him of his command. The disgraced officer went to the palace
next day, and sat down in the presence chamber. Upon the Shah's reproving him,
he answered boldly, (...) I am not in your majesty's pay, I may use the
freedom, which belongs to every independent man. The emperor approved, and
restored him MOD. UNIV. HIST. VI.383.
.

Treby moved, A. D. 1721, for the mutiny bill, which is not commonly brought in
till the end of a session. Iekyl was for going on with the more necessary
regulations for supporting credit. Craggs said, he wondered that a person who
had received signal favors from the crown should oppose a bill so necessary
for the safety of government. Lord Molesworth stood up, and said, Mr. Speaker,
Is it come to this, [I believe it is come to this] that every man who has a
place must do all the drudgery that is enjoined him DEB. COM. VI.227.
? On which principle, officers have been (as elsewhere observed) sent for from
Flanders to vote for the minister.

In the year 1766, the governor of New England (Bernard) in his speech to the
council and house of representatives, took occasion to blame their wise and
patriotic conduct in excluding from the king's council the principle
crown-officers. This proceeding (at all times proper, as the people cannot be
too much on their guard against court-tools, nor too apprehensive of the danger
of trusting power in their unhallowed hands) was peculiarly necessary at a time
when the colonists had so lately seen a rapacious minister disposed to encroach
in the most shameless manner on their liberty by loading them with taxes, to
the payment of which they had not given, nor could give their consent, as
having no representative in parliament, where those taxes were imposed.

Those brave Americans defended their conduct upon the principles of their
charter right to choose and refuse as they please, which they should certainly
not give up either to their governor, or to the secretaries of state. They
insisted, that their governor's pretending to make observations on their
elections, was a high breach of their privilege. That, while they observed the
directions of their charter, they were accountable only to God and their own
consciences, for the manner in which they gave their suffrages. And that their
charter itself would be of very little value to them, if it required that they
should in their elections be under the control of their governors. It is with
regret I find myself obliged to give only heads of this spirited piece, the
strain of which is worthy of the most elegant, as well as the freest age or
nation LAND. MAG. 1766, p. 332, 407.
.

A resolution, A. D. 1683, passed the assembly of Pennsylvania, That no person
appointed by the governor to receive his fines, forfeitures, or revenues
whatsoever, shall sit in judgment in any court of judicature, when a fine may
accrue to the governor MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLI.8.
.

No man could be a magistrate at Florence if he had a brother or near relation
in the magistracy Ibid. XXXVI.77.
.

Tous ceux qui possedent, etc. All military officers are excluded from sitting
in the assembly of the states general by a resolution, A. D. 1625 ETAT PRES. DE
LA REPUBL. DES PROVE. UNI^^, par Ianicon, I.78.
.

Tindal observes CONTIN, IX.538.
, It was a very unusual thing i^ England for gentlemen who held such posts [of
paymaster general and chancellor of the exchequer, held by Mr. Pit and Mr.
Legge] to oppose a secretary of state, who was supposed to know and to speak
his royal master's sentiments, in favor of continental connexions. Accordingly
Mr. Leg was quickly, in reward for his obstinacy against the court, turned
out. Yet our daring court-jesuits are ever sounding in our ears the usefulness
of what can alone overthrow the British empire; I mean, court-influence in
parliament. So little do they dread the tremendous curse of heaven pointed
directly at the heads of those who put light for darkness, and darkness for
light, who call good evil, and evil good.

The court-tools say, the influence of the court in parliament is necessary,
and that places, pensions, and sinecures are necessary. But what did honest old
Epaminondas say to the ambassadors of the king of Persia? If the king wants me
to do any thing for the good of my country, I am ready to do it without a
bribe. If he wants me to betray my country, his kingdom is below my price.
Corn. Nep. IN EPAM.
.

There might be some pretense for court-influence in parliament when there were
many jacobites. There might in the time of Charles I. when there were many on
the side of the tyrant. Yet the patriots of Charles's time established the
self-denying ordinance, on purpose to break through it. And they gained their
point more effectually than William's bribing ministry by the contrary conduct.
It is true, he used to say, If he had places and pensions enough to give, he
should soon reconcile whigs and tories Rap. II.802.
. But what did he mean by enough? A place for every jacobite of consequence in
the three kingdoms? This is romantic. But this corrupt policy will go a certain
length. And if ministers can but shuffle on a little and a little longer, they
do not much care by what means, because the money is flowing in all the while.
Sir Robert, (says a friend of the arch-corruptor, whispering him in the house)
what are you doing? This fiction will be detected tomorrow. No matter, says
the other; it will stop that fellow's [ Pulteney's] mouth today, and let
tomorrow take care of itself.

Judge Hales would not suffer a gentleman's cause to be heard, till he paid him
for a buck sent him by the gentleman, though the present was a customary one.
Compare this delicacy of sentiment, which would not suffer those great men so
much as to seem biased, with the execrable grossness of our times, in which we
see hundreds of court dependents sitting with grave and modest face in the
house of commons, where there ought not to be the shadow of an influence likely
to bias the members against the interest of their constituents.

Some of our court-writers own, that pensions and bribes cannot be too
vehemently decryed; but openly declare their opinion, that the crown ought to
have employments in its gift to engage support. I own I do not understand what
need there is of any support, but rectitude of measures; or how a lucrative
place can be considered otherwise than as a bribe, if it inclines a man to
support what he would not otherwise support.

Why do we refuse a right of voting at elections to those who receive alms?
Because we suppose, that such persons, being needy, will of course be
dependent, and under undue influence. Why do we suffer men to sit in the house
of commons who do receive alms, that is, pensions, and are upon the parish,
that is, the nation? Because -- we have schemes to carry, which are
inconsistent with the public good.

Your lordships (says the earl of Chesterfield in the debate on a bill for
making officers independent of the ministry, A. D. 1734 DEB. LORDS, IV.199.
.) are, I am sure, all convinced, that the happiness, the essence of our
constitution does not depend upon outward forms, but upon realities. Our
constitution does not depend upon our having always a parliament; but upon that
parliament's being independent of the administration; upon its being in the
power of parliament to examine severely, and judge impartially the conduct and
the measures of those employed in the administration, to represent the
grievances, and watch over the liberties and the properties of the people of
this nation, and to take away evil counselors from before the king. But if
ever a majority of both houses of parliament should come to be composed of
gentlemen whose daily bread, or at least their chief support, depended entirely
upon the favors of the crown, can it be imagined that it would then be in the
power of parliament to examine freely, or judge impartially, the conduct of
these favorites; to relieve the people from the oppressions brought upon them
by such favorites; or to tell their sovereign any ungrateful truths about
those whom he had thought fit to employ as his ministers? Would not an
arbitrary negative be then put upon all such questions in parliament? Would not
the best designs of the uncorrupted and independent few be baffled by a corrupt
and slavish majority? And shall any question which tends toward the preventing
such a misfortune, have now the ill fate to be rejected by your lordships?

It is well remembered how much, and how justly, all ranks in the nation were
pleased with the act made at the instance of the present king (whom God
preserve!) A. D. 1762, for preventing the removal of the judges at the demise
of every sovereign, which naturally tended to put them on courting the heir
apparent, to the violation of justice in their sentences. But why were we
pleased with this regulation? According to the opposers of all schemes for
restoring independency to parliament, there was no need of any such regulation.
According to them, there is no corruption, no dependency, no need of any
schemes for making either judges, or members of parliament independent.

It would be ridiculous (says the excellent Trenchard CATO'S LET. III.286.
) to throw away reason upon those banditti, who go into parliament with the
execrable intention of carrying to market a country, which trusted them with
its all. Such men are worse than cannibals, who only eat their enemies to
satisfy their hunger; but do not sell and betray their countrymen, who have
trusted them with the protection of their persons and property.

In the debate, A. D. 1742, about bringing in the place bill DEB. COM. XIV.33
-- 64.
, Sir W. Will. Win said, Gentlemen often change their sentiments with their
situation, and that a gentleman, after he becomes a placemen, begins to
entertain notions of the prerogative of the crown and the liberties of the
people, very different from those he had whilst he was a plain, honest, country
gentleman. If any thing like this should happen in the present debate, it may
tend to disappoint the motion; but with all those who are neither placemen no
pensioners, I am sure it ought to be an argument in its favor; and, I hope, it
will prevail with some gentlemen, who in former sessions opposed this motion,
to alter their sentiments and their way of voting upon this occasion, when they
have such a plain proof before their eyes, that, if a place does not induce a
man to vote against his honor and his conscience, it at least byasses his
judgment, and makes him conclude that to be wrong, which he before thought and
declared to be right.

Lord Strange's speech in answer to that of Edw. Walpole, A. D. 1742 DEB. COM.
XIV.41.
, is close to our present purpose. As we seem to improve every day in those
doctrines that are introductory of arbitrary power, the doctrine of corruption
has this day been pushed farther than ever, I believe, it was in this house. It
has been represented not only as a harmless, but a necessary implement of
government; and all the laws we have for excluding pensioners, and several
sorts of officers, from having seats in this house, may, by the same sort of
reasoning, be proved to be subversive of our constitution, and introductory of
anarchy, confusion, and arbitrary power. If a gentleman of a small estate, or
an estate, however large, that cannot supply the wants of his luxury or
avarice, cannot be supposed capable of being induced by any mercenary motive
the crown can throw in his way, to consent to grants or regulations, or to
approve of measures that tend toward the introduction of arbitrary power, or
that appear to be inconsistent with the public good; why should we exclude
pensioners, why should we exclude the commissioners and officers of our customs
and excise, from having seats in this house? If the power of granting pecuniary
and mercenary rewards to members be so necessary for the managing of this
house, and for answering the necessary ends of government, why should we, in
any respect, abridge that power, which if ever so extensive, can do us no harm,
and which, if too much abridged, may overset both our government and
constitution? Surely, no man of common sense would make the least approach
toward a precipice, if he could keep his distance without the least danger or
inconvenience; therefore, if we admit this doctrine, we must suppose those
parliaments void of common sense, in which the laws we now have for excluding
pensioners, and several sorts of officers, were agreed to. But experience in
all ages, and all countries, must convince us that this doctrine is false,
deceitful, and pernicious. In all countries where arbitrary power has been, or
is now set up, corruption was the footstool upon which it mounted into the
throne. By corruption men are induced to arm their magistrates, or supreme
magistrate, with such powers, as will enable them to destroy first the essence,
and afterward the very face of public liberty.

[His lordship then shows, that nations are enslaved not by a coup de main, but
by slow and imperceptible, but therefore more formidable degrees. That
designing men begin with flattering and bribing, in order to obtain of the
people the necessary advantages; that, by this means, they accordingly do
obtain first one degree of power, and then another; till at last they find
bribery needless, and that they can carry their designs by main force. He then
goes on as follows.]

Let us consider, Sir, in what liberty and property truly consists, and we
shall see, that where any one man has in his power a large fund for corruption,
both may be absolutely destroyed, and an arbitrary power established before
people become generally sensible of their danger. A man's personal liberty
consists in its not being in the power of any man, or magistrate, with
impunity, to imprison or kill him, or inflict any personal punishment upon him,
unless he has been formally tried, and justly condemned by that method of
trial, and by those laws, which have been established, and are approved of by
the majority of the society to which he belongs. Property again consists in a
man's being secure of enjoying, and transmitting to his posterity, what has
been left to him by his ancestors, or acquired by his own industry, unless the
whole, or some part of it, be taken from him, in pursuance of laws that have
been established, and are approved by the majority of the society to which he
belongs. Whilst this is the case, every man of the society enjoys liberty and
property in their full extent; and this will be our case as long as our
elections and parliaments remain free from any influence either compulsive or
corrupt. But, suppose, Sir, a majority of our house of commons consisted of
such as held lucrative places from the crown, and suppose a judge were to be
brought before them who for the sake of some corrupt consideration, had, at the
desire of the crown, illegally and unjustly condemned and imprisoned many of
his fellow subjects; would not the crown, I mean the ministers of the crown,
endeavor to protect such a judge? Would not they give hints to their officers
in this house, that a dismission would be the certain consequence of their
giving a vote against this tool? And can we suppose that many of these officers
would choose to lose a place of 500 l. or 1000 l. a year, rather than give a
vote in favor of this judge? Sir, I have a very great opinion of our present
judges, but, without any reflection upon them, I will say, that it is upon the
independency and integrity of our parliaments that we must depend for the
integrity and impartiality of our judges; for the crown has many ways to reward
a pliable judge, and as many to punish an obstinate one. Nay, if parliaments
were once become dependent upon the crown, an obstinate integrity would of
itself be sufficient for getting a judge removed by the address of both houses
of parliament; for if the majority of parliament were such as depended upon the
crown for getting or holding some lucrative employment, they would easily be
persuaded that such judge had done injustice to the crown, or had fomented
sedition by showing favor to the seditious, and under this pretense they would
vote for addressing to remove him, without considering that they thereby
established arbitrary power; and made not only their own estates, but their
lives and liberties dependent upon the arbitrary will of their sovereign; for
by this precedent, all our judge^ would be convinced, that they must take
direction^ from the ministers of the crown in all prosecutions* trials, and
causes that might afterward come before them; and what man could say he had
any liberty or property left, if the ministers of the crown had it in their
power to take his life, liberty, or estate from him, whenever they pleased, by
a false accusation, and a mock trial? Even after such a fatal turn in our
constitution, as long as a spirit of corruption prevailed among the people, and
the cour^ kept within the bounds of common decency, there would be no occasion
for any compulsive methods, either at elections, or in parliament, because the
ministers would always find people enough, that would be ready to take their
money or their favors, and in expectation or return would agree to vote (...)
directed; but if by the ridiculous conduct of the court, a spirit of liberty
should arise among the people, the violent and compulsive methods usual in such
cases would be made use of. Informers, or delatores, as the Romans called them,
would be found out and retained, and spread over the whole nation, in order to
bring false informations against those who dared to oppose the court either at
elections or in parliament; and in both, men would be found to vote according
to the directions of a minister, i^ order to preserve that property by a
slavish subjection, which they had before been endeavoring to increase by a
villainous corruption. After what I have said, Sir, I hope I need not
particularly mention all the other methods by which a corrupt dependent
parliament may sap the foundations of our constitution. Ensnaring laws may be
made, or the laws we have for securing our liberties may be repealed, or
suspended under various pretenses, without a corrupt man's being sensible that
he is thereby exposing his own estate to the precarious tenure of arbitrary
laws. On pretense of a sham-plot or a pretended disaffection, the Habeas Corpus
act, that corner stone of our liberties, may be suspended for a twelvemonth,
and under the same pretense that suspension may be renewed for another, and a
third twelvemon^h, till at last the annual suspension of that salutary law may
go as glibly down as the mutiny bill, or malt tax, now does; for when these two
bills were first introduced, no man supposed they would ever become bills of
course, to be passed without opposition in every succeeding sessions of
par^iament.

Lord Strange then goes on to show how, among other particulars, a designing
ministry might gradually increase the army to such a pitch as would easily
overthrow liberty.

Can we suppose, says his lordship, that any man would risque his losing a
lucrative employment by voting against a small augmentation of the army? This,
Sir, must convince every true lover of liberty, how necessary it is, that no
member of this assembly, or at least as few as possible, should be under such
temptation. I shall grant, that in most points, which come to be debated before
this house, some of our members may have a private interest in opposing, or
agreeing; but as long as this private interest does not proceed from the
favors they enjoy, or expect from the crown, it can never injure the public
good; because if some have a private interest in opposing, others will have a
private interest in agreeing to what is proposed; and those whose private
interest is no way concerned, will always cast the balance in favor of the
public good. The granting of money is the only case where we can suppose the
members generally engaged by their private interest, to oppose what is
necessary for the public service; but this interest is so small, with regard to
each particular member, that it can never be of any weight. This is
demonstrated, Sir, from the whole course of our history, for I defy any man to
give me one instance where the parliament denied granting what was necessary
for the public service, unless they were denied justice with regard to the
redress of grievances, or unless they had well grounded apprehensions that the
money would be misapplied. But let us see, Sir, how this argument will stand
upon the other side of the question. It is certain that the parliament ought
never to grant more than is absolutely necessary for the public service. It is
likewise certain, that we never ought to grant even what is necessary, till all
grievances be redressed, and our former grants regularly and strictly accounted
for. This is our duty as members of this house: but shall we perform this duty
if a majority of us be greatly concerned in interest to neglect it? And this
will always be the case if a majority of us hold or expect some lucrative
office or employment at the pleasure of the crown, because it will always be
the interest of ministers, and even their safety may sometimes be concerned in
our not performing this duty. Suppose they ask from parliament 500,000 l. or a
million for carrying on some whimsical, perhaps pernicious scheme of their own;
will a member of this house, who is to pay for his share not above 50 l. of
this sum, refuse granting it, when he is to get or hold 500 l. or 1000 l. a
year, by consenting to the grant? Will a member of this house insist upon first
redressing a grievance by which he suffers little, perhaps no sensible
prejudice, when he is to get or hold 2 or ^00 l. a year by letting it remain?
And finally, Sir, will a member of this house call ministers to a strict
account by which he can never expect to put a farthing in his own pocket, when
by neglecting to do so, he may get or hold a good post or employment, and
perhaps procure a round sum, which he himself has purloined from the public.
Sir, I was sorry to hear a young gentleman talk so much of men's private
passions and affections, and of every man's having a view to the service of
some favorite passion, in every vote he gives in parliament, or at elections.
I hope the case is far otherwise; but if it is not, we ought to endeavor to
make it so, by putting it out of the power (at least as far as we can, by such
laws as this) of any man to serve himself by his way of voting in parliament or
at elections, any further than may result to him from the general good of his
country If we can do this; if we can put it out of the po^er of the selfish and
mercenary to sell their votes in p^rliament, no man will purchase a seat there
at any high price, and this will of course put an end to bribery and corruption
at elections; for no mercenary soul will purchase what he cannot sell; and
those who are prompted by their ambition to purchase, will never go to any high
price, nor will they submit to be the slaves of a minister after they have
purchased. Even ministers themselves would cease their bribery at elections,
because they could not depend upon having their candidate's vote in parliament,
if he had no lucrative office depending upon his voting always with the
minister; and if the floodgates of the treasury were not opened at any
election, I am convinced we should soon have little or no bribery in the
kingdom. Whilst there are purchasers, Sir, there will be sellers; I am afraid
there are at present too many of both: but if you can make it worth no man's
while to purchase, you will put an end to the traffic; and this is the design
of the bill now proposed. I have shown, that if you do not agree to it, there
will be, there must be, a corrupt dependency in parliament; that by such a
dependency our constitution may be overturned, without any compulsive
dependency: and that the latter may be made use of by an arbitrary government,
and certainly will be made use of, as soon as it becomes necessary for the
support of its arbitrary power. Upon this side, Sir, the danger is certain and
inevitable. Let us then consider the danger pretended to be on the other. If we
exclude officers, or the greatest part of them, from having seats in this
house, it is said, it will introduce anarchy and confusion, because it will be
impossible to govern such a numerous assembly as this without a power in the
crown to reward those who appear zealous in its service; and that as soon as
this impossibility i^ perceived, all our officers, civil and military, will
join with the crown in laying aside the use of parliaments. What the honorable
gentleman may mean, Sir, by governing such a numerous assembly, I do not know;
but according to the common acceptance of the word, I should be sorry to see
it in the power of ministers to govern either house of parliament, by any other
method than that of convincing the majority that nothing is proposed or
intended but what is for the public good; for if either house were to be
governed by the hopes of reward, I am sure it could be of no service to the
people, and of very little even to the crown itself; because the design and use
of parliaments is, that they may be a check upon the conduct of ministers; and
no man, whose behavior in this house is governed by his hopes of reward, will
ever set himself up for a check upon the conduct of those who alone can bestow
the reward he expects. We must, therefore, suppose that ministers may prevail
with a majority of this house to approve or agree to what appears to be for the
public service, without having it in their power to give a title, post, or
pension to every one that approves of their measures; otherwise we must
conclude that no such house ought to exist, and, consequently, that the very
form of a limited government ought to be abolished in this selfish and corrupt
nation. What effect some late corrupt practices may have had upon the genius
and morals of the lower sort of people, I do not know, but I hope it has as yet
had little or none upon the generality of those that have any chance of being
members of this house; and unless they are become very much degenerated, we
must, from experience, conclude, that when our ministers pursue popular and
right measures, they may depend upon the assistance and approbation of
parliament. This, I say, we must from experience conclude: for in former ages
our ministers had few rewards to bestow, and yet they never failed of having
the parliament's approbation, when their measures were such as were agreeable
to the people. Nay, from the very nature of the case, we must draw the same
conclusion; for a house of commons freely chosen by the people must approve of
what the people approves of. If from selfish motives they should disapprove or
oppose such measures, the opposing members would be sure of being turned out at
the next election; and as the king has it in his power to bring on a new
election whenever he pleases, his ministers may easily get rid of such selfish
mean spirited members, and may consequently, if they desire it, always have a
parliament generally composed of gentlemen of true honor and public spirit;
but the contrary is what most ministers desire, as has of late been manifest
from the characters of those who were generally set up as candidates upon the
court interest. We can never, therefore, be in danger of anarchy or confusion
from its not being in the power of a minister to bribe a majority of this house
into his measures. When bribery and corrupt motives prevail within doors, they
will certainly prevail without, and then we may see a member burnt in effigy
one year, in the public streets of his borough, and rechosen the year following
as their representative in a new parliament. We may see the most notorious
fraudulent practices by the underlings in power, and these underlings
encouraged by the minister, and protected by a majority in parliament: we may
see the most unpopular and destructive measures pursued by our ministers, and
all approved, nay, applauded by parliament. These things we may see, Sir: these
things we have seen within these last twenty years; and this has brought
affairs both at home and abroad into the melancholy situation which is now
acknowledged by all, and will soon, I fear, be severely felt by the whole
nation.

So just are these observations of lord Strange on the powerful effect of
places and pensions on members of parliament, that the very next speech
confirms them. For in it we see Mr. Sandys (lately made chancellor of the
exchequer) opposing the very bill which he himself was concerned in bringing in
last sessions DEB. COM. XIV.44.
.

What makes all doctrines plain and clear?
About two hundred pounds a year.
And these, which were full plain before
Obscure again? Two hundred more.
HUDIB. Sandys was very severely handled by Mr. Cornwall. And Sir John Barnard
diverted the house with the following sneers upon his ductility.

From what has been said Ibid. 59.
, by some gentlemen in the debate, I foresee, that if our parliaments continue
in time to come, as complaisant to our ministers as they have been in time
past, the fate of the question under this administration will be the same with
that, which was the fate of the question about reducing our army under the
last. The worthy gentleman who was at the head of our former administration,
and is now so deservedly sent to the other house, had, whilst he was a country
gentleman, so strenuously opposed keeping up a numerous standing army in time
of peace, that after he became a minister, though excess of modesty could never
be reckoned among his foibles, he had not the assurance directly to oppose a
reduction. No, Sir, during the first part of his administration, he always
declared himself for a reduction as soon as a favorable opportunity should
offer. But he always endeavored to show, that the present, was not a proper
opportunity; and at last both he and his friends gathered assurance enough to
tell us, that even in times of the most profound tranquillity, a greater number
of regular troops was, and always would be necessary, than that he had so
strenuously opposed in the year 1717, when there was the high^^^ probability of
our being soon engaged in a war, bot^ with Sweden and Spain. This, Sir, was the
conduct of our former minister, with regard to the annual question about
reducing our army, and this I could almost lay a wager will be the conduct held
by our present ministers, with regard to the bringing in, and passing this
bill. They cannot directly oppose a bill which they have upon former occasions
so often and so strenuously patronized: but though last session did, yet this
session does not, it seems, afford us a proper opportunity for applying a
remedy to an evil which they themselves allow, has brought Europe, as well as
this nation, to the brink of destruction; and this I am afraid will be their
way of reasoning as long as they continue ministers, or at least until they
become as hardened as their predecessor, which they may probably do, if they
continue as long in power, and then like him they will freely declare, that
they have actually changed their sentiments, and that no such bill ought ever
to be passed.

The corporation of London showed their opinion of the precariousness of the
principles of placemen and pensioners, in their remonstrance to the king, A. D.
1770. The forms of the constitution, like those of religion, were not
established for the form's sake, but for the substance. And we call God and men
to witness, that, as we do not owe our liberty ^o those nice and subtle
distinctions, which pensions, and lucrative employments have invented, so
neither will we be deprived of it by them: but, as it was gained by the stern
virtue of our ancestors, by the virtue of their descendants it shall be
preserved CITY'S REMONSTRANCE to the king, A. D. 1770.
.

In 1774, the house of representatives of the province of Massachusetts bay,
presented a petition and remonstrance to the governor and council, for the
removal of Peter Oliver, esquire from the superior court. A court wholly erected
and constituted by the general assembly, which power was granted by the royal
charter.

They complain that the said Peter Oliver had taken a salary and reward from
the king, which was contrary to the plain meaning of their charter, and against
the known constitution of that province.

The governor refused to comply with their request, as it would be, he said,
counteracting his majesty.

They pray that he would take the advice and assistance of his majesty's
council on the above petition and remonstrance, without which advice, he, they
said, would act directly contrary to the most evident design of their charter.

CHAP. III. That Placemen often hold a plurality of Employments, incompatible
with one another.
PLURALITIES in the state, as in the church, may be for the advantage of those,
who hold them; but they are certainly a disadvantage to the public. Let a man's
abilities be what they will, he will certainly not fill six employments at the
same time, with the same success as one.

Aristotle blames the Carthaginians for giving different public employments to
the same men. What should we think, says he, of a legislator, who should order
the same man to be both a shoemaker, and a musician Arist. POLIT. II.12.
?

The Guises, when they had power in France, in order to gain popularity, made a
regulation, that no person should hold more than one employment at a time MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXIV.237.
.

It was one of the charges against Buckingham, that he had engrossed more
offices, than could be duly filled by any one man. That, by that means, he had
too much power to do mischief; and too little to do good PARL. HIST. VII.50.
.

When the first land tax was laid on, in the time of Hen. IV. it was provided,
that no member of parliament should be a collector, comptroller, etc. PARL.
HIST. II.121.


The old writ of parliament for the knights, says expressly; Nolumus quod tu
nec aliquis alius vic' dicti reg' nostri aliqualiter sit electus [electi sitis,
it should be] We will, that neither you [the sheriff, to whom the writ is
directed] nor any lieutenant of the king's be by any means elected. Because it
was supposed, in those simple times, a man could not be in two places, serving
his country in two capacities, at the same time. We make nothing of a
gentleman's being at the same time colonel of a regiment warring in Flanders,
governor of a fort in North-Britain, and member of parliament at Westminster.
The duke of Shrewsbury was in king William's time, lord treasurer, taking care
of the king's money; lord chamberlain, taking care of the palace; lord
lieutenant of Ireland, governing that unruly, and (in those days) rebellious
country; and an English peer, trying causes in the last resort; and voting in
the greatest national concerns Tind. CONTIN. I.368.
. What abilities he must have had, to manage such great and widely distant
affairs, at the same time!

A soldier goes altogether upon force. A senator ought to be as cool as a
judge. It is therefore very unlikely, that a good officer should be a proper
person to make a member of parliament.

Mr. Win, afterward Sir Watkin Williams Win, in the debate on this
subject, shows that placemen and officers are very unfit for being members of
parliament. The business of the commons DEB. COM. VIII.165.
, says he, is to represent to his majesty, the grievances of the people; to
inform him if any of his ministers, or officers, makes an ill use of the power
he delegates to them, and to impeach and present such evil ministers. Now I
would be glad to know who are the most proper representatives for these
purposes, gentlemen who have large properties in the country, who are
independent of the ministers and officers of the crown, and who by living in
the country, are perfectly acquainted with the circumstances of the people; or
gentlemen who for their chief support, depend upon the ministers and officers
of the crown, who know nothing of those they represent, and are not only
ignorant of their true interests, but are really indifferent about their
welfare. I hope it will not be controverted, but that the first sort of
gentlemen are the most proper representatives of the people.

The brave and free-spirited Fletcher of Scotland, who wrote A. D. School, speaks
of the returning of military men for members, as a thing of a most formidable
nature, and dangerous tendency Fletcher's WORKS, p. 37.
.

The gentlemen of the sword, are not proper representatives of a people, whose
civil constitution abhors standing armies, and cannot subsist under them. The
fortunes and expectations of those gentlemen depend upon observing the word of
command; and it is but natural, that they should support power, i^ which they
are sharers. It is not to be expected that ever they should concur in a vote,
or an address, (...) disband or reduce themselves, however desirable or
necessary the same may be to us CATO'S LET. III.25.
.

My lord's steward is a very honest man; but if I had an affair to settle with
my lord, I would choose my neighbor for a referee, rather than the steward
Bolingbr. POLIT. TRACTS, 275.
.

Sir Charles Sedley observes, in his speech, A. D. 1699, that there were then 9
commissioners of excise 7 of admiralty, 3 of the post office, and 6 of the
customs; and that great part of these places must be superfluous; but that all
were members of parliament; and that many gentlemen held two offices, while
they had seats in the house DEB. COM. III.195.
.

It has been said, it might be dangerous to deprive the greatest part of those,
who hold civil, military, or naval employments, of a share in the legislation,
lest they be irritated against that institution from which they are excluded.
The answer to this is very simple. Take away the infamous emoluments annexed to
a seat in parliament, and you will presently remove all eagerness after seats
in the house. Why should gentlemen want to be in parliament? To have a
troublesome, unprofitable, expensive office. Do men want to be churchwardens,
sheriffs, etc. Do they drink with clowns, kiss old women, and expend thousands
in obtaining places, by which there is nothing to be got?

It was an article against the earl of Orford in king William's time, That he
had held several inconsistent offices at the same time, by which means he
avoided being called to account for his embezzelments DEB. COM. III.147.
.

In the time of the late war in Flanders, the ministry were, on some occasion,
likely to be so hard pressed, that they thought it necessary to send to
Flanders for some officers, who were members (hopeful members, who had not the
opportunity, in several years together, of once saying Aye, or No, in St.
Stephen's chapel) to vote for the court. Some of them came accordingly. Others
the duke of Cumberland would not suffer to leave the army GENT. MAG. Aug. 1747.
. This shows, that the court looks upon officers as bound to obey the commands
of the minister, and to vote as ordered by him.

A. D. 1773, the duke of Leinster opposed his brother lord Chapter Fitzgerald's
being member for Dublin, because he was an officer in the navy, and therefore
might by his necessary attendance on his naval duty be prevented from doing
that of a representative See WHIT^H. EVEN. POST. Dec. 7, 1773.
.

CHAP. IV. Places and Pensions not given according to Merit.
IF the nation is to be plundered, it would be some comfort to think that the
spoil was divided among the deserving, if it might be supposed any deserving
person would be concerned in plundering his poo^ indebted country. But it is
too notorious, that courts reward according to a different system of morals
from that which the ancient philosophers, prophets, and apostles taught; which
makes Dr. Iohnson's definition of the word pension Iohnson's DICT. II. Word
PENSION.
appear but too accurate, viz. Pay given to a state-hireling for treason to his
country.

Aristotle POLIT. V.9.
observes, that it is of great consequence in a state, that the persons
employed in public business do possess not only valuable qualifications in
general, but those particular qualifications which are necessary for the
successful discharge of their respective duties. A man's being honest and
benevolent, for instance, is not enough to recommend him to the office of a
commander either by sea or land, if he is timid, or unskilful in war; and
another's being full of military courage and conduct, is no reason why he
should be a financier, or a treasurer. We consider very little, whether the man
be fit, or unfit, for the place. We consider chiefly whether the place, that is
the salary, is fit for him; we consider what power he has, by parliamenteering,
or otherwise, to support, or to prejudice, the schemes of the court. If he is
likely to stand in the minister's way, we kick him up stairs, if not, down.

Aristotle observes POLIT. V.^.
, that those who enjoy the honor of great offices in the state, may expect to
be envied by those who have no share in them. But that if, besides, they load
themselves and creatures with the spoils of the public by turning their duty
into a mere matter of emolument, they will be doubly hated by their countrymen,
who find themselves excluded from this double advantage.

Pendant qu' a Rome, etc. While at Rome [during the first Punic war] the public
employments were obtained only by merit, and were of no advantage to those who
obtained them, but in so far as they gave a greater opportunity of being
useful; at Carthage all was venal, and every service done by particulars to the
public was paid for GRAND. ET DECAD. DES ROMANS p. 32.
.

The Carthaginians allowed no man to fill any important post, unless he was
poss^ssed of property as well as merit. And surely, if it were not, that rich
men are too commonly admitted to important stations merely in virtue of their
wealth, without regard to merit, the Carthaginian regulation (with all due
submission to Aristotle, who blames it) is not amiss. For power ought
certainly, in some degree, to be annexed to property. Yet the Carthaginian law
undoubtedly tended, as the philosopher observes, to exclude merit, which is
often poor, to excite avarice, and promote bribery ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVII.260.
.

Before Tarquin's time, nobody solicited for a public employment Ibid. XI.318.
. Among us, all sorts of profitable employments are solicited for (excepting
the office of dissenting ministers only.) Every man holds himself duly
qualified for the place, so the profits of the place be suitable to his
circumstances.

Augustus ordered, that all, who bribed for offices, should be incapacitated
for five years ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.514.
. And for prevention of so great an evil, he ordered, that every candidate for
an employment should deposit a sum of money to be forfeited, if he was
convicted of corruption Ibid. 531.
.

Antony advanced to honors and emoluments all his friends and relations Ibid.
XIII.297.
. He gained Lepidus by making him pontifex maximus. So Walpole got places or
pensions for all, who could claim the most distant relation or connection with
him.

The emperor Antoninus deprived many persons of pensions settled on them by
Adrian; saying, he could not bear to see the state devoured by those who were
of no use to it Ibid. XV.198.
.

The emperor Julian proposed only to employ mea of merit, without paying any
regard whatever to recommendation or interest Ibid. XVI.219.
.

Constantius used to sell employments, which tempted those who bought them, to
oppress the people, in order to indemnify themselves Ibid. XVI.227.
.

The ancient Gauls used to fight for posts and places. If our place-hunters
should take to this practice, instead of the present method of obtaining them
by selling their country; we should, besides other advantages, get rid of many
worthless individuals. Yet the crime of shedding blood about a place would be
the same as that of our duellists murdering one another about a point of
honor, or a wh --.

Abu Beer, Mohammed's successor, used to reward merit with money. Omar gave
money only to the necessitous. We give, or rather heap money upon those, who
have neither merit, nor necessity to plead. Omar thought, merit was to be
honored, not paid.

King John III. of Portugal rewarded all services himself; by which means he
knew that they were not over-looked, nor overpaid. He rewarded moderately; for
the approbation of a wise and good king, who saw with his own eyes, was to be
reckoned up as a prodigious enhancement of a moderate reward. He commonly made
an apology, for that he had many to be bountiful to; which showed, that he was
well served. He created no new employments on purpose to gratify a set of court
blood-suckers. He did not heap several employments upon the same persons. For
he said, One public post, and a man's private concerns were business enough for
any one man MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXII.237.
.

The barbarous Abyssinians have a better notion of encouraging merit, than the
civilized English. They do not allow a youth to cut his hair in the manly form,
till he has done some feat of valor, and his honors increase according to his
behavior Ibid. XV.44.
.

The Dutch East India Company do not prefer according to seniority merely, but
according to merit Ibid. X.565.
.

Cardinal Ximenes was very curious in enquiring into the characters and
abilities of those, to whom he gave employments Ibid. XXI.214.
.

Cath. of Medicis, the mother of the Parisian massacre of diabolical memory,
introduced into France the practice of selling court-places, and of mortgaging
the revenues for ready money Volt. ESS. SUR L'HIST. III.364.
.

How mean does lord Bacon appear in his letter to James I Lord Bacon's LET. p.
85.
* in which he sings his own praises, and labors to show himself fitter for the
place of chancellor, than the great and good lord chief justice Coke, or lord
Hobart.

Dr. Pinto, who first set on the revolution in favor of Portuguese liberty and
the duke of Braganza, was never advanced by him, never envied, nor looked upon
as a favorite. But he had what he wanted, the king's private friendship and
esteem MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXII.312.
. How much di^gust and contention had been avoided, had a certain noble earl of
our times, very useful Of this I was repeatedly informed by the late excellent
Dr. Hales, who pro^es^ed himself a great admirer of that nobleman's abilities
and dispositions; and I willingly lay hold of the opportunity of writing
somewhat in favor of one, against whom so much has been so rashly thrown out.
For I would be the defender (as far as lies within my reach) of those whom I
see blamed beyond their demerits. Non tibi Tyndaridis facies invisa Lacaenae,
Culpatusve Paris -- Divom inclementia, divom
Has evertit opes --
VIRG. It is not lord B --, but lord Corruption, that has brought the British
empire to the condition, in which we see it.


in conducting the education of one, who was made for a good king, contented
himself with being the king's learned friend, a station for which he was very
fit, and had never aspired to that of a statesman and treaty-maker, for which
he was very unfit!

One Cunningham was made governor of Iamaica for saving Walpole's bones, when
attacked by the London mob, on account of his excise scheme MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XLI.409.
. A man totally unqualified either by abilities or experience, and who owed his
preferment entirely to the partiality of the minister. He died six weeks after
his arrival of a fever contracted at an entertainment, being habitually
intemperate.

While worthless pushing men obtain rewards for small services, often for cruel
injuries, done their country, modest merit declines its deserved recompense.

Piso, the conqueror of the formidable insurrection of the slaves, modestly
declined ^ triumph on the occasion.

Cicero, for saving the commonwealth from the fury of Catiline, was rewarded
and satisfied with only a corona civica, that is, a wisp of hay put round his
head. He had neither floating, nor fixed pension. Yet Cicero's times were not
the simple ages.

The moderation of Sir Henry Vane was truly admirable. Finding, that, as
treasurer of the navy, his income, at the low rate of 4 d. in the pound
commission, amounted, in the Dutch war, to 30,000 l. a year, he said, it was a
shameful robbery of the public, and desired to give up his patent, which he had
received from the late king for life, and to have, instead of it, for an agent
he had brought up to the business, a salary of 2000 l. a year. Several of our
bloodsuckers, I mean commissaries, in the late German war, got from 50,000 l.
to 500,000 l. and have never shown any compunction on account of robbing the
public.

Gratuities were given to sufferers in the troubles under Chapter I. 5000 l.
offered Mr. Hollis, were refus^^ by him. 10,000 l. were given Mr. Vassal for
the damages he suffered in opposing ship money; and 5000 l. to Mr. Hampden on
the same account PARL. HIST. XV.278.
. In this way the public ought to have compensated a popular gentleman for his
late sufferings by ministerial oppression, and the truly laudible stand he made
against a tyrannical court, by which the public is benefited, and therefore
ought to show its gratitude; (...) not by pushing a man into the station of a
legislator, who so far from being qualified according to law, was at that very
time collecting money to pay his debts; not by forcing into the office of a
magistrate, a man, whose private conduct was notoriously obnoxious to the
magistrate's just censure. But this by the by.

Dr. Walker, who defended Londonderry against Iam. II. and his popish army,
when those, whose duty it was, deserted the place, was rewarded with the thanks
of the commons. We do not hear of any money given him DEB. COM. II.360.
.

William Sacheverell was offered by the king the place of one of the
commissioners of the admiralty. He refused, saying, He would not accept the
salary, because he did not understand sea affairs Tind. CONTIN. I.41.
.

A bill was ordered in A. D. 1653, making those persons incapable of holding
places who should solicit for them. A bill was proposed, A. D. 1692, against
buying and selling offices Ibid. 193.
. It was found after the revolution, that there had been a most shameful
selling of places under James II. A committee was therefore appointed to
enquire into it, and a bill to prevent the like for the future DEB. COM. II.334.
. The commissioners for public accounts found, A. D. 1713, that one Hutchinson
had paid 1000 l. for the office or register of seizures to the earl of Wharton.
Resolved, That giving or taking money for procuring offices relating to the
management of the public revenue is a scandalous corruption, and highly
detrimental to the public. But the offense having been committed before the
queen's pardon was published, the house proceeded no farther in the matter
Ibid. V.12.
.

To suffer the buying and selling of places is one of the most effectual
methods that can be invented for plucking up by the roots out of the minds of
the people all emulation, or desire of excelling in any thing either useful or
ornamental to a country. If I know, that 5000 l. properly distributed will
procure me a place of 500 l. a year, and that unless I carry in my hand the
necessary douceur, I may in vain solicit, and employ friends to solicit for me,
though they could with truth affirm, that I possessed every accomplishment that
enriches the human mind; if I know all this, what am I naturally led to, but to
endeavor by all possible means to get the necessary 5000 l. not to lose time
in acquiring a set of unprofitable accomplishments. Thus a deadly damp is
struck to all laudable ambition in a people; and an endless avidity after
sordid riches excited. The noblest disposition is checked, and in its place the
basest encouraged. Our state-gardeners cultivate the weeds, and pluck up the
useful plants.

Purchasing of places tempts the purchasers to extort from the people
exorbitant perquisites in order to reimburse imburse themselves. And then the
business comes to be, not how to perform the duties of the place in the most
faithful and effectual manner, but how to make the most of it.

By 12 Edw. IV. and 5 Edw. VI. any person, giving money, or reward of any kind,
for any office, which, in any way, touches the administration of justice, the
keeping of towns, or castles, etc. is disqualified for holding such place PARL.
HIST. VII.54.
.

There was a difficulty about the officers of the court of wards, if the bill
abolishing it should pass, because they must lose their places. One said they
ought to have nothing, because they had bought their places contrary to law.
There was no provision for them PARL. HIST. XXIII.61.
. This is the very argument in our times, for keeping up a multitude of
burdensome places; that the annihilating them would ruin innumerable families.
But it is a very frivolous pretense, because they may be put upon half-pay,
with a provision for widows, and then to be abolished; instead of which, we are
continually multiplying them.

Cardinal Richelieu, in his TESTAM. POLIT. (which the Abbe de S. Pierre thinks
the greatest political work ever published before his times) condemns all
buying and selling of places; because it leads the subjects not to emulate one
another in merit, but in riches S. Pierre, OUVR. POLIT. XVI.20.
.

The Abbe de S. Pierre's proposal, of ch^osing by scrutiny to all places of
power and trust, would make the office of a prime minister, a secretary of
state, etc. much easier, and less exposed to envy, and animosity. For, if a
candidate's companions in office did not recommend him, there could be no
reflection made upon the minister, if he was not advanced. Walpole was always
sorry, when a place fell vacant. By filling it, he gained one friend, and 20
enemies; any one of which could injure him, more than the person advanced could
serve him. When men are gratified without merit, they are not so easily
satisfied, as when they are rewarded in some proportion to their deservings.
For this very proportion will in some degree regulate their expectations.
Whereas those, who obtain what they have in no degree deserved, are led to form
imaginary pretensions to unknown merits, without all bounds.

The Abbe S. Pierre thinks the French custom of making the great offices of the
state, and even the descent of titles and honors, hereditary, hurtful and
inconsistent with sound policy. All honors and powers (except, for plain
reasons, the regal) ought to be personal only, and to be given to no
individuals, but such as, upon scrutiny, were found to be men of such
distinguished worth, as to deserve to be raised to distinguished places, though
sprung of mean parents OUVR. POLIT. IX.100. et pas.
. Suppose the silly son and heir of a truly great man, who had, by his conduct,
raised himself to the rank of a duke, to have 500 l. a year settled on him out
of the estate, would not that be sufficiently rewarding him for all the merit
he has, in taking care to be the son of a duke? And would not this policy give
greater scope for laudable ambition, than our present, which insures the most
worthless and most uncultivated blockhead of a dukedom, and a seat in the house
of peers, if he happens to be born by a duchess, wh^ever may have begot him?
The eldest son of the archbishop of Canterbury, (who ranks above the first duke
in England) is only John, or Thomas such-a-one, esquire. Yet the son of an
archbishop, has as good a natural claim to be an archbishop, as the son of a
duke, to be a duke.

Kings, and king's favorites often read their sin (in this as in other
respects) in their punishment. If they will employ unqualified persons, their
business will be done accordingly. The great Dutch Nassau fleet, fitted out by
prince Maurice against the Spaniards in America, and officer'd according to the
court interest, did nothing. A fleet of ships fitted out at private expense,
and officer'd according to merit, did great feats MOD. UNIV. HIST. XI.463.
. The French affirm, that their disgraces in the last war, were occasioned by
madam Pompadour's filling all the great posts in their fleet and army, with her
creatures, and those who gained her interest by money.

That the merit chiefly regarded in our times, is the merit of seconding the
views of the court, and that the greatest demerit, according to our modern way
of estimating demerit, is opposing court measures; appears from the court's
late proceedings against my incomparable friend, the great Dr. Franklin, whom
they have deprived of his place of deputy postmaster of North America, which
place he himself improved from being a burden upon the government, to its
bringing in a revenue of several thousands a year; -- all because that faithful
trustee would not sit silent, and see his constituents betrayed.

CHAP. V. Profusion in Places and Pensions.
IT is not a little to the disgrace of human nature, that in any age, or in any
country, any member of society should require to be paid, like a hireling, for
serving his country. Every state is a great family. The king is, or should be,
the father of it; the grandees, the elder brothers; and the people the younger
children. But what should we think of a family, of which we saw the head, and
the elder brothers, plundering the younger children of their portions, and
reducing them to a starving condition; insisting that themselves ought to be
supported in their grandeur, and recompensed for taking upon them the charge of
domestic affairs, in such an exorbitant manner, as the younger part of the
family could by no means support. If this head of a family, or these grandees,
should demand a recompense for services done to a neighboring family, we
should not so much wonder or blame them for a sordid disposition. When the
people of Poland wanted to have our celebrated Sir Philip Sidney for their
king, it had been no matter of wonder, if he had required an ample civil list
revenue, as a recompense for the innumerable disgusts and fatigues of the regal
station, or that, like the German generals whom we have employed in our
continental wars, he had been less sparing of the purses of the Polish people.
If we were to do the Dutch any material service, it might be expected, that we
should demand a proper compensation; but that Englishmen should hesitate about
serving Englishmen, that a lord, who has no necessary business to fatigue him,
but drinking, whoring, masquerading, and New-marketing, should grudge a few
hours in a week to serve his country, unless his country will recompense him
ten thousand times above the worth of his service, -- this gives a shocking
idea of the sordid disposition of the grandees of modern times. At the same
time the public ought not to be, and hardly ever is, ungrateful. But public
rewards ought rather to be honorary, than pecuniary, and if they must be of the
latter sort, they ought to be frugal, not profuse; else they do more mischief
than good.

The salaries annexed to those places, the holders of which do real service to
their country, naturally lead people to a very wrong way of thinking, viz. That
we are not obliged to serve our country, unless we be paid for our service.
Whereas, the truth is, that serving our country to the utmost of our power, is
(like obedience to parents, providing for our wives and children, and
worshipping God) our indispensible duty, previously to any emolument we may
expect on that account. See Mr. Southwel's speech below.

As for the holders of sinecures, and those men who receive annual pensions for
nothing, they may be compared to Pluto's three-headed mastiff, Cerberus, who
gobbled up the sop thrown to him by the Sibyl, and immediately stretched out
his hairy bulk in his kennel, and fell a snoring.

Cerberus haec ingens latratu regna trifauci
Personat, adverso recubans immanis in antro.
Cui vates, horrere videns jam colla colubris,
Melle soporatam et medicatis frugibus offam
Objicit; ille fame rabida tria guttura pandens
Corripit objectam, atque immania terga resolvit
Fusus humi, totoque ingens extenditur antro.
VIRG. The quoting of this passage from the famous sixth book of the Eneid
inflames me with a desire to display a portion of the spirit of our learned
bishop who has found in it a mystical sense, which nobody ever dreamed of
before his DIVINE LEGATION, nor since. Were my genius brightened with a spark
of his fire, I should show (with no less success, than he has had in proving
Moses's divine commission by what will equally establish Lycurgus's, viz. his
designed neglect of the mention of future rewards and punishments, and with no
less success than he has had in establishing the alliance between the two
things in the world which ought the most carefully to be kept separate, viz.
the state and the church) -- were my mind, I say, tinctured with the true
Warburtonian spirit of criticism, I should show that by the sl^eping mastiff
Virgil intended to point out an idle hanger on at court; by Vates, (the old
prophete^s, as lucus a non lucendo) the prime minister, as statesmen are less
remarkable for their prophetical sagacity, than for their resemblance to old
women; by the snakes on Cerberus's neck bristling up at the approach of the
Sibyl and the hero, I would show, that the poet meant the speechifying, and
opposition made by the place-hunter. Being got so far as this, the offa, or
sop, composed of honey, etc. would spontaneously explain itself into the place,
and its douceurs. The dog's opening three throats to swallow one morsel, does
most beautifully set forth the disproportion between a placeman's voracity and
the richest income the minister can afford to give him. In this manner would I
attempt to imitate, non passibus aequis, this great discoverer of secret
meanings, who has left us one thing to regret, among so many things to admire,
viz. That he has taken so much pains to find senses where no body was at a
loss, viz. in the Eneid, and has declined pointing out sense, where no body has
been able to find any, I mean, in the XXXIX ARTICLES, the CREEDS, and the
HOMILES, which he has subscribed, and therefore must understand. But to return
to our subject, the profusion in places and pensions.

Lord Molesworth thinks, the servants of the crown should be paid by
appointment of parliament. It may be said, all moneys expended are subject to
parliamentary enquiry. But there is a very great difference between
appropriating beforehand, and finding fault afterward, when the money is
spent, and all that can be done is passing a vote. And even that is not to be
expected, if our parliaments, instead of checks, are to be sharers in the
plunder.

A king, as such, ought not, of all men, to grant bounties; because what he
grants is not out of his own, but the property of others St. Pierre, VI.54.
. All that a king is, and all that he has as king, is on account of the public,
whose servant (to use king Iam. Ist's expression) he is. Therefore, whatever he
gives to his wh --, or his minion, is a robbery of the public, because his wh
--, or his minion, are of no advantage to the public, and have not earned any
part of the public money; but on the contrary, deserve the strapado, or the
gallows. And whatever a king gives, or suffers his ministers to give, to the
undeserving, or what they give too profusely to the deserving, is a robbery of
the public. A king's income is not as a gentleman's rent, a private fund at his
disposal. For a kingdom is not a private estate; but a trust for which the
holder is accountable to his people. And woe to those kings and ministers, who
betray so awful a trust. A king is to dispense, not to spend the public money.
There are many persons necessarily to be employed in a state. Them the king is
to pay. How then (says St. Pierre VI.55.
) can he have bounties to grant? unless he robs some of those who serve the
public? Every guinea he gives to one, who has not deserved it, or who has not
deserved it all, is so much kept back from one, who has deserved it, or would,
if he had not been discouraged by seeing a traitorous king or ministry
embezzling the public money, by throwing it away on the worthless, to the
injury of the deserving. A king, as a gentleman, and out of his official and
accountable character, may bestow upon his lawful pleasures, or upon those who
have served his lawful private interests, more than a duke may lay out; but not
more than two dukes may spend. If he lays out the public money, or suffers his
crew to lay it out, in bribing villains to betray liberty, I have only to say,
I lictor, deliga ad palum, virgis caedito, caput obnubito, infelici arbori
suspendito.

Our courtiers find the parliament too ready to give. Therefore, according to
the common saying, Lightly come, lightly gone, they care not how they dissipate
their ill gotten riches. Chapter VII. of France, a prince of an excellent
character, was, at his accession, so low in both cash and credit, that he had
not ready money to pay for a pair of boots, that were brought him; and the
maker, not caring to trust his poor majesty, carried them away. This narrowness
of circumstances gave that wise and good prince a handle to retrench
unnecessary expenses, and set out on a foot of great frugality, which he
continued after his finances were more flourishing MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV.45.
.

The enormous emoluments annexed to our great offices of the state, are big
with every evil. They render the sincerity of real patriots suspected, and
expose the administration to the certain execration of the people, who, by this
means, are often reduced to an uncertainty whom to trust. Pensions and places
are rightly bestowed in very few instances. They are a disgrace to men of
family and fortune, be their services to their country what they will. For
pensioning such men is making them appear to the public not noble, not
generous, not magnanimous; but greedy, sordid hirelings. A pension may perhaps
be rightly given to an ingenious, but poor man, to support him in his pursuit
of arts, science, manufactures, commerce, or whatever may be for the public
advantage. But care ought to be taken, that he be not over-fed, and by that
means become lazy.

There is no magnanimity without some degree of self-denial. But what
self-denial do our nobility and gentry show, when they scramble for the
profitable places, and will not serve their country, unless they be overpaid
immensely beyond the worth of their services? If a nobleman has in his mind
nothing more noble, or disinterested, than an artizan or a plough-driver, what
claim has he to more respect than they would have, if they had as much money in
their pockets, or as much lace on their waistcoats, as he has?

If the nobility were to serve their country in the great offices of the state
gratis, the heroism would be nothing more than is shown by private trustees,
arbitrators, churchwardens, overseers of the poor, and other parish-officers.
Are those poor low-bed creatures, whom our polite courtiers call the scum of
the earth, more disinterested than the nobility of the land?

By 43 Eliz. any person elected overseer of the poor, and refusing to do the
duty, is punishable, though he has no reward for doing the duty. Why should not
all public officers be filled in this manner STAT. AT LARGE, II.318.
? If it be alleged that this would be troublesome, and fall heavy upon the
nobility, let them take the offices by rotation.

Even in the law some things are appointed to be done gratis Blackst. COMM.
III.128.
. It is hard, that our nobility should be loath to do for their country what the
lawyers (a sordid enough set of men) do every day.

If the nobility and gentry declined serving their country in the great offices
of the state, without sordid hire, let the honest bourgeoisie be employed. They
will think themselves sufficiently rewarded by the honor done them.

Why should not our kings, when a court-place falls vacant, publish, that they
want a secretary of state, or a lord chamberlain, or a lord steward; places
which any man of common sense and common honesty can fill; the public business
being all a mere routine. And why should they not order all persons desirous of
the vacant employment to send in their proposals sealed (as when there is a
fleet to victual, or a public work to be done) and accept him, who offers to
serve his country on the most reasonable terms? Let the person chosen, bring in
his bill of expence^. There is no reason why the public should not repay what
is fairly laid out for the public benefit. If it be thought proper to give a
statesman, who has shown himself able and honest, five hundred guineas for a
ring, as was given the brave admiral Drake for services of greater danger and
more importance, than those of fifty state-secretaries, I have no objection.
But that half our nobility should be upon the parish, I mean, upon the public,
I own I see no manner of reason; nor that a set of places, which might be
filled at the expense of a few hundreds a year, must cost the nation many
hundred thousands, while we are sinking in a bottomless sea of debt.

The grand Turk, when he thinks a wazir, an aga, a teftardar, a pasha, etc.
has, by oppression, spunged up a good deal of money in his service, squeezes
him till he has reduced him to his former condition, which often helps up the
sultan's exhausted treasure. If we were to introduce such a custom as this in
England, the squeezings of a thousand or two of our over-drenched
court-spunges, might do somewhat toward preventing the dreaded necessity of
applying a sponge to our public debts.

It is commonly reckoned, that five or six of our places or pensions are equal
in their annual amount to all that is paid in the three provinces of Holland,
Zealand, and Overyssel, to placemen and pensioners. The burgomaster of a great
town has perhaps 20 l. a year salary. The deputies or members of parliament
have 200 l. a year. One happy consequence is, that there is little aspiring to
preferment in the state, because there is little to be got that way Burn. HIST.
OWN TIMES. I.290.
.

No servant of the Dutch East India company has so mean an appointment, as to
be pinched, nor so affluent, as to be above his business MOD. UNIV. HIST. X.561.
.

Ask the courtiers, what produces the present clamours, and all clamours
against government, which is always immaculate. They will answer, The desire of
places and preferments. Which may be partly true. But why then do they not
reduce the incomes of the places as low as in Holland? Why do they not abolish
all that are useless? They do the very contrary. They are continually
increasing the number, if not the value of them. They are constantly heaping on
fuel, and then they swear and blaspheme, because the fire continues to rage.

I may suppose, (says Mr. Southwel in his speech on a motion for a deduction
from salaries during the continuance of a war) that our salaries and pensions
above 50 l. a year, amount to at least a million sterling. If I said two, I
believe I should not be mistaken, etc. If our place-men and pensioners consume
2,000,000 l. a year of the public income, they swallow up at once the whole
land tax at four shillings in the pound.

Mr. Pelham, brother to the duke of Newcastle, used to say, he grudged the
great incomes enjoyed by the great place-men; for that the business of the
nation was done by the clerks in the offices, who have but 50 l. a year, even
as the business of the church is not done by the bishops and deans, but by the
curates of 20 l. and 30 l. per annum.

Immediately after the treaty with Portugal, which settled Ferdinand and
Isabella on the throne of Spain, the deputies from the cities insisted on a
repeal of grants made by Hen. IV. of crown lands (among other particulars,
Gibraltar was granted to the duke of Medina Sidonia) and of pensions out of the
revenues. They gave orders accordingly, and such reforms were made, that 30
millions of maravedis arose annually from the savings MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXI.161,
192.
.

The whole revenue given by the Poles for the support of their king's royal
dignity, does not exceed 100,000 l. a year Ibid. XXXIV.10.
. Five or six of our courtie^^ devour as much annually; for which they do
nothing, but what were better let alone, as buying votes, and mis-governing the
public affairs.

In the kingdom of Siam, the great officers of the state have no salaries.
Therefore there can be no scrambling. But there is great injustice in the
courts of law, because the judges have it in their power to enrich themselves
by extortion Ibid. VII.263.
.

The governor of the Dutch East India Company at Batavia is employed from
daybreak till night in the business of his office, so that he can hardly allow
himself half an hour for dinner Ianicon, ETAT PRES. DES PROVE. UNI^S, I.360.
. Our tinselled placemen we -- stretch on the rack of a too easy chair,
And hear their everlasting yawn confess
The pains and penalties of idleness.
POPE.

Pope Sixtus V. cut off at once an expense of 600,000 l. per annum, which it
cost the apostolic chamber before his time in pensions and gratuities.

When the Spanish finances were low, A. D. 1608, and the ministry would not
retrench the sums laid out on spies and pensioners, the nation was offended,
and the historians have handed down to posterity their infamy MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXI.336.
. Let our posterity likewise read, for the honor of our ministers, that toward
the end of the eighteenth century, when the public debt was greater than had
ever been known, there was at the same time more pensioning, than ever was
known.

With a laudable frugality, they [the Spaniards, in the year 1739, when Britain
declared war against them] retrenched all their extravagant pensions and
salaries, and reduced their expenses in all the departments of their government
Tind. CONTIN. VIII.425.
. The Spaniards grew wiser, at last, than they were at first. Let us see,
whether the English will go and do likewise.

Alphonsus V. of Arragon, surnamed the Wise, put off an extravagant, greedy
courtier, who was always asking somewhat, by telling him, That a king, who
thinks to satisfy his spendthrift courtiers, employs himself in a manner as
fruitless, as he who should think to fill a hogshead, which had holes in its
bottom. He may impoverish himself, but will never enrich them.

When Hen. III. complained, that his revenues were hardly sufficient, ad
simplicem victum, etc. for victuals, clothing, and the accustomed charities,
much less for warlike expeditions; his counselors faithfully told him, his
poverty was occasioned by his giving so much away. The king took the hint;
called many to account, and made them refund Brady, II.549.
. We give our ministers half a million on demand, to make good the pretended
deficiencies of the civil list, without so much as asking how there comes to be
a deficiency, much less calling any body to account, or making any one refund.

The counselors, and all officers, both great and small, (in the time of Hen.
III.) were to swear, at their creation, that they would, to the utmost of their
power, execute their offices, without any other reward than meat and drink
Brady, II.644.
. Many a great place-man in our times has, from 500 l. to 5000 l. a year. If a
minister, in our times, takes this oath, and if he calls 5000 l. a year meat
and drink, he must have a very hearty appetite, or a very nice palate; for,
even in these dear times, a man may have for 50 l. a year, as much mutton and
small beer (and there is no better meat and drink than mutton and small beer)
as any Christian can decently consume. But it will be answered, Our statesmen
do not take this oeconomical oath. Upon which our statesmen will perhaps give
me leave to observe, or, if they do not, I will make the observation without
their leave, viz. That we have as much occasion for parsimony, as our ancestors
in the time of Hen. III. The public debt was nev^^ in those times so high as
one million, whereas we have seen the nation indebted to the value of 140
million^.

All the incomes of the government-places in Elizabeth's reign, amounted to
only 18,000 l. a year 1 Chapter I. they were computed at 120,000 l. a year PARL.
HIST. VI.367.
. In those days, the navy and army cost but little. In our times, it is
computed, that the government has the disposal of 2 or three millions per
annum, taking in the navy, the army, and the church: of which the first is our
strength, and our glory, and therefore we can hardly cherish, and maintain it
too nobly; the second is worse than useless; for it is dangerous to liberty, as
every officer is a court-place-man, and as the army is the necessary and
natural instrument of tyranny; as for the third; the mere expense it costs the
nation, is hardly an object of consequence enough to alarm. Of which more in
the sequel.

The yearly salary of the lord high treasurer of England in the time of Hen.
III. was 100 marks. Harley, in queen Anne's time, said, a lord high treasurer
of England, if he were indifferent which of the two places he went to in the
next world, might get 5,000 l. 10,000 l. 50,000 l. or what he pleased by his
place Rapin, I.387.
. Lord Bacon writes to king Iam. I. that the place of attorney general was
honestly worth 6000 l. a year LORD Bacon's LET. p. 84.
. The lord high treasurer Middlesex, in the time of Iam. I. declared, that the
gains of that office had been 8000 l. per annum, nay more than he could well
tell PARL. HIST. VI.326.
. In the time of Hen. IV. the profits of the hanaper in chancery were only 2000
l. a year Ibid. II.80.
. The earl of Wiltshire, father to queen Anne Boleyn, had 20 shillings a day,
as lord privy seal Anders. HIST. COMM. I.366.
.

Queen Elizabeth enriched none of her favorites at the expense of her people.
She pretended, that her people were her only favorites. She had sense enough
to observe a spirit of liberty rising, and humoured it prudently. Iam. I. and
Chapter I. had not the sagacity to imitate her.

Parliament grants a large subsidy, A. D. 1606, which enabled James to gratify
his favorites, (his great joy) out of the money granted by parliament Rapin,
II.172.
. In this, James acted upon principles directly contra^y to those of Elizabeth.

Elizabeth's wisdom kept her fleet and forts always in good order. Her
frugali^y displeased her avaricio^^ courtiers; but pleased her people. She bore
gre^^ national expenses with the ordinary revenues, and helped her neighbors;
which her predecessors had never done. Most of them beggared themselves by
gorging a few greedy courtiers. She discharged and the great expenses of
government, (which must be great, considering the number of enemies around her)
out of the crown revenue, for she did not lavish her money upon the
court-leeches like her predecessors Rapin, II.65.
; [and her successors, Rapin might have added.]

The pensions of 4 l. per week (settled on about 70 members of the commons
during the civil war, because their estates were sequestrated by the king [ Chapter
I.], or did not yield a subsistence) were afterward taken off to relieve the
public PARL. HIST. XV.59.
. Compare this integrity and disinterestedness with our monstrous profusion in
places and pensions needlessly bestowed on the worthless tools of the court,
and k^pt up from year to year, from father to son, while the nation is sinking
under a load of debt.

The queen sends a message, A. D. 1702, to the commons, That in reward of
Marlborough's services, she had made him a duke, and given him 5000 l. a year
during her life, out of the post house revenue, and wishes the house would
think of means for continuing to him and his heirs, the pension, as well as the
title. The whole house were struck dumb. The speaker stood up to see if any
body would speak to the queen's proposal. At last a member opened. The debate
ran very high, and it is said that an old member spoke thus: Though I have
accepted an employment at court, I did not do it with the design that my mouth
should be shut in this house, when any thing is offered that I think
detrimental to my country. The house sent an address to the queen, in which,
after approving the esteem she had expressed for the duke of Marlborough, they
beg leave to lay before her the consequences of making a precedent for future
alienations of the revenue of the crown, which had been much reduced by the
exorbitant grants of the last reign, etc DEB. COM. III.210. Tind. CONTIN. I.577.
. The commons in those days hesitated about settling a pension on a hero, whose
actions will be celebrated as long as the world stands. We make it a rule to
pension every man we employ, deserving and worthless. Because a scoundrel has
received 5000 l. a year for many years, for doing the business of a place, in
which there is no business to do (that is, in plain English, 5000 l. a year for
pocketing 20,000 l. a year) therefore we are to settle 2 or 3000 l. a year on
him for life, after he has resigned his sinecure; and perhaps continue the same
to his booby son after him, while thousands of our people are flying, for want
of bread, to America, and the nation in continual danger of bankruptcy.

Instead of the challenge 2 Samuel XII.3.
, Whose ox, or whose ass, has the king [or the minister] taken; we may ask the
crew, Whose farthing candle, or whose draught of small beer, have they not
taxed? A poor hard-working man, who has a wife and six children to maintain,
can neither enjoy the glorious light of Heaven, nor the glimmering of a tallow
taper, without paying the window tax and the candle tax. He rises early, and
sits up late; he fills up the whole day with severe labor; he goes to his
flock-bed with half a belly full of bread and cheese, denying the call of
natural appetite, that his wife and little starvelings may have the more. In
the mean while the exactors of these taxes are revelling at Mrs. Cornelly's
masquerade, at the expense of more money for one evening's amusement, than the
wretched hard-working man (who is obliged to find the money for them to
squander) can earn by half a year's severe labor.

Thysius ascribes the continuance of the Athenian state, to their strict
observance of the laws; their severe punishments for bribery, which was always
capital; and their severity against offending magistrates Aut. This. DE REP.
ATHEN. 261.
.

Noble was the answer of Curious Dentatus to the Samnite ambassadors, when they
offered him as a bribe a large quantity of plate: they found him sitting on a
wooden bench by the fire, cooking his victuals. He rejected their present with
disdain, and said, My poverty Plut. APOPHTH. Val. Max. IV.3. ANT. HIST. XII.139^
inspires you with hopes of corrupting me, but your attempts are vain. I had
rather command the rich, than be rich myself. Carry back with you this fatal
metal, which men make use of only for their destruction; and tell your
countrymen, that they will find it as difficult to corrupt, as to conquer me.

The Achaeans declined to their ruin, from the first violation of the salutary
law, by which the whole confedrcy was bound to take no present, from any of the
neighboring kings Schooch. Rep. ACHAEOR. 32.
.

Epicrates, the Atherian, was, according to law, capitally condemned for taking
a present in his embassy, though he had done great service to his country.
Callias was fined 50 talents or several thousand pounds, for the same crime,
though he had made a glorious peace for his country. Philocrates was punished
for taking a present of Philip of Macedonia Ibid 33.
.

Nulla aut admodum exigua, etc. Pecuniary rewards were scarce known among the
Athenians. Virtue was its own best reward; and was thought to contain all that
was desirable. The Athenians were greedy of nothing but glory. Therefore, an
olive wreath was the highest of all prizes Ant This. DE REP. ATHEN. 251.
.

Nihil opus pecunia, etc. There is no occasion for money; (says the great and
good Epaminondas to Diomedes, attempting, by order of Artaxerxes, to corrupt
him) for if your king wants any thing of me, that is for the advantage of my
country, [ Thebes] I will do it for nothing. If he desires the contrary, he is
not rich enough to bribe me; for I will not sell my country, for the wealth of
the world Corn. Nep. in EPAMIN.
.

The Athenians had their logistae, euthyni, and heliastae, or public auditors
of all accounts, to whom all, who touched the public money, were answerable
annually Aut. This. DE REP. ATHEN. 257.
.

Isti quos paverant, etc. Those who had been enriched by the public plunder for
many years, when Ibid.
deprived by Hannibal of this unjust gain, thought themselves injured, and in
revenge, instigated the Romans against that illustrious chief Live.
.

It is capital for a Venetian ambassador to receive a present in his embassy
LIFE of the DUKE d' EPERNON, p. 559.
.

The duke d' Epernon, upon a stop of the exchequer in France, was advised to
raise an income from the people under his government, as other grandees did. He
answered, that it was not his business to condemn the proceedings of others;
but that he could not think of extorting a subsistence from the miserable
people, who were in want of bread Ibid. 581.
.

He afterward refused to lay impositions on the people for the public service,
and wrote to the king, desiring to be excused the odious office of oppressing
the poor. The villainous courtiers immediately set up a clamor against him,
that he only aimed at popularity, and was imagining treacherous schemes against
the government.

When M. de Voisin, chief clerk of the parliament of Paris, received orders to
resume his office, A. D. 1771, the parliament having been before arbitrarily
changed by the tyrant, he declared, that his honor, duty, and consci^nce, did
not permit him to perform the functions of it. He therefore resigned his place,
and was rewarded for his integrity by banishment, and confiscation of his
office, which cost a million of livres, and brought in 100,000 yearly.

The great duke de Sully, instead of making his ministry useful to himself by
gaining friends, never hesitated making himself enemies, by standing between
his master and those importunate courtiers, who were perpetually craving in a
degree out of all porportion to their merit MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV.382.
.

By the spoils of conquered nations, Caesar was enabled to corrupt the Roman
people, and bribe them to be instruments of their own ruin, by erecting an
absolute monarchy in his favor Preface to a FRAGMENT of POLY^. p. iii.
.

The states of Arragon told Don Pedro IV. their king, that pensions given to
courtiers, are wages paid by the subjects to those, who labor for their
destruction MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXI.70.
.

By 29 and 30 Car. II. a tax of 2 shillings per pound was laid on places, and
one of 3, upon pensions Tind. CONTIN. VIII.13.
.

In the year 1600, to the last year but one of queen Elizabeth, the whole of
the ordinary public revenue amounted to no more than 600,000 l. per annum; in
1633, the 8th of Chapter I. to 800,000 l. in 1660, the 12th of Chapter II. to 1,200,000
l. in the year 168^, 2d of James II. to 1,900,000 l. in 1714, the 12th of Anne,
to 3,200,000 l. in 1751, the 25th of Geo. II. to something short of 6,000,000
l. and in the 5th of his present majesty, the year 1765, to full 10,300,000 l.
Thus from queen Eliz. to Chapter II's time, our public burdens were doubled, being
a space of about 60 years; and from thence to the last of queen Anne, about 54
years, near treble; from 1714 again, to the year 1751, that again nearly
doubled; and what is still more extraordinary, this last enormous burden
increased from 6 to upwards of 10,000,000 l. in the narrow compass of 14 years,
from 1751, to 1765 WHITEH. EVEN. POST, Apr. 10.
.

There was one million of debt contracted on the 6 d. per pound tax, laid A. D.
1760, on pensions LAND. MAG. 1760, p. 230.
. The interest of a million, at 4 per cent. i^ 40,000 l. per ann. Therefore the
pensions must have amounted to 1,600,000 l. per ann. at least. For 1,600,000
six-pences, are only equal to the 40,000 l.

A. D. 1744, a motion was made, that the incomes of places and pensions should
be taxed, at least during the continuance of the war, at the rate of 8
shillings in the pound. Objections were made to the motion, as might be
expected. To these what follows was replied by Robert Vyner, Esquire.

I do not wonder, Sir, to hear a placeman affirming, that our public
employments are attended with vast trouble and expense, and the salaries and
perquisites belonging to them are no more than they deserve; but most other
gentlemen in the kingdom are convinced, that few or none of our public
employments are attended with any expense, and that the business in every one
of them might be performed for much less that it is at present; for as to the
expense, we all know that every shilling of it is, in most of our public
offices, defrayed by the public. The officers are not obliged to furnish
themselves with so much as pens, ink, and paper out of their salaries; but have
these and many other articles provided for them at the public charge. [In the
year 1773, it was found, that the public has long been charged near 5000 l. a
year for pens, ink, and paper for the house of commons.] And as to the
business, it is well known, that in all our offices, those who do the most
business have the smallest salaries. Nay, in many of our public posts, the man
who has the place with the salary annexed to it, gets a deputy to do the
business for, perhaps, a tenth part of the salary, and sometimes the deputy has
no part of the salary, but the perquisites only, or, perhaps, but a share of
them. These being facts notoriously known, I shall very readily agree with the
honorable gentleman, that a strict parliamentary enquiry into all our public
posts and offices is very necessary, and might be of great service to the
nation. If such an enquiry were strictly and impartially carried through, we
might not only reduce the salaries and perquisites of most of the officers and
placemen in the kingdom, but a vast number of useless officers and placemen
might be laid aside, and several of the offices that have been of late years
erected, might be entirely abolished; which would not only be a great saving to
the public, but a great security to the liberty of the people. But such an
enquiry, Sir, I despair of ever seeing set on foot, and much more of ever
seeing it carried on with effect; therefore, since we cannot remove the evil, I
am for making the most we can of it, by subjecting all salaries and pensions to
a double tax; nor am I in the least afraid of doing injustice to any placeman,
by not leaving him a sufficient compensation for all the business he does for
the public; for in all our offices there is so little business done, or such a
number of persons employed, that one moiety of the salary, and in many cases
much less than a moiety, would be a sufficient reward for all the business they
do. With regard to pensioners, I am so far from being afraid of doing them
injustice, that, as to most of them, I believe, if we stripped them entirely of
their pensions, we should do a piece of signal service, as well as justice to
the public; for I have a strong suspicion that most of the pensions that have
been granted of late years, were granted for what ought rather to be called
ministerial than public service.

The customs and sentiments of a people always depend upon the customs and
sentiments of the rich and great families amongst them. If the rich and great
are selfish and mercenary, the same spirit will soon prevail generally among
the people. Prevent its being in the power of the rich and great to be selfish
and mercenary, and they will soon begin to be actuated by motives of ambition
and the desire of public esteem; and from them the same spirit will diffuse
itself through the whole body of the people. The monstrous salaries that have
been of late years annexed to all the high offices in our government, and
granted without distinction to the rich as well as the poor, have raised such a
selfish spirit among the people, that a man is now reckoned a fool or a madman
if he gives himself any trouble about serving his country without some
pecuniary reward. Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum respuat aurum? Diminish those
salaries, Sir, and grant them to none but such as stand in need of them for
their support, or for supporting the dignity of their office, and you will put
it out of the power of the rich to be governed by pecuniary motives. Among them
the motives of ambition and public esteem will soon resume their proper seat,
and a generous desire to serve one's country without any pecuniary reward will
from them diffuse itself through the whole body of the people, insomuch that it
may very soon become scandalous to desire any of the public money if a man can
serve his country and support himself without it. I know, Sir, it may be said,
that unless you grant such salaries as may be a temptation to men of fortune to
serve the public, no man of fortune will ever enter into the public service.
This I take to be a very severe satire upon our men of fortune. It is supposing
that they are governed by nothing but sordid and mean pecuniary considerations;
that they have no regard for their country, nor will do it any service unless
they can thereby supply their luxury or satisfy their avarice. But I have not
so bad an opinion of our men of fortune, or the men of fortune of any country.
Put pecuniary considerations out of the way, and mere generous motives will
take their place. Nay, men of fortune would engage in the public service, if it
were for nothing else but to have something to do, for a state of mere idleness
is, above all others, the most irksome; of which we may be convinced, by
observing the many inventions of men for preventing their being in such a
state. Many other motives would engage them in the public service, and even in
that service which, above all others, is the most dangerous and toilsome; I
mean the army, especially in time of war. This we may be convinced of from what
is now the case in France: The pay of the officers of their army is so small,
that it can be a temptation to no man of fortune; and the colonel of a regiment
must always, in that service, be at a much greater expense than his pay will
answer. Yet there is hardly a man of fortune in that country who is not, or has
not been, in the army, unless it be such as have been b^ed to the law. The case
would soon be the same in this country, Sir, if pecuniary temptations were once
removed, or very much diminished; and besides the public saving, it would
contribute not a little toward putting an end to the luxury and extravagance
that now prevail^ among our quality and chief gentlemen; for among men of
fortune the public money, like money got by gambling, is generally spent in
luxury and extravagance. I may say it is always so, except when it falls into
the hands of some covetous, avaritious creature, and then it contributes,
perhaps, to enrich a family, that was before richer than is consistent with the
happiness and constitution of this kingdom; for it is our business to have many
rich families amongst us, but none too rich: and I am sure it is not the
business of any state to contribute, at the public expense, toward the supply
of luxury or the satisfaction of avarice, neither of which can ever be fully
supplied or satisfied, nor will ever say he has enough. To a luxurious man, the
more you give the more methods of expense he will always invent; and money to
an avaritious man is like water to a dropsical, the more you give the more he
will desire. I believe no one who hears me will say, that public spirit and
disinterested regard for our country is not now at a very low ebb among the
people of this kingdom. What is the cause of this? The cause is plain and
evident. The great salaries, and many unlawful, I may say, cruel, perquisites
that have been of late years connived at, or by law, or custom, annexed to most
of the high offices in the kingdom, have introduced this spirit too generally
amongst our noble and rich families; and as such families may be called the
heart and vitals of the people, the corruption has from thence diffused itself
through the whole body. This is the true cause, Sir, and the remedy is as
obvious as the disease. The rich and great will have a concern in the
government of their country, if they can. You have no occasion to invite them
by lucrative temptations. If you do not invite them by such temptations, they
will take that concern from motives that are generous and consistent with the
public good. Public spirit, and a desire of esteem, will then be their only
motives for engaging, or desiring to be engaged, in the public service; and
when this spirit begins to prevail generally among the rich and great, the
people, as they always do, will soon begin to follow their example. As men are
naturally fond of power, though attended with no sordid gain, ambition may
still cause a contention who shall serve their country in the highest offices;
but that contention will never be so violent, as to produce faction, nor can it
produce any dangerous opposition to a wise and upright government, because
among a people generally governed by virtue and public spirit, no ambitious man
can form a party against such a government; and much less can he form a party
for overturning the liberties of his country, because the ambition of one man
will always be a check to the ambition of another; for no man who is actuated
by ambition only, will ever consent to give himself an absolute master; but a
luxurious or avaritious man may very readily consent to give even himself an
absolute master, if he may thereby hope to supply his luxury or indulge his
avarice. We may thus see, Sir, that a stop must be put to the selfish mercenary
spirit that now prevails among the people, if we have a mind to preserve our
liberties. Such a law as I have mentioned would certainly be the most effectual
method for this purpose. It must be confessed by every one who can talk
impartially of matters relating to government, that officers and placemen are
proportionably more numerous in this country than in any other on earth; and
the profits so vastly exceed the service required, that every man is fond of
getting a place under the government, because in no sort of business he can
earn so much for a little service. Justice, therefore, can require of us no
exception, but that mentioned by my honorable friend who made you this motion,
I mean that of the judges; and no compassion can prompt us to go further than
to places or pensions of 50 l. a year and under. These are all the exceptions
that either justice or compassion can require of us, and admitting these, I am
convinced the additional tax proposed would produce a very considerable yearly
revenue, especially if the commissioners of the land tax should fall upon a way
of subjecting perquisites, as well as salaries, to this double tax; which, I
think, they might easily do, and ought to do; for the perquisites of offices
are very different from the fees of lawyers, physicians, or pa^sons, and still
more different from the wages of journeymen. These are the price, and the only
price they have for their labor or attendance; but the perquisites of offices
are not the price of labor or attendance. They have their salaries for the
price of their labor and attendance; and their perquisites are the price only
of their impudence and imposition, commodities which, I am sure, ought to be
taxed as high as any that are produced or imported; and that they may be highly
taxed is one of my chief reasons for approving this motion Alm. DEB. COM. I.313.
.

Mr. Southwel speaks excellently on this subject, as follows Alm. DEB. COM.
I.330.
.

Sir, As reformation of abuses in the church has always been a most frightful
word to priests, so reformation in government has always, for the same reason,
been equally terrible to ministers: Those abuses in religion which make a
reformation necessary, have generally been introduced by the cunning of
priests, for increasing their own power or their revenues; and those abuses in
government which render a reformation necessary, have generally been introduced
by the cunning of ministers, in order to increase their own power or profits.
These two orders of men have therefore the same reason to dread a reformation,
because it must be attended with a diminution of their power or their profits,
and probably with a very great diminution of both. For this reason, Sir, when I
hear a minister running out against reformation, and dressing it up in all the
hobgobling shapes his fancy can suggest, I always think of the priests of Diana
at Ephesus: It is not the danger that threatens the public, but the danger that
threatens their shrine, which they are afraid of; and as the overgrown power
of ministers is of as pernicious consequence to free government as the
overgrown power of priests is to true religion, a reformation is as often
necessary in one case as the other. This is the foundation of that maxim laid
down by Machiavel, that in order to preserve a free government, it often
becomes necessary to bring it back to the first principles, which is a maxim
the friends of liberty will always take care to observe, and we may expect that
it will be as constantly opposed by ministers, who always have been, and always
will be, grasping at arbitrary power. Upon this principle, Sir, let us examine
the motion now before us, in order to see whether it is not returning a step
back toward our ancient constitution. I am sure, no man, who has read the
history of the nation, will say that our ancestors the Saxons ever thought of
inviting men to serve the public by great salaries or pensions. On the
contrary, we know that all those offices that are of the true Saxon originals,
such as sheriffs, parish offices, and most of our offices in cities and
boroughs, are attended with an expense, instead of being of any advantage to
the officers. At least if they now make any advantage of them, it is by some
innovation unknown to our ancestors, and such a one as they never would have
allowed to be introduced. But the crown, having, by some means or other, got
into its possession the arbitrary disposal of almost all offices and places,
ministers soon found that the more valuable these offices and places were made,
the more their power would be extended; therefore they resolved to make them
lucrative as well as honorable, and from that time they have been by degrees
increasing, not only the number of offices and places, but also the profits and
perquisites of each. Not only large salaries have been annexed to every place
or office under the government, but many of the officers have been allowed to
oppress the subjects by sale of the places under them, and by exacting
extravagant and unreasonable fees, which have been so long suffered, that they
are now looked on as the legal perquisites of the office. Nay, in many offices,
they seem to have got a customary right to defraud the public; and we know how
careful some of our late ministers have been to prevent or defeat any
parliamentary enquiry into the conduct and management of any office. By these
means, Sir, the expense of our civil government is become so great, that it is
hardly in the power of the people to support it. At least it is not in their
power to support the expense of our civil government, and at the same time to
support a foreign war with that vigor which is necessary for bringing it to a
happy and speedy conclusion. But this is not the only inconvenience that
attends the multitude of offices and places under our government, and the large
salaries and perquisites annexed to them: They not only render it impossible
for us to support or carry on a foreign war with vigor, but they render it
impossible for us to preserve our liberties without some great reformation in
our constitution. The motion now before us does not therefore proceed from any
extravagant spirit of reformation, but from a just sense of the danger we are
exposed to, if we do not reform. As to the danger that threatens our liberties,
I do not much wonder at our ministers not being affected with it; because from
the whole course of our history, as well as from late experience, I have
observed that as soon as a gentleman becomes a minister, or, as he calls
himself, a servant of the ^own, he shakes of all concern for the liberty of his
^ountry; and whatever professions some of our present ministers may have
formerly made, I am afraid it will be found, that they have no more virtue than
their predecessors. For this reason, I say, Sir, I do not wonder at our
ministers not being affected with the danger our liberties may be in from the
number of our officers, and the high salaries annexed to their several offices;
but as to the danger we are exposed to by our inability to support a foreign
war, I wonder that even our ministers are not affected with it. My wonder does
not arise, Sir, from any high notion I have of their virtue or love for their
country, but from my being convinced that they have a great love for
themselves, and a paramount regard for their own safety and interest.

Mr. Southwel observes, that the ministry were in some danger, left the people,
provoked on thinking how they are taxed, while the curtiers are wallowing in
places and pensions, might make an insurrection to the danger of their
plunderers. Then he goes on as follows:

Men, Sir, who are capable of judging without prejudice, I am sure, must be
sensible of the great danger our liberties are in from the vast influence the
crown has of late years acquired by the multiplication of offices, and the
increase of officers as well as the increase of their salaries and perquisites;
for surely no gentleman will say that our monarchy would continue to be a
limited monarchy, if the crown were sure of having always a parliament at its
devotion; and that this may be the case, that this will be the case, is I think
absolutely certain, if some effectual methods be not very soon taken to prevent
it. A reformation therefore of some kind or other is become absolutely
necessary, if we intend to preserve our liberties. A place-bill, and a bill for
excluding officers of all ranks and degrees, with a very few exceptions, from
voting at elections, would have some effect; but it is very certain that the
most effectual method would be to diminish the number and value of those gifts
which the crown has a power to bestow; and the motion now before us, is, I
think, the most obvious step, and the first step we ought to take for this
purpose. The motion is in itself so reasonable, and the honorable gentleman
who made it has chosen such a seasonable and critical conjuncture for offering
it to our consideration, that if it be not agreed to, I shall despair of ever
seeing any effectual law made for preventing that corrupt influence which the
crown has a power to make use of both in parliament and at elections. A new
administration may, in order to gain a little popularity, at their first
entrance into power, connive at the introducing and passing, or may themselves
introduce and promote, some bill, that has a specious appearance of being in
favor of liberty; but I shall never expect an effectual bill from that
quarter. I have such an opinion of ministers, that I cannot be easily
convinced, that they will ever consent to have their power effectually
abridged; therefore I must be of opinion, that if ever any such bill be passed,
it must make its way through this house against the power and influence of the
administration, and must be forced through the other two branches of the
legislature, or one of them at least, by the obstinate virtue of this assembly.
Thank God, we have still the power in our hands, in some measure, to compel a
compliance with what our constituents as well as ourselves think absolutely
necessary for the preservation of our constitution. But in the case now before
us, we have no occasion to make any extraordinary use of our power: no tacking
is proposed: no refusal nor any delay of the supplies is desired: What my
honorable friend has proposed, comes not only naturally but necessarily into a
supply-bill, and consequently must be agreed to by the other two branches of
the legislature, or the whole of this branch of the supply must be lost. If
therefore such a natural and such a well-judged proposal as this in favor of
our liberties be rejected by this house, can I suppose that ever any other can
make its way against the torrent of ministerial favor?

Mr. Southwel then goes on to show the particular propriety of a saving scheme
at a time, when the nation was engaged in a war against France and Spain* with
no allies, but such as were more a burden than an advantage, overloaded with
debts and taxes, the incomes of the sinking fund on the decline, foreign trade
lessened, etc. Then he proceeds as follows:

In these circumstances, Sir, and when we are in so much danger of being run
out before the war can be brought to a period, will any gentleman say, that we
ought to allow our ministers, placemen, and pensioners, to enjoy the same
salaries and pensions they were provided with in time of peace? Or that we
ought not to deduct some part of their salaries or pensions, or subject them to
some higher tax than any other sort of people? But this, it is said, is the
practice of arbitrary governments, or of princes that are aiming at arbitrary
power; and we ought not to make their conduct a precedent for ours. Can this be
called reasoning? Because an arbitrary government does a just or a right thing,
therefore we are never to do so. If we can find no precedent for this in any of
the free governments of Europe, it is because their ministers and officers have
either no salaries at all, or no more than is absolutely necessary for
supporting the dignity o^ their office. But our ministers and officers have
higher salaries and perquisites in proportion, than the ministers and officers
even of any arbitrary government in Europe; and since we imitate them in
granting high salaries and pensions, we ought to imitate them in making
deductions, when we are involved in a foreign war. This was done by the court
of Spain, as soon as war was declared against us, if there is any credit to be
given to our gazettes, and newspapers. In order to provide for the expense of
the war, that court began with reducing the appointments of all their officers,
both civil and military, and with annihilating the perquisites of many others.
The same thing was done by the court of Vienna, when they found themselves
attacked by France and Spain. In Russia likewise, they made large deductions
from the salaries of their officers during the war with Sweden; and even lately
in Denmark, when there was but the appearance of a war with Sweden, his Danish
majesty began with laying a tax upon all salaries, in proportion to their
yearly produce. If no such thing has been practiced by France, it is because
the quality in that kingdom are proud of serving the government both in the
civil and military offices, especially the latter, without any considerable
pecuniary reward. As many of our nobility and rich gentry are able enough to
support the dignity of any public office, they can be preferred to, out of
their own private fortunes, surely no man will say, that it would not be
generous in them to do so at a time, when their country is in such danger and
distress. And even when an officer has no private fortune of his own, but has a
good salary from the public, surely it would be generous and right in him to
contract his way of living, and give up one half of his salary in a time of
public distress. If our public officers will not voluntarily do what is
generous and right, they ought to be made to do so by some public regulation,
for which purpose nothing better can I think be contrived, than the proposal
now under consideration. The opposition made by our ministers to this motion,
is in my opinion a most convincing proof of the corrupt influence that proceeds
from the lucrativeness of (...) public offices and employments. This of itself
alone, ought to be a prevailing argument with every lo^^ of liberty, to render
them less lucrative, even supp^^^ing that the public distress did not make it
necessary* Ministers may perhaps think, that nothing but lucr^^tive motives
will prevail with men to accept (...) places or employments in the government
of their country, because nothing but a mercenary spirit (...) prompt a man to
accept of any such, upon the term^ they are generally offered by ministers, I
mean upon condition of betraying their country in parliament, or at elections;
but if we have a mind to prese^^^ our liberties, I am sure we ought not to
enable the crown or its ministers, to get any servants upon such terms. If the
country is to be served by none but such as will agree to betray its liberties,
I had rather choose it should not be served at all; for anarchy is better than
an established tyranny, because from confusion, order may be brought forth;
whereas from an established tyranny, nothing but irretrievable oppression is to
be expected. Therefore, if it were true, that nothing but lucrative motives
could in England prevail upon men to serve their country, it would with me be
no argument against rendering the temptation less cogent; because a small
salary may prevail upon a poor man to serve the public, and a poor man is not
so able to support an oppressive government, as an avaricious or luxurious rich
man may be. But, Sir, whatever our ministers may think, whatever bad opinion
they may have of their countrymen, I have no such opinion of them. If nothing
but honorable services were required, men of honor would engage in the
service of their country, without any pecuniary reward. And I do not think it
in the least difficult to introduce such a custom, (...) would make it
dishonorable in any man of for^^ne to desire or accept of a sordid pecuniary
reward (...) salary, for any service he did, or could do his country. To talk
of a man's right to a pecuniary reward for serving his country, is to talk in
that (...) mercenary style, which has been designedly introduced of late years,
in order to propagate minis^^rial corruption; but to talk justly, no man has a
right to a pecuniary reward for any service he can do his country. Sir, the
service of our country is like the service of God; when we have done all we
can, we have done but our duty, and no man can have a right to a reward, for
doing no more than his duty. The rewards therefore bestowed for public
services, are not what any man has a right to demand, but such only as
generosity, charity, or prudence, may induce the country to bestow: and I am
sure neither generosity, charity, nor prudence, can be pleaded for giving
large, or indeed any pecuniary rewards, to those who are already possessed of
exorbitant riches; and when a country is itself in the utmost distress, surely
it ought not to grant such high pecuniary rewards, even to those that stand in
need of them, as it may do when it is in affluent circumstances; but our
conduct in this country, seems to have been directly contrary to these maxims.
I am sure it cannot be said that we have been in affluent circumstances for
th^se thirty years past: I believe every impartial man will grant, that we have
been for that whole time in a declining condition; and yet in that time, we
have not only augmented very needlessly the number of our public officers and
servants, but we have greatly augmented the salaries and perquisites of many of
them. We may easily guess, Sir, with what view these augmentations were made,
and we may be convinced that the same view now creates an opposition to their
being reduced. It is not the danger, Sir, of drawing men of fortun^ from the
service of their country, but the danger of drawing men of fortune from the
service of ministers, that creates an opposition to this motion; but this is so
far from being a reason for me to oppose it, that it is one of the strongest
arguments I can think of for agreeing to it. I wish we could draw every man of
fortune from that service, for none but men who are entirely governed by their
avarice or luxury, will ever enter into the service of ministers, upon the
terms they require; and in the hands of such men, neither the counsels nor the
treasure of the country can be safe. A poor man may be honest and faithful, but
an avaricious man will be neither, if he can safely indulge his avarice by
being otherwise. A poor man may live contented upon a small salary, but a
luxurious man no income can satisfy, therefore he will endeavor by any means
to get a supply. Can we expect, Sir, that either the counsels or treasure of
our country will be safe in the hands of those, who in order to get them into
their hands, have agreed to betray the liberties of their country. Sir, if they
do not sell the counsels of their country, it is because they cannot find a
purchaser; and if they do not convert the treasure of their country to their
own use, it is because they are afraid of punishment. There is more danger
therefore, with regard to the public counsels or treasure, in having such men
of fortune employed, than in having men of no fortune employed in the public
service; and with regard to our liberties, the danger is infinitely greater,
because men of no fortune could not betray the liberties of their country by
getting into parliament, nor could they so powerfully assist an oppressive
administration in corrupting our elections. For this reason, Sir, we ought not
to provide any ministry with the means of ^^mpting the avaracious or luxurious
rich to accept of places or employments in the government; and much smaller
salaries or profits, than are annexed to most of these places, would be a
sufficient temptation, because they would be a sufficient support for gentlemen
of no fortune. There is therefore no weight in the objection made to this
proposal, That it would drive all gentlemen of fortune and character out of the
public service; because it would drive no gentleman of fortune out of the
service, but such as ought not to be allowed to enter in to it; or who at least
ought not to be tempted by lucrative considerations to enter into it,
especially as long as such temptations are at the disposal of our ministers,
and as long as a lucrative place in the government is no objection to a
gentleman's being a member of this house. The only remaining objection I have
heard made to this proposal is, That it would make but a very small addition to
our public revenue, if we make those exceptions which justice and compassion
require. I have already shown, Sir, that justice has nothing to do in the
question, because no man has a right to any pecuniary reward from the public;
and as to compassion, it cannot I am sure carry us farther, than the honorable
gentleman who made the motion has mentioned. Suppose then we except all
salaries and pensions of 50 l. a year and under, will any gentleman say, that 4
s. in the pound upon all salaries and pensions above 50 l. a year, would not
produce a very considerable revenue? I shall not pretend to determine, or even
to guess at what it would produ^^ but I may suppose that our salaries and
pensions abo^^ 50 l. a year amount to at least a million sterling; (...) I said
two, I believe I should not be mistaken; (...) suppose no more than one, it
would produce an additional annual revenue of 200,000 l. a year, without any
additional charge; and such an additional revenue is I think far from being
inconsiderable; at a time when our government finds itself under a necessity of
indulging even the most destructive vice of the people, [the drinking of gin
under licence] in order to raise money by taxing it.

The court-sycophants pretend, that the dignity of the crown [the voracity of
their extravagance, they should say] requires a great expense to support it,
and particularly a numerous attendance at court. But the truth is, the
greatness of a prince is never estimated according to the splendour of his
court, unless it be by women and children. All mankind agree to pronounce him a
great prince, who makes his enemies fear him, and his allies and subjects love
him. And this is done by a procedure directly opposite to an unbounded expense
laid out upon a set of idle hangers-on. But I shall have occasion to treat of
regal parade hereafter. In the mean time, on the exorbitant number of placemen,
let us observe in what light the court-list exhibits that abuse. There we find
plac^^ piled on places, to the height of the tower of Babel. There we find a
master of the household, treasurer of the household, comptroller of the household,
cofferer of the household, deputy-cofferer of the household, clerks of the
household, clerks comptrollers of the household, clerks comptrollers
deputy-clerks of the household, office-keepers, chamber-keepers, necessary
housekeepers, purveyors of bread, purveyors of wine, purveyor^ (...) fish,
purveyors of butter and eggs, purveyors of confectionary, deliverers of greens,
coffee-women, spicery-men, spicery-men's assistant-clerks, ewry-men, ewry-men's
assistant-clerks, kitchen-clerk-comptrollers, kitchen-clerk-comptroller's first
clerks, kitchen-clerk-comptroller's junior clerks; yeomen of ^he mouth,
under-yeomen of the mouth, grooms, grooms children, pastry-yeomen, harbingers,
harbingers-yeomen, keepers of ice-houses, cart-takers, cart-takers grooms,
bell-ringers, cock and crier, table-deckers, water-engine-turners,
cistern-cleaners, keeper of fire-buckets, and a thousand or two of the same
kind, which if I were to set down, I know not who would take the trouble of
reading them over. Will any man say, and keep his countenance, that one in one
hundred of these hangers-on is of any real use? Cannot our good king have a
poached egg for his supper, unless he keeps a purveyor of eggs, and his clerks,
and his clerk's deputy-clerks, at an expense of 500 l. a year? while the nation
is sinking in a bottomless ocean of debt? Again, who are they, the yeomen of
the mouth, and who are the under-yeomen of the mouth? What is their business?
What is it to yeoman a king's mouth? What is the necessity for a cofferer,
where there is a treasurer? And, where there is a cofferer, what occasion for a
deputy-cofferer? Why a necessary-house-keeper? cannot a king have a
water-closet, and keep the key of it in his own pocket? And my little cock and
crier, what can be his post? Does he come under the king's chamber window, and
call the hour, mimicking the crowing of the cock? This might be of use before
clocks and watches, especially repeaters, were invented; but seems as
superfluous now, as the deliverer of greens, the coffee-women, spicery-men's
assistant-clerks, the kitchen-comptroller's first clerks and junior clerks, the
groom's children, the harbinger's yeomen, etc. Does the maintaining such a
multitude of idle^^ suit the present state of our finances? When will frugality
be necessary, if not now? Queen Anne gave 100,000 l. a year to the public
service. We pay debt^ on the civil list of 600,000 l. in one article, without
asking how there comes to be a deficiency.

The pretense, that a king ought to have a number of attendants about him, to
keep up his state, and strike the people with an awe of government, wants no
answer. Was ever the parade of government kept up at a higher expense than in
our times? Was ever government more despised by the subjects, than our^ is now?
Compare our times with those of Queen Elizabeth, who refused supplies, when
offered her, saying, the money was as well in the people's pockets as in hers,
till she came to want it.

Julian reformed the Roman court, dismissing many thousands who had pensions
for no service ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVI.249.
. Yet we do not find, that he lost the good will of the people on that account.
Our courtiers cry, There is no possibility of keeping things quiet without
places and pensions. I own I am inclined to think there is another and better
method of keeping things quiet, viz. By government's showing, on all occasions,
an unvarying uprightness and disinterestedness of conduct. And I am sure, that
bribery is a very precarious instrument of government. For the more the court
bribes, the more it must bribe. Nor is there any impossibility in diminishing
the number of places. It is often done; though they are much oftener increased.
In the year 1709, a third secretary of state was appointed, viz. the duke of
Queensbury; and Row, the poet, was made under-secretary Tind. CONTIN. II.119.
. The number was since reduced again to two, without bad consequence. But there
is always a lion in the way, when the reformation of an abuse is proposed*

Sir Edw. Coke complains heavily, about the beginning of Chapter I. of new-invented
offices, with large fees, and useless old ones very chargeable; of a plurality
of offices held by single persons; of extravagance in the king's household; of
new tables set up in the palace; of voluntary annuities and pensions; of
unnecessary charges in the king's living; of costly diet, apparel, buildings,
etc. PARL. HIST. VI.363.
. Were he to see the proceedings of our times, he would soon forget those of
Chapter I.

The commons address the queen, A. D. 1708, that the number of the
commissioners for paying the Scotch equivalent money be reduced; the greatest
part of the business being done DEB. COM. IV.130.
.

CHAP. VI. That Places, Pensions, Bribes, and all the Arts of Corruption, are
but false Policy, being endless and insufficient.
AFTER all the shocking accounts here given of the enormous expense the nation
is put to by the villainous art of a succession of ministers, it must be owned,
that bribery and corruption are false policy at best, as being endless and
ineffectual.

In the most ancient of all writings, I mean, (...) sacred, we find wisdom and
virtue, synonimous term^, and vice and folly put promiscuously for one another*
Wisdom is pursuing the noblest ends by the most pro^mising means. But the ends
a corrupt minister (...) in view are raising himself and his friends to power,
and filling his own and their pockets, Are these (...) noblest ends a being
formed for glory, honor, and immortality can propose to himself? And is
bribing the most promissing scheme for obtaining these noblest ends? I trow not.

He was a shrewd observer, who remarked, that whoever first introduces treats
and presents among a people, to obtain their favor, paves the way for the
destruction of that people Plut. in CORIOL.
.

The free states of Greece were ruined by Philip of Macedon, more by bribery
than the sword. The Asiatic riches gained by the Spartans, corrupted and ruined
them. The Roman commonwealth was overset by corruption, in consequence of
Lucullus's conquests in the east. Till then honor was the reward of virtue;
afterward sordid wealth filled the place of honor in the minds of the Romans;
which rapacity continued and increased, till the emperor's throne was fairly
bought by Didius Iulianus.

No prince ever bribed more than Philip of Macedon. But the persons he bribed
were his enemies; or foreigners. When he understood, that his son Alexander was
endeavoring to gain the affections of the Macedonians by gifts, he checked him
severely Cic. DE OFF. II.
.

Though, as a politician, he had a great opinion of the force of gold; and was
wont to say, that no city was impregnable, through the gates of which an ass
laden with that metal, could pass; though he was accustomed to retain
pensioners in every state, and naturally lavish of his money to domestic
flatterers; yet he checked this humor, as soon as he perceived it, in his son.
He wrote him a letter on the subject full of excellent philosophy. How came
you, young man, said he, to reason so wretchedly with yourself, as to fancy
those will serve you faithfully, whom daily you corrupt with money? Do you
this, that the Macedonians may hereafter take you, not for their king, but for
their steward or paymaster. If you discharge these offices well, you must make
but a pitiful prince. They are spoiled who take gifts, by being taught thereby
an habit of taking.

Sylla, in the true spirit of a corruptor (of an English borough-candidate, I
was going to say) feasts the whole Roman people ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.94.
. Will any man pretend, that Sylla was at that expense for an (...) purpose?
Some of our court-sycophants pr^^end, that our borough-hunters are no way
blameable for the same proceeding. But the sense of our wise ancestors was
otherwise, who have made laws against giving victuals and drink to electors, as
much as against bribing with hard money.

There never was a greater corruptor than Caesar, who destroyed the liberties
of his country. He invented new pretenses for (...) and bribing the people of
the city. He gave unusually magnificent shows, and largesses of corn without
measure, presented many leading men with slaves and land estates, lent to needy
senators large sums of money at low interest, or without; he descended so low
as to bribe favorite slaves and freemen, and to crown all, he doubled the pay
of the army Sueton. IN JUL. 26, 27. et pass.
. By these extravagancies he run himself into debt to the amount of above
250,000 l. of our money, and he found, that bribing was endless. At last the
wages of iniquity were raised so high, that it cost him 310,625 l. to buy off
Aemili^^ Paulus, the consul, from Pompey's party ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.179.
.

When he stood candidate for the consulship with Lucceius, the patricians
fearing, that two such consuls together should overset the republic, agreed to
support Bibulus's interest against that of Lucceius, by buying votes with the
public money; even Cato himself countenancing the scheme Sueton. IN JUL.
[ ne Catone quidem abnuente.] But did this temporary expedient save the state?
Could Cato think it would? How, indeed, could he miss seeing, that it must
hasten the ruin of liberty, because it hastened the destruction of the people's
virtue, without which no people ever preserved their liberty?

Brutus and Cassius found the Romans so debased, that they thought it necessary
to bribe on their part, as the triumviri did on theirs. And after all, the
Roman legions (unworthy of the name of Romans!) basely deserted them to join
the triumviri ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.389.
.

Octavius (afterward Augustus) gave undoubted and repeated proofs of his
cowardice. Yet his army, the Roman legions, the despisers of cowardice, stood
by him. Why? Because he bribed them with money, corn, and lands. See Lipsius's
chapter of the gifts of Augustus, etc.

The Roman legions, accustomed to have the public money distributed among them,
were much dissatisfied with Galba for leaving off that good old custom ANT.
UNIV. HIST. XIV.489.
. When princes once begin bribing, their tools will not suffer them to leave
off. There never was a better pretense (if any pretense were good) for bribing,
than that of king William's ministry, viz. buying off the jacobites. Yet who,
that considered what a door it opened, would have advised such a measure?

Ambitious and avaritious men are insatiable. At the beginning of the reign of
Chapter VIII. of France, the duke of Lorrain made very high conditions for himself
and his party. They were granted. He seemed for some time contented. But soon
after, he, and the constable de Bourbon, and many others, begun to hatch
mischief MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV.82.
.

When the electors become universally corrupt, as well as the elected, the fate
of Rome will be renewed in Britain. The grandeur of Rome was the work of many
centuries, the effect of much wisdom, and the price of much blood. She
maintained her grandeur while she preserved her virtue. But when luxury grew up
to favor corruption, and corruption to nourish luxury, then Rome grew venal,
the election of her magistrates, the sentences of her judges, the decrees of
her senate, all was sold; for her liberty was sold when these were sold, and
her riches, her honor, her glory, could not long survive her liberty. She who
had been the envy, as well as the mistress of nations, fell to be an object of
their scorn, or their pity. They had seen and felt that she governed other
people by will, and her own by law* They beheld her governed herself by will;
by the arbitrary will of the worst of her own citizens, of the worst of both
sexes, of the worst of human kind* by Caligula, by Claudius, by Nero, by
Messalina, by Agrippina, by Poppaea, by Narcissus, by Calistus, by Pallas, by
princes that were stupid or mad; by women that were abandoned to ambition and
to lust* by ministers, that were emancipated slaves, parasi^^^ and panders,
insolent and rapacious. In this mis^rable state the few, that retained some
sparks of the old Roman spirit, had double cause to mourn i^ private; for it
was not safe even to mourn in public. They mourned the loss of the liberty and
grandeur of Rome, and they mourned that both should be sacrificed to wretches
whose crimes would have been punished, and whose talents would scarce have
recommended them to the meanest offices in the virtuous and prosperous ages of
the commonwealth. Into such a state (the difference of times, and of other
circumstances considered) at least into a state as miserable as this, will the
people of Britain both fall and deserve to fall, if they suffer, under any
pretense, or by any hands, that constitution to be destroyed, which cannot be
destroyed unless they suffer it; unless they cooperate with the enemies of it,
by renewing an exploded distinction of parties; by electing those to represent
them, who are hired to betray them; or by submitting tamely, when the mask is
taken off, or falls of, and the attempt to bring beggary and slavery is avowed,
or can be no longer concealed. If ever this happens, the friends of liberty,
should any such remain, will have one option still left; and they will rather
choose no doubt to die the last of British freemen, than bear to live the first
of British slaves DISSERT. UPON PARTIES, 213.
.

The members of the Polish diet oppose the most* salutary measures of the
court, till they are bought off MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIV.12.
. The court ought not to have begun buying off. If they had not, the
expectation of being bought off would never have come into the heads of the
members. And their requiring unanimity, is a great disadvantage, as making each
single vote of too much consequence. Indeed nothing can be more absurd than
giving one a negative against one hundred, in any case, where the interest of
all is concerned. Did ever any man in his wits think of putting one guinea, or
one ounce, in the balance against one hundred guineas, or one hundred ounces?

About the time when the ill-advised measure of taking off the jacobites by
places and bribes was proposed to king William III. the earl of Braidalbin
formed a scheme of quieting the highlanders by distributing money among them. A
sum of 15,000 l. was sent him. It was offered to be distributed among the
chiefs of the clans. But it did not content them. On the contrary (as when a
villain, instead of being set at defiance, is offered a bribe to prevent his
setting up a false accusation) they rose in their demands. They thought their
own importance must be very great, that the government should think it worth
while to take them off. This is a weighty lesson to all courts and ministers,
not to begin bribing; for once begun, no one knows where it will end; but to
set the heads of parties at defiance, and trust, for the public approbation,
and security in their places, not to bribes of any kind, but to a clear
conduct, which will always support them, or enable them to sink with a grace.

Most sins are their own punishment even in thi^ life. The court-corruptor may
read his sin in his punishment, in the distress and vexation he brings himself
into by raising a nest of hornets about his own (...), by disappointing (for he
must disappoint) a multitude of expectants. And every disappointed man becomes
a mortal enemy; and one enemy does him more mi^chief than ten friends do him
service. Then he find^ all his measures, even his most laudable ones,
embarrassed.

Walpole often said, the vacancy of every place gave him anxiety; for he could
only oblige one (the pers^^ to whom he gave it) and must disappoint many. (...)
would therefore imagine, that even the court itsel^ should wish the number of
places diminished.

The market-price of a borough 30 years ago was 1500 l. Now they are thought
pennyworths at 3000 l.

He who undertakes to govern a free people by corruption, and to lead them by a
false interest against their true interest, cannot boast the honor of the
invention. The expedient is as old as the world, and he can pretend to no other
honor than that of being an humble imitator of the devil. To corrupt our
parliaments has been often attempted, as well as to divide our people in
favor of prerogative, and in order to set the arbitrary will of our princes
loose from the restraints of law DISSERT. ON PARTIES, 217.
.

When pensions grow common, and are promiscuously given to those who have
deserved them and those who have not, the demand and application for them will
grow universal. Every one will esteem it a sort of contempt to him to be left
out, and think himself as well entitled as another who is not entitled at all.
So that what is taken from the people's industry and given for the people's
protection, will be squandered away to support laziness, prodigality and vice,
and the bread of the children will be thrown to dogs Gord. TRACTS, I.242.
.

As the crown never was, so it is ridiculous to believe it ever will be better
for such irregular supplies. The demand upon it will rise in exact proportion
to their fancied riches, and the weakness of the ministry. Every one will think
he has a right to share in the profit who has had a share in the guilt; and
endless importunities must distract the court, as well as exhaust the nation.
Whereas a general* good husbandry will soon put an end to all wild and
impertinent solicitations. No one will pretend to what no one has. Worthless
men will not spend their substance in hopes to repair themselves out of the
kingdom's ruin; but the direction of public affairs will fall naturally into
hands who have no interest but in the public happiness Ibid. 239.
.

When it happens that the spring head shall be tainted, from whence are to be
drawn the men of experience, action, and counsel; busy persons by different
arts, some by abject flattery, others by perplexing matters to be bought off,
will soon prevail to be let into many of the chief offices and dignities of the
state, which they will so pollute with their foul dealings, and weaken and make
contemptible by their ignorance, that cleaner and abler hands will afterward
be hardly invited in to restore things, and give them a better complexion. And
in such times, the worst of men, who insinuate best, and are ever the most
active, will get into many posts of trust and importance, and endeavor, if
possible, to engross the whole commonwealth to themselves, and invade all her
posts, where they will lie strongly entrenched and watchful to oppress virtue
and merit of any kind, with which they are at open war; for if endowments of
the mind, love to the nation, integrity, experience, conduct, and solid wisdom,
should once obtain, get ground, and be taken notice of, they who shine, and are
recommended by no such qualities, must quit their holds and withdraw, or remain
the universal contempt of that people, whose affairs they are so little able to
administer Daven. II.58.
.

Bad men have ever given a false color to their proceedings, and covered their
ambition, corruption, and rapine, with the pretense of their master's service*
they make him believe their greatness advances him; whereas truly it tends to
his diminution, and he is often weak for want of that wealth and power which
they share among one another. Their riches have frequently brought envy upon
the prince, but we can hardly meet with an instance of any who in his distress
has been assisted from the purses of his ministers: for they are commonly the
first who fly from his misfortunes, and though they pretend that his power is
revered in them, and that they make him strong by the benefits he lets them
bestow, yet a wise king sees through all this artifice, and knows that he, who
would reap any advantage from his favors in the opinions of men, must make
them sensible that they owe them singly to his goodness, and not to the
intercession of those about him Ibid. III.20.
.

Kings reduced to streights either by their own or by the negligence of their
predecessors, have been always involved in dark and mean intrigues; they have
been forced to court such as in their hearts they abhor, and to frown upon
those whose abilities and virtues they secretly approve of and reverence.
Instead of being heads of the whole commonwealth, as in law and reason they
ought to be, they have often been compelled to put themselves in the front
sometimes of one and sometimes of another party, as they saw it prevalent, a
policy in the end ever fatal to rulers. Being entangled, they have been
constrained to put into the chief administration of their affairs, projectors
and inventors of new taxes, who being hateful to the people, seldom fail of
bringing odium upon their master; and these little fellows, whose only skill
lies that way, when they become ministers, being commonly of the lower rank of
understandings, manage accordingly; for their own ignorance in matters of
government occasions more necessities than their arts of raising money are able
to supply Daven. III.4.
.

Ill conduct in money matters of itself is sufficient to raise a strength
against them in power; and where parties are already formed, it renders those
the bolder who design mischief to the state, because they know how difficult it
is for a government to resist its enemies, when it is without treasure, and has
not the affections of the people; which was the case of Hen. III. of France, a
prince full of natural valor, blessed with early victories, and adorned with
eloquence, which was said to be irresistible; yet one of his own subjects, not
of the royal blood, came to his capital city at the head of no more than seven
persons, in order to begin a rebellion, which aimed at wresting the scepter
from him. How came a man of the duke of Guise's caution and sagacity, to take
in hand an enterprise at first sight so unlikely to succeed, but that he knew
how low this king had brought himself by a long series of mis-government; that
France impoverished by taxes was grown weary of his rule; that the minds of the
people were quite alienated from him; that his riots and profusion had quite
exhausted that treasure wherewith his crow^ was to be defended. And without
doubt, this view gave the house of Lorrain, the council of sixteen at Paris,
and the general faction of the league, courage to begin that war Daven. IV.429.
.

If it is asked, how it came to pass that so ma^^ commonwealths and monarchies
have been subverted, the answer is easy; they did not sink under invasions, or
perish by foreign force, till the way to conquest had been first opened by
their own misgovernment. But to come to particulars, and to examine into the
origin of these various mischiefs, which have disturbed government, whence is
it that there have been factions in a state? In commonwealths it was because
they did not hold a strict hand over their great ones, and took no care to keep
out corruption. Hereupon the manners of the common people were depraved, and
they followed those whom they thought most willing and most able to support
them in their vic^^; and this first divided Rome. In a monarchy, parties thus
took their rise; either the prince was weak, unable to exert the regal
authority, and so private men grew upon him, and not being in a condition to
suppress both, he was compelled to court first one and then the other side, as
his necessities required; himself nourishing that disease, which, in the end,
wasted his power; or if he had false cunning, and meditated in his mind to
overthrow the laws underhand, he encouraged parties, kept them equally poised,
and suffered them to consume their strength one against the other, in hopes
they should be both so impaired by their mutual strivings, as to be unable to
give him opposition, and thus to become master of the whole at last. Whence
came it, that countries have been ruined, by not consulting national interest?
Either the prince himself had bad designs, or not being endowed with royal
virtues, and destitute of wisdom, he committed the administration of his
affairs (...) unskilful or corrupt hands. Whence was it that affecting
arbitrary rule has so often thrown this kingdom into civil wars? The fault lay
in the judges, who wrested law, and made it serve the turns of power; and in
the ministers, who did not perform their duty in representing to the prince the
danger of such measures. From whence have arisen those schisms by which the
church has been so often rent asunder, but from neglect or unskilfulness in the
general administration? From neglect, when the temple was suffered to be
profaned by the licentious living, the pride, ignorance, and vices of the
clergy, which might induce many to separate from such whose lives, they
thought, were a blemish to their doctrine. From unskilfulness, when the
government has believed that diseases of long growth could admit of a sudde^
cure, that to sharp humors it was better to apply ^^^^oding medicines than
^enitives, and that persecution was the only way of reclaiming non-conformists
from their errors. What has most frequently been the cause of public wants, but
a complication of mismanagements, as well in the prince as in his ministers? He
omitted his part, which was to overlook them, and his negligence produced their
corruption. They encouraged profusion, as getting most by it, and he neglected
economy, because it gave him present trouble. In governments ill administered,
public wants lead the way; but private poverty follows close after; and when
both happen together, which must always be the case at last, then is ruin near
at hand. Which way soever we look, when any thing has been out of order in a
state, generally speaking, the mischief did proceed from some omission in the
executive power, either from above or from below; when vice abounds, we find
the laws have not been put in execution; when impiety and irreligion prevail,
they have not been sufficiently discountenanced; when there is an uncommon
decay of trade, it is either not encouraged or not protected; when the law is
tedious and expensive, some great corruption has been suffered to creep into
the courts of justice; in naval matters, when good conduct and courage are
wanting, negligence and cowardice have met with too much impunity. Thus, in
these instances, and in many others, which have been ever the subjects of
complaint, as at first they were derived from a bad, so they are to be
corrected by a better administration of affairs Daven. V.13.
. [Consequently not by bribery and corruption.]

Much nobler it is to enjoy the praises of an universal people living in plenty
and at their ease, no^ bur^hened by taxes and duties, than to have the good
words of a few flatterers, or those harpies which commonly haunt a court, to
gripe all they can; who, ^hen they are gorged themselves, pollute all the
re^ainder with their obscene claws, so that nobody else desires to touch it.
Besides, we have hardly an ^^^tance of any prince that in time of need was
truly (...) and defended by his minions, and the crea^^res of his bounty and
favor; but a king beloved for wise, just, and careful government, has been
very ^^^dom deserted by his people Daven. II.263.
.

I wish (says the excellent Mr. Trenchard) our ^^bblers in corruption would
count their gains, and balance their losses with their wicked advantages. Let
them set down in one column their mercenary gifts and precarious dependencies;
sometimes half purchased with money, sometimes by dividing the profits with
parasites, and always with the loss of their integrity and reputation; and on
the other side let them write down expensive contentions, and constant
attendance in town, to the neglect of their families and affairs, and a manner
of living often unsuitable to their fortunes, and destructive to their health,
and at least one fourth part of their estates mortgaged, and liable to the
discharge of the public debts; and above all the rest, the insecurity of what
remains, which must be involved in every species of public misery. And then let
them cast up the account, and see where the balance lies CATO'S LET. III.279.
.

Let them consider, on the other hand, (says he) what a figure they make in
their several countries, among their neighbors, their acquaintance, their
former friends, and often amongst their own relations. See how they have been
hunted and pursu^^ from place to place, with reproaches and curses from every
honest man in England; how they have be^^ rejected in counties and rich
boroughs, and indee^ only hoped for success any where, by the mere fo^^ of
exorbitant corruption, which has swallowed u^* great part of their unjust
extortions. Then let the^ set against all these evils, a good conscience, a
(...) reputation, a disengaged estate, and being the hap^^ members of a free,
powerful, and safe kingdom; (...) which was once their case, and might have
continued so, if they had acted with integrity. Sure it is worth no man's time,
to change an estate of inheritance, secured to him by steady and impartial
laws, for a precarious title to the greatest advantages, at the wi^^ of any man
whatsoever CATO'S LET. III.280.
.

The public can never have a firm existence, unless all the different ranks of
men cooperate to its preservation, not faintly, but with the utmost spirit and
vigor. For if among those in high stations, there is not an affection which
warmly embraces the honor and interest of the commonwealth, and if the same
genius does not universally possess the inferior order of people, such supine
negligence and giddy administration will creep into the state, as must be
attended at last with sudden ruin. If it be the interest of a great many to
promote disorder, the affairs of a country will proceed amiss, notwithstanding
all the endeavors of a wise and virtuous prin^e, and a good senate. Therefore,
to mend things rightly, the whole people must be mended. To bring this about,
in all likelihood, the best ways are by precepts and examples to inspire as
many as possible with a true zeal and affection to their native country; to
cultivate in the minds of the common people, a due reverence to religion; to
advance morality among the better sort; to give all men in general, an honest
interest; and to make virtue and merit the only road to greatness and
preferment. It may perhaps be beneficial and safe in a tyranny, ^o let all
things loose, and deprave the manners of the people; for the light is thereby
extinguished, that would otherwise be troublesome and too discerning; but it is
not so with lawful governments, where the prince and people compose one body;
since if the inferior members are there infected, the disease will produce such
unwholesome fumes and vapors, as may reach and hurt the head at last. After a
country has been long afflicted with calamities occasioned by foreign or civil
wars, the minds of the people will take different turns, sometimes to great
piety, and at other seasons to the height of vice. The Rom^^^, after the Gauls
had sacked and burnt Rome, were presently kindled with new devotion. They
revived their ancient justice and discipline, they restored those old and
almost obsolete laws, that were the chief strength of their constitution, and
they reassumed their former virtue. But after the civil wars in the times of
Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, they were not at all bettered by their miseries,
(which is the worst symptom of a depraved people) and rather plunged deeper
into wickedness. For when Vespasian's party seized the city, there were in some
streets rapine and murders, and in others, feasting and prostitution; so that
one and the same town, gave the view of a raging war, and a riotous peace. Wise
lawgivers and directors of a people, may make advantage of a favorable crisis.
As for example, when a long war is at an end, they may take that time to reform
the vices of the age; for at such a season, when poverty is grown upon them,
men will probably be more willing to listen after virtue, and those methods, by
which their condition is to be restored. Nothing prevails mo^^ with the
multitude, nor operates better toward their amendment, than the example of the
great ones; if such are seen to content themselves with moderate power, wealth,
and honors, it teaches those belo^ them to be temperate in their desires; by
which means, faction may be quite rooted out, which in most soils is but a weed
that grows from the disappointment of ambitious hopes; and where faction can be
destroyed, government is rendered much more easy to the rulers, and without
doubt less expensive; for when that reigns, men expect to be highly courted,
and largely paid, for looking after their own safety. Dishonesty has nothing in
it so very charming, but (...) mankind might be persuaded to lay it quite
aside, at least in relation to the public, if they could do their business in
the world with other aids, and by any other way. For why in the late reign^ did
so many protestants help on the designs of popery? -- Because it was the only
means of obtaining greatness and preferment. Why in former times were we
betrayed by some persons? -- Because the court had made selling the peoples
rights, a gainful traffic. But if men could have mounted up to wealth and
honors by any other steps, if those who were then at the helm, had employed
and rewarded such as they had seen zealous for the religion of their country,
jealous of its liberties, and careful of its safety; if general integrity had
been taken notice of, and called into the offices of the state, by degrees the
age would have mended of itself; vice and folly must have withdrawn, and been
out of countenance, and virtue and good sense might perhaps, at last, have
gotten the upper hand. Any body of men that have but one way to honors and
advancement, will take that course, though it be never so much out of the road
of honesty; and if there is but one place where offices and dignities grow, and
are gathered, thither men will get, whatever it shall cost them. Any faculty of
the mind, whether for use or for pleasure, which is in great vogue and
estimation, will be cultivated and improved; and men will bend their whole
study to excel, in what they see most pleasing or most advantageous. It is the
same thing with vice and virtue, either of them thrive, as they are encouraged
or discountenanced. Bar but the gate to vice, and men will desire to enter and
advance themselves in the world by courage, prudence, temperance, integrity,
zeal for the public, magnanimity, and true wisdom; but if another mark be set
up, and all their aims directed thither, they will endeavor to rise and
prosper as others have done, by fraud, se^vile compliance, treachery, artifice,
bribery, tricks, and corrupted eloquence; and when a commonwealth is thus
abandoned, even some of those in good esteem are contented to come in, and take
their share of the plunder. In a free country, it is the concern and interest
of princes, that virtue should be restored to her just value, and rightful
dominion; and that vice should for ever be deposed, and especially banished
from the place in which are bred up the men of action and counsel. When men
quit the paths of virtue, which lead to true wisdom, they are presently
bewildered in error; and 'till they get again into the right road, and observe
her dictates and directions, nothing is to be expected but misery and
confusion. When men leave honesty, wisdom forsakes them, and mixes no longer in
their counsels; and the general immoralities of a people, embolden weak and ill
persons, to thrust themselves into the administration of business, who, void of
all skill and art, cast the commonwealth upon rocks, where she is like to split
and perish; and in such a country, unless there be an universal tendency in the
whole, (...) be guided by the principles of former honor, i^ affairs must
impair daily, till at last, in the course of a few years, it shall be quite
lost, and utterly extinguished. In a free country, if a few of the mo^^
conspicuous persons, do but agree to lay to heart the honor and safety of the
public, they will go very far toward its preservation, or at least keep off
the evil day for a while. For when fortune had undertaken to destroy the
commonwealth of Rome, the single virtue of Cato held her long in play, and gave
her a great deal of opposition; much more then, in a nation where many yet
remain untainted, may these good patriots, if they will exert themselves,
preserve its constitution against the attempts of designing men; who are very
far from having the wealth of Crassus, the fame of Pompey, or Caesar's conduct,
and who indeed resemble the subverters of the Roman liberty in nothing, but the
luxury and rage of Clodius. When things go amiss in a state, men are apt to
blame the ministers; though such errors, (the corruption of the people
considered) perhaps were not to be avoided. For a country may have been so
depraved, in a long process of time, that its affairs cannot suddenly be
capable of a good and sound administration. But if any corruptions are crept
into the subordinate parts of this government, they will be undoubtedly
corrected in times of peace and quiet.

Nor could it be difficult for former princes to corrupt both the electors and
the elected; for in most kingdoms, the court has been a shop with wares in it
to fit all kinds of customers; there is hope for some, which feeds many at a
small expense; there are titles for the ambitious; pleasures for the young and
wan^on; places for the busy; and bribes ^o be clearly conveyed for such as
desire to maintain an appearance of honesty, and to betray their trust but now
and then in important matters. With these baits and allurements, princes might
easily draw into their net the unthinking gentry of the land, and thereby
poison the fountain head of the laws, and sap the very foundations of the
political constitution Daven. II.57.
.

Let us hear, on this subject, Sir Francis Dashwood in the house of commons. A.
D. 1745 Alm. DEB. COM. II.331.
.

That there is a difference, Sir, between our constitution and establishment,
that under the latter the former may be destroyed, and consequently the people
divested of their rights and privileges, no one can deny, who considers the
fatal effects of corruption; nor can any man pretend, that the people are not
sensible of this difference, if he reflects upon the instructions that have
been given by the people in all parts of the united kingdom, to their
representatives in this house. That the danger to which our constitution may be
exposed by the success of the present rebellion is more imminent, no man, I
believe, will openly deny; but that the danger to which it may be exposed by
the success of corruption is more certain, every man must grant, who is not
biassed by the post or pension by which his head is confounded, though his
heart may not perhaps be as yet corrupted. Should the rebellion be crowned with
success, which I think we are in very little danger of; our constitution may be
preserved even by the good sense of the pretender himself, if he has any,
because a constitutionally limited monarchy is more secure, and consequently
more elegible to a king of good sense, than the most absolute one; but the
singular misfortune of corruption is, that a king may thereby be rendered
absolute, even without his designing or knowing any thing of it, till it
becomes impossible for him to govern by any other means. Gentlemen I see, Sir,
are surprised at such a new and extraordinary doctrine; but there is nothing
more plain, if we consider the nature of government, and the only two methods
by which it can be supported. No man, I believe, ever supposed that a
government can be supported by a king or other supreme magistrate by himself
alone. He must have a majority, or at least a great number of people, engaged
with him to support the government, and these men must be engaged by the public
interest, or each man by his own private interest. The multitude, I shall
grant, may be kept in awe by their fears; but the most absolute, the most
arbitrary tyrant must have a number of men engaged by their private interest
sufficient to impress that fear. One single man may, by his authority, persuade
a multitude; but a single man never can frighten a multitude. Every government
must therefore have a number of men for its support, and thos^ men must be kept
engaged to do so by the public, or by their private interest. When those who
support the government are engaged to do so by the public ^nterest alone, or by
that chiefly, it is a free government, even though by its form it be supremely
administered by one sole monarch. But when they who support the government are
engaged to do so by their private interest alone, or by that chiefly, it is an
absolute government, even though by its form it be supremely administered by a
king, lords, and commons; and such a government can be supported no way but by
corruption. If such a government be supremely administered by a sole monarch,
he must have a mercenary army for his support, and money enough to hire or
corrupt them; and if such a government be by its form supremely administered by
a king and parliament, he must have money enough to hire or corrupt his
mercenary parliament, as well as his mercenary army. To apply this, Sir, to our
constitution, and to show that by corruption our king may, without his own
knowledge, be rendered not only absolute, but unable to govern by any other
means; it is very certain, that the freedom of our constitution consists in
every man's being directed with respect to his voting both at elections, and in
parliament, by the public interest alone, or by that chiefly: Whilst this
continues to be the case, our constitution will be preserved, and we shall
continue to be a free people. For this purpose, a public and disinterested
spirit must be propagated and preserved among the people, and it will always be
the king's interest to do so, because he can have no interest separate or
distinct from that of his people. But ministers have often a private interest
which is distinct from, and opposite to that of the people; and when any such
man happens unfortunately to become the king's prime minister, he will make it
his business to root out all public spirit, and to plant a selfish spirit in
its stead. All the favors of the crown, and all the posts and offices in the
kingdom will be bestowed, not upon those who deserve them, or are qualified for
them, but upon those that vote in parliament, or at elections according to his
direction, and without any regard to the national interest. This a cunning
minister may do without its being possible for the king to discover it; because
the king can know the merits or qualifications but of a very few of his
subjects. By such means, a selfish venal spirit may be introduced into
parliament, and from thence propagated through the whole nation; and then if
the king has but money enough, or lucrative places and offices enough at his
disposal, which a corrupt parliament will always take care to provide for him,
he becomes, without his designing it, as absolute as if he had no parliament at
all, and may act in a more oppressive manner than any sole monarch can venture
to do, because he has the sanction of parliament for every thing he does, and
has the principal families in the kingdom engaged to justify his measures.
Thus, Sir, our king may be made absolute without his having ever entertained
any design against our liberties; and the poison being once thoroughly
diffused, which it may by such a minister's continuing long at the head of the
administration, it will then be impossible for the king to support his
government without corruption; for when the public interest is considered by no
man, or but by a very few, when the whole or a great majority of the people are
actuated by nothing but selfish mercenary views, can the king expect to have
his government supported by a majority in parliament, let his measures be never
so much calculated for the public good, unless* he makes it their private
interest to do so? While he can do this, he may expect to reign absolute, and
yet according to law; but the moment he ceases to do this, or ceases being able
to do it, he must either put an end to parliaments, or the parliament will put
an end to his reign; for all those who find they cannot make their market of
him, will join against him, in hopes of making a better market of his
successor. I must therefore think, Sir, we cannot do a better service to our
sovereign, than by passing such laws as are necessary for putting a stop to the
progress of corruption, and reviving a public and disinterested spirit among
the people; and as the people have loudly called for some such laws being
passed, we cannot take a more proper opportunity for introducing them, because
it will confirm and strengthen that spirit which now appears among the people
without doors in ^avour of our present establishment, and will make them more
ready to venture their lives in support of the government, should any future
success of the rebels, or the landing of any foreign troops, make it necessary
for us to call for the assistance of their hands as well as their purses. What
our ministers may think, Sir, I do not know, having little or no correspondence
with any of them; but as they enjoy the greatest advantages under our present
governmeat, and as the people have so generally shown themselves zealous for
supporting that government, under which they in particular enjoy so many
advantages, I am sure: every other man thinks they are in gratitude bound to
give satisfaction to the people with regard to those laws which they think so
necessary for securing their liberties against the fatal effects of corruption.
Therefore I do expect in this session to see a very extraordinary change in the
conduct of our ministers. Though in former sessions they have opposed every
such law, yet now I hope they will themselves be the introducers and the
promoters of every one of those laws which the people have so long called for
in vain; and if I should have the pleasure of seeing such a change in their
conduct, I make no doubt of having the pleasure to see every one of those bills
passed into laws, without any opposition in either house of parliament. These,
Sir, are the hopes I conceive from that spirit which has appeared among the
people for supporting our present most excellent government, and our present
most wise administration. This is the return of gratitude I expect from our
ministers, who have always shown themselves most grateful to those who have
served them in this house or at elections; and I hope they will not be less
grateful to those who have shown themselves ready to serve their king and
country at a time of such imminent danger. This return, I am sure the people
expect; and I think we should take this first opportunity to give them some
hopes of their not meeting with a disappointment. As we do not know how soon
the rebels may enter England, as we do not know how soon an army of foreign
troops may be landed amongst us, we ought not in prudence to let slip this
first opportunity of convincing the people, that there is nothing they can
desire for securing their liberties, but what they may expect from this
government, and from this session of parliament. For this reason, Sir, I think
it necessary to add something to our address on this occasion. Therefore I have
prepared an additional paragraph; and I must humbly move, that it may be added
to what the honorable gentleman has been pleased to propose. The additional
paragraph I have prepared is in these words. And in order to the firmer
establishment of his majesty's throne on the solid and truly glorious basis of
his people's affections, it shall be our zealous and speedy care to frame such
bills, as, if passed into laws, may prove most effectual for securing to his
majesty's faithful subjects the perpetual enjoyment of their undoubted right to
be freely and fairly represented in parliaments frequently chosen and exempted
from undue influence of every kind. For easing their minds in time to come of
the apprehension they might entertain of seeing abuses in offices rendered
perpetual without the seasonable interposition of parliament to reform them,
and for raising in every true lover of his king and country the pleasing hopes
of beholding these realms once more restored to that happy and flourishing
state, which may reflect the highest honor on his majesty's reign, and cause
posterity to look back with veneration and gratitude on the source of their
national felicity.

CHAP. VII. The common Apologies for Corruption, as a supposed necessary Engine
of Government, shown to be false.
LORD Walpole, in his speech, A. D. 1739, labors to show, that the sovereign's
power of rewarding merit is one of the most fundamental and most useful parts
of our constitution: [so a learned bishop tells us, in his Alliance between
Church and State, that an established provision for the clergy is the very
foundation-stone of a church. I like those honest men, who fairly own, that
money is their great object.] There are many sorts of public services (says
lord Walpole) which cannot be immediately explained, which it would be
inconsistent with the public good to divulge; and yet, if this bill [the
pension bill] should pass into a law, his majesty could reward no services in
any member of the other house without explaining and divulging these services;
nay, and putting it in the pow^^ of that house to judge, whether these services
deserved such a reward, which might occasion disputes between that house and
the crown, and would certainly discourage every member of that house from
rendering any secret services to the public. [The Dutch carry on their
government very successfully without this waste of the public money to reward
secret services.] This, my lords, would be a great prejudice to our civil
government; and the frequent oaths that are to be introduced by this bill would
be of the most dangerous consequence, not only to our established religion, but
even to natural religion itself. In our ancient polity, both religious and
civil, it was a wise maxim, never to oblige or allow a man to swear in any case
where self-interest was concerned, especially when the circumstances of the
case were such as made it impossible to convict him of perjury, even though he
should be guilty of it; but this maxim seems to be quite overturned by this
bill, and, therefore, I am convinced it will introduce amongst us an utter
contempt of perjury, which is always followed by an utter contempt of religion
DEB. LORDS, VI.374.
.

But will the unrestrained practice of peculation, without oaths, be found
consistent with religion and morality? Government, we know, never hesitates
about exposing the merchant, tradesman, manufacturer, or shipmaster to the
danger of perjury for the sake of the revenue.

Some of the tools of power insisted in Mr. Gordon's time, A. D. 1722, as he
tells us TRACTS, I.335.
, that matters are come to that pass that we must either receive the pretender,
or keep him out with bribes and standing armies. That the nation is so corrupt,
that there is no governing it by any other means. And, in short, that we must
submit to this great evil, to prevent a greater; as if any mischief could be
more terrible than the highest and most terrible of all mischiefs, universal
corruption and a military government. It is indeed impossible for the subtilty
of traitors, the malice of devils, or the cunning and cruelty of our most
implacable enemies, to suggest stronger motives for the undermining and
overthrow of our excellent establishment, which is built upon the destruction
of tyranny, and can stand upon no other bottom. It is madness in extremity, to
hope that a government founded upon liberty, and the free choice of the
assertors of it, can be supported by other principles; and whoever would
maintain it by contrary ones, intends to blow it up, let him allege what he
will. This gives me every day new reasons to believe what I have long
suspected; for if ever a question should arise, Whether a nation shall submit
to certain ruin, or struggle for a remedy? these gentlemen well know which side
they will choose, and certainly intend that which they must choose. I am willing
to think, that those impotent babblers speak not the sense of their superiors,
but would make servile court to them from topics which they abhor. Their
superiors must know, that it is raving and phrenzy to affirm, that a free
people can be long governed by impotent terrors, that millions will consent to
be ruined by the corruption of a few; or that those few will join in their ruin
any longer than the corruption lasts. That every day new and greater demands
will rise upon the corruptors; that no revenue, how great soever, will feed the
voraciousness of the corrupted; and that every disappointment will make them
turn upon the oppressors of their country, and fall into its true interest and
their own. That there is no way in nature to preserve a revolution in
government but making the people easy under it, and showing them their interest
in it; and that corruption, bribery, and terrors will make no lasting friends,
but infinite and implacable enemies; and that the best security of a prince
amongst free people, is the affections of his people, which he can always gain
by making their interest his own, and by showing that all his views tend to
their good. They will then, as they love themselves, love him, and defend him
who defends them. Upon this faithful basis, his safety will be better
established, than upon the ambitious and variable leaders of a few legions, who
may be corrupted, disobliged, or surprised; and often have been so; and hence
great revolutions have been brought about, and great nations undone, only by
the revolt of single regiments. Show a nation their interest, and they will
certainly fall into it. A whole people can have no ambition but to be governed
justly, and when they are so, the intrigues and dissatisfactions of particulars
will fall upon their own heads. What has any of our former courts ever got by
corruption, but to disaffect the people, and weaken themselves? Let us now
think of other methods, if it is only for the sake of the experiment. The ways
of corr^^^ion have been tried long enough in past administrations. Let us try,
in this, what public honesty will do, and not condemn it, before we have fully
proved it, and found it ineffectual; and it will be time enough to try other
methods when this fails.

That all-beholding eye which controuls the universe, pierces through all
disguises, and perceives, that the diffusion of vice through this nation is
derived from one source, the corruption of the great; which, promoted by the
most assiduous arts, and vindicated by venal eloquence, has, at length,
absorbed all regard for the community into the two selfish passions of ambition
and avarice. And when the most vigorous effort [by a place-bill] was made to
purge that place [the house of commons] which once cleansed, would have
transfused its own purity through all orders and degrees of men, did not the
f^agitious opposition to that attempt, so essential to the very being of
virtue, and solicited by the earnest and universal cry of the whole people,
produce an instance of supererogatory prostitution, which drew wonder from a
minister? For want of this barrier to confine corruption, honesty has been put
up to public sale, and found its price, to the cost of a nation twice betrayed;
hence a loose has been given to public profusion, and rapine, unchecked, and
unchastised; and the illicit gains have been as profusely squandered by
individuals, in luxury, sensuality, and every unmanly gratification; and hence
the means of obtaining these ignominious emoluments have been purchased by
involving the nation in perjury, treachery, and a general dissolution of
manners Gord. TRACTS, II.269.
.

Only able men are equal to the weight of just government. Every blockhead
(...) capable of the scheme of government we have seen carried on in this
country (not in the present incorrupt times) because every blockhead can pay a
set of hirelings, while he can find the assets. To make straight what is
crooked, to level mountains and raise valleys, to redress what is wrong, is
matter of labor, as well as of genius, and ministers love ease better than
toil, and the card-table and bottle of Burgundy better than reading and
thinking. Then they cry out, You must not expect that statesmen should make
themselves gally-slaves. Thus even laziness is dragged in as an apology for
corruption. And then they pay on and drudge on in the beaten track, and all is
well so long as they can hold their places; for their pockets are growing
fuller and fuller every day. But the excellent Davenant shows this manner of
reckoning to be fallacious, and that statesmen could not make such conclusions,
if their calculations were just.

What great hazard is there for a minister to contend with the intrigues of
here and there a courtier, discontented because his immoderate hopes of getting
are not gratified? Or to suffer the obloquies of a devouring crew, who may,
perhaps, be angry because the public is no longer exposed to be their prey, and
that they cannot make their wonted gains by the high interest of money, large
premiums, and by discounting tallies? Is it not much more safe and easy to bear
all this, than to have an army mutinous for want of pay, seamen clamorous for
their wages, the family officers grumbling* for the want of their arrears, and
at the same time, the whole people groaning under the weight of heavy taxes?
All which are the sad effects of negligence and profusion in a court Daven.
IV.426.
.

It is true, an honest and wise minister, who observes this conduct, and is
more frugal for the public than in his own private affairs, cannot avoid
raising many enemies. In a bad age it is a virtue not without its dangers. They
who have been so long fed with corruption, that their stomachs can digest no
other diet, will dislike such measures; and a man treading these st^ps must arm
himself with patience, for his temp^r must be often tried. They who would steal
the golden apples, will hate the watchful eyes that are upon them; and he who
undertakes this post, is to expect that secret malice will be working in the
dark to undermine him: Perhaps he may be pursued by the most interested part of
mankind with open clamours. Advantages will be taken of the least trip he
makes. He must look for traverses, to be traduced, and to have his actions
scanned and misinterpreted. However, let him persevere, for if a state be not
quite devoted to ruin, he who acts thus uprightly for it, and with such care,
will overcome all difficulties; and the wisdom and justice of his counsels
will, at last, meet with universal approbation Ibid. 425.
.

When such as have this post are vigilant and frugal for the public, those in
lower stations think it needful to tread in the same steps. When they who sit
at helm have clean hands themselves, they can compel those below them to be
honest; and hope of reward, or fear of punishment, working more than sense of
duty, men begin to find it their interest to quit the ill courses they were in,
especially when they see they have not the corruption of those above them to
resort to as a refuge. Thus great examples from chief ministers may, by
degrees, restore the affairs of a whole kingdom. Besides, their vigilance and
frugality give such credit, and add such real strength to any state, that they
who rule it will soon be able to reform abuses. On the other hand, where there
is a corrupt, negligent, and profuse administration, does any thing go right?
Is not the bad influence of it felt from top to bottom? Who, is there that
thinks it worth his while to serve well? When the public is exposed to plunder,
does not almost every man forget the duties of his office, and employ his whole
thoughts in contriving how he may have as large a share of the booty as any of
his fellow robbers? And do not the great thieves protect the less? In a state
so disordered, what is there to induce men to discharge their duty, but
sometimes honor Daven. IV.423.
?

In the year 1711, when the tories were endeavoring to overturn the whig
administration, which had reduced the power of France so low, and were
projecting the infamous treaty of Utrecht, Burnet says, They finding the house
of lords could not be brought to favor their designs, resolved to make an
experiment, which none of our princes ventured upon in former times; a
resolution was taken of making twelve peers at once. What has been the conduct
of the minister under similar circumstances? has he not advised the creation of
sixteen new peerages, not, indeed, at once; that would have been too explicit a
declaration of his motives, but all in the space of two years; and not content
with this, he has likewise advised the giving pensions to a great number of
that house, under the denomination, indeed, of lords of the bedchamber; but as
the number of these lords has been increased in the present reign from twelve
to twenty-two, the fact is, that by what ever name they are called, the king
has so many more servants in his pay in that house, and the m -- has the rod of
deprivation hanging over their heads, which has lately fallen most heavily upon
those who have presumed to exercise their freedom of voting against what he
recommended. But in the other house, and where it is more material, this
measure has been carried much farther. We are informed by history, that from
the time of the revolution, it has been the characteristic mark of those who
opposed any increase of power in the crown to contrive bylaws, and every other
method, to prevent the influence of the crown in that house. Several acts of
parliament have been passed to limit the number of officers who received their
places from the crown, to have seats in the house of commons, and one
particularly during the whig administration of queen Anne, which declares that
no person possessed of an office, created after such a period, should be
capable of a seat in that house; and this was afterward enforced by another of
1 Geo. I. which was proposed by Mr. Stanhope, secretary of state, and
restrained persons having pensions during pleasure, from sitting in the house
of commons. These laws were passed to be a restraint on the crown, they are now
in force, and mean to provide for the liberty of the people, by preventing the
crown from creating a dependence upon it in the representatives: but, like
other human institutions, they have been evaded; when a minister shall presume
to advise, in the teeth of those acts of parliament, the creation of such a
number of grooms of the bedchamber, clerks of the green cloth, and other
officers of the household, each with a salary of 500 l. per annum, as to be
double the number of these of his late majesty; and when some gentlemen have
been removed from these employments with pensions, to make room for members of
the house of commons, that the law might be only evaded, not openly violated;
and when we see gentlemen of the first fortunes, and who have the two last
reigns prided themselves in their independency, eagarly and meanly thrusting
themselves into this pitiful pension; I say, when we consider these things,
where is the security of laws, or upon what principles of the constitution can
these measures be defended? The reason, I understand, the minister gives for
pursuing this measure, is the union of parties; the larger the source of bounty
in the crown, the more general will be its dues. This may be plausible
reasoning, but the fact is, and of this I confess myself jealous, that by these
pensions, the crown has increased its influence in the house of commons; and
with regard to the act of queen Anne, if a list of new erected places should,
as was done the beginning of the late reign, be ordered to be laid upon the
table of the house of commons, I cannot see but that those of the supernumerary
offices of the household must be of the number; otherwise the crown may, in any
future emergency, create as many as shall then be found necessary to answer the
pu^poses of the minister CATO'S LET. I.51.
.

There arises infinite michief from the ambition of particulars. But what
ambition? The ambition of shining in the eyes of men of discernment? Of
excelling in knowledge, or in virtue? Of being blessings to their country, and
tutelar gods to mankind? Nothing less. Their ambition is only to get into ranks
and places, which are distinguished; not to be men of distinguished characters
in those ranks and places. They have not the sense to consider, that the
cringing of the multitude is not to the man, but to the star and garter, the
long wig, or the lacquered chair.

Compare a true great man, with a mean man in a great place, an Epaminondas
with an Alexander, a Scipio with a Caesar, a Trajan with a Chapter V. the effect
will be the same, as that of placing an oriental diamond by a Bristol stone.

When vanity, luxury, and prodigality are in fashion, the desire of riches must
necessarily increase in proportion to them: and when the power is in the hands
of base, mercenary persons, they will always (to use the courtiers phrase) make
as much profit of their places as they can. Not only matters of favor, but of
justice too, will be exposed to sale; and no way will be open to honors or
magistracies, but paying largely for them. He that gets an office by these
means, will not execute it gratis: he thinks he may sell what he has bought,
and would not have entered by corrupt ways, if he had not intended to deal
corruptly CATO'S LET. I.201.
.

However we shall venture to affirm, that if this nation should ever be under
any great disorder, the truest course to mend it, will be to plant in the minds
of the better sorts morality, and the shame of doing ill to their country; and
we shall presume to assert, that observing the rules and dictates of virtue,
does not only lead to heaven and a blessed state hereafter, but it is the best
way of securing to a people in general, prosperity, peace, safety, and
happiness, in this present world Daven. II.321.
.

CHAP. VIII. Bills, Statutes, Resolutions, etc. showing the Sense of Mankind on
the Evil of Placemen and Pensioners in Parliament.
THE general principle, says the author of the DISSERTATION UPON PARTIES, p.
198. That parliaments ought to be independent on the crown, has not only been
always the same, but it has been always so declared in the most authentic and
solemn manner; and parliaments have not been more intent on any national
concern whatever, than on maintaining this principle, and securing the effects
of it. I say, parliaments have been constantly thus intent, and especially in
the best times, during more than three centuries at least; for I would not go
back too far, nor grope unnecessarily in the dark. What else did those laws
mean, that were made in the time of the Lancaster kings to regulate the
elections, and to prevent the influence, which Rich. II. had illegally and
arbitrarily employed, and which there was room to fear that other princes might
employ? What else do all those resolutions, all those acts of parliament mean,
that have been made so often, and enforced so strongly from time to time, and
from those days to these, against the influence of the crown, either on the
elections, or on the members of parliament?

There is another question which I must ask. If this be so, what do these men
mean, who are employed, or rather what does he mean [ Walpole] who employs
them, to plead in all places and on all occasions, even the most solemn, in
favor of this very influence, nay of the very worst sort of it; of that
influence which is created immediately by corruption; for to that their
arguments reach, by undeniable consequence. Reason is against him and them,
since it is a plain absurdity to suppose a control on the crown, (and they
have not yet ventured to suppose the contrary that I know of) and to establish
at the same time a power and even a right in the crown to render this control
useless. Experience is against them, since the examples of other countries, and
at some times (former times I mean) of our own, have proved that a prince may
govern according to his arbitrary will, or that of his mere arbitrary minister,
as absolutely, and much more securely with, than without the concurrence of a
parliament. Authority, even the uniform authority of our whole legislature is
against them. The voice of our law gives them the lie. How then shall we
account for this proceeding; this open and desperate attack upon our
constitution, and therefore upon our liberty? Have these great men made any
nice discovery that escaped the sagacity of our ancestors, and is above the
narrow conceptions of all other men except themselves at this time? Is it less
fit now, than the wisdom of this nation has judged it to be for so many ages,
that kings should govern under the constitutional control of two other estates
DISSERTATION ON PARTIES, 198.
?

The XXXIst article of Magna Charta restrains the king's officers from holding
pleas of the crown. Nullus vicecomes, constabularius, etc. Brady, II. Append.
p. 134.


So early as A. D. 1375, the commons were sensible of the necessity of a
place-bill. For in that year, they petitioned the king, that no member for
county, or city, be a collector of taxes PARL. HIST. I.337.
.

The sense of our ancestors on pluralities, and incompatible places, appears by
an act made, A. D. 1413. That no undersheriff, sheriffs clerk, receiver, or
bailiff, be attorney in the king's courts, while in any of those offices. At
the same time was passed an act to prevent frauds in elections Rapin, I.505.
.

In the parliament of A. D. 1451, it was provided, that no member should be a
commissioner or collector PARL. HIST. II.278.
.

We know, (says the brave Fletcher of Scotland) that the customs have been
taken from the farmer^ [the customs were then farmed in Britain as now in
France] only to bestow the collectors places upon parliament men [in Scotland.]
Shall we make good such funds as are exhausted by bribing men to betray our
liberty? If any justice were to be found in this nation, the advisers of such
measures had long ago been brought to a scaffold. There is no crime under
heaven more enormous, more treacherous, and more destructive to the very nature
of our government, than that of bribing parliament Fletcher, p. 357.
. What would this staunch old Scot have said, if he had seen some hundreds of
notorious placemen sitting in the British senate, and voting 600,000 l. at once
out of the pockets of the poor people, to make good deficiencies in the civil
list, exhausted by * * hiatus * *?

On occasion of the king's attorney being elected a member, A. D. 1614, Sir
Roger Owen said, No attorney had ever been chosen, nor anciently any privy
counselor, nor any who took livery of the king. That, 7. Rich. II. a knight
banneret was put out of the house. Sir Thomas More, who had been himself
chancellor, and speaker, says, The eye of a courtier can endure no color, but
one; the king's livery dazzling his sight. He compares them to clouds gilded by
the sun's rays, and to brass coin, which the king's stamp makes current. After
searching of precedents, it was resolved, That Noy should sit the remainder of
the parliament; but no attorney general after him PARL. HIST. V.295.
.

Pensioning was got to such a height, A. D. 1618, that an order was obtained
from the king to the officers of the exchequer to pay no pension that he shall
grant for the future ACT. REG. IV.305.
.

Even the king-killing parliament (Que Dieu m'en conserve, the French say, when
they are frightened, et la saint Vierge) proposed that no person serving for
wages be a voter. How absurd then that members themselves be servants receiving
wages of those whose interest it is to plunder and enslave their fellow
subjects. They likewise exclude all members of councils of state, officers in
army or garrison, treasurers, or receivers of public money, and lawyers, to the
end all officers of state may be certainly accountable, and no factious men to
maintain corrupt interests. They likewise propose very good regulations for
carrying on elections, and restrain their proposed parliament from several
things, as impressing men for foreign service, making void public securities,
punishing arbitrarily without authority of law, men before the offense; giving
up or taking away any of the common rights of the people PARL. HIST. XVIII.526,
527.
.

A. D. 1643, an attempt toward a place-bill was made. There was no great want
of it in those days, the court having few places to dispose of. Yet Chapter I.
tells his Oxford parliament, that most of them were in his service. This
probably gave rise to the self-denying ordinance Ibid. XII.463.
.

The self-denying ordinance, A. D. 1645. was a signal exhibition, and instar
omnium, of the sense of parliament, on this subject. It enacts by the authority
of lords and commons, that all members of both houses be at the end of 40 days
discharged from holding any place, civil or military, granted by parliament
since Nov. 1640. All other officers, commanders, etc. to continue as before.
The benefit of all offices, neither military nor judicial, hereafter to be
granted by parliament, to go to such public use as parliament shall appoint,
leaving to the persons holding such offices only such a competent salary as
parliament shall appoint. Some places and offices are excepted Ibid. XIII.443.
. But Mr. Prynne severely accuses the members of violating the self-denying
ordinance. There is scarce one day, says he, or week at least, does pass, but
we are still bestowing some place or office upon members, for which we are
censured in pamphlets, etc. PARL. HIST. XVIII.322.


What do the enemy say? Nay, what do many say who were friends at the beginning
of this parliament* Even this, that the members of both houses have got great
places and commands, and the sword into their hands. What by interest in
parliament, what by power in the army, they will perpetually continue
themselves in grandeur, and not permit the war speedily to end, lest their own
power should determine with it. The words of Cromwell on the self-denying
ordinance Rapin. II.513.
. The self-denying ordinance passes the commons, is rejected by the lords, sent
again to the lords, and passed by them after four months Ibid. II.516.
; which, says Whitelock, began the fatal difference between the two houses,
which ended in cutting off the lords from parliament. Shameful that the lords
with their great estates should be more greedy than the commons.

Parliaments were thought by the known laws of our nation to advise and
regulate unruly kings Milt. EIK. 22.
.' [Not then surely to hold places under kings.]

Leave was given, A. D. 1679, to bring in a bill for vacating the seat of
members, accepting places DEB. COM. I.348.
.

The commons concluded the year 1680 with a vote worthy to be inscribed in
letters of gold on the most conspicuous place in St. Stephen's chapel; That no
member of the house should accept of any office o^ place of profit from the
crown, without leave of the house, nor promise of any such office, or place o^
profit, during such time as he continued a member of the house Rapin, II.719.
.

Against pensioners in parliament, A. D. 1681, an anonymous speaker argues as
follows.

The name of a pensioner is distasteful to every English spirit; and all
pensioners, I think, are sufficiently despised by their countrymen DEB. COM.
II.14^.
. He expatiates on a pensioners breach of trust; his pocketing what is given by
the people for the necessary charges of government. He observes, that receiving
a pension is plundering the people, and distressing the king, and putting him
and his ministry on wicked shifts, to satisfy a set of blood-suckers, which is
endless; for the more the court gives, the more it must go on to give. That it
naturally leads a king to think hardly of the most faithful counselors, and
incorrupt parliaments, who restrain the boundless waste of the public money.
That it lays us open to our enemies abroad by exhausting our treasure, which
should arm us against them, and disables us for paying our heavy debts. He
observes, that the pensioners of the pension-parliament called themselves the
king's friends, and so they do now. That endeavors were used, but
ineffectually, about 10 Rich. II. to get a corrupt parliament Ibid. 150.
. That there was another unsuccessful attempt about A. D. 1459, or 60. That
about 20 Hen. VIII. many of the king's dependents were in the house. But it
does not appear that any parliament gene^ally took money to vote, till the
pension parliament, under Chapter II. [Every mischief must originate from a
Stuart.] That parliament perverted the very end of parliaments, which have been
and are the great refuge of the nation, which cure all its diseases, and heal
all its sores. But those men [the pension-parliament] had made it a snare to
the nation, and at best had brought it to be a mere engine to get money,' Every
parliament which allows this evil practice is partaker of this sin DEB. COM.
I.151.
. He proposes that the pensioners be obliged to confess their fault on their
knees, before the house of commons, one by one, and that they refund. Our law,
says he, does not allow a thief to keep what he has gotten by stealth, but of
course orders restitution. And shall these proud robbers of the nation not
restore their ill gotten goods? He then proposes that every one of them be
voted incapable of sitting in parliament, or holding any office, civil or
military; For it is not fit, that they who were so false and unjust in that
trust, should ever be trusted again Ibid.
. He says their ought to be a sufficient mark of infamy set on them, that the
people may know who has bought and sold them.

A debate in the house of commons, A. D. 1689, about excluding placemen from
thence, proved warm and obstinate. Carried for the placemen, because otherwise
the fittest persons for public employments would remain excluded, and be
deprived of the opportunity of serving either king or country Tind. CONTIN.
I.116.
.

Some lords protest, A. D. 1693, against the speaker of the commons being
allowed to sit, though he had taken a place, because the speaker, if corrupt,
could do more mischief than a private member DEB. LORDS, I.422.
.

A bill was sent from the commons, A. D. 1693, for incapacitating several
persons holding places civil and military from sitting in the house of commons.
The court lords oppose it vehemently. The earl of Mulgrave spoke for it. It
appears by the speech, that the act was not then made which vacates the seat of
a placeman, and obliges him to be re-elected. The courtiers brought, instead of
this, a bill for the frequent meeting of parliaments. But William having no
mind to part with the present during the war, refused his assent, though passed
by both houses DEB. LORDS, I.417.
.

A bill was brought in, A. D. 1690, to enable commissioners to take an account
of all public moneys, to be nominated by the commons, and might be members; but
none to be dependant on, or accountable to the king or queen. To be chosen by
ballot. Every member to put into a glass a list of the nine gentlemen he judged
the fittest. Sir Samuel Barnardiston being chosen, owned, that he was one of
the accountants to their majesty's; on which another was put in his room. Some
time afterward, however, a new set of commissioners being to be chosen, Sir
Samuel was one. Whether he kept his accountant's place at the same time, does
not appear DEB. COM. II.378, 381, 388.
.

One of the heads of the bill of succession, made in king William's time, was,
That no placeman or pensioner under the king shall be a member of the house of
commons.

Resolved, A. D. 1699, That no person be a trustee for the forfeited Irish
estates, who has any place of profit or trust, or is accountable to the king,
or is a member of parliament DEB. COM. III.125.
.

A bill was passed by the commons, the same year, for restraining the number of
officers in parliament Ibid. III.94.
. Rejected by the lords.

Resolved, the same year, That no member of the house of commons be a farmer,
or manager of excise Ibid. III.124.
.

A bill to prevent parliament men taking places, was sent to the lords, A. D.
1692. It was proposed, that those who accepted places, should be incapacitated.
The bill was committed by the lords to a grand committee. Thrown out in the
house of pe^rs by two voices. This parliament was called the officers
parliament, from the great number of them in the house. The people began to be
afraid of falling under military government. Ambitious men aimed at popularity
by promoting the place-bill. Government preferred them. They then went over to
the court. Then the cry was, That the court was corrupting the house. The bill
was rejected by the lords for a profound reason. It seemed to establish (they
said) an opposition between the crown and the people, as if those who were
employed by one, could not be trusted by the other. And who can deny this? The
very idea of a representative should be, one wholly detached from every
connection with all but his constituents. Can a representative be too free?
Another employment is many times inconsistent with a seat in the house. An
officer ought to be keeping his men in order. Or is the busine^s of an officer
in the army, like that of a church officer? Some places depend for their
profits, on the quantity of money given by parliament. Is not this a temptation
to vote away the people's money? Is not parliamentary privilege enough for one
person to hold, without his having a place and pension besides? Have not the
nobility and the court power enough, without lording it in the house of commons
too? What good or lawful design can a king or minister have, in giving a place
to a member? Will it attach him more to his country's interest? or to that of
the court? which two are almost always opposite. One vote may determine the
fate of a nation Tind. CONTIN. I.227, 229.
.

William III. A. D. 1693, rejects the place-bill, though approved by both
houses, and though it only hinder^d members taking places while members. The
commons resolved, That whoever g^ve the king advice to refuse the royal assent
to a bill, which was to redress a grievance, and take off a scandal from the
proceedings of the commons in pa^liament, is an enemy to king and country, etc.
A representation to the king was drawn up, in which was a paragraph (afterward
rejected) signifying that members of parliament are responsible to their
constituents; that the constituents will probably be offended at the refusal,
and the commons knew not how to appease them, etc. Instead of this, such was
the prevalency of court-influence, that they put a paragraph, praying that for
the future, the king would follow the advice of his parliament, and not that of
private and interested persons. The king gives a general answer, the matter
drops Ibid. I.250.
.

The commons order in a bill, Dec. 13, 1696, That no person be elected member
of parliament, who holds any office, or employment of profit under the
government, nor any member accept a place or employment Tind. CONTIN. I.227.
.

There are two clauses, 12 and 13 Will. III. cap. 2. by which all offices of
trust, and all pensions from the crown, are made disqualifications STAT. AT
LARGE, III.5^^.
. This is the very salvo we wanted. But (behold the misfortune!) this excellent
regulation never came to be in force: for it was not to take place before the
arrival of a certain event (the Hanover family's succession, I suppose) and was
too good for this nation; therefore was repealed before that time. B^t the
author of FACTION DETECTED says, the cause concerning pensions has been
restored since, viz. A D. 1715; by a statute in which year a pena^ty was
appointed of 20 l. a day for any person sitting, or voting, who has a pension
from the crown for any term, short of life.

The lords having by the regency-bill rejected the clause inserted in an act
passed some years before for settling the succession, by which all civil and
military officers were made incapable of sitting or voting in the house of
commons after the queen's decease, and having sent down that bill to the
commons, they seeing the barrier against court power thrown down, resolved in
some measure to repair it by admitting only 47 civil and military officers into
their house, and among them 10 privy counselors; 5 flag officers, and as many
generals. The bill thus amended, was sent up again to the lords, who (to show
themselves always ^^iends to integrity, and enemies to corruption and tyranny)
altered it, excluding only the commissioners of the prize-office, and all such
new officers, as the court might create in time to come. Debates and
conferences followed DEB. COM. III.453.
. The court party endeavored to show the injustice of excluding those, who
were actually performing services to the nation. [If they were, how should they
serve in the house of commons?] That this would be a restraint on the liberty
of the counties and corporations, [it would restrain them indeed from injuring
their country]; that it would discourage brave men from serving their country
in war, when they found they were to be disgraced by exclusion from the house
of commons. The opposite party argued, that a bad prince might make a bad use
of his creatures and dependents in the house of commons. The bill was once
likely to be carried, postponing some of the lords amendments, [ i. e. their
amendments the wrong way] but the court party being reinforced by some coming
round, who used to be on the contrary side, [bribed most probably] the lords
amendments were approved with a few alterations, to which the lords agreed
Ibid. 454.
.

A. D. 1704. To mortify some members, who had taken places, a bill was brought
in for excluding out of the house of commons, all persons in any offices or
employments erected since Feb. 6. 1684, or to be erected Ibid. 438.
. Passed the commons immediately, but the lords (who had nothing to do with it)
must go to tinkering it, and the commons not liking (as they had not much
reason) their amendments, the bill was lost. There was likewise another bill,
immediately after, set on foot by the commons, to prevent persons entitled by
their offices to receive any benefit by public annual taxes, to be granted,
from being members of parliament: which being levelled against many brave and
deserving members, who served the nation by sea and land, occasioned some
murmurs; to stifle which, the commons empowered their committee to receive a
clause, for excepting flag officers and captains in the navy, and all general
officers and colonels of the land forces and marines; [a foolish exception;
they are some of the most dangerous people in parliament.] The bill passes in
the negative.

A bill was brought into the Scotch parliament for securing the succession, in
case of queen Anne's death. It proposed among other things, that no person
shall have a vote in regulating the succession, who has any place, mediately,
or immediately, under the crown. That all election be by ballot. A lesser baron
to be added to parliament, for every new created nobleman, to balance the two
houses. The crown not to have the power of making peace and war without
parliament. All the males between 16 and 60 to be trained. No indemnity for
state-crimes without consent of parliament. No place or pension in Scotland to
be given, but by parliament DEB. LORDS. VII.21.
.

Motion in the Scotch parliament, 1704, by lord Anstruther, that no officer of
the customs or excise, or collector, surveyor, manager of customs, nor any
farmer of any branch of the revenue, shall be a member of parliament Ibid.
VII.32.
; which was afterward enacted Ibid. VII.35.
.

A general self-denying bill was offered, A. D. 1705, by those very men, who,
in the first session of parliament, when they hoped for places themselves, had
opposed the motion for such a bill with great indignation. Now the scene was a
little altered. They saw they were not like to be favorites, and therefore
pretended to be patriots. This looked so strangely in them, that it was
rejected, but another bill of a more restrained nature passed, disabling
certain officers from serving in parliament.' To this a general clause was
added, which disabled all who held any office created since A. D. 1684, or any
in future. Passed readily the commons. The lords thought it too comprehensive.
Altered it to some particular disabilities. The commons refuse their
alterations. The excellent bill drops. So the public good is bandied from party
to party Tind. CONTIN. I.685.
.

It was resolved, A. D. 1710, even under the tory-ministry, that no person be a
commissioner (for stating the public accounts) who has any office of profit, or
is accountable to the sovereign DEB. COM, IV.196.
. So suspicious were they of the effects of clashing interests. They allowed
commissioners, however, to be chosen from the house of commons; not
apprehending any effect from members holding such a ^o^t of places, because
they were not lucrative. They were chosen by ballot. One gentleman had 246
suffrages.

A bill was ordered in A. D. 1711, for securing the freedom of parliaments, by
limiting the number of officers in the house Ibid. IV.255.
.

A committee was appointed by the house, A. D. 1711, to enquire what new
offices or places of profit had been created or erected since the 30th Oct.
1705, and whether the number of commissioners for executing offices is
increased, and to examine how the laws stand in respect of officers sitting in
the house Ibid. 257.
.

A bill (formerly often attempted) for disabling members from holding places,
was brought into the tory parliament, A. D. 1711; but dropped. The
qualification of 600 l. a year, for a knight of the shire, and 300 l. for a
burgess, passed. The design was to exclude courtiers, military men, and
merchants, and to increase the influence of the landed interest. The
qualification was not extended to Scotland Tind. CONTIN. I.200.
.

The bill for limiting the number of placemen in the house of commons was
brought in and passed, A. D. 1712. The scandal of corruption was thought to be
more flagrant than ever; for it was believed that men were not only bribed for
a whole session, but had new bribes for particular votes.

Bill for securing freedom of parliaments, by limiting the number of placemen
in the house, read a second time, and committed. And because several bills for
the same unquestionably salutary tendency had been lost in the blessed house of
peers, it was proposed to tack it to a money bill. Question put. Passes in the
negative, 160 against III DEB. COM. V.12.
. This smells strong of a collusion between the two houses, and that they both
twisted the same cord, though seemingly contrary ways and at opposite ends.

The self denying bill was brought into the house of commons, A. D. 1712, and
passed. Many of the lords being irritated at the late creation of twelve new
peers at once, it was expected it would pass their house too. But their
lordships seemed suddenly to alter their way of thinking of it; and whereas it
was drawn to take place after the present parliament, they altered it, to take
place after the death of the queen; so that it was no more thought of Burn.
IV.363
.

The commons resolved themselves into a commitee of the whole house, A. D.
171^, to consider of the several lists of accounts, of annuities, pensions,
bounties, etc. granted by the late queen, or his present majesty. Several were
mentioned by the discontents [that is, those who had none themselves] which
were bestowed on those who had no need of them. A motion made for an address to
the king against them [because we have no share]. When it was moved to address
the king to retrench unnecessary pensions; Walpole (in character) said, You
ought not to stint the king's benovolence, nor debar his majesty [the minister]
from the exercise of the most glorious branch of his royal prerogative, which
is to bestow his favors [in sordid pelf, and paltry pay] on such as
distinguish themselves in his service DEB. COM. VI.23.
[that is, in doing dirty work].

Walpole and Pulteney resign, A. D. 1720, because lord Townsend was removed
from his post of lieutenant of Ireland; and it was thought he influenced
several members to oppose the supply against Sweden, which Walpole and Pulteney
were for Ibid. VI.120.
. Walpole and Pulteney took care, both of them, to let the house know they had
resigned. What does this show? That places are odious, and the honor is to
resign them. Why? because of the filthy lucre attending them. Were they only
laborious, or were men voted into them by their country for merit, it would be
no brag to resign them Ibid. 120, 121.
.

A. D. 1728, the famous self-denying bill passed the commons, which provided,
that no member should sit, till he had taken an oath, that he had no pension
during pleasure, or for any number of years, nor any office in part, o^ in
whole, from the crown, held by any person for his benefit, and that he would
not receive any such emolument, during the time of his being a member, without
giving notice to the house within 14 days after accepting the same, if
parliament was sitting, or after its first sitting, on pain of wilful perjury,
and incapacity of holding any office. Whoever refused, or neglected taking the
oath, was to lose his seat, and forfeit 30 l. each day he sat without taking
the oath. It would have been very barefaced for the commons to have refused
this bill; for it only enacted, that no member should be a court-tool without
leave of the house. But, as the bill, if it had passed into a law, might have
been troublesome, it was contrived, that it should be thrown out by the lords.

It was now the opinion of the public, and not without foundation, that the
minister [ Walpole] suffered the pension-bill to pass in the house of commons,
only because he knew it would be thrown out in the house of lords Tind. CONTIN.
VIII.101.
.

The following is the oath to be taken by members, if the pension-bill, passed,
A. D. 1731, by the commons, and rejected by the lords, had passed into a law;
I, A. B. do solemnly and sincerely swear, that I have not, directly or
indirectly, any pension during pleasure, or for any number of years, from the
crown, nor any office in part, or in the whole, from the crown, held for me, or
for my benefit, by any person whatsoever. And I do solemnly and sincerely
promise and swear that I will not receive, accept, or take, directly or
indirectly, during the time of my being a member of this parliament, any
pension during pleasure, or for any number of years, or any other gratuity or
reward whatever, etc. without signifying the same to this house, within
fourteen days after I have received or accepted the same, if the parliament be
then sitting, or within fourteen days after the next meeting of the parliament.
So help me God DEB. COM. VIII. Append.
.

Any member taking the oath, if found to have had a pension at the time, during
pleasure, or for any number of years, etc. [as in the oath] without signifying
the same to the house, was to be held guilty of perjury, and to suffer
accordingly. Any member refusing to take the oath, was to lose his seat; or
sitting and voting, through oversight of the house, to forfeit 30 l. each day,
and to be incapacitated for holding any office, etc.

A motion was made in the house of peers, A. D. 1730, to call for a list of
pensions payable by the crown. Passes in the negative DEB. LORDS, IV.29.
. Several lords protested, Because no instance can be given, that the list of
pensioners was denied, when called for by either house. Because we conceive,
the refusal will be misinterpreted without doors, as it will raise a jealousy
that there are too many members upon the list, which aspersion ought to have
been obviated, by producing those lists, as in former times has been frequently
done.

A. D. 1731, it was moved in the house of commons, that a committee be
appointed to enquire, whether any members of this house have, directly or
indirectly, any pensions during pleasure, or for any number of years, or any
offices from the crown, held on trust for them in part, or in the whole Tind.
CONTIN. VIII.101.
. Walpole said, this was turning the house of commons into a court of
inquisition: That if it was made effectual, it would oblige members to accuse
themselves Ibid.
. This, however, was trifling; for enquiry might have been made, and
discoveries gained, as in all other cases of roguery, by means entirely
consistent with liberty and the constitution.

Sandys moves, A. D. 1731, for a committee to enquire whether any member had
any pension, directly or indirectly, during pleasure, or for years, or any
office from the crown, holden in trust for him in part or whole DEB. COM.
VII.81.
. This motion was vigorously opposed, though the pension-bill met with no
opposition. It was carried in the negative, 206 to 143.

They did not choose, I suppose, to have it known what knaves they were. So a
prudent pickpocket, being accused of purloining a missing watch in the company,
where he was; declared himself very willing to purge himself by oath; but
strongly refused standing the search. It was observed, however, on that
occasion, that many members suspected to be on the black list, voted for the
enquiry, to save appearances, well knowing that it would not proceed.

A motion was made in the house of peers, A. D. 1732, for restraining officers
concerned in the salt-duty from interposing in elections. Passed in the
negative; though the same is established with respect to other duties. Nineteen
lords protested, because the officers of the customs are immensely numerous,
and have a prodigious influence in elections DEB. LORDS, IV.85, et seq.
. They form a second standing army, and often supply the place of the other,
whose attendance at an election would be too gross a violation of the law. A
house of commons influenced by the servants of the crown (it is observed by
their lordships) might be a representative of an administration, or of a
minister; but could no longer be a true representative of the people.
Parliaments are so great a check on ministers, that they have always
endeavored either to enable the crown to govern without them, or to influence
their elections, or to corrupt them so thoroughly, that their efficiency shall
be lost. The antiquity of the statutes for preventing these evils, shows how
early they begun to prevail. There is little danger, since the revolution, of
any attempt to govern without parliaments. The wisdom of this house has seemed,
by rejecting the pension-bill three times successively, to think the laws
already in force sufficient to prevent corruption in the members, but the
influence of the servants of the crown in elections, must, in our opinion, be
looked upon as a growing danger, whose consequences require the utmost
watchfulness to prevent them, as the great multitude of the tax-gatherers are
solely directed by the treasury. The number of these creatures of the court was
too great before; and by the new establishment of this duty, it is to be
increased, and, at the same time, no restraint laid on their power, which is
the more dangerous, as it does no violence openly to parliaments; but operates
secretly, silently, and securely.

A pension-bill passes the commons, A. D. 1733; lost again among the worthy
lords, as before DEB. COM. VII.285.
.

Several precedents were brought, A. D. 1733, of officers seats in the house
vacated on their being promoted to governments of towns, forts, etc. Yet
general Wade was allowed to sit after his acceptance of the government of three
forts in Scotland Tind. CONTIN. VIII.184.
. N. B. Wade was on the orthodox side.

Mr. Sandys moves, A. D. 1733, to bring in again the pension-bill thrown out by
the lords DEB. COM. VII.261.
. Which he said had passed for two or three sessions without opposition, and
had as often been thrown out by the lords; that it had been observed, that
there never was any thing brought into either house, that was in itself for the
public good, but what by perseverance was at last carried into a law. Truth and
reason will prevail at last; which encouraged him again to renew this motion;
that the bill was ready, and he desired leave to bring it up. It was objected,
That it was a new sort of motion to ask leave to bring up a bill. That the
constant custom had been to move for leave to bring in a bill. It was answered,
that on occasion of the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act, the bill was
brought up ready drawn, and passed without opposition.

The remembrance of the excise scheme and the convention was revived [ A. D.
1739.] and it was suggested, that they might have been fatal to the minister [
Walpole] had he not had a majority of placemen in parliament, and therefore it
was necessary to obtain a bill for excluding placemen and pensioners from
sitting in parliament Tind. CONTIN. VIII.435.
. Accordingly at a court at Guildhall, instructions were given the London
members, that they should make the passing of a place and pension-bill a
previous step to the passing of any money-bill whatsoever. The example of the
city of London was followed by the cities of York and Salisbury, and other
great corporations all over England, though many of their members were known to
have voted always on the side of the minister Tind. CONTIN. VIII.435.
.

The year 1739 is, above all others, famous for the place-bill then brought in,
which occasioned a thorough agitation of that question, and produced many of
the noblest harangues ever uttered in parliament or any where else; some
extracts from which I have placed in this chapter DEB. COM. XI.202. et seq.
.

A. D. 1740, a motion was made in the house of commons for a place-bill, with
exception of 150 places, which were to have leave to sit in the house.
Rejected, 222 against 206 Tind. CONTIN. VIII.452.
.

In the Devonshire instructions, A. D. 1741, is the following article: Use your
utmost endeavors to limit the number of placemen in, and to exclude pensioners
from the house of commons DEB. COM. XII.
.

It was ordered, the same year, that leave be given to bring in a bill for
making more effectual the laws for disabling persons from being chosen members
of or sitting or voting in the house of commons, who have any pension during
pleasure, or for any number of years, or any office held in trust for them
Ibid. XIII.187.
. A place-bill was sent up to the lords the same year Ibid. 188.
.

A bill for limiting officers in the house of commons was read a second time in
the house of peers, A. D. 1741. Moved to commit it. Passes in the negative.

Several lords protested, because they conceived that the constitution points
out this bill as one of its principal securities to preserve the independency
of the three several constituent parts of the supreme legislative power; for if
any one of these becomes dependent on the other, the constitution is
dangerously altered: But if any two become dependent on the third, it is
totally subverted, and the wisest establishment that ever was formed of a free
government, shrinks and degenerates into a monarchical, an aristocratical, or
democratical faction; and should the number of employments continue to
increase, we may live to see a constant majority of placemen, meeting under the
name of a parliament to establish grievances instead of redressing them; and
because the freedom of parliament is not secured, by the law, which obliges a
member who accepts a place to quit his seat, since experience shows, that he
will be constantly re-elected. They observed, with concern, that a bill of this
nature, had been thrice rejected by the commons. They said it was near the end
of the present parliament, and therefore it was particularly seasonable, to
provide for the freedom and independency of the next DEB. LORDS, VII.736.
.

A. D. 1760, some new regulations were made by an act relating to a tax of one
shilling in the pound on all places above 100 l. a year; and the ministry took
that opportunity of adding to the influence of the crown, by erecting a
needless new office, and officers, while the commissioners of the land tax
might have done all the new business, as before LONDON MAG. Feb. 1760. p. 7^.
.

In a commitee of the whole house on the state of the nation, A. D. 1770, it
was proposed, that leave be given to bring in a bill to disqualify certain
officers of the excise and customs for voting at elections for members of
parliament Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.230.
. The ministry gravely opposed such a salutary bill, though it was observed to
them, that our wise ances^ors had enacted, that no commissioner of the customs,
or excise, should sit in the house of commons, or use interest in any election.
If this question could have been carried, it would have been productive of
great advantage to the constitution, as the influence of the crown in elections
is very alarming indeed: many seaport boroughs are almost entirely carried by
the numbers of little places the court disposes of there; and even in cities
and counties the antiministerial candidate feels the power of the crown an
heavy weight against him. We are not surprised at the court's carrying the
question, but a good deal so, that the country gentlemen, who have so long been
exclaiming against the undue influence of the crown, should join with them in
this vote Ibid. 231.
.

A. D. 1772, Mr. Sawbridge moved the house of commons that a new writ might be
issued for choosing a member for Warwick, as lord Greville, the member for that
town, was, according to the Gazette, appointed a commissioner of trade, which,
by 6 Anne, c. 7. 26. vacated his seat. That young nobleman was in the house.
The ministry would not let him answer, whether he had accepted the place, or
not. Mr. Sawbridge insisted, that his silence was sufficient reason for
concluding, that he had accepted. That it must often be difficult, if not
impossible, for the house to prove, that a member has accepted a place (most of
them being sinecures,) that therefore the house had a right to demand of the
person, so charged, a categorical answer. As the ministry durst not give a flat
negative to the proposal, the words of the act being pretty clear, they were
reduced to the chicane, that legal proof was not before the house. On this
ground the matter was left. The ministry then moved for the order of the day,
and carried it against issuing the writ, 117 to 7 Alm. DEB. IX.336.
. Had I been at Mr. Sawbridge's elbow, I should have desired him to move, that
the Statutes, which lie upon the table before the speaker, might be immediately
carried out and burnt.

A. D. 1773, Sir William Main, moved for leave to bring in a bill for limiting
the number of placemen and pensioners in the parliament of Ireland, and for
enquiring into charges of government in Ireland, and what might be retrenched.

Placemen excluded from the house of commons, and not re-eligible by the laws
now in being, summed up by the author of FACTION DETECTED BY FACTS, are the
following, viz.

Commissioners, and farmers of excise; commissioners, comptrollers, auditors,
of appeals; seven commissioners of revenue in Ireland; seven commissioners of
the victualling office; the commissioner and clerk of the pells; all the
deputies, inferior officers, and under-clerks of these offices; commissioners
of the treasury, exchequer, and admiralty; secretaries of state, paymaster of
the forces; great part of the Gibraltar and Minorca establishments; all new
revenue-officers, established since 5 W. and M. all new placemen since 4 Anne,
except those in the army or navy; commissioners, sub-commissioners,
secretaries, receivers of prizes, comptrollers of the accounts of the army;
commissioners of transports, of sick and wounded; agents for regiments;
commissioners for wine-licences; governors, and deputy-governors of
plantations; commissioners of the navy in the outports; pensioners of the crown
during pleasure, or for a term of years. Riding, or spliting of places, is
contrary to law. 500 l. fine for sitting contrary to the law, by which places
vacate seats. The fine recoverable by any person who shall sue. No
revenue-officer of the post office is to persuade, or dissuade, any voter, on
pain of 100 l. penalty, by 9 Anne. A law, 9 Anne, against fraudulent
conveyances, with a view to elections, with oaths and penalties.

On one hand, to view the number of places which exclude from the house, one
would imagine there could be no placemen in it; on the other, to think of the
number of placemen in the house, as appears by the annual COURT CALENDAR, one
would imagine there was no law for excluding placemen. How great then must the
number of placemen in this country be upon the whole?

CHAP. IX. Speeches on the Danger of Placemen and Pensioners in Parliament.
FROM the strain of the following speeches in parliament, and quotations from
books, may be collected the sense of many of the ablest and best men of this
country, on the danger of placemen and pensioners in the house of commons.

Hear Sir Francis Winnington, in his speech on this subject, in the house of
commons, A. D. 1680. DEB. COM. II.61.
.

Mr. Speaker. Sir, The last house of commons being sensible how narrowly this
nation escaped being ruined by a sort of monsters, called Pensioners, who sat
in the late long parliament, had entered into a consideration how to prevent
the like from coming into future parliaments; and in order thereto resolved,
that they would severely chastise some of those that had been guilty, and make
the best laws they could to prevent the like for the future; and for that
purpose a committee was appointed, of which Mr. Sergeant Gregory, now Judge
Gregory, was chairman, by which many papers relating to that affair came to his
hands. Sir, I think it a business of so great importance, that it never ought
to be forgotten, nor the prosecution of it deferred. I have often heard, that
England can never be destroyed but by itself; to have such parliaments was the
most likely way that ever yet was invented. I remember a great lawyer said in
this house, when it was debated in the last parliament, that it was treason;
and he gave many learned arguments to make it out. Whether it be so or no, I
will not now offer to debate; but I think, for those that are the legislators
of the nation to take bribes, to undermine the laws and government of this
nation, that they ought to be chastised as traitors. It was my fortune to sit
here a little while in the long parliament; I did observe that all those that
had pensions, and most of those that had offices, voted all of a side, as they
were directed by some great officer, as exactly as if their business in this
house had been to preserve their pensions and offices, and not to make laws for
the good of them that had sent them hither. How such persons could any way be
useful for the support of the government, by preserving a fair understanding
between the king and the people, or rather how likely to bring in arbitrary
power and popery, I leave to every man's judgment. They were so far from being
the true representatives of the people, that they were a distinct interest from
both king and people; and their chief business was to serve the ends of some
great minister of state, though ever so opposite to the true interest of the
nation. Sir, this business ought never to fall (though there should be ever so
many prorogations and dissolutions of parliaments) before something be done in
it; I think it is the interest of the nation that it should be prosecuted from
parliament as if there were an impeachment against them. And therefore, Sir, I
would humbly move you to send some members of this house to Judge Gregory for
the papers he has in his custody relating to this affair, that so you may in
convenient time proceed farther herein, as you shall think good. And, Sir,
being there is a report that some of this house have now made a bargain at
court for great offices, in order to vitiate and corrupt their votes in this
house; which, though but a project to cast a reflection on such members,
however, to satisfy the world, I pray, Sir, let there be a vote past that no
member of this house shall accept of any office under the crown during such
time as he continues a member of this house.

Lord Mulgrave in the house of peers, A. D. 1692, spoke as follows on the
subject of placemen in parliament.

My lords, I beseech you to consider the meaning of that word representative.
Can representatives do any thing contrary to the mind of their constituents? It
would be absurd to propose it: And yet how can it be otherwise, if
representatives, after being chosen, may change their dependency, and engage
themselves in employments plainly inconsistent with the great trust reposed in
them? And that I will take the liberty to demonstrate to your lordships they
now do, at least according to my conception of the matter. I will instance
first in the least or lowest incapacity they must be under who so take
employments. Your lordships must know but too well what a general carelessness
there appears every day more and more in the public business; if so, how is it
likely that men should be as diligent in their duty in parliament as that
business requires, when employments and other business shall take up both their
minds and their time? But then, in some cases, it is worse, as in commands of
the army and other employments of that kind, when they must have a divided
duty: for it does admirably become an officer to sit voting away money in the
house of commons, while his soldiers are perhaps taking it away at their
quarters for want of his presence to restrain them, and of better discipline
among them. Nay, perhaps his troop or regiment may be in some action abroad,
and he must either have the shame of being absent from them at such a time, or
from that house where he is entrusted with our liberties. To this I have heard
but one objection by a noble lord, viz. That if this act should pass, the king
is not allowed to make a captain a colonel without disabling him to sit in
parliament. Truly, if a captain has only deserved to be advanced for exposing
himself in parliament, I think the nation would have no great loss in the
king's letting alone such a preferment. But, my lords, there is another sort of
incapacity yet worse than this; I mean that of parliament-mens having such
places in the exchequer, the very profit of which depends on the money given to
the king in parliament. Would any of your lordships send and entrust a man to
make a bargain for you, whose very interest shall be to make you give as much
as he possibly can? It puts me in mind of a farce where an actor holds a
dialogue with himself, speaking first in one tone, and then answering in
another. Really, my lords, this is no farce. It is no laughing matter to undo a
nation; but it is altogether as unnatural for a member of parliament to ask
first in the king's name for such a supply, give an account from him how much
is needful toward the paying such an army, or such a fleet, and then
immediately give by his ready vote what he had before asked by his masters's
order. Besides, my lords, there is such a necessity now for long sessions of
parliament; and the very privileges belonging to members are of so great
extent, that it would be a little hard and unequal to other gentlemen that
members should have all the places besides.

All the objections that have been made may be reduced to these: First; it is
told us, that it is a disrespect to the king, that his servants or officers
should be excluded the house. To this I desire it may be considered, that it is
in this case as when a tenant sends up a person to treat for him: Would any of
your lordships think it a disrespect; nay, would the king himself think it any,
if the tenant would not wholly referr himself to one of your own servants, or
the king's commissioners in the case of the crown? And if he chooses rather some
plain honest friend of his own to supply his absence here, will any man blame
such a proceeding, or think it unmannerly? Another objection is, That this act
may by its consequence prolong this parliament, which they allow would be a
very great grievance; and yet suppose the king capable of putting it upon us,
which I have too much respect for him to admit of; though I am glad, however,
that it is objected by privy counselors in favor, who consequently I hope
will never advise a thing which they now exclaim at as so great a grievance.
But pray, my lords, what should tempt the king to so ill a policy? Can he fear
a freedom of choice in the people, to whose good will he owes all his power,
which these lords suppose he may use to their prejudice? Give me leave to say,
as I must not suspect him of so ill a design as the perpetuating this
parliament, so he cannot, he ought not, to suspect a nation so entirely, I was
going to say so fondly devoted to him. My lords, no man is readier than myself
to allow that we owe the crown all submission as to the time of calling
parliaments according to law, and appointing also where they shall sit. But
with reverence be it spoken, the king owes the nation entire freedom in choosing
their representatives; and it is no less his duty than it is his true interest
that such a fair and just proceeding should be used toward us. Consider, my
lords, of what mighty consequence it may be, that so many votes should be free,
when upon one single vote may depend the whole security or loss of this nation.
By one single vote such points may be ca^ried as I almost tremble to think of.
By one single vote a general excise may be granted; and then we are all lost.
By one single vote the crown may he empowered to name all the commissioners for
raising the taxes; and then, surely, we should be in a fair way toward it.
Nay, whatever has happened may again be apprehended; and I hope those reverend
prelates will reflect, that if they grow once obnoxious to a prevalent party,
one single voice may be as dangerous to that bench, as a general
dissatisfaction among the people proved to be once in a late experience: which
I am far from saying by way of threatening, and mean it only by way of caution.
My Lords, we may think because this concerns not the house of lords, that we
need not be so over careful of the matter; but there are noblemen in France, at
least such as were so before they were enslaved, who that they might domineer
over others, and serve a present turn perhaps, let all things alone so long
till the people were quite mastered, and the nobility themselves too, to bear
them company. So that I never met a Frenchman even of the greatest rank (and
some had 10,000 pistoles a year in employments) that did not envy us here for
our freedom from that slavery which they groan under; and this I have observed
universally, excepting Monsieur de Louvois, Monsieur Colbert, or such people,
because they were the ministers themselves who occasioned these complaints, and
throve by the oppressing of others.

See Danger of Mercenary Parliaments, first printed, A. D. School STATE TRACTS,
time of king William, II.638.
.

Let us see (says that judicious writer) whether a house of commons full of
officers and court-pensioners will answer those noble and laudable ends of
their constitution. And here indeed I begin already to be ashamed of my
undertaking; the proof of the negative is so ridiculous, that it looks too much
like a jest to ask any one in his wits, whether a parliament filled with
delinquents will ever call themselves to an account, or what account will be
given if they should? Whether an assembly of public robbers will sentence one
another to be punished, or to make restitution? Whether it is possible our
grievances can be redressed that are committed by persons from whom there is no
higher power to appeal? whether there is any hope of justice, where the
malefactors are the judges? Whether his majesty can be rightly informed in
affairs relating to himself or the public, when they are represented to him
only by such persons who design to abuse him? Whether the public accounts will
be faithfully inspected by those, who embezzle our money to their own use?
Whether the king's prerogative can be lawfully maintained by such who only
pervert it to their own sinister ends and purposes? Whether a parliament can be
a true balance where all the weight is only in one scale? Or lastly, Whether a
house of commons can vote freely, who are either prepossessed with the hopes
and promises of enjoying places, or the slavish fears of losing them?

The same writer goes on STATE TRACTS, time of king William, II, 637.
faithfully to alarm his country against what was in those bashful days very
alarming, because it was new. In our times (the present always excepted) as
hackneyed wh -- s thieves, murderers, and the like, are proof against shame, we
read and hear arguments every day gravely brought in defense, or at least in
alleviation of the very practice which alone can, and must ruin liberty, if it
has not already.

Here I must confess there are not many instances to be given; the project of
corrupting parliaments being but of late date, ^ practice first set on foot
within the compass of our own memories, as the last and most dangerous
stratagem that ever was invented by an encroaching king, to possess himself of
the rights of a free born people; I mean Chapter I^. who, well remembering with how
little success both he and his father had made use of open arms and downright
violence, to storm and bat^er down the bulwarks of our excellent constitution,
had recourse, at last, to these mean arts and underhand practices of bribing
and corrupting with money those who were entrusted with the conservation of our
laws, and the guardianship of our liberties. And herein he so well succeeded,
that the mischiefs and calamities occasioned by that mercenary parliament, did
not terminate with his life and reign; but the effects of them are continued
and handed down, and sensibly felt by the nation to this very hour.

The same judicious writer goes on STATE TRACTS, time of King William, II.641.
to observe, that the parliament which succeeded to the pensioned parliament,
was, fortunately for the nation, composed of different men, who accordingly
pursued different measures. That James II. was greatly advantaged in his
designs against liberty, by having a way paved for him by the pensioned
parliament. That he did not succeed in his laudable endeavors, to corrupt his
parliament. That, accordingly he was precipitated from the throne, and driven,
with his execrable race, into perpetual banishment from his country, which made
way for the revolution. That the revolution did not produce the expected
advantages, because its effect was blasted by corruption in parliament. We were
filled, (says he Ibid. 640.
) with golden dreams, not only of a bare security for our estates and lives;
but an inexhausted affluence of all manner of blessings, a nation is capable of
enjoying. But tho we have dreamt the dreams, yet we have not seen the visions.
And the nation is by this time sadly sensible how wretchedly they have fallen
short of their expected happiness, yet are they not all acquainted with the
true spring and fountain from whence all their misfortunes flow, which is
indeed no other than that bare faced and openly avowed corruption, which, like
an universal leprosy, has so notoriously infected and overspread both our court
and parliament. It Is from hence are plainly derived all the calamities and
distractions under which the whole nation at present groans: it is this that has
changed the very natures of Englishmen, and of valiant men made them cowards,
of eloquent dumb, and of honest men villains. It Is this can make a whole house
of commons eat their own words, and countervote what they had just before
resolved on: it is this could summon the mercenary members from all quarters of
the town in an instant, to vote their fellow criminals innocent: it is this that
can make the parliament throw away the people's money with the utmost
profusion, without enquiring into the management of it: it is this that put a
stop to the examination of that scandalous escape of the Toulon fleet into
Breast: it is this that has encouraged the mismanagement of the admiralty in
relation to the loss of so vast a number of men of war and merchant ships, as
well as other miscarriages which were by all men judged not to proceed from
their want of understanding in sea affairs: it is this that has hindered the
passing a bill so often brought into the house for incapacitating members to
bear offices: it is this that could not only indemnify, but honor a leading
member for his audacious procuring and accepting a grant of lands, which, by
the parliament, had been set apart for the public service; a vote that shall
stand recorded in their own journals to the never dying infamy of that
mercenary assembly: it is this could make the same person most confidently
affirm, that he was sure the majority of the house would agree to what he was
going to propose: it is this that could make men of peaceable dispositions and
considerable estates, vote for a standing army: it is this that could bring
admirals to confess that our fleet under their command, was no security to us:
it is this could make wise men act against their own apparent interest. In
short, it is this that has infatuated our prudence, staggered our constancy,
sullied our reputation, and introduced a total defection, from all true English
principles. Bribery is indeed so sure and unavoidable a way to destroy any
nation, that we may all sit down and wonder that so much as the very name of a
free government is yet continued to us. And if by our wa^y choice of members we
should happen to recover our ancient constitution, we shall with horror and
amazement look back and reflect on the dreadful precipice we shall have so
narrowly escaped.

The same patriotic writer observes STATE TRACTS, time of king William, II.653.
, that the executive power ought not to be lodged in the house of commons,
because it would deprive the kingdom of that which is the noblest and most
useful work of their representatives, the calling ill ministers to account, and
the preserving a steady administration in the subordinate officers of the
government. But in a house of commons abounding with officers, if any one of
them be attacked, it alarms the whole fraternity, and they all engage to bring
him off, though it be by the scandalous way of putting the question for
candles, and carrying it in the negative. This was the case of the admiralty
last parliament, and may be of the treasury this sessions, if fortune proves so
propitious, that one of their members be made speaker. This point gained, the
next will probably be to establish the army, and then to suspend or repeal the
triennial act.

A. D. 169^, the following remarkable paragraphs appeared in the famous
HUSH-MONEY PAPER, as it was called, published by John Lawten, Esquire.

Two hundred thousand pounds a year bestowed upon the parliament has already
drawn out of the subjects pockets more millions than all our kings since the
conquest have ever had from this nation. And that this should be done without
any rude complaint, is a proof, that if a king can manage well Mr. Guy's
office, he may, without much ado, ^et up for absolute. Venalis est Anglia, for
Venale est Parliamentum. Heretofore, indeed, it was necessary only that they
should give reasonably, as Flamock's rebellion, and others in Hen. VIIth's
reign witness; and I believe our ^olls will not furnish us with many sessions,
wherein money was given, and no one country bill granted. But our ancestors
were wise enough to instruct their members, and our constitution so regular
that we had frequent elections. The house is now so officered, that by those
who have places and pensions, together with their sons, brothers, and kinsmen,
and those who are fed with the hopes of preferment, and the too great influence
these have upon some honest mistaken country gentlemen (who are possibly over
frighted with the French) the king can baffle any bill, quash all grievances,
stifle accounts, and ratify the articles of Limerick. When I find the money the
nation gives to defend our liberties from foreigners abroad, i^ like to
undermine them at home, in a word, when I see neither the one nor the other
house can withstand the power of gold; I say, when I perceive all this, it is
time to give warning, it is time to look about us. If the members of parliament
are to overlook all the ill husbandry of the government, that they may share in
the profuseness and bribery of it; if our rights are to be set to sale by some
and neglected by others, when the very being of the government depends upon our
being satisfied, what amendment, what confirmation shall we have of our
constitution, when all our dangers are over? This is a thought which deserves
our most serious reflections. I could name a certain gentleman, who exactly
resembles Hen. Guy, who the last sessions* when the house was a little out of
humor, disposed of no less than sixteen thousand pounds in three days time for
secret service. Who are in places we may find out, but God knows who have
pensions, yet every man, that made the least observation, can remember, that
some who opened loudly at the beginning of the last sessions, who came up as
eagar as it is possible for reformation, had their mouths soon stopped with
hush-money. It has been of some time whispered, that if this will not at first
pre-engage to do what will be exacted at their hands, we shall have a
parliament. I cannot tell whether a new parliament will not be practiced upon
by the Carmarthen art; however, it is our last and best remedy: for if this
continues, God have mercy upon poor England. Hitherto we have been, and we are
like, for ought I see, to be repaid for all our expenses of blood and treasure,
with the smoke whch Boccalini mentions in his advices from Parnassus, whereby
the enemies of the government have but too great advantage given them to
ridicule us for our foolish credulity?

If men are to make fortunes by being of our senate house, says the same
gentleman STATE TRACTS, time of king William, II.370.
, we had better ourselves pay the disbursements of those we send, we had better
ourselves allow them plentiful salaries for sitting there; each particular
county would save by it in the public assessments, and find their account in
it, whilst they preserve their members from the temptation, of being hired out
of their interest, and consequently get good laws for what they give. We can
scarce pay too much for good laws, and if we have not some that we have not
yet, we shall not, when the war is over (let it end which way it will) be able
to call what we have our own. In the late times, the city of London often
petitioned for passing of laws: will they always lend money now, and never
expect a thorough alteration of the ministry, and securities for the future,
against court projectors? In James Ist's time, there were certain sparks, who
undertook for parliaments, that were called undertakers; and there is a certain
secret that has stole out of our cabinet, that one of these, immediately on the
king's refusing the triennial bill last sessions, undertook that it should be
thrown out the next time they sat, with as much scorn and contempt as was the
judges bill. It is time to have annual parliaments instead of triennial, since
privy counselors and lords of the treasury, (both which stations this person
enjoys) can so perfectly feel the pulse of a parliament during an interval.

Sir Charles Sedley in his speech, A. D. 1699, thus sets forth the danger from
placemen in parliament. I believe, Mr. Speaker, when we come to consider of it,
we shall find that it is convenient not only to lessen the officers of the
court and state in point of profit, but in point of number to. We have nine
commissioners of excise, seven of the admiralty, three of the post office, six
of the customs. I know not why half may not do the business as well. But when I
consider, that all these, or most of them, are members of parliament, my wonder
is over; for though it may be a dispute whether many heads are better than one,
it is certainly true, that m^^y votes are better than one. Many of these
gentlemen have two offices besides their seat in parliament, which require
attendance in several places, and abilities of diverse natures; but members of
parliament, though well principled, have no privilege to be fit for any thing
they please to undertake without practice, study, or application. Sir, we are
called by the king, and sent up by the people; and ought to regard no interests
but theirs, which, as I told you before, are always the same: let us therefore
proceed accordingly. The late proposals of the courtiers themselves to save the
king money was, by applying the profits, salaries, and fees of their places
that exceed 800 l. per annum, to the war. Thus will the public charge lie
easier upon the people, and the present reign be more and more endeared to
them. What is necessary we shall cheerfully supply, when we see all men set
their shoulders to the burden, and stand upon an equal footing for our common
defense, and that what we give is applied to those uses for which we give, and
the army paid. This offer, Sir, as I remember, began when an observation was
made by you of the long accounts, and that a great part of the king's revenue
remained in the hands of the receivers; to which a worthy member answered, It
could not be helped, by reason some receivers were members of parliament, and
stood upon their privileges. To which another member answered, That we could
not deprive members of their privileges; but that to remedy the like for the
future, we were ready to pass a vote, that no member of parliament should be a
receiver of the king's revenue. This alarmed the whole body of men in office;
so that some stood up, and to prevent the house from harping any longer upon
that string, said, They so little valued their own profit, that they were
willing to resign all their fees, salaries, and perquisites exceeding 300 l.
per annum, toward the next yearly charge. This, if really intended, was very
generous; but if it were only a compliment, a shift, or expedient to avoid the
present vote we were upon, that no member of parliament should be a receiver of
the revenue, nothing was more disingenuous; nor could a greater abuse be
offered to the house; for we proceeded so far as to vote, that judges, and some
others, should not be comprehended. People abroad, who received our votes, will
think strangely of it, if after all these preparations we do nothing in it, and
suffer ourselves to be thus gulled. But I hope better of the worthy gentlemen,
and cannot but think they were in earnest with this house upon so solemn a
debate DEB. COM. III.195.
.

Mr. Trenchard proposes, in order to check corruption, that parliament
establish a commission for enquiring, by oath, into all abuses of the civil
list and other revenues; into useless offices, salaries, perquisites, bills of
offices, pensions, etc. excepting only the king's privy-purse; report to be
made to parliament. And that all members of parliament receiving pensions,
purses, etc. in a corrupt or clandestine manner, be guilty of high treason
Gordon's TRACTS, I.245.
.

Thus harangues* on the same subject, the excellent Hutcheson, in the house of
commons, A. D. 1716 DEB. COM. VI. Append. p. ^.
.

In the late reigns, and particularly in the long pensionary parliament in the
reign of Chapter II. the nation became very sensible of the mischievous
consequences which had already happened, and the more fatal which might still
result, from the dangerous breach which had been made in our ancient
constitution. It was now evident to the meanest capacity, that a designing
prince, who, with the assistance of a wicked ministry, should be able, after
several trials, at last to procure a parliament to his purpose, would have the
liberties of the people entirely in his power, and might govern them at
pleasure; from which state of slavery it was evident, that nothing less than a
revolution could rescue them; and if they failed in that experiment, that then
their chains would be riveted for ever. Under this melancholy prospect of
affairs the nation groaned, and complaints were heard in every corner of our
streets; and even the very pensioners in that parliament were not arrived to
such a pitch of impiety as to take pleasure in the drudgery they had engaged
in, but acted with reluctance and remorse, and, as we have been very lately
told in this place, betrayed the cause they had so wickedly espoused, and
frequently gave notice to the friends of England of the attempts which were to
be made on the liberties of their country. This pensionary parliament was at
last dissolved, but with what view, and by what advice, I will not pretend to
say. Certain it is, that that prince never had it afterward in his power, in a
parliamentary way, to destroy the liberties of the people. The resumption of
charters was then put in practice, with many other expedients toward the
establishment of an absolute monarchy, which had been long in view; but by the
death of that prince, and the unskilful conduct of his next successor, an end
was put to these designs for that time, the people having unanimously applied
the only remedy in such cases; and this brought about the late happy
revolution.

In the year 1734, as abovementioned, a bill for securing the freedom of
parliament, by limiting the number of officers in the house, was read twice;
and when it was moved that it should be committed, and that motion opposed, Mr.
Sandys spoke as follows:

Sir, As this DEB. COM. III.125.
bill met with no opposition, either when it was moved for, or when it was
brought in and read the first time, I was very little apprehensive that we
should have had any debate upon it; and much less was I apprehensive that our
going into a commitee upon it would have been opposed; for as yet it can be
called little more than a blank; it cannot well deserve the name of a bill,
till it has gone through the committee, where the many blanks which are now in
it are properly to be filled up. I was indeed surprised to hear the worthy
gentleman, who spoke last, say, that he thought it the most extraordinary and
unreasonable bill that he had ever seen brought into this house; for if the
gentleman will look into our Journals, he will see that this very bill has been
often brought in, and has almost always been passed in this house; [in
confidence of its being thrown out by the lords, which looks more decent] and I
am sure, if ever it was thought reasonable by this house, it must now be
thought much more so, when the number of placemen is much greater in this house
than it was heretofore. The worthy gentleman has likewise told us, that he
thinks the bill unjust, both with respect to the crown, the people, and the
gentlemen who have the honor to be employed by the crown. As to which I shall
take notice, in general, that by the same method of reasoning he may pretend to
show us, that all the laws that were ever made for regulating elections were
unjust, and were encroachments upon the rights of the people. I shall readily
agree with him, that the people are the properest judges who ought to be chosen
by them for representatives in parliament; and I am confident, that were they
left to a free choice, we should not see so many civil and military officers
brought into parliament. The people, I believe, would always think themselves
more secure in being represented by country-gentlemen, with whom they are well
acquainted, and who can have no interest separate from them, than by clerks of
offices, or such other persons, whom they perhaps never saw, or heard of,
before they came down to be chosen their representatives, and whom probably
they may never see again, till they return to ask the same favor; which every
gentleman here knows to be often the case of many of our little boroughs in
England. But to say that it would be any injustice to lay a restraint upon the
people as to the choice of their representatives, seems to me very
extraordinary, when we consider the laws now in being, by which the people are
restrained from choosing any gentleman for their representative who is not
possessed of such an estate. Surely we may, with respect to elections, without
being guilty of any injustice, lay what restrainsts we think necessary for the
good of the public, and the preservation of our constitution; for I am sure
that whatever is for the benefit of the people cannot be justly said or thought
to be injurious to the crown. It is extraordinary to say, that what is proposed
by this bill would be an injustice done to those who are thereby to be made
incapable of being elected; for have not we already a law, by which all the
officers concerned in the collection of the customs and excise, are rendered
incapable of being chosen members of parliament, and yet I have never before
heard it urged that there was any injustice done to those gentlemen by
excluding them from having seats in parliament as long as they are in an
office, which is inconsistent with their being members of this house. I will
allow, that the choice made by the burgesses of a little borough, or by the
freeholders of a county, if it falls upon an officer, civil or military, shows
that the majority of those electors, at that time, did not think the office he
then enjoyed incompatible or inconsistent with his being their representative;
but I hope it will not be said that the burgesses of a little borough, or even
the freeholders of a county, are better judges in this respect than the
representatives of the whole people of Great Britain met in this house,
especially when the opinion of this house is approved off and confirmed by the
other two branches of our legislature. As to the alternative pretended, that if
this bill should pass into a law, it would render either the officers civil and
military contemptible, of this house contemptible, in the eyes of the people; I
cannot imagine how it could produce either of these effects; for a^ to the
officers, civil or military, is it to be imagined, that a successful general or
admiral, a brave and ^xperienced captain by sea or land, or a civil officer,
honest, expert, and diligent in the station he is in, would be contemned
because he was not capable of being a member of this house? Were the clergy
ever brought into contempt by their being excluded the privilege of being
chosen members of parliament? On the contrary, I believe they never got any
honor by being members of either house; and I believe there are very few
officers, civil or military, in the kingdom, who ever gained much honor or
much repute among the people by their being members of either house of
parliament, unless when their being such was the occasion of their being turned
out of the offices they enjoyed, and might have continued to enjoy to their own
honor, and the advantage of their country, if they had not been members of
parliament. As to the other part of the alternative, that this house may be
rendered contemptible by what is now proposed, I am not in the least afraid of
it; but I am very much afraid, that if some bill of this nature is not speedily
passed into a law, this house will become contemptible in the eyes, not only of
our own people, but of the whole world. Gentlemen may pretend that no man is
influenced in his way of thinking, or in his manner of acting, in this house,
by the post or the office he possesses, and from which he may be turned out,
whenever a prime minister may have a mind; but while men are men, I am
convinced there will always be a great number, by far, I fear, the greatest
number, who will rather vote according to the directions of the prime minister
for the time being, than run the risk of being turned out of the lucrative post
or office they then hold at the pleasure of the crown; and if ever a majority
of this house should happen to be composed of such men, I am sure it will
become as contemptible as ever the senate of Rome was, after it became the
political tool of their arbitrary and tyrannical emperors. I will likewise
agree with the honorable gentlemen, that it may be necessary, at least it may
be convenient, for this house always to have in it some of those gentlemen, who
belong too, and are conversant in, the methods of transacting business in the
several great offices of the kingdom; and therefore I am not for excluding from
seats in parliament all those who are in offices, civil and military. I believe
no gentleman in this house ever had any such thought in his head; and if
gentlemen will but peruse the bill, as it stands now, they will see that there
is to be an exception, which is now left blank, as in all such cases is usual,
in order that when we go into a committee, gentlemen may then propose the
filling up in that blank as many officers, or as many sorts of officers, as
they have a mind. About this, indeed, I expected there might have been some
debates; but considering the great number of officers of all sorts we have now
in the house, considering how greatly the number may be increased in times to
come; considering the great clamor already raised in the nation against so
many officers being in this house; I really did not expect that any gentleman
would have opposed the committing of the bill, or would have pretended that the
passing of some such bill was not become necessary, both for the honor of this
house and the safety of our constitution. To conclude, the bill is at present
but a blank; but I am confident it may be made a good and reasonable bill, and
agreeable to every gentleman in this house; therefore, I hope, the house will
agree to the going into a committee upon it, because, if gentlemen do not like
it after the blanks are filled up, they may then drop it, or throw it out upon
the third reading DEB. COM VIII.122.
.

In the famous year 1739, a place-bill, as above mentioned, was proposed to the
commons by Mr. Sandys in the following speech:

Sir, I am now going to lay before you a proposal which has already been
several times made to you, without meeting with that success which I thought it
deserved; but as I think it a good one, and absolutely necessary for the
preservation of our constitution, I am far from being discouraged by its former
bad success, nor shall I be discouraged from a future attempt, even though it
should now meet with as bad a reception as heretofore, because I am fully
convinced of the truth of that observation, which was long ago made by one of
our best lawyers: That a good bill or motion once proposed in parliament, and
entered upon our journals, can never die: It may at first meet with bad
success: it may meet with repeated bad success; but, unless our constitution be
absolutely and irrecoverably destroyed, it will by its own merits, at last
force its way through the several branches of our legislature. [This criterion,
if applied to the present times, when we have reason to think no merits
whatever would carry a bill through the houses, unless it were favored by the
ministry, is so shocking, that it will hardly bear to be thought of.] The
proposal, I am to make, Sir, is plainly and in short, this, That criminals may
not be allowed to be their own judges; and that our liberties may not be
committed to the keeping of those who are retained to destroy them. It is the
duty of parliament to redress all public grievances, and punish all high and
heinous offenders, who have been artful or powerful enough to evade the laws of
the kingdom. It is the duty of parliament to grant no more money for the public
service than what is absolutely necessary, and to see that money properly
applied and duly accounted for. And it is the duty of parliament to watch over
the liberties and privileges of the people, by taking care not to pass any laws
that are inconsistent with the liberties and privileges of the people, and by
providing speedy and effectual remedies against all encroachments that have
been, or may be, made by ambitious princes, or guilty ministers. These, Sir,
are among the chief of the duties of parliament; but how can we expect a
performance, if a majority of the members be such, whose self-preservation or
security depends upon their neglecting or acting contrary to these duties? Can
we expect, that public grievances will be redressed, if a majority of
parliament be such as have themselves been, or such as are the friends and
confederates of those that have been the cause of these public grievances? Can
we expect that any high offender will be punished by parliament, if the
majority of it be such as have been companions and sharers with him in his
crimes, or such whose chief subsistence depends upon screening him from
justice? Can we expect that any supply demanded by the crown will be refused,
if it is to be granted by those, whose chief subsistence depends upon making
the grant; or that the public money will be properly applied, or duly accounted
for, if those who have applied or may apply it to their own use, are to be the
only inspectors of the public accounts? Or, lastly, Sir, can we expect that a
parliament will guard against the encroachments of an ambitious prince or
guilty minister, if the majority of that parliament be such as have the whole,
or a necessary part of their subsistence, from the places or pensions they hold
at the arbitrary will of that ambitious prince, or guilty minister? These are
questions, which, in my opinion, can be answered in the affirmative by no man
who will and dare make use of his reason; and yet every one of these questions
must, I think, be answered in the affirmative by those who affirm that our
constitution can never be in any danger from a majority or near a majority of
this house being composed of such as hold places and pensions at the arbitrary
will of the crown. I shall grant, Sir, that it may be necessary for us to have
amongst us some of the chief officers of the treasury, admiralty, and army, as
well as several others of those that are employed by his majesty as chief
officers in the executive part of our government. These, I say, it may be
necessary to have amongst us, in order to give us such information, as may
often become necessary in the several branches of business that come regularly
before this house. [Here Mr. Sandys might have observed, that even supposing
the presence of some of the officers of state necessary occasionally in the
house of commons, it does not follow, that their voting is necessary. The
judges sit in the upper house, as skilled in the laws; but they do not vote.]
But I am sure it is no way necessary, but on the contrary, quite inconsistent
with the dignity of this house, to have it filled with ^^erks of of offices,
and inferior officers of ou^ ^avy and army. I confess I have the greatest
regard for such of those as we at have at present amonst us; because I hope
they have all so much honor, that they would disdain to sacrifice their duty,
as members of this house, to any selfish consideration; but we cannot be sure
that those who succeed them in their offices and employments will be gentlemen
of so much honor; and as they may likewise succeed them with regard to their
seats in this house, our constitution may be thereby brought into the utmost
danger; for if I were not well assured of the honor of those officers we have
now amongst us, we have a^ready such a number, that I should think our
constitution upon the brink of destruction; and as the number may increase so
as, in a short time, to become the majority of this house, whilst we have it in
our power, we ought to take care to provide against this danger by limiting the
number of officers that are to have seats in this house; for if the majority of
this house should once come to be composed of officers, and these officers such
as had a greater regard to the places they possess, or preferments they hope
for, than to the liberties and constitution of their country, it would be
ridiculous to think of getting the approbation of this house to any such
regulation. Therefore, Sir, as this is not yet, I hope, our unfortunate case, I
shall beg leave to move, that leave may be given to bring in a bill for the
better securing the freedom of parliament, by limiting the number of officers
to sit in the house of commons DEB. COM. XI.202.
.

Mr. (late lord) Lyttleton, spoke in defense of it as follows.

Sir, while this house is full of independent gentlemen, or of such placemen
only whose places are not so much the best of their property, that they cannot
risk the loss of them without a spirit of martyrdom, who have something of
their own sufficient to outweigh their employments, and while the number even
of these shall be confined within some moderate bounds, a minister must regard
this assembly as an awful tribunal, before which he is constantly to account
for his conduct: He must respect your judgments, he must dread your censures,
he must feel your superintendency. But we can imagine a future house of commons
so crowded with placemen, that a specta^^r in the gallery might be apt to
mistake and think himself at the levee of a minister instead of a parliament.
The benches here may be covered not only with officers of rank in the
government, not only with the servants of the crown, but with the servants,
perhaps, of their servants; and what sentiments, Sir, have we reason to think
the sight of a house so filled would excite in a minister? Would he think
himself in the presence of his country, or in the midst of a guard that would
enable him to defy its justice, and de^^de its resentment. The possibility of
this happening hereafter is the ground of this bill, which therefore the people
of England do not only consider as a single point to be gained for them upon
any present necessity, but as a general security against all they apprehend for
the future. Sir, my worthy friend, who made you this motion, in the opening of
it explained to you sufficiently, that there is no intent of running into any
extremes. If I thought there was, I would oppose it as much as any man here. I
know but one thing more preposterous than such a general place-bi^l as would
exclude all persons in office from a seat in this house, and that is to leave
the number of them under no limitation at all. But for fear of starving, must
we die of a surfeit? Between these two absurdities, can no medium be found?
Cannot we continue those amongst us who are of any use to the house, who can
give any assistance, any weight, any facility, any grace to our proceedings,
and shut the door against others, whom it is neither decent, nor safe, to
admit? Sir, the doing this is easy; it will be done by this bill, it is what
the wisdom of former parliaments would have done long before now. But the
reason they did it not was, It never entered into their thoughts to conceive
that some, who have since sat in parliament, would attempt to come there, I do
not mean, from any personal incapacity, but from the nature itself of their
offices, incompatible almost with the very idea of a member of parliament. It
is a surprising thing; but it is verified by what we see every day, that the
common practice of some ages goes beyond even the fears of the past. We must,
therefore, supply from experience what our predecessors failed to foresee; and
we are called upon to do so by the unanimous voice of the nation. Sir, the
greatest affairs before us are of less importance than this. It is better Spain
should invade the freedom of the American seas, than the crown of England
violate the independence of parliament. It is not Spanish or French arms, but
Spanish and French maxims of government, that we should have most to fear from,
if the vigilant caution, the jealous spirit of liberty in this house did not
concur with the goodness, the natural goodness of his majesty, to secure our
free constitution. Let the cortes of Spain, let the parliament of Paris, be a
warning to us; let them show us what we may come to, if we do not prevent the
growth of corruption, before it produces here the insensible, gradual, fatal
change it did there.

Sir, I am trying to recollect what objections have been made to this bill, and
I protest I can find none that seem to me to want a reply. One chiefly insisted
upon is, That it carries an air of suspicion. Sir, in all the states that I
have read of ancient and modern, the most suspicious people have been always
the latest enslaved. To suspect human frailty in tempting circumstances, is a
very natural jealousy; and a too secure confidence will hardly be thought a
parliamentary virtue. It is painful indeed to be suspected, but the greater the
pain, the greater the desire should be to remove that suspicion. But, Sir,
against the present house of commons, no such suspicion can be conceived --
Upon what grounds should it be founded? Upon what probability? Has the private
discourse of such gentlemen here ever been different from their public
behavior? Have they ever talked one way and voted another? Have there been any
indications of a private interest, that of any one man ever prevailing over
that of the nation, against fact, reason, or justice? Have not the majority
here constantly shown the strongest conviction, that their conduct was strictly
conformable to the most disinterested love of their country? Such a house of
commons ought not to be, is not suspected: But granting such a doubt to have
been formed, Is this the way to remove it? Will the rejecting this bill clear
our character, or can all the art and power of calumny give half the weight to
an imputation of that kind as such a proceeding? Sir, to those who treat this
bill as chimerical thing, an idle speculative project, I will say but one word,
That the most chemerical thing in nature is the notion of a free constitution,
where the restraining powers are not entirely exempt from dependency. Such
liberty is indeed a speculation fit for schoolboys; for what would terms and
appearances avail, if independence were lost? You might retain the vain ensigns
of your former authority, but would they give you any dignity? Would they be of
any use to the public? The mace there upon your table, what would it signify?
It might be born before you with ridiculous pomp; but it would be what Cromwell
called it once, a mere bauble; or, if it had any weight, it would be only to
oppress, not to protect. Sir, the present form of our government, k^ep it but
free from corruption, is so wisely constitu^ed, the powers in it are so happily
mixed, that it has all the advantages of a republic without the defects and
evils attending o^e. But, on the other side, I must say that if it should be
corrupted, if the contracts of parliament should be bought off by the crown,
the very reverse would be true; and it would h^ve all the defects, all the
evils of an absolute monarchy, without the advantages; it would be a more
expensive, and worse administered abs^lute power. Sir, I h^pe it is understood
that in what I have said I am only contending for a provisional security
against a mischief not yet felt in all its malignity, but yet of so increasing
a nature, and such ruinous consequences, that we must be b^ind not to foresee,
and worse than carele^s, not to pr^vent them. I will only add, that every year
we delay this security, may probably add both to the neces^^ty and difficulty
of obtaining it; and that people (...) of doors may be apt to doubt, from the
success of this question today, whether even now it does not come a little too
late DEB. COM. XI.208.
.

Mr. Pulteney, on the same occasion, spoke as follows.

Sir, The opposition made to this motion, is, in my opinion^ one of the
strongest arguments that can be made us^ of in its favor, and must I think
appear so to every man, who considers the persons conce^^ed in that o^position,
and the arguments they make use of for s^pporting it. Who are the persons that
oppose this motion? Who were they that have always opposed such motions?
Placemen, ministers, and the favorites or pensioners of ministers. What do
they say for justifying their opposition? They deny a principle, a maxim, which
in all ages, in all countries has hitherto been acknowledged; and upon which
many of our laws now in being, are founded. That a gentleman's behavior in
this house may be influenced by a place or pension, is a maxim universally
acknowledged, and in this kingdom so much established, that we have already by
law excluded many of the former, and all the latter, from having seats in this
house. We have, I say, already by law excluded all pensioners from having seats
in this house, and I should be glad to know the difference between a pension of
1000 l. a year, and a place with a sallary of 1000 l. a year. I know of none,
save only that the latter is generally more valuable than the former; and
therefore a gentleman will be more loath to lose it, or to give a vote in this
house, that may disoblige a minister, who can take it from him. I say, Sir,
that a place with a salary of 1000 l. a year, is more valuable, than a pension
of 1000 l. a year; because a place furnishes a gentleman with an opportunity to
serve his friends, and perhaps to provide some of them with little places, or
offices under him. To which I must add, that a place often furnishes a
gentleman who is not very scrupulous, with an opportunity of plundering his
country yearly, of twice, perhaps ten times, the value of his salary; and this,
I must observe, makes another very material difference, between a place and a
pension. A placeman may very probably be a person, whose conduct this house
ought to enquire into. He may be a public criminal, and therefore he will
certainly be against an impartial and strict enquiry into the conduct of any
minister, officer, or placeman, lest the enquiry should at last light upon
himself. There is therefore greater reason for excluding all placemen, than for
excluding all pensioners from having seats in this house. Our admitting some of
the former, does not proceed from an opinion, that a gentleman's behavior may
not be influenced by a place, as much as by a pension, but from the necessity
we are under of having some great officers amongst us, in order to give us
proper information and direction in many affairs that must come under our
consideration. For this reason, when I hear gentlemen who have very good
places, gravely telling us, that no gentleman of family or fortune can by any
place he may enjoy, or expect, be induced to join in measures that may be of
dangerous consequence to the constitution or liberties of his country, I think
it is a clear proof not only that the behavior ^a gentleman of family and
fortune may be influenced by the posts he enjoys or expects, but also that his
judgment may be biased. He may thereby be induced to think those things
indifferent, or of no moment, that are far from being so. He may be thereby
induced to think the liberties of his country in no danger, when they are upon
the very brink of destruction. Sir, let us consider that of the 513 members who
represent England and Wales, there are but 92 chosen by counties, and of the
remaing 421, there are at least 350 chosen by cities, boroughs, and cinque
ports, where the administration would have the absolute command and direction.
If this should ever happen to be our unlucky situation, can we suppose that any
gentleman would set up to be a member of this house, or a representative even
for any of our counties, but such as resolved to submit with regard to their
behavior here to the absolute direction of the prime minister? No gentleman of
honor would put himself to expense, or expose himself to the resentment of an
all powerful minister, if by setting up us a candidate at any election, he were
absolutely certain that he could thereby do his country no service. Instead of
gentlemen of family, fortune, character, or interest in their country, we
should then see this house filled with the lowest tools and vilest sycophants
of absolute power. Instead of this house's being a check upon ministers, it
would then, like the parliament of France, or the Roman senates under their
emperors, be an instrument for the oppressions of ministers, and a cloak for
their crimes. The most rapacious plunderer, the most tyrannical oppressor would
then insolently boast, that he did nothing but according to law, that the
public treasure was regularly accounted for in parliament, and that he was at
all times ready to submit his conduct to a parliamentary enquiry. Surely, Sir,
no gentleman can think that the liberties of this nation consist in our having
the resemblance of a parliament. We may have a parliament, that parliament may
be chosen once every seven years, may sit annually as it does now, may pass
laws, grant money, receive accounts, and even make enquiries, and yet we may
have neither constitution, nor liberty left; for if it should once come to be
in the power of the administration to have always a majority in parliament,
ready to obey the directions given them by the ministers, there would be no
necessity for destroying the form of our constitution, or for making a direct
and absolute surrender of our liberties. Without either of these, our sovereign
would be as absolute, and might be more tyrannical, than the Grand Signior
himself. Such a parliament would grant him as many saphis and janiza^^es as he
thought necessary, for keeping his slaves in subjection; would give him any
revenue he pleased to demand, and would pass whatever laws he might please to
propose; and the judges being under no parliamentary restraint, would in every
part of his dominions give judgment according to the directions of the prime
vizier, or governing bashaw. Thus oppression would be countenanced by the forms
of law, the people plundered, and the innocent murdered, by the administration
of justice. It is this sort of ruin, Sir, we have chiefly to apprehend, and
this sort of ruin we may step by step be led into, without our being sensible
of the several steps. We shall certainly be led into it, if we trust any longer
the guardianship of our liberties to those whose foresight is dimmed by the
places they enjoy, or expect. If a minister were to propose a law for giving
the crown a power of sending to every county, city, and borough in the kingdom,
such a c^nge d'elire for the choice of members of parliament, as is now sent to
a dean and chapter for the choice of a bishop, I believe very few gentlemen of
family or fortune, would, for the sake of any place, ag^ee to it. But an
equivalent power may be got by multiplying penal laws, and increasing the
number and power of officers; and a gentleman of fortune, family, character,
and interest in his country may, by a good place, be induced to believe, that
such a law, or such an increase of the number and power of officers, is
necessary for preventing fraudulent practices, or the like; and may therefore
agree to it, without seeing the danger our constitution may be thereby exposed
to. Thus, by degrees, he may be made to agree to such propositions, one after
another, till he has thereby established in the crown the absolute direction of
most of the elections in the kingdom. This, Sir, would have been the certain
consequence of the late excise scheme; and yet there were many gentlemen of
family and fortune that approved of it. I am convinced they did not foresee
this consequence; nay, I have so much charity as to believe, that the chief
patron of that scheme did not; but every impartial man in the kingdom is now, I
believe, sensible of it. That scheme was indeed, such a large step toward
giving the crown the direction of most of our elections, and by good luck was
so thoroughly considered before it was brought into this house, that most
gentlemen became sensible of the danger before it was too late; and that was
the cause of its meeting with the fate it deserved; but its fate will be a
warning to future ministers not to attempt making such a large step at once:
they will from thence see that they must grasp at this power by little and
little, which they will certainly do, and as certainly at last accomplish,
unless we take care to exclude from this house most of those who, by the places
they enjoy, are induced to have a better opinion of ministers than any man
ought to have, that is entrusted with the guardianship of the constitution and
liberties of his country. The question is not, Sir, whether a gentleman may be
induced by the office or place he holds or expects, to make at once, and in an
open and direct manner, an absolute surrender of the liberties of his country.
No prince, or minister, of common sense will ever desire such a surrender,
because, if he can get into his hands an uncontrollable power over most of our
elections, and consequently the direction of the parliaments chosen by this
uncontrollable power, his power will in every respect be as absolute, and may
be exercised in a more arbitrary manner, and with greater security to himself,
than it could be without the appearance of a parliamentary authority; for every
unpopular and oppressive measure would then be made the act and deed of the
parliament; and the lenity of the minister in the execution of those penal laws
enacted by parliament, or in the exercise of those powers granted him by
parliament, would be set forth and extolled by his tools in a Gazetteer, or
some such paper, published by his authority, and dispersed through the whole
kingdom at the public expense. The question, therefore, now before us, is,
Whether a gentleman's eyes may not, by a lucrative and honorable post of
employment, be so overclouded as to prevent his seeing through the plausible
pretenses that may, from time to time, be made use of by an artful minister,
for getting into his hands, or into the hands of the crown, such an
uncontrollable power as I have mentioned; and this question, even with respect
to Gentlemen of family and fortune, will, I am sure, be answered in the
affirmative by every man in this kingdom, who does not possess or expect some
post or employment, or some of those titles of honor which, by our
constitution, as it is now modelled, the crown has absolutely at its disposal.
To tell us, Sir, that our liberties can never be in danger from a majority of
placemen in this house, unless the people be generally abandoned as to all
principles of virtue and public good, and unless the crown has, at the same
time, formed designs against our liberties; and that the only method for
removing this danger, in case we should at any time be threatened with it,
would be to take proper measures for restoring virtue and public spirit among
the people, and for removing evil counselors from about the throne -- to tell
us this, I say, Sir, in a serious manner, is something very extraordinary: It
is mistaking the effect for the cause, and desiring us to begin at the wrong
end. Corruption, Sir, is not the effect, but the cause of a general depravity
of manners among the people of any country, and has in all countries, as well
as this, been first practiced and encouraged by ministers and courtiers. It
would therefore be ridiculous in us to think of restoring virtue among the
people, till we have once made it impossible for ministers and courtiers to
corrupt them; and I am sure it would be still more ridiculous in us to think of
removing an evil counselor from about the throne, till we have once removed
his creatures and tools out of this house. I hope, Sir, there are at present no
evil counselors about the throne; if there were, I am sure no such counselor
has a majority of his creatures and tools in this house. If this were the case,
it would have been very ridiculous to have made such a motion as this now
before us. It would be very ridiculous to think of restoring our constitution
by any legal method. It is this misfortune we intend to prevent by the bill now
moved for. It is a misfortune now foreseen by all unprejudiced men in the
kingdom. I hope it is not yet too late to think of preventing it by a legal
method; for after we have once fallen into this misfortune, it will be
impossible to recover. If an ambitious minister should once get a majority of
his creatures and tools into this house, can we suppose they would consent to
impeach or remove him from the throne Can we suppose they would ever consent to
any bill that might tend to distress the administration of their master? Can we
suppose they would refuse any thing that might tend to prolong his
administration and increase his power? Every attempt to restore the
constitution would be branded with the name of republicanism. The discontents
of the people would be called disaffection and jacobitism; every opposition
would be said to proceed from malice and resentment; and the misfortune would
be, that many honest well-meaning men, induced by their places to have a better
opinion of ministers than they ought to have, would give credit to these
pretenses, and would believe that by agreeing to the minister's arbitrary
schemes, they were only strengthening the hands of the government against
republicanism, jacobitism, and sedition. If it were possible to be merry in a
debate of so great importance, it would be diverting to observe the
contradiction in the arguments made use of against this motion. By some our
gentlemen of family and fortune are represented to be men of such strict honor
and such clean heads, that no place or pension can mislead their judgment, or
misdirect their will; no selfish consideration can make them overlook the
danger our liberties may be exposed to, or consent to any thing they think may
in the least endanger our constitution. By others, again, our gentlemen of
family and fortune are represented as such selfish mercenary creatures, that
unless the government would give them posts or pensions, they would refuse to
consent to those things that are absolutely necessary for the ends of
government and the preservation of their country. Now these two contradictory
positions, though they cannot be equally true, may be, and I believe they are,
equally false. We have, I believe, some gentlemen amongst us whose judgment
cannot be biassed, nor their will directed by any selfish consideration. Such
men, I hope, we shall always have in some of our highest offices, and these are
not designed by this bill to be excluded from having seats in this house; but
their number will always be small, and therefore not sufficient by themselves
alone to support the constitution against a combination of all the fools and
knaves that may hereafter get into this house; therefore we must endeavor to
prevent this combination, and this can only be done by such a bill as is now
proposed. On the other hand, I believe, here may be some amongst us, who
propose nothing by their service in this house, but their own private
advantage; and whilst we have placemen and pensioners amongst us, such men will
endeavor all they can to get into parliament: Nay, it may become so customary
for every man that votes with the court to have a place or a pension, that no
man will do so without some such reward. But if ever this selfish spirit should
get into parliament, our constitution will be undone; and to prevent this is
the design of the bill now moved for: If no man could, by being a member of
parliament, propose to get any place, or office, or any advantage to himself,
the mercenary and selfish would seldom endeavor to get themselves chosen, at
least they would never be at any expense for this purpose; and as such men have
seldom a great natural interest in any part of the kingdom, there would always
be such a small number of them in parliament, that their opposition could never
obstruct or retard any thing that seemed necessary for the just ends of
government, or for the preservation and happiness of the society. The public
good would then be the only aim of ministers, as well as members, because
neither of them could hope for success in any other; and as men of good sense
and strict honor are the best judges, and the most ready to agree upon what is
necessary for the public good, it would then be as much the business of
ministers to get such men chosen, as it is now their business to get such
members chosen as are men of mercenary tempers or shallow understandings; for
all ministers will have jobs to do in parliament as long as they have any hopes
of success, and the weak or mercenary will always be the most proper for this
purpose. I am indeed surprised, Sir, to hear it said by an honorable
gentleman, whose attachment to the present establishment is not to be doubted,
that if most placemen were excluded from this house, there would soon be a
majority of Jacobites in it. Such a supposition is not to be made, without
first supposing that a great majority of the people are Jacobites; and to
suppose this is, I am sure, no compliment to our present royal family, and much
less to the king now upon our throne. As long as our parliaments are
independent, and our elections free, there can never be any considerable number
of Jacobites either in this house or in the nation; but if there should once
come to be a majority of placemen and officers in the house, that majority
would soon create a majority of Jacobites in the nation; and in that case,
though the majority within doors might be a good security to ministers against
parliamentary prosecutions, yet it would be but a bad security for the royal
family against an insurrection of the whole people without doors. The army,
upon which we now seem so much to depend, or a great part of them, would
probably join with the people, and the certain consequence would be the
overthrow of our present establishment. This danger, I know, a guilty minister
will always choose to expose his master to, rather than expose himself to a
legal trial before a free and independent parliament; because, in a general
conflagration, he may possibly escape notice, or may perhaps be able to
sacrifice his master by way of an atonement for himself; but those who support
him in thus exposing his master, can have no great regard for their sovereign,
and in such an event would certainly meet with the contempt and punishment they
so highly deserved. For this reason, Sir, as I have a greater regard for the
security of the royal family than I have for that of our present ministers, or
of any set of ministers, that shall ever get into the management of our public
affairs, I shall be for putting it out of the power of any future minister to
over-turn our constitution, by getting a majority of placemen and pensioners
into this house. This, I think, is now become absolutely necessary for
preventing our being brought under one of the worst sort of tyrannical
governments that was ever contrived, or established. For this purpose the bill
now moved for is one of the most certain, and one of the most obvious methods
that can be thought of. It can be attended with no inconvenience. It is
impossible to show so much as a plausible reason against it; and therefore, if
this motion be rejected, it must afford a most melancholy reflection to every
one that understands our constitution, and has a regard for the liberties of
his country.

It was urged by Mr. Southwell, and others, that the voice of the people called
for this bill; and that voice called for the serious attention of a wise
legislature; and that voice would be heard, first or last, and will have its
effect; that it could not be smothered, much less rejected with contempt. In
that house, they said, they ought to see with the same eyes with their
constituents, and ought to feel what the nation feels, which was a good reason
for not admitting placemen or pensioners; for the seeing and feeling of those
who receive and those who pay will be very different. That they had heard it
delivered in that house, that no man ought to be allowed to keep his place
under the crown, who voted against the minister's measures, or jobs, in
parliament. it was said, that it was well known that many boroughs were so
publicly venal, that their brokers dealt as openly for the ^ale of them, as
bawds for the sale of a prostitute.

A post in the army having fallen vacant, A. D. 1741, the gentleman, who had
the next right to it, happend to be a member of parliament, and one that had
opposed the court, which few officers do now adays: the ministers, as usual,
were against his preferment, because he had opposed the king's [that is, their
own] measures in parliament; but the king told them, the gentleman had always
behaved well as an officer, and he had nothing to do with his behavior in
parliament; so gave him the commission he had by his rank a right to DEB. COM.
XIII.199.
.

The ^ense of the city of London, on this subject, appears from the following
instruction to their representatives, A. D. 1741.

As nothing can effectually secure the freedom of our happy constitution,
except an incorrupt, and independent representation of the people, we insist on
your utmost endeavors to procure a proper bill for reducing and limiting the
number of placemen in the house of commons, especially as so many gentlemen, in
a situation of manifest dependence, were known to have seats in the last
parliament DEB. COM. XIII.16.
.

A motion was made, A. D. 1742, by Mr. Cornwall, that leave be given to bring
in a bill for the better securing the freedom of parliaments, by limiting the
number of officers in the house of commons. Sir Watkin Williams Win seconded
the motion to the following effect:

Sir, As this motion was last session agreed to, and as the bill itself was
brought in, and in every step approved of by this very house of commons, I
should with great confidence of success rise up to second this motion, if I did
not, from experience, know, that gentlemen often change their sentiments with
their situation; and that a gentleman, after he becomes a placeman, begins to
entertain notions of the prerogatives of the crown, and the liberties of the
people, very different from those he held whilst he was a plain honest country
gentleman. If any thing like this should happen in the present debate, it may
tend to disappoint the motion; but with all those who are neither placemen nor
pensioners, I am sure it ought to be an argument in its favor; and I hope it
will prevail with some gentlemen, who, in former sessions, opposed this motion,
to alter their sentiments and their way of voting upon this occasion, when they
have such a plain proof before their eyes, that if a place does not induce a
man to vote against his honor and his conscience, it at least biasses his
judgment, and makes him conclude that to be wrong which he before thought, and
declared to be right. Another strong argument in favor of this motion, Sir,
is, the melancholy and distressed condition which the affairs of Europe, as
well as of this nation, are now reduced to. We have, for near thirty years,
been in a course of approving and supporting almost every political measure the
crown seemed resolved to pursue. With regard to foreign affairs, we have
approved and supported every one of them without exception. Thank God, I have
had no concern in this general uninterrupted approbation. I have, at the
respective times, publicly declared my dislike of many of them, and yet I am
far from thinking that any of those who approved voted at any time against the
plain dictates of their conscience; but I am convinced that many of them were
biassed in their judgments by the fears of losing the places they possessed, or
the hopes of getting the titles, places, or preferments, they expected. In
disputes on particular subjects in politics, it is very easy to impose upon
gentlemen who have never made that science their study, and are never let into
any secrets of state, unless with a design to deceive them; therefore, in all
such cases, I have great charity for those who happen to differ from me in
opinion. But when the wickedness or folly of the measures begins to appear from
the fatal consequences they have produced, my charity begins to cease with
respect to those who persevere in their opinions, and refuse coming into any
method for preventing themselves or their successors in this house from being
deceived by the same biass toward a court. I have, Sir, as great an opinion,
as any gentleman ought to have of the honor and impartiality of those who are
members of either house of parliament; but it is arguing against common sense,
and common experience to pretend that no member of this house will be biassed
in his opinion, or influenced in his voting by 500 or 1000, or perhaps, 5000 l.
a year. It has in all countries, and in all ages, been held as an established
maxim, that no man ought to be allowed to sit as a judge, or even as a
jury-man, in any cause where he is to get or lose by the event of the suit; and
as we sit as judges almost in every case that can come before us between the
people and their sovereign, or those employed by him in the executive part of
our government, surely no man ought to be allowed to sit here, who is to get or
lose the whole, or the chief part of his subsistence by the judgment he passes
upon any affair depending in this house. In former times, Sir, when we had no
standing army, nor any officers of our army kept in continual pay; when we had
no excise, nor excisemen; when we had few or no taxes, and as few
tax-gatherers, it was not necessary to have any such law enacted; because no
public officer then ever thought of getting himself chosen a member of
parliament; whilst he remained in pay, he was obliged to attend the duty of his
office, and consequently could neither attend the business, nor be chosen a
member of parliament. This is the true reason why the high sheriff of a county
cannot even now be chosen a member of this house; and when this maxim was first
established by common law, or, as the lawyers call it, common reason only, it
fell by degrees into disuse, and public officers of all ranks and degrees may
be, and are, now chosen members of parliament except high sheriffs, and some
few others, who have been disqualified by express statute. Thus, Sir, our
constitution stands at present; and as the number of our public officers of all
kinds, and in all stations, has been of late years vastly increased, and is
every day increasing; as their yearly profits and emoluments have been vastly
augmented; and as their power is growing every year more and more extensive,
they have now a great sway in all our elections, especially those for our
cities and boroughs; so that in a few years, we may, nay, we must expect, that
a majority of this house will always consist of such as hold or expect offices,
places, or private pensions at the pleasure of the crown; and what justice or
mercy the people can expect from such a house of commons, common sense, I had
almost said, common experience, may instruct. For this reason, Sir, if we have
a mind to preserve our constitution; if we have a mind that parliament should
ever be of any use to the king or his people; if we have a mind to prevent a
parliament's being a cumbersome clog to a good king, and a cruel instrument of
oppression in the hands of a tyrannical one, we must pass a Jaw for limiting
the number of officers in this house; and this we ought to be the more ardent
to have speedily done, because if we are once caught in the share, it will be
impossible for us ever to escape; for if a majority of this house should ever
once come to consist of officers and placemen, it is not to be supposed they
would pass a bill for their own exclusion. On the contrary, if they should
entertain the least jealousy of their (...) being able to get themselves, or a
majority of such as themselves, chosen at a new election, they would, by the
authority of a late precedent, continue themselves, or they would pass an
excise-bill, or some such bill, for giving the court an absolute command over a
majority of our elections, and thereby establish an arbitrary power of the most
extensive, cruel, and tyrannical kind, I mean, an arbitrary power supported by
a corrupt parliament and a numerous mercenary army. To prevent this, Sir, I
rise up to second the motion made by my worthy friend. I shall always endeavor
to prevent it by my vote in this house, and if ever it should become necessary,
by the risk of my life and fortune in the field DEB. COM. XIV.33.
.

There is a curious speech of lord Raymond on occasion of the second reading of
this bill; in which he declares against a place-bill, because it would prevent
young men of fortune from accepting employments, when they found they could not
sit in parliament. [But the independent people do not choose they should have
places, and sit in parliament at the same time, because their places may biass
their votes, and the people do not approve of lay-pluralities and non-residence
any more than of clerical.] He says, if young men of fortune do not accept
employments, they will not understand business. [If they be members of
parliament, and placemen at the same time, they will certainly understand
neither the business of parliament nor that of their places.] He says, the bill
will exclude all young men of fortune from the army. [The independent people
would be glad, that there were no army, and that, instead of it, we had a well
regulated militia.] He says, the security of the nation consists in having the
army officered by men of fortune. [The security of a nation consists in the
people's being armed, and capable to defend themselves against all enemies,
foreign and domestic DEB. LORDS* VIII.10^.
.]

Lord Sandwich, on this occasion, speaks as follows:

In ancient times, my lords, nay, I may say, till after the restoration, we had
no occasion for such bills. The crown had but a few lucrative employments to
bestow, and many of those it had at its disposal, were such as were generally
granted for life; consequently, no minister could hope by such means to gain,
much less to preserve, a corrupt majority in either house of parliament; and
the impossibility of success prevented their making any such attempt. We had
then no mercenary standing army, nor had the crown any lucrative military
commissions to dispose of. If an army was at any time raised for foreign
service, no officer employed in that army could look upon his post as an estate
for life; therefore, though a commission in the army was considered as an
honor, it was never looked upon as a favor; but on the contrary, those landed
gentlemen who had acquired a character in their country for conduct, courage,
and military knowledge, were often solicited to accept of commissions in the
army which was to be raised, and when the service was over, they returned to
live upon their estates in the country without being at any further expense to
the public. We had then, my lords, but very few customs, and no excises;
consequently a minister could not spread his excise-men over the whole kingdom
to influence elections in counties, or to govern them in most of our inland
boroughs; and the salaries of custom-house-officers were so trifling, that no
man of any great character or fortune would accept of them; so that such
officers had but very little influence in any of our seaport towns. But now,
my lords, the case is quite altered; the posts in the army, and in the
collection of the public revenues, and the other places in the disposal of the
crown, are become so numerous and so lucrative, that they must have a great
influence upon the members of the other house, if there be no restraint upon
the number of placemen allowed to have seats in that house. This, I say, must
be the consequence, unless we suppose, that men will judge and determine as
impartially in a case where they are to get 500 l. or 1000 l. a year, as in a
case where they are to get or lose nothing by their judgment or determination;
and to suppose this is so contrary to the nature of mankind, and to the
established maxims of all societies, that I am sure none of your lordships will
make any such suppositions. Parliaments, we know, are designed to be a check
upon ministers; we likewise know, that almost every post in the disposal of the
crown, is left to the arbitrary disposal of ministers; and we also know that no
minister ever did or ever will give a lucrative post or employment to a man who
opposes his measures in parliament. From late experience we know, that some of
the highest officers in the kingdom have been dismissed for no other reason but
because they disapproved of the measures pursued by our ministers, and had
honor enough to declare their disapprobation in parliament. Can we then
expect, my lords, that the other house will be a check upon the conduct of our
ministers, as long as there is a majority in that house who enjoy, or expect,
lucrative and honorable employments from the benevolence of these very
ministers? I shall not say, that in such a case the members would all be
corrupt in their determinations, but I will say, that in many cases they would
be biassed in their judgments, and thereby induced to approve of what, in duty
to their country, they ought to have disapproved of; or to put a negative upon
what, in duty to their country, they ought to have given their consent to.
Therefore, my lords, if we intend that the other house should answer the end of
its institution, by judging impartially, and determining wisely and justly in
every case that comes before them, we must pass this bill, or such a bill as
this; or we must pass a bill for taking from the crown the disposal of those
posts and employments that are necessary for the executive part of our
government; and surely those lords who seem so mighty jealous of any
incroachment upon the prerogative of the crown, will agree to the former rather
than to the latter of these two expedients. The latter, I shall grant, would be
an infringement of one of those prerogatives now enjoyed by the crown; but I
cannot, for my life, see what the former has to do with the prerogative of the
crown, nor can I conceive how any one prerogative of the crown is to be in the
least affected by this bill. There is no confinement, nor the least restraint,
proposed upon the power the king has to dispose of offices or employments. He
may grant them as fully and freely as before: he may even grant them to members
of parliament, notwithstanding any thing proposed to be enacted by this bill;
and the member may enjoy the office or employment so granted to him; only if it
be such a one as is not excepted in this bill, he is not to be rechosen. Is
this, my lords, an infringement of any prerogative of the crown? Has the king a
power to tell the people whom they are to choose, or whom they are not to choose?
No, my lords; but the legislature has, and has already in many cases exercised
that power. The people are already, by law, restrained from choosing a man for
their representative who is not possessed of 600 l. or at least 300 l. a year:
they are already restrained from choosing any man concerned in collecting the
public revenue: they are already restrained from choosing the high sheriff to be
their representative; and now they are to be restrained from choosing any
placemen besides those excepted in the bill. This, it is granted, is a new
restraint; but it can no more be said to be an infringement of the people's
liberties, than confining a madman can be said to be an infringement of his
liberty; for if the people were not mad, or something worse, they never would
choose a man as the guardian of their liberties, who must either forfeit the
lucrative post he enjoys, or betray his trust to ministers, who can, and
probably will, take his post from him, if he does not; and who have always, by
experience, been found to be the greatest enemies to the liberties of the
people. --

No inconvenience, but great benefit, has accrued from that law which disables
commissioners and officers of our customs, or excise, from being members of the
other house. Experience must therefore give a favorable opinion of this bill.
Can it be said, that in the year 1693 we were influenced by any factious
discontents? And yet in that year, such a bill as this, which was entitled, A
Bill touching free and impartial Proceedings in Parliament, passed both houses;
but by the advice of the ministers was refused the royal assent; as several
others had been during the beginning of that reign. Can it be supposed, that in
the year 1701, we were governed by any factious discontents; and yet in the act
then passed, there was an express clause for excluding all placemen from having
seats in the house of commons after the settlement then established should take
place; which clause met with the approbation not only both houses of
parliament, but of the crown itself. And surely no man will derogate so much
from the known courage of king William, as to say, that he would have allowed
himself to be bubbled by any faction or party into a regulation which he
thought would strike at the root of our constitution. This clause, it is true,
was afterward in the queen's time repealed; but I wish the noble peers who
were the promoters of that repeal had considered a little more their own
characters as well as the constitution of their country; for if they had, they
might perhaps have made some such exceptions as are contained in this bill; but
I am sure they would never have agreed to and much less proposed a general and
absolute repeal of that clause DEB. LORDS, VIII.107.
.

On occasion of the debate on the pension-bill, A. D. 1730-31, an oath was
proposed to be taken by members, purging themselves of the guilt of receiving
any pension from the crown. Several lords protested against its being rejected
in their house; because the bill would, if committed, have been regularly the
subject of debate, and amendments might have been made as this house thought
proper; and because the commons had passed the bill with so much honor to
themselves; and because this bill only enforces the observation, and prevents
the evasions of former laws. By one of these laws, no person who has a pension
from the crown during pleasure, can sit in the house of commons; but the effect
of this law was or might have been evaded, in great measure, by grants of
pensions for certain terms of years. To remedy this abuse, it was enacted by
another law; that no person who enjoys a pension for any number of years, shall
sit in that house, under certain penalties; but the effect of this law may be
evaded by giving gratuities, or making annual presents; and the commons would
find it difficult to obtain those accounts which can alone show what pensions
are paid to particular persons. By the laws now in force, whoever accepts any
office or employment under the crown, cannot sit in that house, till he has
been re-elected. But an office may be held by some person who is not a member
of that house, in trust for one who is. The arguments used for the necessity of
preserving an influence to the crown by the power of rewarding; are not to the
present purpose, or if applied, they prove what is not much to the honor of
this house; as rejecting this bill looks like approving all the evasions that
have or can be invented or put in practice.

Strictly speaking, all influence over either house, except that which arises
from a sense of these duties which we owe to our king and country, is improper;
for although this influence appears to be that of the crown, it may become
virtually that of the minister; and if ever a corrupt minister should have the
disposition of places, and distribution of pensions, gratuities, and rewards,
he may create such an influence, as shall effectually deprive the prince of the
great advantage of knowing the true sense of the people, and a house of
parliament being prevailed upon to approve such measures as the whole nation
dislikes; he may, for the sake of an unworthy servant, lose the affections of
his people, whilst he imagines that he both deserves and possesses them; and
this improper influence will always be most exerted in the support of ill
measures and weak ministers.

The trust reposed in parliament is much greater than it was, in respect to
those heavy taxes which have been for many years past, and which must be, for
all succeeding times [unless the national debt could be paid] annually laid by
parliament, and also the immense debts which have been contracted.

The service of the house of commons was formerly a real service, therefore
often declined, and always paid for by the people; it is now no longer paid
for, no longer declined, but sought after at a great expense. How far these
considerations, with that of the vast increase of the civil-list, and of the
debts contracted on it, deserve to enforce the reasons for exacting some
stronger engagements, from members of the house of commons to those whom they
are chosen to represent, is we think sufficiently obvious.

Although the multiplying of oaths ought to be avoided, yet an oath being the
most solemn engagement men can lay under, we judge it on that account the more
proper to be imposed; nor will the probability of its being broke by the
iniquity of mankind be an argument of greater force against this bill, than
against any other law made for preventing any other crime DEB. LORDS, IV.29.
.

It is well known, my lords, (says lord Chesterfield in the debate on a bill
for making officers independent on the ministry, A.D. 1734 Ibid. 198.
) that there are many officers of the army who have nothing, or at least very
little to subsist on but their commissions; and it is likewise well known that
there are many gentlemen of the army now in both houses of parliament. There
are now, my lords, more officers of the army in each house of parliament than
there were when we had on foot an army of above 60,000 men: These are facts
which will not, I believe, be controverted. It is, I do not know how, become of
late years a prevailing opinion, that the only way of getting preferment in the
army is to have a seat in the other house of parliament: This, it is true, my
lords, must be an erroneous opinion. It is impossible that any man can justly
and honorably acquire any preferment in the army by his behavior in either
house of parliament, and therefore this must be an opinion for which I hope
there never was any ground. I am sure there can be no ground for it under his
present majesty; but erroneous as it is, it is become a general opinion, and we
know that mankind always were, and always will be governed and influenced by
general opinions and prejudices; and according as the prevalence of this
opinion increases, we may expect an increase of the number of officers in both
houses of parliament. We may expect, my lords, that in future times, as soon as
any gentleman has once got a commission in the army, he will next employ all
his money and credit, and all his friends to procure himself a seat in
parliament; he will perhaps pawn the last shilling's worth he has in the world,
besides his commission, in order to procure himself a seat in the other house
of parliament; and how dangerous it may be to our constitution to have such a
man depending for the continuance of that commission upon some future
enterprizing minister, I leave to your lordships to judge. No man has a better
opinion than I have of the gentlemen who are at present the officers of our
army; but I must say, that I think it too hard a trial even for their virtue,
especially in this degenerate age, to have it in the power of a desperate
minister to tell them upon occasion of an important question in parliament, 'If
you do not vote, Sir, as I direct, you shall starve.'

In the debate on the famous pension-bill, A. D. 1739 DEB, LORDS, VI.372.
, lord Walpole observed, that a bill with the same title had been four times
sent up to the lords, and as often rejected. That it was an affront to the
lords to send them the same bill five times. That it is dangerous to make
alterations. [The bill, however, was no alteration, but intended to enforce an
old law.] That the bill supposes corruption in the other house, which is a
slander on the house, and a reflection on the government. That it is impossible
there should be any pensioning; because no pension can be granted but by
warrant from his majesty, and all moneys are to be accounted for to king and
parliament. [So that, in short; corruption is, like the stories of ghosts and
goblings, a mere nonentity, at which only silly people are sacred.] That
besides, the ministry have no inclination to corrup^ the members of the house
of commons. I have the honor, says his lordship, to be nearly related to some
of those employed in the administration: From thence I have had an opportunity
of knowing their most secret thoughts; and from thence I have formed my
opinion. Therefore, if it is neither in the inclination nor in the power of any
one employed in the administration to corrupt the members of the other house,
what occasion can we have, would it not be altogether imprudent in us to make
an alteration in one of the most fundamental parts of our constitution, in
order to guard against a grievance which is neither felt, nor can be, in his
present majesty's reign, so much as supposed?

Lord Talbot answered lord Walpole, that the commons, by sending up the bill,
showed, That they believed not only the possibility, but the reality of
corruption. That there were two statutes before calculated for the same
purpose; but that ministerial craft working upon abandoned prostitution could
evade them. That the commons, if in earnest, might justly be offended, if the
lords rejected the bill, which might produce a rupture between the houses, and
might set the whole nation against the lords; if the commons meant only to
delude their constituents by a pretended zeal against corruption, trusting,
that the lords would throw out the bill, would it be consistent with the
dignity of the house of peers to be accessory to such abominable craft. That a
private pension is not a reward of merit, but a breach of trust; and to reject
the bill would be giving a sanction to breach of trust. That it could not be
said, that the lords passing the bill was a slur on the commons, when the
commons originated it. That a parliament 2 Hen. VIII. passed an act to cancel
all the debts the king had contracted upon loans; and the historians account
for this iniquitous proceeding from that parliament's being filled with the
king's servants, with whom justice had not so much weight as complaisance to
the crown.

The numbers of placemen in that parliament, (says his lordship) are not
specified; but I believe they did not amount to near three hundred in both
houses; nor is there mention made of a single pensioner. The parliament,
stigmatized by the name of the pensionary parliament, proposed an expurgatory
oath to clear themselves from that aspersion, containing many particulars, one
of which was, that each member should swear he had never given his vote in
parliament for any reward or promise whatsoever. I sincerely wish, that to
gratify the people the same or such another oath should now be taken; and as
the oath proposed by this bill will, I think, be rather more effectual,
therefore, I am for the bill's being committed, and hope it will be passed into
a law DEB. LORDS, VI.375.
.

To pretend [alluding to lord Walpole's speech] that we are not at present in
any danger from the private pensions that may be given to members of the other
house, must appear absurd to every man that considers the nature of ministers,
or the nature of mankind. My lords, it is a danger we can never be free from;
nor can we sufficiently guard against, as long as it is in the power of a
minister to give, or of a member to receive. It is absolutely necessary for a
minister to have the consent or approbation of parliament in almost every step
of his conduct. Therefore from the very nature of ministers, we may suppose,
that if he cannot obtain such consent or approbation by his authority, he will
endeavor to obtain it by his power; and from the nature of mankind we must
suppose, that among such a number of men as are in the other house, the
minister will always find some ready enough to prostitute their consent or
approbation for a considerable bribe, or annual pension. Thus we must always be
exposed to this danger; and now we are a great deal more exposed to it, than
ever we were heretofore; because our ministers now have infinitely more to
give, and custom or example has, I am afraid, greatly added to the number of
those, that are ready to receive DEB. LORDS. VI.383.
.

By the very act of settlement itself, my lords, it was expressly enacted,
amongst other things, That no person having a pension from the crown, should
serve as a member of the house of commons; and though this clause was in
general repealed by an act of the 4th and 5th of queen Anne, yet it was then
again thought so reasonable to exclude pensioners from having seats in the
other house, that it was anew enacted, That no person having a pension from
the crown during pleasure, should be capable of being a member of any future
house of commons; and by an act of the 1st of the late king, their incapacity
was farther extended to all persons having any pension from the crown, for any
term or number of years, either in their own names or in the name of any other
person in trust for them, or for their benefit. Thus your lordships see, that
by the laws now in being, all persons who have pensions from the crown during
pleasure, or for any term or number of years, are rendered incapable of having
seats in the other house; and by these laws, great penalties are inflicted upon
those who presume to break through them. But as no provision has been made by
either of these laws for discovering secret offenders, and as every man must be
sensible that such pensions may be given privately, the gentlemen of the other
house have thought it, and I hope your lordships will think it necessary, to
provide the best remedy that can be thought of for this defect, which is the
chief, and indeed the sole intention of this bill. I cannot help t^^refore
being astonished at its being pretended, that this bill will occasion any
alteration, or innovation in our constitution; and there is nothing convinces
me more of the necessity there is for passing it, than the circumstances of the
noble lords, who I find oppose it. To the honor of the administration in the
first year of the late king, I must observe, that the law passed at that time
for excluding pensioners from the other house, was introduced by a secretary of
state, and approved by most of those in the administration; and it was prudent
and right in them to do so. A minister that has no intention to make use of
bribery and corruption, has no occasion to oppose any bill that can be thought
of, for preventing such infamous and illegal practices; and therefore, when I
find such a bill opposed, by those who are the known friends of a minister, it
will always be a prevailing argument with me, not only to think that there is a
present and pressing necessity for such a bill, but also, that the bill
proposed will be in some measure effectual. It will at least raise the price of
prostitutes, because the more risk a man runs, the higher wages he will of
course expect; and the higher you raise the price of those who are liable to be
corrupted, the more difficult will every future minister find it to corrupt,
notwithstanding the many and great boons our ministers have now to bestow; and
then they must think of gaining the consent or approbation of parliament by
their authority in persuading, and not by their power in corrupting DEB. LORDS,
VI.384.
.

I find (says the earl of Carlisle) some lords are, upon this occasion,
extremely apprehensive of corrupting the morals of the people, by a
multiplicity of new oaths, I wish the same apprehensions had prevailed, when
such an infinite number of oaths were contrived, for collecting our customs and
taxes. Most of these oaths are to be taken by multitudes of people, and in
cases where there are great temptations for perjury. The oath now proposed, is
to be taken by none, but members of the other house; and the temptations to
perjury can never be great or frequent, but when our constitution is in the
utmost danger. It is therefore something strange, that we should be so little
apprehensive of corrupting the morals of the people, by a multiplicity of
oaths, when we are contriving methods for preserving the revenue of our
sovereigns, and so very apprehensive of the like effect, when we are contriving
methods for preserving the constitution and liberties of our country. A
foreigner, upon considering this behavior, would be apt to judge we had very
little concern about the latter, provided we could but enjoy a share of the
former; and if we should reject this bill, without much Letter reasons than I
have yet heard against it, I fear most of our own people will join in forming
the same false opinion of this honorable and august assembly. Your lordships
must be all sensible how prevalent the jealousy at present is, of there being a
great number of pensioners in parliament: the gentlemen of the other house have
endeavored to allay that jealousy, and to vindicate the honor of their
assembly, by sending us up this bill. If it should be thrown out here, what
will the nation think? Will it not be generally supposed that this is the
house, in which the number of pensioners prevails, and that here the pensions
have the most infallible effect? Or perhaps it will be supposed, that there are
pensioners in the other house as well as in this, but that the pensioners in
the other, for the sake of recommending themselves to their constituents, had
leave from their masters to agree to this bill, because their masters knew they
could depend upon the number and submission of their pensioners in this, for
throwing it out. I am very sensible, my lords, there is no real ground for
either of these suppositions; but those without doors, who do not know the
reasons upon which your lordships proceed, when they find a bill rejected which
makes no alteration in our constitution, which does not so much as make an
alteration in any former law, which contains nothing but an inforcement of the
laws in being against pensioners; such persons, I say, may think they have
reason to make one or other of these suppositions; and should not we be
extremely cautious of giving the least shadow of reason for judging so
unworthily of our assembly DEB. LORDS, VI.388.
?

My lords, as the laws now in being for excluding pensioners from the other
house, must to every man that considers them, appear to be altogether
ineffectual, if this bill be rejected, I shall, even in my time, if I live but
a very few years, expect to see the other house full of pensioners. I shall
expect to see a minister in that house, out of a wantonness of power, by his
single veto, or the monosyllable NO, throw out a bill of the utmost importance,
without designing to give his slaves so much as one reason for what he obliges
them to do. This indeed, if it should ever happen, I shall look upon as a sign
of his power, but not of his prudence; and I may prophesy, that if ever a
minister should get such a power over the other house, his power in this will
be as absolute and equally insolent Ibid. 389.
.

The bishop of Salisbury [Sherlocke] opposed the bill, because it gave the
commons the means of finding out transgressors more effectually. Perhaps his
good lordship might think this was taking the business of reforming mankind out
of the hands of the bishops, whose indefatigable labors, in season and out of
season, in word and doctrine, in teaching and preaching, are equal to the
pulling down of any strong holds of Satan. See bishop Burnet's panegyric on the
diligence of the clergy, at the conclusion of the HISTORY OF HIS OWN TIMES.

By this bill, says the bishop, the commons are to become superior to the chief
branch of the legislature, to the crown itself; for they are to judge of the
actions of the crown, and may determine, that a well-merited reward, given by
the crown for the most eminent public services, was a corrupt reward, given for
a gentleman's corrupt behavior in their assembly.

Here his good lordship seems, with submission, to make a distress where there
is none. For the supposed eminently serviceable gentleman had nothing to do but
quit his seat in the house, and then the crown might give him a pension of
100,000 l. a year. But it does not seem easy to understand why a bishop should
be so zealous about this supposed encroachment on the crown, so long as it did
not break in upon the power of the king to manufacture parsons into bishops.

By what follows, one would imagine his lordship was disposed to be merry. If,
says he, the other house should once render themselves superior to the crown,
they would of course become superior to this house likewise, and would soon
engross, as they have done before, the whole power of our government. They
would either vote this house useless, [what a dreadful thing it would be if
they should vote the inestimable bishops useless!] as they have once done
already, or they would render it insignificant, by making it entirely
subservient to them. All this power the commons would acquire by the single
circumstance of having power to demand an oath of their members, that they were
not the minister's hirelings.

The bishop afterward expresses an anxiety about too many oaths, as if
corruption were not as bad as perjury; but he says nothing about too many
unintelligible and self-contradictory articles to be subscribed by the clergy.
The laws of this kingdom, says the bishop, have always been extremely cautious
of subjecting a man to an oath, in any case where his interest may be
concerned. Therefore the good bishop ought to have been a great enemy to
clerical subscription; for that, surely, is subjecting a man to an oath, where
his interest is concerned, (so is his taking the oaths to the government.) Yet
the language of the bishops is, subscribe, or starve.

The oath proposed by this bill, says the bishop, is, I think, such a one as
can be understood by no man. [Is it more unintelligible, my good lord, than the
Athanasian creed, or the doctrine of predestination to eternal torments; which
is so full of sweet, pleasant, and comfortable matter See the XVIIth article.
?

Some readers may observe, that these remarks are rather ad hominem, than
answers to the bishop's objections. True: but the bishop's objections are so
frivolous, and besides so peculiarly unsuitable to the character of a bishop,
who ought to have rejoiced in an opportunity for setting his face against
corruption, that my treating him and his objections with contempt, where every
friend of virtue and his country has a right to express indignation, ought to
be considered as no small degree of candor. For the same reason I take no
notice of his pretense, that it must be difficult to determine, what is a
corrupt pension; that the innocent would have been in danger from this bill;
that there was no danger from placemen or pensioners in the house of commons;
that neither king nor ministry, were capable of corrupting any members of the
commons; that those who are for putting a stop to corruption, are enemies to
the constitution; that the opposers of Chapter Ist's tyranny* were only a
disaffected party, etc. So much for a specimen of pontifical politics -- sic
digerit omina Calchas. VIRG. DEB. LORDS, VI.400.


Lord Carteret observed, that nothing would cast a worse slur upon the house of
peers, than their rejecting this bill; that corruption cannot be too soon
guarded against; for that the only time to guard against it is, before it
becomes prevalent, as after a majority in either house becomes corrupt, it will
be impossible to get a good bill against corruption passed; that 99 persons in
every hundred throughout the kingdom, thought there was real danger from
corruption; that the passing of the bill would quiet the minds of the people,
etc.

I shall conclude (says he) with observing to your lordships, that if you
reject it, all those who think we are in danger from corruption, will conclude,
that it is already become impossible to guard against it by any legal means,
and will therefore begin to think of some other method for preserving our
constitution, which may prove of dangerous consequence to the illustrious
family, now upon our throne.

On the same occasion, the duke of Argyle spoke as follows:

My lords, we are now upon a bill, for putting an end to, or at least
preventing, one sort of corruption in the other house; and from the opposition
the bill meets with here, and the imaginary dangers that were suggested for
supporting, or rather excusing that opposition; those who are not personally
acquainted with the noble lords, who have spoke upon that side of the question,
would I think be apt to suppose their opinion to be either, that corruption is
now become a necessary evil, without which the forms of our government could
not be preserved, or that it is an evil of very little consequence, and not at
all incompatible with the subsistence of a free government. Corruption my
lords, has always hitherto been allowed to be vile, to be dangerous. I have for
my own part discouraged it in all stations: I shall always disdain the
obedience or the parasitical sort of assent, that is to be gained only by
corruption, and I have always been sorry, when I have observed, it was not
equally discouraged by others; for if it were no way encouraged by those in
high stations, it would never be possible for the mode in any country to cover
that infamy, which naturally attends the corrupted; nor would the quality of
the offender ever atone for the wretched meanness of the offense. Corruption,
my lords, is of all dangers the greatest our constitution can be exposed to,
and the most to be apprehended. Its approach is imperceptible, but its blow, if
not prevented, is fatal; and you cannot prevent its blow, unless you prevent
its approach. The laws now in being for excluding pensioners from having seats
in the other house, are designed as a safeguard, against corruption's entering
in one shape at least within the walls of that house; and when we are
considering whether these laws ought to be enforced, we have no occasion for
examining into late measures, or for supposing that any late practices have
been made use of for corrupting the members of either house. We have now as
much reason to guard against the approach of corruption as we had when these
laws were made; therefore we are now to consider only the laws themselves, and
if they appear insufficient, they ought to be amended, whether any corrupt
practices have lately been made use of or not. That these laws are insufficient
for the end intended, must, I think, appear to any one that peruses them. There
are penalties, it is true, inflicted upon pensioners that shall presume to sit
or vote in the other house; but it is evident that these penalties can never be
recovered, because the fact can never be proved. A pension or a bribe may be
given in such a manner, that even he who gives it can be no direct witness
against the receiver; and it is always given in such a secret manner that the
criminal may have good reason to think his crime can never be discovered. For
this reason no penalty you can inflict will ever have a great effect; and this
makes it necessary, in cases of suspicion, to require an oath from the party
suspected. I shall not say, my lords, that the oath required by this bill will
have all the effect that could be wished. There may be some so abandoned as to
despise the religious ceremony of an oath; but it will have an effect upon a
great many; and even the most abandoned will be shy of denying their having a
pension upon oath in the very face, perhaps, of the man who pays them their
pensions. Nay, even prudence itself will make men shy of being guilty of
perjury, lest the concealment of their crimes should afterward be imputed to
them as a favor, and made use of as a handle for obliging them to do as much
dirty work afterward, without a pension, as they had done before for the sake
of a pension. It is an old and a true proverb, That when I trust a man with my
secret, I make him my master. An avaritious, or an extravagant and necessitous
man may accept of iniquitous wages from a minister, and yet he would not,
perhaps, choose to be such an absolute slave to that minister, as he must be,
should he put it in his power to convict him of perjury. Therefore the oath
prescribed by this bill will certainly have a very great effect; and as the
laws proposed to be enforced by this bill evidently appear to be insufficient,
this method of enforcing them ought to be chosen, at least till a more
effectual one can be thought on DEB. LORDS, VI.394.
.

My lords, I look upon the present question to be a trial of skill, the fate of
which is to determine whether or no our constitution is hereafter to be
destroyed by corruption, and the people reduced to the fatal necessity of
endeavoring to restore it by the sword. If this should ever come to be the
unlucky fate of this nation, those who now oppose our making use of legal means
for securing our constitution, whilst it is yet in our power, will have no
great reason to rejoice in their past conduct. Let us consider, my lords, the
vast sums of money that are now at the disposal, or under the direction of the
crown; the infinite number of lucrative posts, places, and employments, most of
them unknown to our ancestors, now depending upon the sole and arbitrary
pleasure of the crown; and the great variety of penal laws, by one or other of
which the most innocent may be made to suffer, the most cautious may be
entrapped, and from which the most guilty may be screened by virtue of that
disposing or mitigatory power, which, with respect to many of them, is now
lodged in the officers of the crown. Let us, I say, my lords, consider these
things, and we must acknowledge that the present danger we are in of having our
parliaments converted into a Turkish divan, is far from being imaginary; and
when we are under such well grounded apprehensions, shall we rack our invention
for visionary dangers, in order to excuse our agreeing to any method for
guarding against a danger so real, and which may, upon the first change of
ministers or measures, become inevitable and irresistible DEB. LORDS. VI.396.
.

In the end of the late queen's reign, there was just such another bill brought
into this house, which at that time met with so good a reception here, that it
was thrown out by only one vote; and its meeting with that fate was occasioed
by the fault of one noble lord, who, at the time the question was put, happened
to be in the court of request, with two proxies in his pocket Ibid. 397.
.

The duke of Newcastle said, he thought this bill unnecessary, as it was well
known that the members of the other house were gentlemen of the best families
and fortunes in the kingdom. The preservation of their estates, depended upon
the preservation of the constitution; and as bribing would destroy the
constitution, and render even the bribe precarious; no member could be guilty
of taking a bribe, because there could be no temptation to it. And he thought
it would diminish the prerogative of the crown, therefore he could not agree to
the bill.

He was answered by lord Chesterfield, that there was a suspicion of some such
practices, because that house had frequently sent this bill to the lords. To
pretend that this bill encroaches upon the prerogative of the crown, is
somewhat strange. Has the crown a prerogative to infringe the laws? To say so,
is destroying the credit and authority of the crown; but the crown has nothing
to do with pensions, it is the minister's affair. Men of family and fortune may
be avaricious or luxurious, and may not think of the dangerous consequences of
corruption; certainly if they did, there would be no occasion to make laws
against it; it would appear so horrible, that no man would allow it to approach
him. The corrupted ought to consider, that they do not sell their country only:
that perhaps they may disregard; but they sell likewise themselves: they become
the bondslaves of the corruptor; who corrupts them, not for their sakes, but
for his own. Therefore if people would but consider, they would always reject
the offer with disdain. But history shows, that to satisfy the immediate
cravings of some infamous appetite, the alluring bait is swallowed. This makes
it necessary in every free state to contrive, if possible, to prevent
corruption. The sooner a remedy is applied, the less will be our danger of
falling into that fatal distemper; from which no free state, where it has once
become general, has ever yet recovered DEB. LORDS, VII.409.
.

In the committee on the bill for taxing places and pensions, A. D. 1744, Mr.
Archer spoke as follows;

'Sir, There is a short but material amendment which, I think, should be made
to this question. It is so adapted to the necessities of the present times, and
so much for the honor of the committee, that I am satisfied it will be
agreeable to you, and to every other gentleman here. We are now so happy as to
enjoy a most profound calm without the least ruffle of wind or weather. All
opposition lies hushed; but least a storm should soon arise, I am for making
use of this happy juncture, this favorable opportunity, of proving to the
world that this extraordinary unanimity does not proceed from any selfish views
or expectations, but from a true disinterested public spirit; and if the
amendment which I shall beg leave to offer, should pass with the same
unanimity, as all other questions have hitherto done, it will be a proof of it
beyond contradiction. Sir, what I propose, is to lay a double tax upon places
and pensions in ease of the landed interest of this kingdom; and who is there
in this committee that can have any reasonable objection against it? As for the
gentlemen in place, they cannot but be sensible what an uncertain and
precarious situation they are now in; and that they hold their places by the
weakest of all tenures, by nothing but the smiles of a great man, which are
more fickle and inconstant than those of fortune. Perhaps it may soon be proper
for some of them to follow the example of a noble earl, and resign; therefore
it cannot be worth their while to oppose it. Besides, it may be some
consolation to them that their landed estates will receive some benefits from
their places which they themselves are so likely to lose; it is impossible,
therefore, that any objection can come from them. As for the gentlemen who are
to succeed them, if they are the same as I have heard mentioned, they are
persons of such exalted notions of honor and patriotism, that you could not
put a higher affront upon them than to imagine, that the sordid lucre of the
place has any share in their thoughts. No, Sir, their patriotism, like virtue,
is its own reward, and the only one they desire; and therefore, it is equally
certain, they will not oppose it. And as for the great man who has the disposal
of these places, it will be doing him a very fignal piece of service; for by
lessening the value of places, you will lessen the number of candidates, and so
far take off from that immense trouble and fatigue, which he is forced daily,
nay, hourly to undergo from innumerable solicitations, visits, letters,
messages, and importunities; and besides this, it will be a great honor to his
administration, not to stand in need of the mean assistance of places to
support it. Those gentlemen, therefore, who have any regard for his ease or his
honor, must all espouse this motion. As for the rest of the house, they are
country gentlemen, who feel too much the weight and burden of this tax upon
their lands not to wish for some relief; it is, therefore, fairly to be
conclud^d, that neither they nor any other gentlemen in the committee, can
disapprove of this amendment. But, Sir, if all these reasons, strong as they
are* more particularly at this juncture, were laid (...) of the case, the thing
is so evidently right and jus^ in itself, that it cannot be opposed. Sir, it is
^ fundamental rule of justice, as well as policy, that all taxes for the
support of the government, should be laid with equality; and how can it be
pretended that 4 s. in the pound upon land, and no more upon places, is an
equal tax? The land is taxed in proportion to the rent, which is generally the
full value, every body being desirous to let their estates for as much as they
can get. The place is taxed in proportion to the salary, which is seldom a
quarter part of the income, the fees and perquisites generally amounting to
five or six time^ as much. The rent is subject to deductions for repairs and
losses by the tenants; the salary is subject to neither. Nay, the land-owner is
sometimes forced to pay the tax for rent which he does not receive; whereas the
placeman never pays it, but upon the receipt of his salary. The land subjects
the owner to the expense and trouble of serving many offices, particularly the
high-sheriff's, grand-jury-man's and others; the place is so far from being
liable to any of them, that it is of itself an indemnification and excuse
against all. Then how can it be said, that this is acting fairly and
impartially? It is therefore high time for us to rectify this unequal
oppressive method of taxation; and if you lay 8 s. in the pound upon places and
pensions, it is very obvious how many advantages will flow from it. 1st, It
will in some measure operate as a place-bill; for by lessening the value of the
places, it will lessen that undue influence which is supposed to arise from
them. 2dly, It will coroborate and strengthen that favorite law, the
qualification act; for if it is necessary that the members of this house should
have an estate in land to a certain value, the less charge you lay upon the
land, the more likely they will be to fulfill and answer the intent of that good
law. 3dly, It will in like manner fortify the laws of election; for if every
freeholder is required to have 40 s. a year, to entitle him to a vote, do not
take away a fifth part of it from him by a tax of 4 s. in the pound upon the
land, but rather lay it upon places and pensions. In short, Sir, almost all the
good laws made for the freedom and independency of parliament, will be in some
measure assisted by this amendment. But I do agree, that some places are of too
small value to admit of a double tax, as the excise officers, and others, of 50
l. a year and under; but they might easily be provided for out of the
contingencies of the year; and a few other places are of too great importance
and service to the state to undergo any diminution, I mean the judges, upon
whom I am so far from levying a double tax, that I would rather except them
from all taxes whatsoever; for I think it a great dishonor and reproach to any
government not to support their magistrates with splendour and dignity; and if
any other exceptions should be thought proper, they might all be provided for
in the body of the bill. But upon places in general, a double tax is the true
and just proportion to be observed; and that you may be fully satisfied that
this amendment is not only founded upon reason but also upon precedent, I shall
beg leave to refer you to an act of parliament made 29 and 30 Chapter II. when, for
carrying on the war vigorously against France, 1 s. in the pound was laid upon
personal estates, and 3 s. upon pensions; and it is amazing to me, how so wise
and useful a law came to be so much neglected. Perhaps, Sir, some gentlemen
might think it better to appropriate a greater share of the profits of places
and pensions to the service of the war, which I am far from disapproving of;
and indeed I have heard, they have already done so in Spain and Turkey; but at
present I choose rather to move it in this unexceptionable way to avoid all
dispute, and to preserve that unanimity which has hitherto so happily subsisted
amongst us. The amendment, therefore, that I beg leave to offer is, to insert
in the question, after the 4 s. in the pound upon lands, etc. these words, and
the sum of eight shillings in the pound upon places and pensions.

CHAP. X. Of Qualifications for Members of Parliament.
THE wisdom of our ancestors, and their anxiety about the safety of the state,
put them upon endeavoring, by all possible means, to prevent the mischiefs
likely to arise from bribery and corruption; and, for that purpose, suggested
the necessity of place and pension-bills, as we have seen in the foregoing
chapter. To exclude corruption still more effectually, they added
qualification-acts. They thought a member of parliament, who was himself a man
of fortune, would both be less liable to ministe^ial influence, as being above
want, and likewise would be more solitous about the fate of his country, as
having himself a considerable prize at stake. On this subject, various views
are to be taken, and various considerations to be attended to. Experience shows
us, that men are not always more or less obnoxious to corruption according to
their circumstances; and that their greediness of the public money regulates
more by their dispositions than their fortunes. The man, who loves money,
whether with a view to hoard or to dissipate it, is the dangerous man, either
as an elector or a member. And of the two, the spend thrift is more likely to
sell his country for money, than the miser.

Again, it must be owned, that in the present disorderly state of things,
qualification-acts are likely to be of advantage; for every little check on
corruption is wanted, and all too little.

But if representation were put upon an adequate foot, the power of
commissioning legislators so divided, that it would be impossible to fill the
house by corrupt means (which it would be, if it were necessary to bribe
206,000, the major half of 410,000, instead of 5,723; see vol. i. p. 39, et
seq.) and if parliaments were annual, with exclusion by rotation, etc. it would
be of much less consequence, that electors and members were men in independent
circumstances, than as things are now.

No minister would find it for his advantage to tempt either elector, or
member; and if there were no buyer, there could be no sellers. The only
advantage, which would then appear to kings, lords, commons, ministers,
electors, members, etc. would be that of the public; and that advantage every
man would plainly see he might as well pursue as not; because his own advantage
would be included in that of the public; and he would find that he could no
other way seek his own private advantage, than by consulting that of the public.

The Romans, in the republican times, show, that they thought it useful to see
that those, who were entrusted with the care of the general safety, should be
men of property. Accordingly, the qualification of a Roman senator was 6458 l.
6 s. 8 d. raised by Augustus to 9687 l. 10 s. -- which if a senator impaired,
he lost his seat Sueton. IN AUG. Cic. XIII.5.
.

A quali^^^ation-bill was rejected by the lords, A. D. 1697. They thought the
nation should be at liberty to choose honest men, though poor, and pay them
wages Tind. CONTIN. I.350.
.

The qualification-act, requiring members for counties to be men of at least
600 l. a year, and burgesses of 300 l. in land, was passed in the year 1711.
when the majority of the commons were tories Burn. IV.316.
. The design, Burnet says, was to exclude merchants and traders. But that, he
thinks, was bad policy, because landed men are generally no judges of the
interests of commerce, which is an object of great importance.

It was enacted 9 Anne, that every member for a county should have an estate at
least for his own life of 600 l. a year, and every member for city, or borough,
300 l. (a most ridiculous difference! as all members have equal weight in the
house) and that every election of a person not so qualified, should be void;
every candidate, if called upon at his election, to be obliged to give in his
estate upon oath. And the commons read twice a bill for explaining that act,
and increasing the qualification of members DEB. COM. XI.296.
. It was dropped.

A. D. 1713. the commons, in a grand commitee, considered the act of the ninth
year of her majesty's reign, entitled, An Act for securing the Freedom of
Parliaments, by farther qualifying the Members to sit in the House of Commons;
and came to the following resolutions: -- I. That notwithstanding the oath
taken by any candidate on or after any election, his qualification may be
afterward examined into. II. That the person whose qualification is expressly
objected to in any petition relating to his election, shall, within fifteen
days after the petition read, give to the clerk of the house of commons a paper
signed by himself, containing a rental or particular of the lands, tenements,
or hereditaments, whereby he makes out his qualification; of which any person
concerned may have a copy. III. That of such lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, whereof the party has been in possession for three years before
the election, he shall also insert in the same paper, from what person, and by
what conveyance or act in law, he claims and derives the same; and also the
consideration if any paid, and the names and places of abode of the witnesses
to such conveyance and payment. IV. That if a sitting member shall think fit to
question the qualification of a petitioner, he shall, within fifteen days after
the petition read, leave notice thereof in writing with the clerk of the house
of commons; and the petitioner shall, within fifteen days after such notice,
leave with the said clerk of the house the like account in writing of his
qualification, as is required from a sitting member. DEB. COM. V.62.
.

The eldest sons of peers, the members for the universities, and the 45 members
for North Britain, are exempted from the qualification-law. Yet I should think,
it would not be easy to show why any man, whether he be the son of a duke or a
cobbler, should be trusted in a station, where he is likely to be tempted, if he
is in circumstances which render him obnoxious to temptation. Nor is it easy to
imagine, why a member for Middlesex must show his circumstances to be above
temptation, while a member for Clackmannan, whose vote weighs as heavy as any
other's, may be a dependent beggar.

An estate, or income, for life only, is not a security against corruption. Yet
it is admited as a qualification. But a member may be tempted to seek, by
indirect means, a provision for his family, who must come into distress after
his death; if the income is for life only.

A. D. 1761, a bill was brought into parliament, by which it was proposed, it
should be enacted, that every member, before he sat, or voted, should be
obliged to give into the house of commons a rental or schedule of his estate,
with all particulars, signed and sworn to, on pain of a severe fine in case of
falsification, to be levied by any person suing for the same as an action for
debt, in spite of privilege, etc. And, on every dimunition of his annual
income, during the sitting of parliament, to give an account of the same to the
house. Eldest sons, or heirs apparent of peers or lords of parliament, members
for the two universities, and for Scotland, (for no known reason) to be
excepted from this salutary regulation; as if 50 or 60 members obnoxious to
bribery were no grievance.

But when this bill came to be passed into a law, it was so amended (the wrong
way) that it might as well not have been passed. For, first, it was not to be
in force, till the determination of the then sitting parliament; and besides,
it was so whittled down, that a member might give in a mock schedule or rental
to the house, in the same manner as at his election; and he could not be
challenged concerning his qualification any more during that parliament:
Whereas by the bill, as first proposed, it would have been very dangerous to
give a mock-qualification for seven years; and members would have been at any
time liable to be accused of having reduced themselves to a condition obnoxious
to bribery.

BOOK II. Of taxing the Colonies.
CHAP. I. That the Object, our Ministers have had in View in taxing the
Colonies, was, enlarging the Power of the Court, by increasing the Number of
Places and Pensions for their Dependants.
THE subject of our late broil with our colonies, the greatest evil that has
arisen in the state for these many centuries past, is doubly entitled to a
place in a work which contains an enquiry into public abuses, both as being
itself one of the grossest abuses, and also as being particularly the
consequence of parliamentary corruption.

It is the exorbitant voraciousness of the court-tools, the great number of
those needy persons, and the fear our ministers are constantly subject to, from
the hostility of their opponents, with the consciousness, that they hold their
places by the tenure of interest, and not of merit; that has lately misled our
ministry into the most fatal measure of laying taxes upon our colonies, who
have no representation in the house of commons which taxes them. Our ministers
(...) made a breach perhaps never to be closed; they have opened a wound
perhap^ never more to be healed -- all to get a few more places for their
wretched dependents.

Upon the modern plan of government, viz. Buying every necessary vote, a
British ministry must be so distressed for money, as to be at any time ready to
dig up the very foundations of Pandaemonium, if they thought there were either
gold or diamonds to be found in that soil. Ye^, when Walpole was at his wit's
end for money to stop the mouths of his harpies, it was suggested to him, that
the colonies could afford to pay taxes as well as the mother country, and that
from thence a large income might in time be raised for the use of
electioneering and pensioning, and that there might be many good posts and
places ^stabli^hed in the colonies for the advantage of the court-tools; even
Walpole had, on that occasion, some consideration. He answered to those, who
made this proposal, That the colonists, by the profits of our trade with them,
enabled us to pay our taxes, which was the same as paying taxes to the mother
country; and that, by the restrictions, under which we have laid their
commerce, all their money com^s to the mother country; and the mother country
can at most have but their all. His successors, however, have seen this object
in a different light, and have considered a small advantage to themselves as of
more consequence than a great benefit to the public. But so long as we see such
villainous uses made of the public money by our ministers, we ought to
discourage all the arts we see them using for bringing money into the treasury,
or increasing their own influence, and therefore we ought to oppose their
taxing the colonies, as an abuse, in which we are deeply concerned, and which
may prove fatal to ^s, as well as to the colonists.

Bad ministers always show an inclination for multiplying taxes. It gives an
opportunity for them to embezzle; for in much handling of money, some will
stick to the fingers. And a bad ministry want, above all things, money, to dole
about, in order to keep in power. If they gain their present point, the spoils
of the colonies will help up the supplies, and the influence of the court will
be increased; they will have more trumpeters to defend their measures; success
will sanctify rapine and bribery; the free spirit of the colonists (who seem at
present to possess a larger measure of that virtue, than the mother country)
will be broken by the iron rod of oppression; and Corruption, like another lewd
Cleopatra, as described by Dryden, (Her galley down the silver Cydnos rowed,
Her tacklings silk; the streamers waved in gold, etc.)
will sail in triumph through the whole British empire in Europe, Asia and
America; her false and sophisticate charms will bewitch all eyes, and debauch
all hearts, and all will be willing to sell their country, if a purchaser can
be found.

It is not yet, but it will soon be, too late to ward off this horrible ruin.

In the year 1754, when our profound government, always too busy in the wrong
place, proposed to tax the colonies by act of parliament, and to direct the
governors to concert measures for their defense against the French, instead of
leaving both to the colonists themselves, this wise scheme was communicated by
governor Shirley to a gentleman of Philadelphia, then in Boston, who has very
eminently distinguished himself, before and since that time, in the
philosophical world, and whose judgment, penetration and candor, as well as
his readiness and ability to suggest, or carry into execution every scheme of
public utility, have most deservedly endeared him, not only to his
fellow subjects over the whole American continent, but to multitudes on this
side the Atlantic, and now suffers for that integrity which should have
procured him reward. This sagacious gentleman (whose friendship the collector
of these papers will ever account one of the most fortunate circumstances of
his life) sent the governor a set of remarks, of which the following are the
heads; and which do almost exhaust the subject.

That the people always bear the burden best, when they have, or think they
have, some share in the direction.

That when public measures are generally distasteful to the people, the wheels
of government must move more heavily.

That excluding the people of America from all share in the choice of a grand
council for their own defense, and taxing them in parliament, where they have
no representative, would probably give extreme dissatisfaction. [How soundly
this extraordinary person judged of the sentiments of the colonists, let the
history of the subsequent proceedings of our incorrigible government in
attempting, in spite of this wise premonition, to tax them in parliament, bear
witness.]

That there was no reason to doubt the willingness of the colonists to
contribute for their own defense.

That the people themselves, whose all was at stake, could better judge of the
force necessary for their defense, and of the means for raising money for the
purpose, than a British parliament at so great a distance.

That natives of America would be as likely to consult wisely and faithfully
for the safety of their native country, as the governors sent from Britain,
whose object is generally to make fortunes, and then return home, and who might
therefore be expected to carry on the war against France rather in a way, by
which themselves were likely to be gainers, than for the greatest advantage of
the cause.

That compelling the colonies to pay money for their own defense, without their
consent, would show a suspicion of their loyalty, or of their regard for their
country, or of their common sense, and would be treating them as conquered
enemies, and not as free Britons, who hold it for their undoubted right not to
be taxed but by their own consent, given through their representatives.

That parliamentary taxes, once laid on, are often continued after the
necessity for laying them on, ceases; but that, if the colonists were trusted
to tax themselves, they would remove the burden from the people, as soon as it
should become unnecessary for them to bear it any longer.

That, if parliament is to tax the colonies, their assemblies of
representatives may be dismissed as useless.

That taxing the colonies in parliament for their own defense against the
French, is not more just, than it would be to oblige the cinque ports, and
other coasts of Britain, to maintain a force against France, and to tax them
for this purpose, without allowing them representatives in parliament.

That the colonists have always been indirectly taxed by the mother country
(besides paying the taxes necessarily laid on by their own assemblies) inasmuch
as they are obliged to purchase the manufactures of Britain, charged with
innumerable heavy taxes; some of which manufactures they could make, and others
could purchase cheaper at other markets.

That the colonists are besides taxed by the mother country, by being obliged
to carry great part of their produce to Britain, and accept a lower price than
they might have at other markets. The difference is a tax paid to Britain.

That the whole wealth of the colonists centres at last in the mother country,
which enables her to pay her taxes.

That the colonists have, at the hazard of their lives and fortunes, extended
the dominions, and increased the commerce and riches of the mother country, [so
much that in Josh Gee's time, it was reckoned, that our colony trade was almost
the only commerce, by which we were gainers] that therefore the colonists do
not deserve to be deprived of the native right of Britons, the right of being
taxed only by representatives chosen by themselves.

That an adequate representation in parliament would probably be acceptable to
the colonists, and would best unite the views and interests of the whole empire.

A headstrong minister made afterward so good use of these masterly
observations, as to improve upon the stupidity of the blind pilots of 1754. For
he almost set America in arms, by proposing to tax them in a time of peace, the
money to be applied, not to their defense, but to the general purpose of all
the British taxes, the support of a standing army, and gorging the rapacity of
the state-bloodsuckers. He had the influence afterward to obtain a
parliamentary confutation of the colonists doctrine, and a declaration, that
the king and parliament of Great Britain ^ad, have, and of right ought to have,
full power and authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient force to bind
the colonies, and his majesty's subjects in them, in all cases whatsoever; and
consequently in the case of taxation without representation. This was literally
Pope's divine right of governing wrong. And the worthy gentleman above referred
to, being asked in the house of commons, what he thought of the declaration,
answered frankly, He thought it, and supposed that all the colonists would
think it, arbitrary and unjust. Some of their blundering doings our profound
ministers were afterward obliged to undo, to the diversion of three kingdoms,
and the colonists.

Grenville would have considered, had he been a man of conceptions large enough
for a tradesman's clerk, that by confining our colonists to trade only with us,
we make them pay our taxes, without directly laying upon them any internal tax.
For, if half our manufacturers are maintained by them, do they not pay the
taxes, which we charge upon those manufacturers? Does not the consumer pay the
whole charge of the article he consumes? But that short-sighted politician
exclaimed, that our chargeable colonies ought not to expect immunity from those
taxes, which come so heavy upon us, and of which charge a great part is
occasioned by the defense of our colonies. Would Grenville then have approved
of our getting rid of this chargeable appendage? I believe the French would
have thanked him for a part of the encumbrance, and I believe his own countymen
would have ^orn him to pieces, if he had proposed alienating any part of what
all considerate persons know to be of inestimable advantage to us, if we do
not, by injustice and false policy, disappoint ourselves of the advantage.

The object which a commercial nation ought to have always in view, is the
enlargement and establishment of its commerce: nor is there any plan more
promising for this purpose, than that of colonising. For colonists proceeding
originally from a mother country, come into the world with a prejudice for that
country, which will naturally lead them, in the conduct of their commerce, to
favor that country above all others; and this happy prejudice can only be
diminished, or eradicated, by ill usage on the part of the mother country.
Nothing brooks constraint so little as commerce: nothing is more delicate,
nothing more spontaneous. Whatever proceedings of the mother country therefore
break in upon the freedom of commerce, defeat the very intention of colonising,
and overthrow it to the foundation. By this rule let the wisdom of our
ministers in taxing the colonies be judged of, or rather the distress they are
in for a little money, and a few posts and places for their creatures.

CHAP. II. Our Colonies of great Advantage, and therefore deserved better
Treatment.
GRENVILLE's party, in order to defend their own folly in opening a breach
between the mother country and the colonies, endeavored to depreciate the
value of the colonies to Britain, and to show, that were we even to lose them,
the damage would not be great. They pretended, that colonies are naturally
prejudicial to the populousness of a mother country. But they only exposed
their own ignorance. Devenant, if they had ever read him, (and they must be
deep politicians who never read that capital author) would have saved them the
trouble of falling into this absurdity. It will peradventure (says that
masterly writer) be a great security and encouragement to those industrious
people [the colonists] if a declaratory law were made, That Englishmen have
right to all the laws of England, while they remain in countries subject to the
dominion of this kingdom Daven. II 36.
. The colonists, the noble discoveries and settlers of a new world, from
whence, as from an endless source, wealth and plenty, and the means of power
and grandeur unknown to former ages, have been pouring into Europe these three
hundred years!' What encouragement, what security do they not deserve to enjoy!
With the design of setting up, and keeping up a standard, in favor of civil
and religious liberty, did the heroic ancestors of the colonists fly from
persecution in their native country; they crossed the vast Atlantic; they
pierced those woods where no humanised foot from the creation had trod; they
roused the deadly serpent in his hole, the savage beast in his den, and the
brutal Indian in his thicket; they encountered all the danger and difficulties
of forming those settlements which have made the British empire what it is.

Generally speaking (says Devenant Ibid. II.10.
) our colonies, while they have English blood in their veins, and have
relations in England, and while they can get by trading with us, the stronger
and greater they grow, the more this crown and kingdom will get by them; and
nothing but such an arbitrary power a^ shall make them desperate, can bring
them to rebel.

Colonies do not naturally produce depopulation in the mother country; but
rather the contrary. For many individuals emigrating, cause cheapness for
those, who stay behind. They marry, and carry on population. The mother country
thus coming to swarm with people, they find themselves obliged to cultivate
trade and manufactures, etc.

Devenant accordingly shows II.2.
, that England is grown both more popolous and richer, since the improvement of
the colonies, than before; that, particularly, from the restoration to the
revolution, viz. 28 years, the number of inhabitants was increased 900,000.
What indeed has increased the wealth and power of the nation so much beyond
queen Elizabeth's (...), but the colonies?

"We cannot but wonder, says that excellent author, at their policy who were
the first promoters of that law in 1693, which puts a difficulty upon, and
restrains the sale of any plantation or parcel of land in America to
foreigners; whereas indeed we should invite and encourage aliens to plant in
the West Indies, whereby the crown gains subjects, and the nation gets wealth
by the labor of others. This statute does peradventure want revising. And
countries that take no care to encourage an accession of strangers, in a course
of time will find plantations of pernicious consequence. It may be computed
that there have gone from England to the West Indies for many years by a medium
about 1800 persons annually; but then there is reason to think, that for some
time the persecutions abroad have brought over to us by a medium about 500
foreigners every year; and there are grounds to believe, that for these last 20
years the West Indies have sent us back annually about 300 persons of their
offspring with this advantage, that the fathers went out poor, and the children
came home rich. But if such measures should hereafter be taken as will hinder
the accession of strangers, or discourage the planters from returning back;
then these colonies would drain us every year of 1800 persons.

We shall show, that the plantations are a spring of wealth to this nation;
that they work for us; that their treasure centres all here; and that the laws
have tied them fast enough to us; so that it must be through our own faul^, and
mismanagement, if they become independent of England.

Sir Josiah Child, thinks, the New-Englanders, in his times, consumed ten times
the value, in English manufactures, of what they sent to England. Yet he
reckons New England the least advantageous of all the colonies. He thinks, two
thirds of all the English shipping was, in his time, employed in the American
trade, meaning chiefly the continental colonies.

Postlethwayte thinks half the English manufactures go to America.

At the time of the stamp act, it was computed, that the Americans owed Britain
four millions sterling: A proof of a prodigious commerce.

The king, A. D. 1721, recommended encouraging the colonies to furnish naval
stores, which would not only be advantageous otherwise to both countries, but
would divert the colonists from setting up, and carrying on manufactures, which
directly interfere with those of Britain Tind. CONTIN. I.652.
.

A. D. 1723, the exports to Pennsylvania were 15,992 l. In 1742, they were
increased to 75,295 l. From 1744 to 1748 inclusive, our whole Exports to
America.

Northern Colonies. L. West India Islands. L. 1744, 640,114 796,112 5, 534,316
503,669 6, 754,945 472,994 7, 726,648 886,463 8, 830,243 734,095 Total
3,486,266 3,363,333 Difference 122,933 Total 3,486,266

From 1754 to 1758, inclusive.

Northern Colonies L. West India Islands. L. 1754, 1,246,615 685,675 5,
1,177,848 694,667 6, 1,428,720 733,458 7, 1,727,924 776,488 8, 1,832,948
877,571 Total 7,414,055 3,767,859 Difference 3,646,196 Total 7,414,055

From this view of our whole exports to our American colonies, it appears, that
our trade to the islands 27 years ago, viz. A. D. 1744 amounted to 796,112 l.
and thirteen years ago, viz. A. D. 1758, to 877,571 l. That in 1744 our whole
exports to the continent of America amounted to 640,114 l. but in 1758 to
1,832,948 l. So that in 14 years, viz. from 1744 to 1758, our ^sland trade has
been neither much increased nor diminished; but that our trade to the continent
was in the same period increased almost threefold. And in the year 1758, we
had not got possession of all North America. For the peace, by which we have
excluded the French from all that part of the continent, which is east of the
Mississippi, and are become masters of a territory, whose extent baffles
arithmetic, was made in 1703. Supposing our trade to the continent of America
to increase at the same rate, which nothing was likely to hinder, but our
enraging our colonists by Grenville's mad and unjust project of taxing them,
without representation, it is evident, that this alone would have been an
inexhaustible, and endless fund of trade. For, if in the last of the above
quoted years, viz. 1758, our trade was increased threefold beyond what it was
14 years before, it was to be expected, that in another period of 14 years,
viz. A. D. 1772, the present year, it should be again increased more than
threefold, because our dominion, and number of people in the continent, have
received an addition from an extraordinary cause, viz. the peace of 1763. If
so, the amount of our exports to the continent of America, in 1772, ought to be
5,498,844 l. And in 14 years more 16,496,532 l. So that, if the fatal Grenville
had never been born, -- patriae et Trojae communis Errinys.

VIRG. here was a fund of trade, which might have employed more manufacturing
hands, than would have made this island as populous as Holland. For many ages
will be past, before manufactures can come to be cultivated in America to any
such effect as to supersede those of the mother country. Because for many ages
to come, it will be more advantageous for the working people to take land,
settle, and marry, than to be journeymen manufacturers. Which likewise secures
a prodigious and still growing and accomulating increase of people. It is
found, that, on the continent of America, the number of the people is at least
doubled every twenty years. Therefore, if the number of British people on the
continent of America be now two millions, (I put the lowest computation) twenty
years hence it will be four millions. Let the reader only consider one moment,
what sort of head that m^n must have had, who could think of risquing the loss
of four millions of customers for the manufactures of his country -- all for
the sake -- of making a few places for collectors, and commissioners of duties
and taxes, that he might have somewhat to stop the Cerberian barking of a pack
of hungry court-curs. Statesm^n have no right to expect our putting a more
candid construction upon their proceedings. If they really meant the public
good, we should see them aiming at the public good; we should see the national
debt lessened, the army reformed, the number of places and pensions reduced,
etc. -- But to return.

More than one-fourth part of the English shipping is supposed to be employed
in the trade to America Hume, HIST. STUARTS. I.125.
.

The excellent Dr. Franklin says, the force of the American privateers in the
last war, was greater, as to both men and guns, than all queen Elizabeth's
royal navy LETTERS, p. 206.
. He thinks Britain can want no trade, but with her American colonies, which
must be continually increasing.

I am aware, that, in diminution of the value of our colonies, the Grenville
party have alleged, that the colonists, are very deeply indebted to us, and
that they have ever shown a backwardness to acquit themselves of those just
debts; so that our commerce with them is much less to be desired. But is it not
notorious, that for many ages together the mother country had no shadow of
complaint of this kind against the colonies; and that the first cause of the
interruption of payments from America was our minister's stopping the trade
between our colonists and the Spaniards in that part of the world.

Such have our colonies been to us, and such, and more than we can imagine,
they would have been to us.

And now it is a favorite object with us, to enslave and destroy those whom we
ought both from gratitude and prudence, to support and cherish. For, whilst I
am writing these lines, Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth; or rather may
the memory of the transaction be annihilated both from heaven and earth -- At
this very hour, we are meditating to deprive the city of Boston of its port
during an unlimited period, by which 25,000 people are to be punished, many
thousands utterly beggared, and a loss of half a million brought upon the
inhabitants of that great city for a riot committed by certain individuals
unknown; the inhabitants offering to make up the damages. We are proposing to
punish the innocent with the guilty, and to punish the guilty for acting
somewhat outrageously, after we ourselves had by our tyranny put them out of
their wits.

In the NEWS PAPERS of April, 1774, was published the following comparison
between the proceedings of government against Boston in New England, for a riot
committed there by persons unknown, and the proceedings of government against
the city of Edinburgh, on account of a riot, A. D. 1737, in which captain
Porteous, of the town-guards, was, by persons to this hour unknown, taken out
of prison, and put to death, for the slaughter of several people at an
execution, for which he was condemned as a murderer, and afterward reprieved
by the queen regent, the king being abroad.

PROCEEDINGS AGAINST
Edinburgh,
Began the 10th of Feb. 17^7, and ended the 21st of June, having continued near
four months.

The provost and magistrates of Edinburgh, the judges of Scotland, and many
other witnesses examined at the bar.

Counsel and evidence for the magistrates and city fully heard at the bar.

Two members for Edinburgh, forty-five for Scotland in the lower house, and
sixteen in the upper house.

Charge -- An overt act of rebellion, and an atrocious murder -- proved on a
full hearing, and by competent evidence.

Frequent conferences held between the two houses to compare the evidence, etc.

Punishment -- A fine of 2000 l.

for proof, see the JOURNALS of the Lords and Commons in 1737, and the BILL
against Edinburgh.

Boston,
Began the 14th, and ended the 31st of March, 1774, being in all seventeen days.

Witnesses examined at the privy council, and their evidence suppressed.

The agent refused a hearing at the bar.

Not one member for Boston in either house, nor for all or any part of America,
nor even a voice in electing one.

Charge -- A riot and trespass -- no evidence, and no hearing.

Not one conference.

Punishment -- The loss of their port, to the injury of the town, at the lowest
and most favorable estimate, of 500,000 l. the restoration of their port, and
of the use of their property, left at the king's mercy, after they shall have
paid for the tea the full price, and all damages, to the amount, we may
presume, of 30,000 l.

JOURNALS of the Lords and Commons 1774, and the BOSTON PORT BILL.

CHAP. III. The Colonies, though so valuable to Britain, have been greatly
oppressed by the Mother Country.
EVERY act of authority of one man [or body of men] over another, for which
there is not an absolute necessity, is tyrannical Beccaria, CRIMES AND PUN. p.
10.
.

Our colonists have long complained, that we have needlessly hampered and
restricted their trade; that, like awkward parents, we have exerted too much
authority over our children; while the whole art of managing them consisted in
letting them alone.

The colonists complain, that the governors we send them are generally needy
men, whom we send thither chiefly to fill their pockets; that both governors
and judges depend more upon the British court than upon the people whom they
are to govern and to judge; that our court gives authority to the commissioners
of customs to appoint and pay, at the expense of the people, without their
consent, as many officers as they please, to the multiplication of placemen,
the plundering the people, and the danger of liberty; that the whole people of
America are put to expense and trouble merely to put a little money in the
pockets of a few Portugueze merchants in England. The colonists must not import
directly from Portugal even a little oil or fruit, without having them loaded
with the expenses of a voyage three thousand miles round by England, which, in
war time, increases every article 30 per cent. and imporishes the colonies.
They must not make a nail, a penknife, or a hat. We empty our jails on them,
and fill their country with our rogues and thieves. We oblige their assemblies
to provide quarters for our soldiers, and find them firing, bedding, candles,
small beer, or rum, salt, vinegar, etc. at the expense of the provinces, in a
time of profound peace, though they have little occasion for a military force
at any time, being themselves all trained to arms. The colonists were, however,
so pleased at the removal of the stamp act, that they agreed to the quartering
of troops, hoping that it would be only a temporary grievance. But that they
might not give place to authority where it was unconstitutional, they made acts
of their own assemblies, leaving out some of the small articles, as salt and
vinegar. Even this was found to be rebellion, and the province of New York had
its assembly annihilated for the offense.

The house of representatives of Massachuset's-Bay petitioned the king to
remove Sir Fr. Bernard, their governor; because, amongst other things, he had
misrepresented the colonists to the ministry in such a manner, that it was
thought necessary to send a military force among them (Instead of sending them
soldiers, they should have removed grievances.) Those military men turned the
assembly room into a barrack for the common soldiers, and planted the sentinels
in such a manner, that the counselors and justices of the courts were
interrupted and challenged in passing on their business. They endeavored to
quarter their troops in the town of Boston, while the barracks were useless. He
dissolved the assembly at the most improper time, and arbitrarily refused to
call another, though often petitioned for ten months together.

The colonists complain of general warrants, under which any officer or servant
of the customs may break open any man's house, closet, chest, etc. at pleasure;
of our court's establishing the arbitrary and oppressive power of the excise
laws in the customs; of appointing judges, during pleasure, to try all revenue
causes without jury; of compelling his majesty's subjects in all revenue
matters to take their trials in any of the colonies, however distant from their
respective habitations, where their characters are known; of a secretary of
state's sending a requisition to the assembly at Boston, with threats, tending
to force their determinations, which ought to be free; of threatening and
punishing the American assemblies for petitioning the king, though the act of
settlement expressly secures this right to the subject; of misapplying several
American revenues; of impowering the crown to seize and send over to Britain,
for trial, those of the colonists who become obnoxious to the court, without
legal indictment, or bill found by jury; of suspending the legislative power of
the province of New York, so as to destroy that freedom of debate and
determination which is the necessary, unalienable, and constitutional right of
such assemblies, etc.

Governor Bernard complains heavily and repeatedly, that the election of the
council at Boston in New England, gives the people too much power See his LET.
TO LORD SHELBURNE.
. What idea, upon the principle of salus populi, can be formed of too much
power in the hands of the people? Suppose a people should choose to keep all the
power in their own hands, and delegate none? Oh, then, we the court, must be
content to be a part of the people, and have no opportunity of wallowing in
wealth and pleasure, and raising great fortunes from the spoils of the
industrious.

So Walpole opposed all reformations of parliamentary abuses; because they
tended to throw too much power into the hands of the people. This is the true
spirit of courts and court-tools; and they, who cannot see the cloven foot,
when thus uncovered to the knee, must obstinately shut their eyes.

Dr. Franklin, in his examination before the house of commons, declared, that
the causes of the British parliament's having lost, in great part, the respect
of the colonists, were, the restraints lately laid on their trade, by which the
bringing of gold and silver into the colonies was prevented, the pro^ibition of
paper-money among themselves, and then demanding a new and heavy tax by stamps,
taking away at the same time trial by juries, and refusing to receive and hear
their humble petitions Alm. DEB. COM. VII.113.
.

Governor Bernard of New England, having refused to call a legal assembly of
representatives, as above hinted, the people of a great many towns sent to
Boston commissioners to meet and treat of public affairs, and prevent anarchy
and confusion; but disclaiming all authoritative or governmental designs or
acts. This committee of convention petitioned governor Bernard for a regular
assembly as usual. The governor would not receive the petition, because that
would have been acknowledging the legality of the committee of convention,
which drew it up. He afterward sent them a message, that he could not suffer
them to continue sitting, after the assembly of the province was, by authority,
dissolved and forbidden to sit; and that the committee of convention was, to
all intents and purposes, an assembly under a different name. He therefore
warns them of the consequences. The committee of convention afterward
remonstrated to the governor against lodging troops in the city, while there
were barracks fit for receiving them, and not full, as contrary to act of
parliament. The committee of convention afterward published a manifesto,
signifying, that the design of their meeting was to preserve the peace, and to
petition the king in favor of the province, that a regular assembly might be
called, and grievances redressed. The members of the council of the province of
Massachusetts Bay addressed general Gage, commander of the forces sent to
Boston, excusing their own conduct, and the disturbances in Boston, and begging
that the military might be moved to the Barracks.

I believe they, who are so violent for loading our poor fellow subjects in
America with taxes, would think themselves hardly used, if they were hampered
in their manufactures and commerce by a people beyond the occean, in the same
manner as the colonists are by us in many instances, severe, useless, and
impolitic. Such are our restraining them from the use of slitting mills and
steel furnaces; our prohibiting them the cutting of white pines; our
regulations, which oblige them to bring to us all their products, though they
might find better markets elsewhere; which is obliging them to sell to us all
their products at our own price; and those other regulations, by which they are
prohibited manufacturing many necessary articles, or purchasing them of other
nations, only that they may be obliged to have them of us at an advanced price;
for we can afford no goods but at an advanced price, loaded as we are with 140
millions of debt, the interest of which, amounting to above 5 millions per
annum, must be raised in great part out of the profits of our trade. Thus we
make the poor colonists sell to us as cheap as we please, and purchase our
goods as dear as we please. This alone is taxing them with a vengeance.

The Carthaginians obliged the people of Sardinia (vae victis!) to buy corn of
them exclusively, at the price they set upon it: but we do not hear that those
tyrannical conquerors forced the enslaved Sardinians to sell them their
products at a price of their own fixing; while we impose this law, not on the
conquered Welsh or Irish, or the once restless and rebellious Scotch; but on
our colonists, our once tractable and obedient children, to whom we are under
greater obligations than to Scotch, Irish, and Welsh, all put together.

The colonists complain, that their trade is peculiarly restricted by laws made
in a parliament, in which they are not represented; that they are taxed in the
same parliament; therefore have no opportunity of giving, or withholding,
their consent; which produces a confusion of taxes, as their own assemblies are
obliged to lay on taxes for defraying the necessary expenses of their
respective provinces, at the same time that the mother country may be laying on
other taxes so heavy, that both together may be beyond the abilities of the
people. They complain of being obliged to find quarters, firing, bedding,
candles, rum, etc. for the army, though they are obliged to keep up a militia
of their own. That their money raised without and contrary to their consent, is
to be applied, likewise, without and contray to their approbation, viz. in
paying the salaries of governors, judges, and other officers appointed by the
court, and remov^able at its pleasure. They affirm, that several of their
original charters are, by late laws, set aside; so that the settlers are
deceived out of the privileges, on the faith of which they first left their
native country, crossed the ocean, and established those colonies, which have
been of so great value to the mother country. They complain of having been
restrained by the ministry from the privilege of petitioning against these
oppressions, and having their assemblies annihilated for doing what the Bill of
Rights allows to every Englishman; a stretch of power very much resembling that
of Chapter II. in seizing the charter of the city of London.

The act of parliament, by which the stamp act was repealed, asserted a power
in king, lords, and commons to tax the colonies. But it seems, the secretary of
state alone has power to dissolve, annihilate, and interdict their assemblies.
Thus, if our proceedings against America are viewed on one side, the colonists
are subject to king, lords, and commons; if, on the other, the secretary of
state alone is their master.

Can it be with a favorable design to the colonies, that the ministry always
recommend to the governors, who are generally their creatures, to obtain
permanent salaries for the government-offices? Is there any better means for
securing good behavior in officers, than putting them upon the foot of quamdiu
se been gesserint? Stopping supplies our ancestors thought the only sure way to
obtain redress of grievances. Give the American governors and other officers
permanent salaries, so as they shall be independent on the people, and you give
them the hint to erect themselves into petty despots and tyrants.

The colonists have long complained, that we needlessly hamper their trade with
the ports of Europe. Why may not, say they, the colonists be allowed to fetch
and carry in their own ships, to and from the several ports of Europe, whatever
articles do not interfere with the trade of the mother country? Are the people
of Britain afraid, lest the colonists be too thriving? They will only, in that
case, be the better customers to the mother country. For the more luxurious
they grow, the more they will want of the British manufactures, unless we drive
them to other shops by our ill usage, or exorbitant prices. Nothing requires
more to be free and unconfined than commerce.

The duty of 3 d. per gallon on melasses, they say, is more than the article
will bear, and therefore operates as a prohibition; stopping their exportation
of horses, lumber, flour, and fish, to the French and Dutch colonies; and the
vent for them in England and the West Indies is not sufficient to take them
off. The stopping the exportation of melasses into the continental colonies,
hinders their distilling, and is a prejudice to the rum-trade with Africa, and
throws it into the hands of the French, and hurts the fishery. There used to be
imported into Rhode Island only 1,150,000 gallons of melasses annually; the
duty upon which is 14,375 l. sterling, a larger sum than ever was in
circulation at any one time in the colony. The money to be sent out, never to
return. How is this drain to be kept running? If the colonies be, by our clumsy
laws, disabled from purchasing British manufactures, who will be the gainers?
The restricting of the colonists from sending their products to better and more
convenient markets, than Britain, is a loss to Britain of all the difference;
for all the profits, the colonists get, have always come to Britain; and the
more considerable their profits, the better for the mother country.

The courts of vice-admiralty, they say, are a great grievance. A
custom-house-officer may seize, for what he calls probable cause, in Georgia,
and carry the trial to Halifax, 1500 miles. The unfortunate owner of the seized
goods must follow. When arrived there, out of the reach of his friends and
acquaintance, he must give bond, else he cannot reclaim his goods. If the
judge, perhaps with iniquitous views, pronounces, that there was probable cause
for seizing them, the unhappy man may be ruined, and all his comfort will be
the same with that of the sick man, who dies, secundum artem, of the doctor,
that he is undone according to act of parliament. The patience of the
colonists, for so many years, under such severe laws, deserved at our hands
other treatment than we have lately regaled them with.

CHAP. IV. Precedents respecting Colonies.
THE conquered nations generally had each a protector in the Roman senate, as
the Allobroges had for their patron Quintius Fabius Sanga, and they were wont
to send ambassadors to Rome See ANT. UNIV. HIST. Vol. XIII. p. 140.
. Our American colonies, though not conquered countries, have,
constitutionally, no person in our senate to plead their cause, when we lay
taxes on them, without knowing whether they are able to bear them. For the
house of commons receives no petitions on money-bills, because it is to be
supposed, every place, that is taxed, is represented by a member, or members.
The rebellions of the Germans, Pannonians, etc. in Augustus's time, were owing
chiefly to the extortion of the governors set over them, by the Romans. A
lesson for our instruction with respect to our colonies ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIV.19.
. And see Tully's orations against VERRES, praetor of Sicily.

King John IV. of Portugal (formerly duke of Braganza) consulting the states
about raising two millions for the war with Spain, for the preservation of
their lately recovered liberties, they desired the king to give out an edict
for raising them in whatever way he pleased. But that magnanimous prince
answered, That he would have no money, but by the grant of his people. The
people immediately raised him four millions MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXII.299.
.

The city of Ghent refused, about 200 years ago, to pay its quota of a tax,
laid on in the states of the united provinces, because, they pretended, they
had a stipulation with Charles's ancestors, that they were to pay no tax,
unless they gave their express consent to the laying it on. It was answered,
that the subsidy was granted by the states of Flanders, in which their
representatives sat. They resist; and are totally deprived of their liberties
by Charles Robertson's CHAPTER V. II.430, 442.
.

The Spanish Netherlands were taxed last century by the imperial court under
the denomination of the circle of Burgundy. But this was thought unjust,
because they were subject to the states of the united provinces, and were taxed
by their own government, as the Americans by their assemblies; so that they
must have had the charges of two governments to defray, if they submitted to
the imperial tax; which was imposed on the pretext, of their having a voice in
the council of the empire; whereas the Americans have no voice in the British
Parliament. They refused to submit to the imperial taxation MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXX.428.
.

The Spaniards do not make the best of their colonies. They give their gold to
the industrious nations for those manufactures, which themselves should make,
and which would have rendered them a great maritime power Ibid. XXXIX.213.
. Philip II. by sending vast sums into the Netherlands when carrying on his
wars, enriched those countries, and made them powerful against himself. Thus
the Spaniards are only factors for the rest of Europe. The king and grandees
only see the gold, and then spread it all over the industrious nations, and
their poor are the poorest in the world. The Spaniards have several times made
attempts toward a spirit of manufactures, but wars have interrupted them. And
now, 1771, it has been said, that the king has sent two merchants to travel
through all Europe, and learn manufactures and commerce. The continual
importation of metal into Europe, must in time defeat its own intention. Specie
is now 32 times less valuable, than when the Spaniards discovered America Ibid.
214.
.

Batavia is more populous than Holland; yet continues subject to Holland, and
of prodigious advantage to the mother country. Why then should we dread the
defection or rebellion of our colonists, unless we mean to force them upon it?

Portugal holds almost her existence by her possessions in Brasil Ibid.
XXXVIII.2.
. Every nation in Europe gains by colonising, the Spaniards excepted.

The once prodigious power of the Portuguese in the East, dwindled through the
corrupt, effeminate, and unjust conduct of the viceroys they sent to Goa MOD.
UNIV. HIST. IX.290.
.

The viceroy of Manilla continues in office only three years. His successor has
power to examine him rigorously. Sometimes the successor has let himself be
tampered with; to prevent which the people have taken the trial and punishment
of (...) governors into their own hands Ibid. IX.460.
. If the people wish their business done, the sure way is to do it themselves.

Davenant, II.8, thinks, the only danger we are to guard against, respecting
our colonies is, their becoming powerful at sea; because, while we are their
masters in naval force, we can secure their obedience to our commercial laws.
But surely, in all cases of commerce, there is somewhat necessary, besides mere
compulsory government. We may oblige our colonists to submit to our laws, and
be very little the better for our colonies, if there be not a cordiality kept
up between them and us.

CHAP. V. Of Taxation without Representation.
IT appears by Chap. III. above, that our colonists have at all times had
sufficient ground of complaint against the mother country; and that if they had
been of that turbulent disposition, and as desirous of shaking off the
connection with us, as the Grenvillians falsely pretend, they must have given
repeated proofs of those bad dispositions. On the contrary, we know, that no
people ever were more peacable, or better affected, than the colonists have all
alone shown themselves; 'till we bethought ourselves of insulting them with
taxes imposed upon them by our parliament, in which they have no
representation, and with the direct design of raising money upon them for our
own advantage.

To impose taxes, is one of the most dangerous parts of a king's, or
government's business.

Periculos^^ plenum opus aleae
Tractas, et incedis per ignes
Suppositoa cineri doloso.
HO^. New taxes have raised sundry rebellions, and disturbances in England, as
9 Edw. III. 4 Rich. II. 9 Hen. VI. 4. Hen. VII. 16 Hen. VIII. etc. A parliament
was summoned, 39 Hen. III. A demand was made by the court. The commons thought
it exorbitant. Would grant nothing, so much were they offended; though they
assembled with the design of granting. So the people of Carolina lately, at the
very time, when they were expressing great rage against the government's
proposing to tax them without representation, voluntarily taxed themselves, to
a considerable value, to make a present to a person in England, whose public
conduct pleased them. The Roman senate, when Hannibal was at their gates,
knowing that people will do more voluntarily, than by force, for carrying on
the war, proposed, not a tax, but a benovolence. The consequence was, that the
Mensarii (tellers) could not receive the money, it c^^e in so fast.

Nothing produces so much ill-blood, as touching people's money. The malt-tax,
in Scotland, A. D 1712, because thought contrary to the union, had almost broke
the union, before it was 10 years old. It was an unjust tax that produced the
terrible insurrection under Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, which had almost
ovorturned the state. It was an injudicious tax that put the whole kingdom of
Naples in confusion under Massaniello the fisherman. What effect the attempt to
tax our own colonies may produce, remains to be seen -- and felt. God forbid
that it should equal the fears of wise and thoughtful men. To provoke three
millions of people to their utmost rage, is no slight affair.

The two counties palatine of Chester and Durham, had (says Petyt, RIGHT OF THE
COM. 45.) parliaments of their own, before the conquest, and were not subject
to any of the laws of the land, unless they agreed to them.

It was debated, A. D. 1621, whether the county palatine of Durham should have
representation in parliament, as the rest of England. It was agreed, that it
should; but it did not pass into a law, 'till 25 Car. II. when it was settled,
that the county should have two members, and the city of Durham two PARL. HIST.
V.464.
.

Time was, when the city of Chester had no representation. The privilege of
sending members was granted to that city, because (says the act 35 Hen. VIII.
c. 13. the inhabitants thereof have often been touched and grieved with acts
and statutes made in parliament, as were deragatory unto the most ancient
jurisdiction, liberties, and privileges thereof, as prejudicial unto the
commonweal, quietness, and peace of his majesty's subjects.

In the same manner representation was granted to the bishopric of Durham; and
it was not taxed 'till represented in parliament.

Mr. Molyneux (the gentleman, I suppose, with whom Mr. Lock corresponded)
wrote a pamphlet, A. D. School, to prove, that Ireland (though a conquered
country) ought not to be taxed by the English parliament DEB. COM. III.88.
. In our times it is not. How much less our brave colonists, who never were
conquered?

In the reign of Hen. III. says Devenant, we find where parliaments have not
been consulted, they have not thought themselves obliged to pay the expense;
for as we learn from Matthew Paris, king Hen. held a parliament at Winchester,
where he desired an aid from his people, in regard his own treasure had been
exhausted with paying his sister's portion to the Emperor, and by his own
wedding. The parliament replied, That these things had been done without
advising with them, and without their consent; and seeing they were free from
the fault, they ought not to participate of the punishment. The Poictovins, to
serve their own turn, had at another time engaged him in an useasonable war
with France; upon which he called a parliament, and desired an aid. The barons
told him, he had undertaken it unadvisedly; and that his parliament wondered,
he would undertake so difficult and dangerous a business, without their advice
and assent.

In ancient times, the lords have given the kings subsidies out of their own
property. 13 Edw. III. the lords granted, for themselves, a tenth of all the
corn growing upon their demesnes, the commons granting nothing at that time. At
other times the knights of the shires, have granted separately from the other
commoners; and at other times, the representatives of cities and boroughs have
granted by themselves. But still they granted only what was their own to grant.
They did not grant the property of people at the distance of 3000 miles, who
had not one representative among them.

Gee, in his excellent piece on trade, remonstrates against all measures, which
tend to hamper our colonies. What would he have said, if he had been told, that
the time would so soon come, when we should, with horror, see our
administration eager to send an armed force to dragoon them into submission to
unjust laws, by which their property was to be seized contrary to their own
consent, and those brave people by authority declared traitors, seditious,
rebels, etc. for defending their property?

It has been said on the subject of taxing the colonists in parliament; Why may
not the colonists be taxed by the same assembly, which has an unquestioned
power of making laws for them? But this is a confused and undistinguishing way
of reasoning. It is hardship enough on the colonies to find their commerce
hampered by laws, in the making of which they had no hand, nor could even
remonstrate against them, while they were under consideration. But there may be
pretexts for making laws, whose operations may eventually bring inconvenience
upon the colonists; while no pretext can justify taxing them, so long as they
continue unrepresented. Legislation and taxation, are very different things.
The lords cannot alter a letter in a money-bill, though they may amend any
other. And it is always to the commons the king has recourse for supplies, and
to whom he returns thanks for them. The reason is plain. The lords have no
power over the property of the people. The members of the house of commons are
the representatives of the commons of England; and as such have a delegated
power to grant supplies out of the property of the commons. the lords may at
any time raise a sum of money for the crown out of their own property; but they
cannot grant out of the property of the commons, because the commons have given
them no such power, and because they sit in parliament upon their own account,
and not as representatives.

The British house of commons proposing to tax the unrepresented colonies in
America involves, therefore, in my opinion, some striking absurdities. What is,
for instance, to be the business of the provincial assemblies of
representatives in America, if the power of taxing the colonies be in the
British parliament at Westminster? Is it not obvious, that these two powers are
incompatible? It is notorious, that by their charters several, if not all the
provinces have the right of laying on taxes. And how then is the provincial
assembly of New England, for example, to lay on a tax of half a crown in the
pound, at the same time that, for ought that is known in New England, the house
of commons in Old England may be voting a tax upon the people of that province
of seventeen and sixpence in the pound? If we may put any trust in the first
rule in arithmetic, here is the whole pound gone. Again: What could be more
absurd than the commons giving and granting what was neither their own
property, nor that of their constituents, what they had no more right to give
and grant, (no man can give away a free subject's property, but himself or his
representative) than they had to give and grant the property of the people of
Holland or France? Again: The king was, according to custom, to thank the
commons for granting the American tax. But how was he to thank them? For
sparing their own pockets, and taking out of those of the colonists against
their consent? Or was he to thank the colonists, who were to pay the money?
Certainly not. They were to pay it against their inclination.

The taxing of the unrepresented colonies is so unjust, that were it ever so
prudent, it ought not to be done. It is so impolitic, that were it ever so
just, it ought not to be thought of.

If the king is to take at his pleasure, what have we to give? was the common
argument against Chapter Ist's raising money without consent of parliament; and
may, with equal propriety, be used by our colonists against their being taxed
by the British parliament, in which they have no representation.

Edw. I. summoning one of his parliaments, uses these words, Ut quod omnes
tangit ab omnibus probetur. He would have them consult about public affairs,
that what concerns all, may be approved by all. A sound maxim surely. But would
our taxing the colonists contrary to their approbation, be acting upon this
principle?

Some short-sighted defenders of the late oppressive measures taken with our
American brethren have attempted to wheedle them into a persuasion, that their
being taxed by the British parliament, in which three millions have not one
representative, is no greater hardship than what is suffered by the mother
country, in which, though representation, as I have shown in the former volume,
is as far from adequate, as can well be imagined; yet six millions have 558
representatives, and in which every man, woman, and child, by living in one
county or other, is represented by one or two members, who cannot tax them
without taxing themselves, their children, their friends, dependents, tenants,
etc. If the three millions of colonists had 279 representatives in parliament
(the half of 558) it might then be time to make comparisons between their case
and that of the mother country. Till then, or till they have some shadow of
representation, nothing can be more absurd.

We have lately seen all England besetting the throne with complaints, that one
county is deprived not of representation, but of one particular favorite
individual, as one of their two representatives, while they may choose any other
individual upon the island in his place; and this not to perpetuity, but only
during seven years at most; this we have lately seen, and we wonder, that three
millions should complain, that they are to be taxed from age to age to whatever
amount it may please the British parliament to impose on them, in which they
have not the shadow of representative. Would they be the posterity of true
Britons, if they did not complain of this?

The firmness shown by the colonists against what to them is precisely the same
oppression as to us it would be to have taxes laid on us by an edict from the
throne, has, by very high authority, been pronounced sedition and rebellion:
but with all due submission to authority, ( -- truth and justice are above all
authority) when the illustrious Hampden resisted the lawful sovereign's
unlawful demand of only three shillings and four-pence, because he had no voice
in consenting to the laying on the ship-tax, was he too guilty of sedition and
rebellion? If he was, we are all rebels, but the jacobites; and our gracious
king Geo. III. (whom God preserve) is an usurper; for the revolution was
brought about with the direct design of preventing any man's property being
seized without his consent given either in person or by representative, which
makes it the same to our colonists to be taxed by the parliament of Britain as
by that of Paris.

Suppose the British parliament should imagine a tax to be paid exclusively by
those who have no vote for members of parliament, as the people of Manchester,
Ely, etc. Would not this be universally decried as the most flagrant
partiality? Yet this would be more plausible than a British parliament's taxing
America; because the members cannot be supposed competent judges of the
abilities of the colonists to bear taxes; whereas they are undoubtedly judges
of the ability of their own countrymen, whether voters or not. Again: Suppose
the parishes in the county of Middlesex to send two representatives each to a
parliament, or legislative assembly, excluding only that of Islington from
representation. Suppose this legislative assembly to lay taxes on the
unrepresented parish of Islington; Could it with any reason be expected, that
the parishioners of Islington should quietly submit to such gross abuse? Yet
this would be less inconsistent with equity than a British parliament's taxing
America, because the representatives of the other parishes of Middlesex must be
supposed competent judges of the ability of the Islingtonians; whereas the
members of the British parliament can be no judges of the ability of the
colonists.

Magna Charta, and the Bill of Rights, prohibit the taxing of the
mother country by prerogative, and without consent of those who are to be
taxed. If the people of Britain are not to be taxed, but by parliament; because
otherwise they might be taxed without their own consent; does it not directly
follow, that the colonists cannot, according to Magna Charta, and the bill of
rights, be taxed by parliament, so long as they continue unrepresented; because
otherwise they may be taxed without their own consent?

At the time when the famous stamp act of blessed memory was invented, the
colonies were said to be indebted to Britain to the amount of no less than four
millions, occasioned by their want of ability to make remittances, the
consequence chiefly of our severe restraints on their commerce. The colonists
are almost all farmers, wholly dependant on the produce of their lands,
contented, and consequently happy; but in no condition to bear taxes, otherwise
than by enabling us to pay our taxes out of the produce of their tobacco, rice,
indigo, corn, lumber, wood, fish, furs, etc. How poor in cash must those
countries be, where the sheriffs, in raising the annual taxes laid on by the
assemblies, are often obliged to make returns into the treasury, of household
goods taken in execution for want of cash; which goods cannot be sold for want
of money to purchase them; where men of the best credit cannot raise cash to
pay debts inconsiderable when compared with their estates; where creditors,
when they sue to execution, obtain orders for sale of lands and goods, and
though they offer those lands and goods for almost nothing, they are nothing
the nearer being reimbursed, because there are no monied men to purchase after
repeated advertisements of the sales. Thus the debtor is stripped, and the
creditor not paid, and they break one another all round. And this very distress
has been increased by those very ministers, whose taxation-schemes particularly
required all measures to be used, which were likely to promote a circulation of
cash in the colonies. We have followed the example of the Egyptian
taskmasters, demanding money of the poor colonists at the same time that we
put a stop to their trade with the Spanish colonies, the only means by which
they could obtain wherewith to satisfy our demands. Here is a complication of
blunders beyond the power of language to set forth in an adequate manner.

Even governor Bernard (no friend to the colonists) owns their inability to
bear taxes. I can (says he) readily recommend that part of the petition, which
prays relief against those acts which are made for the purpose of drawing a
revenue from the colonies. For they are so little able to bear drawing money
from them, that they are unable at present to pay the charges of their support
and protection Governor Bernard to lord Hillsborough* July 16, 1768.
.

It was very fairly made out, that the colonists were not, generally speaking,
in circumstances to pay the stamp-duty. And to raise the price of justice so
high, that the people shall not be able to obtain it, is much the same as
flatly denying them justice; while Magna Charta says, Nulli negabimus, nulli
vendemus justitiam, etc.

By the Grenvillian politics, the American assemblies were not only to be
stripped of the power of giving their own; but of defending their own. The
stamp-duties were expressly declared to be for raising a revenue for making a
more certain and adequate provision for the government of the colonies. As if
the colonies had not common sense to consult for their own defense, and the
administration of justice. Courts are always for over-governing. This was
rendering the American assemblies useless. On this principle, any number of the
creatures of a court might have been saddled upon the colonists, with salaries
to any amount, and all on pretense of a certain and adequate provision for the
support of government and administration of justice. This is the economy in
Ireland; a conquered country. But the Grenvillian politics treat the colonies
worse than Ireland. For we leave to the Irish the power of taxing themselves in
their own parliament; while we tax the colonies in the British parliament,
where they have not one representative.

Before the taxing of the unrepresented colonies was thought of, the ministry
ought to have reduced exorbitant salaries, abated, or abolished excessive
perquisites, annihilated useless places, stopped iniquitous pensions, withheld
electioneering expenses, and bribes for votes in the house, reduced an odious
and devouring army, and taxed vice, luxury, gaming, and public diversions. This
would have brought into the treasury ten times more than Grenville could ever
expect from taxing, by force and authority, the unrepresented colonies.

Even a conquered city has time given it to raise the contribution laid upon
it; and may raise it in its own way. We have treated our colonies worse than
conquered countries. Neither Wales nor Ireland are taxed unheard and
unrepresented in the British parliament, as the colonies. Wales sends members
to parliament; and Ireland has done so. And as Ireland is not now represented
in the British parliament, neither is it taxed in the British parliament.

It is frivolous to allege, that because the mother country has been at
expenses for the colonies, therefore the British parliament may tax them
without allowing them any legal opportunity of remonstrating against the
oppression. The mother country has spent her blood and her treasure in
supporting, at different times, France against Spain, and Spain against France,
Prussia against Hungary, and Hungary against Prussia, and so on, without end.
Does this give our parliament a right to tax all Europe?

What difference is there between the British parliament's taxing America, and
the French court's laying England under contribution? The French court could
but do this, if they had conquered England. Have we conquered our colonies?

But are then the colonists, it will be said, to be complimented with immunity
from all share of the public burden, while they enjoy their share of the public
protection? How will the necessary uniformity of the whole monarchy be
preserved, if it be left to the discretion of a fifth part of the whole people,
whether they will contribute any thing, and how much, to the general supplies?

The question was not, Whether the colonists should contribute to the public
expense. The Grenvillians knew, that when requisition had been made by
government, the colonists had answered their demands; particularly in the year
1756, 7, 8, 9, 1760, 61, and 62; they knew that the town of Boston contributed
for several years together twelve shillings in the pound. Our government,
therefore, thought it but just to reimburse the colonies a part of their
excessive expenses. But their successors, contrary to the sense of all mankind,
thought it better to obtain by force, than with a good will. Accordingly we
find so early as A. D. 1765, immediately after the first of the colonists
showed a little courage in refusing to submit to taxation without
representation, orders were given to governor Bernard to employ the military
under general Gage in suppressing the spirit of liberty Alm. DEB. COM. VII.82.
.

Where would have been the harm of making a fair and moderate proposal to the
colonies? If they raised the money in obedience to our requisition, as
formerly, all was well. But surely it was soon enough to propose levying money
upon them by parliamentary taxation, when they refused to give upon requisition.

Instead of this, the court-language all ran in the imperative mood. A spirit
of faction in America -- acts of violence, and resistance of the execution of
the law -- state of disobedience to all law and government -- measures
subversive of the constitution -- a disposition to throw off all dependence on
the mother country -- steady perseverance necessary to enforce the laws --
turbulent and seditious persons, who, under false pretenses, have deluded
numbers in America, and whose practices cannot fail, if suffered to prevail, to
produce the most fatal consequences to the colonies immediately, and, in the
end, to the whole British dominions. Thus did our ministers put into the mouth
of their amiable S -- a language as remote from his disposition, as integrity
is from theirs; setting him before his people in the character of an eastern
despot, and not of the father of his subjects. See a certain speech.

Could not George Grenville have proposed, That the colonies should send over a
certain number of agents who, by act of parliament, should have session and
suffrage in our house of commons, during a certain period, in order to settle
what sum the colonies should raise in proportion to the contribution raised by
England -- and to determine concerning the colonies sending, or not sending,
members to subsequent parliaments? If it had been objected to this proposal,
that the colonists sending over a set of temporary members to our parliament
was a thing wholly unprecedented, he might have answered, that at the glorious
revolution the corporation of London was introduced, and sat and voted in the
house of commons; and the acts of the convention parliament were afterward
established by a regular parliament composed in the usual manner, of king,
lords, and commons. And as to the quota, or contingent, to be raised by the
colonists, it might have been made to regulate, as that of Scotland, by the
contribution in England, in such a manner, that when the taxes raised in
England amount to a certain sum, America shall contribute a thirtieth,
fortieth, or fiftieth part of that sum. The colonists would naturally have sent
over their ablest men and best patriots. They would have been prejudiced in
favor of what those men had agreed to; or those men would have satisfied our
parliament, that it could answer no good end to lay taxes upon the colonies; as
all their money centers at last in England, and the more we raise upon them by
way of tax, the less we can gain by them in the way of commerce. The colonies
could not then have complained of taxation without representation, or of having
their money taken from them by force. This would have been treating them as
England did Scotland at the union; and surely no one will pretend that England
is not under greater obligations to the colonies than to Scotland.

In the time of Edw. III. a parliament was directed to meet at several
different parts of the country at the same time, because the whole parliament
could not assemble speedily enough at Westminster PARL. HIST. I.308.
. I suppose the provincial meetings communicated their resolutions to that part
of the parliament which met at the seat of government; and those resolutions
which were made by the greatest number of the provincial meetings were to pass
into laws. Suppose, that in imitation of this plan, a correspondent parliament
had been formed in America; their resolutions communicated to the British
parliament, would have regularly and constitutionally informed the latter, of
the sense of the colonists upon every important point; which cannot now be done
in any constitutional way; as the house of commons receives no petitions upon
money bills, and the colonists have no members in the house. The reader sees
that various ways might have been proposed for raising taxes upon the colonies,
if it had been found proper to raise such taxes, none of which ways would so
have irritated the colonists, or given them such an opportunity of exclaiming
against the injustice and ^apacity of the mother country.

On the contrary, such was the relentless fury of the ministry, A. D. 1768,
against the colonists, that they proposed to address the king to fetch over any
of them, who had shown opposition to taxing without representation, to be tried
in England, for that no jury in America would find them guilty, the people
being all of one sentiment relating to that subject. This was fairly declaring,
that they would rather see the constitution (which requires that the accused be
tried by persons of the vicinage, supposed to know his character and behavior)
violated, than not see the Americans punished Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.43.
. And if such a law should ever be enacted, and the spirit of contention should
be kept up, we may suppose a disturbance to happen in every town of North
America, and that it will be necessary to fetch over half the people of the
plantations as witnesses, or as attestors to the character of the accused
persons. All the shipping that belongs to both mother country and colonies,
will be insufficient for bringing over and sending back the multitudes that
will be wanted on such occasions. And how is this expense to be borne? the
freight and charges, I mean, of so many hundred thousands of witnesses, as will
be summoned? And how is the business of the colonists to be carried on during
their absence in England? How are the damages arising from their absence to be
made up? How is the loss of many innocent lives to be made up? For many of
these ships will of course be cast away, and many passengers will contract
deadly diseases, by change of climate, etc. The objections to this scheme are,
in short, beyond reckoning, many of which will occur to every reader. An
eminent member of the house of commons very lately declared in the house, that
in his opinion, the whole proceedings of the ministry, with respect to the
colonies, are Frenzy. But, to proceed,

The ministry, in the same year 1768, insisted on a declaration against the
colonists founded upon a supposed illegal resolution of the assembly of Boston,
which resolution they could not produce when called upon, and which governor
Pownal assured the house had never been made in the ass^mbly of Boston, and
that the supposition of its having been made, was owing to a mistake, and
showed how the mistake arose. The chorus-men, who, at proper times, call for
the question, helped them at this dead lift, by an incessant repetition of the
question, the question [that is, in plain English, Let us vote, right or wrong,
as the ministry would have us.] At length, at 4 o'clock in the morning, the
whole house in confusion, the resolutions and address were agreed to; upon
which a member remarked, "That it was indecent to bring into the house
resolutions ready cut and dry, only for the drudgery of passing them. That it
was more indecent to pass them in so confused a manner; but most indecent to
answer all arguments with The question, the question Alm. DEB. COM. VIII.47.
.

If the colonists should object, that it will be very inconveni^nt for them to
send members from such a distance, it may be answered, that so it is for the
northern ^a^ts of Scotland. All these matters of convenience must be as chance
orders them. Nor can any two parts of ^ great kingdom enjoy precisely the same
advantages in all respects.

Were parliaments shortened, were they restored to their efficiency, and set
free from court-influence, the colonists might send as representatives any set
of men possessed of property and common understanding. Members would then have
no interest to pursue, but that of their country. They would of course be
honest, because they wou^d have no temptation to the contrary. And an honest
parliament would make all people in public stations honest.

Some of the American colonists charters expressly secure to them the privilege
of taxing themselves. It would be flagrant treachery for the mother country to
tax those colonies; for nothing, but absolute necessity, and the safety of the
whole, (which would be ridiculous to mention on this subject) could justify
deceiving the posterity of those pe^^le, who trusted to the faith of the
mother country, and settled those colonies upon the express stipulatio^ of not
being taxed by parliament. If the colonists charters give them the exclusive
power of taxing themselves, the British parliament's taxing them, is destroying
their charters. If the American charters may be destroyed, the charters of all
the cities, and those by which all crown lands are held, may be annihilated.

The purport of all the colony-charters is, That all the emigrants, and their
posterity, do enjoy for ever, all the privileges and liberties, which Enlishmen
do in England. And they were to pay to the king, a fifth part of all the gold
and silver ore found in America, and no other tax. Is it allowing them the
privileges of Englishmen to tax them without giving them representation? Is not
every Englishman represented by his county members.

The British parliament cannot justly alter the charters of the colonies,
without giving the colonists indemnification for whatever they may suffer in
consequence of such alteration. And how shall several millions of people be
indemnified for being obliged to what they never expected, and, on the
contrary, thought themselves, by their charters, secured against. I mean, being
taxed by those, whose interest it is, in order to lighten their own shoulders,
to lay a grievous burden on theirs.

The Americans are already under the same grievance as the mother country, viz.
Of being unequally represented in their own assemblies, which yet have power to
tax them. To subject them to be taxed by the British parliament, would be
subjecting them to two taxing powers. This would be an additional grievance,
unknown in Britain, which is subject only to one; it would be an additional
grievance, even supposing America represented in parliament, in an adequate
manner, as many parts of Britain are. But how would the injustice be doubled
and trebled, if the Americans were taxed in the British parliament, in which
they have no representation adequate, or inadequate! The British parliament's
taxing the colonies* without representation, is treating them as papists, or
rebels. Nay it is treating them as France would treat England, if* for our
sins, we were become a conquered dominion under her.

A. D. 1772, governor Pownal, upon lord Barrington's moving, that the report of
the committee on the mutiny-bill might be read, requested the house, that,
before it passed, its effects on the colonies might be considered. That the
question was of no less importance, than, Whether or not there shall remain
established by power against law and the constitution, a military government in
America, exclusive of the supreme civil magistrate. I am sorry (says he) to
find such a heedless inattention in gentlemen to the concerns of public liberty
Alm. DEB. IX.337.
, He then puts the house in mind of the remonstrances he had formerly offered
on the same subject. I stated (says he) the powers of the charters, and those
of the military commissions. I showed them to be incompatible and illegal. He
then affirms, that the case was not fairly stated to the crown lawyers, who
justified it, nor, consequently, were their opinions law. He therefore desired
to have an opportunity of calling for the opinion of the attorney and solicitor
general, in order to bring on in form the consideration of that great question;
and that the further reading of the report be adjourned. Lord Barrington
opposed all consideration; because the servants of the crown might come into
censure. Governor Iohnstone pronounced the military commission illegal,
impracticable, and self-contradictory. Governor Pownal said, I know, it is to
no purpose to press a motion, which a majority can refuse. But if those
gentlemen will let us have the case and opinion, and by that means, a proper
ground for debating the question, I am ready to meet them on that ground. And
as I see in his place one of the learned gentlemen, who signed the opinion,
[for the legality of the military commission] if he will in his place rise up
and defend the present establishment and practice, I am ready for the argument.
The learned lawyer was afraid, to engage with the unlearned gentleman; and the
ministry, as usual, prevailed.

Egregiam vero laudem, spolia ampla refertis.

VIRG. It has been thought, that our misconduct with respect to our colonies
has been the chief cause of the late unexampled confusions in credit. The
colonists were accustomed to take from Britain, to the value of 500,000 l.
annually in teas. Our wise taxation-schemes put them upon refusing our teas all
admission into America. This prejudiced our East India company, and lowered the
price of India stock; which occasioned many adventures in that stock, both in
Britain and Holland, to sail. Such mischief a rapacious and blundering ministry
can bring upon their country, in scrambling after a little money to gratify
their creatures.

I do not pretend to justify all the steps that have been taken by the
colonists. It is not easy for the most stoical individual to keep up his
philosophy when provocation runs high, much less for a mixed multitude of all
sorts of people. The first aggressors in all such cases, are chiefly to blame;
though those who resist in an unjustifiable manner, are not innocent.

The Bostonian proceeding, A. D. 1773, in destroying the tea, on account of the
duty laid upon it, must be given up as inexcusable; since all they had to do
was to keep firm in their resolution, not to buy or drink any of it WHITEHALI
EVENING, March 15, 1774.
. But why did our government provoke the people of Boston, by sending them
these cargoes of tea, loaded with an invidious duty?

Nothing is more peaceful by nature, than the element of water; yet we see to
what a height the waves upon the ocean are raised by the winds, with what fury
they dash the strong ships of several thousand tons burden, and beat them to
pieces. Nothing is more innocent than the cattle, of which so many hundreds are
driven into this great metropolis every week, 'till they be provoked. A boy of
fifteen may drive a whole herd of them before him; but if a set of brutal
butchers, with their sticks and dogs, set themselves to enrage those placid
animals, they immediately change their nature, and become as furious as lions
and tigers; they toss with their horns whatever comes in their way, and happy
is he that can make his escape. So our colonists had originally the very
dispositions we could have wished; they had the most implicit respect for the
mother country. Our prime minister's grey-goose-quill governed them, 'till that
fatal hour in which the evil Genius of Britain whispered in the ear of George
Grenville, George! erect thyself into a great financier.

The ministry paid, from the beginning, no regard to the universal
dissatisfaction occasioned by, and universal opposition made to taxing the
unrepresented colonies.

A. D. 1765, Ian. 17, a petition was presented to the house of commons from the
merchants of London trading to America, setting forth, that the colony trade,
of infinite advantage to Britain, suffered grievously by the colonists being
reduced to a state of inability to discharge the debts owing by them to
Britain, by means of taxes and restrictions laid on them by government,
particularly by the stamp act. There came afterward petitions to the same
purpose from Bristol, Liverpool, Halifax, Leeds, Lancaster, Manchester,
Leicester, and other great trading and manufacturing towns.

Here follow the heads of Mr. Pitt's speech in the house of commons on the same
subject.

He insisted, that every capital measure, the ministry had taken, was wrong.
George Grenvi^le, the American tax-master, sat by him. He says, he plainly
discovers the traces of an overruling influence in the conduct of the then
present mististry. Observes, that a more important subject had not been before
the house since the revolution. He acknowledges the sovereignty of the
mother country over the colonies in all cases, but that of imposing taxes,
which is no part of governing or legislative power. That in a free country the
subjects represented in parliament are supposed to grant supplies voluntarily;
but that the colonists had no opportunity of giving voluntarily, having no
representation in parliament to grant for them. That it is an absurdity in
terms for the house of commons of Britain to pretend to give, or grant, to the
king, what was not their property, but that of the colonists. We, your
majesty's commons of Great Britain, being unwilling to give or grant your
majesty any farther supplies out of our own pockets, have made a law for
obliging our fellow subjects of America to pay, whether willingly or
unwillingly, what they have no opportunity of granting voluntarily LAND. MAG.
1766, p. 507.
.

Grenville in answer said, he could see no difference between external taxation
[meaning the mother-country's restricting the trade of the colonies, perhaps
for the benefit of both] and internal [or ordering the colonists, in the style
of conquerors, of robbers, I was going to say, to pay so much money, whether
they choose to grant it, or not.] He then, in a jesuitical manner, observes,
that many individuals and bodies of men in England are taxed in parliament who
have no representation; while he knew, that every man in England is represented
by his county-members at least; and that, while parliament (if unbribed) cannot
over-tax the people without over-taxing themselves, on the contrary, the
greater burden they lay upon the Americans, the less themselves will have to
bear. He observes, that protection and obedience are reciprocal. That if
Britain protects, America is obliged to obey [every just law; but not every
unjust one.] He overlooks the great advantage Britain gains by America, by
which she is enabled to protect herself, and her colonies, for her own sake. He
raves against the colonists for showing a little spirit in opposition to
oppression; but he takes no notice of their hardships in being taxed without
representation, except that he mentions Chester and Durham as having been taxed
before they were represented, and accordingly they demanded, and immediately
obtained representation. See the preamble to 34 and 35 Hen. VIII. in which the
complaint of the people of the county palatine of Chester of the disherison and
damages suffered by them for want of representation in parliament, might,
mutatis mutandis, be exhibited by our American colonists.

Mr. Pit went on afterward, and applauded the spirit with which the colonists
had resisted tyranny. He affirms, that Britain gains 2,000,000 l. annually by
her colonies. That by means of this advantage, estates which 60 years ago were
let for 2000 l. a year, now yielded 3000 l. and lands now sold for thirty years
purchase instead of eighteen. That our profits by America carried us
triumphantly through the late war. And shall a miserable financier come with a
boast, that he can fetch a pepper-corn into the exchequer to the loss of
millions to the nation LAND. MAG. 1766, p. 511.
?

Suppose the taxing of the colonies shoul swell the treasury (which it will
certainly not do, but the very contrary) we should then only have the colonists
all. That we have now. Then we should have it with a grudge. Without taxing
them, we always have had, and, for many ages, shall have, all the money they
can raise. For they must have our manufactures. If we insist on taxing them,
and irritate them in such a manner as to diminish our commerce with them, who
will be the gainers? Such policy will neither suit ministry nor people.

I have been told by pretty good authority, that the neat produce of our
judicious taxes on our colonies, by which we have lost (to mention only one
article) the sale of teas to the amount of 500,000 l. per ann. amounted last
year, viz. 1772, to the respectable sum of 85 l. sterling money. Such is the
wisdom of our ministers!

Is this a time for us to lessen our public income? Do we not, as we manage
matters, find difficulty enough in defraying the public expense with the
largest public revenue we can raise? Have we been able to ease the nation of
any part of the heavy load which lies upon our commerce? Have ten years of
peace extinguished any part, worth mentioning, of the public d^bt? Do not our
ministers know, that a comparison between the present state of the French
finances and ours is enough to make an Englishman's blood run cold? If France
should think of taking this opportunity to make an attack upon us, are we in a
condition to go to war with that formidable enemy; or does it show our ministry
to be endowed with common sense, who can find no time but this to support the
mis-named dignity of government, to compel the colonists to what they call a
due submission to government, etc. Will the vindication of the pretended honor
of government, if it were to be vindicated by the proposed measures, make up
for the diminution it will produce in our trade and revenues? Will the conquest
of our colonies indemnify us for our being conquered by France?

Supposing the effects of violent measures with the colonies to prove less
fatal than the apprehensions of many, their lowest consequences must be a
diminution of our trade and revenues. This we are from experience certain of;
for we already feel it. But suppose those effects to prove such as may
naturally be expected; how will it be with us, when we find the public revenue
fall so short, that it will not stretch to pay the public creditors their whole
dividends? What will a set of rash and hotheaded statesmen be able to advance
for defending themselves against the rage of many thousands stripped of,
perhaps, half their incomes.

The more violent of the anti-colonistical party seem to build their main hope
of reducing the Americans to obedience on a military force. But it may be
remarked concerning this scheme, That it will either prove successful, or not:
If the latter, then will the impotence of our government appear more
conspicuous to all Europe, Asia, Africa and America, and the advisers of the
measure will be ashamed of it, and wish it had never been adopted. (...) on the
contrary, the colonists should find themselves obliged to yield so much against
their inclination to this military force, notwithstanding the many advantages
they have above what the mother country can boast of for defeating a design
upon their liberties -- let the people of England consider with horror what a
frightful hint this gives to the enemies of liberty for enslaving the
mother country. I am myself a friend to liberty, and therefore will not explain
more minutely. These are hopeful politics, whose consequences are too shocking
for a good citizen to explain.

In short; The new method of taxing our colonists in parliament, where they
have no repres^ntation, adequate or inadequate, is subversive of liberty,
annihilates property, is repugnant to the genius of the people, oppressive to
their indigence; it strikes at the root of their charters, as colonists, and of
their privileges as British subjects ever loyal and unoffending; it is
deragotary from the faith of government, omnius to the liberty of the British
empire, unjust in its principles, rigorous in its execution, and pernicious in
its operation alike to the mother country and the colonies. What public measure
can the memory of man produce, deserving so many commendations? Whether it is
yet time to reverse such proceedings, or whether it will be better policy to
pursue still farther the measures, which have hitherto appeared so honorable,
and proved so salutary, is humbly submitted.

To crown what I have to say on the grievance which makes the subject of this
IId Book, I will subjoin a copy of the spirited PROT -- T of eleven worthy
noblemen, who have endeavored to stop the torrent of ministerial fury against
our abused colonies. I wish it were in my power worthily to celebrate the
praises of those illustrious personages. The consequences of the violent
proceedings, they have so bravely opposed, will, I am horribly afraid, make
their fame, as well as the disgrace of the first movers of all this mischief,
but too lasting.

After the Prot -- t, I will add a copy of a PETITION from the American
gentlemen resident in London to both houses, imploring their forbearance and
justice in a manner, which does the public spirit as well as the abilities of
the petitioners the highest honor.

I have in my hands a manuscript copy of an humble Petition of several Natives
of America to the K -- 's most excellent M -- y, requesting the suspension of
the R -- l assent to the two fatal bills from which they apprehend the most
lamentable consequences. But as this Petition is not yet presented, I do not
think I can, with propriety, give it a place in these collections. It is but
short, and the matter of it, mutatis mutandis, much the same with that of the
other.

PROTEST against the bill, for the better regulating the government of the
Massachuset's Bay, in New England.
DISSINTIENT, Massachuset's Bay, in the election of counselors, magistrates,
and judges, and in the return of jurors, which they derive from their charter,
could with propriety be taken away, the definite legal offense, by which a
forfeiture of that charter is incurred, ought to have been clearly stated and
fully proved; notice of this adverse proceeding ought to have been given to the
parties affected; and they ought to have been heard in their own defense. Such
a principle of proceeding would have been inviolably observed in the courts
below. It is not technical formality, but substantial justice. When therefore
the magnitude of such a cause transfers it from the cognizance of the inferior
courts of the high judicature of parliament, the lords are so far from being
authorized to reject this equitable principle, that we are bound to an
extraordinary and religious strictness in the observance of it. The subject
ought to be indemnified by a more liberal and beneficial justice in parliament,
for what he must inevitably suffer by being deprived of many of the forms which
are wisely established in the courts of ordinary resort for his protection
against the dangerous promptitude of arbitrary discretion.

"2dly, Because the necessity alleged for this precipitate mode of judicial
proceeding cannot exist. If the numerous land and marine forces, which are
ordered to assemble in Massachuset's Bay, are not sufficient to keep that
single colony in any tolerable state of order, until the cause of its charter
can be fairly and equally tried, no regulation in this bill, or in any of those
hitherto brought into the house, are sufficient for that purpose; and we
conceive, that the mere celerity of a decision against the charter of that
province, will not reconcile the minds of the people to that mode of government
which is to be established upon its ruins.

"3dly, Because Lords are not in a situtation to determine how far the
regulations, of which this bill is composed, agree, or disagree, with those
parts of the constitution of the colony that are not altered, with the
circumstances of the people, and with the whole detail of their municipal
institutions. Neither the charter of the colony, nor any account whatsoever of
its courts and judicial proceedings, their mode, or the exercise of their
present powers, have been produced to the house. The slightest evidence
concerning any one of the many inconveniences stated in the preamble of the
bill to have arisen from the present constitution of the colony judicatures,
has not been produced, or even attempted. On the same general allegations of a
declamatory preamble, any other right, or all the rights of this or any other
public body, may be taken away, and any visionary scheme of government
substituted in their place.

"4thly, Because we think, that the appointment of all the members of the
council, which by this bill is vested in the crown, is not a proper provision
for preserving the equilibrium of the colony constitution. The power given to
the crown of occasionally increasing or lessening the number of the council on
the report of the governors, and at the pleasure of ministers, must make these
governors and ministers masters of every question in that assembly; and by
destroying its freedom of deliberation, will wholly annihilate its use. The
intention avowed in this bill, of bringing the council to the platform of other
colonies, is not likely to answer its own end; as the colonies, where the
council is named by the crown, are not at all better disposed to a submission
to the practice of taxing for supply without their consent, than this of
Massachuset's Bay. And no pretense of bringing it to the model of the English
constitution can be supported, as none of those American councils have the
least resemblance to the house of peers. So that this new scheme of a council
stands upon no sort of foundation, which the proposers of it think proper to
acknowledge.

"5thly, Because the new constitution of judicature provided by this bill is
improper, and incongruous with the plan of the administration of justice in
Great Britain. All the judges are to be henchforth nominated (not by the crown,
but) by the governor; and all (except the judges of the superior court) are to
be removable at his pleasure, and expressly without the consent of that very
council which has been nominated by the crown.

"The appointment of the sheriff is by the will of the governor only, and
without requiring in the person appointed any local or other qualification.
That sheriff, a magistrate of great importance to the whole administration and
execution of all justice, civil and criminal, and who in England is not
removeable even by the royal authority, during the continuance of the term of
his office, is by this bill made changeable by the governor and council, as
often, and for such purposes, as they shall think expedient.

"The governor and council thus entrusted with powers, with which the British
constitution has not trusted his majesty and his privy council, have the means
of returning such a jury in each particular cause, as may best suit with the
gratification of their passions and interests. The lives, liberties, and
properties of the subject are put into their hands without control; and the
invaluable right of trial by jury is turned into a snare for the people, who
have hitherto looked upon it as their main security against the licentiousness
of power.

"6thly, Because we see in this bill the same scheme of strengthening the
authority of the officers and ministers of state, at the expense of the rights
and liberties of the subject, which was indicated by the inauspicious act for
shutting up the harbor of Boston.

"By that act, which is immediately connected with this bill, the example was
set of a large important city (containing vast multitudes of people, many of
whom must be innocent, and all of whom are unheard), by an arbitrary sentence,
deprived of the advantage of that port, upon which all their means of
livelihood did immediately depend.

"This proscription is not made determinable on the payment of a fine for an
offense, or a compensation for an injury; but it is to continue until the
ministers of the crown shall think fit to advise the king in council to revoke
it.

"The legal condition of the subject (standing untainted by conviction for
treason or felony) ought never to depend upon the arbitrary will of any person
whatsoever.

"This act, unexampled on the records of parliament, has been entered on the
journals of this house as voted nemine dissentiente, and has been stated in the
debate of this day, to have been sent to the colonies, as passed without a
division in either house, and therefore as conveying the uncontroverted
universal sense of the nation.

"The despair of making effectual opposition to an unjust measure, has been
construed into an approbation of it.

"An unfair advantage has been taken on the final question for passing that
penal bill, of the absence of those ords who had debated it for several hours,
and strongly dissented from it on the second reading; that period on which it
is most usual to debate the principle of a bill.

"If this proceeding were to pass without animadversion, lords might think
themselves obliged to reiterate their debates at every stage of every bill
which they oppose, and to make a formal division whenever they debate.

7thly, Because this bill, and the other proceedings that accompany it, are
intended for the support of that unadvised scheme of taxing the colonies, in a
manner new, and unsuitable to their situation and constitutional circumstances.

"Parliament has asserted the authority of the legislature of this kingdom,
supreme and unlimited over all the members of the British empire.

"But the legal extent of this authority furnishes no argument in favor of an
unwa^rantable use of it.

"The sense of the nation on the repeal of the stamp act was, that in equ^ty
and sound policy, the taxation of the colonies for the ordinary purposes of
supply, ought to be forborne; and that this kingdom ought to satisfy itself with
the advantages to be deprived from a flourishing and increasing trade, and with
the free grants of the American assemblies; as being far more beneficial, far
more easily obtained, less oppr^ssive and more likely to be lasting than any
revenue to be acquired by parliamentary taxes, accompanied by a total
alienation of the affections of those who were to pay them. This principle of
repeal was nothing more than a return to the ancient standing policy of this
empire. The unhappy departure from it, has led to that course of shifting and
contradictory measures, which have since given rise to such continued
distractions; by which unadvised plan, new duties have been imposed in the very
year after the former had been repealed; these new duties afterward in part
repealed, and in part continued, in contradiction to the principles upon which
those repealed were given up; all which, with many weak, injudicious, and
precipitate steps taken to enforce a compliance, have kept up that jealousy
which, on the repeal of the stamp act, was subsiding; revived dangerous
questions, and gradually estranged the effections of the colonies from the
mother country, without any object of advantage to either. If the force
proposed should have its full effect, that effect, we greatly apprehend, may
not continue longer than whilst the sword is held up. To render the colonies
permanently advan^^geous, they must be satisffed with their condition. That
satisfaction we see no chance of restoring, whatever measures may be pursued,
except by recurring, in the whole, to the wise and salutary principles on which
the stamp act was repealed.

Richmond, Portland, Abingdon, King, Effingham, Ponsonby, Rockingham,
Abergavenny, Leinster, Craven, Fitzwilliam.

* The bill passed. Contents, with their proxies included. -- 92

Not Contents, -- 20




Copy of a Petition from the American gentlemen, who happened to be resident in
London, to the two houses.
The humble PETITION of several Natives of America, She^eth,

"That your petitioners are constrained to complain to this right honorable
house of two bills, which, if carried into execution, will be fatal to the
rights, liberties, and peace of all America.

"Your petitioners have already seen, with equal astonishment and grief,
proceedings adopted against them, which, in violation of the first principles
of justice, and of the laws of the land, inflict the severest punishments
without hearing the accused.

"Upon the same principle of injustice, a bill is now brought in, which, under
the profession of better regulating the government of the Massachuset's Bay, is
calculated to deprive a whole province, without any form of trial, of its
chartered rights, solemnly secured to it by mutual compact between the crown
and the people.

"Your petitioners are well informed, that a charter so granted was never
before altered or resumed, but upon a fu^l and fair hearing; that, therefore,
the present proceeding is totally unconstitutional, and sets an example which
renders every charter in Great Britain and America utterly insecure.

"The appointment and removal of the judges at the pleasure of the governor,
with salaries payable by the crown, puts the property, liberty and life of the
subject, depending upon judicial integrity, in his power.

"Your petitioners perceive a system of judicial tyranny deliberately at this
day imposed upon them, which, from the bitter experience of its intolerable
injuries, has been abolished in this country.

"Of the same unexampled and alarming nature is the bill, which, under the
title of a more im^artial administration of justice in the province of
Massachuset's Bay, empowers the governor to withdraw offenders from justice;
holding out to the soldiery an exemption from legal pr^secution for murder; and
in effect subjecting that colony to military execution. Your petitioners
entreat this right honorable house to consider what must be the consequence of
sending troops, not really under the control of the civil power, and
unamenable to the law, where the crime is committed among a people whom they
have been industriously taught, by the incendiary arts of wicked men, to regard
as deserving every species of insult and abuse. The insults and injuries of a
lawle^s s^ldiery are such as no free people can l^ng endure; and your
petitioners apprehend, in the consequences of this bill, the horrid outrages of
military oppression followed by the desolation of civil commotions.

"The dispensing power, which this bill intends to give to the governor,
advanced as he is already above the law, and not liable to any impeachment from
the people he may oppress; must constitute him an absolute tyrant.

"Your petitioners would be utterly unworthy of the English ancestry, which is
their claim and pride, if they did not feel a virtuous indignation at the
reproach of disaffection and rebellion, with which their countrymen have been
cruelly aspersed. They can with confidence say no imputation was ever less
deserved. They appeal to the experience of a century, in which the glory, the
honor, the prosperity of England, have been, in their estimation, their own;
in which they have not only borne the burden of provincial wars, but have
shared with this country in the danger and expense of every national war. Their
zeal for the service of the crown, and the defense of the general empire, has
prompted them, whenever it was required, to vote supplies of men and money to
the utmost exertion of their abilities. The journals of parliament will bear
witness to their extraordin^ry zeal and services during the last war; and that
but a very short time before it was resolved here to t^ke from them the right
of giving and granting their own money.

"If disturbances have happened in the colonies, they entreat this right
honorable house to consider the causes which have produced them among a people
hitherto remarkable for their loyalty to the crown, and affection for this
kingdom. No history can show, nor will human nature admit of an instance of
general discontent, but from a general sense of oppression.

"Your petitioners conceived, that when they had acquired property under all
the restraints this country thought necessary to impose upon their commerce,
trade and manufactures, that property was sacred and secure. They felt a very
material difference between being restrained in the acquisition of property,
and holding it when acquired under those restraints at the disposal of others.
They understand subordination in the one, and slavery in the other.

"Your petitioners wish they could possibly perceive any difference between the
most abject slavery, and such entire subjection to a legislature, in the
constitution of which they have not a single voice, nor the least influence,
and in which no one is present on their behalf. They regard the giving their
property, by their own consent alone, as the unalienable right of the subject,
and the last sacred bulwark of constitutional liberty. If they are wrong in
this, they have been misled by the love of liberty, which is their dearest
birthright; by the most solemn statutes, and the resolves of this honorable
house itself, declaratory of the inherent right of the subject; by the
authority of all great constitutional writers, and by the uninterrupted
practice of Ireland and America, who have ever voted their own supplies to the
crown -- all which combine to prove, that the property of an English subject,
being a freeman, or a freeholder, cannot be taken from him but by his own
consent. To deprive the colonists, therefore, of this right, is to reduce them
to a state of villenage, leaving them nothing they can call their own, nor
capable of any acquisition but for the benefit of others.

"It is with infinite and inexpressible concern that your petitioners see in
these bills, and in the principles of them, a direct tendency to reduce their
countrymen to the dreadful alternative of being totally enslaved, or compelled
into a contest the most shocking and unnatural with a parent state, which has
ever been the object of their veneration and their love. They entreat this
right honorable house to consider that the restraints, which examples of such
severity and injustice impose, are ever attended with a most dangerous hatred.

"In a distress of mind, which cannot be described, your petitioners conjure
this right honorable house not to convert that zeal and affection, which have
hitherto united every American hand and heart in the interests of England, into
passions the most painful and pernicious. Most earnestly they beseech this
right honorable house not to attempt reducing them to a state of slavery,
which the English principles of liberty, they inherit from their mother
country, will render worse than death -- they, therefore, pray that this right
honorable house will not by passing these bills overwhelm them with
affliction, and reduce their countrymen to the most abject state of misery and
humiliation, or drive them to the last resources of despair:

"And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

BOOK III. Of the Army.
CHAP. I. General Reflections on standing Armies in free Countries in Times of
Peace.
IN a survey of public abuses, it would be unpardonable to overlook that of a
standing army in times of peace, one of the most hurtful, and most dangerous of
abuses.

The v^ry words, Army, War, Soldier The very word soldier, gives us the idea of
a sordid Swiss, hired one time by one tyrant, and another time by another, to
butcher mankind. It is derived from soldarius, and that from Soldum, pay. See
Spelm. voc. Soldarius.
, etc. entering into a humane and christian ear, carry with them ideas of
hatred, enmity, fighting, bloodshed, mangling, butchering, destroying,
unpeopling, and whatever else is horrible, cruel, hellish. My inestimable
friend, the late great and good Dr. Hales, was used to say, that if any thing
might be called the peculiar disgrace of human nature, and of our world, it is
war; that a set of wretched worms, whose whole life, when it holds out the
best, is but a moment, a dream, a vision of the night, should shorten this
their short span, should assemble by thousands and myriads, travel over vast
countries, or cross unmeasurable oceans, armed with swords and sp^^rs and
infernal fire, and when they meet immediately fall to butchering one another,
only because a cou^l^ of frantic and mischievous fiends in human shape,
commonly called kings, have fallen out they know not about what, and have
ordered them to go and make havoc of one another.

Yet such is the turn of mind of those who are at the head of the world, that
they bestow more attention upon the art of war, that is, the art of d^st^^ying
their fellow creatures, than upon the improvement of all the liberal arts and
sciences, and outvie one another in keeping up bands of those butchers of
mankind commonly called standing armies, to the number of many thousands; and
so prevalent in this infatuation, that even we, though surrounded by the ocean,
must mimick the kingdoms on the continent, and beggar ourselves by keeping up
an army of near 50,000 in times of profound peace.

The whole art of war from beginning to end is, at best, but a scene of folly
and absurdity. Two kings, already possessed of more territory than they know
how to govern, fall out about a province. They immediately take up arms.
Immediately half a continent is deluged in blood. They carry on their infernal
hatred, while either of them can find in the purses of their beggared subjects
any money to squander, or while they can find any more of their miserable
people, who, being by the fell ravage of war stripped of all, are glad to throw
themselves into the army, to get a morsel of bread. And when the two mighty
belligerant powers, the two venomous worms, have carried on the contest almost
to the destruction of both, the point in dispute remains undecided as before,
or they see, that it might have been infinitely better decided by arbitration
of indifferent states, without the spilling of one drop of christian blood.

War is not a more proper method of deciding controversies between kings, than
single combat between individuals. All that can be determined by fighting is,
that the conqueror is the best fighter of the two; not that he has justice on
his side. As I should conclude that private person, who chose rather to decide
a quarrel by a duel, than to appeal to the laws of his country, or stand to
arbitration of a few friends, a ruffian and a murderer; so I do not hesitate to
pronounce every king a butcher of mankind who chooses rather to appeal to the
ratio ultima regum, than to arbitration of neutral princes.

Standing armies first became necessary, or the pretense of their necessity
plausible, when the disbanded troops, called tard-venus, in France, took to
plundering and mischief in times of peace. Then the neighboring princes
pretended they must be upon an equal foot with France. But what is that to
England, surrounded by the sea, and guarded by a fleet equal to all the
maritime force of Europe?

In former times we had no mercenary army. It was the militia that went to the
holy war, that conquered France, etc. So at Rome there was no mercenary army in
the best times of the republic. Our Hen. VII. raised no small jealousy by his
100 yeomen of the guards, augmented by him from 50, the whole standing army of
his times. In the days of Chapter II. the army wa^ got to 5,000; in our times to
near 50,000. There can no account be given of this alarming increase, but the
increase of corruption, and decrease of attention to liberty. And now, our
patriotic parliaments have made the army a sacred establishment, and the
sinking fund a temporary expedient.

An army, in a free country, says judge Blackstone COMM. I.413.
, ought only to be inlisted for a short and limited time. The soldiers should
live intermixed with the people. No separate camp, no barracks, no inland
fortresses should be allowed. Yet it is notorious, that our soldiers are
inlisted for life, on pain of death, if they desert; and that camps, barracks,
and inland forts, are very common in our pretended free country. The mere
slavery of a soldier's life, and the rigorous discipline, and Turkish
severities, so great a number of brave, and freeborn English subjects are
exposed to in the army, are sufficient to render it the abhorrence of every
true English spirit, and the peculiar disgrace of our country, and our times.
See Blackstone's COMMENTARIES, I.415, where the learned author (no malecontent)
shows the peculiar danger to liberty from enslaving so many subjects, (and
thereby exciting their envy against their countrymen, who enjoy what they are
forever deprived of) and then arming those slaves, to enable them to reduce the
rest to their condition, of which ill policy history furnishes many terrible
examples.

In a land of liberty it is extremely dangerous to make a distinct order of the
profession of arms. In absolute monarchies, this is necessary for the safety of
the prince, and arises from the main principle of their constitution, which is,
that of governing by fear: but in free states, the profession of a soldier,
taken singly and merely as a profession, is justly an object of jealousy. --
The laws, therefore, and constitution of these kingdoms know no such state as
that of a perpetual standing soldier, bred up to no other profession, than that
of war Blackst. COMM. I.407.
. Yet we see gentlemen breed up their sons for the army as regularly as for
law, physic, or divinity; and, while in France, the land of slaves, the
soldiery are engaged only for a certain time, ours are for life; that they may
be effectually separated from the people, and attached to another interest.

The judge goes on to show, that in the Saxon times, the military force was
under the absolute command of the dukes, or heretochs, who were elected by the
people. This the judge, as if he were fascinated in favor of prerogative, sees
in a dangerous light. This large share of power, says he, thus conferred by the
people, though intended to preserve the liberty of the subject, was perhaps
unreasonably detrimental to the prerogative of the crown.' And then he mentions
one instance of its being abused. But will any Englishman, understanding what
he says, gravely declare, that he thinks an armed force safer, in respect of
liberty, in the hands of a king, than of a number of subjects elected by the
people? Yet this very author prefers a militia to an army. If all this be
either consistent with the fundamental principles of liberty, or with itself,
it is to be understood in some manner, which I own to be out of my reach.

Those, who have the command of the arms in a country, says Aristotle POLIT.
VII.9.
, are masters of the state, and have it in their power to make what revolutions
they please.

The soldiery are themselves bound for life, under the most abject slavery. For
what is more perfect slavery, than for a man to be, without relief, obliged to
obey the command of another, at the hazard of his life, if he obeys, and under
the penalty of certain death if he disobeys, while the smallest misbehaviour
may bring upon him the most painful and disgraceful punishment? The sense of
their own remediless condition may naturally be expected to excite in them the
same disposition, which shows itself in the negroes in Iamaica, and the eunochs
in the eastern seraglois.

In the mutiny-act, it is always mentioned, that keeping up an army in time of
peace, without consent of parliament, is unlawful. But there is no such clause
for keeping up marines. Yet marines are as much an army as any other men; are
mostly at land; and may, at any time, be applied to the enslaving of the
people, as readily as the soldiery. It Is true, their number is at present
inconsiderable; but that is entirely at the disposal of government.

Lord Hinton's arguments against a reduction of the army, A. D. 1738.

^. The army is only a change made in the management of the armed force of the
nation, which was formerly kept up in the guise of a militia.

Ans. The army is the very creature of the court; and therefore likely to
execute every order of the court. The army is detached from the people for
life, and enslaved for life. A militia continues still a part of the people,
and is to return and mix with the people again, which must keep up in their
minds both an awe and an affection for the people.

2. N^w all the countries about have regular disciplined armies.

Ans. This is no reason for our keeping up an army, (...) separated from all
our neighbors. It is a (...) keeping up a fleet, and a militia.

3. Our militia cannot be trusted. Our people are otherwise employed, than in
learning military discipline.

Ans. The army are, on no account, preferable to a mi^itia, but there being
more thoroughly trained. Let the militia then be thoroughly disciplined. Fifty
days exercise at different times in the year, will train them thoroughly. Let
them have pay for those days, and carry on their business the rest of the year
as at present. And let every male be trained; and then see, whether enemies
will invade, or tumults disturb.

4. The army has not yet enslaved us. Experience shows us, that a standing army
is not unfriendly to liberty.

Ans. We ought to depend on the constitution for the safety of our liberties;
not on the moderation of the individuals, who command our army. If our army has
not yet enslaved us; we know, that the far greatest part of the world has been
enslaved by armies. But it is much to be questioned, whether we are not already
so far enslaved, that the people could not now obtain of government what they
requested, though the undoubted sense of the people was known to government.

5. An annual army is different from a standing army. The former may be
dissolved, whenever it pleases parliament to give over providing for it.

Ans. There is no difference, as to the liberty of the subject, whether the
army be on one foot, or the other; whether it be established by law, or whether
it be constantly kept, and certainly never to be reduced.

6. An army is necessary to keep the peace. Turbulent people raise tumults
about matters, which have had even the sanction of parliament, as excises,
turnpikes, suppression of gin, etc.

Ans. Good government is a surer way to keep the peace, than keeping up a
formidable and expensive army. The people may judge wrong, or be misled
occasionally. But it is mal-administration that sets up popular demagogues, who
could not excite the people to tumults, if government did not afford some cause
for discontent. The sanction of parliament neither will nor ought to satisfy
the people, unless the people be satisfied of the independency of the m^mb^rs,
who compose it. So much for lord Hinton's arguments.

Whatever it may be called, that government is certainly, and necessarily, a
military government where the army is the strongest power in the country. And
it is eternally true, that a free parliament and a standing army are absolutely
incompatible CATO'S LET. III.285.
.

It is the interest of favorites to advise the king to govern by an army: for
if he prevails (over his subjects) then they are sure to have what heart can
wish; and if he fail, yet they are but where they were; they had nothing, and
they can lose nothing DEB. COM. II.153.
.

Every officer in the army, almost, is an addition to the power and influence
of the ministry. And every addition to their power and influence is a step
toward aristocracy or absolute monarchy.

All armies whatsoever, says Davenant, if they are over large, tend to the
dispeopling of a country, of which our neighbor nation is a sufficient proof;
where in one of the best climates in Europe men are wanting to till the ground.
For children do not proceed from intemperate pleasures taken loosely an at
random, but from a regular way of living, where the father of the family desires
to rear up, and provide for the offspring he shall beget (...)* II.189.
.

When a country is to be enslaved, the army is the instrument to be used. No
nation ever was enslaved but by an army. No nation ever kept up an army in
times of peace, which did not lose its liberties.

An army is so forcible, and, at the same time, so coarse an instrument, that
any hand, that wields it, may, without much dexterity, perform any operation,
and gain any ascendancy in human society ^ume, HIST. STUARTS, II.91.
.

Mr. Hume ESS. II.370.
. calls the army a mortal distemper in the British government, of which it must
at last inevitably perish.

It was Walpole's custom, if a borough did not elect his man for their member,
to send them a messenger of Satan to buffet them, a company of soldiers to live
upon them.

In this way a standing army may be used as an instrument in the hand of a
wicked minister for crushing liberty.

There is much stress laid, by those, who would lull us asleep, that we may not
see our danger from the army, on the behavior of that of James II. who, on
being put to the trial on Hounslow heath, whether they would stand by the
tyrant, all laid down their arms. But we must be weak indeed, if we suffer
ourselves to be misled by a precedent so little in point as this. The ^^my were
all brought up protestants, and Iame^ ^anted to make use of them to establish
popery, of the cruelties of which he had given them a pretty specimen. Does it
follow, that because a protestant army would not be the instruments of a tyrant
in overthrowing the religion they were brought up in (even the soldiers had
some zeal for religion in those days, though not a zeal according to knowledge)
and establishing one they were from their infancy taught to dread above all
earthly evils -- does it follow, I say, that because an army would not do what
must be so disagreeable to themselves, they would not do what may be supposed
agreeable to themselves, that is, would not promote the establishing of a
military government? All history confutes this reasoning. For all history
shows, that the soldiery have ever been ready to enslave their fellow-subject^*
and almost all nations have actually been enslaved by armies.

Lord Clifford's scheme for making Charles II. absolute, was liberty of
conscience; security of property; upright judges, to keep the people in
good humor; the fort of Tilbury to be made sufficient to bridle the city.
Plymouth, in the west; Hull, in the north, made tenable. Some addition to the
army, and 200,000 arms in each of the above forts, all which might be done
imperceptibly Rap. II.662.
.

The pretensions of a particular body of men, if not checked by some collateral
power, will terminate in tyranny Fergus. HIST. CIV. SOC. p. 195.
.' No body of men are more likely to form pretensions unfavourable to liberty,
than the military, nor is any body of men so hard to check, or restrain within
due bounds.

Under such kings as the present (whom God preserve) we should have little to
fear, with an army as numerous as that of France. But a tyrannical prince, o^
daring minister m^g^t bring this kingdom into dreadful confusion (...) having
on his side an army of only 10,000 (...); and we seem now to plead prescripti^n
for keeping up a force of above four times that number.

The people will grow always too hard for the prince, unless he is able to
subdue and govern them by an army Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, II.102.
.

When a country is so circumstanced, that frugality is peculiarly necessary, a
standing army is peculiarly improper. The annual charge of keeping up from 30
to 50,000 men is not small. And I think it impossible to show any occasion we
have for 5000 men, if we were so wise as to keep the militia upon a proper
foot. Upon this one article we might, if we had imitated the Dutch, have saved
a sum much above half a million per annum, which would have kept the nation
clear of this mountanious load of debt, which is now sinking it into bankruptcy
and ruin. We find, that when the army was about 18,000, the charge was above 5
or 600,000 l. per annum. From this it is easy to compute what an expense the
devouring army has cost, especially of late, since it has been so frightfully
numerous.

The commons, in their remonstrance, A. D. 1628, complain of the army in time
of peace, and of Backingham's standing commission as general. We establish from
year to year, a great army at an immense expense, while the nation is drowned
in debt; and while no mortal can conceive from what quarter external danger can
come upon us. We hold it far beneath the heart of any free Englishman to think,
that this victorious nation should stand in need of German soldiers to defend
their king and kingdom PARD. HIST. VIII.22^.
. The duke of Newcastle and the whig-administration did not think it beneath
them to bring over Hessians and Hanoverians in the year 1756, to defend the
king and kingdom. Mr. Pit sent them a packing, and without their help,
over-conquered the French. For he conquered them in Germany; whereas he had no
occasion to do any thing, besides destroying their commerce by sea, taking
their American continent and islands, interrupting their fishery, and harasing
their coasts.

In the year 16^7, when the subject of the army was argued on both sides, the
principal topic in favor of it was taken from the practice of the
neighboring nations, whose keeping up a standing force makes it necessary,
said they, for us to do the same Burn. HIST. OWN TIME 3, III.284.
. But we know, it is neither the interest, nor the inclination, of any of the
powers of Europe, but France only, to give us any disturbance. And we know,
that the continental powers of Europe keep up armies with other views than to
us ( France excepted;) why then should we keep up an army with a view to any of
them, but France? And why on account of France, when we have naturally so great
an advantage of France in our insular situation, and our powerful fleet? And if
these two be not sufficient, it ^s certain, that a well regulated militia in
the maritime counties must render all thought of an invasion from France, as an
operation of war, romantic and absurd. There is no reason to think that they,
who stand up for an army, do seriously think it necessary for any other purpose
than to make a provision for a number of persons who depend on the court, and
thereby strengthen ministerial interest.

Though there was, in the times when this debate was agitated, a pretender
living, and under the declared support of Louis XIV. the inveterate enemy of
king William and British liberty, and though there was then a restless and
powerful jacobite party in the kingdom, our ancestors did not choose to trust
their illustrious deliverer with more than 10,000 horse and foot; and the whigs
lost much reputation by stickling for this small number, which, in the
following year, was reduced to 7000. We keep up an army of above 40,000 in a
time of profound peace, and without shadow of use for one soldier, but for a
few garrisons abroad.

We think neither king nor parliament ought to keep up an army in the field
when the war is ended, to the vast expense and utter impoverishment of the
people. The trained-bands, which may be made use of with little charge, and the
forces, which may be kept up in some chief garrisons, being sufficient to
suppress any commotion or disturbance that is likely to arise from the
occasions of the late trouble [Surely then we have had no occasion since for a
standing army], and we conceive an army should only be kept up in case of a
powerful insurrection within the kingdom, or of an invasion from abroad. [Even
for those occasions a militia is incomparably preferable in an island.] To
maintain a perpetual army in the bowels of the kingdom at the expense of the
subjects, when there is no enemy to fight with, is but to en^^ve the king and
kingdom under military bondage. Words of the Scotch commissioners in their
remonstrance to parliament for disbanding the English and Scotch armies, A. D.
1647 PARL. HIST. XVI.462.
. They add afterward, Armies were raised in defense of religion, the king's
person and authority, the privileges of parliament, and the liberty of the
subject, and when they are no more useful for that end, and the houses may
consult freely, and act securely, without hostile opposition, it is high time
to disband them, that the laws of the kingdom may take place; [ i. e. because
the laws are not likely to take place under the fear of a standing army] Some
of our neighboring nations are necessitated to keep up armies, because they
have enemies that lie contiguous to their borders. But the sea is our bulwark.
[N. B. The English fleet was not then, nor before, to be compared with what it
has been in our times,] and if we keep up amity and peace among ourselves, we
need not fear foreign invasions, etc. Ibid.
. By this passage it appears, that the Scotch, whom we have lately seen so
blamed for their slavish disposition, had, in those days, more of the spirit of
liberty than the English showed then, or since. In fact, the English people's
showing so little uneasiness under the grievances of a standing army, and the
others of our times, shows them to be but too ripe for slavery.

The raising of one single regiment in Spain within these six years, under
color of being a guard for the king's person, so inflamed the nation, that a
rebellion had ensued, if they had not been disbanded speedily DEB. LORDS, I.291.
.

Thus writes Mr. Vernon to the earl of Manchester: We are more jealous of our
constitution and liberty than of our bad neighbors, and therefore have allowed
but 350,000 l. for maintaining guards and garrisons this year, (School) which we
compute will keep about 4000 horse and dragoons, and 6000 foot Cole's MEM. 9.
.

Your royal progenitors have ever held their subjects hearts the best garrison
of this kingdom. The speaker's speech, A. D. 1621, to Chapter I. against billeting
soldiers on private houses Rapin, II.265.
.

A numerous army always gives cause to suspect that the government is either
afraid of the people, or has a design upon the people.

The commons resolve, A. D. 1673, that the continuance of any standing forces
in the nation, besides the militia, is a great grievance and vexation to the
people. They likewise resolve, that according to the laws of the land, the king
has no guards but those called gentlemen-pensioners and yeomen of the guard;
that an army has never been countenanced (but quite contrary) by parliament,
which has always looked on them as a set of men unlawfully assembled, of vast
charge to king and kingdom; altogether useless to the nation, as appears from
the peaceableness of the king's reign since the restoration. That the king
accordingly was often without them; that guards, or standing armies, are only
in use in arbitrary countries where princes govern more by fear than love, as
in France; that a lifeguard is a standing army in disguise, and that as long
as they continue, the roots of a standing army will remain Chanal. DEB. COM.
I.199.
. What a wonderful illumination has opened the minds of our parliament since
those ignorant times. A standing army is now an essential of the constitution.

Oxford (the friend of France and the pretender, the attainted Oxford) on the
mutiny bill, says While he has breath, he will speak for the liberties of his
country, and against courts martial, and a standing army in peace, as dangerous
to the constitution DEB. LORDS, III.78.
.

The most likely way to restore the pretender, is maintaining a standing army
to keep him out Trenchard.
.

Any man who would suggest to the king [ William] that he could not be safe
unless he were surrounded with guards, ought to be abhorred by every true
Englishman Lord Summers.
.

The sagacious Fletcher of Scotland dropped the friendship of lord Sunderland,
because he voted for the army Charact. from a Manuscript,
.

An army in time of peace, unless by parliamentary authority, is illegal, says
the declaration of rights at king William's accession Hume, HIST. STUARTS,
II.456.
. If there be reason to suspect parliament of corruption, it may be added, that
even with parliamentary authority, it is dangerous to liberty.

The throne of tyranny, which is upheld by an army, is in continual danger of
being overthrown by the army. The Roman army dethroned and massacred several
emperors of their own setting up. So do the Turkish janissaries from time to
time. Therefore the masters of both have been obliged to employ them as much as
possible in wars, on any pretense, to keep them from raising seditions MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XIII.5.
. Thus tyranny is not only a curse to the people, who are immediately under it,
but to all the surrounding nations.

Robbers, says Sir Thomas More, often prove gallant soldiers; but soldiers
likewise often prove gallant robbers.

An able anonymous speaker in parliament, A. D. 1681, says, a king must govern
either by a parliament or an army; and that when the parliament is laid aside,
the army must come in its place. That honest gentleman did not think of the
possibility of bribing a parliament.

Lord Haversham, in his speech on the occasional conformity-bill, A. D. 1703,
complains heavily of the conduct of the war. England, says he, is a strong a^s
crouching between two burdens, the navy and the army, and nothing material done
for a great expense raised on the people DEB. LORDS, II.65.
.

I would fain know (says Fletcher, p. 37.) if there be any other way of making
a prince absolute, than by allowing him a standing army; if by it all princes
have not been made absolute; if without it any. Whether our enemies shall
conquer us is uncertain. But whether a standing army will enslave us, neither
reason nor experience will suffer us to doubt. Therefore no pretense of danger
from abroad can be an argument for keeping up mercenary forces.

The advocates for the army plead strongly for its usefulness in keeping the
peace. Yet it is certain, that there have not been any where more terrible
insurrections, than in countries where great standing armies have ^een kept up;
as at Rome in the imperial times, where the majority of the emperors died
violent deaths; in Turkey, where the janissaries from time to time rise in a
fury, and dethrone a grand signor, or oblige him, to save himself, to make a
scapegoat, or rather a sacrifice of his wizir; at Algiers, where it is almost
the established form of government for the dey to be murdered, and his murderer
to succeed him, etc.

The barbarous common soldier (says Whitelock MEM. 312.
, on occasion of Sanford's being plundered and killed by those of his own party
at Colchester, A. D. 1648) will know no distinction between friends and foes.
The goods of either come alike to his rapine; and upon a hasty word, he no more
regards the blood of a friend, than of an enemy.

In the debate on the army DEB. LORDS, IV.58-64.
, lord Strafford said, he commanded a regiment of dragoons in the reign of king
William, and at that time there was not any such law as what was in this bill,
that we had no yearly mutiny-bills; yet, in those days the men were as good,
and as well disciplined as at any time since. If any of the soldiers committed
any crime, they were sure to be punished; the officers delivered them up to the
civil power, to be dealt with according to law.

The French and Swiss troops are certainly as well disciplined as ours; and yet
in France a soldier has a right in time of peace to his discharge after six
years service; and in the Swiss service their soldiers generally contract for a
certain number of years, after which they may return home if they please, which
is the true cause of that count^y's being always full of disciplined soldiers
Alm. DEB. COM. IV.285.
.

Lord Egmont, in the year 1750, spoke as follows in favor of our soldiery, and
against martial law.

Sir, The commander in chief of our army may make himself master of many of our
elections; and where he cannot by such means make himself master, he may do as
Caius Marius did at Rome, he may give private orders to his soldiers to murder
any one that shall dare to set himself up as a candidate against the man he has
recommended. For the first attempt that great and wicked Roman made against the
liberties of his country, was to get his soldiers to murder the man who stood
candidate for the tribuneship in opposition to the person he patronized; and
the Roman soldiers were even by that time become so abandoned, so lost to all
sense of law or liberty, that they readily obeyed their general's orders,
though he was then out of command, and though it was about 100 years after the
end of the second Punic war, and not above 150 years after the Romans first
began to keep the same army under military law for a number of years together.
For though the Romans from the very first origin of their city were almost
continually engaged in wars, yet those wars were always for the first 500 years
carried on by fresh armies; so that it seldom happened that any number of their
troops were above a year without returning to enjoy the happiness of freedom
and liberty. By this custom, their citizens continued all to be soldiers, and
their soldiers to be citizens; but soon after they began to keep up and carry
on their wars by standing armies, their citizens lost that warlick spirit, and
their soldiers that love of liberty by which alone the freedom of government
can be preserved. For this reason, Sir, we ought to be careful not to give the
meanest soldier of our army an occasion to think that he is in a state of
slavery: On the contrary, we should, as far as is consistent with the nature of
military service, furnish them with reasons for rejoicing in their being
English soldiers, and consequently in a condition much superior to that of the
slavish armies upon the continent.

Debate about martial law DEB. COM. VI.177.
, A. D. 1718. It was moved, that the offenses committed by the soldiery be
cognizable and punished in time of peace by the civil magistrate only. Carried
for the martial law.

In slavish countries, the army is generally the most numerous, and
contrariwise in free countries.

The Roman army in Augustus's time was 13 legions, supposed of 5000 men each,
or 65,000 men. In the emperor Alexander's time the Roman legions were 32, or
160,000 men, quartered in many different places ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.361.
. In Turkey, the ordinary establishment is above 150,000 men Roberts. CHAPTER V.
I.391.
. Of their insolence to the prince and cruelty to the people, see Montalb. RER.
TURC. COMMENT. p. 5. The Persian army, when effective, consists of 309,000
horse, and 40,000 foot DE LAET. DESCR. PERS. 163
.

The Chinese army is supposed to consist of 2,6^9,191 men. MOD. UNIV. HIST.
VIII.11.
Some of the inland kingdoms of Africa have raised armies of a million of men
Ibid. XVI.470.
. The Mogul's army consisted in the beginning of last century, of no less than
1,068,248 horse COMM. DE IMP. MAGN. MOGOL p. 146.
. The kings of Pegu in India, have had armies of a million, or a million and
half of men MOD. UNIV. HIST. VII.64.
.

That of the king of Congo in Africa, is said to consist of 900,000 men, A. D.
1665 MOD. UNIV. HIST. XVI.63.
. Pranjinoko, an East-Indian monarch, had an army of 1,700,000 men, besides
80,000 horse, and 1500 elephants. Yet he was conquered Ibid. VII.297.
. Tamerlane's army was 800,000 men. According to some authors double the
number. Bajazet's not quite so numerous. In a slavish country, the army is
always an important object Ibid. XII.81.
.

CHAP. II. Facts relating to the Army.
ALL wise states have been jealous of the army. The Carthaginians had a council
of one hundred taken out of the senate, whose office was to watch the conduct
of the generals and officers ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVII.258.
.

Pisistratus having procured from the city of Athens fifty fellows armed only
with cudgels for the security (...) his worthless person from pretended
dangers, improved this handful into an army, and with it enslaved his country.
When Tyndarides meditated the ruin of the Syracusan liberty, one of his first
steps was to draw round him a multitude of needy and desperate people, by way
of a guard Ubb. Emm. II.118.
.

The Romans were startled at the fight of 120 lic^ors, or peace-officers for
the guard of the decemviri. Such an army was dangerous, they said, to liberty.

What would those jealous old Romans, what would our stern forefathers have
said, had they seen 18,000 mercenary soldiers kept up in this free country
(whose natural guard is a militia, and a fleet equal in force to that of all
Europe put together) in a time of profound peace, in spite of all the repeated
and continued remonstrances of all men of public spirit for ages, at the same
time that our governors do not know how to defray the necessary charges of
government, and the nation is plunged in a bottomless sea of debt.

When Rome was thought to be in the utmost danger from the contest between
Sylla and Marius, the consul Octavius was advised to arm the slaves for the
preservation of the republic. He rejected a proposal so unconstitutional. For
the Romans thought it dangerous to put arms in the hands of slaves ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XIII.61.
. Our free British policy directs us hardly to trust arms in any other hands
than those of slaves. For we have no slaves in Britain, but the soldiery. That
they are slaves. -- slaves for life -- in the strictest sense of the word, will
appear manifest to every person, who attends to the proper definition of
slavery, viz. being obliged to submit for life, to the absolute command of
another, to do or to suffer whatever the superior imposes on him, without
redress.

Sylla, on the contrary, gave liberty, citizenship, and arms, to 10,000 slaves,
to attach them to his interest; breaking through all principles of the
constitution, to gain his own ambitious views.

It is strange, says Harrington, that kings should be so fond as they are of
standing armies. No order of men has suffered so much as they, by the soldiery.
The sons of Zeruiah, Ioab captain of the host, and Abishai his brother, were
too strong for David; thus the kings of Israel and of Judah fell most of them by
their captains or favorites, as I have elsewhere observed more particularly.
Thus Brutus being standing captain of the guards, could cast out Tarquin; thus
Sejanus had means to attempt against Tiberius; Oth^ to be the rival of Galba,
Casperius Aelianus of Nerva, Cassius of Antoninus, Perrenis of Commodus,
Maximinus of Alexander, Phillippus of Gordian, Aemilianus of Gallus, Ingebus of
Lollianus, Aureolus of Gallienus, Magnensius of Constantius, Maximus of
Gratian, Arbogastes of Valantinan, Ruffinus of Arcadius, Stilico of Honorius.
Go from the west into the east: upon the death of Marcianus, Asparis alone
having the command of the arms, could prefer Leo to the empire; Phocas deprived
Mauritius of the same; Heraclius deposed Phocas; Leo Isaurus could do as much
to Theodosius Adramytinus, as Nicephorus to Irene, Leo Armenius to Michael
Curopalates, Romanus Lagapenus to Constantin, Nicephorus Phocas to Romanus
^^er, Johannes Zismisces to Nicephorus Phocus, Isaac Comnenus to Michael
Stratioticus, Botoniates to Michael the son of Ducas, Alexius Comnenus to
Botoniates; which work continued in such manner, 'till the destruction of that
empire. Go from the east to the north: Gustavus attained to the kingdom of
Sweden, by his power and command of an army; and thus Secechus came near to
supplant Boleslaus III. of Poland. If Wallestein had lived, what had become of
his master? In France the race of P^aramond was extinguished by Pepin; and that
of Pepin in like manner, each by the major of the palace, a standing magistracy
of exorbitant trust. Go to the Indies: you shall find a king of Pegu to have
been thrust out of the realm of Tangu, by his captain general, etc.

Caesar puts all Rome, and Pompey himself, into a consternation, by approaching
the city at the head of a terrible army. Domitius Abenobarbus, fearing Caesar's
vengeance, takes what he thinks to be poison.

Sylla bribes the legions, who were the instruments of his tyranny, with the
confiscated lands of the friends of liberty ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.91.
.

The army is as fickle as the people. Often turns upon its masters, as the lion
sometimes devours his keeper.

In the contest between Sylla and Marius, the consular army was sometimes on
one side, sometimes on the other.

When Caesar, by every wicked art, procured the government of Illyricum for 5
years, with an army of 4 legions (not half the standing force now kept up by
our ministers) Cato told the senators what they afterward severely felt, That
they were placing an armed tyrant in their citadel.

Even the pension-parliament, in Chapter II's time, and James's first
passive-obedience parliament, stopped short, and turned upon those corrupt
ministries, when the last stroke was levelled against liberty. They saw that
when they should be no longer necessary, they would be used as traitors always
are by those, who take advantage of their treason, that is, sacrificed to the
resentment of the people. And in king William's time, the court party almost
ruined themselves by speaking up for the army CATO'S LET. III.278, 289.
.

Pompey brings home at one time spoils of war to the value of 12 millions
sterling, with which he bribed the army, to attach them to himself, giving the
private men fifty pounds each, and large sums to the officers ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XIII.148.
.

The greatest part of the Roman emperors set up by the praetorian guards. The
same military men murdered the amiable Pertinax, for attempting to restore
discipline Ibid. XV.280.
. The soldiers would suffer none to reign, but tyrants Ibid. 281.
.

The Roman legions were, by the triumviri, bribed against their country with
the lands of their proscribed countrymen.

Augustus disposed of the army, so as to have them always within call. Their
number computed to be 170,650, of which 10,000 were always in the neighborhood
of Rome Ibid. XIII.490.
.

Augustus takes to himself the government of all the provinces, in which troops
were, on pretense of insurrections, commonly kept; and leaves the others to be
disposed of by the conscript fathers; thus cunningly keeping in his own hands
the army, which lay in those provinces Ibid. 488.
.

Aurelius would not, like too many of his predecessors and followers, enrich
the army with the plunder of the people Ibid. XV.224.
.

Maximin, and several others of the imperial tyrants, were massacred by the
same army which set them (...) the throne. The case has been the same in most
^^untries, where the prince rules by means of an armed force.

Philippus, the supposed poisoner of the excellent emperor Gordian, chosen
emperor by the army, writes home to the senate to inform them. They are obliged
to acquiesce ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.409.
. And when Aurelian was murdered, the senate did not dare to choose a successor,
though the army left it to them, lest they should not make a choice agreeable
to the army. Wretched Romans! could not even choose their tyrant Ibid. 469.
.

Claudius, and all the Roman emperors after him, gave the soldiers money on
their accession Ibid. XIV.322.
. It was they, who dragged him from behind the tapestry, where, through
aversion to eminence, he had hid himself, and set him on the throne Ibid. 320.
. Nero was carried to the camp, to be received as emperor, before he was
acknowledged by the people Ibid. 368.
. It was the praetorian guards, who raised, at their pleasure, almost all the
emperors to the throne.

The Roman legions, taken by the Gauls in Vespasian's time, swear allegiance to
them, and promise to give up their officers Ibid. XV.14.
. So little does principle prevail in the army, and so little are they to be
trusted by princes.

Nothing but a bribed army would have supported the villainous Roman emperors.
Caracalla attempted in the sight of the legions to stab his father the emperor
Severus. He remonstrates to him on his bloody ^^d unnatural disposition.
Caracalla shows no remorse; on the contrary, he afterward attempts to depose
his father, and debauches, for that purpose, several (...) the officers.
Murders his brother Geta immediately on his accession, and 20,000 of his
domestics, and makes it death to utter his name. Murders in cold blood the
whole youth of Noricum, and almost all the Alexandrians, because they had
lampooned him. Orders a tribune and sol^iers to bring Chilo and murder him
before his face. The people save Chilo. Cara^^lla, to appease the people,
denies his having had any such design, and orders the tribune and soldiers to
be put to death as the proposers of Chilo's murder. Massacres a daughter of
Aurelius for expressing some concern for the cruel fate of Geta, and several of
the sacred vestal virgins on the same account. Orders his soldiers to massacre
a multitude of people in the theater for not liking a charioteer in the
Circen^ian games, whom he approved. The military ruffians, not distinguishing
the delinquents from the rest, fell indifferently upon all, sword in hand, and
made a dreadful havoc of the helpless unarmed multitude, sparing only such as
redeemed their lives with money. He loaded the people with taxes in all the
provinces, saying, while I wear this sword, I shall never want money; and at
Rome caused numbers to be put to death, sometimes out of revenge, for their
censuring his tyrannical proceedings, sometimes for his diversion merely; for
his supreme delight was the sight of streaming blood, and the sound of dying
groans. No sex, rank, or age, escaped his fury. He wrote to the senate, that he
knew, they disapproved his conduct; but that he neither valued nor feared them,
while he had an army at his command. These are some of Caracalla's feats. Yet
this devil (and surely the most inveterate of the infernals, if he were to come
up hot from the regions of fire and brimstone, could not outdo such a
character) was, after his being put to death by order of Macrinus, his
successor, manufactured, by the irrisistible army, into a god, and Macrinus,
the emperor, was obliged by the army to give his order to the senate for that
purpose. Such are the blessings of a standing army ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.320 --
342.
!

The danger of armies appeared in the Florentines war with the German banditti
[mercenaries dis^^nded by making peace between the Florentines and Visconti]
who amounted to 8000 horse, and 4000 foot, and plundered all Italy. Many towns
paid whatever ransom those miscreants imposed on them. The fairest and most
populous provinces in Italy were laid under contribution by a set of lawless
ruffians, whose progress increased their numbers, as their barbarity did the
horror in which they were held. Wherever they met with the least resistance,
ruin to the inhabitants was the certain consequence: they demolished towns,
desolated countries, slaughtered people, and nothing but money could buy off
the ravages. It was upon this occasion that the wisdom and magnanimity of the
Florentines shone out with a luster, equal to that of the greatest states of
antiquty. Instead of being intimidated by the example of their neighbors, or
the numbers of the banditti, they considered them as monsters, and were
determined to destroy them. The most respectable citizens of the Florentine
allies came to Florence, to persuade the people, and magistrates, that they had
no way to avoid certain destruction but to send deputies to treat with the
ruffians; and that they might buy their peace cheaper than their quarters for a
single day would cost them; this advice was disdained by the Florentines.
Malatesta led his troops to the field against the banditti, and offered them
battle, but the robbers were startled at their valor, and retreated: the
Florentines pursued them with success. And now it appeared that true courage
cannot animate a lawless set of men.

The attention of all Italy had been employed for some time upon the firm
conduct of the Florentines, and it now became their admiration. The most
distant states interested themselves in the fate and support of so much
magnanimity, and wanted to ^hare in the glory.

Thus ended, to the immortal honor of Florence, a danger that threatened great
calamity to her state MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.126.
. Armies are dangerous, when kept up, and dangerous when disbanded.

So much is an army necessary to tyranny, that all the despotic power now in
Europe is owing to standing armies being formed, and was, till then, unknown.
Chapter VII. of France (where the first standing army was established) was very
absolute, and Lewis XI. more. He humbled his nobles; divided them; increased
his army and his revenue; and by threatening and bribing, biassed the assembly
of the states See Roberts. HIST. CHAPTER V.I.98.
.

The revolution in which Elizabeth, daughter of Peter the Great, mounted the
throne of Russia, was brought about by Elizabeth's being more in favor with
the army, than the great duke, whom she dethroned MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLII.344.
.

When cardinal Ximenes's authority for governing the kingdom of Spain, during
the minority of Chapter V. was questioned by some of the grandees, he brought out
to them the will of Ferdinand, and ratification by Charles, appointing him
regent. Afterward drawing them to a balcony, from whence they could see some
troops exercising, If, says he, you be not contented with the authority I have
shown you, look there; by these I mean to keep up my power. He was armed; they
unarmed. Which was likely to prevail See Roberts. CHAPTER V.II. 33.
? Ximenes was a wise and good minister. But had he been the worst that ever was
possessed of power, the army would probably have supported him.

When the silly commons of Denmark, A. D. 1660, threw away their liberties (as
children do the playthings they are tired of) the king at first told them,
offering him absolute power, that he had scruples, Nolo episcopari; but he
artfully shut the city gates on pretense of keeping the peace; but in reality,
because, having the army entirely in his power, it was impossible for any of
the nobility to retire to their estates without his leave, which brought his
intrigues to a speedy issue MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXII.20.
.

In the great kingdom of Siam, the governors of the distant provinces often
engage the troops under them to revolt, and set up for themselves Ibid. VII.264.
.

When prince Maurice attempted to seize the liberties of Holland, he filled the
roads and avenues with his soldiers Ibid. XXXI.230
. It was impossible for the cities of Holland to save themselves, because the
statholder had the army at command, and the states of Holland were wholly
disarmed Ibid. 232.
.

In this very year 1772, the Swedish army has enslaved that country.

Unfortunately for the peace of mankind, armies are but too easily found, ready
to fight for any cause. Did not that most worthless prince Rich. III. find an
army of Englishmen ready to fight for him against liberty. Did not Chapter I. find
one? Was not the army under Iam. II. willing to support his tyranny, till they
came to understand, that he intended to Disband them the first opportunity, and
to replace them with an army of papists? And did he not find an army to fight
for him afterward in Ireland?

An army may be led on to any violence, however contrary to the general
sentiments, ^f there is a prospect of a plentiful harvest of spoil. Ladislaus,
king of Naples, A. D. 1413, though himself a papist, and every soldier in his
army a papist, plundered the holy Father's holy chapel and palaces, stripped
the holy churches, seized the holy jewels, and holy shrines of the holy saints,
and massacred several of the holy bishops MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXVIII.213.
. Charlemagne, on the contrary, proposed to employ his soldiery in time of
peace, in making canals and public works Ibid. XXIII.146.
. Ours are employed too in time of peace -- in drinking, whoring, powdering for
the reviews, and massacring the people.

The Turkish janissaries and priests rule all, and set up and pull down sultans
at their pleasure. The Roman army, under the emperors, did the same. It is
certain, that the janissaries and priests in Turkey could at any time obtain a
Magna Charta for their country, and that the Roman army under the emperors
could have restored the republican liberty, when they pleased. But such is the
nature of man. A king will erect himself into a tyrant; and every common
soldier is for supporting him, because he himself is a petty tyrant under the
great one; which pleasure he knows he must lose, whenever general liberty is
restored. Therefore he will certainly never promote a restoration of liberty.

In two years we have seen the constitution of France, Sweden, and Poland
overturned, and reduced to military governments Dalr. II.245
.

By this, (says Whitelock Whitelocke's MEM. p. 245.
, speaking of the army's petition, A. D. 1646.) we may take notice how soon the
officers and soldiers of an army, though ever so well disciplined, will,
through want of action, [an army can have no action in time of peace], fall
into disorder, and designs of trouble. Again: Here it was observed [in the
house] that a victorious army out of employment is very inclinable to assume
power over their principals; and this occasioned the parliament's greater care
for their employment in Ireland. He observes, on the two houses ordering their
declaration against the army to be erased from their journals, That then the
parliament begun to surrender themselves and their power into the hands of
their own army. When they removed the king from Holdenby, they acted altogether
by their own authority; and when he asked by what warrant, cornet Joyce
answered, It was the pleasure of the army. Afterward Ibid. 254.
, the soldiery beset the house of commons, and extorted ordinances in their
favor. Then parliament found it necessary to enable the city to raise the
militia for their defense against the army. The army advances. This report of
their approach puts all in terror. The committee of safety is revived. The
sheriffs and common council attend the house with letters from the army. A
committee of both houses sits all night. Letters are sent from both houses
requiring general Fairfax not to come nearer than 1^ miles of London. The
trained-bands were raised, and the shops for several days shut. Messages after
messages from the parliament and city to the terrible army. The army at St.
Albans. The trained-bands ordered to guard the house. The army sends demanding,
that 11 members, obnoxious to them, be suspended, with other matters equally
arbitrary. At length, says the same author Whitelocke's MEM. 257.
, several counties, and the citizens of London begun to make all their
applications to the general and army, omitting the parliament, and all looked
upon the army as in the chief place, and were afraid of doing any thing
contrary to them.' And, the votes of the house showed such a fear of the army
as was much censured. The 11 members, for the sake of peace, though nothing was
laid to their charge, left the house, and some of them the kingdom.

When Chapter I. ever bent on mischief, proposed to give Spain the Irish army, who
had no visible want of them, the lords agreed immediately. But the wise, and
consequently suspicious, commons found a design in this, viz. to keep up an
embodied army, which he could call over from Flanders when he pleased. The mad
king insists on performing his promise. Parliament publishes an ordinance
forbidding all persons to as^i^t in transporting them, on pain of being
declared enemies to the state. Nobody dared, after this, to obey the king Rap.
II.380.
.

In the tyranny of Chapter I. soldiers were billetted on private houses, as a
punishment for resisting the king's unparliamentary schemes for raising money.
The people were afraid to go from home, even to church, lest their houses
should be rifled the while. The magistracy were resisted by them. Farmers fled,
and the rents were unpaid. The manners of the people were debauched by the
ruffian-soldiery. Robberies, rapes, and murders were committed by them,
unpunished, unrestrained. The manufacturers, and other working people, were
interrupted in their business by their violence. The markets were unfrequented,
through danger of traveling. And insurrections and rebellions were the
consequences to be expected from the discontents of the people PARL. HIST.
VII.450.
.

It is true, that alehouses and sots-holes are as great a nuisance as can be in
a country; and therefore it is no great matter what burden be laid on them. But
inns are absolutely necessary in a commercial country; and to fill them with
useless and dangerous soldiers is a grievance they may very justly complain of,
as it singles them out from all other house keepers, and subjects them, like
papists, to an extraordinary tax. And on the other hand, to place the army in
garrisons and barracks, is separating them still more from the people, and
leading them to think themselves and their interest totally distinct.

This, and a thousand other considerations, show an army in a free country to
be an institution incapable of being put on a proper foot.

In the year 1647, when general Fairfax entered the city with his army, where
he behaved with much regularity, his power was so uncontrouled, that he might,
probably, have assumed what station he pleased Macaul. IV.342.
. His having so great power by means of his forces, shows the tremendous
importance of the army. His making so moderate a use of the ascendancy he had
(compare his conduct with Cromwell's aftewards) shows extraordinary magnanimity.

When Fairfax saw himself at the head of the army, he assumed the authority of
a king, as appears by his letters still extant. He protests against all
proceedings of the parliament during certain periods. He insists on the
punishment of the eleven members, who were obnoxious to the army; who
afterward grew very outrageous; they had some pretense, because parliament had
resolved to disband them without satisfying their demands PARL. HIST. XV.^94.
. Cornet Joyce, and a party of soldiers seize the king at Holdenby. Parliament
resolves (too late) to redress the army's grievances, and expunge the offense.
By which resolutions, says Whitelocke, they gave themselves up to their own
army.

The two new speakers send a strong remonstrance to Fairfax on the violences
committed by the army Ibid. XVI.^^7*
. They complain of his coming nearer the city than they had ordered, and desire
him to return to his station. They complain of the army's attacking and killing
several persons; and of warrants from him for raising men and money without
authority of parliament; the very worst charge against Chapter I. himself.

The city was dreadfully alarmed at the approach of the army so near at St.
Albans. The shops shut, and trained bands ordered out on pain of death. The
guards about the two houses were doubled, and arm^ placed in the outer rooms
XV.443.
.

See a letter from the lord mayor, aldermen, etc. to Fairfax, flattering him
most shamefully, and assuring him that no counter-army has been, or shall, with
their consent, be raised. The army was then predominant above all.

Parliament publishes (too late) an indemnity for the army. A committee of
members sent to treat with them. All which made them only more insolent PARL.
HIST. XV.407.
.

The commons recant their votes against the army, and appoint a fast through
fear of them Ibid. 412.
.

The army is a formidable body not to be provoked, and will be upon you before
you be aware. General Skippon to the parliament Ibid. 413.
.

Fairfax marches into the city without opposition. Plants ordance against the
gate on the bridge. The citizens presently yield, and revoke all they had
published against the army. They offer the general a golden ewar, value 1,000
l. and invite him and his officers to a feast at Guildhall. He declines these
forced compliments. He and his army march through the city with laurels as
conquerors. The city sneaks. This is the true spirit of the army. The general
receives the thanks of both houses [for enslaving them Ibid. XVI.239.
.]

A remonstrance comes from the army for purging the house of the members
disliked by them Ibid. 251.
. Upon which the lords order a letter of thanks to be sent to Fairfax for his
care of the parliament's independency. The army threatens open war, if any of
the expelled members presume to sit, unless they acquit themselves of all blame
to the satisfaction of the house Ibid. 272.
.

Delinquents, i. e. those whom the army disapproved, disqualified by a forced
act of parliament for voting in elections for mayors, recorders, sheriffs, etc.
but no mention of members Ibid. 311.
. In this manner did the army rule with a rod of iron.

Cromwell and Ireton pretend to be much offended against the soldiers, while
they were secretly encouraging them. Parliament suspects Cromwell, and designs
to seize him. He hears of the design, and suddenly flies to the army, though
just before, he had told the house he was hated in the army, and in danger of
his life, because he was for the Parliament PARL. HIST. XV.364.
.

Many members, A. D. 1648, were seized and confined by the soldiery Ibid.
XVIII.447.
. Treated with unexampled insolence; especially Prynne, who deserved so well of
the public by standing up for liberty, for which he with Bastwicke and Burton
was pilloried, and cruelly mangled.

Under Cromwell, the mock-patron of liberty, there was established a standing
army of 10,000 horse, and 20,000 foot. This was his way of settling a free
constitution Ibid. XX.258.
.

The sudden dissolution of the parliament, A. D. 1653, is ascribed by some to
Cromwell's ambition, who wanted to take upon himself the charge of protector,
and employed a set of members in the house to propose it. Some refusing to quit
the house, were driven out by a file of musketeers: So that what in Charles I.
was called abominable tyranny, was acted anew by the liberty folks. O man? O my
worthless fellow creature! What a Proteus thou art! But thou art my
fellow creature; and therefore, if I could, I would do thee good. Cromwell
protests that he knew nothing of their dissolving themselves till they came to
him Ibid. XX.241.
. Immediately after he had done the most tyrannical thing ever heard of, viz.
excluding by military force almost 100 members from the house, because they
were not of his side, the commons request him to be king PARL. HISE XXI.169.
. Such weight does the army give to the scale, in to which it is thrown.

In the time of the republic, when England was in the way to her highest
pinnacle of glory, the chief attention was paid to the fleet. Kings, on the
contrary, trust chiefly to the army, as being the proper instrument for gaining
the great object of kings. It is doubtful,' says our celebrated female
historian, whether a naval force could be rendered useful in any capacity, but
that of extending the power and prosperity of the country Macaul. HIST. V.111.
. She observes Ibid.
, that Cromwell could not have established his usurpation, but by the army;
that after the dissolution of the republican parliament, the army was the only
visible acting power; and that they accordingly took upon themselves the whole
government of the state, and sweet was the government they carried on.

M^. Pierrepoint said, in the house of commons, A. D. 1660, it was inconsistent
for an army and a parliament to subsist together, and that the trained bands
were sufficient. Colonel Birch said, The people's liberties were not safe with
such an army; that though he was a member of it himself, yet he moved it might
be paid off PARL. HIST. XXII.365.
.

See major Robert Huntingdon's reasons for laying down his commission, A. D.
1647, RYM. FOED, XX, 558, in which he shows, that he saw plainly, Cromwell's
design was to set himself and the army above both parties, viz. king and
parliament; and that Cromwell, with all his cunning, had often publicly
declared in conversation with his friends, That the interest of honest men [his
own party] was the interest of the kingdom. That he hoped the army should be an
army, as long as they lived. That it was lawful to purge the parliament, or put
a period to it, and support his own party by force. That it was lawful to play
the knave with knaves, etc.

Cromwell's pranks show plainly, that a man of courage backed by an army, is
capable of any thing. The dialogue between him and Whitlocke, about Cromwell's
taking the crown, is very curious. Cromwell shows, that he thinks public
affairs on a very precarious foot on account of the quarrels between the army
and parliament. Complains of the pride, ambition and avarice of the latter,
engrossing all places of profit and honor; their factious dispositions, delays
of business, design to perpetuate themselves in power, scandalous lives,
nothing to keep them in bounds, being the supreme power. Cromwell proposes to
take upon himself the name of king [before he was lord-protector] Whitlocke
told him, the cure would be worse than the disease; that he had the kingly
power almost, without the invidious name. That the very contest was, whether
England should be a monarchy, or a republic, not whether the king's name should
be Chapter or Oliver. Whitlocke proposes that Cromwell restore Chapter II. and
stipulate security for himself and friends. Cromwell not pleased with
Whitlocke's sentiments, conceals his displeasure with much prudence, and sends
Whitlocke soon after ambassador to Sweden. Whitlocke's MEM. p. 523.


In the short space of 12 years, the parliament had entirely subdued and
established tyranny of more than 500. In the form of government built on its
ruins, they had recalled the wisdom, and the glory of ancient times. One
revolted nation they had reduced to obedience; another they had added to the
English empire. The United Provinces were humbled to a state of accepting any
imposed terms. And the (...) enemy of all the courts and states of Europe was
turned to humble and earnest solicitation for friendship and alliance. At this
full period of national glory, when both the domestic and foreign enemies of
the country were dispersed, and every where subdued, when England, after so
long a subjection to monarchical tyranny, bade fair to outdo in the
constitution of its government, and consequently in its power and strength,
every circumstance of glory, wisdom, and happiness, related of ancient, or
modern times; when Englishmen were on the point of attaining a fuller measure
of happiness, than had ever been the portion of human society -- the base and
wicked selfishness of one trusted citizen [at the head of an army] disappointed
the promised harvest of their hopes, and deprived them of that liberty, for
which, at the expense of their blood and their treasure, they had so long and
so bravely contended Maccaul. HIST. V.95.
. Thus our incomparable female historian sets forth the mischiefs which that
extraordinary man was enabled to do to his country, by means of the tremendous
army. Nor did he obtain for himself any honor or advantage, which could in any
degree compensate for the evils he brought on England. He destroyed the
liberties of his country, and with them ruined the happiness of his own life.
Wretched ambition! To what do thou bring thy votaries! See Cromwell, who
might have lived peaceful and happy, had he, immediately after settling the
commonwealth, disbanded his army, and returned to a private unenvied station,
and who might have been to all ages celebrated among the illustrious founders
of states, the patrons of liberty, and destroyers of tyrants -- behold him,
canting, sneaking, and dissembling, to curry favor with those he despised;
beh^ld him tortured with guilt, and fear of assassination, and of damnation;
scared at the sight of every stranger* terrified at pamphlets and paragraphs
encouraging to destroy him; armed with a coat of mail under his clothes; afraid
to sleep two nights in the same chamber, or to return the same way he went;
incumbered with guards, and afraid even of them; hated by his relations;
distrusting, and distrusted by his domestics; dying just in time, surrounded
with difficulties and distresses, from which he was not likely to extricate
himself.

What availed his raising himself to the romantic height, to which he at last
soared, when from a private gentleman, and a cornet of horse, he came to be
every thing of a king but the name, and seemed by his answer to Monsieur
Bellievere admiring his wonderful fortune, (L'on ne monte jamais si haut, que
lorsqu'on ne scait ou l'on va) to be himself astonished at his own elevation --
What availed, I say, the wonderful feats he performed by means of the army,
when he made all Europe stand aghast at the sound of his name? A very short
space of time would, probably, if he had lived, have brought him down as low,
as ever he was high. For nothing is permanent that is not founded in justice.

Afterward the army fell into the hands of Lambert, whose officers make
demands on the parliament. They resolve against them. Great contests between
parliament and army Rap. II.609.
. At last Lambert stops the speaker in his coach, and hinders the house from
meeting Ibid. 610.
. This was the second time of forcibly dissolving this parliament.

When the peaceable Richard, the son of Cromwell, succeeded to his father's
protectoral power, he soon found that the officers designed to force him to
dissolve the parliament Rap. II.604.
. He is obliged to yield to the army; loses all his authority. The army takes
the government Ibid. 605.
.

The parliament would have established republican government, upon the
resignation of Richard Cromwell, if they had not been bullied out of it by Monk
and the army, who brought in again upon their country, the curse of the Stuarts.

There was in short nothing but doing and undoing in those times the parliament
being as much slaves to the army then, as they are in modern times [the present
always excepted] to the court.

It is well known, that Chapter II. proposed, by means of the army, to enslave the
kingdom.

The garrison of Tangiers being brought over to England, served to augment that
small army, on which the king [ Chapter II.] relied, as one solid basis of his
authority Hume's HIST. STUARTS, II.335.
.

An honest, though too timid house of commons, addressed Chapter II. against his
guards (which were but 6000) as unfavourable to liberty. Ibid. 234.
.

The commons in Chapter II's second parliament, voted the standing army, and king's
guards, illegal Hume' HIST. STUARTS, II.303.
. Mr. Hume approves this as necessary to liberty Ibid.
.

The parliament beginning to doubt, whether there had not been too great a
confidence reposed in Chapter II. by that generation, of fond fools, who received
him at his restoration, and by their beslobbering, spoiled him; voted, that he
should not have power to keep the militia under arms above a fortnight
together, without consent of parliament Ibid. 137.
. They were jealous even of the militia. We are not afraid of above 40,000
soldiery wholly dependent on the crown, and detached for life from the people.

Clarendon at last persuaded Chapter II. that he could not be safe on his throne,
without disbanding the army, which having once been above all other powers in
the state, and having modelled it at their pleasure, would not be likely to
brook submission to a king. It was accordingly broke, all but 1000 horse and
5000 foot, The first standing army in England Ibid. 136.
.

It was generally believed that the design was to keep up and model the army
now raised, reckoning, there would be money enough [300,000 l. a year for three
years, expected from the French king] to pay them, 'till the nation should be
brought under military government.

Chapter II. and his brother the duke of York, laid the main stress of their
kingship upon the army.

If once they (the duke of York's enemies) get the navy, purge the guards and
garrisons, and put new men in, they will be absolute masters. The duke of
York's words in his letter to the prince of Orange Dalrymp. MEM. II.219.
.

The king ( Chapter II.) has yet the fleet, the garrisons and guards; so that if he
will stand by himself, he may yet be a king. The duke of York to the prince of
Orange Dalrymp. MEM. II.221.
.

Upon the defeat of Monmouth's rebellion, king James became intoxicated with
his prosperity. Instead of disbanding his army, he encamped it on Hounslow
heath, and resolved to make it the great instrument of his power Ibid. 169.
.

Mr. Trenchard, in the year 1722, defied the advocates for standing armies, to
produce a plausible pretext for keeping them up. What would he have said, had
he lived in our times, when every argument for them is growing weaker. See
CATO'S LET. III 248, seq.


I presume, says he Ibid. 250.
, no man will be audacious enough to propose, that we should make a standing
army part of our constitution. Is it not, in our times, to every intent and
purpose a part of our constitution?

Parliament under William and Mary were unconquerably resolute on disbanding
the army, and sending away the Dutch guards, though the king had in a manner
petitioned for their stay. William was highly disgusted, so that he made a
speech which he intended to speak in parliament, and to abdicate, and go
abroad. It is uncertain how he was diverted from his purpose. In his letter to
lord Galway, he has these words. It is not to be conceived how people here are
set against foreigners. And afterward. There is a spirit of ignorance and
malice prevails here, beyond conception Tind. CONTIN. I.389.
.

King William, in his speech, A. D. 1697, tells parliament that a land force is
necessary; and indeed there was, at that time, some pretense, because of the
mad disaffected party which prevailed. Yet a militia was manifestly preferable
then, and at all times. But the best kings love a mercenary army better than a
free militia. Many of the members were offended at the king's recommending so
strongly an army of landforces. And the first resolution made was directly in
the teeth of the king's speech, viz. That all the landforces of this kingdom
which have been raised since September 29, 1680, shall be paid and disbanded.
The army consisted then of 17,656 infantry, and 6,876 horse and dragoons.
Orders were given out for rewarding, paying off, and granting privileges to the
soldiers, and for making the militia useful DEB. COM. III.76.
.

It is said, that the same prince, enraged at parliament's refusing to let his
Dutch guards stay with him, after he had requested it as a personal favor,
swore, if he had a son, they should not leave him. That is, it would have been
worth his while to keep them in spite of parliament. And it is plain* he
thought this practicable, and if it was, then any thing may be practicable by
him, who has the command of the tremendous army.

The commons, staunch to the salutary doctrine of No standing army in a free
country in a time of peace, went on reforming the army, till at last they
settled it at about 10,000. The king was highly offended at their jealousy of
him, who had done so much for them; and never deceived them. Said to Burnet,
that if he had known how the English would treat him, he never would have
meddled with them Tind. CONTIN. I.366, 368.
. Did our glorious deliverer really think the people were not as anxious about
their own safety as he could be? What was it to him, what army the people of
England chose to keep up? Did not they know best? And was it not their affair
much more than his?

Upon the disbanding of the army under king William, a larger provision was
made for the sea service. The nation could better afford it Ibid. I.390.
.

The Dutch keep up no more than 32,000 standing forces in time of war; though
they are upon the same continent with, and their capital not many days march
from the French dominions (...). Lords, IV.452.
.

So hard have the ministerial crew been put to it for arguments to defend the
keeping up of a standing army, that we find in the DEB. OF THE LORDS, IV.453, a
pretense, taken from the number of standing forces kept up by France, for our
keeping up an army proportioned to the French. Whereas we should have no more
to fear from France's keeping up an army of a million of men, than of one
thousand, unless their fleet was an overmatch for ours.

In Walpole's time, it was strongly alleged, that officers were advanced, or
neglected according to their parliamentary conduct and conn^^^^ons. Does not
this render the army dreadfully dangerous to liberty?

In all deliberations of this kind, (says Mr. Pulteney in the debate on the
Spanish convention, A. D. 1739 DEB. COM. XI.63.
.) I have constantly observed these military gentlemen very prudently consult
the peace of their country, as well as their own glory, by being the first to
approve of the minister's most destructive schemes, and even his pacific
measures. We all know, when it has happened otherwise, what was the
consequence. They, who had the courage, to follow the dictates of their own
breasts, were disabled from further serving their country in a military
capacity.

The author of the Present State af the Nation, estimates the yearly expense of
the useless and dangerous army in a profound peace at 1,437,600 l. including
ordance; while the inestimable fleet, and militia, the natural strength of a
free country surrounded with the sea, cost the nation only 1,600,000 l.

Every opportunity a minister and his tools have of embezzling the public money
is an evil. The keeping up of a numerous standing army furnishes this very
plentifully. It is alleged, that the great commanders under the umbrage of the
ministry, have constantly several thousand men in their pockets. False musters
were found, A. D. 1711. Not above two thirds of the muster-rolls were effective
men. The annual estimate of the army in those times used to be about 700,000 l;
one third of which, therefore, or 233,000 l. a year, must have been sunk in
certain pockets. Many debtors were protected by the military. Chartres guilty
this way, and of tampering with witnesses, produced before the committee. The
queen was to be informed, and desired to punish Chartres, and all other persons
concerned. It was found, that subjects had been imprisoned in the Savoy without
authority in writing from a commission-officer; that they had been put in
irons, and sold to be sent abroad. The queen was desired to give certain
soldiers their dismission from the service, and protection against pressing;
for having witnessed these facts DEB. COM. IV.214.
. Thus the people are plundered, and amidst the show of a numerous army,
deprived of the advantage, if advantage there be, in the reality. See a motion
about the absence of officers from Minorca DEB. LORDS, VIII.69.
. Out of nineteen officers, only five were left on duty in the island, at a
time when the invasion of it was threatened by Spain, so publicly, that all
Europe knew it. See the examination of general Anstruther, lieutenant governor
Ibid. seq.
.

The great victories gained in queen Anne's time over the French in land
fights, were very prejudicial to England. For it was impossible we should gain
any advantage by continental conquests, and it was chiefly from that time, that
we attached ourselves to continental schemes, and became delighted with great
armies and land wars, while the sea is our proper element (of which more
elsewhere); and the unfortunate circumstance of two German princes filling the
British throne immediately afterward, who had no idea of an insular situation,
nor of any security, but what depends on numerous standing forces; all these
contributed to draw us into the fatal error of keeping up a large standing army
in this kingdom surrounded by the ocean; and in times of peace, as well as of
war. It is not 20 years since we thought it necessary, A. D. 1756, to send for
Hessians and Hanoverians to defend us against an expected invasion from France;
which measure even Voltaire condemns, and compares this proceeding with queen
Elizabeth's, who defended herself, without foreign auxiliaries, against Philip
II. of Spain, the duke of Parma, the queen of Scots, the Irish, and the papists
ESS. SUR L'HIST. VI.133.
. Yet George I. reduced his landforces, A. D. 1718, though he was at war with
Spain, and his three kingdoms swarmed with jacobites DEB. COM. VI.183.
.

CHAP. IV. A Militia with the Navy, the only proper Security of a free People
in an insular Situation, both against foreign Invasion and domestic Tyranny.
A Standing army, as those on the continent, continues, of course, from year to
year, without any new appointment, and is a part of the constitution. Our
courtiers affect to call the British land-establishment a parliamentary army,
and would deceive us into the notion of a difference between a standing army
and a parliamentary. The British landforces, say they, are appointed from year
to year, not only as to their number, but their subsistence; so that the
parliament's neglecting to provide for their subsistence would be annihilating
the army at once. But is the army the less a grievance for its being on this
foot, than if it were on the same with those of France or Spain? Suppose that
for twenty years together, we should have no parliament called. At the end of
that period, could the grievance and loss to the nation be estimated as at all
less upon the whole, than it would have been, if the king had at the beginning
of the twenty years, declared by edict, that there should be no parliament
during that period? This would be a bolder stroke of tyranny, than merely
neglecting, from year to year, or refusing, to let the writs be issued; but the
people would be as really deprived of the advantages of parliaments by one
proceeding, as by the other.

No kingdom can be secured otherwise than by arming the people. The possession
of arms is the distinction between a freeman and a slave. He, who has nothing,
and who himself belongs to another, must be defended by him, whose property he
is, and needs no arms. But he, who thinks he is his own master, and has what he
can call his own, ought to have arms to defend himself, and what he possesses;
else he lives precariously, and at discretion. And though for a while, those,
who have the sword in their power, abstain from doing him injury, yet by
degrees he will be awed into submission to every arbitrary command. Our
ancestors [the Caledonii, see Tacit. etc.] by being always armed, and
frequently in action, defended themselves against the Remans, Danes and
English, and maintained their liberty against the encroachments of their own
princes Fletcher, p. 307.
.

We all know, that the only way of enslaving a people, is by keeping up a
standing army; that by standing forces all limited monarchies have been
destroyed; without them none; that so long as any standing forces are allowed
in a nation, pretenses will never be wanting to increase them; that princes
have never suffered a militia to be put upon any good foot, lest standing
armies should appear unnecessary Fletcher, p. 346.
.

Mr. Fletcher gives p. 54.
the plan of a militia for Britain. He proposes three camps in England, and one
in Scotland; and that every youth of every rank should spend one or two years
in the camp, at his coming of age, and perform military exercise once every
week afterward. But a great deal less than this would* be sufficent to make
this, or any populous island innaccessible to a foreign enemy. If we had in
Britain a sea and land militia, there would be no occasion for the scandalous
practice of pressing.

The Athenian and Spartan militia conquered the Persian mercenary armies,
though infinitely more numerous. The greatest part of Alexander's army was
militia. The Romans conquered all nations, in the republican times, while their
army was an unpaid militia. In the imperial times, when the army was hired, the
northern militia drove them out of one province after another, and at last
Odoacer made himself king of Italy. The Turks had more trouble in subduing the
militia of Hungary and Epirus, than in conquering all their empire besides.
Scanderbeg, with a small militia, was constantly successful in 22 battles
against standing armies. Hunniades and Matthias fought the Turkish standing
armies always with militia, and performed such actions as posterity can hardily
believe.

The Grecians carried on their wars against Persia, by means of their militia;
and at last beat the numerous mercenary armies, and subdued the vast empire of
Persia. The Romans carried on their wars against Carthage by means of their
militia; and, at last, beat the mercenary armies of Carthage, and destroyed
that rich and populous city. But when the Romans, in order to support the
arbitrary power of their emperors, began to put their whole trust in mercenary
armies, their military glory soon began to decline; and at last the Goths and
Vandals, and other northern nations, by means of their militia, drove before
them the mercenary armies of Rome, and made that proud city submit to the yoke
which she had, in former times, by the same means, put upon a great part of the
world DEB. LORDS, V.301.
.

La constitution de Rome, etc. The constitution of Rome was founded upon this
principle, That those only should be soldiers, who had property to answer to
the republic for their conduct. The equestrians, as being the richest, formed
the cavalry of the legions. When their dignity was increased, they would not
serve any longer; so that it was necessary to raise another cavalry. Marius
took into his legions all sorts of people. The Roman republic was undone
Montesq. L'ESPRIT. DES LOIX, I.287.
.

At the conclusion of the first Punic war, the Carthaginians were compelled, by
their treaty with the Romans, to evacuate Sicily. Gisco, therefore, who
commanded in that island, to prevent the disorders which might be committed by
such a multitude of desperate fellows, composed of so many different nations,
and so long inured to blood and rapine, sent them over gradually in small
bodies, that his countrymen might have time to pay off their arrears, and send
them home to their respective countries. But either the lowness of their
finances, or the ill timed parsimony of the Carthaginians, totally defeated
this salutary measure, though the wisest that, as their affairs were at that
time circumstanced, could possibly have been taken. The Carthaginians deferred
their payment till the arrival of the whole body, in hopes of obtaining some
abatement in their demands, by fairly laying before them the necessities of the
public. But the mercenaries were deaf to every representation and proposal of
that nature. They felt their own strength, and saw too plainly the weakness of
their masters. As fast as one demand was agreed to, a more unreasonable one was
started; and they threatened to do themselves justice by military execution, if
their exorbitant demands were not immediately complied with. At last, when they
were just at the point of an accommodation with their masters, by the mediation
and address of Gisco, two desperate ruffians, named Spendius and Mathos, raised
such a flame among the unruly multitude, as broke out instantly into the most
bloody and destructive war ever yet recorded in history. The account we have of
it from the Greek historians must strike the most callous breast with horror;
and though it was at last happily terminated by the superior conduct of
Hamilcar Barcas, the father of the great Hannibal, yet it continued near four
years, and left the territories around Carthage a most shocking scene of blood
and devastation. Such was, and ever will be, the consequence, when a large body
of mercenary troops is admitted into the heart of a rich and fertile country,
where the bulk of the people are denied the use of arms by the mistaken policy
of their governors. For this was actually the case with the Carthaginians,
where the total disuse of arms amongst the lower class of people laid that
opulent country open, an easy and tempting prey to every invader. This was
another capital error, and consequently another cause which contributed to
their ruin. How must any nation, but our own, which, with respect to the bulk
of the people, lies in the same defenseless situation, how, I say, must they
censure the mighty state of Carthage spreading terror and giving law to the
most distant nations by her powerful fleets, when they see her at the same time
trembling, and giving herself up for lost at the landing of an invader in her
own territories Mountague, ANT. REPUBL. 191.
!

I hope the enemies to a militia will at least allow those new levies, who
composed by far the gre^^est part of Hamilcar's army upon this occasion, to be
raw, undisciplined, and ignorant of the use of arms, epithets which they bestow
so plentifully upon a militia. Yet that able commander, with an army consisting
chiefly of this kind of men, totally destroyed an army of desperate veterans,
took their general, and all who escaped the slaughter, prisoners, and put an
end to the most ruinous and most inhuman war ever yet mentioned in history.
These new levies had courage, a quality never yet, I believe, disputed to the
British commonalty, and were to fight pro aris et focis, For whatever was dear
and valuable to a people; and Hamilcar, who well knew how to make use of these
dispositions of his countrymen, was master of those abilities which Mathos
wanted. Of such infinite advantage is it to an army to have a commander
superior to the enemy in the art of generalship, an advantage which frequently
supplies a deficiency even in the goodness of troops, as well as in numbers
Ibid. 204.
.

A militia is the natural strength of a free people. The Romans had no regular
forces on pay till the year of Rome 347, by which time they had gained most of
their conquests, and which was their best period for public virtue*

When some of the Chinese emperor Tay-tsong's ministers warned him of the
danger of training his subjects so carefully to arms, lest they should rebel
against him; he answered, I carry my subjects in my bosom; and have no more to
fear from them, than a father from his children.

At the union of Utrecht, which was the basis of the union of the seven
provinces against Phil. II. it was settled, that every male between 18 and 60
should be trained to arms MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXI.82.
.

King John III. of Portugal established a militia (the kings of Portugal were
in those times limited) by ordering, that every man of a certain income should
find a foot soldier, when wanted. One of double, a musqueteer; and he who was
possessed of an estate of triple value, a trooper and horse Ibid. XXII.232.
.

At the congress of Munster and Osnabrug, A. D. 1641, it was articled, that
both cities should be guarded by their own burghers and soldiers commanded by
the magistrates Ibid. XXX.249.
. A proper militia.

Cardinal Ximenes, the patriot of Spain, raised a militia of 30,000 men without
expense, able to defend themselves Ibid. XXI.214.
.

The province of Enter Minhoe Dauro, in Portugal, is 18 leagues long, and 12
wide. The standing militia is 16000 men. Tra los montes is 30 leagues by 20.
Militia 10, or 12,000. Beira 34 leagues by 30. Militia 10,000 MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXII 10.
.

The frugal Dutch have a militia in their Indian settlements Ibid. X.553.
. The pay of army officers generally amounts to a third of the whole expense.
The Dutch save this. For their militia officers have no pay. They fight for the
preservation of their property. The frugality of having a militia instead of an
army, will, I am sensible, be no consideration with our court. For one of the
principal ends they have in view, in keeping up an army in times of peace, is
the maintenance of several thousands of gentlemen, as officers, who, by that
means, are inviolably attached to the court.

When the northern nations in the time of Charlemagne made descents on many
coasts in a piratical manner, that great prince established a militia in the
maritime parts of France for the security of the kingdom, which proved
effectual Ibid. XXIII.148, 153.
. His son, Lewis the Pious, neglected to keep it up. The hostilities were
renewed Ibid. 180.
.

For above two centuries, says Vattel, the Swiss have enjoyed a profound peace,
while the noise of arms has resounded on all sides, and war has laid waste the
rest of Europe. He ascribes this to the courage and discipline of the people.

When the Goths and Vandals overran the western parts of the Roman empire
(says Fletcher of Scotland) the generals of armies made themselves kings of the
countries they conquered. They divided the lands among their officers, called
barons, and they again gave small parcels to their soldiers, who became their
vassals, and held by military service. The king's revenue arose out of his
demesne lands. There was no mercenary army. Every man was a soldier, obliged to
fight for his superior; upon which tenure he held his lands. This continued to
be the state of things in Europe for about 1100 years from A. D. 400. In that
period, the sword was more properly in the hands of the barons, than of the
kings. For the people held more immediately of the barons than of the kings.
Now the sword is come into the hands of kings, by means of mercenary armies.
The power of granting money is* not alone a sufficient security for liberty.
For a thousand disciplined ruffians will command the purses of a million of
untrained people. Not only, says he, that government is tyrannical, which is
tyrannically administered, but all governments are tyrannical, which have not in
their constitution a sufficient security against arbitrary power. He means a
militia, to balance the dangerous army: p. 9. Afterward, in consequence of a
more expensive way of living in more polish^d ages, the great land-owners were
obliged to give their vassals up military service, and to take rent for their
lands. Foreign invasions then put princes upon the pretense for setting up
mercenary armies, whose pay was to be levied upon the people by taxes. Yet it
is manifest, that a militia is the only natural defense of a free country both
from invasion and tyranny. For who is so likely to defend property, as the
proprietor? It was the carelessness of the people, that gave kings the
opportunity of setting up tyrannies, and armies for supporting those tyrannies.
Rich and luxurious people chose rather to pay than fight. So the sword went out
of the hands of the people into those of the tyrant, and his hirelings. And now
the people complain; whereas they should have prevented. Kings do not choose to
give up power, when once they have got it into their possession. War became a
profession; and the army enabled the government to tax the people for the
support of the idle soldier and court-sycophant. Our island, however, has no
pre^ence for a standing army.

Some French counselors about Mary of Guise, queen dowager, and regent of
Scotland, induced her to propose a tax for maintaining a standing army to
defend Scotland against England. Three hundred of the lesser barons, when the
lords, too obsequious (as usual) to the court, consented, by silence, to the
measure, remonstrated to the queen regent and prevented the mischief. They were
ready, they said, to defend their country. They would defend it better than
mercenaries, men of desperate fortunes, who have no hopes, but in the public
calamity, who, for money, would attempt any thing, and whose faith would follow
fortune's wheel. The queen dowager was afraid to push the scheme; but Mary took
it up, on pretense of Bothwel's having a design to seize her person. The army,
however, was soon abolished, and Iam. I. when king of Scotland, had only forty
gentlemen for his guard. Had Chapter I. only had 5000 regular forces, as a basis
for his army, he would probably have conquered.

Fletcher answers the objection, That only a standing army can defend us
against the standing army of France. He says, in our wars with France, our
naval power ought chiefly to be trusted to. Mercenary troops are calculated, he
says, to enslave a nation. They are composed of men, who make a trade of war;
of detached ruffians freed from shame and connection with their country for
life; whereas a militia are to return again among the people after serving a
certain number of years. Caesar, in order to enslave his country, continued the
same men beyond the usual term (...) years. For the Romans intended, that both
civil and military power should pass from hand to hand, and never grow
inveterate among the same set of men.

Nothing will make a nation so unconquerable as a militia, or every man's being
trained to arms. For ^very Briton having in him by birth the principal part of
a soldier, I mean the heart; will want but little training beyond what he will
have as a militia-man, to make him a complete soldier. A standing army, though
numerous might be routed in one engagement, if an engagement should happen in
consequence of a French invasion. Whereas the militia of Britain would be a
million of men; which would render a descent from France an operation of war
not to be thought of Fletcher's WORKS, p. 31.
.

All the force, which the French can throw over to this country, before our
fleet can come to our assistance, must be so inconsiderable, that the^^ landing
would deserve the name of a surprise, rather than of an invasion; says one, who
will hardly be suspected of intending to derogate from the importance of the
army; I mean John, duke of Argyle DEB. LORDS, VII.79.
.

De Wit proposed to the French king, during the first Dutch war, an invasion of
England. The king replied, that such an attempt would be fruitless, and would
unite all the jarring parties in England against the enemy. We shall have, says
he, in a few days after our landing, 50,000 men (meaning the militia) upon us
Hume* HIST. STUARTS, II.446.
.

Mr. Fletcher adds afterward what follows.

The essential quality of a militia consistent with freedom is, That the
officers (...), and preferred, and they, and the soldie^^ maintained, not by
the prince but the people, who send them out. Ambitious princes [and he would
have added, if he had fore-known the late duke of Newcastle's opposition to the
establishment of the militia, corrupt ministers] have always endeavored to
discredit the militia, and render it burdensome to the people, by never
suffering it to be upon any right, or even tolerable footing; all to persuade
the necessity of standing forces. In the battle of Naseby, the number of forces
was equal on both sides; and all circumstances equal. In the parliament's army
only nine officers had ever seen actual service, and most of the soldiers were
London prentices, drawn out of the city two months before. In the king's army
there were above 1000 officers, who had served abroad; yet the regulars were
routed by the prentices. A good militia is of such i^portance to a nation, that
it is the chief part of the constitution of every free government. For, though,
as to other things, the constitution be ever so slight, a good militia will
always preserve the public liberty; and in the best constitution ever known, as
to all other parts of government, if the militia be not upon a right foot, the
liberty of the people must perish. The militia of ancient Rome made her
mistress of the world. Standing armies enslaved her. The Lacedaemonians
continued 800 years free, because they had a good militia. The Swiss are the
freest people in our times, and like to continue such the longest, because they
have the best militia. Fletcher's WORKS, p. 31, 42, 54.


However a corrupt government may intend to defeat the design of a militia by
totally perverting it from its original intention and use, this ought not to
hinder all men of property from learning the use of arms. There is no law
against a free subject's acquiring any laudable accomplishment. And if the
generality of housekeepers were only half-disciplined, a designing prince, or
ministry, would hardly dare to provoke the people by an open attack on their
liberties, lest they should find means to be completely instructed in the
exercise of arms before the chain could be rivetted. But without the people's
having some knowledge of arms, I see not what is to secure them against
slavery, whenever it shall please a daring prince, or minister, to resolve on
making the experiment. See the histories of all the nations of the world.

The militia-act is long and intricate; whereas there was nothing necessary,
but to direct, that every third man in every parish in England, whose house had
10 or more windows, should be exercised in his own parish, by an experienced
sergeant, times every year, the days to be appointed; and every third part of
every parish to be upon the list for three years, and free six years, so that
in nine years every such housekeeper in England might have had all the
knowledge he could acquire by field-days. The men never to be drawn out of
their respective parishes, but to resist an invasion, quell an insurrection, or
for some necessary purpose. Every healthy housekeeper of 10 windows and above,
under 50, who refused to enlist and attend the exercising days, to be fined. No
hirelings to be accepted. The commanders to be the men of largest property in
each county.

A country, in which every man of property could defend his property, could
have no occasion for a dangerous standing army, and would be incomparably more
secure against invasion, than it could be with a standing army of 50,000 men
scattered over a whole empire.

Lord Lyttleton thinks the militia (the only permanent military force, our
ancestors knew) was commanded by the heretoch of every county, who was annually
chosen into his office by the freeholders in the folkmote, or county court; and
that after the Norman times, this command devolved upon the earl of each county.

A militia consisting of any others than the men of property in a country, is
no militia; but a mungrel army.

Men of business and property will never choose to enter into the militia, if
they may be called from their homes, and their business for three years,
together, subject to martial law all the while.

Brigadier general Townshend, in his Dedication of the Plan of Discipline
composed for the Militia of the county of Norfolk, affirms, that he has made
some persons masters of that exercise in two or three mornings, so as to
perform it with grace and spirit; and that the common men learned it in seven
or eight days time, some in less.

The same gentleman complains heavily of the discouragements, slights, delays,
evasions, and unnatural treatment of the militia-act from those, whose duty it
was to see it executed according to its intention. One would think the old
militia law might have directed our government to avoid sending the militia out
of their respective counties. This was always expressly guarded against, and
was never to be done, but in the case of foreign invasion SEE Lord Lyttleton's
HIST. HEN. II. vol. III. p. 318.
.

The single circumstance of the national militia's being first settled by the
great and good Alfred, ought to prejudice all friends to liberty in its favor.
That able politician lord Molesworth thinks a militia infinitely preferable to
an army, both on the score of safety from tyranny at home, and of invasion from
abroad. Judge Blackstone COMM. I.336.
gives the preference to a militia. The Polish militia serve but 40 days in the
year Blackst. COM. I.409.
.

Queen Elizabeth's whole reign may be almost called a state of defensive and
offensive war; in England as well as in Ireland; in the Indies as well as in
Europe; she ventured to go through this state, if it was a venture, without the
help of a standing army. (...) people of England had seen none from the days of
Richard II. and this cautious queen might perhaps imagine that the example of
his reign and those of other countries where standing armies were established,
would beget jealousies in the minds of her people, and diminish that affection,
which she esteemed and found to be the greatest security of her person, and the
greatest strength of her government. Whenever she wanted troops, her subjects
flocked to her standard; and her reign affords most illustrious proofs, that
all the ends of security and of glory too may be answered in this island
without the charge and danger of the expedient just mentioned. This assertion
will not be contradicted by those who recollect in how many places and on how
many occasions her forces fought and conquered the best disciplined veteran
troops in Europe Bolingbr. REM. HIST. ENGL. 159.
.

The militia was established by Alfred, and fell into decay under the Stuarts.
A proof, that a militia is good, and ought to be kept up. The Stuarts were
friends to standing armies. A demonstration, that standing armies are
dangerous. James II. at his accession declared the militia useless; and
demanded supplies for keeping an army, he was to raise Hume's HIST. STUARTS,
II.388.
. It is well known what armies Charles I. raised, and in what bloody business
he employed them. Charles II. had, at the beginning of his reign, about 5,000
men. Toward the end of his reign, the army was increased to near 8,000. James
II. at the time of Monmouth's re^^llion, had on foot 15,000 men. At the prince
of Orange's arrival, 30,000 regular troops Ibid. 446.
.

The command of the militia was only put in the hands of the crown, when the
nation was in a state of insanity, and every man ready to lay down his head on
a block, for the king [ Chapter II.] to chop it off, if he pleased. As it is
regulated by 30 Geo. II. c. 25, it remains too much on the same foot. For it is
officered by the lord lieutenant, the deputy lieutenants and other principal
land-holders, under a commission from the crown, which places it, as every
thing else is, too much under the power of the court See Blackst. COMM. I.411.
.

The first commission of array is thought to have been in the times of Hen. V.
When he went to France, A. D. 1415, he empowered commissioners to take an
account of all the freemen in each county, who were able to bear arms, to
divide them into companies, and to have them in readiness for resisting the
enemy Hume's HIST. STUARTS, II.321.
.

The citizens, and country gentlemen soon became excellent officers; says Mr.
Hume HIST. STUARTS, I.360.
. This shows what a militia may in a short time be brought to. For what is a
militia man, but a soldier, engaged for a limited time, and less completely
trained? And what is a soldier, but a militia-man completely disciplined and
enslaved for life? The principal part of a soldier is the heart; and that
almost every Briton has by birth without training. A militia-man is a free
citizen; a soldier, a slave for life. Which is most likely to show the most
courage and the greatest attachment to his country?

The militia -- if it could not preserve liberty to the people, preserved at
least the power, if ever the inclination should arise, of recovering it Ibid.
I.70.
.

Against insurrections at home, the sheriff of every county has the power of
the militia in him, and if he be negligent to suppress them with the posse
comitatus, he is fineable. Against invasions from abroad, every man would be
ready to give his assistance. There would be little need to raise forces, when
every man would be ready to defend himself, and to fight pro aris et focis
Whitlock's speech on the militia. PARL. HIST. X.278.
. What would this honest man have said, if he had been told, that the time
would come, when it would be called necessary to keep up a standing army in
this free country, surrounded with the ocean, in peace as well as war, to the
formidable number of above 40,000, a number superior to that with which
Alexander conquered the world?

Why must the British soldiery be enslaved for life, any more, than the sailors
on board the navy? Were the militia put upon a right foot, the same individuals
might serve either by sea or land, during a certain short period, and then
return to their respective station. I know the court-sycophants will object to
this, That a soldier requires a great deal of training and reviewing, before he
comes to have the cool courage necessary in action, etc. But this is all
pretense. We hardly ever have had, or can have occasion for any soldiery. Our
wars with France in old times are now by all parties confessed to have been
merely the loss of so much blood and treasure without possibility of advantage
to this island. And our continental wars since the Revolution we have been
drawn into chiefly by the unfortunate circumstance of our having on our throne
a set of princes connected with the continent. There is no advantage we have
ever gained by war, which would not have been greater, and cost us incomparably
less, if we had kept to the sea. For we never can have a nation for our enemy
that is not commercial, and we can certainly at any time force a commercial
nation to yield to reasonable terms by attacking their commerce, their foreign
settlements, their coast-towns, their fisheries, etc. And by sea we may always
command the superiority. For every Briton is born with the heart of a soldier
and a sailor in him; and wants but little training to be equal on either
eliment, to any veteran of any country. Accordingly we never hear of the common
men, in either service, showing any appearance of cowardice.

Immediately after the mutiny bill had passed the lower house, Mr. Thomas Pit,
elder brother of Mr. William Pit, then paymaster general, moved, on the 9th of
March, 1749, for leave to bring in a bill to limit respective times, beyond
which no non-commissioned officer or soldier, now, or who hereafter may be such
in his majesty's land-service, shall be compelled to continue in the said
service. The motion was seconded by Sir Francis Dashwood; but very poorly
supported in numbers. And at last, on the 19th of April, it was, upon a
division of 139 against 82, put off for two months, so that it was no more
heard of. Had this limitation taken place, such a rotation of soldiers would
have ensued among the common people, that in a few years every peasant,
labourer, and inferior tradesmen in the kingdom would have understood the
exercise of arms; and perhaps the people in general would have concluded, that
a standing army, on whose virtue the constitution of Great Britain seems to
depend, was altogether unncessary Alm. DEB. COM. III.335.
.

Those incendiaries who go about to destroy our constitution, have not blushed
in the same breath to admit, that standing armies have been generally the
instruments of overturning free governments, and to affirm that a standing army
is necessary to be kept in ours; if you ask them against whom, they answer you
very frankly, against the people; if you ask them why, they answer you with the
same frankness, because of the levity and inconstancy of the people. This is
the evil; an army is the remedy. Our army is not designed, according to these
doctors of slavery, against the enemies of the nation. We are confident that
the present army is incapble of being employed to such purposes, and abhors an
imputation which might have been justly cast on Cromwell's army, but is very
unjustly insinuated against the present Bolingbr. REM. HIST. ENG. 273.
.

The great and good lord Russel was accused, among other things, of intending
to seize and destroy the king's guards.

The king's guards! (says Sir Robert Atkins, in his defense of lord Russel, p.
359.) what guards? Whom does the law understand or allow to be the king's
guards for the preservation of his person? Whom shall the court, that tried
this noble lord, whom shall the judges of the law, that were then present, and
upon their oaths, whom shall they judge, or legally understand, by these
guards? They never read of them in all their law books. There is not any
statute law that makes the least mention of any guards. The law of England
takes no notice of any such guards: and therefore the indictment is uncertain.
The king is guarded by the special protection of almighty God, by whom he
reigns, and whose vicegerant he is. He has an invisible guard of glorious
angels.

Non eget Mauri jaculis nec arcu;
Nec venenatis gravida sagittis.
(Creed) Pharetra.
HOR. The king is guarded by the love of his subjects. The next under God, and
the surest guard. He is guarded by the law and courts of justice. The militia
and the trained bands are his legal guard, and the whole kingdom's guard. The
very judges that tried this noble lord, were the king's guards, and the
kingdom's guards, and this lord Russel's guard against all erroneous and
imperfect indictments, from all false evidence and proof, from all strains of
wit and oratory misapplied and abused by council. What other guards are there?
We know of no law for more; king Hen. VII. of this kingdom (as history tells
us) was the first that set up the band of pensioners: since that the yeoman of
the guard: since them certain armed bands, commonly nowadays (after the
French mode) called the king's life guard, rid about, and appeared with naked
swords to the terror of this nation; but where is the law? where is the
authority for them?

It had been fit for the court, that tried this noble lord on this indictment,
to have satisfied themselves from the king's council, what was meant by these
guards; for the alleging and setting forth an overt fait, or open deed, in an
indictment of treason, must be of something that is intelligible by law, and
whereof judges may take notice by law: and herein too, the indictment fails,
and is imperfect.

Barillon writes to his court, that James II. intended to abolish the militia
entirely, and to maintain the army with the money Dalrymp. II.169,
. That both parliament and people disliked this very much, but that the king
^oul^ keep the troops on foot, whether parliament provided for them or not,
knowing that without them he could gain his point by his army and connection
with the French king.

It does our Hen. II. great honor, (says lord Lyttleton LIFE HEN. II. III.356.
) that he was the first author of a regulation for arming his whole people; for
no prince, who desired to govern tyrannically, would have thought of such a
regulation; nor could any country, in which such a law was maintained, be
either enslaved by the crown, or much oppressed by the nobles. It seems indeed
that the ancient constitution of England, had always intended what this statute
of Hen. II. enacted; as all freeholders were required by the common law of the
land to assist in opposing and driving out invaders; but the want of care to
provide the burgesses, and free so^men, who did not hold any fiefs by military
tenures, with proper arms, rendered that obligation of little or no effect;
whereas from this time, the whole community of freemen were bound to have in
their own custody, and transmit to their heirs, the usual arms of a foot
soldier, and those who were worth 16 marks in chattles or rents, were to
provide heavy armor, nay even those who had but 10, were to furnish themselves
with scull-caps and habergeons of iron, together with lances, and to leave them
to their heirs.

Harrington thinks, there ought, in a free country, to be no army, but a
cavalry of the nobility and gentry, and an infantry of the commons.

See 13 Edw. I. cap. 6, for arming the people according to their possessions in
lands STAT. AT LARGE, I.120.
. In the ^ower are the records of the militia grants for cu^^^dy ^f shires,
cities, towns, ports, etc. See the militia acts 25 Edw. III. cap. 8. -- 13 Chapter
II. cap. 6. -- 13 and 14 of the same, cap. 3. -- 15 of the same, cap. 4, etc
Ibid. II. pass.
. There is in Riley's PLAC. PARL. p. 458, an order, to the lord lieutenant of
Northamptonshire, 20 Edw. I. that all who have 40 libratas terrae, have
military arms. This order was founded in reason. Whoever has property, ought to
be in a condition to defend his property. In England the arms are in one set of
hands, and the property in another.

Sir Robert Cotton being consulted 3 Car. II. in a difficult state of affairs,
amongst other things gave this advice at the council table Rushworth, p. 469.
. There must be, to withstand a foreign invasion, a proportion of sea and land
forces. And it is to be considered, that no march by land, can be of that speed
to make head against the landing of an enemy: then it follows, that there is no
such prevention as to be master of the sea. For the land forces, if it were for
an offensive war, the men of less livelihood, were best spared; and were used
formerly to make such wars purgamenta republicae, if we made no farther
purchase by it. But for the safety of the commonwealth, the wisdom of all times
did never entrust the public cause to any other than to such, as had a portion
in the public adventure. And that we saw in 1588, when the care of the queen
and of the council did make the body of that large army no other than of the
trained bands. In the same advice to the king, he lets him know how the people
resented his keeping up an army in the winter, though we were then in war both
with France and Spain. The words are these. The dangerous distastes to the
people are not a little improved by the unexampled course, as they conceive, of
retaining an inland army in winter season, when former times of general fear,
as in 1588, produced none such; and makes them in their distracted fears
conjecture idly, it was rais^^, wholly to subject their fortunes to the will of
power, rather than of law, and to make good some farther breach upon their
liberties and freedoms at home, rather than to defend us from any force abroad.

Queen Mary, (William being in Holland) on the alarm of an invasion from the
Pretender, gives orders to put the militia in readiness. Trained bands of the
cities of London and Westminster, to the number of 10,000, under command of the
lord mayor, were drawn out. The queen goes to see them; was pleased with their
activity and loyalty Tind CONTIN. I.200.
.

The two remarkable victories gained by the ruffian rebels, A. D. 1745, over
the king's troops, show that a militia is not so contemptible as the friends of
a standing army affect to think it See CONTIN. Rap. IX.181, and 222.
.

Though neither commanders, nor men, of the New England militia, who took
Louisburg, A. D. 1745, had ever seen any military service; though the ground
between the place of landing and the town was boggy, unequal, and almost
impassible; though the town was defended by several batteries, particularly one
of 35 cannon of 42 pounds each, a drawbridge, and circular battery of 16 guns,
of 24 pounds each, and at the mouth of the harbor, a battery of 34 guns, 42
pounders; though the walls, ramparts, and bastions mounted 64 guns, and though
there were in the place 10 mortars of 13 inches caliper, and six of nine
inches, and a garrison of 1200 regulars; those militia-men proceeded with all
the regularity and intrepidity of veterans, and took the place accordingly
Ibid. 160.
.

In the year 1749, the number of sailors voted, was 1500, at the same time that
the land forces were to be 18,857. It would have been more natural to imagine
that parliament would vote the large number for the sea service, and the small
one for the land. Accordingly Mr. Nugent observed, that it seemed as if those
who draw up the estimates, had meant them for France, and not for England Alm.
DEB. COM. IV.8.
.

Mr. Thornton moved, A. D. 1751, to bring in a bill to make the militia more
useful. He said he had searched into the causes that rendered the militia weak
and contemptible, and the remedy would not be either difficult or tedious. He
said the militia laws had been spoiled by design, that some villainous clauses
had been artfully intruded into them, which were previously known to be such as
would render them entirely useless. But a well constituted militia in the year
1745 would have saved the nation 3,000,000 l. and though it might cost the nation
10,000 l a year, and there should be occasion to use it but once in thirty
years, which was the space between the two last rebellions, we should then have
had that service for 300,000 l. which has cost us 3,000,000 l. and that it was
evident, that less labor would be lost by 200,000 militia, who would
immediately return to their work, supposing that two days only in a month were
set apart for their exercise, than by 20,000 regular troops, who consider every
species of industry as incompatible with their station, or their duty Alm DEB.
COM. V.19-25-29.
.

The bill was ordered to be committed.

In the year 1756 was published a collection of 43 addresses to the king, and
instructions to members of parliament, from London, Bristol, and many counties,
etc. complaining of the loss of Minorca, and other miscarriages, ^^casioned in
great measure by the want of a militia, to secure the mother country, which
would have allowed sending out a sufficient force to defend Minorca, etc. In 34
of the addresses a militia is recommended. Yet that staunch* old Whig the duke
of Newcastle continued an enemy to the militia, and was the last to come into
it.

Lord Orford, A. D. 1757, set the example to the kingdom by giving orders for
putting the militia act in execution Rapin, CONTIN. IX.559.
.

A. D. 1759, an alarm being brought to England of 3000 hands being at work upon
flat-bottomed boats, and other preparations in France for an invasion, the
government expedited the raising of the militia, which before went on but
heavily Tind. CONTIN. IX.580.
. The king reviewed that of Norfolk, and expressed high satisfaction with them.
Some thought the militia then no way inferior to regulars.

And we all remember what consternation we were in, A. D. 1756, when our
enemies overran almost all our colonies, when we lost Minorca, Oswego, etc.
because we were afraid to send men to their defense, and disgraced ourselves in
the eyes of all Europe by importing foreigners to secure us against the
flat-bottomed invasion, we pretended to apprehend from France. A well-appointed
militia would, at both those periods, have saved the nation's honor.

In the year 1759, king Geo. II. sent a message to both houses, to notify, that
he had information of a designed invasion from France, to the end, that his
majesty may (if he shall think proper) cause the militia, or such part thereof
as shall be necessary, to be drawn out, and embodied, and to march as occasion
shall require LAND. MAG. June, 1759, p. 296.
. The peers thanked the k^^g for his intention to call out and employ the
militia, if necessary, etc. and the commons resolved, that an humble address be
presented to his majesty to give directions to the lieutenants of counties for
carrying the militia act into execution.

Many remember what a condition we were in A. D. 1745, when a handful of
highland ruffians penetrated to the very center of England, and filled the
whole nation with terror and dismay.

That six or seven thousand men unprovided with horses, with magazines, and
many of them with arms, should march from the extemities of Scotland to within
eighty miles of London, through a country that abhorred their manners, and
detested their cause; and that they should return to Scotland without losing
above fifty men by death or desertion, is next to incridible. Upon their
return, they were guilty of many excesses in plundering the inhabitants of the
country, which they had forborne when they marched into England. This was owing
to the chagrin they had conceived at their disappointment; yet they were not
accused of being sanguinary to the people of the country, though it was said in
the skirmish at Clifton some of them called out to give no quarter to the
king's troops. But their success in a great measure may be accounted for by the
dissimilarity of manners between them and their enemies. Bred up in hardy,
active, and and obstemious* courses of life, they were always prepared to
march, and never at a loss for accommodation or provision: they were devoted to
enthusiasm to the cause they were engaged in, and they thought no crime was
equal to the disobedience of the commands of their leaders, who, during their
march into England, sought all means to conciliate the minds of the people to
their interest. The common people of England, on the other hand, having been
long used to pay an army for fighting for them, had at this time forgot all the
millitary virtues of their ancestors. The militia, therefore, was useless, and
few but those who regularly entered into the service of the government chose in
their own persons to venture any thing against the rebels. They depended upon
the army for their protection, and it was found by experience that the unweildy
motions of the regulars gave their enemies a vast advantage, by rendering it
next to impossible to come up with them. This was the real cause of their
performing such amazing marches with so little loss; and of their being able to
hold out so long against so great a superiority of numbers and discipline Tind.
CONTIN. IX.212.


Why may not a militia be made useful Alm. DEB. COM. III.53.
? Why may not the nobility, gentry and freeholders of England be trusted with
the defense of their own lives, estates, and liberties, without having
guardians and keepers assigned them? And why may they not defend these with as
much vigor and courage as mercenaries who have nothing to lose, nor any other
tie to engage their fidelity, than the miserable sixpence a day, which they may
have from the conqueror? Why may not a competent number of firelocks be kept in
every parish, for the young men to exercise with on holy days, and rewards
offered to the most expert, to stir up their emulation? Why may not a third
part of the militia be kept up by turns in constant exercise? Why may not a man
be listed in the militia till he is discharged by his master, as well as in the
army till he is discharged by his captain? And why may not the same horse be
always sent forth, unless it can be made appear he is dead or marred? Why may
not the private soldiers of the army, when they are dispersed in the several
parts of the kingdom, be sent to the militia? And why may not the inferior
officers of the army in some proportion command them? I say, these and other
like things may be done, and some of them are done, in our own plantations, and
the islands of Iersey and Guernsey; as also in Poland, Switzerland, and the
country of the Grisons, which are nations much less considerable than England,
have as formidable neighbors, no seas, nor fleet to defend them, nothing but a
militia to depend upon, and yet no one dares to attack them. And we have seen
as great feats done formerly by the apprentices of London, and in the war by
the Vaudois in Savoy, and Miquelets in Catalonia, and the militia in Ireland,
as can be paralleled in history. And so it would be with us, if the court would
give their hearty assistance in promoting this design; if the king would appear
in person at the head of them, and give rewards and honors to such as deserve
them, we should quickly see the young nobility and gentry appear magnificiently
in arms and equipage, show a generous emulation in outvying one another in
military exercises, and place a noble ambition in making themselves serviceable
to their country. They object, that such a militia as this is a standing army,
and will be as dangerous and much more chargeable. I answer, That there can be
no danger from an army, where the nobility and gentry of England are the
commanders, and the body of it made up of the freeholders, their sons and
servants; unless we can conceive that the nobility and gentry will join in an
unnatural design to make void their own titles to their estates and liberties;
and if they could entertain so ridiculous a proposition, they would never be
obeyed by the soldiers, who will have a respect to those that send them forth,
and pay them, and to whom they must return when their time is expired. For if I
find a man, I will as surely choose one who will fight for me, as a mercenary
officer will choose one, that will. And the governments of king Charles II. and
king James, are witnesses to the truth of this, who debauched the militia more
than ever I hope to see it again, and yet durst never rely upon them to assist
their arbitrary designs, as we may remember, at the duke of Monmouth's
invasion; their officers durst not bring them near his army for fear of a
revolt. Nay, the pensioned parliament themselves turned short upon the court,
when they expected to give them the finishing stroke to their ruin.

I do not think our constitution and liberties will ever be absolutely safe,
until we return to our ancient method, of making military exercises the
diversion and amusement of all ranks of men, and of making it the custom or
fashion for all laymen, at least, to breed themselves up to arms and military
discipline; and if we can accomplish this, I believe it will be granted, we
should then have no occasion for a standing army, or for keeping a greater
number of regular troops in continual pay, than was necessary for the grand^ur
and personal safety of our king and royal family DEB. LORDS, V.308.
.

This strength [says lord Lyttelton, viz. of the national militia, when all the
gentry were soldiers, paid and maintained by the lands they held] could never
fail, as that of a mercenary army must at sometimes, by the wealth of the state
being consumed and exhausted, but continued as fixed as the lands disposed of
in this manner, and ever ready to oppose either foreign invaders, or intestine
rebellion. I may add too, that it was equally fitted to resist any tyranny in a
king, being wholly composed of those men, who, by their property in the realm,
and their rank in the state, were most interested to guard the liberties of the
subject against the crown Lord Lyttelt. HIST. HEN. II.III.95.
. The noble author adds, that though every landholder's being a soldier gave
the barons frequent opportunity of disturbing the peace, yet it was no easy
matter for any of them to exercise their tyranny long, without being checked --
whereas in absolute monarchies [which cannot subsist in countries where the
people of property are armed] the constitution affords no remedy against the
despotism of the prince. A strong recommendation of a militia!

Mr. Thronton, A. D. 1751, made the following remarks in the house of commons
Alm. DEB. COM. V.20.
.

I must not omit to take notice that the militia laws have been opposed by
design; some villainous clauses having been artfully intruded into them, which
were previously known to be such as would render them entirely useless. As this
cannot be denied, I persuade myself, that after a very little reflection, every
gentleman present will concur in my opinion, that some alteration is necessary
with respect to our militia, eit^er to commence now, or at a more convenient
seaso^^ or, at least, at the eve of a commotion, when their assistance shall be
wanted to surmount the danger which we would not prevent. If our militia is not
to be frequently exercised, let there be some law, by which it may be more
effectually raised. Let us no longer acknowledge the importance of a militia in
the preamble of many of our statutes, yet render this very militia ineffectual
by suffering such destructive clauses to remain, as will reduce the statute
itself to a mere form of words, and a dead letter, to the astonishment of other
nations, and the disgrace of our own. Let us, Sir, repeal all the present laws
concerning the militia; we shall then evidently perceive our nakedness, and in
what a defenseless state they will leave us. Let us no longer be amused with
the appearance of a security, which they cannot give; nothing more, surely,
than the discovery of our danger, is necessary to put us immediately upon our
guard; nothing more is necessary to determine us to enact laws which shall be
in effect what the present laws are only in form; and I hope we shall, upon
this occasion, remember the great maxim of Cosmo de Medicis, from whom
Machiavel derived all his political knowledge; Defer not till tomorrow what
can and ought to be done today. A regulation, Sir, by which our country is to
be defended against superstition and slavery, against the fury of an invasion,
or the rapine of rebellion, requires the most mature and dispassionate
deliberation. Shall we, therefore, defer this regulation, till we hear the drum
of an enemy beat to arms? Shall we defer it till every heart throbs with
apprehension, and every mind is confused with anxiety and terror? Till
impatience for obtaining the end shall cause us to mistake the means? Till a
time when a hypocritical zeal for the safety of the public taking advantage of
the confusion, shall bring us into greater danger? Were not the very clauses
that have emasculated our statutes relating to the militia introduced in the
time of public and imminent danger, by designing men, who under a pretense of
increasing our security, took away what security we had?

Let us then in this interval of tranquillity, when the mind is at leisure to
examine and choose, set about changing these ruinous clauses for such as will be
quite proper. Let us now establish our safety upon a firm foundation, by
passing such a law as will furnish this country with a militia equally
effective, more easily raised, and maintained at a less expense than that of
any other nation in the world; let us no longer trust our liberty and our
lives, our religion, our country and our posterity, to a mercenary army, that
has no motive to defend us, but its pay, and no concern for our liberties,
because they have given up their own.

If it should happen, Sir, that a large military force should suddenly be
wanted at a time when the parliament is not sitting, and his majesty is abroad,
how is it to be supplied? Will not the waiting for an act of parliament produce
the most dangerous delay? And will not the same inconveniences follow, that
happened in the year 1745? Inconveniences, which we now feel, and which will
probably be long felt by our posterity. A well constituted militia, Sir, at
that time, would have saved the nation 3,000,000 l. and if it be admitted that
such a militia would be attended with an annual expense to the whole nation of
10,000 l. and that there should be occasion to use it but once in thirty years,
which is the space between the two last rebellions, we should then have that
service for 300,000 l. which has cost us 3,000,000 l. and consequently save
(which would be good economy, instead of superfluous expense) 2,700,000 l.
upon the balance. Besides, those whom the want of this force might encourage to
interrupt our tranquillity, may be deterred from their attempt by observing
that a new regulation has rendered us sufficiently formidable. To prevent is
certainly still better than to cure. These considerations, Sir, appear so
formidable to me, that I cannot think any gentleman will continue to oppose, or
even on any account to delay the measure which they have induced me to
undertake and recommend. But, Sir, lest any gentleman should doubt whether this
measure be practicable, I shall observe, that the establishment of a militia in
any country, where the people are numerous and in^ustrious, is not only
practicable, but easy. Switzerland and Germany, which are poor countries,
thinly inhabited, have their militia, notwithstanding the people must be
necessarily dissipated by the great extent of the lands which they cultivate.
And is a militia impossible in England? A country that is remarkable for its
fertility, and crowded with men, where a few acres afford a plentiful
subsistence, and almost every parish could furnish a regiment. If it be
objected, that this militia cannot be exercised without taking the husbandman
or the manufacturer from his labor, a circumstance which cannot but be hurtful
to a trading nation; I answer, our militia may be exercised on holidays,
according to the practice in Switzerland; but supposing that two days in a
month were to be set apart for this purpose, it is evident that less labor
would be lost by 200,000 militia, who would immediately return to their work
from their exercise, than by 20,000 regular troops, who consider themselves as
gentlemen soldiers, and every species of industry as incompatible with their
station, and indeed with their duty. I would not, however, be thought an
advocate for the total reduction of the army. I know that an army is necessary,
that there must be guards and some troops, at our garrisons, in Gibraltar and
Port Mahon, and a sufficent number of regular forces in Ireland, the islands of
Scotland and the West Indies. But I think such a reduction of the army is
expedient, as would cause a saving equivalent to the expense of 260,000
militia, and that enough would still remain for the above services. This
number, Sir, of 260,000 for the militia was our ancient contingent; and as they
are dispersed through the several counties of this island, will effectually
repress, if not prevent any invasion from abroad, and quell every disb^rbance
that may be fomented at home. They will be always ready in every part of the
kingdom to assist the civil power, as well as to protect our coasts from
insult; coasts of such extent, that if the present standing army was doubled,
it would not be able to secure the island from being plundered in some part or
other, by the daring crew of a buccaneer, or a desperate association of
smugglers. And as it is our coast that principally makes a millitary force of
any kind necessary, what must be our situation, when without any force by which
this coast can be secured, and with scarce a fortified place in the kingdom, we
are not able to bring together 6000 men for the defense of the capital, upon a
sudden and unexpected attack? The marshals Belleisle and Saxe both remarked,
that we must be easily overrun; and it is a common saying among the French,
that England would be only a breakfast: [But then the French must give up the
troops they send against us; because our fleet would effectually out of their
retreat:] And I should be sorry if they should put us to prove the contrary,
before we have a militia established. Need we have a better hint, or stronger
motive to provide for our safety? Fas est ab host doceri. As to the difficulty
of reforming our militia, if it be said that experiment is against me, and that
experiment is stronger than argument; if it be alleged that former attempts to
establish a militia have been ineffectual, it needs only to be considered by
what means these attempts have been made. They were made in consequence of
those very statutes which being perverted from their primary intentions are
evidently felo de se; so that the militia, which was designed to be a regular
and well-disciplined body, is degenerated into a mere mob: But even this mob
has been known to do good service. I will no^ trespass, Sir, upon the
indulgence of the house by proving self-evident propositions: It is sufficient
only to state them. It is of absolute necessity we should have a millitary
force sufficient to defend eleven millions of people, and it is acknowledged on
all hands that our present force is not sufficient. There are but three ways by
which this deficiency can be supplied; first, by a regular army of mercenaries;
secondly, by foreign auxiliaries; thirdly, by a militia. A regular army of
mercenaries we can neither afford to pay for living in idleness, nor spare from
the trades in which they would be otherwise employed. The hiring of auxiliaries
is attended with equal expense, and is yet less to be depended upon: For they
who may be engaged to supply auxiliaries to us, may, when we want them, be
scarce able to defend themselves, as was the case in the unhappy year 1745.
Auxiliaries may be bought off by our enemy at the very minute we want them, or
sent under restrictions, which will render them wholly unserviceable. There
needs not indeed any argument to prove a measure to be impolitic, which has
already incumbered us with debts, that it is scarce possible we should pay, and
has reduced our neighbors, the Dutch, into yet more deplorable poverty and
distress. A militia, which would defend us by men of property, whose interest
is involved in that of their country, and who would only circulate their pay,
and not carry it abroad, must be our only resource. Such a militia, Sir, has
been rejected by those who have had the management of this unhappy country, who
have, for reasons best known to themselves, squandered the public treasure in
vain attempts to obtain from foreign and domestic mercenaries what a militia
only can supply, [the duke of Newcastle, the importer of 12,000 Hessians and
Hanoverians, A. D.. 1756.] Let us then interpose in the behalf of an injured
nation; let us once more connect the civil and military power, and direct their
united efforts to the same end. This, as it will give us strength at home, will
give us reputation abroad. This is advised by Machiavel, as the surest means of
national greatness: This was successfully practiced by the Spartans and Romans
of old, the Goths and ancient Germans; and this is now the glory of the Swiss,
a nation which, however inconsiderable in its extent, no ambitious power has
dared to molest. I therefore humbly move, that leave may be given to bring in a
bill for the good purpose that I have mentioned.

In the year 1758, the ministry pretended to consider the militia as capable of
real service. For we find in that year a message from the king by Mr. Pit,
That he is informed of a French invasion, and may perhaps have occasion for the
militia. The commons return thanks for the information, and address the king to
give orders to the lieutenants of counties to use their utmost diligence in
ordering the militia Alm. DEB. COM. V.237.
.

CHAP. V. Parliamentary Transactions, Speeches, etc. relating to the Army.
THE commons, A. D. 1673, vote the standing army a grievance, and were going to
address the king against it. The king suddenly goes to the house of peers to
prorogue the parliament. The lords, according to their slavish custom, hasten
to attend him. The commons shut their door, and kept black rod out, till they
vote the alliance with France, evil counselors about the king, standing army,
and duke of Lauderdale grievances DEB. COM. I.185.
.

The commons address the king against Lauderdale on account of the army in
Scotland, raised at Lauderdale's instance, which was to be ready to enter
England on command from the privy council, and for openly affirming in council,
that the king's edicts are equal to laws Ibid. 207.
.

It was observed in parliament, A. D. 1674, That neither our ancestors, nor the
people of any country, free, like ours, whilst they preserved their liberties,
did ever suffer any mercenary or standing guards around their prince; but chose
that his safety should be in them, as theirs was in him.

A motion was made, A. D. 1717, for a supply for maintaing the army. Opposed by
Shippen, Windham, Walpole, jacobites and discontented whigs together. The same
Walpole afterward kept up a more numerous army than 18,000, of which number he
complains heavily here Ibid. VI.154.
.

All the arguments in favor of a standing army, Mr. Shippen said, were
reducible to two propositions. 1. That the only danger of continuing the
standing army is the expense of it. 2. That we ought to comply with the number
of forces proposed, because it is demanded by the king, who is the best judge
of our necessities.

He said, it was very extraordinay, that the expense should be thought the only
danger, for that was not the chief argument against a standing army; but the
chief argument was, that the civil and military power could not long subsist
together; that a standing army in time of peace would necessarily impede the
free execution of the laws of the land.

It is the infelicity of his majesty's reign, that he is unacquainted with our
language and constitution, therefore it is incumbent on his ministers to inform
him, that our government does not stand on the same foundation with his German
dominions. That a standing army supposes not only a distrust, but weakness in
the government; and therefore could not promote his majesty's service. He said,
some of the freest and bravest people in Europe had, by this method, lost their
liberties. The civil power was drawn in from time to time, by pretended
exigencies, to allow and maintain an armed force in peace; but they found they
had erected a power superior to themselves; that the soldiery, when they had
tasted the sweets of authority, would not part with it; and that even their
princes began to think, that ruling by an army was a more compendious way of
government, than acting under the restrainsts of law. And now they wear the
chains, and lament the loss of that freedom, which they consented to destroy.

Mr. Shippen said, I know these assertions interfere with what is laid down in
his majesty's speech; but we are to consider that speech as the composition and
advice of the ministry, and are therefore at liberty to debate every
proposition in it; especially those, which seem rather calculated for the
meridian of Germany, than of Great Britain.

It was said, the above words were highly dishonorable to, and unjustly
reflecting on, his majesty's person and government; and therefore it was
ordered, that Wm. Shippen, Esquire. be, for the said offense, committed prisoner to
the Tower.

If the prince of Orange, (says Trenchard HIST. ARMIES, p. 97.
) in his declaration, instead of telling us, that we should be settled upon
such a foundation, that there should be no danger of our falling again into
slavery, and that he would send back all his forces as soon as that was done,
had promised us that after an eight years war (which should leave us in debt
near twenty millions) we should have a standing army established, a great many
of which should be foreigners; I believe few men would have thought such a
revolution worth the hazard of their lives and estates; but his mighty soul was
above such abject thoughts as these; his declaration was his own, these paltry
designs are those of our undertakers, who would shelter their own oppressions
under his sacred name. I would willingly know, whether the late king James II.
could have enslaved us but by an army, and whether there is any way of securing
us from falling again into slavery, but by disbanding the army. It was in that
sense I understood his majesty's declaration, and therefore did early take up
arms for him, as I shall be always ready to do. It was this alone which made
his assistance necessary to us, otherwise we had wanted none but the hangman's.

It is a common evasion of the advocates for the army, that we have only such a
number, 12,000, or 20,000, in England, and that the rest are in Ireland, where
they cannot annoy us, and are necessary there to keep the
raw-head-and-bloody-bones-papists quiet. But neither is there any honest use
for one regiment in England nor in Ireland, the people being, if only half
disciplined, as able as the army both to keep the internal peace, and deter
invaders; of which the histories of all the ages between Richard II. and
Charles I. are vouchers; nor is the keeping an army in Ireland at all less
dangerous to British liberty than in England. Hear Mr. Trenchard: HIST.
STANDING ARMIES, p. 88.
An army kept in Ireland is more dangerous to us than at home: For here, by
perpetual converse with their relations and acquaintance, some few of them
perhaps may warp toward their country; whereas in Ireland they are kept as it
were in a garrison, where they are shut up from the communication of their
countrymen, and may be nursed up in another interest. It is a common policy
amongst arbitrary princes often to shift their soldiers quarters, lest they
should contract friendship among the natives, and by degrees fall into their
interest.

When the duke d'Alencon came over to England, (says Mr. Gordon TRACTS, I.26.
) and for some time had admired the riches of the city, the conduct of queen
Elizabeth, the wisdom of her government, and the magnificence of her court; he
asked her, amidst so much splendour, where were her guards? Which question she
resolved a few days after, as she took him in her coach through the city, when
pointing to the people (who received her in crowds with repeated acclamations)
'These, said she, my lord, are my guards; these have their hands, their hearts,
and their purses, always ready at my command.' And these were guards indeed,
who defended her through a long and successful reign of forty-four years
against all the machinations of Rome, the power of Spain, a disputed title, and
the perpetual conspiracies of her own popish subjects; a security the Roman
emperors could not boast of with their praetorian bands, and their eastern and
western armies.

Were not the French as powerful, says Mr. Gordon TRACTS, I.26.
, in Charles IId's and James Ist's times, as they are in this long and
destructive war, and with a weaker alliance to oppose them? And yet we then
thought a much less army, than is now contended for, a most insupportable
grievance; insomuch that in Charles IId's reign, the grand jury presented them,
and the pension-parliament voted them to be a nuisance, sent Sir Joseph
Williamson to the Tower, for saying, the king might keep guards for the defense
of his person, and addressed to have them disbanded. And now our apostates
would make their court, by doing what the worst parliament ever England saw,
could not think of without horror.

Of 26 Roman emperors, 16 were deposed and murdered by the soldiery. The
Turkish sultans are often massacred by the janissaries. The army under Cromwell
expelled the parliament under which they had fought. Afterward under Monk they
destroyed the government they had set up, and brought back the Stuarts, whom
they were raised t^ expel. Charles II. wisely disbanded them, lest they should
have sent him a packing again. James I^d's army joined the prince of Orange,
who came over on purpose to exclude their worthless master, and all his race.
What better can be expected from men of base principles, who call themselves
soldiers of fortune? Who make murder their profession, and enquire no farther
into the justice of the cause, than how they shall be paid; who must be false,
rapacious and cruel in their own defense. For having no other profession or
subsistence to depend upon, they are forced to stir up the ambition of princes,
and engage them in perpetual quarrels, that they may share of the spoils they
make. Such men, like some sort of ravenous fish, fare best in a storm Gordon's
TRAC^S. I.28.
.

Lord Morpeth moved, A. D. 1733, for an address to the king to reduce the
forces DEB. COM. VII.272.
.

It was urged, that there was a great necessity to reduce the expenses of the
nation; [What was the necessity then compared with that of our times?] and that
it might best be done by reducing the standing army, which in time of peace was
not necessary, but was absolutely inconsistent with the liberties of the people.

To which it was answered, that they might as well address the king to govern
according to law; that it was insinuating that the king did not take the first
opportunity of reducing the army, and thereby lessening the public charge. Did
not every body know, that the king did not wish to reduce the army; but, on
account of his wretched electorate, wished to keep foreign ^^oops in pay, and a
large army ready to fly to its defense, whenever it should be attacked? We had
accordingly at one time in our pay as follows: Hessians per ann. L. 241,259
Sweden, -- L.50,000 Wolfenbuttel, -- L.25,000 Total, -- L. 316,259

The duke of Marlborough brought into the house of lords, the same year, a bill
to prevent the officers of the army below the rank of colonels from being
deprived of their commissions otherwise than by court martial, or address of
parliament DEB. LORDS, IV.186.
. This was intended for detaching military officers from all connection with
and dependence on the ministry. Before the second-reading, many lords called
out for the question; the plain English of which is, Right or wrong, we are
against this bill. Lord Chesterfield checked them severely. Lord Hervey said,
the bill was an open and direct attack on the royal prerogative, (of which
elsewhere) and might overset the constitution, etc. The Truth is, that
supposing parliament itself under ministerial influence, as it was then, and
has been since (I do not say, that is, in our virtuous times, the case) it is
of very little consequence, whether the army be under ministerial influence
through the mediation of parliament or otherwise.

The bill of A. D. 1735, for quartering the army in time of elections DEB.
LORDS, IV.460.
. enacts, That, in order to the securing of the freedom of elections, the law
of 3 Edw. I. be still in force, which forbids on great forfeiture, any man's
disturbing the freedom of election by force, malice, or menacing; and that the
secretary at war do give order for the removal, the day before, or sooner, of
every regiment, troop, etc. to the distance of at least two miles from any
place, where an election for the house of commons or Scotch peers is to be
held; and to remain, till one day after the election; every officer disobeying,
to be cashiered and incapacitated, besides forfeiture; the king's life guards,
the guards attending on any of the royal family, and the garrisons of forts and
castles only excepted; and allowing liberty for military officers and soldiers,
who have right of voting, to attend. As the bill was first drawn, the offenders
were to be tried in the King's Bench; but that constant friend to liberty the
duke of Newcastle, proposed leaving out that clause, by which means the
offending officers were to be left safe in the hands of the secretary at war,
who generally having a good understanding with the ministry, would take care,
that they should not be too severely punished, though they should stay, and
take care of the minister's interest at an election; or in the words of one of
the speakers Ibid 473.
, if an officer should bring his regiment, troop or company, to the very place
of election, and plant centries to attend the poll-books, he knows how he is to
be tried; he is to be tried by his brother officers in a court martial; and I
do not know, but their sentence may be pleaded in bar to any future indictment
brought against him upon the statute of Edw. I. for what interpretations may
hereafter be put upon this last law, cannot now be so easily determined: And
therefore I hope your lordships will pass the bill in the same shape the
learned judges have brought it in, unless some more convincing reason than any
I have yet heard should be given for turning it into a form very different from
that in which it is at present.

And the protesting lords afterward observed on this subject, That it was much
more necessary, that officers and soldiers should be subject to be tried by the
civil power for an offense of this high nature against the constitution, than
for quartering a man contrary to the method prescribed by the act to prevent
mutiny and desertion; for which crime they are at present liable to be tried
and cashiered by the civil magistrate. They likewise observed, that the offense
being against civil society, came much more naturally under the cognizance of
the civil magistrate, than of a court martial, as a court martial on the other
hand, is more competent to try military offenses, than the civil magistrate
DEB. LORDS, IV.485.
.

Afterward another amendment, the wrong way, was made to the bill; by which
the penalties, instead of being inflicted on the offending officers and
soldiers, were to come upon the secretary at war, if he neglected to issue
orders for the removal of the soldiery. Several lords protested, because they
conceived, that the leaving out of the clause would be defeating the effect and
intention of the whole bill Ibid.
.

In the debate about the landforces, A. D. 1735 DEB. COM. IX.52.
. it was argued by those, who were for augmenting the forces to 25,744 men,
that events might happen, [so we are to be at a certain expense on account of
what might happen] that the affair of Poland, the only bone of contention
publicly owned, was what England had little to do with; but if that should.
[what if it should not?] appear not to be the real motive to war; or if success
should [what if it should not?] encourage either side to extend their views,
the balance of power [ay the blessed balance of power, containing in one scale
the enestimable electorate, and in the other the insignificant British empire]
may, at last, be brought into real danger, and then, for the sake of preserving
the liberties of Europe, [why not the liberties of Asia?] upon which the
liberties of this nation will always depend, we must [fight all the windmills
on the continent] take a principal share in the war. In this convincing manner
did the Walpolians in those days argue for increasing the standing army. But
whether it was not by arguments of greater weight, that they gained a majority
in the house, is left to the reader. If the keeping up of a standing army of
40,000 men was now to be debated in the house of commons, our courtiers would
be puzzled to find arguments as plausible as even the above drawn from Poland,
and the bone of contention. It was observed by the opposers of the
augmentation, that several of the princes of Germany, who were more immediately
concerned, remained neutral, though they had, at that time, large armies
unemployed, which would be all sent to the Rhine, if they thought their country
in any real danger, or that France had any design to impose an emperor upon
them. While they remain so secure, while they give themselves so little concern
about the event of the war, why should we be so terribly frightened DEB. COM.
IX.56.
?

The insensible operation of prejudice in the most sincere, and intelligent
minds, is very wonderful; and we cannot be too attentive to ourselves to guard
against it. The great and good duke of Argyle, in the debate, A. D. 1734, on
the motion for addressing the king, to know, by whose advice the duke of Bolton
and lord Cobham were removed from the command of their regiments, spoke as
follows, without laughing; I hope, my lords, there are no gentlemen in the
army, that ever were, or ever can be prevailed on, either to act or speak
contrary to their conscience by the fear of their being turned out of their
commission. I hope, there never will be any such in our army DEB. LORDS. IV.215.
. And afterward Ibid. 216.
, What signifies a prerogative, if the king is never to make use of it, without
being obliged to give an account to parliament of his reasons for so doing?

Without a presumption, (says lord Carteret) that we are in circumstances of
danger, no member of this house can agree to the keeping up of a standing army
of 18,000 men, unless he thinks, such an army ought to be kept up even when the
nation is in the greatest tranquillity and security; a way of thinking into
which I hope no member of this house, nor any British subject, ever will come:
for if this should ever be established as a maxim, a standing army of 18,000
men at least, would become a part of our constitution Ibid. V.239. A. D. 1738.
. [Which prediction we see fulfilled.]

Lord Carteret, on the rejection of the bill for making military officers
independent on the ministry, moved for an address to know who advised the
removal of the duke of Bolton and lord Cobham from their regiments, A. D. 1734
DEB. LORDS, IV.207.
.

The court lords said, This was breaking in upon the king's, that is, the
minister's royal prerogative. Lord Bathurst answered, That it was the duty of
the lords, as the king's hereditary counselors, and was accordingly usual for
them, to desire to be informed, who were the advisers of such exertions of the
royal prerogative, as gave umbrage to themselves, or the people. The army (he
observed Ibid. 211.
) has really no dependence upon parliament. The king indeed depends upon
parliament for a legal power to keep a standing army in time of peace, and for
enabling him to pay them and discipline them according to law; but if in any
future time the parliament should think it necessary to reduce a part of the
army, and of consequence make no provision for their pay, the resolution of
parliament could not break any one regiment, or any part of any one regiment in
the kingdom; the officers might all legally continue in their respective
commands, and if the king then upon the throne should not think fit to break
any of them, they might indeed then very probably think they had a good right
to their pay, as long as they continued in commission, and if they could not
get it by law, they might probably join with the king in raising it contrary to
law, especially if he, foreseeing what would happen, had taken care to model
them for that purpose, which any king might soon do while the army continues
upon the same footing it is on at present. And for this reason, my lords, I
must be of opinion that all these arguments which have been used for showing us
the danger of making an army independent, are so many arguments for showing the
danger of an army's being entirely dependent upon one branch only of our
legislature, and consequently are good arguments for the bill, which was
designed to make the army not entirely dependent upon any one, but upon all the
three branches of our legislature.

A. D. 1740, near forty lords protested against an augmentation of the army,
because nothing less than absolute necessity should prevail for that purpose;
because the ministry had made but an indifferent use of the great forces
employed in the late war; because the pretense of disaffection to government,
rendering a great army necessary, was groundless; [there was much
dissatisfaction with the conduct of the ministry; but that was to be removed by
correcting the errors of government, not by keeping up a formidable and odious
standing army] because the army then on foot, with the fleet, was sufficient to
secure the kingdom against invasion; because our allies might be better
assisted by us with money, than with men; because France is no example for
England, the forms of government in the two countries being totally different;
because adding to the number of officers is increasing the power of the
ministry already too great, especially on the eve of a general election, which
might give an incurable wound to the constitution; because the number of
officers in parliament was continually increasing, and that the ministry expect
officers to promote their schemes in parliament, appeared from a recent fact,
viz. that the four eldest officers of the army were lately displaced, without
any crime having being alleged against them; and ministerial arts in
parliament, can alone destroy the essence of the constitution, and open
violence alone, the forms of it DEB. LORDS, VII.634.
.

There is no end to the evils of a standing army. In this discourse (says Mr.
Gordon) I have purposely omited speaking of the lesser inconveniences
attending a standing army, such as frequent quarrels, murders and roberies; the
destruction of all the game in the country, the quartering upon public, and
sometimes private houses; the influencing elections of parliament, by an
artificial distribution of quarters; the rendering so many men useless to
labor, and almost to propagation, together with a much greater destruction of
them by taking them from a laborious way of living, to a loose idle life; and
besides this the insolence of the officers, and the debaucheries that are
committed both by them, and their soldiers in all the towns they come into; the
ruin of multitudes of women, dishonor of their families, and example to
others; and a numerous train of mischiefs besides, almost endless to enumerate.
These are trivial grievances in respect of those I have treated above, which
strike at the hearts blood of our constitution, and therefore I thought these
not considerable enough to bear a part in a discourse of this nature Gord.
TRACTS, I.28.
.

If the army be continued but a few years, it will be accounted a part of the
prerogative, and it will be thought as great a violation to attempt the
disbanding it, as the guards in Chapter II's. time. It will be interpreted a design
to dethrone the king Trench. HIST. ST. A^M. p. 103.
. Our times prove Mr. Trenchard a true prophet.

Mr. Trenchard Ibid. p. 80.
takes notice, that the prince of Orange, in his first declaration, set forth
all the oppressions of king James IId's reign, excepting only that of his
keeping up a standing army in time of peace; as if he had thought that no very
great grievance. William promised, however, to send home the foreign forces he
brought with him, as soon as he established a free parliament, liberty, and the
protestant religion, etc. [ Burnet blamed him to his face very severely for
establishing corruption] and he kept his word so well, that he and his
parliament had almost finally fallen out, because he would not send away his
Dutch guards; so much are even good kings attached to power, and to armies, the
instrument of power.

After much debating, voting, resolving, and disbanding, the army establishment
was settled. A. D. 1697, at 10,000, landmen, and 3000 marines, which last it
was pretended, were not a land-force, but a water-force. Nor did the ministry
accomplish the parliament's intention.

Thus, (says Mr. Trenchard HIST. OF STANDING ARMIES, p. 87.
) what our courts for above 1000 years together never had the effrontery to
ask, what the pension parliament could not think of without astonishment, what
James's parliament chosen almost by himself, could not hear debated with
patience, we are likely to have the honor of establishing under a deliverance.

Mr. Trenchard Ibid. 84.
throws out broad hints, that the strange and continual mismanagement of sea
affairs in king William's time, could hardly have come about any other way,
than through a design of magnifying the importance of land armies. And I will
take the liberty of likewise throwing out a broad hint, that we have seen the
same traitorous policy carried on at different periods since that time by
various ministers, who were yet very good whigs. Let the reader cast an eye
backward upon all our windmill expeditions to the continent, under William,
Anne, and the two Georges; let him remember the loss of Minorca; let him
observe how many reviews are made of the army, to one survey of the fleet; let
him -- but enough of this.

See Mr. Gordon's Argument against standing armies. TRACTS, Vol. I. in which,
p. 7, he ascribes the preservation of British liberties to his times, A. D.
1697, merely to the smallness of the army. N. B. Our standing force now is
double the number of what was then kept up. He observes, that neither the
Israelites, Athenians, Corinthians, Achaians, Lacedaemonians, Thebans,
Samnites, nor Romans, while they were free, kept any soldiers in pay at home.
They never trusted arms in the hands of any, but those, who were interested in
preserving the public peace. When the fatal ambition of extending their
dominions put them upon conquering kingdoms, they were obliged to keep
mercenary soldiers in the conquered provinces.

Ex illo fluere, ac retro sublapsa referri
Spes Romanorum.
VIRG. Even then they did what they could to prevent a military force from
getting footing in Campania. They made a law, and put up an inscription at the
passage of the Rubicon, Imperator five miles, etc. Let every commander,
soldier, and armed prince, leave here his arms and standard, and not presume to
come in military array, farther than this river. Therefore Julius, having
traitorously and rebelliously violated this law, had nothing left, but to push
on his ambitious schemes, and endeavor to save himself, by the destruction of
his country.

The excellent Mr. Gordon, then goes on to mention some remarkable instances of
free nations losing their liberties by suffering the establishment of mercenary
standing armies. Athens was in this manner enslaved by Pisistratus; Corinth by
Timophanes; Syracuse by Agathocles; Rome by Julius; Milan by Sforza; Sweden by
Gustavus Ericson; England by Cromwell, etc. Mr. Gordon does not quote his
authorities. But they are taken from authentic history.

What I lament (says the writer of LET. TO TWO GREAT MEN A. D. 1760. p. 46.
.) as the greatest misfortune that can threaten the public liberty, is to see
the eagerness with which our nobility, born to be the guardians of the
constitution against prerogative, solicit the badge of military subjection, not
merely to serve their country in times of danger, which would be commendable;
but in expectation to be continued soldiers, when tranquillity shall be
restored, and to be under military command during life. When I see this strange
but melancholy infatuation so prevalent, I almost despair of the constitution.
If it should go on in proportion as it has of late, I fear the time will at
last come, when independence on the crown will be exploded as unfashionable.
Unless another spirit possesses our nobility; unless they lay aside their
military trappings, and think they can serve their country more effectually as
senators, than as soldiers, what can we expect, but to see the system of
military subordination extending itself throughout the kingdom, universal
dependence upon government influencing every rank of men, and the spirit, nay
the very form, of the constitution destroyed. We have generally beaten the
French, and always been foolish enough to follow their fashions. I was,
however, in hopes we should never have taken the fashion of French Government;
[the bill, of this year 1774, for the government of Canada is the very thing]
but from our numerous armies, and the military turn of our nobility, I am
afraid we are running into it as fast as we can. And unless something can be
done to bring back our constitution to its first principles, we shall find that
we have triumphed only to make ourselves as wretched as our enemy; that our
conquests are but a poor compensation for the loss of our liberties; in a word,
that, like Wolf, falling in the arms of victory, we are most gloriously --
undone.

The vesting of courts-martial with the power of punishing with death in times
of peace (the consequence of a standing army) was carried in the house of
commons by a small majority, A. D. 1718, viz. 247 to 229. Walpole (in those
days a flaming patriot) opposed all courts martial. They (he said) who gave the
power of blood, gave blood. Though afterward, when he came to be a minister,
he was better reconciled to standing armies and mutiny bills in times of peace;
he never dared to ask above 17,000 men. We have now doubled that number. His
demand produced a debate every year. He founded his pretended necessity for a
standing army upon jacobitism. In our times, a minister could not bring out the
word without laughing. Our ministers, therefore, found it upon -- upon -- I
profess I do not know what they found it upon, if it be not the necessity of
keeping down the spirit of the people, enraged against corruption and
peculation; or the necessity of finding places in the army, the war-office,
etc. for their too^s, and the sons of their tools.

There is one thing (says lord Gage DEB. COM. XI.388.
fatal above all others, that must be the consequence of so great a body of
troops being kept on foot in England, and will be the finishing stroke to all
our liberties. As the towns in England will not be able much longer to contain
quarters for them, most of those, who keep public houses, being near ruined by
soldiers billeted on them; so, on pretense of the necessity of it, barracks
will be built for quartering them, which will be as so many fortresses with
strong garrisons in them, erected in all parts of England, which can tend to
nothing but by degrees to subdue and enslave the kingdom. But if ever this
scheme should be attempted, it will be incumbent on every Englishman to
endeavor to prevent it by all methods; and as it would be the last stand that
could be ever made for our liberties, rather than suffer it to be put in
execution, it would be our duty to draw our swords, and never put them up till
our liberties were secured, and the authors of our intended slavery brought to
condign punishment.

Several lords protested on occasion of the election of 16 Scotch peers, A. D.
1735, when a batallion of his majesty's forces were drawn up in the Abbey Court
at Edinburgh, and three companies of it were marched from Leith (a place of one
mile distance) to join the rest of the batallion, and kept under arms from nine
in the morning till nine at night, when the election was ended; contrary to
custom at elections, and without any cause or occasion that could be foreseen,
other than the overawing of the electors, we apprehend to be of the highest
consequence both to our liberties in general, and the freedom of elections in
particular; since whatever may have been the pretense, whatever apprehensions
of disorders or tumults may have been alleged in this case, may be equally
alleged on future occasions; especially as we have a number of regular forces
abundantly sufficient to answer such calls: and we apprehend that the
employment assigned to this batallion will give great distrust and uneasiness
to many of his majesty's subjects, who will fear what use may be made of the
rest of that very great number of men now kept up in this nation DEB. LORDS,
14.427.
.

Lord Chesterfield endeavors, A. D. 1741, to show that the strength of this
country consists in our fleets, and not in our land forces. That the fleets of
Great Britain are equal in force and number of ships to the united navies of
the greatest part of the world; that our admirals are men of known bravery, and
long experience, and therefore formidable not only for real abilities and
natural courage, but for the confidence which their presence necessarily
excites in their followers, and the terror which must always accompany success,
and enervate those who are accustomed to defeats; that our sailors are a race
of men distinguished by their ardour for war, and their intrepidity in danger,
from the rest of the human species; that they seem beings superior to fear, and
delighted with those objects which cannot be named without filling every other
breast with horror; that they are capable of rushing upon apparent destruction
without reluctance, and of standing without concern amidst the complicated
terrors of a ^aval war, is universally known and confessed, my lords even by
those whose interest it is to doubt or deny it. Upon the ocean, therefore, we
are allowed to be irresistible, to be able to shut up the ports of the
continent, to imprison the nations of Europe within the limits of their own
territories, deprive them of all foreign assistance, and put a stop to the
commerce of the world. It is allowed that we are placed the sentinels at the
barriers of nature, and the arbiters of the intercourse of mankind. These are
appellations, my lords, which however splendid and o^tentatious, our ancestors
obtained and preserved with less advantages than we possess, by whom, I am
afraid, they are about to be forfeited. The dominion of the ocean was asserted
in former times, in opposition to powers far more able to contest it, than
those whom we have so long submissively courted, and of whom we are now
evidently afraid DEB. LORDS, VIII.12.
.

There is a very remarkable difference between a standing law and a standing
army. A standing law, though it was at first made perpetual, though it should
be observed for ages together, yet it cannot say to the legislature, You shall
not repeal me; but an army, though it was never designed to be perpetual,
though it has been kept up but a small number of years, may say to us, You
shall not disband me; if you attempt to do so, I will turn you out of doors. We
know this by experience; and that experience may convince us that an annual
parliamentary check, such as it is pretended we now have, would be of very
little signification against an army sufficient, and that army provided with a
general resolved, to make the parliament do whatever he had a mind. Oliver
Cromwell, and the army under his command, were faithful to that parliament
which established them, as long as the parliament did nothing to displease
them; but as soon as the parliament began to think of disbanding them, they
immediately, and without any garbling, rebelled against the parliament, and at
last turned it out of doors. And with a part of the same army, we may remember,
that general Monk in a few months, and with but very little garbling, dissolv^d
the rump parliament, by whose authority he at first pretended to act, and
restored king Chapter II. DEB. LORDS. V.395.


The keeping up of a standing mercenary army in a free country, necessarily
destroys the martial spirit and decipline of the rest of the people; and all
histories show that a cowardly people must soon become slaves to a foreign or
domestic army. The keeping up of such an army in a trading country encourages
and promotes a spirit of idleness, lewdness, debauchery, luxury, and
extravagance among all ranks and degrees of men; and every one knows, that the
trade of a country, especially where it has many rivals, can be supported by
nothing but by the industry, virtue, sobriety, and frugality of the people. The
quartering of soldiers, even in this country, is a terrible grievance and a
heavy load upon many private men, and of most dangerous consequence to the
freedom of our elections, because it is a rod in the hand of our ministers,
which they make use of for correcting any corporation, or county, that shall
choose a member whose face is not agreeable to the court. The providing of a
daily support for so many hale, lusty fellows, most of whom have been bred up
to some laborious trade or employment, greatly diminishes our profits by trade,
and consequently our national revenue, which every one knows, depends upon the
labor and industry of our poor. These are disadvantages which are universally
acknowledged; and therefore we ought never to submit to the keeping up a
standing mercenary army, but in cases of the most urgent necessity; nor ought
we at any time to keep up a more numerous mercenary army than the present
necessity evidently requires DEB. LORDS, V.252.


The witty earl of Chesterfield Ibid. 269.
, answering the wi^e duke of Newcastle's arguments for keeping up what was
then, A. D. 1738, called a numerous army, viz. 18000 men, speaks as follows.

I need not, I believe, my lords, trace the noble lord in his travels over
Europe, in order to extinuate the dangers he has endeavored to pick up, for
showing the necessity we are under at present for keeping up such a numerous
army. I think all the dangers he has mentioned, either abroad or at home,
depend upon may be's, which must always subsist. A minister may die -- a prince
may have ambitious views -- a prince's success may raise the jealousy of others
-- his misfortunes may revive their hopes -- there may be a design to invade
us, though we have not at present the least item of it -- Spain may refuse to
do us justice, or may be assisted by the French, though we have yet no reason
to expect either the one or the other -- A plot for an insurrection may be
forming, though we have not at present the least intimation of any such thing,
not even from common reports or surmises -- And all these may be's, or
possibilities, will become probabilities, or certainties, if we should reduce
our army. Are these arguments, my lords, that can convince any man in the
kingdom of our being under a present necessity for keeping up a numerous
standing army in time of peace?

If a parliamentary army (says he DEB. LORDS, V.268.
) kept up from year to year becomes an affair of course, I can see no reason
for not establishing it by a perpetual law. I wish the bill now before us had
been a bill of such a nature. Such a bill would have made people sensible of
their danger; whereas by the method we are in, we are like to have a perpetual
army palmed upon us, under color of an annual bill. An army kept up by a
perpetual law, would be as much an army kept up by consent of parliament, as an
army perpetually kept up by an annual bill. I can see no difference between the
one and the other: they are both dangerous, and equally dangerous to our
constitution; and were thought so by the whole nation, except a few courtiers,
in the reign of Chapter II. when the custom of keeping up a few regular troops
under the denomination of guards, was first introduced. I do not know how the
words unless with consent of parliament, crept into the claim of right; for
from the journals of parliament it appears, that the house of commons in Chapter
II.'s time were of opinion, that the keeping up a standing army in time of
peace was inconsistent with our constitution, whether that army was kept up
with or without the consent of parliament. In their resolutions there is no
such exception; and if the keeping up a standing army in time of peace be
wrong, as it must be, if it be inconsistent with our constitution, I am sure
the sanction of parliament, whether by an annual or perpetual law, cannot make
it right.

It is no argument Ibid. 273.
, my lords, to say, we have kept up an army for a great many years without
being sensible of any danger. A young fiery ^orse is never brought at* once to
submit to the curb, and patiently to receive the rider upon his back. If you
put the bit into his mouth without any previous preparation, or put a weak* and
unskilful rider upon his back, he will probably break the neck of his rider;
but by degrees you may make him tamely submit to both. A free people must be
treated in the same manner: by degrees they must be accustomed to be governed
by an army, by degrees that army must be made strong enough to hold them in
subjection. If you should at once attempt to govern your people by a military
power, and before they are a little prepared for the yoke; if you should mount
your army upon them before it has gathered strength to keep its seat in the
saddle, your people would probably break the necks of those that attempted to
ride them. But we have already, for many years, been accustoming our people to
be governed by an army, under pretense of making use of that army only to
assist the civil power; and by degrees we have been for several years
increasing the number, and consequently the strength of our army.

To pretend that our liberties DEB. LORDS, V.278.
can be in no danger from our army, because it is commanded by gentlemen of the
best families and fortunes in the kingdom, is an argument I am surprised to
hear made use of. For our liberties ought to depend upon our constitution, and
not upon the honor of the gentlemen of our army. I can, it is true, depend
upon the honor of those who are at present the officers of our army; but my
dependence is not founded upon their being gentlemen of family or fortune: It
is founded upon their personal characters only. I have the honor to be
acquainted with many of the chief officers of our army: I know their honor,
and the regard they have for the liberties of their country; and upon that
knowledge, I can depend. If I were not acquainted with them, I should have but
little regard to their being gentlemen of family and fortune: for in all
countries where arbitrary power has been established, many gentlemen of the
best families and fortunes, have* through fear or ambition, become the tools of
ministers, and have assisted or suffered them to sacrifice the liberties of
their country.

Lord Carteret afterward observes DEB. LORDS, V.249.
, That all the nations around, and especially France, were cultivating commerce
and manufactures. That this made it necessary for England to study all possible
means for reducing the price of her manufactures, in order to be on an equal
foot with her neighbors. That a reduction of the army was one of the most
obvious measures for lessening taxes, and reducing manufactures. [How much
stronger is that argument now, when we have more than doubled the national
debt!] So far, says he, have we been from being frugal; and saving upon this
article, or indeed, any other article of public expense, that we have for many
years kept up a more numerous standing army than was in my opinion necessary;
and upon most of the other articles we are every year increasing, instead of
diminishing. Our civil list revenue has been increased from 4 or 500,000 l. to,
I may say, near a million a year. The expense of our army at home has been of
late years increased: the expense of our land forces in the plantations,
Minorca, and Gibraltar, has been increasing for several years, and is this year
higher than it was the last: The expense of Chelsea hospital is every year
increasing; and as we are almost every year creating some new post, or adding
some new officer to the management and collection of our public revenue, this,
I believe, is a hidden and dangerous sort of expense, which has been vastly
increased of late years, and is every year increasing. Many smalls, my lords,
make a great, as we may see by comparing our present annual revenue with what
it was forty or fifty years ago. Before the revolution, the whole of the public
expense, which the people of this nation were annually lo^ded with, was but
about two millions. Now what we call the current expense, which the parliament
provides for every year, amounts to above two millions besides the civil list,
the interest growing due every year to our public creditors, and the sinking
fund, which are provided for by established, perpetual revenues; and as the
civil list revenue may be computed at near one million, the interest growing
due upon our public funds at near two millions, and the sinking fund at above
one million yearly, we must reckon that the people of this nation are now, even
in time of peace, loaded with a public expense of six millions, instead of the
two millions, which was the highest sum they were ever loaded with in time of
peace, before the late happy revolution.

Mr. Lyttleton (since lord Lyttleton, lately deceased) on the subject of the
standing army, spoke as follows in the house of commons, A. D. 1739 DEB. COM.
X.413.
.

As I can see no good use that can be made of these troops, and as I will not
suppose that any bad one (...) intended, I must conclude they are kept for
ostentation alone. But is it for his majesty's honor to put the luster of his
crown, to put his dignity upon that, in which he may be rivalled by the petty
prince of any little state in Germany? For I believe there are few of them now
that cannot produce at a review an army equal to ours, both in number and show.
If the greatness of a state is to be measured by the number of its troops, the
elector of Hanover is as great as the king of England. But a very different
estimation ought to be made of our greatness; the strength of England is its
wealth and its trade: Take care of them, you will be always formidable: lose
them, you are nothing; you are the last of mankind. Were there no other reasons
for reducing the army, it should be done upon the principle of economy alone.
It is a melancholy thought to reflect how much we have spent, and to how little
purpose for these 16 years past. Sir, could it be said, We are indeed loaded
with debt; but for that charge we have increased our reputation, our commerce
flou^^shes, our navigation is safe, our flag is respected, our name honored
abroad, -- could this be said, there is a spirit in the people of England which
would make them cheerfully bear the heaviest burdens -- On the other side,
could an opposite language be held, could it be said, We have indeed no
victories, no glory to boast of, no eclat, no dignity; we have submitted to
injuries; we have borne affronts; we have been forced to curb the spirit of the
nation; but by acting thus, we have restored our affairs, we have paid our
debts, we have taken off our taxes, we have put into the power of the king and
parliament, to act hereafter with more vigor and weight; -- could this be
said, this also might be satisfactory. -- (...) to have failed in both these
points, at the same time by a conduct equally inglorious and expensive, to have
lost the advantages both of war and peace, to have brought disgrace and shame
upon the present times, and national beggary upon ages to come, the consequence
of which may be national slavery; such a management, it such a management can
be supposed, must call down national vengeance upon the guilty authors of it,
whosoever they be, and the longer it has been suspended, the more heavy it will
fall.

Mr. Shippen, A. D. 1739, spoke on this subject as follows DEB. COM. X.407.
.

Can it be thought, that our influence at foreign courts depends upon the
number of landforces we keep in continual pay? Nor, Sir; our influence depends
upon the riches and number of our people, and not upon the number of our
regular regiments, or the appearance they make at a review. We have many
thousands that would make as good an appearance in the day of battle if their
country were in danger, though they are not at present masters of all the
punctilios proper only for a review. We have a navy, which no nation in the
world can equal, far less overcome, by which we may carry the dread of this
nation into every country that is visited by the occean: And we have money,
notwithstanding the bad use we have made of so long a peace, to hire as as many
foreign troops as we can have occasion for, and to support them as long as we
can have any service for them. Therefore, while we are unanimous amongst
ourselves, while our government possesses the hearts and affections of the
people in general, which every virtuous and wise government must necessarily
do, this nation must always have a great influence upon the counsels of every
court in Europe, nay of every court in the world, where it is necessary for us
to extend our influence. From hence we may see, Sir, that in this nation we can
never have occasion for keeping up a great number or any number of regular
troops in order to give weight to any negotiations; and if any power in Europe
should refuse to observe or perform the treaties they have made with us, we
ought not to seek redress by negotiation. We may make a demand; but it is
beneath the dignity of a powerful people to sue for justice. Upon the first
refusal or affected delay, we ought to compel them, not by keeping an army at
home, which would be ridiculous, but by sending an irresistible fleet, with an
army on board to ravage their coasts; or by getting some of their neighbors,
with our assistance, to attack them; both which will always be in the power of
every government of this country, that preserve their influence abroad by
preserving the affections of the people at home; and that without keeping any
number of regular troops always in pay; for whilst the spirit of liberty, which
is the nursing mother of courage, is preserved among our people, we shall never
want a great number of brave men of a^l degree amongst us, that will be ready
to venture their lives in the cause of their country; and such men may in a few
weeks be sufficiently disciplined for action, though they might not perhaps
observe all the punctilios so exactly as a parcel of idle mercenary fellows,
who have had perhaps nothing to do for seve^ years together, but to dance
through their exercises. The keeping up of a standing army in this nation, can
never therefore be necessary, either for preserving our influence amongst our
neighbors, or for punishing such of them as shall-offend us; and with respect
to our own defense, as we have no frontier but the ocean, while we preserve a
superiority at sea, a popular government in this country can never be under the
least necessity of keeping up any land forces, especially if they would take
care to have our militia but tolerably armed and disciplined; for no nation
will be mad enough to invade us, while we are united among ourselves, with a
handful of troops, who must either all die by the sword, or be made prisoners
of war; because we could by means of our navy prevent their being able to
return. And if any of our neighbors should prepare to invade us with a great
fleet and a numerous army, we should not only have time to prepare for their
reception, but we might lock them up in their ports by means of our navy, or we
might give them enough to do at home by stirring up some of their neigbours
upon the continent to invade them.

In consequence of our attachment to continental measures, armies (says lord
Bolingbroke) grew so much into fashion, in time of war, among men who meant
well to their country, that they who mean ill keep them still up in the
profoundest peace; and the number of our soldiers in this island alone is
almost double to that of our seamen. That they are kept up against foreign
enemies, cannot be said with any color. If they are kept for show, they are
ridiculous. If they are kept for any other purpose whatever, they are too
dangerous to be suffered. A patriot king, seconded by ministers attached to the
true interest of their country, would soon reform this abuse, and save a great
part of this expense; or apply it in a manner preferable even to the saving it,
to the maintenance of a body of marine foot, and to the charge of a register of
thirty or forty thousand seamen. But no thoughts like these, no great designs
for the honor and interest of the kingdom, will be entertained, till men who
have the honor and interest of the kingdom at heart arise to power Bolingbr.
ID. PATR. KING, 196.
.

At Carthage (says Mountague) their military institution was such that the
power of their generals in the field was absolute and unlimited; and if their
conduct was approved of, generally continued to the end of whatever war they
were engaged in. They had no occasion for the dangerous resource of a dictator.
The watchful eye of their standing court martial, the committee of 104 of their
ablest senators, was a perpetual and never failing check upon the ambition or
ill behavior of their generals Montague, 357.
.

Our method of trying delinquents, (says lord Carteret) either in the land or
sea service, by a court martial composed of their respective officers, has been
judged liable to many objections, and has occasioned no little discontent in
the nation. For as their enquiry is restricted to a particular set of articles
in each service, I do not see how a commanding officer, vested with a
discretionary power of acting, can strictly or properly come under their
cognizance, or ever be liable to their censure, unless he is proved guilty of a
direct breach of any one of those articles. But as a commander in chief may
easily avoid any offense of that nature, and yet upon the whole of his conduct
in any expedition, be highly culpable; a court martial thus circumscribed in
their power of enquiry, can never be competent judges in a cause where they are
denied a proper power of examining into the real demerits of the supposed
o^fender. Much has been said about trying offenses of this nature like other
criminal cases by juries. A scheme which at the very first sight must appear
absurd and impracticable to the ^^tional and unprejudiced. As therefore
instruction is the true end and use of all hist^^y, I shall take the liberty of
offering a scheme drawn from that wise and salutary institution of the
Carthaginians, which is, That a select standing committee be appointed, to be
composed of an equal number of members of both houses, chosen annually by
balloting, with a full power of inquiring into the conduct of all commanders in
chief without any restraint of articles of war; and that after a proper
examination the committee shall refer the case with their opinion upon it to
the decision of his majesty. This scheme seems to me the least liable to
objections of any I have yet met with. For if the members are chosen by
ballot^ing, they will be less liable to the influence of party. If they are
chosen annually, and refer the case to the decision of the crown, which is the
fountain of justice as well as mercy, they will neither incroach upon the royal
prerogative, nor be liable to that signal defect in the Carthaginian committee,
which sat for life, and whose sentence was final without appeal.

His late majesty [ Geo. I.] even after the war with Spain was begun, made a
reduction of his landforces, and told his parliament he did so, because he
thought his fleet sufficient not only to give a check to the ambitious views of
Spain, but to compel them to agree to reasonable terms. The event, accordingly,
answered his expectations: for by means of his fleet, he soon convinced the
Spanish court how vain it was for them to contend with this nation. -- This is
an example, which ought now to be followed. I wish it had always been
followed.' Speech against the standing army, A. D. 1738 DEB. LORDS. V.247.
.

He then goes on to show, that there is no more occasion for an army on account
of the domestic state of affairs, than he had shown there was an account of
foreign. That there might be discontents; but there was no reason to apprehend
disaffection. That there had been some mobs and tumults: but that it did not
follow, that therefore an army must be kept up. A law, says he, which the civil
power is unable to execute, must either be in itself oppressive, or it must be
such a one as gives a handle for oppression. I hope this house will always have
penetration enough not to pass a law which is in itself oppressive, or at least
the goodness to repeal it, as soon as it appears to be so; and I hope we shall
always have virtue and courage enough to send that magistrate or that officer
to Tyburn, who shall dare to make an oppressive use of any law we give our
consent to. Therefore if there be any laws now in being, which cannot be
executed by the civil power, we ought to enquire into them, and the use that is
made of them, in order to amend or repeal them; and to contrive some other
methods or laws for answering those ends, for which they were intended. Surely
we are not to make a sacrifice of our constitution and liberties, by
establishing a military government for the support of oppressive or dangerous
laws, which through inadvertency or want of foresight have been agreed to,
either by ourselves or our ancestors. But suppose, my lords, that the mobs and
tumults which have lately happened, and the opposition that has in some cases
been made to the civil magistrate, have proceeded from nothing of an oppressive
nature in any of our laws, nor from the oppressive use that has been made of
any of them, which I hope is the case; yet experience has taught us that
regular troops are far from being proper or effectual instruments, for
preventing such tumults, or for aiding the civil magistrate in the execution of
our laws. The late atrocious murder committed by the mob at Edinburgh was
perpetrated within a few hundred yards of a whole regiment of regular troops;
and even here in Westminster, nay even within the verge of the court, we know
that great affronts have been offered to the government, and some murders
committed by mobs within the view of our regular troops. It is impossible, my
lords, to make our regular troops proper or effectual instruments for quelling
mobs, or for enforcing the laws of their country, unless you lodge the civil as
well as military power in the officers of your army; and such a regulation, I
am sure, no lord of this house would agree to, nor would any officer of our
army, I hope, desire to see it established.

The following is part of one of the parliamentary speeches for a place-bill.
In separating it from the rest, I have cut off the name of the speaker. It is
much to the purpose on this subject.

The keeping up of a standing army in this island in time of peace, was always,
till the revolution, deemed inconsistent with our constitution. Since that time
indeed, we have always thought the keeping up of a small number [not 50,000;
for that is in my humble opinion a great number] of regular troops is necessary
for preserving our constitution, or at least the present establishment. How far
this may be right, I shall not pretend to determine. But I must observe, that
the famous scheme for overturning our constitution, which was published in the
year 1629, required but 3,000 foot for this purpose; and if Charles I. had, in
the year 1641, been provided with such a number of regular troops upon whom he
might have depended for overawing the mob of the city of London, his fate, I
believe, would have been very different from what it was. I am very far from
thinking that such a very small number, even now that our people are so much
difused to arms, would be sufficient for overturning our constitution; but
there is a certain number which would be infallibly sufficient for this
purpose, and it is not easy to determine how near we may now be come to that
number. Now suppose, we are come within 2 or 3,000 of that number, and that a
minister, in order to render his success against our constitution infallible,
should, upon some specious pretense or other, desire the parliament to consent
to an augmentation of 2 or 3,000 men to our army; can we suppose that such a
small augmentation upon a plausible pretense, would be refused by a parliament
chiefly composed of officers and placemen? Can we suppose that any man would
risk his losing a lucrative employment, by voting against such a small
augmentation? Some civil powers to be executed by civil officers, and some
military powers to be executed by a standing army or a standing militia, are
certainly necessary in all governments: I am afraid it is impossible to
preserve a free government, when all those powers are lodged in one single man;
but when they are not only lodged in one single man, but greatly increased
beyond what is necessary for the support of a free government, I am sure the
freedom of that government must be soon at an end; and it is very hard to
distinguish between the powers necessary for the support of a free government,
and these that are sufficient for establishing an arbitrary one. The partition
is so thin, that it may easily be mistaken, and certainly will be mistaken by
most of those who are under a temptation to judge partially in favor of
arbitrary power.

Part of Sir Charles Sedley's speech in parliament on the bill for disbanding
the army, A. D. 1699 DEB. COM. III.190.
.

I hope my behavior in this house has put me above the censure of one who
would obstruct his majesty's affairs. I was as early in the apprehensions of
the power of France as any man. I never stuck at money for fleets, armies,
alliances, or whatever expenses seemed to have the preservation of our new
settled government for their end. I am still of the same mind; but that was
war, and this is peace; and if I differ from some worthy gentlemen who have
spoke before me, they will be so just as to believe it is not about the end,
but the means, that we contend. Some may think England cannot be safe without a
standing army of 30,000 men; and will tell us the king of France has 200,000 in
pay disciplined troops; that all our neighbors are armed in another manner
than they were wont to be; that we must not imagine we can defend ourselves
with our ordinary and legal forces. All this is very material, and would have
great weight with me if England were not an island accessible only by sea, and
in that case not till the invaders have destroyed our navy, which is or may be
made superior to any force that can be brought against us. It is very difficult
to land forces in an enemy's country; the Spanish armada was beaten at sea, and
never set foot on English ground; his present majesty with all the shipping of
Holland could bring over but 14,000, or 15,000 men, and that so publicly, that
nothing but an infatuated prince would have permitted their landing. Our
attempt upon Breast shows us that it is easy with a small force to prevent an
^ssault from the other side of the water. As we are capable of being attacked
in several places, so it may be urged as reason for several troops more than
our finances can bear; but if we burden the people thus far in peace, it may
tempt some to wish for war again; every change carrying a prospect of better
times, and nothing can make worse times than a standing army of any number of
men will at present. If we are true to ourselves, 10,000 men are enough; and if
not, 100,000 are too few.

If we had improved the militia, we might have had at this time 5000,000 men
tolerably disciplined. This would have put the power into the hands of the
people, where only it can be safe.

Mr. Hutcheson, in his speech on the forces for 1718 DEB. COM. VI. Append. p.
46.
, observes, That no legislator ever founded a free government, but he avoided
this Charybdis [of a mercenary army] as a rock against which his commonwealth
must certainly be shipwrecked, as the Israelites, Athenians, Corinthians,
Achaians, Lacedaemonians, Thebans, Samnites and Romans; none of which nations,
whilst they kept their liberty, were ever known to maintain any soldiers in
constant pay, within their cities, or ever suffered any of their subjects to
make war their profession; well knowing that the sword and sovereignty always
march hand in hand; and therefore they trained their own citizens and
inhabitants of their territories about them, perpetually in arms; and their
whole common wealths, by this means, became so many formed militias. A general
exercise of the best of their people in the use of arms, was the only bulwark
of their liberties. This was reckoned the surest way to preserve them both at
home and abroad, the people being secured thereby as well against the domestic
affronts of any of their own citizens, as against the foreign invasions of
ambitious and unruly neighbors. Their arms were never lodged in the hands of
any, who had not interest in preserving the public peace, who fought pro aris
et focis, and thought themselves sufficiently paid by repelling invaders, that
they might with freedom return to their own affairs. In those days there was no
difference between the citizen, the soldier, and the husbandman; for all
promiscuously took arms when the public safety required it, and afterward laid
them down with more alacrity than they took them up. So that we find among the
Romans, the best and bravest of their generals came from the plough,
contentedly returning when the work was over, and never demanding their
triumphs 'till they laid down their commands, and reduced themselves to the
state of private men. Nor do we find this famous common wealth ever permitted a
deposition of their arms in any other hands, 'till their empire increasing,
necessity constrained them to erect a constant stipendiary soldiery abroad in
foreign parts, either for the holding or winning of provinces. Then luxury
increasing with dominion, the strict rule and dicipline of freedom soon abated,
and forces were kept up at home; which soon proved of such dangerous
consequence, that the people were forced to make a law to employ them at a
convenient distance; which was, that i^ any general marched over the river
Rubicon, he should be declared a public enemy. See above page 441.

Though we should admit, that an army might be consistent with freedom in a
commonwealth, yet it is otherwise in a free monarchy; for in the former, it is
wholly at the disposal of the people, who nominate, appoint, discard, and
punish the generals and officers as they think fit, and it is certain death to
make any attempt upon their liberties; whereas in the latter, the king is
perpetual general, may model the army as he pleases, and it will be called high
treason to oppose him. This subject is so self evident, that I am almost
ashamed to undertake the proof of it. For if we look through the world, we
shall find in no country, liberty and an army stand together; so that to know
whether a people are free or slaves, it is necessary only to ask, Whether there
is an army kept up amongst them? This truth is so obvious, that the most
barefaced advocates for an army do not directly deny it, but qualify the matter
by telling us that a number not exceeding twenty or thirty thousand are a
handful to so populous a nation as this. Now I think that number may bring as
certain ruin upon us, as if they were as many millions; and I will give my
reasons for it. It is the misfortune of all countries, that they sometimes lie
under an unhappy necessity to defend themselves by arms against the ambition of
their governors, and to fight for what is their own; for if a prince will rule
us with a rod of iron, and invade our laws and liberties, and neither be
prevailed upon by our miseries, supplications, nor tears, we have no power upon
earth to appeal to, and therefore must patiently submit to our bondage, or
stand upon our own defense; which if we are enabled to do, we shall never be
put upon it, but our swords may grow rusty in our hands; for that nation is
surest to live in peace, that is most capable of making war; and a man that
has a sword by his side, shall have least occasion to make use of it. Now I
say, if a king has thirty thousand men beforehand with his subjects, the
people can make no effort to defend their liberties without the assistance of a
foreign power, which is a remedy most commonly as bad as the disease; and if we
have not a power within ourselves to defend our laws, we are no government. For
England being a small country, few strong towns in it, and these in the king's
hands, the nobility disarmed by the destruction of tenures, and militia not to
be raised but by the king's command, there can be no force levied in any part
of England, but must be destroyed in its infancy by a few regiments; for what
will twenty or thirty thousand naked unarmed men signify against as many troops
of mercenary soldiers. What if they should come into the field, and say, You
must choose these and these men your representatives? Where is your choice? What
if they should say, "Parliaments are seditious and factious assemblies, and
therefore ought to be abolished? What is become of your freedom? If they should
encompass this house and threaten, if the members do not surrender up their
government they will put them to the sword; What is become of your
constitution? These things may be done under a tyrannical prince, and have been
done in several parts of the world. What is it that causes the tyranny of the
Turks at this day, but servants in arms? What is it that preserved the glorious
commonwealth of Rome, but swords in the hands of its citizens? I will add here,
that most nations were enslaved by small armies. Oliver Cromwell left behind
him but twenty-seven thousand men; and the duke of Monmouth, who was the
darling of the people, was suppressed with two thousand; nay, Caesar seized
Rome itself with five thousand, and fought the battle of Pharsalia, where the
fate of the world was decided, with twenty two thousand. And most of the
revolutions of the Roman and Ottoman empires since, were caused by the
pretorian bands, and the court janissaries; the former of which never exceeded
eight, nor the latter twelve thousand men. And if no greater numbers could make
such disturbances in these vast empires, what will double or treble the force
do with us? And they themselves confess it when they argue for an army; for
they tell us we may be surprised with ten or fifteen thousand men from France,
and having no regular force to oppose them, they will over^un the kingdom.

The fear of an invasion is no argument for an army; because a sufficient fleet
to intercept invaders in their return, with a sufficient militia to give them a
proper reception upon their arrival, is prefe^able to an army, which must be
scattered in different pa^ts of the kingdom, and could not be brought together
to resist the invaders before they had done a great deal of mischief.

It was observed by Mr. Pulteney DEB. COM. VII.38.
in the house of commons, A. D. 1729, in a debate on the number of forces for
that year, that one fundamental argument for the establishment of our liberties
in the Bill of Rights is, that the keeping up a standing army in time of peace
is contrary to law; that accordingly, after the peace of Ryswick, the greatest
part of the army was disbanded; and, though upon the just fear of a new war,
the parliament complimented king William with an establishment of 10,000 men,
yet the same was not obtained without opposition; many honest and sober men
among the warmest sticklers for the revolution, looking upon it as an
encroachment on our liberties, and being justly apprehensive it would prove a
dangerous precedent: that during the late war our land forces, together with
those in our pay, amounted to above 200,000 men, the load of which still lies
heavy upon us; but after the peace of Utrecht, there was a general reduction,
except about 12,000 men; that upon the late king's accession, when the
rebellion broke out in Scotland and England, the army was indeed augmented with
several regiments, an^ other additional troops, but these were again reduced
not long after; that in the year 1727, upon the prospect of the great dangers
that were apprehended from the treaty of Vienna, an augmentation of about 8000
men was moved for in this house, but the same was warmly opposed; nor was it
granted, but upon assurance that this expense should cease, as soon as the
extraordinary occasion that called for it was over: that the event has shown
that most of those apprehensions were grundless and chimerical.

On the superior importance of the navy to the army, M. Potter Alm. DEB. COM.
IV.268.
spoke excellently in the house of commons, A. D. 1751, as follows;

I am really astonished, Sir, when I consider how inconsistent some gentlemen
are, when they argue for a number of land forces to be kept in the pay of the
public in time of peace, and when they argue for a number of seamen to be kept
in the pay of the public. When the question before us is about the number of
land forces to be kept up in time of peace, they never once think of the vast
number of brave landmen we have, and I hope always shall have in this island:
These are with them, upon that occasion, of no account with regard to the
strength or power of the nation, which they then say consists only in the
number of men we have in actual pay, and subject to the slavish rules of
military law; and when any one proposes a diminution of the number, they
exclaim, What, will you weaken the hands of government? Will you dismiss those
men upon whom alone you can depend for your protection? But when the question
comes about the number of seamen to be kept in public pay, they then tell you
that the maritime power, or strength of this nation, does not depend upon the
number of seamen you have in the actual pay of the public, but upon the numbers
that belong to the wide extended British dominions, though many of them are at
all times dispersed over the whole face of the globe. These you may reduce,
these you may dism^^s at pleasure, without exposing yourselves to any dang^^.
From this way of arguing, Sir, would not an ignorant stranger conclude that the
government has no power over the land men of this island, even in the case of
an invasion, or that a man might learn to be a complete sailor in a few days,
but could not learn to be a complete soldier in a few years? One of these
conclusions an ignorant stranger would certainly draw; and yet, with respect to
both, we know that the case is directly the reverse. Upon any threatened
invasion his majesty has as much power over the land men, that is to say, the
mili^^^, so far as relates to the proper use to be made of them, as he has over
the seamen; nay more, because the landmen are always at home, but great numbers
of our seamen are at all times abroad; and do not we all know, that to make a
complete seaman requires several years service at sea, and early in life too?
Whereas the most ignorant land man may learn all the business of a common
soldier in a few days: I mean all the fighting business; for as to all the
punctilios of a review, I shall grant, it may require some months before he can
go through them with dexterity.

Mr. Sandys DEB. COM. XII.127.
, A. D. 1740, spoke as follows on the inconveniences to which the subjects are
reduced by quartering soldiers.

Sir, It is an unfortunate state we are fallen into, that every session of
parliament must be attended with new laws, or new clauses in old laws, for
oppressing the industrious subject, and endangering the liberties of the
country. It is impossible to levy high duties upon the necessaries or
conveniences of life; it is impossible to keep up numerous standing armies
without such laws, or such clauses, and yet we have, for twenty years, been
contriving how to continue and increase both. The high duties we groan under
were introduced for supporting a heavy and expensive, but necessary, war; but
how the keeping up of a numerous standing army in time of peace was introduced,
I can no other way account for, than by supposing, that it was necessary for
supporting unpopular destructive measures, and a hated minister. I am surprised
to hear the forcible quartering of soldiers upon public or private houses
insisted on, as if it wear a necessary means for the support of our government.
Sir, if we were to attend strictly to our constitution, even as it stands at
present, we ought in no mutiny bill to admit of the quartering of soldiers,
even on public houses, except for a few nights in their march from one garrison
to another, or for the first night after they arrive at the place designed for
their residence. Though we now keep up, though we have long kept up, a great
number of standing forces in time of peace, yet, properly speaking, they are no
more than is supposed to be necessary for guards and garrisons; and
accordingly, the resolution annually agreed to in this house is, That the
number of effective men to be provided for guards and garrisons in Great
Britain for the ensuing year, shall be such a number as is then thought
necessary. Before the revolution we had guards and garrisons, even in time of
peace. But before the revolution, and some years after, we had no quartering of
soldiers, either upon public or private houses, in time of peace, without the
consent of the owner. On the contrary, by an express law, the latter end of Chapter
IId's reign, it was enacted, That no officer, military or civil, or other
person, shall quarter or billet any soldier upon any inhabitant of this realm
without his consent; which law stood in force till near the end of the year
1692, when the first law was made for quartering soldiers in public houses.
Before that year, Sir, our guards and garrisons, by which, I mean, all the
soldiers we had on foot, even in their marching from one place to another, were
obliged to quarter themselves, as other travelers do, in houses that were
willing to receive them; and when they came to any garrison, or place where
they were to reside, every officer and soldier provided quarters for himself,
in which, I believe, there was no inconvenience found; for when soldiers behave
civilly and are agreeable to the people, there will always be houses enough,
either public or private, that will be glad to receive them for what they are
able to pay, unless there be a greater number of them than the place can
conveniently accomodate. From the revolution to the year 1692, we had a sort of
civil war amongst ourselves; for Ireland was not entirely reduced till the end
of the year 1691, and as inter arma silent leges, perhaps, during that time
some liberties were taken with the laws in respect to quartering or billeting
of soldiers. But in the year 1692, the domestic tranquillity of the three
kingdoms being re-established, the parliament began to think of restoring the
laws to their pristine force. However, as we were then engaged in a dangerous
foreign war, and upon that account obliged to keep a greater number of troops
than usual; and as our troops were often obliged to march in great bodies
either from one place of the kingdom to another, as danger threatened, or
through the kingdom in their way to Flanders, the parliament saw it would be
necessary to provide quarters for them upon their march in a different manner
from what had been allowed by law; and therefore, in the mutiny-bill for the
ensuing year, which then first begun to be entitled, A bill for punishing
officers and soldiers who shall mutiny or desert their majesty's service, and
for punishing false musters, and for the payment of quarters," the clause for
quartering soldiers in public houses, without consent of the owner, was
introduced, and has ever since remained in all the mutiny bills passed to this
day; for a favorite power once granted to the crown is seldom recovered by the
subject without some remarkable revolution in our government.

The transaction which, in the year 1741, occasioned the following reprimand,
shows, in a very striking light, the evil of a standing army, and one of the
bad uses it may be put to.

Mr. Blackerby, M. Howard, Mr. Lediard! You having at the bar of this house
yesterday confessed, that you did send for and cause to come, on Friday the
eighth day of May last, a body of armed soldiers, headed by officers in a
military manner, who did take possession of the church yard of St. Paul, Covent
Garden, near the place where the poll for the election of citizens to serve in
this present parliament for the city of Westminster, was taken, before the said
election was ended; and you having acknowledged your offense therein, the house
did order you to attend this morning, to be brought to the bar to be
reprimanded on your knees by me for the said offense. I cannot better describe
to you the nature of this offense you have been guilty of than in the words of
the resolution this house came to upon their examination into that matter,
which are; That the presence of a regular body of armed soldiers at an election
of members to serve in parliament is an high infringment of the liberties of
the subject, a manifest violation of the freedom of elections, and an open
defiance of the laws and constitution of this kingdom. And it is impossible, if
you will consider the terms of this resolution, but that you must have in your
breast the deepest sorrow and remorse for this rash act of yours, which, if it
had not been duly animadverted upon, might have given the most dangerous wound
to the constitution of this free country that perhaps it ever had felt. -- This
country is free, because this house is so; which this house can never be, but
from the freedom of election to it: And amidst the too many ways for violating
that, none can be more pernicious, because none more quick, decisive, and
parmanent, than what you might unhappily have set a precedent for, and which
might have grown to an extremity under the specious and ready pretenses of
fears and necessity that supersede all law; a precedent that would have
received an authority from the place it began in, the seat of the government
and legislature of this kingdom. Necessity, which is to take place of law, must
be lest to the circumstances of every particular case. The act must be presumed
to be wrong, enquired into as such, and excused only by the clearest proofs,
that the necessity for it was real. What you have done is against one of the
most essential parts of the law of the kingdom. Has any real necessity been
shown for it? There might be fears; there might be some danger: but did you try
the strength of the law to dispel those fears, and remove that danger? Did you
make use of those powers the law has invested you with as civil magistrates for
the preservation of the public peace? No: You deserted all that; and wantonly,
I hope inadvertently, resorted to that force the most unnatural of all others,
in all respects, to that cause and business you were then attending, and for
the freedom of which every Briton ought to be ready almost to suffer any thing.
More might be said; but you have acknowledged your offense, and have asked
pardon for it. This has disposed the house to lenity. Use it not to lessen the
sense of your crime; but to raise in your hearts that sense of gratitude you
owe to the house for that gentle treatment you have met with on this occasion;
in expectation of which you are discharged, paying your fees DEB. COM. XIII.104.
.

The confidence, which a standing army gives a minister, puts him upon carrying
things with a higher hand, than he would attempt to do, if the people were
armed, and the court unarmed, that is, if there were no land-force in the
nation, but a militia. Had we at this time no standing army, we should not
think of forcing money out of the pockets of three millions of our subjects. We
should not think of punishing with military execution, un-convicted and
un-heard, our brave American children, our surest friends and best customers.
We should not insist on bringing them over to be tried here, on pretense of no
justice to be had in America, in direct violation of the constitution,
especially when we had so late an experience of their candor in acquitting an
officer of the army charged with murdering one of their people, even since the
commencement of the present unhappy dissentions. We should not think of putting
them in a state of subjection to an army rendered independent on the civil
magistrate, and secured from punishment even for the most atrocious offense, by
their being to be sent 3000 miles to their mock-trial, across an ocean, where
the persons and things indispensably necessary for their trial, cannot possibly
be had. We should not think of putting a part of our western dominions, as
large as all Europe, under French law, which knows nothing of our inestimable
privilege of trial by jury, whilst our kings at their coronation solemnly swear
to govern all the subjects by the English law. We should not think of giving
our kings power to make not only laws, but legislators, for a vast multitude of
the subjects, without concurrence of lords and commons. We should not propose
to give the sanction of parliament to popery, in direct opposition to
revolution-principles. We should not think of giving papists the power of
making laws obligatory upon protestants, with severe penalties and sanctions.
We should not imagine a government for a vast colony, vested merely in a
governor and council, always supposed to be creatures of the court, without so
much as the name of an assembly of representatives, without the people's having
any hand in the making of their own laws, which is the very perfection of
slavery. We should not think of resuming unforfeited charters. We should not
think of making governors, the needy, and often worthless dependents of our
corrupt court, lords paramount over our brave colonists, by giving them the
power of appointing and removing judges at their pleasure, while the governors
themselves, however tyrannical, are liable to no impeachment by the people. We
should not -- but there is no end to observations on the difference between the
measures likely to be pursued by a minister backed by a standing army, and
those of a court awed by the fear of an armed people.

I had collected a great deal more upon the ARMY, than what is here laid before
the public. Fearing lest I should tire the reader, I have suppressed many
speechs and quotations on this head, as well as most of the others I have
treated of. What I have published will show plainly, that the ablest men, and
best citizens of this realm, have looked upon a mercenary army in times of
peace, whether allowed from year to year, or established for perpetuity, as a
dangerous and alarming abuse in a free country. They opposed it strenuously in
treatises, pamphlets, and speeches. And we let it pass annually without
question or dispute. Whether the fears of our ancestors, or our indifference,
are most reasonable, time will show. By the aspect of the present times, it is
not improbable, that the point may very soon be decided.

END of the SECOND VOLUME.
MAY 30th, 1755.
The following PROPOSALS, are laid before those Gentlemen, who choose to
promote SCIENCE in America, for PRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION, SKETCHES OF THE
HISTORY OF MAN.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

By HENRY HOME, Lord KAIMS.

Author of Elements of Criticism, etc.

AMERICA: Printed by ROBERT BELL, Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA. M, DCC, LXXV.

A SPECIMEN CIVIL SOCIETY. Different FORMS OF GOVERNMENT compared.
THE finest countries have been depopulated by despotism; witness Greece,
Egypt, and the lesser Asia. The river Menam, in the kingdom of Siam, overflows
annually like the Nile, depositing a quantity of slime, which proves a rich
manure. The river seems to rise gradually as the rice grows; and retires to its
channel when the rice, approaching to maturity, needs no longer to be watered.
Nature beside has bestowed on that rich country variety of delicious fruits,
requiring scarce any culture. In such a paradise, would one imagine that the
Siamite^ are a miserable people? The government is despotic, and the subjects
are slaves: they must work for their monarch six months every year, without
wages, and even without receiving any food from him. What renders them still
more miserable is, that they have no protection either for their persons or
their goods: the grandees are exposed to the rapacity of the king and his
courtiers; and the lower ranks are exposed to the rapacity of the grandees.
When a man has the misfortune to possess a tree remarkable for good fruit, he
is required in the name of the King, or of a courtier, to preserve the fruit
for their use. Every proprietor of a garden in the neighborhood of the capital
must pay a yearly sum to the keeper of the elephants; otherwise it will be laid
waste by these animals, whom it is high treason to molest. From the seaport of
Mergui to the capital, one travels ten or twelve days through immense plains of
a rich soil, finely watered. That country appears to have been formerly
cultivated, but is now quite depopulated, and left to tigers and elephants.
Formerly, an immense commerce was carried on in that fertile country:
historians attest, that in the middle of the sixteenth century above a thousand
foreign ships frequented its ports annually. But the King, tempted with so much
riches, endeavored to engross all the commerce of his country; by which means
he annihilated suc^essivly mines, manufactures, and even agriculture. The
country is depopulated, and few remain there but beggars. A despotic government
stifles, in the birth, all the bounties of nature, and renders the finest spo^s
of the globe equally sterile with its barren mountains.

I have insisted longer upon the deplorable effects of despotism than perhaps
is necessary; but I was fond of the opportunity to justify, or rather applaud
the spirit of liberty so eminent in the inhabitants of Britain. I now proceed
to compare different forms of government, with respect to various particulars;
beginning with patriotism. Every form of government must be good that inspires
patriotism; and the best form to invigorate that noble passion is a common
wealth founded on rotation of power, where it is the study of those in office
to do good, and to merit approbation from their fellow citizens.

CONDITIONS.
I. THE American EDITION of LORD KAIMS's SKETCHES OF THE HISTORY OF MAN, will
be printed on the same Paper and Type with the Specimen, in Four Volumes, and
the Book will be neatly bound and lettered in two Octavo Volumes.

II. The Price to Subscribers will be Twenty-four Shillings Pennsylvania
Currency. No Money expected until the delivery of the Book.

III. When One Hundred Encouragers are pleased to approve of these Conditions
by the Favor of subscribing their Names, the Work will be immediately carried
into Execution, and finished with proper Expedition. -- Subscriptions are
gratefully received by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street, WILLIAM WOODHOUSE in
Front-Street, and by all, who are pleased to lend their helping Hand toward
the Promotion of American Manufactures.

POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, etc.
After treating of our duty to the Gods, it is proper to teach that which we
owe to our Country. For our Country is, as it were, a secondary God, and the
first and greatest Parent. -- It is to be preferred to Parents, Wives,
Children, Friends, and all things, the Gods only excepted. -- And if our
Country perishes, it is as impossible to save an Individual, as to preserve one
of the fingers of a mortified hand. HIEROCLES. VOL. III.

The curious, and a^l gentlemen and ladies who wish to be very knowing in the
things of the polite world, are informed that ROBERT BELL, of Third-street,
Phi^adelphia, has now for sale, complete in four volumes, with neat bindings,
the greatly admired and much desired

LETTERS written by the Right Honorable PHILIP DORMER STANHOPE, Earl of
CHESTERFIELD, to his son, PHILIP STANHOPE, Esquire late envoy extraordinary at the
court of DRESDEN Together with several other pieces on various subjects.
Published by Mrs. EUGENIA STANHOPE, Price, 1 l. 6 s.
SAID BELL has also for sale, a great variety of new and old BOOKS, among
which are, BLACKSTONE'S Commentaries on the laws, 5 vols. 3 l. 11 s. 3 d.
ROBERTSON'S History of Charles the 5th, 3 vols. 1 l. 10 s. LELAND'S New History
of Ireland, 4 vols. 2 l. BURGH'S Political Disquisitions, 3 vols. 1 l. 16 s.
PRIESTLEY and FURNEAUX'S curious letters to BLACKSTONE, on religious liberty,
and other interesting subjects, 11 s. 3 d. PROFESSOR Cullen's Lectures on the
materia medica, 1 l. 10 s. SWAN'S British Architect; or Builders Treasury.
Illustrated with upwards of one hundred Designs and Examples, curiously
engraved on sixty folio Copper plates, 1 l. 10 s. HAWKESWORTH'S New Voyage of
Captain Cook round the World, for making discoveries in the Southern
Hemisphere, 2 vols. 16 s.


ALL THESE ARE AMERICAN EDITIONS.

AND SUBSCRIPTIONS are now received at said BELL'S, for promoting an American
Edition of HOME LORD KAIMS his SKETCHES of the HISTORY OF MAN, in four volumes
octavo, price 1 l. 10 s.


ALSO: FOR SWAN's Collection of Designs in Architecture, including curious
designs of stone and timber bridges, containing above one hundred and twenty
plates, curiously engraved on copper -- This work to be published ^n numbers
monthly, at five shillings each. The whole to ^e comprehended in twelve
numbers, at 3 l.


N B. The first number of this useful and ornamental work, will be published on
wednesday the twentieth of September, 1775, at that very remarkable Epoch,
when the Americans laid down external commerce, took up arms, and internal
manufactures, to support their constitutional liberty against the despotic
e^c^oachments of royal, ministerial, and parliamen^ary Traitors; because false
delicacy then vanished from royal names and royal things, as utterly
insufficient to va^^ish over criminal actions, although attempted by men that
once were, and might have continued majestic.

POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS; OR, An ENQUIRY into public ERRORS, DEFECTS, and
ABUSES. Illustrated by, and established upon FACTS and REMARKS, extracted from
a Variety of AUTHORS, Ancient and Modern.

CALCULATED To draw the timely ATTENTION of GOVERNMENT and PEOPLE, to a due
Consideration of the Necessity, and the Means, of REFORMING those ERRORS,
DEFECTS, and ABUSES; of RESTORING the CONSTITUTION, and SAVING the STATE.

By J. BURGH, GENTLEMAN; Author of the DIGNITY of HUMAN NATURE, and other Works

VOLUME THE THIRD AND LAST.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street; and WILLIAM
WOODHOUSE, in Front-Street. M, DCC, LXXV.

NAMES OF THE ENCOURAGERS.
Those Names, to which no Residence is annexed, are mostly Inhabitants of
PHILADELPHIA.
HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire GENERALISSIMO of all the FORCES in
AMERICA, and a MEMBER of the HONORABLE, the AMERICAN CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

A.
William Allen, Esquire Andrew Allen, Esquire -- Alston, Esquire Ricloff Albertson, Captain
Charles Alexander, John Appowen, James Ash, Rev. Francis Allison, D. D.
Vice-Provost of the College of Philadelphia, Robert Aitken, 7 Sets, Garrit
Abeel, New York, Rev. Patrick Alison, Baltimore.
B.
John Barron, Esquire Thomas Barclay, Richard Bache, James Budden, John Bayard,
John Benezet, Elias Boyse, Thomas Bryant, Abraham Bickley, William Bingham,
Captain Barber, Joseph Borden, Esquire Bordenton, John Bull, Esquire White-Marsh, John
Sayer Blake, Esquire Wye-River, Maryland, John Broom, New York, Samuel Broom,
New York, Abraham Brasher, New York, Captain John Berrian, New York, Abraham
Brinckerhoff, New York.
C.
Samuel Chase, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of Maryland, in the
Honorable, the American Continental Congress, John Cadwalader, Esquire Lambert
Cadwalader, Esquire George Clymer, Esquire one of the Treasurers, for the Honorable the
American Continental Congress, George Campbell, Esquire William Coats, Esquire Thomas
Coombe, Esquire John Copperthwait, John Clark, John Cox, James Cresson, Joseph
Crukshank, Thomas Cuthbert, Peter T. Curtenius, New York.
D.
John Dickinson, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of Pennsylvania, in
the Honorable, the American Continental Congress, John De Heart, Esquire one of the
Delegates, for the Province of New Jersey, in the Honorable, the American
Continental Congress, Silas Deane, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province
of Connecticut, in the Honorable, the American Continental Congress, 2 Sets,
John Donnell, 2 Sets, Joseph Dean, Sharp Delany, Benjamin Davis.
E.
George Eichelberger. Joel Evans, Ezekiel Edwards* Manuel Air.
F.
J^seph Falconer, Persifor Frazer, Samuel Fairlamb, Chester.
G.
Christopher Gadsden, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of
South Carolina, in the Honorable, the American Continental Congress, Robert
Gouldsborough, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of Maryland, in the
Honorable, the American Continental Congress, George Gray, Esquire Henry Hale
Graham, Esquire Benjamin Gibbs, George Graaff, Francis Gurney, Bartram Galbreath,
Doctor George Glentworth, Samuel Garrigues, Rev. John Gordon, M. A. Rector of
St. Michael's Parish, Talbot County, Maryland, Lewis Gordon, Esquire Northampton,
Pennsylvania, Hugh Gain, New York, 7 Sets, William Green, N. Y. 14 Sets,
William W. Gilbert, New York.
H.
John Hancock, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of Massachusett's
Bay, in the Honorable, the American Continental Congress, 2 Sets, Michael
Hillegas, Esquire one of the Treasurers, for the Honorable, the American
Continental Congress, Thomas Hartley, Esquire York-Town, Pennsylvania, Samuel
Hunter, Esquire Northumberland, Pennsylvania, Captain William Heysham, Thomas Hale,
-- Howell, James Humphreys, jun. 4 Sets, Benjamin H^lme, New York, John
Heyleger, Esquire New York, Robert Hys^op, New York, Samuel H^ke, New York.
I.
Thomas Jefferson, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of Virginia, in
the Honorable, the American Continental Congress, Robert Strettle Jones, Esquire
Francis Johnston, Esquire Jared Ingersol, Esquire The Honorable Thomas Jones, Esquire one
of the Judges of the Supreme Court, New York, James Irvine, George Irvine,
Matthew Irvine, William Jackson, David Jenkins, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
K.
Henry Kelly, London, Reynold Keen, Robert Knox.
L.
Thomas Lawrence, Esquire Jacob Laughlin, Samson Levy. Hugh Lloyd, Benjamin Loxley,
John Lardner, Samuel Leacock* The Library Company of Philadelphia. John
Lambert, New Jersey, John Lasher, jun. New York.
M.
Colonel Thomas Mifflin, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Province of
Pennsylvania, in the Honorable, the American Continental Congress: And
Quartermaster General, of the American Army. Henry Middleton, Esquire one of the
Delegates, for the Province of South Carolina, in the Honorable, the American
Continental Congress. Thomas McKean, Esquire one of the Delegates, for the Counties
of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex, on Delaware, in the Honorable, the American
Continental Congress. J^^n Magill, Esquire Robert Macgill, 4 Sets. Samuel Miles.
Esquire James Mease, James Milligan, Jonathan Mif^lin, jun. Israel Musgrove, ^oseph
Musgrove, Thomas Montgomery, William Montgomery, Samuel Meredith, Edward
Milner, Samuel Massey, Charles Massey, Robert Morris, Anthony Morris, jun. John
Mitchell, Christopher Marshall, Robert McKnight, William Mary's, Joseph Miller,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, 14 Sets, Alexander M Dougall, Esquire Col. of a
Provincial Regiment, in the pay of New York, Benjamin McKessom, Esquire N. Y. Lewi^
Mo^ris, Esquire New York, Robert Henry M^Donald, of Trelawny, in the Island of
Jamaica.
N.
George Noarth, Esquire of Reading, William Neufville, Esquire Charlestown,
South Carolina.
O.
Christopher Offalsuvrick, Eleazar Oswald, New Haven.
P.
John Park, Esquire Assistant-Quarter Master-General, of the American Army, John
Patton, Thomas Pryor, Thomas Proctor, Miles Pennington, Jeremiah Platt,
New York. Daniel Phoenix, New York.
R.
George Ross, Esquire one of the Delegates for the Province of Pennsylvania, in the
Honorable the American Continental Congress, Joseph Reed, Esquire Secretary to his
Excellency General Washington, Jacob Rush, Esquire Doctor Benjamin Rush, William
Rush, George Rutter, Thomas Roker, Joseph Rhoads, Samuel Reily, Bernard Romans,
William Robinson, John Le Chevalier Room, Esquire New York, Henry Remsen,
New York. James Rivington, N. Y. 7 Sets.
S.
John Sullivan, Esquire one of the Delegates for the Province of New Hampshire, in
the Honorable the Continental Congress; and Brigadier General in the American
Army, This Gentleman has sa^d, It is better that 50 Thousand Men should be
slain, (himself among the slain), th^n that 50 Thousand Men should live to be
made slaves. The Editor of this American Edition of the P^lit^c^l
Disquisitions, has taken the Liberty of eternizing this Sentence, as far as
this work can preserve it, because he esteems it a saying worthy of the most
renowned Heroes, Legislators, and Philosophers of Antiquity, and may be adopted
by Heroes that now exist, and also by Heroes yet unborn, whose expa^ded Souls
can so^r above the Fetters of s^avery, and gloriously dare to fight for the
safe conveyance of the ri^hts of mankind, do^n to the (...) Pos^e^ity. N B.
Should any of Mr. Lukewarm's Faimly, who are always numerous among the timid,
buy this Book, and unhappily think he has too much for the Money -- He may
immediately apply the f^llowing remedy -- Either tear the offensive le^f out --
Or more e^^ectually to punish the forward Editor -- Burn the whole Book -- That
there may be immediate Occasion for a Second Edition -- For some Minds are
strangely squeamish, and think it a great Crime for a struggling Bookseller, to
support or pro^u^e Opinions, although he charge nothing for them; but had he
fortunately excised upon his Customers, so as to be es^eemed rich, his Nonsense
would soon be converted into ster^ing Sense, and his Obtrusions would then be
very acceptable, for the Slaves of Riches, would then support him with a most
infallible Reason -- Hear him! -- Hear him! -- For he is very rich. Roger
Sherman, Esquire one of the Delegates for the Province of Connecticut, in the
Honorable the American Continental Congress, James Smith, Esquire York-Town, Peter
Scull, Esquire of Reading, ^amuel Smith, jun. William Smith, George Schlosser,
William Straker, Joseph Saunders, James Skinner, Enoch Story, Doctor Peter
Sonmans, Archibald Shields, Sassafras Neck, Maryland, Zebulon Seaman, Esquire
Queen's County, New York.
T.
Charles Thomson, Esquire one of the Delegates for the Province of Pennsylvania, in
the Honorable the American Continental Congress. William Thompson, Esquire Colonel
of the Pennsylvania Regiment of Riffle-men, or Wood-rangers, now in the
American Army. Richard Thomas, William Tailor, Elisha Tyson, Robert Townsend,
New York. Isaiah Thomas, Worcester, New England.
W.
James Wilson, Esquire one of the Delegates for the Province of Pennsylvania, in
the Honorable the American Continental Congress. Anthony Wayne, Esquire John
Willcocks, Esquire John Wallace, Joshua Maddox Wallace, Joseph Wilson, Francis
Wade, Joseph Watkins, jun. Casper Weitzel, Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
Y.
Doctor Thomas Young, Thomas York.
Z.
The Reverend John Joachim Zubley, one of the Delegates, for the Province of
Georgia, in the Honorable the American Continental Congress. David Zubley, of
Acton, near Savannah, in Georgia.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEN the Author wrote the General Preface to these Disquisitions, he proposed
to lay before the Public more than three volumes of the materials he had
collected. What these three volumes contain, is the most interesting to the
Public; and his health daily breaking, disqualifies him for proceeding farther
at present.

LONDON, June 25, 1775.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME III.
BOOK I. Of Manners.
CHAP. I. Page 1. Importance of Manners in a State. CHAP. II. Page 59. Luxury
hurtful to Manners, and dangerous to States. CHAP. III. Page 98. Of the public
Diversions, and of Gaming, and their I^fluence on Manners. CHAP. IV. Page 119.
Of Duels. CHAP. V. Page 1^0. Of Lewdness. CHAP. VI. Page 150. Influence of
Education upon Manners. CHAP. VII. Page 159. Of Punishments. CHAP. VIII. Page
172. Able Statesmen apply themselves to forming the Manners of the People.
CHAP. IX. Page 246. Of the liberty of Speech and Writing on Political Subjects.
CONCLUSION. Page 267. Addressed to the independent Part of the People of
GREAT BRITAIN, IRELAND, and the COLONIES.
POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, etc.
BOOK I. Of Manners.
CHAP. I. Importance of Manners in a State.
THIS work professes itself to be an inquiry into public errors, deficiencies,
and abuses. And surely there is no grosser error, no deficiency more fatal, no
abuse more shameful, than a nation's losing the proper delicacy of sentiment
with regard to right and wrong, and deviating into a general corruption of
manners. Has ambition raised a tyrant, a Caesar, or a Charles, to despotic
power? The sword of a Brutus, or the axe in the hand of the man in the mask, in
a moment sets the people free. Has an aristocracy of thirty tyrants, as at
Athens, seized the liberties of a country? A bold Thrasybulus Corn. Nep. VIT.
THRASYS*
may be found, who coming upon them in their secure hour, shall, by means
perhaps seemingly very inadequate, blast all their schemes, and overthrow the
edifice of of tyranny they had set up, burying them in its ruins. The people
thus set free, if the spirit of liberty be not extinct among them, and their
manners generally corrupt, will preserve their recovered liberties. If their
manners be so universally debauched, as to render them incapable of liberty,
they will, as the degenerate Romans, upon the fall of Julius, set up an
Augustus in his place. It is impossible to pronounce with certainty concerning
any country, as the angel did of the devoted cities, that the decline of
manners in it is universal and irretrievable. But where that is the case, the
ruin of that country is unavoidable, the disease is incurable. For vice
prevailing would destroy not only a kingdom, or an empire, but the whole moral
dominion of the Almighty throughout the infinitude of space.

The excellent Montesquieu Montesq. II.119.
teaches the necessity of manners, in order to gain the effect proposed by
laws; and brings several instances where the manners defeated the purpose of
laws. Nothing, he says, could appear to the Germans more unsupportable than
Varus's tribunal. They cut out the tongues of the advocates, who pleaded at the
bar, with these sarcastic words, as related by Tacitus, Viper! give over
hissing. The trial ordered by the emperor Justinian, on occasion of the murder
of the king of the Lazians, appeared to that people a horrible and barbarous
thing. Mithridates, king of Pontus, haranguing against the Romans, reproaches
them, above all things, with the formalities of their courts of justice. The
Parthians could not endure a king, set over them by the Romans, because, having
been educated in a commonwealth, he was free and affable. Even liberty and
virtue to an enslaved and vicious people, become odious and insupportable, as a
pure air is disagreeable to those who have lived in a marshy country. No people
ever lost the spirit of liberty but through the fault of their government.

Liberty cannot be preserved, if the manners of the people are corrupted; nor
absolute monarchy introduced, where they are sincere, says Sidney ON GOVERNMENT.

When Antigonus, and the Achaians, restored liberty to the Spartans, they could
not keep it; the spirit of liberty was gone.

When Thrasybulus delivered Athens from the thirty tyrants, liberty came too
late; the manners of the Athenians were then too far gone into licentiousness,
avarice, and debauchery. There is a time, when a people are no longer worth
saving.

When the Tarquins were expelled, Rome recovered her liberty. When Julius was
stabbed, Rome continued in slavery. What occasioned such different consequences
from the same measure in this same country at different periods? In the times
of the Tarquins, Rome was incorrupt; in those of Caesar, debauched. Even in the
dictator's times, a few more Catos and Brutuses would have restored liberty.
For the people are always interested against tyranny, if they can but be
properly headed. Half the firmness the Dutch showed against the Spanish
tyranny, would emancipate France.

When the Romans were defeated by Hannibal, most of their allies forsook them.
But Hiero king of Sicily saw that the constitution of the republic was still
sound, and rightly concluded, that she would recover. He would not have thought
so in the times of Lucullus, of Cinna, Sylla, etc. when corruption was wasting
all like a pestilence.

Il ne faut pas beaucoup de probite, etc. Great probity is not essentially
necessary for the support of a monarchy, or despotic government. The force of
laws in the former, in the latter the arm of the prince lifted up, commands
all. In a popular government, another engine is necessary, viz. virtue; because
nothing else will keep up the execution of the laws, and the practice of what
is right Montesq. I.31.
. This sentiment is oracular. And what then is the prospect we have before us?

Where the manners of a people are gone, laws are of no avail. They will refu^e
them, or they will neglect them. There are in our times more of the laws
ineffectual, than those that operate. And on every occasion of misbehaviour, we
hear people cry, there ought to be such or such a law made; whereas, upon
inquiry, it is perhaps found that there are already several unexceptionable
laws upon the head standing; but, through want of manners, a mere dead letter.

If all parts of the state do not with their utmost power promote the public
good; if the prince has other aims than the safety and welfare of his country;
if such as represent the people do not preserve their courage and integrity; if
the nation's treasure is wasted; if ministers are allowed to undermine the
constitution with impunity; if judges are suffered to pervert justice and wrest
the law; then is a mixed government the greatest tyranny in the world: it is
tyranny established by a law; it is authorized by consent, and such a people
are bound with fetters of their own making. A tyranny that governs by the
sword, has few friends but men of the sword; but a legal tyranny, (where the
people are only called to confirm iniquity with their own voices) has on its
side the rich, the timid, the lazy, those that know the law, and get by it,
ambitious churchmen, and all those whose livelihood depends upon the quiet
posture of affairs: and the persons here described compose the influencing part
of most nations; so that such a tyranny is hardly to be shaken off. Men may be
said to be enslaved by law or their own consent under corrupt or degenerate
republics, such as was the Roman commonwealth from the time of Cinna till the
attempts of Caesar; and under degenerate mixed governments, such as Rome was,
while the emperors made a show of ruling by law, but with an influenced and
corrupted senate, to which form of government England was almost reduced, till
the King came over to put our liberties upon a better foot Daven. II.300.
.

Plato DE REPUBL. IV. in fine.
calls virtue the health of the mind, and vice its disease and disorder. That
nation is in a dreadful way, in which almost every mind is diseased and
disordered.

The ancient politicians placed their whole dependence for the safety of their
governments, on the virtue and patriotism of their people. Now we place our
security in our commerce, our fleet, our treasures, our ministry's skill in
managing a house of commons. Formerly the fortunes of private men were the
strength of the state. Now the public money is the object of the general
avarice. The great kingdoms and states of antiquity had the same internal force
of men and money, after they lost their liberties, as when they had them. But a
nation of men, who only fight for their country, or undertake the
administration of their country, because they are paid for it, are very
different from a nation of men who are willing to die for their country.

Elle [Athenes] considerait, etc. The Athenians considered, that in a republic
manners were above all things necessary Montesqu. III.32.
. In England we never consider this.

The Athenians did not suffer those who frequented lewd women, to harangue the
people. Demosthenes highly approves this law ANT. UNIV. HIST. VI.314.
.

It is of great consequence (says Solon in his letter to Epimenides), of what
dispositions those are, who influence the common people Ibid. XLI.
.

A magistrate overtaken in liquor was severely punished; the first archon,
though accidentally, with death.

It was impossible for any man at Athens to live a dissolute life unreproved:
for every man was liable to be sent for by the Areopagites, to be examined, and
punished, if guilty. At Rome the censors had the same power Ibid. VI.330*
. We Christians may be as wicked as we please. Our governments encourage vice
for the benefit of the revenues.

Emmius DE REP. ATHEN. I.107.
accounts for the long duration of liberty in the Athenian republic, by
observing that the people were of a sublime, bold, and penetrating genius, as
much superior to the other states of Greece, as the other states of Greece were
to the barbarous people. That there was continually rising among them a
succession of men eminent for political wisdom and integrity, who planted in
the minds of the people sentiments of true patriotism, and inspired them with
such a love of liberty, that every Athenian was ready to pour out his best
blood for its preservation. That the people were, by Solon, taught, that the
strength of a free state consists in its laws; that laws are nothing, unless
they be obeyed; that laws will not be obeyed, unless honor be given to the
obedient, and punishment inflicted on transgressors; that the laws are not to
be subjected to the government, but the government to the laws; that riches,
interest, and party are to yield to the laws, not the laws to them. That
therefore in the best times of that commonwealth, honors and rewards were
given in such a manner, as tended to lead the persons honored and rewarded to
gratitude rather than to ambition, which Demosthenes exemplifies in the case of
Miltiades, Cimon, Themistocles, and others. And on the contrary, whoever made
himself obnoxious to the laws of his country, was to expect no alleviation on
account of his riches, his family, or even of his former meritorious actions.
Accordingly Miltiades, Themistocles, Cimon, and others, though eminent for
their public services, were not spared, when thought to have violated the laws.
For the Athenians considered, that it is the duty of a citizen to behave well,
not on one occasion only, but at all times; not to be at first zealous,
faithful, and obedient, and afterward a lawless plunderer; for that this is
not the behavior of men of principle, who are uniform in their conduct, but of
artful and insidious men, who study only to surprise the public opinion, that
they may deceive with the better success. That the Athenians were, above all
other nations, severe against corruption above all other offenses, as what
tends most directly to the destruction of states. The Athenians, therefore,
punished this crime with a fine to ten times the value of the bribe, or with
outlawry, or death; some of which punishments were inflicted even on those, who
had on other occasions deserved well of their country, as Timotheus, Epicrates,
Thrasybulus the younger, and others. Another cause of the flourishing state of
the Athenian republic, was the encouragement given to marriage and population.
Another was the wise severity of Solon, in bringing upon the offenses of
magistrates a swifter punishment than on those of private persons; for that the
latter might be delayed; but if the former was put off, things might quickly
come into such disorder, that it would be too late to think of punishing
powerful offenders; besides, that the offenses of private persons may be
compared with those of the common sailors, on board of a ship, which may not
prove fatal to the crew; but the crimes of magistrates are like those of the
master, or pilot, which endanger the loss of ship, loading, crew, and
passengers. That Solon likewise laid great stress on the education of youth,
that they might be habituated to virtue, industry, courage, and love of their
country. That his laws tended to honor, wisdom, and virtue, and to bring
disgrace on the contrary characters, by refusing to men of profligate lives all
honors in the state, and even forbidding them to speak in the assembly of the
people. For the wise legislator thought there was little probability, that he,
who could not manage his own private estate, would administer that of the
public with frugality and wisdom; and that the people would not, or however
ought not, to pay any regard to the patriotic harangues of a man, who studied
more to polish his speeches, than to regulate his life.

While all Europe groaned under the chain of Roman tyranny, the Germans, and
northern nations, preserved their liberty.

Tacitus says, nobody among the Germans laughs at vice; or apologizes for
corruption, by saying, it is universally practiced DE MOR. GERM.
. But the Germans were barbarous heathens; we are polite christians.

Hannibal, when praetor of Carthage, set about reforming abuses, regulated the
finances, restrained the injustice of the judges, and peculation of the
grandees, and collectors of the revenues, who were got to such a degree of open
corruption, that they pretended a lawful title to whatever they could plunder
from the people. The many proved of course too hard for one. Yet (such is the
advantage of integrity) they had no means for this purpose, but exciting the
Romans against him. The consequence was, that this illustrious warrior and
reformer, who had bled for his country, and had labored for its reformation,
was driven into exile, and hunted from country to country, like a felon, and at
last beset in his retirement by his enemies, and only escaped the cruelties,
they would have inflicted on him by destroying himself.

Every page of the history of the great revolution of Rome shows some instance
of the degeneracy of the Roman virtue, and of the impossibility of a nation's
continuing free after its virtue is gone.

It is thought by many of the authors of this part of the Roman history, that
such was the corruption of manners, that the greatest part of those who opposed
Julius, were enemies to the man rather than to his cause ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XIII.410.
.

Would the Romans in the times of Sc^pio, have suffered Caesar to keep his
government in Gaul, to debauch the army, and openly corrupt the people? No.
There were times when ten Pomp^^s and twenty Caesar's could not have enslaved
the Roman people.

A tender Virgin of eighteen years of age, has but little strength of body,
compared with that of an athletic ravisher inflamed with lust. Ye^ we find she
can preserve her honor safe, if she pleases* even against his utmost strength;
and in fact, scarcely any woman loses her virtue, no nation its liberties,
without their own fault. What Milton says of one is ^^ue of both.

-- Chastity!
She who has that, is clad in complete steel,
And like a quiver'd nymph, with arrows keen
May trace huge forests, and unharbour'd heaths,
Infamous hills, and sandy perilous wilds,
Where through the sacred rays of chastity
No savage fierce, bandit, or mountaineer
Will dare to soil her virgin purity.
Yea there, where every desolation dwell.
By grots and caverns shagg'd with horrid shades,
She may pass on with unblanch'd majes^y,
Be it not done in pride, or in presumption.
-- But when lust,
By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk,
But most by lewd, and lavish act of (...)
Lets in defilement on the inward parts,
The soul grows clotted by contagion,
Embodies and embrutes, till she quite lose
The divine property of her first being.
MILT. COMUS. Nothing is more essentially necessary to the establishment of
manners in a state, than that all persons employed in stations of power and
trust be men of exemplary characters.

Let Valerian [afterwards emperor] be censor, said the Roman senators, who has
no faults of his own ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.416.
.

The Roman censors had authority over all persons, except only the governor of
Rome, the consuls in office, the rex sacrorum, and the superior of the vestal
virgins. This office, so useful in the republican times, was neglected under
almost all the emperors Ibid.
.

The Roman censors used to strike out of the list th^se senators, who seemed to
them not to support, with proper dignity, their illustrious station. We find
sixty-four thus disgraced, in the times of Sylla, when it may be supposed the
manners were greatly degenerated.

It is to be doubted that those old-fashioned heathen censors would, if they
were employed among us, take umbrage at our christian foibles of adultery,
gambling, cheating, rooking, bribing, blasphemy, sodomy, and the other froli^s
which so elegantly amuse our senatorial men and women of pleasure.

The Romans to the last showed their opinion of the usefulness of the office of
censors. We find it, after a long interruption by the civil wars, restored, and
sixty-four senators immediately struck out of the list Ibid. XII.151.
.

Scipio was not chaste from stupidity; for it is recorded of him, that he was a
great admirer of beauty.

Socrates acknowledged, that he was naturally inclinable to sensuality, but
that he had, by philosophy, corrected the bent of his nature.

The public cannot be too curious concerning the characters of public men; so
common is it for them to change upon preferment, according to the old adage,
honores mutant mores.

Sylla, who, in his youth, was of so tender a heart, as to weep for very slight
occasions, became one of the most cruel of men; ordered Granius to be strangled
in his presence, as he lay a dying ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.96.
, and deluged Rome with the blood of her citizens.

Nero, when he was to sign a dead-warrant, in his earlier years, often wept,
and wished he had never learned to write. Yet the very name of that prince
afterward became the proverb for cruelty.

That state is going to ruin, said Antisthenes, in which the honors due to
merit, are bestowed on the artful and designing, or on the tools of power.

The Athenian archons, before they entered upon their office, were obliged to
swear, that if ever the^ were convicted of bribery, they would send to Delphi,
as a fine, a statue of gold of their own size Ubb. Emm.. DE REP. ATHEN. I.27.
.

The ancient Spartans chose their ephori out of any rank indifferently; which
policy Aristotle prefers to that of the Cretans, who elected their cosmi only
from certain particular orders.

Aristotle says, that in 400 years there was neither sedition, nor tyranny, in
Carthage; a proof of a good constitution, good administration, and virtuous
manners.

Aristotle commends the Carthaginian wisdom, for that they chose their men of
authority rather according to their personal characters, than according to
family. Men of great power, and of no character, are very hurtful, and actually
have very much prejudiced the Spartan republic. ARIST. POL. II.11.
And afterward in the same chapter, he blames their policy in confining
authority only to the rich. For that this naturally leads the people to the
admiration and pursuit of riches, rather than the study of virtue. Whilst it is
impossible that a state should be secure, where virtue is not supremely
honored.

The manners of the upper ranks will descend to the lowest. When M. Antonius,
grandfather of the triumvir of the same name, was accused, his slave bore the
torture with heroic fortitude ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.453.
.

It was to keep up a sense of national honor, that there was a law made,
forbidding a Roman citizen to be scouraged Ibid. XII.242.
: Ad illa mihi pro se quisque, etc.

Let every reader of history (says Live. Procem.) apply his mind to observe the
manners and characters of our ancestors; by what sort of men, and by what arts
of peace and war, the commonwealth was raised; and let him attend to the causes
of its decline, viz. the neglect of discipline, and degeneracy of manners; and
let him observe how this degeneracy has increased in an accelerated proportion,
till we are now fallen into such a condition, that we can neither bear our
vices, nor the reformation of them.

When the first triumviri, Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, were laying the
foundation for the ruin of Roman liberty, and had so debauched the people (a
people cannot be enslaved while they continue honest), that candidates, instead
of depending on their services and merits, openly bought votes; and afterward,
improving upon corruption, instead of purchasing single votes, went directly to
the triumviri, and paid down the ready money; when all was thus going headlong
to ruin, Cato attempted to put some check to the torrent of wickedness. What
was the consequence? He only got himself the ill will of both rich and poor.
All love of country was then lost in a general scramble for the spoils of their
country ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.170.
.

The resemblance between the disposition of the Roman people of those
degenerate days, and that of a certain country in our times, is striking enough
to freeze the blood in the veins of every friend to that country.

The Romans seems to have lost their national character from the time of the
fall of their rival Carthage. Time was, when hardly a Roman could have been
found capable of the villainous proceedings of Caepio.

And it was not till the Roman virtue was degenerated, that the republic was
capable of basely violating a solemn treaty with the Numantians, though that
unhappy people had actually complied with the conditions.

As if the superior powers had intended a lessen for all mankind, not to trifle
with solemn treaties, the Romans are defeated by the Numantians (even the women
lending their assistance, and attacking the Romans with unusual valor), though
their army was 30,000 against only 4000. Of the Romans, 20,000 were cut in
pieces in the pursuit, their courage failing them, at through sense of the
guilt of an unjust and cruel war. The Numantians would not afterward treat
with the Roman general; so infamous was the character of those who formerly
reproached the Carthaginians with their national treachery, at last they agreed
to treat with Tib. Gracchus, whose reputation for probity wa^ eminent. The
wicked senate, as if determined still farther to make good the suspicions,
which the Numantians Ibid. XII.392.
had of them, again violates the new treaty with the Numantians, though that
people (called by the destroyers of mankind, barbarous) had generously spared
10,000 Romans, whom they had in their power. The Romans, who boasted their
justice and clemency in war, were not to be satisfied but with the destruction
of those who had saved them. Nor did their sufferings for their treachery end
here. Tib. Gracchus, who had made the treaty with the Numantians, being
offended at the disgrace brought on him by the senate's basely violating it,
begun that fatal sedition, distinguished by the name of the Gracchi, which drew
after it the most destructive consequences ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.392, et seq.
.

The Romans at the time of Sylla's voluntary resignation, had it in their power
to recover their liberties. But corruption was even then too far gone Plut. IN
SYLL.
.

My much esteemed friend and relation Dr. Robertson thinks, the Roman empire
must have sunk, though the Goths had never invaded it, because the Roman virtue
was sunk HIST. C^. V.1.3.
. They were so debauched, that among the northern nations it was usual to call
a person of a flagitious character, a Roman, as among us, a Jew. The
destruction of eternal Rome was completed in less than two centuries from the
first irruption of the barbarians Ibid. 7.
. Rome destroyed by Goths and Vandals, resembled a lion devoured by vermin.

The degeneracy of the Roman senate appeared shockingly conspicuous on occasion
of the prosecution of Iugurtha. When that bloody tyrant, the murderer of his
benefactor's two sons, came to Rome to answer for his innumerable crimes, after
having for several years neglected the summons, and carried on war against the
Roman generals; he frees himself from the deserved censure, by bribing one of
the ten tribunes; who accordingly in open senate stops the examination of the
king, when questioned by the others concerning certain senators, whom he had
corrupted See Sallust. BELL. ^UGURTH.
.

Iugurtha returning home after an acquittance obtained by money, cries out, O
city ready for sale, if a buyer rich enough can be found Ibid
!

Corruption ruins the whole proceedings of a state, both in peace and war.

Iugurtha, notwithstanding his at^ocious villainies, continued unpunished, and
baffled the vengeance of the mighty Roman commonwealth for several years,
because corruption protected him. He had bribed the senate, and the commanders
who went against him. But whenever the war was put into the hands of Metellus
and Marius, men of honor, he was presently crushed.

It is a great evil in a state, when there is not power to curb offenders Anon.
ap. Ub. Emm. DE REP. ATHEN. I.125.
.

The Roman senate, whose degrees formerly shoot three quarters of the world,
sneak to Pompey, all (...) Hortensius and Catulus. ANT. HIST. XIII.131.


The Roman people, lost to the true republica^ spirit, confer on Pompey
voluntarily more power tha^ Sylla obtained by force of arms.

When inconsiderable merits obtain high rewards, it is to be presumed, that
real merit is scarce in that country, and contrariwise.

Calpurnius Flamma, for saving the whole Roman army at the Furcae Caudinae, was
rewarded with the elegant ornament of a wisp of hay put round his head.

Aul. Posthumous misbehaved, or was unfortunate in one battle; gained a victory
in another. The stern Roman people did not however allow, that the success
should expiate for the miscarriage. He could not obtain the honor of a
triumph; but was obliged to content himself with an ovation ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XI.380.
.

Horatius Cocles was rewarded with a contribution of victuals and a bit of land
Ibid. XI.370.
.

The Greeks would not have the names of their commanders mentioned on occasion
of victories; but ascribed them to the army in general. We find Demosthenes
afterward blaming the honors shown to the generals, by ascribing such and
such victories to such and such commanders. At length they became so exorbitant
in conferring honors, that Demetrius Phalerius had 300 statues in Athens.

Mr. Hume observes, that the Romans were very vicious in the times of the Punic
wars, when the commonwealth was most flourishing POL. ESS. IV.39.
. But they were not corrupt or dishonest to their country, or luxurious or
extravagant. These are the manners which chiefly tend to bring ruin upon
states. These are political vices. And yet every able statesman will guard
against the prevalency of other vices, as well as these. For there is a
connection between vices, as well as between virtues, and one opens a door for
the entrance of the other.

If Caesar and Pompey (says the author of GRAND. ET DECAD. DES ROMANS p. 229.)
had been very Cato^s, there would have been other Caesar's and other Pompeys,
and the republic, destined to ruin, [through corruption] would have been
dragged to the precipice by other hands.

A remain of virtue among the Romans in Catiline's time, kept the state afloat,
in spite of his traitorous attempts to sink it. That being at the time of
Caesar's attack extinct, he was enabled to finish what his predecessor
attempted in vain. Catiline was defeated and killed. His design is branded with
the infamous name of a conspiracy. Caesar conquered his opposers, and for a
short time triumphed over liberty. His attempt is called a civil war; and
himself reckoned among the heroes.

Cicero accuses Catiline to his face in the open senate; but dares not exert
the consular power to apprehend or punish him, though in the senate house he
threatened destruction to the senate Sal. BELL. CATIL.
.

A state must be weak, or its government incapable, when one desperado is too
mighty for the laws.

Caesar advances all his partisans to posts and honors ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XIII.225.
. With what view? Manifestly with the same which moves our court to give places
to members of the house of commons, viz. to bias them from the interest of
their country, and bribe them to do their dirty work. When Brutus had executed
the law on the destroyer of his country's freedom, he scorned to harangue the
people, in order to reconcile them to the measure. Much less could he have
brought himself to bribe them, even to allure them to their interest.

Pompey barefacedly gets himself proposed for dictator, at a time when there
was no use of a dictator. That is, he plainly told his countrymen, he should be
much obliged to them, if they would give him leave to do with them whatever he
pleased. For a dictator's power was absolute. Cato, however, had influence
enough to retard Pompey's scheme ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.171.
, and to get him made sole consul, the first of the kind, which likewise was a
gross violation of the constitution. Ibid. 173.
A standing army is appointed him, and his government in Spain continued. The
Romans seem to have been at this time weary of liberty and happiness.

It is a prognostic of the downfall of a state, when salutary regulations are
unnecessarily broke through.

Marius was chosen consul four times successively, notwithstanding the law
forbidding any man's being twice consul in less than ten years Ibid. 9.
.

When Marius treacherously endeavored to ensnare the brave Metellus, the
latter showed a firmness worthy of universal imitation. To do a base action,
says he, is, under all circumstances, shameful. To do well, when no danger is
nigh, is common. But to do well in spite of danger, is the part of a brave man
Ibid. 2^.
.

Sylla was created, thr^ugh fear, perpetual dictator. Rome was ripe for
slavery, before Julius wreathed her chains. All the intestine confusions in
Rome were owing to a constitution originally ill-balanced. A statue was erected
to the conqueror of his country in the very forum which he had so lately
drenched with the noblest blood of Rome. He himself publicly expresses his
contempt for the slavish disposition shown in his own favor, by the degenerate
sons of the brave Romans. They even pay distinguished honors to his memory,
after his death. Yet it is certain, that Tarquin, whom their ancestors
expelled, and for his sake rejected regal government, was not so bloody a
tyrant as Sylla.

When the efficiency of government goes from where the constitution placed it,
into hands which have no right to it, that state is far gone toward ruin.

The Roman consuls became at last slaves to the triumviri, Caesar, Pompey, and
Crassus. ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.154.


When the houses of parliament are seen to be the tools of the ministry, the
liberties of Britain are near their end.

Caesar bribes all Rome against Pompey, say the ancient universal historians
Ibid. 174.
. Then all Rome must have been corrupt. For Pompey was certainly the better man
of the two.

With the power which Julius had, he might have reformed, instead of enslaving,
his country. That it was not by the wisest men thought impracticable, appears
from Brutus's and Cicero's endeavors for that purpose, from Augustus's
proposing (however insincerely) to restore the republican government, and even
from Tiberius's affected design of quitting the throne. Therefore the apology
for Augustus's continuing Iulius's tyranny, viz. That Rome was become unfit for
republican government, is false and slavish Gord. DISC. ON TACIT. I.68.
.

Here a distinction is to be made between a people incapable of free
government, and a people among whom the spirit of liberty is got to so low an
ebb, that they have not the courage to seize it, when put within their reach,
or to resist the attempts of those who would deprive them of it. Any people are
capable of enjoying liberty, when procured for them. The Romans, if Augustus
had restored the republican government, would have been free; and there is no
doubt, but he had it in his power to restore it, and probably to keep it up,
during his life (as Epaminondas made his stupid countrymen the Boeotians great
in spite of themselves during his life), and he is inexcusable for neglecting
the opportunity, and instead of pursuing the glorious views of Brutus,
rivetting the chain which Julius had fastened but slightly; and flattering the
senators, that he underwent so many labors and perils only to restore peace to
the Romans. Those abject slaves decree him honors for dashing out of their
hands their liberties, when within their grasp ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.462.
.

The Romans, it is true, at the time of Caesar's execution, were ripe for
slavery. None to seize liberty, when put in their hands. They were no longer
that nation of heroes, to whom liberty was dearer than life. They were become
effeminate, debauched, and accustomed to live by the price of their votes,
which they sold to the best bidder Ibid. 283, 4, 5.
. Time was, and continued for many ages, when it would have been no disputable
point, whether a tyrant was to be extirpated or not, as it was on this occasion
Ibid. 286. the various opinions of the senators, concerning the destroyers of
Caesar.
. There was indeed no room for disputing the point. From the time of the
expulsion of the Tarquins, by the Roman constitution, it was unlawful for any
person to assume singular power. Julius, therefore, who did this, was legally
executed by Brutus, excepting that he had no regular trial.

It may, therefore, be said of a people, that they are at the same time capable
and incapable of liberty. The French, for instance, are incapable of liberty,
inasmuch as they cannot find a set of men capable of oversetting the tyranny
under which they groan, and of restoring and establishing, instead of it, a
free government, which shall keep itself up for ages, in spite of any attempts
to overthrow it, and to restore the present system of despotism. At the same
time there is no doubt, but the French are so far capable of liberty, that if
the necessary deliverers and defenders could be found, they would be actually
delivered, and would be actually free. But to return;

Atrocious crimes unpunished, as well as inconsiderable merits over-rewarded,
and honest men persecuted, are bad symptoms in a state.

Murders became, in the times of Sylla and Marius, common, and often escaped
unpunished, as of Aul. Sempronius, Pomponius Rufus, etc.

A decline of manners threatens a decline of empire ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.42,
et pass.
.

When Rome became to such a degree corrupt, that the rapacious publicans in
Asia had interest enough to get Rutilius Rufus, their enemy, banished, that
brave detector of villainy betook himself to Greece, and lived among the
philosophers. After some time, the Romans were desirous of recalling him. But
he refused to return to a place, where knaves had got such an ascendancy as to
be able to bring punishment upon honest men Ibid. 33.
.

The once illustrious Roman senate became, under the emperors, an assembly of
mean-spirited wretches, entirely devoted to corruption and servitude. For this
execution [of Octavia, the innocent wife of Nero] as for some notable
deliverance, they pompously decreed gifts and oblations to the gods. Such was
the debasement of the once great and venerable Roman senate. Fear had stopped
their mouths, or opened them only to the most scandalous strains of
flaflattery. Our historian observes here to their eternal infamy, that as often
as any cruel sentence was pronounced by the prince, as often as murders or
banishments were by him commanded, so often were acknowledgments and
thanksgivings, by the authority of the senate, paid to the deities ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XIV.407
.

Dio Cassius describes at large an entertainment, to which the emperor [
Domitian] invited the principal men among the senators and knights. An
entertainment, says that writer, which more than any thing else, displays his
tyrannical temper, and how wontonly he abused his power. At the entrance of the
palace the guests were received with great ceremony, and conducted to a
spacious hall hung round with black, and illuminated with a few melancholy
lamps, which were only sufficient to discover the horror of the place, and the
several coffins, upon which were written in capitals the names of the several
senators and knights invited. Great was their fright and consternation at the
sight of so dismal a scene; for the emperor had often publicly declared that
he could not think himself safe so long as one senator was left alive, and that
amongst the knights there were few, whom he did not look upon as his enemies.
After they had long waited expecting every moment their last doom, the doors
were at length all on a sudden burst open, when a great number of naked
persons, having their bodies all over dyed black, entered the hall, with drawn
swords in one hand, and flaming torches in the other. The guests, at this
dreadful appearance, giving themselves up for lost, already felt all the
agonies of death. But those whom they looked upon as their executioners, having
for some time danced round them, at once set open the doors, and acquainted
them that the emperor gave the company leave to withdraw. Thus did Domitian
insult these two illustrious orders, showing, says Dio Cassius, how little he
feared them, and at the same time, with how much reason they might dread his
resentment, since it was in his power to cut them all off without exposing
himself to the least danger ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.69.
.

A slavish submission to the commands even of the lawful prince, is a mark of a
decline of the spirit of liberty.

One of Solomon Shah's generals voluntarily offered to kill himself, to divert
the prince and his court MOD. UNIV. HIST. VI.17.
. Twenty officers, commanded by Hasan khan to kill themselves, to show the
sultan's ambassadors their submission, immediately obey Ibid, III.277.
.

How was the Roman spirit sunk when Tiberius wrote to the senate, desiring the
tribunitial power for Drusus; which the fathers granted with the more refined
flattery, as they had foreseen this request. Satues were decreed both to
Tiberius and Drusus; alters were erected to the gods; a^ches raised, etc. M.
Silanus moved, that for the future not the names of the consuls, but of those
who exercised the tribunitial power, should be prefixed to all public and
private records. Haterius Agrippa, that the decrees of that day should be
written in letters of gold, and hung up in the senate. Thus the lords of the
Roman senate, who once headed mighty armies, raised and d^posed great kings,
bestowed or took away empires, were by degrees changed into mean slaves, and
become, by their infamous behavior, an object of derision and contempt to all
foreign nations; nay, to that very tyrant whose favor they strove to gain by
disgracing themselves. Drusus, who was then in Campania probably with his
father, wrote to the senate, returning them thanks for the tribunitial power
with which they had invested him; but did not condescend to come to Rome, as
was expected, to receive it ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIV.169.
.

Non est nostrum aestimare, etc. it does not become us to judge of the persons
you are pleased to advance, nor of the reasons for your advancing them. The
gods have given you sovereign power; to us remains the glory of obedience. The
scoundrel speech of M. Terentius to Tiberius, acknowledging his connection with
Sejanus, the most odious minister of the most odious emperor Tacit. ANN. VII.
.

When Libo Drusus, in the reign of Tiberius, was unjustly tried upon the lex
majestatis, and his estate to be divided among his accusers; which, as Amm.
Marcellinus says, was sounding a trumpet to assemble the odious dilatores
against the best men in Rome; the degenerate senators strove which should most
grossly flatter the cruel emperor, by declaring the deceased Libo (for he laid
violent hands upon himself before his condemnation) guilty of treason. The
first lords of the senate were not above taking upon themselves the vile office
of informers. The metropolis of the world often in those times saw her public
dignities bestowed as rewards upon those execrable parricides who had spilt her
best blood. One senator made one motion, and another made another proposal, all
disgraceful to the unhappy deceased, but flattering to the tyrant. So miserable
was the servility of the once venerable Roman senate so early as the beginning
of Tiberius's reign Tacit. ANNAL. II.
.

Valerian the Roman emperor, about the middle of the third century, was
conquered by Sapor king of Persia, dragged chained through all the cities of
that vast kingdom, and treated with greater indignity than the meanest slave.
For that haughty conqueror made him his footstool when he mounted his horse. He
flayed him (alive, some say), dressed his skin, dyed it red, hung it up, and
showed it to all stangers. And the wretched fallen Romans were obliged to bear
all this unresented; which patience brought on them attacks from the barbarous
nations ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.425.
.

At last the Roman empire was fairly put up to auction by the soldiery, and
purchased by the highest bidder, Didius Iulianus, who reigned two months and
six days, hated, cursed, and stoned by the people, and at last put to death by
order of the senate, and whose most remarkable action was causing a number of
children to be murdered, that he might have their blood to use in his magic
rites Ibid. 282.
. And though other emperors might not so openly purchase the imperial diadem,
it is certain that they generally made a present, on their accession to the
soldiery, which was the fine qua non of their preferment.

The western or proper Roman empire, was annihilated by Odoacer the Goth, who
takes the throne from Augustulus, and makes himself king of Italy, A. D. 476,
507 years after the battle of Actium, which terminated the Roman republican or
free state, and begun the monarchy; after which fatal period, public virtue
declined continually, and the vast dominion of the Romans was by degrees
mutilated of Britain, Spain, Africa, and Gaul; the greatest state the world
ever beheld, demolished by its own luxury and depravity, by the hand of a
contemptible barbarian, a person so obscure, that his family, and the country
he came from, are scarce known ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVI.597.
. From the foundation of Rome to Odoacer's conquest, was 1324 years.

How were the mighty fallen, when the emperor Valentinian II. sent an embassy
to deprecate the wrath of Attila coming against him, and at the head of the
embassy, the bishop of Rome Ibid. 569.
. Poor Roman emperor!

-- Quantum mutatus ab illo
Caesare!
VIRG. Afterward the Saracens, the Nubians, the most contemptible nations,
broke into the empire. Like the dying lion in the fable, she was exposed to all
disgraces. Attila, my master and yours, are the words of that barbarous
monarch's ambassador to the fallen Roman emperor Ibid. XIX.226.
. Alaric, the Goth, deposes the Roman emperor twice, and afterward shows him
publicly in the dress of a slave Ibid. XVI.513.
. The mighty Rome, the seat of liberty, the mistress of the world, the nurse of
heroes, the delight of gods, which humbled the proud tyrants of the earth, and
set the nations free, was taken by Alaric the Goth, A. D. 410, and plundered
for three days. What nation could have taken Rome in the days of the Scipios
and the Fabii Ibid.
?

So lately as A. D. 1347, an attempt was made to restore liberty to the Romans
by Nicholas Gabrini de Rienzo, the son of a miller. He proposes to restore to
the people their ancient republican government. Punishes with banishment and
death some of the ancient nobility convicted of oppression. Invites all the
citizens of Italy to liberty. Foreign princes seek his alliance. Pope Clement
is glad to countenance him, and desires him to govern Rome in his name. Becomes
quickly intoxicated with his authority, disdains to depend on the pope. Loses
the people's favor. For in those times no people would be free, unless the
pope gave them leave. Rienzo assumes swelling titles. Irritates several princes
needlessly. The pope thunders out bulls against him. The bigoted people
abandon him. He makes his escape, and sculks about long in the habit of a
pilgrim. The people, unworthy of liberty, sink again into slavery MOD. UNIV.
HIST. XXVI.43.
.

Let us hear the excellent Davenant on this subject.

And now to recapitulate the reasons of this great people's ruin, first, their
luxuries extinguished ancient honor, and in its room introduced irregular
ambition; ambition brought on civil wars; civil war made single persons too
considerable to remain afterward in a private condition; so that the
foundation of their destruction was laid in the century wherein Caesar invaded
their liberties: however, they might have continued a powerful and flourishing
nation for many ages, if the succeeding princes had imitated either Julius or
Augustus. But many of those that followed, assumed to themselves unlimited
authority; and when bad emperors came, they pulled down what had been building
up by the wisdom of all their predecessors. They seized upon that treasure
which the frugality of preceding times had set aside for urgent occasions. They
accounted the public revenues to be their own particular property, and to be
disposed of at their pleasure. Such as were lavish, squandered away among their
minions and favorites, that which was to maintain the dignity of the state.
When their profusion had reduced them to necessities, they fell to laying
exorbitant taxes, and to pillage the remote provinces: when these provinces
were harassed and exhausted by continual payments, they became weak and unable
to resist foreign invasions. In these naked and defenseless provinces the
barbarians nestled themselves, and when they were grown strong and powerful,
from thence they made irruptions into Italy, till at last they came to invade
and conquer Rome itself, the very head and seat of the empire. From this brief
account of the Roman affairs, perhaps it will appear, that to let ministers
waste the public revenues, or to suffer any negligence and profusion of the
like nature, is of dangerous consequence both to the prince and people Daven.
III.56.
.

God forbid that ever any future political writer should have occasion to
describe and account for the decline and fall of the British empire, as
Davenant has that of the Roman.

It is of great consequence to a kingdom, that religion and morals be
considered as worthy the attention of persons of high rank. There is no doubt,
whatever might be pretended, these troubles [in France during the minority of
Lewis XIV.] which were fatal to the lives of many, to the fortunes of more, and
to the liberties of the whole nation, sprung from the coquetries of half a
dozen great ladies, who with light heads, and bad hearts, sacrificed every
thing to their pleasures, according to the nature of the sex, who having
forfeited one virtue, seldom respect any other MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXV.41.
.

The welfare of all countries in the world depends upon the morals of their
people. For though a nation may get riches by trade, thrift, industry, and from
the benefit of its soil and situation; and though a people may attain to great
wealth and power either by force of arms, or by the sagacity of their councils;
yet when their manners are depraved, they will decline insensibly, and at last
come to utter destruction. When a country is grown vicious, industry decays,
the people become effeminate and unfit for labor. To maintain luxury, the
great ones must oppress the meanest; and to avoid this oppression, the meaner
sort are often compelled to seditious tumults or open rebellion. Such,
therefore, who have modelled governments for any duration, have endeavored to
propose methods by which the riotous appetites, the lusts, avarice, revenge,
ambition, and other disorderly passions of the people might be bounded Daven.
II.41.
.

To the sobriety, and temperate way of living, practiced by the Dissenters
retired to America, we may justly attribute the increase they have made there
of inhabitants, which is beyond the usual proportion to be seen any where else.
The supplies from hence do by no means answer their present numbers. It must
then follow, that their thrift and regular manner of living incline them more,
and make them more healthful for generation, and afford them better means of
having the necessaries to sustain life, as wholesome food, and cleanly dwelling
and apparel; the want of which, in other countries, is a high article in the
burials of the common people.

Where riot and luxuries are not discountenanced, the inferior rank of men
become presently infected, and grow lazy, effeminate, impatient of labor, and
expensive, and, consequently, cannot thrive by trade and tillage; so that when
we contemplate the great increase and improvements, which have been made in New
England, Carolina, and Pennsylvania, we cannot but think it injustice not to
say, that a large share of this general good to these parts is owing to the
education of their planters; which, if not entirely virtuous, has a show of
virtue; and, if this were only an appearance, it is yet better for a people
that are to subsist in a new country by traffic and industry, than the open
profession and practice of lewdness, which is always attended with national
decay and poverty Daven. II.33.
.

Burnet is excellent, in the conclusion to his history of his own times, on the
moral character of the people. He observes Burn. p. 428.
, that those of the commonalty of England, who attend the church, are grossly
ignorant in matters of religion; the Dissenters more knowing; which is not
owing to want of capacity, but of teaching. To cure this evil, the bishop, very
judiciously, advises the clergy to use two courses, viz. catechizing, that is,
explaining to young people, in a familiar manner, the first principles of
religion, and of morality; and preaching in the same manner on the same
subjects; applying their discourses to the characters of their audience,
setting before them the evil nature and consequences of the vices they know
them to be particularly addicted to.

He gives a sad account of the gentry of his times; which, it is to be hoped,
would be too severe, if applied to those of the present age. They are, says he,
for the most part the worst instructed, and the least knowing of any of their
rank I ever went among. The Scotch, though less able to bear the expense of a
learned education, are much more knowing. -- A gentleman here is often both
ill-taught, and ill-bred. This makes him haughty and insolent. The gentry are
not early acquainted with the principles of religion. So that after they have
forgot their catechism, they acquire no more new knowledge, but what they learn
in plays and romances. They grow soon to find it a modish thing that looks like
wit and spirit, to laugh at religion and virtue, and so they become crude and
unpolished infidels. -- In the universities, instead of being formed to love
their country and its constitution, laws, and liberties, they are rather
disposed to love arbitrary government, and to become slaves to absolute
monarchy Burn. p. 430.
. He says, he has seen the nation three times in danger of ruin from men thus
tainted, viz. 1. After the Restoration. 2. Under James II. And, 3. Under Queen
Anne's Tory ministry. If so, manners are of great consequence in a state; which
likewise farther appears from what follows:

That excellent Prelate thought liberty a thing very easily lost. I have seen,
says he, the nation thrice on the brink of ruin, by men tainted with wrong
principles. After the Restoration, all were running fast into slavery. Had
Charles II. been, on his first return, attentive to those bad designs, which he
pursued afterward with more caution, slavery and absolute power might then
have been settled into a law, with a revenue able to maintain them. He played
away that game without thought; and he had then honest ministers, who would not
serve him in it. After all that he did, during the course of his reign, it was
scarce credible, that the same temper should have returned in his time: yet he
recovered it in the last four years of his reign; and the gentry of England
were as active and zealous to throw up all their liberties, as their ancestors
had ever been to preserve them. This disposition continued above half a year in
his brother's reign; and he depended so much upon it, that he thought it could
never go out of his hands. But he, or rather his priests, had the dexterity to
play this game away likewise, and lose it a second time; so that at the
Revolution, all seemed to come again to their wits. But men who have no
principles, cannot be steady. Now, A. D. 1708, the greater part of the capital
gentry seem to return again to a love of tyranny, provided they may be the
under-tyrants themselves; and they seem to be uneasy at the court, when it will
not be as much a court as they will have it. This is a folly of so singular a
nature, that it wants a name. It is natural for poor men, who have little to
lose, and much to hope for, to become the instruments of slavery; but it is an
extravagance peculiar to our age, to see rich men in love with slavery and
arbitrary power. The root of all this is, that our gentry are not betimes
possessed of a true measure of solid knowledge and sound religion, with a love
to their country, a hatred of tyranny, and zeal for liberty Burnet, IV.431.
. He then gives some directions for improving our gentry's education.

Wherever the state has, by means, which do not preserve the virtue of the
subject, effectually guarded its safety, remissness, and a neglect of the
public, are likely to follow, and polished nations of every description appear
to encounter a danger on this quarter, proportioned to the degree in which they
have, during any continuance, enjoyed the uninterrupted possession of peace and
prosperity Ferguson's HIST. CIV. SOC. 404.
.

Il y a des mauvais examples, etc. Some bad examples are more mischievous than
crimes; and more states have perished because the people violated morals, than
because they broke the laws. A people's being obliged to observe strictly the
laws and constitution of their country, is no sign of a failure of liberty.
Observe the power which the Roman censors had in the freest times of that
commonwealth, even to the most severe restriction of private luxury in
furniture, tables, clothing, and every article of living which yet produced no
complaint from the people; and, on the contrary, observe the unbridled
licentiousness of manners in the times of the most tyrannical of the emperors
GRAND. ET DECAD. DES ROMANS 96.
.

Nations have often been deceived into slavery by men of shining abilities.
Miserable is the spirit of a nation, that suffers itself to be enslaved by
shining metal. The Romans under Julius were delicately ensnared, and grossly
bribed. The English under Walpole were clumsily bought. The hero, the orator,
the gentleman in Julius captivated many, and concealed the tyrant and usurper.
Walpole told his hirelings, I know your price; here it is. A nation deceived
into ruin, is like a fond but artless virgin debauched by her lover on promise
of marriage. Our case is that of a worthless bold wench, who sells her
maidenhead for a piece of money, or so much a year.

The collector of Alm. DEB. COM. writes very judiciously on this subject, as
follows:

The profligacy of the common people, at this time, [about A. D. 1751,] called
for some legal restraint; for not only every city and town, but almost every
village had assemblies of music, dancing, and gaming. This occasioned a
prodigious dissipation of the time, money, and morals of the lower people.
Robberies were so frequent, that the enormity of the crime was almost effaced
in the minds of the people; and nothing was more common than to advertise in
the newspapers, an impunity to any person who could bring to a party that was
robbed, the effects that had been taken from them, and that too with a reward
according to the value. Those disorders were very justly ascribed, in a great
measure, to the extravagance of the common people, and therefore a bill was
brought in for the better preventing thefts and robberies, and for regulating
places of public entertainment, and punishing people keeping disorderly houses.
The operation of this bill, when it passed the house of commons, was confined
to London and Westminster, and twenty miles round; and all persons within that
circuit were required to take out licenses from the justices of the peace of
the county, assembled at their quarter sessions, before they could open any
room or place for public dancing, music, or any other entertainment of the like
kind. Several other regulations regarding idle, disorderly, or suspected
persons and houses, were inserted in the same act, and pecuniary as well as
corporal penalties were affixed to the transgressors. When this bill went to
the house of lords, they thought so well of it, that they extended the
operation of it all over England. But as a tax was laid by it upon the subject,
when they returned the bill to the house of commons, their amendments were
unanimously disagreed to, because they would not suffer the lords to alter any
bill that was to affect the purse of the subject. They therefore desired a
conference of the lords, and appointed a committee to draw up reasons against
the amendments. The lords, on the other hand, having never formally given up
their right to amend money bills, could not receive the true reason of the
dissent of the commons, without giving up that right, or coming to an open
breach with them. The commons therefore, to avoid so disagreeable an emergency,
drew up reasons against the amendment, which had no regard or connection with
the true reason of their disagreeing with them; and the lords rather than so
good a bill should be lost, agreed not to insist upon their amendments; and
thus the bill passed, and received the royal assent Alm. DEB. COM. V.29.
.

Few crimes either private, or relating to the public, can be committed by
those whose minds are early seasoned with the principle of loving and promoting
the welfare of their native country. For, generally speaking, all our vices
whatsoever turn to her prejudice; and if we were convinced of this betimes, and
if from our very youth we were seasoned with this notion, we should of course
be virtuous, and our country would prosper and flourish in proportion to this
amendment of our manners. Wherever private men can be brought to make all their
actions and counsels thoughts, and designments, to center in the common good,
that nation will soon gather such strength as shall resist any homebred
mischief, or outward accident. No great thing was ever done, but by such as
have preferred the love of their country to all other considerations; and
wherever this public spirit reigns, and where this zeal for the common good
governs in the minds of men, that state will flourish, and increase in riches
and power, and wherever it declines, or is set at naught, weakness, disorder,
and poverty must be expected. This love to their native soil, where it has been
deeply rooted, and where it could be preserved, has made little cities famous
and invincible, as Sparta, Corinth, Thebes, and Athens; and from thence all the
Roman greatness took its rise. But where they are wretchedly contriving their
own ends, without any care of their country's profit, or trafficking its wealth
and liberties, for rewards, preferments, and titles; where every one is
snatching all he can; and where there is a general neglect of national
interest, they grow luxurious, proud, false, and effeminate; and a people so
depraved, is commonly the prey of some neighbor sea^oned with more wise and
better principles. In a kingdom but too near us, we may see all sorts of men
laboring for the public welfare, and every one as vigilant in his post, as if
the success of the whole empire depended on his single care and diligence; so
that, to the shame of another place, they seem more intent upon the prosperity
and honor of their country, under a hard and oppressive tyranny, than the
inhabitants of some free nations, where the people have an interest in the
laws, and are a part of the constitution. Homer in his two poems seems to
intend but two morals. In the ILIAD, to set out how fatal discord among the
great ones is to states and armies. And in his ODYSSEY, to show that the love
of our own country ought to be stronger than any other passion; for he makes
Ulysses quit the nymph Calypse with all her pleasure, and the immortality she
had promised him, to return to Ithaca, a rocky and ba^^ren island. The affairs
of a country relating either to civil government, war, the revenues, or trade,
can never be well and prosperously conducted, unless the men of principle rank
and figure divest themselves o^ their passions, self-interest, overweening
opinion of their own merits, their flattery, false arts, mean ambition,
irregular appetites, and pursuits after wealth and greatness. No people did
ever become famous and powerful, but by temperance, fortitude, justice,
reverence to the laws, and piety to the country. And when any empire is
destined to be undone, or to lose its freedom, the seeds of this ruin are to be
first seen in the corruption of its manners. In vicious governments, all care
of the public is laid aside, and every one is plundering for himself, as if the
commonwealth were adrift, or had suffered shipwreck; and where a people is thus
depraved, their national assemblies have the first open marks of the infection
upon them, from whence spring all disorders in the state whatsoever. For then
such as have most eloquence, valor, skill in business, and most interest in
their country, throw off the mask of popularity, which they had put on for a
time, and in the face of the world desire wealth, honors, and greatness, upon
any terms; and this ambition leads them to corrupt others, that their own
natural vices may be the less observed; so that in a constitution ripe for
change, those who are best esteemed, and most trusted, begin to buy the
people's voice, and afterward expose to sale their own suffrages; which
practice is always attended with utter destruction, or the loss of liberty.
This error in the first concoction does presently deprave the whole mass; for
then the dignities of the commonwealth are made the reward of fraud and vice,
and not the recompense of merit. All is bought and sold, and the worst men who
can afford to bid highest, are accepted; and where the management is once got
into such hands, factions are sufferfered to grow; rash counsels are embraced,
and wholesome advices rejected; every one is busy for himself, and careless of
the common interest; treachery is winked at, and private persons are allowed to
become wealthy by the public spoils; all which is followed with the loss of
reputation abroad, and poverty at home Daven. II.48.
.

Mr. Sydenham, in the debate, A. D. 1744, on the motion for annual parliaments,
argues, that long parments produce, and increase corruption of manners in the
people. 'Sir, says he, the middling people in this country have always, till of
late years, been remarkable for their bravery, generosity, and hospitality, and
those of inferior rank for their honesty frugality, and industry. These are the
virtues which raised this nation to that height of glory, riches, and power it
had once arrived at; but these virtues are every one of them in danger of being
utterly extinguished by ministerial corruption at elections, and in parliament.
For proving this, I have no occasion to appeal to any thing but experience
under the late administration, the decay of every one of these virtues, and the
causes of that decay became so visible to every thinking man in the kingdom,
that the whole nation, except the very tools of the minister, joined in putting
an end to his power, and thank God, with the help of a very extraordinary
conjuncture at court, we at last in some degree succeeded in our endeavors.
For this reason I say I need not appeal to any thing but experience, for
showing what an effect public corruption has upon private as well as public
virtue; but as it may be proved by reason, as well as experience, and as I
think it necessary to take advantage of every argument that can be thought of
for establishing the truth of this proposition, I shall beg leave to consider
separately every one of the virtues I have mentioned, in order to show from the
reason of things how necessarily it must decay, in proportion as public
corruption is introduced. And first with regard to courage or bravery. Though
courage or resolution, Sir, depends in some measure upon the nature or
constitution of the man, yet it may be very much increased or diminished by
custom and education, and especially by public rewards bestowed upon, or
refused to those who have shown any remarkable degree of it in the service of
their country. In former times, and when we had an honest and wise
administration, the chief method by which our nobility and gentry could
recommend themselves to the esteem of their country, or the favor of their
sovereign, was by their courage, and military capacity; and the same
consideration made them take notice of those that were in any station below
them, which propagated a brave and military spirit among all ranks of men in
the kingdom. In those days our ministers did not desire any man in parliament
to vote as they directed. They desired no man to vote, but according to the
dictates of his own conscience, and therefore they never thought of rewarding
those who approved, much less of punishing those who disapproved, of their
measures in parliament. At elections again, though a seat in parliament was
always reckoned honorable, yet as it was in ancient times reckoned rather
burdensome than profitable, there was never any violent competition at the
election, and consequently the person chosen never thought himself much obliged
to those who voted for him, nor did they so much as expect any favors from him
upon that account alone. But no sooner did ministers begin to solicit the
votes, instead of convincing the reason of the members of parliament, then they
begun to think themselves obliged to reward those who complied with their
solicitations; and soon after this practice was introduced, a seat in
parliament became profitable as well as honorable, which of course begot
violent competition at elections; and this made voters begin to claim a merit
with those in favor of whom they gave their vote at any election.

Hinc prima mali tabes.

VIRG. From henceforth, Sir, the natural channel through which all public
honors and preferments flowed, began to be disused, and betraying our country
to the will of a minister in parliaments or at elections, began to be the only
channel through which a man could expect any honors or preferment. When this
began, or whether it has not met with some interruptions since it first began,
I shall not determine; but this I will say, that it never became so apparent as
it did under the late administration; and I wish we may not fatally feel the
consequence of it in the war we are now engaged in. The natural courage of
Englishmen is not by any discouragements to be absolutely extinguished; but I
wish it may not have taken a wrong turn: I wish we may not find that the
courage of our men is become rather an avaricious than an ambitious courage,
and that men now seek to raise by their courage their private fortunes rather
than their own or their country's glory; for if that be the case, we may make
good pirates or maroder^, but we shall never, while this spirit remains, make
good soldiers or seamen; and no man, I believe, can expect that we should be
able to put a glorious end to the war either by piracy or maroding. Courage,
Sir, like many other good qualities, becomes laudable only according to the use
that is made of it, and the motives upon which it is founded; for a man who
ventures his life with no other view but that of raising his own private
fortune, differs from a common highwayman in nothing but this, that the one
plunders according to law, the other against it. When I say this, Sir, I hope
it will not be thought, that I intend to reflect upon any of those brave men
who have ventured their lives in taking prizes from the enemies of their
country: for as they thereby weaken the enemy, it is a public service as well
as a private advantage; and when the first of these motives is their chief
inducement, which I hope it always is with regard to the officers at least,
they deserve the esteem and applause of their country. From such gentlemen we
may expect an equal behavior, where nothing but blows and triumphs are to be
got: from the enemy; but this is not to be expected from those who have nothing
but the prize in view. This sort of courage, which proceeds from sordid
avarice, I have mentioned, Sir, only to show that we are not to suppose, that
all the bold actions we read of in our journals, proceed from that true and
generous spirit of courage by which our ancestors were actuated; nor are we to
judge of the spirit of a people from what appears in their regular armies or
navies, because a spirit of courage may for some time be preserved in the
armies or navies of a country, after it has been industriously depressed among
all other ranks of men. The only way to judge in this case, is to consider the
conduct and behavior of the gentlemen of fortune in that country, the methods
they take to recommend themselves to the esteem of their country, and the
qualifications which recommend those of inferior rank to their favor; and from
these considerations we must conclude, that the ancient spirit of the people of
this nation is now almost entirely extinct. Do we now see any gentleman of
fortune who is not of the army or navy, endeavoring to recommend himself by
his courage or military knowledge? Do we now hear of the armies of foreign
princes being encouraged by the example of a crowd of English volunteers? Do we
now hear of any gentleman's encouraging his tenants and servants to make
themselves masters of military discipline, or con^erring distinguishing favors
upon those who have shown great courage and resolution upon any occasion? Few
such examples are to be met with in our present story; and the reason is plain:
All public favors are now bestowed upon voting, not fighting. If a man be
qualified to vote, he has no occasion for any other qualification; and of late
years, even in our army or navy, it has appeared to be the best qualification
for entitling a man to preferment. We must therefore demolish this
superstructure, which has been raised by corruption. We must render it
impossible for a minister to expect to gain a majority in parliament, or at
election, either by bribery or by a proper dispensation of places and
preferments. I say, we must do this, if we intend to restore that spirit of
bravery by which our ancestors preserved their liberties, and gained so much
glory to their country; and for this purpose nothing can, in my opinion, be so
effectual as the restoration of annual parliaments. Then, Sir, as to the
generosity and hospitality of our nobility and gentry, every one knows, that by
long parliaments and corrupt elections, they have been banished almost entirely
out of the country; for I hope it will not be called generosity, to give a
country fellow, by express bargain, five or ten guineas for his vote; and as
little will it, I hope, be called hospitality to make a county or borough drunk
once in seven years, by way of preparation for an ensuing election. In former
times most of our noblemen and gentlemen lived at their country seats, where
they often generously relieved such of the poor in the neighborhood as were in
real distress; and they daily entertained their friends and neighbors at their
houses, not with luxuries and extravagant feasts, but with a plentiful and
hospitable table. By these methods they recommended themselves to the favor of
their country, or of some neighboring city or borough, and in return, if they
desired it, they had sometimes the honor conferred upon them of representing
it in parliament, which being but of short duration, it never induced them to
think of altering their method of living, or of leaving their seat in the
country. But since the introduction of septennial parliaments, and with them of
course the practice of downright bribery at all elections, this method of
living has been entirely altered, and no wonder it should be so; for suppose a
gentleman to have lived in the most generous and hospitable manner in his
country, or in the neighborhood of his borough; suppose such a gentleman sets
up for their representative, down comes a courtier with his pockets full of
public money, and offers the electors, or such of them as will vote for him,
seven guineas a man: by such an offer the country gentleman's friendship, his
generosity, his hospitality, are all at once effaced out of the memories of
many of them, and he is thereby defeated of his election. Is it not natural for
such a gentleman to resolve, not to put himself any more to the trouble and
expense of being generous and hospitable? The favor of his countrymen he sees
must be purchased, not won; therefore he resolves to contract his expense, in
order to prepare the proper ammunition for the next election; and if he
succeeds, being then assured of his seat in parliament for seven years, and
sensible that being in the country can be of no service to him on any future
election, he retires with his family to London, and resolves to depend upon
bribery alone for his success in every future election. Thus, Sir, an end is
put to the generosity and hospitality of that gentleman, and thus an end has
already been put to the generosity and hospitality of most of the noblemen and
gentlemen of the kingdom. But this is not the only evil, for this change of a
country life into a town life, has introduced a new sort of expense, which is
of the most pernicious consequence to the kingdom in general, and to the landed
interest in particular. By the ancient country hospitality a great deal was, it
is true, consumed, but the consumption was all our own: almost the whole,
excepting a few spiceries, was the produce of our own farmers; whereas the
expense attending a town life is mostly laid out on things of foreign
importation, and most of them of such a nature as tend to deprive us of every
good quality we have left among us. One modern polite supper in town, with a
set of Italian musicians to entertain the company, will now cost as much as
would formerly have hospitably entertained a whole country for a week; with
this difference, that the expense of the latter centered chiefly in the pocket
of the neighboring farmers, whereas the expense of the former centers chiefly
in the pocket of foreigners, and those foreigners, perhaps, who are our most
dangerous enemies. When I consider this, Sir, I do not wonder at the heavy
complaints we hear among the farmers in all parts of the kingdom, for want of a
market for their goods, nor do I wonder at so many of them becoming bankrupt. A
man of fortune who lives in London* may, in plays, operas, routs, assemblies,
French cookery, French sauces, and French wines, spend as much yearly as he
could do, were he to live in the most hospitable manner at his seat in the
country; but will any one suppose, that there is as much malt, meat, bread, or
poultry consumed in his family? Will any one suppose, that the poor, or even
the farmers and tradesmen, in the neighborhood of his country-seat consume as
much, when they have nothing but what they take from their own table, as when
they had his hall to feast in? What a diminution then in country consumptions
must the retiring of one great family make? What a distress must be brought
upon a country, especially if remote from London, when all its rich families
repair to live constantly in this city? Sir, the fatal consequences brought
upon our land estates by thus tempting our rich families to live constantly in
London, are so glaring, that I shall wonder to see any landed gentleman in this
house oppose the motion; and if any of them do, I shall be very apt to suppose
they have some other income less honorable, though perhaps more punctual; for
that annual parliaments would send most of our rich families to the country,
and restore our ancient generosity and hospitality, is a question that can
admit of no dispute; because no gentleman could then preserve his interest in
his country, city, or borough, but by going to live amongst them; and if by
neglecting to live there he should be turned out of parliament, I believe the
most courtly dame could hardly prevail upon the most uxorious husband to live
in London, after having nothing to do there but to see her play at quadrille. I
now come, Sir, to those good qualities or virtues for which the inferior rank
of our people were very remarkable. These, I said, were honesty, frugality, and
industry. As to every one of these, the manners of our people have been very
much altered by the introduction of septennial parliaments, and the corruption
and violent contestation at elections, which have thereby of course been
propagated through the whole kingdom. With regard to the honesty of the people,
perhaps an instance may be here and there found of a man who acts honestly in
private life, and yet has made it his practice to sell his vote to the best
bidder. But I will say, that such a man's honesty proceeds more from the fear
of the gallows than from any natural disposition; and it is well known that few
men jump at once into the height of wickedness. They generally begin with
little venial sins, and move by degrees to the most aggravating crimes. Do not
most of the wretches that suffer at Tyburn tell us, that they began their
wicked course with a breach of the sabbath? This is none of the most heinous
sort of crimes; but the danger consists in the first encroachment upon
conscience; for being once got into a wicked course they seldom stop at the
threshold. In the same manner a man who sells his vote at an election, to a
candidate who he thinks will sell his country in parliament, must be sensible
he has committed a crime: In so doing he certainly acts against his conscience,
and by this means his acting against his conscience, becomes familiar to him,
which prepares him for the committing of any crime he thinks he may be safe in,
and then if he commits no crime in private life, it is not for want of will,
but for want of opportunity. He is honest, just as some women are chaste, only
because they never had an opportunity of being otherwise. The only difference
is, that he becomes wicked by custom, whereas they are so by nature. We should,
therefore, in order to preserve the honesty of our people, prevent, as much as
possible, a man's being tempted to sell his vote at an election, and the best
method for doing this will be to restore annual parliaments, because no
candidate will then be at the expense of corrupting, especially as he cannot
expect to be corrupted by a minister after he is chosen. Now, Sir, with regard
to the frugality of the people, we know by experience, that what people get by
selling their votes at an election, is generally spent in extravagance; and
being once led into an extravagant manner of living, few of them ever leave it,
as long as they have a penny to support it. By this means they are led into
necessities, and having once broke in upon their conscience, by selling their
vote at an election, they are the less proof against those temptations they are
exposed to by their necessities; so that I am persuaded, many a poor man in
this kingdom has been brought to the gallows by the bribe he received for his
vote at an election. Besides, as all the little places under the government
have of late been bestowed upon pliable voters at elections, without requiring
any one other quality to recommend them, such voters generally dissipate their
own substance, in hopes of being afterward provided for by some little place
in government; and, by the example of such voters, many of their neighbors are
led into the same extravagant course of living, which, I believe, is one great
cause of that luxury which now so generally prevails among the lower sort of
people. The same causes, Sir, that promote the people's extravagance prevent
their being industrious. Whilst a little country freeholder or tradesman is
spending in extravagance his infamous earnings at an election, he disdains to
think of honest industry or labor; and being once got out of the road of
industry, many of them cannot find their way into it again. If such fellows are
not provided by the court candidate who was chosen by their venality, with some
little post in the government, which all expect, but few are so lucky as to
meet with, they soon become bankrupts, are thrown into prison, and their
families a burden upon the country which they have sold and betrayed. This is
the fate of most of them; and as to those who happen to be provided for, their
good luck is of the most pernicious consequence in the neighborhood, because
it encourages others to become venal, in hopes of meeting with the same good
fortune; for in this case it is the same as in a lottery, people overlook the
thousands that are unfortunate, and take notice only of the happy few that get
the great prizes: If it were not for this unaccountable humor in mankind, no
man would be an adventurer in a lottery; no man, even in this corrupt age,
would sell his vote at an election. But whilst this humor remains, which it
will do as long as the race of man subsists, there will be adventurers, there
will be sellers. There is no preventing it, but by demolishing the market; and
this, I think, will be the effect of the bill now proposed to you, if it be
passed into a law: it will demolish the market of corruption, both in this
house and at every election in the kingdom, for ministers will not then
corrupt, because they can expect no success by corruption; and though little
contests may now and then happen among country gentlemen, yet they will never
be so violent as to occasion corruption on either side of the question. On the
contrary, Sir, I believe very few contests will ever happen among the country
gentlemen; for in every county, city, and borough in the kingdom, the chief
families will come to a compromise amongst themselves, and agree to take the
honor by turns, of representing it in parliament. No man will grudge his
neighbor the honor for one year, when he knows he is to have the same honor
the next year, or in a year or two after, especially when that honor is to be
attended with no expectation of any post, place, or pension from the crown,
unless he can recommend himself to it by some other qualification: whereas,
when a gentleman is to be chosen into parliament for seven years, and when his
being a member, without so much as the appearance of any other qualification,
is known to be sufficient for recommending or rather enlisting him to some
place of great profit under the crown, I do not wonder at his often meeting
with a violent opposition. The length of the term makes any such compromise as
I have mentioned impossible, which of course creates him antagonists among
those who are only ambitious of the honor; and the expectation of advantage
creates him antagonists, among those who are resoved to make their market. This
generally begets a violent opposition; and if the antagonist be one of the
better sort, he generally has recourse to bribery; for as he is resolved to
sell, he makes no scruple to purchase, if he thinks he can purchase for less
than he may sell. These, Sir, are the causes why we find such violent contests
about elections to septennial parliaments; and as all these causes would cease
the moment we made our parliaments annual, I think it is next to a
demonstration, that in elections for annual parliaments there could be no
violent opposition, and much less any bribery or corruption. Therefore, if we
have a mind to restore the practice of these virtues, for which our ancestors
were so conspicuous, and by which they handed down to us riches, glory, renown,
and liberty, we must restore the custom of having parliaments not only annually
held but annually chosen.

Very excellent is the speech of Sir I. Philips in the house of commons, A. D.
1745, on this subject Alm. DEB. COM. I.336.
.

SIR,
The opinion my honorable friend has of what we ought to do upon this
occasion, and the addition he has proposed to be made to our address, viz.
promissing the king, that the house would frame bills for checking abuses, and
restraining corruption, are so agreeable to my way of thinking, that I cannot
avoid standing up to second his motion, I shall readily concur with those
gentlemen who think that we ought upon this occasion to express, in the warmest
terms, our loyalty to our king, and our steady resolution to support him
against all his enemies, both foreign and domestic; and I hope they will concur
with me, and I believe many other gentlemen in this house, that we ought at the
same time, and with the same energy, to express our fidelity to our country,
and our steady resolution to support the liberties of the people against the
fatal effects of corruption, which, in my opinion, are as much to be dreaded as
any effects that can ensue from the success of the present rebellion. From
arbitrary power established in our present royal family, and supported by a
corrupt parliament, and a mercenary standing army, I shall grant, Sir, we are
in no immediate danger of popery; but the certain consequence will be a general
depravity of manners, and a total extinction of religion of every kind; and
then if chance, or any foreign view should make some future king even of our
present royal family, turn papist, which is far from being impossible, how
could we guard against the introduction and establishment of popery? To a man
who has no religion at all, it signifies nothing what sort of religion is
established; for he will always make that sort or sect his profession, which he
finds most suitable to his interest, consequently such a king would meet with
no opposition from the people; and our laws against popery would be no bar to
his intentions, because every one of them would at his desire be repealed by a
corrupt parliament; therefore the only sure and lasting fence we can have
against popery is, the preservation of our constitution. Whilst the people
continue to have any religion, and are general, sincere protestants, no king,
should he turn papist himself, can have it in his power to introduce, much l^ss
establish popery amongst us, if the people be freely and fairly represented in
parliament; but a government that proposes to support i^self by corruption,
must at the same time endeavor to abolish all principles of honor and
religion; for a man who has any principle of either, will never frame any
selfish motive, give his ^ote in parliament, or at elections, against what he
knows to be the true interest of his country. Such a government must
necessarily conduct itself in direct opposition to all the maxims of true
policy. Merit of every kind will be disregarded, religion will be laughed at,
and patriotism turned into ridicule. Libertinism will be encouraged, avarice
will be fed, and luxury will be propagated, in order to render the operation of
corruption the more easy, and its effect the more certain. And when the people
are generally and thoroughly corrupted, which, because of our frequent
elections, they must be before the government can for its support depend upon
corruption alone, the church of Rome, whose politics we have more reason to
d^ead than her power, will have a much more easy and certain game to play, than
that of forcing the Pretender upon us. This, Sir, they can never do as long as
we have any religion, virtue, or courage amongst us, and should they by an
extraordinary mischance succeed, the Pretender and they together, would find it
a very difficult task to convert a whole nation of religious and sincere
protestants to popery: besides, they could not be sure of the Pretender's not
serving them as Henry II. of France served the protestants of that kingdom:
after they had helped him to the throne, supposing him to be a man of sense and
no bigot, he might very probably for his own ease and security, declare himself
of the same religion with the majority of his subjects. But should we lose our
liberties by corruption, and of course our religion and virtue, if the church
of Rome could find means to convert our king then upon the throne, their
business would be done. Our nobility having no religion, would in complaisance,
or in order to recommend themselves to their sovereign, declare themselves
papists; and the majority of the people having as little religion as they,
would follow their example. Surely, Sir, it will not be said to be impossible
to suppose that any future king, even of our present royal family, can ever be
converted to popery. How many kings have been persuaded to change their
religion by a favorite wife or mistress? How ma^^ from political views? The
crown of Poland, but of late years made one protestant prince declare himself
papist, though all his then subjects were protestants too. The imperial crown
of Germany we know is elective; and a view to that crown may induce some future
king of Great Britain to declare himself papist; if he has a corrupt
parliament, they will be ready at his desire, to repeal that law by which
papists are excluded from the crown and government of these realms. We have
therefore no infallible security against popery, but the preservation of our
constitution, and for this reason, nothing can be more proper than to declare
our resolution, that we will take care to frame such bills as are necessary for
the preservation of our constitution against corruption, at the same time, that
we declare our resolution to support his majesty against a popish Pretender.
This is not only proper, Sir, but necessary upon the present occasion, in order
to convince the world that we are true protestants, as well as loyal subjects,
and that therefore we are resolved to keep every door bolted, by which popery
can make its way into this kingdom; and if we are resolved to frame and pass,
in this session, any bills that may be effectual against corruption, I am sure
no objection can be made against our declaring in our address that we will do
so. I hope we are all now convinced that some such bills are necessary. The
danger we are now exposed to, and the present unlucky circumstances of Europe
must convince every man of the necessity of our having such bills passed into
laws; for the danger our liberties are now exposed to, and the danger to which
the liberties of Europe are now exposed, are both evidently owing to the
measures of a late administration. Measures that could never have been approved
of by a british parliament, if the eyes of some gentlemen's understandings had
not been blinded by the lucrative places they expected, or those they were
afraid to lose. The fatal consequence of those measures were then foretold, and
are now so plainly seen, that those who approved of them, if they speak
ingenuously, must confess their having been misled. I am far from saying, Sir,
that any gentleman who had the honor to represent his country in parliament,
voted against the dictates of his conscience; but it is a failing of human
nature to judge weakly, in cases where our private interest is concerned, which
we may be daily convinced of by many lawsuits, that are obstinately carried on
by men even of the best sense in the kingdom. We must therefore banish, as much
as possible, all private interest from this house, otherwise we can never
expect to have the questions that come before us impartially considered, or
rightly determined. For this purpose, Sir, I hope every gentleman is now
convinced, that some new bills are necessary, and if we are resolved to frame
any such in this session, why should we not say so in our address upon this
occasion? I can suggest to myself no reason against it, and I am very sure it
will give great satisfaction without doors. From hence, I must suppose that my
honored friends motion will meet with no opposition, and therefore I shall add
no more, but conclude with heartily seconding it.

A bill was brought in A. D. 1659, under the commonwealth, that no man should
sit in the house of commons, who was loose in his morals* or profane in his
behavior.

One would imagine, that, at all times, those who have the weight of government
upon their shoulders, should be particularly anxious about the public favor,
with a view to the cheerful obedience of the subjects. But in modern times (the
present always excepted) courts, ministers, and parliaments seem to have given
up the esteem of the people, as an object of no consequence; for every body
knows, the esteem of the people can only be kept by keeping incorrupt
characters. At the same time our governors (the present always excepted) affect
to wonder at the disobedience of the people.

In bad times, men of bad morals have ever been picked out, as the fittest
instruments of enslaving others; and in free states the men of virtue have been
the known preservers of the public liberty SERIOUS ADDRESS, etc. 10.
. Those who are guilty of fraud or oppression in their private capacity, are
never to be depended on in a ^ublic Ibid.
. The Marquis of Halifax Ibid. 11.
says, great drinkers ought not to serve in parliament.

When men have interest to get themselves chosen to places and employments, for
which they are totally unfit, there is reason to fear the government, under
which that happens, is corrupt.

Caesar had interest to get himself chosen pontifex maximus. A hopeful
archbishop! Strongly accused of the most shameful of vices, and notoriously
guilty of every kind of injustice, rapine, and violence. Pompey used to call
him the Roman Aegysthus. And we know, that Aegysthus, after debauching
Agamemnon's queen, procured him to be murdered ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.145.
.

Abilities are undoubtedly of great consequence in a public character. But
virtue is infinitely more important. An honest man of moderate abilities may
fill a moderate station with advantage. A knave confounds whatever he meddles
with, and therefore cannot safely be employed. But in a corrupt state, that
which should give a man the greatest consequence, I mean integrity, gives him
the least. Both abilities and integrity are eclipsed by riches. For want of the
proper abilities, the same person may be a good man, and a bad king,
magistrate, or general. But it is a horrid reproach to a public man, to say, he
has a bad private character; because his example will produce infinite
mischief, and because the man who as an individual is wicked, is not likely to
be good as a prince, a minister, a magistrate, etc. Employing in stations of
power and trust men of notorious bad characters, is disgracing the age in which
it was done; for it supposes a want of better men, and endangers the state.

The great and good Sertorius would not suffer Mithridates king of Pontus to
re-conquer those parts of Asia, which, in virtue of his treaty with Sylla, he
had been forced to give up to the Romans. Sertorius would have been a great
gainer, by only conniving at this injury to his country, which he might have
done in such a manner, as to avoid suspicion. But that brave Roman would not
know himself to be false to his country, for any consideration whatever. The
employers of worthless men are disgraced; and bad men advanced to high
stations, are pilloried, that they may be the more effectually pelted.

Men will never [if they be wise] trust the important concerns of society to
one, who they know will do what is hurtful to society for his own pleasure: A
sentiment of Mr. Boswell's, in his Account of Corsica, p. 302. N. B. Mr.
Boswell, when he wrote that book, was but just of age, and was employed in
improving himself by study and travel, while many of his equals in years and
fortune were in pursuit of debauchery.

Let no bad man be trusted. Aurelian gave up Heraclammon, who had betrayed his
country to him, to be cut to pieces, saying, It was vain to expect fidelity in
the man who had betrayed his own country ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.456.
. He gave the traitor's estate to his family, lest it should be alleged, that
he ordered him to be made away with for the sake of his money.

It was enacted in the time of Henry VI, that no keepers of public stews in
Southwark should be impannelled upon juries, because supposed to be
unconsciencious persons PARL. HIST. II.235.
. I do not pretend to support the character of the persons who kept those
famous houses of reception, which, by the bye, are said to have been under the
government of the good bishops of Winchester; but thus far I will venture to
say, that it would be a very difficult task for a worthy lord, or an
illustrious patriot, who, for the sake of pleasure merely, keeps a wh -- in
open violation of the most solemn vows a man can make, and in direct defiance
of damnation, to show that he is more worthy of being impannelled on a jury, as
being a more conscientious person than the poor keeper of a bawdy house, who
may be faithful to his own spouse, who never had taken a vow upon him at the
altar never to keep a bawdy house, and who keeps it merely for the sake of
getting a livelihood.

See King's very judicious and learned ESSAY ON THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION AND
GOVERNMENT, printed for White, in which the author shows, by observations on a
number of states, ancient and modern, that freedom or slavery will prevail in a
country according as the dispositions and manners of the inhabitants render
them fit for one or the other. And to the same purpose, Hurd's DIALOGUES, Hume,
Montesquieu, Rollin, etc.

CHAP. II. Luxury hurtful to Manners, and dangerous to States.
THE wise ancients thought luxury more dangerous to states, than the attacks of
foreign enemies. -- saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit.
LUCAN. For that a brave people will find that in themselves which will repel
foreign force; whilst a people enervated by luxury are but a nation of women
and children.

The hardy Spartans, a handful of men, but those true men, baffled the attacks
of Xerxes's world in arms. The Romans, while they kept up their martial spir^t
and discipline, were too hard for all the nations around them, and conquered
almost as often as they fought. Afterward, being debauched by the Emperors,
they fell an easy prey to the hardy Goths, Alans, Hunns, etc. The
inconsiderable states of Holland, a handful of people living in a marsh,
resisted for seventy years, and at last baffled the mighty Spanish monarchy,
and forced them to give up all claim to superiority over the Netherlands; which
was, in fact, conquering Spain, and stripping her of part of her former
dominion. Spain was enervated by luxury, the effect of the introduction of gold
from the mines of South America, whilst the hardy Dutch, unexperienced in the
enfeebling arts, fought for civil and religious liberty, with an obstinacy
never to be tamed or tired out.

It may therefore be started by some readers, that however dangerous luxury may
be, we have nothing to fear from that quarter; for that in the late war the
British arms were universally victorious, beyond all past example. That
therefore luxury can as yet have produced no material effect in this happy
country, and cannot be counted among the abuses, of which those collections
profess to be a survey, and an inquiry into the means for correcting.

But to set this matter in its true light, there are several particulars
respecting the conduct of the late war, to be recollected, as, for instance,
that the expense laid out by Britain in the late war, was beyond all example;
which gives us a claim to extraordinary success; that we took upon ourselves
the whole weight of the war, trusting nothing to allies; that, according to
Lord Chatham's account of the matter See his speech on the American stamp act.
, who himself conducted the war in its most glorious times, our success was
chiefly owing to the hardy Scots, among whom it is certain, that luxury has yet
made no considerable progress.

But besides all this, it is to be remembered, that there are other effects
naturally to be expected from the prevalency of luxury in a country, altogether
as dangerous as this, of its tendency to break the martial spirit of a people.
Every man, in proportion to his degeneracy into luxury, becomes more and more
obnoxious to bribery and corruption. He finds wants and desires before unknown;
and these wants and desires being artificial merely, are without all bounds and
limits. For the whole world is not enough for one fantastic voluptuary; while a
very little satisfies nature.

Then he becomes an easy prey to the bribing candidate at an election; then he
is ready to sell his soul to the enemy of mankind, and his country to the
French king, in obedience to the order from the minister, who pays him the
damning pension, and directs when he is to vote evil to be good, and darkness
to be light.

Again, it is notorious, that luxury and expensive living, produce infinite
peculation of the public money, and infidelity in those employed by the public.

It has been disputed, but, I think, with little force of argument on one side
of the question, Whether the avaricious man or the spendthrift is the worse
member of society?

The avaricious man is ever scraping and heaping up, and what he saves perhaps
he locks up in his strong box, to the prejudice of commerce and the injury of
those, whom he ruins by cheating, usury, pettifogging, etc. But he will not
venture upon any bold and extensive mischief. He keeps within the letter of the
law, however he may overleap the bounds of justice; for he has the fear of the
pillory and the gibbet before his eyes.

With the prodigal, on the contrary, it is always neck or nothing. He will
commit the most daring villainy, for the sake of making the figure in life which
he aspires at.

The prevalency of luxury in a country, produces multitudes of this atrocious
species, of which we see many instances daily. It follows, therefore, that,
notwithstanding our late successes in war, indicating a happy superiority to
the enervating effects of luxury upon our national courage, or at least upon
the courage of our northern people, we have still a great deal to fear from
that formidable internal enemy to manners and principles.

Luxury has been sometimes defended upon the pretense of its being favorable
to commerce. But there are facts in history, which show, that it is even
capable of ruining commerce. About the time of the Emperor Justinian, his
subjects, who are commonly distinguished by the name of the Eastern or Greek
Empire, the capital of which was Constantinople, possessed a very advantageous
trade to India, which they lost through their luxury and idleness, and the
States of Italy gained it by their shrewdness, industry, and frugality. This is
explained by the authors of the MODERN UNIVERSAL HISTORY MOD. UNIV. HIST.
IX.216.
as follows:

The decline of the empire of the Greeks, while in the full possession, and
that in a more absolute degree than any other nation whatever, of this
lucrative trade of the Indies, seems to be a strong objection to the principle
laid down at the beginning and maintained through the course of this chapter.
But this, as the reader will see, is fully accounted for by their conduct; for
while in their hands this commerce was really the source of vast riches and
great power, a great part of the former the Greeks retained; the remainder,
together with the naval force, they abandoned. The objection then vanishes; for
it is impossible to furnish a wanton, idle, and profligate nation with power of
any kind, and least of all with a naval force.

Thus luxury is capable of destroying commerce, its parent. Which shows the
wisdom (the necessity, I had almost said) of setting bounds, as the ancients
did, by their ostracisms and petalisms, to the effects of exorbitant wealth in
individuals.

It was a custom at the new year's lustration at Rome, for the consul solemnly
to pray, that the gods would increase the Roman state. But one of those
consuls, wiser than the rest, insisted, that the Roman state was already great
enough, and declared, that he would only pray, that the gods would keep the
commonwealth as it then was; for that it was already great enough. Horace in
his times, which were later, and more corrupt, saw plainly that Rome was too
great.

Suis et ipsa Roma viribus ruit. From the riches, and at the same time the
frugality of the Dutch, it will appear (says Sir William Temple) that some of
our maxims are not so certain as they are current in our common politics. As
that the example and encouragement of excess and luxury if employed in the
consumption of native commodities, is of advantage to trade. It may be so, to
that which impoverishes, but not to that which enriches a country. It is indeed
less prejudicial, if it lies in native than if in foreign wares; but the humor
of luxury and expense cannot stop at certain bounds; what begins in native,
will proceed in foreign commodities: and though the example arises among idle
persons, yet the imitation will run into all degrees, even of those men by
whose industry the nation subsists. And besides, the more of our own we spend,
the less we shall have to send abroad; and so it will come to pass, that while
we drive a vast trade, yet, by buying much more than we sell, we shall come to
be poor Anders. HIST. COM. I.186.
.

Some apologize for luxury as serving to promote arts and taste. On the
contrary, Polybius, speaking of the ignorance of Mummius, casts a reflection on
the arts, as if taste made people extravagant and dishonest. But he might as
well say, we ought not to love women, because that passion often hurries us
into folly and vice. It is not too much taste, but too little prudence and
virtue, that produces degeneracy in a people. The truth is, it is only
occasionally, not necessarily, that commerce, arts, and taste do harm. And the
same spend-thrift, who in a polished age and country breaks for half a million,
would, in a time and place of less cultivation and less ostentation, have broke
for 10,000l.

Montague observes, that the Carthaginians, though enriched by commerce, were
not effeminated by it ANT. REP. p. 338.
.

Riches do not necessarily enervate a people, unless there be a relaxation of
discipline, and degeneracy of manners. The Florentines, (though they had been
at war 50 years, with almost all the states of Italy, and several powerful
princes) were by means of their extensive commerce, encouragement of ingenious
arts, strictness of discipline, and regularity of government, prodigiously
rich; and their riches, far from enervating them, inspired them with ideas of
rivalling the old Romans, not only in sentiments, but in power MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXXVI.100.
. In the time of their war with Scaliger prince of Verona, they were
cultivating the arts of peace at home. Giotto, a famous architect and painter,
worked at this time in Florence; and built the square tower of Florence, said
to be 144 else high Ibid. 101.
.

The Romans did not think of paving streets, till 500 years after the building
of the city ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.358.
; the era of their greatest glory, their greatest virtue, courage, public
spirit, liberty, etc. but of their greatest ignorance of the polite arts, as
appears from the famous instance of the consul Mummius, and others.

Excudent alii spirantia, etc.

VIRG. The Athenians were but clumsy artists, while they were a free people.
They did not take to the fine arts, till they lost their liberties.

The French are thought to excel us as much in painting, statuary, engraving,
and some other elegencies, as they fall short of us in freedom. It must be
confessed, that we have carried music and poetry much farther, than they.

It has often been said, that liberty encourages the arts, and that slavery
depresses them. And it is certain, that men, whose minds are debased and
dispirited by actual cruelty exercised against them by their sovereign, are not
likely to enjoy that tranquil mind, which is so necessary for the free play of
imagination.

But, on the other hand, there is generally found, in a free people, a certain
ferocity, (the very cause of their being free; for kings and ministers are
always ready to enslave all who will permit them) which ferocity is scarcely
consistent with the turn of mind that is necessary for a proficient in the
elegant arts. Add, that a certain degree of luxury, the forerunner of slavery,
is necessary for the support of the fine arts.

In our times the rapacity for riches is got to an unexampled height. We have
not, like the Romans ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.54.
, a temple dedicated to Juno Moneta; but every man and every woman seems to
have erected a temple to money in their hearts. Not that hoarding is the vice
of the times. But the case is worse. For the voracity of those who disgorge
their money as fast as they swallow it, is the most insatiable. Like the
gluttons satyrized by Iuvenal, who forced themselves to bring up one supper,
that they might have the filthy pleasure of eating two, the same evening, our
nobility and gentry, who repeatedly beggar themselves at Mrs. Cornely's, and
Arthur's, are incomparably more insatiable than misers, who have no call upon
them, but that of their avarice merely. Catiline's character, in Salust, suits
a great multitude in our times. Alieni appetens; sui profusus. Rapacious, yet
profuse.

The English are probably the most luxurious people now in the world; and the
English are the most given to suicide of any people now in the world. Does not
this remarkable coincidence give ground to presume, that there is a connection
between luxury and self-murder? That a people enslaving themselves to luxury,
grow extravagant and expensive in their living; and, not being able to bear the
expense of their way of living, and growing effeminate, impotent, and impatient
of disappointment, they suffer despair to hurry them into the crime, which
admits of no repentance or reformation. Ought not then every wise and good
government to suppress luxury? Ought not every individual to set up an example
against it?

Wherever luxury has prevailed, it may be traced by its mischievous effects.

The Ionians were once as valiant as the other Greeks. But they degenerated
through luxury, the ruin of all bravery and public virtue. Maximus Tyrius says,
the Crotonians loved the Olympic games, the Spartans fine armor, the Cretans
hunting, the Sybarites dressing, and the Ionians lascivious dances. The Ionians
accordingly joined Xerxes against their countrymen the Athenians. It is true,
after they saw themselves taken to task by Themistocles, they deserted the
Persians, and gave the Greeks an opportunity of gaining the important victory
of Salamis.

The fall of Athens is, by some writers, ascribed to Pericles's contriving to
bring the court of Areopagus into disgrace, because he was refused admission
into it ANT. UNIV. HIST. VI.331.
.

The conquering of Antiochus was the first introduction of luxury into the
commonwealth Ibid. IX.270.
.

Hannibal probably would have overset Rome, and saved his country from the
horrible cruelty of the Romans, if he had not himself been overset by faction.
Thus faction was the ruin of Carthage, and riches probably were the cause of
faction Ibid. XVIII.110.
.

Scarce any of the ancient Numidians died of any thing, but old age, says
Salust.

Alexander's ministers, and generals, were corrupted by his profusion in
enriching them out of the spoils of the conquered nations Ibid. VIII.562
. Hence factions and conspiracies. At length he himself became infected. Then
he must wear the Persian dress, and mimick the oriental effeminacy. At last he
sunk into a beastly sot, and is thought, by some authors, to have fallen, at
Babylon, a sacrifice to ebriety, though others ascribe his death to poison.

The author of GRAND. ET DECAD. DES ROMANS ascribes the ruin of Carthage in great
measure to the exorbitant riches of some individuals, p. 33.

Alexander and Kouli khan thought it necessary (the same author observes, p.
46.) to retrench the growing riches of their armies.

The great, but effeminate empire of China, said to contain innumerable cities,
some of which inhabited by two millions of people, besides 4,400 walled, and
2,920 open towns. an army of 2,659,191 men, and in all about 12 millions of
families, or 60 millions of people, the first establishment of which is too
ancient for history, was conquered by the warlike Tartars, in as many single
years, as it had stood thousands MOD. UNIV. HIST. VIII.15.
.

The Tartar princes, enervated by the pleasures of the fine country of China,
degenerated from the valor of their ancestors Ibid. VIII.470.
. So Capua proved a Cannae to Hannibal.

Don Pelayo, when he recovered the Asturias from the Moors, walled no towns,
built no castles, fortified no passes, thinking all such proceedings
encouragements to laziness, and detrimental to courage Ibid. XIX.494.
.

At the battle of Bretinfeld, between the Imperialists and the Swedes, and
their allies, A. D. 1642, in which the former were defeated, the regiment of
Madlon, of the Imperial side, fled without striking a blow, and occasioned the
confusion, which proved fatal. After the decision they were surrounded by six
regiments, disarmed, their ensigns torn, their disgrace published, the regiment
erased from the muster-roll, and their sentence read, viz. That the colonel,
captains, and lieutenants, should be beheaded, the ensigns hanged, the soldiers
decimated, and the survivors driven with disgrace out of the army Ibid. XXX.260.
.

The Lusitanians gained victories over the Romans ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.363.
. Any nation in Europe can beat the modern Portuguese.

Hear the excellent Montague on the prevalency of luxury among the Romans, and
its effects Montag. ANT. REPUBL. 269.
.

If we connect the various strokes interspersed through what we have remaining
of the writings of Salust, which he levelled at the vices of his countrymen, we
shall be able to form a just idea of the manners of the Romans in the time of
that historian. From the picture thus faithfully exhibited, we must be
convinced, that not only those shocking calamities, which the republic suffered
during the contest between Marius and Sylla, but those subsequent and more
fatal evils, which brought on the utter extinction of the Roman liberty and
constitution, were the natural effects of that foreign luxury, which first
introduced venality and corruption. Though the introduction of luxury from Asia
preceded the ruin of Carthage in point of time, yet as Salust informs us, the
dread of that dangerous rival restrained the Romans within the bounds of
decency and order. But as soon as ever that obstacle was removed, they gave a
full scope to their ungoverned passions. The change in their manners was not
gradual, and by little and little, as before, but rapid and instantaneous.
Religion, justice, modesty, decency, all regard for divine or human laws, were
swept away at once by the irresistible torrent of corruption. The nobility
strained the privileges annexed to their dignity, and the people their liberty,
alike into the most unbounded licentiousness. Every one made the dictate of his
own lawless will, his only rule of action. Public virtue, and the love of their
country, which had raised the Romans to the empire of the universe, were
extinct. Money, which alone could enable them to gratify their darling luxury,
was substituted in their place. Power, dominion, honors, and universal respect
were annexed to the possession of money. Contempt, and whatever was most
reproachful, was the bitter portion of poverty; and to be poor* grew to be the
greatest of all crimes, in the estimation of the Romans. Thus wealth and
poverty contributed alike to the ruin of the republic. The rich employed their
wealth in the acquisition of power, and their power in every kind of
oppression, and rapine for the acquisition of more wealth. The poor, now
dissolute and desperate, were ready to engage in every seditious insurrection,
which promised them the plunder of the rich, and set up both their liberty and
country to sale, to the best bidder. The republic, which was the common prey to
both, was thus rent to pieces between the contending parties. As an universal
selfishness is the genuine effect of universal luxury, so the natural effect of
selfishness is to break through every tie, both divine and human, and to stick
at no kind of excesses in the pursuit of wealth, its favorite object. Thus the
effects of selfishness will naturally appear in irreligion, breach of faith,
perjury, a contempt of all the social duties, extortion, frauds in our
dealings, pride, cruelty, universal venality and corruption. From selfishness
arises that vicious ambition, if I may be allowed the term, which Salust
rightly defines, the lust of domination. Ambition is a passion which precedes
avarice; for the seeds of ambition seem almost to be innate. The desire of
pre-eminence, the fondness for being distinguished above the rest of our fellow
creatures, attends us from the cradle to the grave. Though as it takes its
complexion, so it receives its denomination from the different objects it
pursues, which in all are but the different means of attaining the same end.
But the lust of domination here mentioned by Salust, though generally
confounded with ambition, is in reality a different passion, and is strictly
speaking only a different mode of selfishness. For the chief end which we
propose by the lust of domination, is to draw every thing to center in
ourselves, which we think will enable us to gratify every other passion. I
confess it may be alleged that self-love, and selfishness, both arise from the
general law of self-preservation, and are but different modes of the same
principle. I acknowledge that if we examine strictly all those heroic instances
of love, friendship, or patriotism, which seem to be carried to the most
exalted degree of disinterestedness, we shall probably find the principle of
self-love lurking at the bottom of many of them. But if we rightly define these
two principles, we shall find an essential difference between our ideas of
self-love and selfishness. Self-love, within its due bounds, is the practice of
the great duty of self-preservation regulated by that law, which the great
Author of our being has given for that very end. Self-love, therefore, is not
only compatible with the most rigid practice of the social duties, but is in
fact a great motive and incentive to the practice of all moral virtue. Whereas
selfishness, by reducing every thing to the single point of private interest, a
point which it never loses sight of, banishes all the social virtues, and is
the first spring of action, which impells to all these disorders which are so
fatal to mixed government in particular, and to society in general. From this
poisonous source Salust deduces all those evils which spread the pestilence of
corruption over the whole face of the republic, and changed the mildest and
most upright government in the universe, into the most inhuman and most
insupportable tyranny. For as the lust of domination can never possibly attain
its end without the assistance of others, the man who is actuated by that
destructive passion, must of necessity strive to attach himself to a set of men
of similiar principles for the subbordinate instruments. This is the origin of
all those iniquitous combinations which we call factions. To accomplish this,
he must put on as many shapes as Proteus; he must ever wear the mask of
dissimulation, and live a perpetual lie. He will court the friendship of every
man, who is capable of promoting, and endeavor to crush every man who is
capable of defeating his ambitious views. Thus his friendship and his enmity
will be alike unreal, and easily convertible, if the change will serve his
interest. As private interest is the only tie which can ever connect a faction,
the lust of wealth, which was the cause of the lust of domination, will now
become the effect, and must be proportionable to the sum total of the demands
of the whole faction; and as the latter know no bounds, so the former will be
alike insatiable. For when once a man is inured to bribes in the service of
faction, he will expect to be paid as well for acting for, as for acting
against the dictates of his conscience. A truth which every minister must have
experienced, who has been supported by a faction, and which a late great
minister, as he frankly confessed, found to be the case with him during his
long adminstration. But how deeply soever a state may be immersed in luxury and
corruption, yet the man who aims at being the head of a faction for the end of
domination, will at first cloak his real design under an affected zeal for the
service of the government. When he has established himself in power, and formed
his party, all who support his measures will be rewarded as the friends; all
who oppose him will be treated as enemies to the government. The honest and
incorrupt citizen will be hunted down, as disaffected, and all his
remonstrances against mal-administration, will be represented as proceeding
from that principle. The cant term disaffection, will be the watchword of the
faction; and the charge of disaffection, that constant resource of iniquitous
ministers, that infallible sign that a cause will not stand the test of a fair
inquiry, will be perpetually employed by the tools of power to silence those
objections which they want arguments to answer. The faction will estimate the
worth of their leader, not by his services to his country; for the good of the
public will be looked upon as obsolete and chimerical; but his ability to
gratify or screen his friends; and crush his opponents. The leader will fix the
implicit obedience to his will as the test of merit to his faction:
consequently all the dignities and lucrative posts will be conferred upon
persons of that stamp only, whilst honesty and public virtue will be standing
marks of political reprobation. Common justice will be denied to the latter in
all controverted elections, whilst the laws will be strained or overruled in
favor of the former. Luxury is the certain forerunner of corruption, because
it is the certain parent of indigence: consequently a state so circumstanced
will always furnish an ample supply of proper instruments for faction. For as
luxury consists in an inordinate gratification of the sensual passions, the
more the passions are indulged, they grow the more importunately craving, till
the greatest fortune must sink under their insatiable demands. Thus luxury
necessarily produces corruption. For as wealth is essentially necessary to the
support of luxury, wealth will be the universal object of desire in every state
where luxury prevails: consequently, all those who have dissipated their
private fortunes in the purchase of pleasure, will be ever ready to inlist in
the cause of faction for the wages of corruption. A taste for pleasure
immoderately indulged, quickly strengthens into habit, eradicates every
principle of honor and virtue, and gets possession of the whole man. And the
more expensive such a man is in his pleasures, the greater lengths he will run
for the acquisition of wealth for the end of profusion. Thus the contagion will
become so universal that nothing but an uncommon share of virtue can preserve
the possessor from infection. For when once the idea of respect and homage is
annexed to the possession of wealth alone, honor, probity, every virtue and
every amiable quality will be held cheap in comparison, and looked upon as
awkward and quite unfashionable. But as the spirit of liberty will yet exist in
some degree, in a state which retains the name of freedom, even though the
manners of that state should be generally depraved, an opposition will arise
from those virtuous citizens who know the value of their birthright, liberty,
and will never submit tamely to the chains of faction. Force then will be
called in to the aid of corruption, and a standing army will be introduced. A
military government will be established upon the ruins of the civil, and all
commands and employments will be disposed of at the arbitrary will of lawless
power. The people will be fleeced to pay for their own fetters, and doomed,
like the cattle, to unremitting toil and drugery, for the support of their
tyrannical masters. Or if the outward form of civil government should be
permitted to remain, the people will be compelled to give a sanction to tyranny
by their own suffrages, and to elect oppressors instead of protectors. From
this genuine portrait of the Roman manners, it is evident to a demonstration,
that the fatal catastrophe of that republic, of which Salust himself was an
eyewitness, was the natural effect of the corruption of their manners. It is
equally as evident from our author and the rest of the Roman historians, that
the corruption of their manners was the natural effect of foreign luxury,
introduced and supported by foreign wealth. The fatal tendency of these evils
was too obvious to escape the notice of every sensible Roman, who had any
regard for liberty and their ancient constitution. Many sumptuary laws were
made to restrain the various excesses of luxury; but these efforts were too
feeble to check the overbearing violence of the torrent. Cato proposed a severe
law, enforced by the sanction of an oath, against bribery and corruption at
elections; where the scandalous traffic of votes was established by custom, as
at a public market. But as Plutarch observes, he incurred the resentment of
both parties by that salutary measure. The rich were his enemies, because they
found themselves precluded from all pretensions to the highest dignities; as
they had no other merit to plead but what arose from their superior wealth. The
electors abused, cursed, and even pelted him, as the author of a law which
deprived them of the wages of corruption, and reduced them to the necessity of
subsisting by labor. But this law, if it really passed, had as little effect
as any of the former; and like the same law^ in our own country upon the same
occasion, was either evaded by chicane or overruled by power. Our own
septennial scenes of drunkenness, riot, bribery, and abandoned perjury, may
serve to give an idea of the annual elections of the Romans in those abominable
tim^s. Corruption was arrived at its last stage, and the depravity was
universal. The whole body of the unhappy republic was infected and the
distemper was incurable. For ^hese excesses which formerly were esteemed the
vices of the people, were now, by the force of custom fixed into a habit,
become the manners of the people. A most infallible criterion by which we may
ascertain the very point of time when the ruin of any free state, which labors
under these evils, may be naturally expected. The conspiracies of Catiline and
Caesar against the liberty of their country, were but genuine effects of that
corruption which Salust has marked out as the immediate cause of the
destruction of the republic. The end proposed by each of these bad men, and the
means employed for that end, were the same in both. The difference in their
success arose only from the difference of address and abilities in the
respective leaders. The followers of Catiline, as Salust informs us, were the
most dissolute, the most profligate, and the most abandoned wretches, which
could be culled out of the most populous and most corrupt city of the universe.
Caesar, upon the same plan, formed his party, as we learn from Plutarch, out of
the most infected and most corrupt members of the very same state. The vices of
the times easily furnished a supply of proper instruments. To pilfer the public
money, and to plunder the provinces by violence, though state crimes of the
most heinous nature, were grown so familiar by custom, that they were looked
upon as no more than mere office perquisites. The younger people who are ever
most ripe for sedition and insurrection, were so corrupted by luxury, that they
might be deservedly termed an abandoned race, whose dissipation made it
impracticable for them to keep their own private fortunes; and whose avarice
would not suffer their citizens to enjoy the quiet possession of theirs.

Though there is a concurrence of several causes which brings on the ruin of a
state, yet, where luxury prevails, that parent of all our fantastic imaginary
wants, ever craving and ever unsatisfied, we may justly assign it as the
leading cause: since it ever was and ever will be the most baneful to public
virtue. For as luxury is contagious from its very nature, it will gradually
descend from the highest to the lowest ranks, till it has ultimately infected a
whole people. The evils arising from luxury have not been peculiar to this or
that nation; but equally fatal to all wherever it was admitted. Political
philosophy lays this down as a fundamental and incontestible maxim, that all
the most flourishing states owed their ruin, sooner or later, to the effects of
luxury; and all history, from the origin of mankind, confirms by this truth the
evidence of facts, to the highest degree of demonstration. In the great
despotic monarchies it produced avarice, dissipation, rapaciousness,
oppression, perpetual factions amongst the great, whilst each endeavored to
engross the favor of the Prince wholly to himself; venality, and a contempt
for all law and discipline, both in the civil and military departments. Whilst
the people, following the pernicious example of their superiors, contracted
such a dastardly effeminacy, joined to an utter inability to support the
fatigues of war, as quickly threw them into the hands of the first resolute
invader. Thus the Assyrian empire sunk under the arms of Cyrus, with his poor
but hardy Persians. The extensive and opulent empire of Persia fell an easy
conquest to Alexander, and a handful of Macedonians. And the Macedonian empire,
when enervated by the luxury of Asia, was compelled to receive the yoke of the
victorious Romans. Luxury, when introduced into free states, and suffered to be
diffused without control through the body of the people, was ever productive
of that degeneracy of manners which extinguishes public virtue, and puts a
final period to liberty. For as the incessant demands of luxury quickly induced
necessity, that necessity kept human invention perpetually on the rack, to find
out ways and means to supply the demands of luxury. Hence the lower classes at
first sold their suff^ages in privacy and with caution; but as luxury
increased, and the manners of the people grew daily more corrupt, they openly
set them up to sale to the best bidder. Hence too the ambitious amongst the
higher classes, whose superior wealth was frequently their only qualifications,
first purchased the most lucrative posts in the state by this infamous kind of
traffic, and then maintained themselves in power by that additional fund for
corruption, which their employments supplied, till they had undone those they
had first corrupted. But of all the ancient republics, Rome, in the last period
of her freedom, was the scene where all the inordinate passions of mankind
operated most powerfully and with the greatest latitude. There we see luxury,
ambition, faction, pride, revenge, selfishness, a total disregard to the public
good, an universal dissoluteness of manners, first make them ripe for, and then
complete their destruction. Consequently that period, by showing us more
striking examples, will afford more useful lessons than any other part of their
history ^
.

Great must have been the frugality and moderation of the Romans, when Attilius
Regulus waring at the head of the Roman legions ab^^^d, wrote home to the
senate, desiring to be recalled, because his farm being, in his absence,
neglected, his wife and children were in danger of starving ANT. UNIV. HIST.
vol. XII. p. 178.
. And by the same rule, the state might be thought on the decline, when the
ladies solicited a repeal of the Oppian law, by which they were, in times of
extremity, restrained in their expenses as to dress, chariots, etc. ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XII.342.
.

In the contest between Crassus and Pompey, we see the former catching the
favor of the people by entertaining them at 10,000 tables, and giving them
largesses of corn. Well might it be pronounced, that the Roman spirit was on
the decline, when such a base art was found successful. Very different were the
times, when Curious Dentatus rejected the Samnite present of plate; or when the
Roman ambassadors set the golden crowns, they had sent them by king Ptolemy, on
the heads of his statues.

We see luxury gradually increasing and prevailing over the Roman spirit and
virtue, till at length, in the imperial times, the contagion even reached
ladies of the greatest distinction, who, in imitation of the prince and his
court, had their assemblies and representations too, in a grove planted by
Augustus, where booths were built, and in them sold, whatever incited to
sensuality and wantonness. Thus was even the outward appearance of virtue
banished the city, and all manner of avowed lewdness, depravity, and
dissoluteness, introduced in its room, men and women being engaged in a
contention to outvye each other in glaring vices, and scenes of impurity. At
length Nero could forbear no longer; but took the harp, and mounted the public
stage, trying the strings with much attention, and care, and studying his part.
About him stood his companions, and a cohort of the guards, with many tribunes
and centurions, and Burrhus their commander, sad on this infamous occasion; but
praising Nero, while he grieved for him. At this time he enrolled a body of
Roman knights, entitled the knights of Augustus; young men distinguished by the
bloom of their years, and strength of body, but all professed profligates. As
the emperor spent whole days and nights in singing, and playing upon the harp;
the sole business of these knight^ was, to commend his person and voice, to
extol the beauty of both, by names and epithets peculiar to the gods, and to
sing his airs about the streets.

It may be questioned whether there is in history any example more striking of
the excess, to which luxury may be carried in a country, than the following of
the ancient inhabitants of Tarentum ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.143.146.148.
.

The heat of the climate, the fruitfulness of the country, and the opportunity
of supplying themselves by sea, with all the delights of Greece, sunk the
Tarentines into idleness, and all the vices that attend it. Their whole life
was spent in feasts, sports, and public entertainments. Buffoons and
prostitutes governed the state at their pleasure, and often determined the most
important affairs by a joke, or an indecent gesture. They bore a mortal hatred
to the Romans, and dreaded their dominion, not so much out of fear of losing
their liberty, as of being disturbed by that warlike and rough people, in the
pursuit of their pleasures. They therefore employed all their Grecian subtilty,
to draw such a number of enemies upon them, as still to keep them at distance
from themselves, and this without appearing to be concerned.

The Tarentines imagining that Rome having at last discovered their secret
plots, had sent that fleet to punish them, they all, with one consent, ran down
to the port, sell upon the Roman fleet with the fury of madmen, sunk one ship,
and took four, the other five escaping. All the prisoners fit to bear arms,
were put to the sword, and the others sold for slaves to the best bidder. The
Romans, upon the news of this act of hostility, sent a deputation to Tarentum,
to demand satisfaction for the insult offered to the republic; but the
Tarentines, instead of hearkening to their demands, insulted the ambassadors in
the most outrageous manner. They admitted them to an audience in the theater,
where Posthumous, who was at the head of the embassy, and had been thrice
consul, harrangued the assembly in Greek. His advanced age, his personal merit,
and above all, the character of an ambassador, from a powerful people, ought to
have gained him respect; but the Tarentines, heated with wine, not only gave no
attention to his discourse, but burst into loud laughter, and impudently hissed
him, whenever he dropped an improper expression, or pronounced a word with a
foreign accent. Nor was this all. When he began to speak of reparation of
injuries, they flew into a rage, and rather drove him out of the assembly, than
dismissed him. As he was walking off with an air of gravity and dignity, which
he preserved, notwithstanding the reception they gave him, a buffoon named
Philonides, coming up to him, urined upon his robe; a new source of immoderate
laughter to the mad and drunken multitude, who clapped their hands, applauding
the outrageous insolence. Posthumous turning about to the assembly, showed them
the skirt of his garment so defiled; but when he found that this had no effect,
but to increase the loudness of their contumelious mirth, he said without the
least emotion, Laugh on Tarentines, laugh on now while you may; the time is
coming when you will weep. It is not a little blood that must wash and purify
this garment. This said, he withdrew left the city, and embarked for Rome. When
the Tarentines came to themselves, and began to reflect on the enormity of
their conduct, and at the same time, on the inability of their neighbors to
defend them against so powerful a republic, they cast their eyes upon Pyrrhus
king of Epirus, whose great reputation for valor and long experience in war,
had gained him the reputation of one of the heroes of Greece. They therefore
immediately dispatched ambassadors to him, but rather to found his disposition,
and observe the situation of his affairs, than to enter without farther
deliberation into any engagements with him. As Pyrrhus naturally loved action,
and the bustle and hurry of war, the ambassadors found him in a disposition to
hearken to any proposal, which would furnish him with employment worthy of his
ambition.

Meton, on the day that a public decree was to pass for inviting Pyrrhus to
Tarentum, and when the people were all placed in the theater, putting a
withered garland on his head, and having a flambeau in his hand, as was the
manner of the drunken debauchees, came dancing into the midst of the assembly,
accompanied by a woman playing on the flute. This silly sight was sufficient to
divert the Tarentines from their most important deliberations. They made a ring
and called out to Meton to sing, and to the woman to play; but when they
expected to be entertained with a song, and were all silent, the wise citizen
assuming an air of great seriousness, You do well Tarentines, said he, not to
hinder those from diverting themselves, who are disposed to mirth; and if you
are wise, you will yourselves take advantage of the present liberty you enjoy,
to do the same. When Pyrrhus comes, you must change your way of life; your
mirth and joy will be at an end. These words made an impression upon the
multitude, and a murmur went about that he had spoken well; but those who had
some reason to fear, that they should be delivered up to the Romans, in case of
an accommodation, being enraged at what he had said, reviled the assembly for
suffering themselves to be so mocked and affronted; and crowding together,
thrust Meton out of the assembly.

Heliogabalus never wore a suit, or a ring, twice. He gave away always to his
guests the gold plate used at supper. Oftentimes he distributed among the
people, and soldiery, gold, silver, and tickets, entitling them to receive
large sums, which were regularly paid. He had his fish ponds filled with
rose water, and the naumachia (a basin large enough for fleets to exhibit
mock-fights) with wine. Tongues of peacocks and nightingales, and brains of
parrots and pheasants, were his dishes, and his dogs were fed with the livers
of geese, his horses with raisins, and the wild beasts of his menagerie with
partridges and pheasants A^T. (...). XV.^51.
. Yet this effeminate wretch was as cruel as the roughest soldier Ibid. 352.
.

Davenant Davenant, I.382.
, thinks the Spaniards laziness came upon them in the time of Philip II. when
they got their new world in America, which brought among them immense treasures
of gold and silver, and damped the spirit of industry. It is to be feared, that
the Nabob fortunes lately acquired in India, and brought hither, may have some
such effect on the disposition of the English.

Commerce established by the czar Peter, introduced luxury. Universal
dissipation took the lead, and profligacy of manners succeeded. Many of the
lords begun to squeeze and grind their peasants, to extort fresh supplies for
the incessant demands of luxury PREF, TO THE CZARINA'S INSTRUCTION FOR A CODE
OF LAWS, p. 11.
. If luxury has produced corruption among the poor Russians, what may it not be
expected to do among the rich English?

The extreme poverty occasioned by idleness and luxury in the beginning of
Lewis XIII. of France, filled the streets of Paris with beggars. The court
(which then resided at the Louvre) disgusted at this sight, which indeed was a
severe reproach on them, issued an order, forbidding all persons, on severe
penalties, to relieve them, intending thereby to drive them out of town, and
not caring though they dropped down dead, before they could reach the country
towns and villages MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV.451.
.

The Moors possessed, for a long time, the richest parts of Spain, and the
Christians the least fertile. The consequence was, that hard labor
strengthened the latter, and easy living enfeebled the former. Accordingly, the
Christians in the last and decisive battle between them and the Moors at
Tolosa, killed 200,000 of the infidels Ibid. XX.171.
.

Scarce half the army, who, under Bourbon, sacked Rome, in the time of Charles
V. got out of that city alive. They fell the victims of their own debauchery.

The nobles of Spain grew so effeminate in the time of Ferdinand and Isabella,
that they would not ride upon horses; but chose mules; because their motion is
gentler and easier. So that the breed of horses would have been lost, if the
king had not given an order about preserving it Ibid. XXI.186.
.

So Horace complains of the Roman youth of his times; Nescit haerere equo
ingenuus puer.

The danger of a people's sliding into luxury and corruption, is thus described
by my worthy friend Mr. professor Ferguson of Edinbu^gh Ferguson's HIST. CIV.
SOC. 392.
.

The increasing regard with which men appear in the progress of commercial
arts, to study their profit, or the delicacy with which they refine on their
pleasures, even industry itself, or the habit of application to a tedious
employment, in which no honors are won, may perhaps be considered as
indications of a growing attention to interest, or of effeminacy contracted in
the enjoyment of ease and convenience. Every successive art by which the
individual is taught to improve on his fortune, is in reality an addition to
his private engagements, and a new avocation of his mind from the public,
Corruption however does not arise from the abuse of commercial arts alone; it
requires the aid of political situation; and is not produced by the objects
that occupy a sordid and a mercenary spirit, without the aid of circumstances,
that enable men to indulge in safety any mean disposition they have acquired.
Providence has fitted mankind for the higher engagements, which they are
sometimes obliged to fulfill; and it is in the midst of such engagements, that
they are most likely to acquire or to preserve their virtues. The habits of a
vigorous mind are formed in contending with difficulties, not in engaging the
repose of a pacific station; penetration and wisdom are the fruits of
experience, not the lessons of retirement and leisure; ardour and generosity
are the qualities of a mind raised and animated in the conduct of scenes that
engage the heart, not the gifts of reflection or knowledge. The mere
intermission of national and political efforts is, notwithstanding, sometimes
mistaken for public good; and there is no mistake more likely to foster the
vices, or to flatter the weakness of feeble and interested men. If the ordinary
arts of policy, or rather if a growing indifference to objects of a public
nature, should prevail, and under any free constitution, put an end to their
disputes of party and silence, that noise of dissension which generally
accompanies the exercise of freedom, we may venture to prognosticate corruption
to the national manners, as well as remissness to the national spirit. The
period is come, when no engagement remaining on the part of the public, private
interest, and animal pleasure, become the sovereign objects of care. When men
being relieved from the pressure of great occasions, bestow their attention on
trifles; and having carried what they are pleased to call sensibility and
delicacy on the subject of ease or molestation, as far as real weakness or
folly can go, have recourse to affectation, in order to enhance the pretended
demands, and accumulate the anxieties of a sickly fancy, and enfeebled mind. In
this condition, mankind generally flatter their own imbecility under the name
of politeness. They are persuaded, that the celebrated ardour, generosity and
fortitude, of former ages bordered on frenzy, or were the mere effects of
necessity on men, who had not the means of enjoying their ease or their
pleasure. They congratulate themselves on having escaped the storm, which
required the exercise of such arduous virtues; and with that vanity which
accompanies the human race in their meanest condition, they boast of a scene of
affectation of languor, or of folly, as the standard of human felicity, and as
furnishing the properest erercise of a rational nature. It is one of the least
menacing symptoms of an age, prone to degeneracy, that the minds of men become
perplexed in the discernment of merit, as much as the spirit becomes enfeebled
in conduct, and the heart misled in the choice of its objects. The care of mere
fortune is supposed to constitute wisdom; retirement from public affairs, and
real indifference to mankind, receive the applause of moderation and virtue.
Great fortitude and elevation of mind, have not always indeed been employed in
the attainment of valuable ends; but they are always respectable, and they are
always necessary when we would act for the good of mankind, in any of the more
arduous stations of life. While therefore we blame their misapplication, we
should beware of depreciating their value. Men of a severe and sententious
morality, have not always sufficiently observed this caution; nor have they
been duly aware of the corruptions they flattered, by the satire they employed
against what is aspiring and prominent in the character of the human soul.

Harrington, in his OCEANA Harrington's OCEANA, p. 323.
, writes, in a very edifying manner, on this subject, as follows:

Rome was never ruined, till her balance being broken, the nobility forsaking
their ancient virtue, abandoned themselves to their lusts; and the senators,
who, as in the case of Iugurtha, were all bribed, turned knaves; at which turn,
all their skill in government (and in this never men had been better skilled)
could not keep the commonwealth from overturning. Cicero, an honest man,
labored might and main; Pomponius Atticus, another, despaired; Cato tore out
his own bowels; the poignards of Brutus and Cassius neither considered prince
nor father; but the commonwealth had sprung her planks, and split her ballast;
the world could not save her.

When governors, say the authors of the UNIVERSAL HISTORY ANT. UNIV. HIST.
VIII.480.
, either through want of thought, or, which is often the case, from a wrong
turn of thought, suffer those of whom they have the care, to sink into all the
excesses of debauchery, they must not expect from these wicked and effeminate
men either generous thoughts or gallant actions. When a people become slaves to
their lusts, they are in the fairest train imaginable of becoming slaves to
their neighbors. Politicians may for a time indeed ward off the blow; but how?
Why, by making use of mercenary troops. Thus the cowardly spendthrift pays a
bully to fight his quarrels, and when he pays him no longer, is beaten by him
himself. This was the fate of the Persians; they hired Greek troops; maintained
them in the exercise of their discipline; made them perfectly acquainted with
their country and manners; suffered them to see and consider those errors in
their government which made it, in spite of its grandeur, appear contemptible;
and then these very Greeks, on their return home, were continually prompting
their countrymen to go and pull down that empire, whose weight scarce permitted
it to stand. If the Persian emperors had always encouraged feuds in Greece, the
Greeks could never have turned their arms upon them; for we see that till one
state subdued the rest, an expedition into Asia might be talked of, but could
not be executed. Instead of this, the necessity we before mentioned compelled
the Persians to compose the quarrels of the Grecians, that they might furnish
him with troops. Peace enervated the Greeks; the facility of recruiting their
mercenaries, made the Persians negl^^t all martial discipline. In the mean time
Philip, blessed with an excellent education, exercised with early troubles,
endowed with invincible fortitude, and full of as restless ambition, raised the
nation he governed from an indigent and dependent state to be, first, the
terror of its neighbors, then the mistress of Greece, last of all a match for
Persia, On this foundation stands the fame of Philip. These were the causes of
his being in a condition to pass into Asia, and these the sources of that
weakness and inability to resist, which afterward appeared in the Persian
administration.

The same authors explain as follows ANT. UNIV. HIST. VII.158.
, the submission of the once brave and free Spartans to a set of lawless
tyrants, for a long course of years.

It may seem strange, that the Spartans, who had entertained such generous
notions of liberty submitted patiently, for so long a tract of time, to the
arbitrary commands of lawless tyrants; but this wonder will in a great measure
be taken off, if we consider two things; first, that the manners of the
Lacedaemonians were greatly corrupted; which is indeed the very basis of
slavery. There can be no such thing as bending the necks of virtuous people;
but when once men are abandoned to their vices, and become slaves to their
passions, they readily stoop to those who can gratify them; and this was the
case of the majority of the inhabitants of Sparta at this time. Secondly, those
amongst them, who were distinguished by their merit and their morals, were, on
this very account, proscribed by the tyrants, and hated by their creatures; so
that they were forced to forsake their country, and leave it to groan under a
power, which they were unable to resist. To this we may add, that such as were
of mild dispositions, flattered themselves with the hopes of seeing better
times; and even in these consoled themselves with the thoughts, that Sparta yet
retained her independency, and was not subjected by another state.

What then avails civilisation? How are nations gainers by improving in arts
and sciences, if they improve at the same time in all that is selfish, base,
and sordid? Our untutored ancestors in the forests of Germany two thousand
years ago, had a high relish for patriotism, liberty, and glory; of which we
their improved posterity talk with contempt and ridicule Iul. Caes. DE BELL.
GALL. and Tacit. DE MOR. GERM. pass.
. Their pride was to bear cold, hunger, and thirst, with a manly fortitude.
Ours to have fifteen dishes of meat, and six different sorts of wine, on our
tables every day. Their pride was to defend themselves against their enemies:
ours to hire a mercenary army, who have only to turn their swords upon us,
instead of our enemies, and we are their slaves. Their pride was, to show
themselves faithful, constant, and disinterested, in serving their country:
ours to fill our pockets with the spoils of our country, and then cry, It will
hold my time. To them honor was the reward for serving the public: we have no
conception of any reward, but yellow dirt.

Of the mischievous effects of luxury, thus writes the humane and pious Dr.
Price Price ON ANNUITIES, p. 274.
.

I have represented particularly the great difference between the probabilities
of human life in towns and in country parishes; and from the facts I have
recited, it appears, that the farther we go from, the artificial and irregular
modes of living in great towns, the fewer of mankind die in the first stages of
life, and the more in its last. The lower animals, except such as have been
taken under human management, seem in general to enjoy the full period of
existence allotted them, and to die chiefly of old age: and were any
observations to be made among the savages, perhaps the same would be found to
be true of them. Death is an evil to which the order of providence has
subjected every inhabitant of this earth; but to man it has been rendered
unspeakably more an evil than it was designed to be. The greatest part of that
black catalogue of diseases which ravage human life, is the offspring of the
tenderness, the luxu^y, and the corruptions introduced by the vices and false
refinements of civil society. That delicacy which is injured by every breath of
air, and that rottenness of constitution which is the effect of intemperance
and debauchery, were never intended by the author of nature; and it is
impossible that they should not lay the foundation of numberless sufferings,
and terminate in premature and miserable deaths. -- Let us then value more the
simplicity and innocence of a life so agreeable to nature; and learn to
consider nothing as savageness but malevolence, ignorance, and wickedness. The
order of nature is wise and kind. In a conformity to it consists health and
long life, grace, honor, virtue, and joy. But nature turned out of its way
will always punish. The wicked shall not live out half their days. Criminal
excesses embitter and cut short our present existence; and the highest
authority has taught us to expect, that they will not only kill the body but
the soul; and deprive it of an everlasting existence.

The same writer, in his 62d page, makes the following observations:

Calves are the only animals taken under our peculiar care immediately after
birth; and in consequence of our administering to them the same sort of physic
that is given to infants, and treating them in other respects in the same
mnner, it is probable that more of them die soon after they are born than of
all the other species of animals, which we see in the same circumstances. See
THE COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THE STATE AND FACULTIES OF MAN WITH THOSE OF THE ANIMAL
WORLD, p. 23. It is indeed melancholy to think of the havo^k among the human
species by the unnatural customs, as well as the vices, which prevail in
polished societies. I have no doubt but that the custom in particular of
committing infants, as soon as born, to the care of foster mothers, destroys
more lives, than the sword, famine, and pestilence, put together. The ingenious
and excellent writer quoted in the last note, observes, that the whole class of
diseases which arise from catching cold, are found only among the civilized
part of mankind, p. 51. And concerning that loss of all our higher powers,
which often attends the decline of life, and which is often humiliating to
human pride, he observes, That it exhibits a scene singular in nature and that
there is greatest reason to believe that it proceeds from adventitious causes,
and would not take place among us if we led natural lives.

All wise states have guarded against luxury as a ruinous evil. At Athens, the
court of Areopagus was to take care, that no person lived in idleness, and that
no man carried on two employments. If a father did not take care to have his
son instructed in some art, by which he might live, the son was not obliged to
maintain the father, when past labor ANT. THIS. DE REP. ATHEN. 258.
.

It was with a view to manners, and for preventing luxury and corruption, that
the wise ancients of Athens, Sparta, Rome, Carthage, etc. appointed censors,
and sumptuary laws, public meals, etc.

When a country is overwhelmed by luxury, the patriot is the man, who, by his
example, and by promoting good police and the execution of good laws, stems the
tide of these vices. He who does other accidental services, is so far laudable;
but not a patriot.

O qui vult pater urbium
S^scribi statuis, etc.
HOR. The patriot is he who delivers his country from that which would
otherwise bring certain ruin upon it.

Lycurgus allowed no strangers at Sparta, nor allowed the Spartans to travel,
lest the manners of the people should be corrupted. There is reason to expect,
that all wise governments should forbid their subjects coming into England,
especially during the life of Mrs. Cornellys.

Valerius Maximus tells us, that an old Roman, on occasion of a sumptuary law,
mounted the rostra, and told the people, It was time to demolish the
commonwealth; since they were no longer to have the liberty of living as
luxuriously as they pleased.

When the salutary Licinian law for restraining luxurious tables, was proposed,
the people (even in the degenerate times of the Iugurthine war) received it
before it was confirmed.

We cannot prevail with the good people of England to keep from eating veal and
lamb in a time of scarcity, though the destruction of young animals is
manifestly of prejudice to the necessary quantity of provisions.

It was a good law of the Emperor Adrian, that he who squandered away his
estate, should be publicly whipped and banished ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.181.
.

The good Emperor Aurelius sold the plate, furniture, jewels, pictures, and
statues of the imperial palace, to relieve the distresses of the people,
occasioned by the invasion of barbarians, pestilence, famine, etc. the value of
which was so great, that it maintained the war for five years, besides other
inestimable expenses Ibid. 217.
.

A law was made in the beginning of Tiberius's reign, That no man should
disgrace his sex by wearing silk Ibid. 122.
.

Of such importance were the Roman censors, that when the office fell into
desuetude for seventeen years, the consequence was, great disorders in the
state Ibid. ^I.503.
.

Edward King of Portugal proposed laws against luxury, promissing, that he and
his nobles would give a strict attention to their execution, by which he meant,
that they would observe them. For it was a maxim of his, That whatever is amiss
in the manners of the people, either proceeds from the bad example of the
great, or may be cured by the good MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXI.135.
.

Sumptuary laws were universal among the ancients. In England we should have
some difficulty in procuring obedience to them; such are our English notions of
liberty. But able statesmen know how to conquer those difficulties ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XIII.252.
.

Peter, to recall his subjects deviating into luxury, just after they had
emerged from barbarity, makes a public wedding at his court, to which every
body was invited. The entertainment was very plain, and there were no liquors
but mead and brandy. Hearing that complaints were made, he observed to them,
that their ancestors had, for many ages, regaled on these liquors. This stopped
the mouths of the Russians, who had often shown, to the Emperor's no ^mall
trouble, a foolish attachment to the bad customs of their ancestors; but (like
some other nations) were too ready to shake off the good ones MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXXV.420.
.

Charlemaigne made sumptuary laws to restrain the luxury of his nobility and
gentry; and made use of a whimsical contrivance to show them, that silk clothes
are not fit for men. He drew them along with him a hunting, one rainy day,
through woods and rugged places; and when they returned he permitted none of
them to change their dress, saying, their clothes would dry best on their backs
by the fi^e, which shrivelled all their furs, torn before in the woods. He
ordered them to come to court the next day in the same clothes. When the court
was full, looking round upon them, What a tattered company have I about me,'
says he, while my sheep-skin cloak, which I turn this way or that, as the
weather sets, is not at all the worse for yesterday's wear. For shame, learn to
dress like men, and let the world judge of your ranks from your merit, not from
your habit. Leave silks and finery to women, or to those days of pomp and
ceremony, when robes are worn for show, and not for use Ibid. XXIII.161.
.

The great and good Lewis XII of France, at his accession, was attacked by the
wits for his frugality. When he was told of it, he only said, I had rather hear
my people laugh at my parsimony, than weep at my oppression Ibid. XXIV.134.
.

The Emperor Maximilian II, never purchased a jewel for himself Ibid. XXX.86.
.

Kong-ti, one of the Chinese Emperors, demolishe^ the imperial palace, because
it was too magnificent, and likely to effeminate the Emperors MOD. UNIV. HIST.
VIII.442.
. Yivn-Tso^g another of those laudable Princes, to check, by example, luxury,
in his attendants, ordered all his embroidered clothes to be publicly burnt
Ibid. 446.
.

The Chinese Emperor Ching-Tsu, about A. D. 1403, ordered a dimond mine to be
shut up. The digging up of these glittering baubles, says he, fatigues and
kills my people, and the stones they find are neither food nor clothing Ibid.
VIII.472.
.

In the war between Ferdinand and the Moors, the King's equipage was remarkably
plain. This being taken notice of to the grandees, by the Queen Isabella, they
imitated it; and, without law, frugality prevailed by the more potent influence
of fashion Ibid. XXI.172.
.

When the daughter of the brave Admiral Colig^ (who was murdered on account of
religion, in the horrible massacre of St Bartholomew) went to be marrie^ to the
Prince of Orange, at the Hague, her carriage was a covered cart, in which she
sat on a board Volt. ESS. SUR L'HIST. III.304.
.

The ancient Portuguese would not let the banks o^ the golden Tagus be searched
for that fatal metal, wisely preferring agriculture to mines ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XVIII.467.
.

It would be of great service to lay a very heavy (...) on saddle-horses and
carriages, kept by people for their own use. To disable nine in ten, of those
who keep horses and carriages, would be a great advantage. People in middling
stations would then be enabled to lay down their carriages and saddle-horses
without shame, or loss of credit. The number of horses, which at present devour
the nation, would be lessened. All luxury would be diminished. For
saddle-horses and carriages are connected with other expenses, and must be kept
up, or fall with them. Many thousands of hands would be usefully employed in
agriculture and the manufactures, which are now driving people in coaches,
chariots, and whiskies, to bankruptcy. The nobility and gentry would recover
that superiority over the bourgeoise, which they so much desire.

See the statutes 37 Edw. III. cap. 8 -- 14, for regulating the diet and
apparel of servants, handicraftsmen, yeomen, their wives and children, of
gentlemen under the estate of knights, of esquires of 200 mark-land, etc. their
wives and children; of merchants, citizens, burgesses; of knights who have
lands within the yearly value of 200 marks, and of knights and ladies, who have
400 mark-land; of several sorts of clerks; of ploughmen, and others of mean
estate STAT. AT LARGE, I.298.
. And see 3 Edw. iv. cap. 5 Ibid. 609.
; see a proclamation by James I, commanding the great men to keep to their
country seats, for reviving the old English hospitality at the approaching
Christmas ACT. REG. IV.312.
; and another by Charles I, A. D. 1632, commanding the gentry to keep their
residence at their mansions in the country, and not at London Rym. FOED.
XIX.374.
.

A Duke of Bedford was degraded from his nobility for the smallness of his
income; because it was thought, his having a title and not a suitable fortune
to maintain it, might be of bad consequence Blackst. COM. I.403.
. I think all noble persons who impoverish themselves by extravagance, ought to
be degraded.

Lord Chesterfield, A. D. 1773, left his estate to his nephew, but under the
prudent restriction, that, if ever he be seen at Newmarket during the races, he
shall forfeit 5000l. and the same sum for every 100l. lost by him at play. The
Dean and Chapter of Canterbury to sue and apply the money to the use of that
church WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, March 27.
.

CHAP. III. Of the public Diversions, and of Gaming, and their Influence on
Manners.
FEW things have a more direct influence upon the manners of the people, than
the public diversions, and gaming. Of the former, the chief are theatrical
exhibitions, which ought to be very carefully attended to by the rulers of all
states. Accordingly, when Solon observed with how much avidity the people
listened to old Thespis's mean compositions, whose theater was a cart, and who
instead of giving out tickets at so much money each, was paid with a goat given
by the neighborhood or quarter where he had entertained the people, from
whence the word Tragedy (a Goat-song) was derived; Solon, I say, when he
observed how greedily the people listened to Thespis's low stuff, struck the
ground with his staff, not without indignation, crying out, that he foresaw
that these trifling amusements would come to be matter of great importance in
life. This was thoroughly verified afterward among both Greeks and Romans,
insomuch that concerning the latter it was proverbially alleged, a Roman
wanted nothing but bread and the Circensian games. The theater, with certain
management, might undoubtedly be made a very powerful instrument for
cultivating either virtue or vice in the minds of a people, as it exhibits an
assemblage of what is most elegant in the fine arts, poetry, painting, music,
speaking, action, etc. and as the story is drawn from what is the most striking
in history and in life. It is reckoned by some, that the first dramatic pieces
were written and performed as acts of religion in honor of the gods. Our
modern productions have, generally speaking, as little tincture of religion as
can well be imagined. And yet I must observe, to the honor of the people, not
the government of our times, that scarce any age ever deserved more praise on
account of the decency and chastity of its theatrical compositions, and the
behavior of the actors and actresses upon the stage, than the present, if you
except the female dancers, whose immodest curvetting in the air, and exposing
of their limbs as they do, are both consummately ungraceful, as every female
motion, that is not gentle, and soft, and tender, like the sex, must be; but
likewise shockingly offensive to modest eyes, and fatally alluring to those
already familiarized to vice. This is an evil which merits reformation. But it
will be much better corrected by the public disapprobation, than by law. We had
a licenser of plays in the time of Walpole, but he only inquired, whether a new
play was anti-ministerial or not. If it contained any satire on corruption, the
index expurgatorius was aplied to it by the Lord Chamberlain without mercy. So
wretchedly do ministers discharge their duty; so miserably do they fill their
important station.

Demosthenes severely blamed the degenerate Athenians for diverting the public
money raised for the defense of the state, to shows and plays, by which the
people were enervated.

A very wise man said, he believed, if a man were permitted to make all the
ballads, he need not care who made the laws of a nation. The ancient
legislators did not pretend to reform the manners of the people without the
help of the poets Fletcher, p. 372.
.

How austere must the manners of the Romans have originally been, which did not
allow a person of character to dance! It was a saying among them, N^^^fere,
etc.. Nobody dances unless he be either drunk or mad See Cicero's ORATION in
defense of a man of consular rank accused of the crime of dancing.
. The Greeks, however, had no objection to this art.

There must have been a considerable falling off, when Sylla won that popular
favor by a show of lions, which in better times he could only have obtained by
substantial services ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.33.
.

The Olympic games are to be looked upon in a very different light from all
other public diversions, shows, etc. They gave an opportunity to all persons to
exhibit their skill and abilities in all the accomplishments which were
esteemed in those days. They kept up a laudable emulation to excel; for, a
prize gained on account of the meanest accomplishment, as swiftness of foot,
for instance, was a matter of great honor, as a man's being victor in that
contest, supposed him to be a better runner than any other within the Olympian,
Nemaean, Elean, or Isthmian circles. The contests were also useful for keeping
up in the people a pleasure in manly and warlike exercises, which was
absolutely necessary in those times, when personal valor was of such
consequence, which now is nothing, since the art of war has, by the invention
of gunpowder, been wholly changed See the learned account of the Olympic
games, prefixed by my late esteemed friend Gilbert West, Esquire to his TRANSLATION
OF PINDAR.
.

The combats of Athletae were first introduced at Rome when the manners of the
people were considerably corrupted, of which these diversions, with the shows
of gladiators and the like, were the causes and symptoms ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XII.354.
.

As for these last, which prevailed more and more as the manners degenerated
more, they are a disgrace to human nature, and only Milton's devils Referring
to the poet's account of the diversions with which the demons amused
themselves during Satan's absence. PARAD. LOST, Book II.
ought to be capable of being diverted with the sight of men tormenting,
cutting with swords, tearing to pieces by wild beasts, and destroying their
wretched fellow creatures. The government which suffered such abominations to
prevail for so many ages, must have been very barbarous. For it is not
necessary, in order to make a people martial and brave, to make them infernal
furies.

We find, that players, on account of their debauchery, were banished from
Italy in the debauched times of Tiberius ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIV.184.
; and that games of hazard, and concerts of music, were forbidden Ibid. XII.450.
. It is not known what the harm of those musical entertainments might be.
Perhaps they were of the same kind with the music-houses in Holland, which are
public brothels.

Antonius led a private life in the imperial court of Rome ANT. UNIV. HIST.
XV.197.
. Aurelius hated the public diversions, and talked with his ministers about the
public business the whole time of his attending them Ibid. 209.
. Constantine put a stop to the shows of gladiators Ibid. 581.
. The Emperor Honorius totally abolished the shows of gladiators Ibid. XVI.492.
.

A motion was made, A. D. 1735, in parliament, for restraining the number of
playhouses DEB. COM. IX.93.
. It was observed, that there were then in London, the opera-house, the French
playhouse in the Haymarket, and the theaters in Covent Garden, Drury Lane,
Lincoln's* inn-fields, and Goodman's- fields; and that it was no less
surprising than shameful to see so great a change for the w^rse in the temper
and inclinations of the British nation, who were now so extravagantly addicted
to lewd and idle diversions, that the number of playhouses in London was double
to that of Paris. That we now exceeded in levity even the French themselves,
from whom we learned these and many other ridiculous customs, as much
unsuitable to the manners of an Englishman or a Scot, as they were agreeable to
the air and levity of a Monsieur: That it was astonishing to all Europe, that
Italian eunuchs and singers should have set salaries equal to those of the
lords of the treasury, and judges of England. After this it was ordered, nem.
con. that a bill be brought in, pursuant to Sir John Barnard's motion, which
was done accordingly: but it was afterward dropped, on account of a clause
offered to be inserted in the said bill, for enlarging the power of the lord
chamberlain, with regard to the licensing of plays.

Plays and other public diversions were stopped by pa^liam^nt, A. D. 1647, for
half a year. Several lords protested because it was not for perpetuity PARL.
HIST. XVI.112.
.

Petitions were presented, A. D. 1738, from the city, university, and merchants
of Edinburgh, against licensing a playhouse DEB. COM. X.9.
.

The reader sees, that, though I have mentioned the entertainments of the
theater among those abuses of our times, of which this work exhibits a general
survey; I have not absolutely condemned them: on the contrary, I have confessed
the use, which a set of able statesmen might make of them in reforming and
improving the manners of the people: the particulars of which I leave to be
found and applied by men of wisdom and of public spirit.

The most fashionable of all diversions in our time, is masquerading; on which
I have a few thoughts to offer.

Shame is the most powerful restraint from bad actions. To put on a mask is to
put off shame. And what is a human character without shame?

It was observed long ago by the excellent Tillotson, on another account, that
the people of England are but too tractable in imitating some of their worst
neighbors in some of their worst customs. The French ^^ught us masquerading,
which has been an amusement of that fantastical people ever since the days of
Charles VI, if not earlier. For in his time there was exhibited a most dreadful
scene of that kind, which, one would have expected to cool a little their
eagerness for masquerades ^^er after. The king and five of the court, on
occasion of a marriage, disguised themselves like satyrs, by covering their
naked bodies with linen habits, close to their limbs, which habits were
bedaubed with rosin, on which down was stuck. One of the company, in a frolic,
running a light against one of them, as they were dancing in a ring, all the
six were instantly enveloped with flames, and the whole company in a
consternation, lest the fire should be communicated to all. Nothing was to be
seen or heard but flames and screams. Four of the six died two days after, in
cruel (...) and the King, who was subject to a weakness (...), was overset by
the fright, so that he was ever ^^ter outrageous by fits, and incapable of
government.

There are few entertainments more unmeaning, to say the least, than
masquerades. For the whole in^ocent pleasure of them must consist in the ready
and brilliant wit of the masks, suitable to the characters they assume. But it
cannot be supposed, that among a thousand people, there are fifty persons
capable of entertaining by the readiness of their wit, and their judgment in
sustaining assumed characters. Accordingly we hear of much stupidity played off
on those occasions; and yet the rage after them continues. Wit must indeed be
at a low ebb, when it is thought witty for a nobleman to assume at a masquerade
the dress of a turkey-cock. This piece of wit, I am informed, was really
exhibited at a late masquerade at Mrs Cornellys's. As we know of nothing
characteristical in a real turkey cock, but his gabbling, it is not easy to
imagine what entertainment a man of quality should propose to give a company by
assuming that character. If he had taken the likeness of a rook, he might have
been a visible satire on gamesters, placemen, etc. If that of an owl, he might
have said he was a deep statesman; or if he chose a quadrupedal transformation,
as that of an ass, for instance, or of a stag, a bull, or any of the horned
(...) him, that he was their representative in parliament, etc. Observing the
frequency of violated marriage-beds of late years, and the frequent
celebrations of masquerades, it requires a considerable stretch of charity to
avoid suspecting a connection between masquerading and intriguing, which may
account for the eagerness shown by the quality for that species of diversion,
in direct opposition to the known disapprobation of both King and Queen; no
great proof of politeness in our courtiers.

Masquerades (says Mr. Gordon a) are a market for maidenheads and adultery, a
dangerous luxury opposite to virtue and liberty. There was something like them
formerly in the reigns of our worst Princes, by the name of masks. As the
present reign resembles these in nothing else, so neither would I have it
resemble them in this. They were revived, or rather introduced, after the
French way, by a foreign ambassador, whose only errand then in England could be
but to corrupt and enslave us, and for that end this mad and indecent diversion
was practiced and exhibited by him, as a popular engine to catch loose minds,
or to make them so with great success. What good purpose they can serve now, I
would be glad to know: The mischief of them is manifest both to public and
private persons; a handle is taken from them to traduce some great characters,
whom I would have always reverenced; and they are visibly on opportunity and
invitation to lewdness. If people will have amusements, let them have
warrantable and decent ones; as to masquerades, they are so much the school of
vice, that excepting a law to declare it innocent and safe, I question whether
human invention can contrive a more successful method of propagating it. The
practice of the commonal^y is formed upon the example of the great, and what
the latter do, the former think they may do. If a city wife has it in her head
against her husband's inclinations, to take the pleasures of the masquerade,
she has but to tell him, that my Lady Duchess -- is to be there (no doubt upon
the same errand), and the poor, sober, saving man must submit, and be content
to be in the class of his betters. From this source of prostitution, I fear
many a worthy man takes to his arms a tainted and vicious wife, and finds in
her a melancholy reason both, for himself and his posterity, to curse and
detest masquerades and all those that encourage them.

Severe and cutting is Mr. Gordon's remonstrance to Sherlock Bishop of London
Gord. TRACTS, II.268,
, on his lordship's politeness in passing over masquerades, when enumerating,
in his LETTER ON OCCASION OF THE EARTHQUAKES, A.D. 1750, the national vices,
which those awful phenomenon suggested the necessity of reforming.

You come, my lords, says he, in all humility, not as our accuser, but as our
faithful servant and monitor in Jesus Christ, and tell us, that your heart's
desire and prayer to God is for us, that we may be saved. Whom do you mean to
save, my good lord? Those who frequent plays, operas, music, d^ncings, gardens,
cock-fighting, and prize-fighting? And why not those who frequent masquerades
and Venetian balls? Surely your lordship cannot be a stranger to the frequent
legal presentiments, which, founded on the declared sense of all sober men, have
stigmatized these dissolute assemblies with the severest public censure; nor
can you be ignorant, that Venetian balls, in their own native soil, exhibit on
occasion, the most various scenes of exaggerated lewdness, which that most lewd
and effeminate of all regions, Italy, can produce? Or did you, in the innocence
of your heart, take it for granted, that our imitations of these balls were so
purified by the presence of the greatest, as to make you fear the censure of
uncharitableness, at least of indelicacy, had they been included in your black
catalogue of sinful recreations? Who knows, my lord, that your courtly omission
of this new imported diversion, has not been the means of sanctifying its
further use; for the very next day after the expected earthquake, I observed
one of these Venetian balls advertised in the public papers, as the first place
for our affrighted countrymen to assemble and rejoice in after the dissipation
of their fears.

A certain late king was fond to distraction of masquerading. And he set before
his people another execrable example, viz. the violation of the matrimonial vow.

His present majesty, whom God preserve, has acted a contrary part in both
respects. This, however, is no comparison between them as kings; but as men
only; and I mention it merely to introduce the following anecdote, which ought
to be kept in remembrance.

A grand masquerade was given out in the last reign for a certain evening. Some
well-disposed persons, taking into consideration the mischievous tendency of
those diversions, ordered hand-bills to be scattered about the streets,
advising the ladies to keep at home; for that the people, displeased with the
indecency of masquerades, had determined to prevent any of the fair sex from
going, and that there would probably be mobbing and quarrelling in the streets.
Whether there was any thing more in this, than that those gentleman hoped to
intimidate the ladies, and keep them at home, I never learned. But, rather than
the court should lose the night's entertainment, a very great commander gave
notice that he would order out a sufficient body of the military to keep the
peace; so that the ladies might go to the virtuous rendezvous without fear of
interruption from the people. This was making our standing army useful.

At the marriage of Tamerlane's grandchildren, the people assembled were
allowed, by the emperor's proclamation, to pursue whatever pleasures they
thought fit, and no one was to hinder another. It is to be expected, that we
shall soon have masquerades at Mrs. -- 's established on this very foot MOD.
UNIV. HIST. VI.362.
. The following paragraph gives an abridged account of a late celebration of
that kind.

Such a scene of ebriety was exhibited last masquerade, and the behavior of
the women of the town, and of the bucks of dissipation, so shocking, it is
hoped, the enormity of it will occasion the total abolition of those abandoned
nightly orgies WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, May 1, 1773.
.

We always begin our pretended reformations of manners at the wrong end.
Instead of making laws to restrain the lower people, our rulers ought to show
them by their example how they ought to b^have. Here follows the preamble to an
act, which might have been entitled, An act to make the lower people better
than their betters. The multitude of places of entertainment for the higher
sort of people is a great evil, as well as those for the lower. The thefts and
robberies committed by statesmen are more mischievous than the petty larceny of
the lower people.

Whereas the multitude of places of entertainment for the lower sort of people
is a great cause of thefts and robberies, as they are, thereby tempted to spend
their small substance in riotous pleasures, and in conseq^ence are put on
unlawful methods of supplying their wants, and renewing the^r pleasures, etc.
Preamble to the act 25 Geo. II. for preventing thefts and robberies, and for
regulating places of public entertainment, and punishing persons keeping
disorderly houses STAT. AT LARGE, IX.109.
.

The oldest accounts we have of diversions bearing any resemblance to
masquerades, and from whence the hint may have been taken, are perhaps, those
of the nightly orgies upon mount Cithaeron, the mysteries of the Bona Dea, and
the like, which were established in honor of sundry gods and goddesses. Their
being concealed under cloud of night, and the secrecy observed with respect to
the transactions carried on in some of them, give them a suspicious air, which
increases the resemblance which our masquerades bear to them. I wish some of
our learned antiquaries would inquire, whether the Bona Dea was not an ancestor
of our famous Mrs. Cornellys Let this page immortalize the genius of this
wonderful outlandish old woman, who by dint of a knack she has at sticking up
lamps against a wainscot, in the shape of fans, bodkins, scissars, and the
like, and of ranging cakes and sugar-plums upon the shelves of a lacquered
cupboard, has for several years so drained our nobility and gentry, that they
cannot pay off their playhouse scores, their Newmarket scores, nor their milk
scores. Her custom is to stick up her lamps, and range her cakes in a certain
set of shapes, (very fine, you may be sure) and next day after she has drawn
together all the people of taste to see them, at the expense of 20,000 l. she
asks pardon in the newspapers, that her show was not so fine as it ought to
have been, and humbly begs the favor of their lordships and ladyships to come
such a night, and they shall see what they shall see. They all go accordingly,
over and over as often as she changes her lamps and her cakes, as it costs them
nothing but their expenses; and the outlandish old woman acts the part of the
money-taker, and sweeps together the guineas. But, whatever may be the matter,
whether her economy is bad, or that money gotten in such a way does not wear
well, she not only sends many to the spunging-house, but is often obliged to
take a night's lodging there herself.

-- dii talem terris avertite pestem.

VIRG.
. It is true, that the mysteries of the Bona Dea are commonly reckoned to have
been celebrated by women exclusively, while the manager of the heightened
pleasures of the English admits a mixture of both sexes. But it is not certain,
that many of the figures, which passed for females, were not in reality of the
other sex in disguise, as it is not certain, that many of the virtuous-seeming
ladies at our masquerades, are not rampant wh -- s in disguise.

Mrs. Cornellys was indicted before the grand jury, A. D. 1771, for keeping a
common disorderly house, and permitting diverse loose, idle, and disorderly
persons, both men and women [of quality], to be, and remain in her house the
whole night, rioting, and otherwise misb^having themselves; that she kept
public masquerades without license, and received and harbored loose and
disorderly persons [of quality] in masks, with great noise and tumult, etc
LAND. MAG. Feb. 1771, p. 109.
.

There was a masquerade in Scotland, A. D. 1773, the very year in which almost
all credit in that country was overthrown WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, Ian. 21. 1773.
; and the same diversions have been exhibited at Southampton, Brigthelmstone,
Margate, etc. Such is the power of example, and so true the old adage, One fool
makes many
As four farthings make a penny.


Those are puny politicians, says Bolingbroke POLITICAL TRACTS, 76.
, who attack a people's liberty directly. The means are dangerous, and the
success precarious. Notions of liberty are interwoven with our very being, and
the least suspicion of its being in danger, fires the soul with a generous
indignation. But he is the statesman formed for ruin and destruction, whose
wily head knows how to disguise the fatal hook with baits of pleasure, which
his a^tful ambition dispenses with a lavish hand, and makes himself popular in
undoing. Thus are the easy thoughtless people made the instruments of their own
slavery; nor do they know, that the fatal mine is laid, till they feel the pile
come tumbling on their heads. This is the finished politician, the darling son
of Machiavel. -- Masquerades, with all the other elegancies of a wanton age,
are much less to be regarded for their expense, (great as it is) than for the
tendency they have to deprave our manners.

As to gaming, I cannot say, that ever I have heard a tolerable apology for it
upon the score of morality, or common honesty. Is it not literally obtaining
money upon false pretenses, and without a valuable consideration, when I draw
100 guineas out of my neighbor's pocket, for which I give him nothing, but
vexation and repentance? And does not every body know, that obtaining money, or
goods, upon false pretenses, is punishable by law, as much as theft or robbery?
This is exclusive of the loss of time, the inflaming of passion, often
producing quarrels and murders, the endangering of chastity, (for it is
alleged, that the ladies do often pay with their persons what they cannot with
their purses) the destruction of fortunes, often ending in d^spair and
self-murder. It is strange, that our nobility and gentry cannot be diverted at
a rate somewhat cheaper than all this. How can a person of quality bear to
think of himself as guilty of what would send him to Newgate, if he were not
above law? Nobility of rank ought to suggest the necessity of acting in a noble
manner. The man is what his actions (not his birth and rank) make him. A man of
noble birth acting in a mean and sordid manner, is only the more mean and
sordid, because he sinks below what was to have been expected of him. Add, that
the vices of a person of rank are incomparably more criminal than those of the
common people; because his example draws the multitude into guilt, and he
becomes answerable for their offenses. Our nobility and gentry, so far from
attending to these considerations, are the great leaders of the people into
this ruinous vice. Besides, the example they exhibit of an endless attachment
to carding, rocking, cocking, racing, pitting, gambling, jobbing, they have
introduced gaming into their system of politics, and a pack of cards is become
an engine powerful enough to overthrow a kingdom.

An anonymous speaker in the House of Commons. A. D. 1754, on occasion of a
lottery proposed by the ministry, argued as follows:

The mortal disease of the present generation is well known to be the love of
gaming; a desire to emerge into sudden riches; a disposition to stake the
future against the present, and commit their fortunes, themselves, and their
posterity to chance. The consequence of this pernicious passion is hourly seen
in the distress of individuals, the ruin of families, the extravagance and
luxury of the successful, and rage and fraud of them that miscarry; this
therefore is the vice, at least one of the vices, against which the whole
artillery of power should be employed. From gaming, the people should be
dissuaded by instruction, withdrawn by example, and deterred by punishment. To
game, whether with or without good fortune, should be made ignominious; he that
grows rich by it ought to be deemed as a robber, and he that is impoverished as
a murderer of himself. Yet, what are the men entrusted with the administration
of the public now proposing? What but to increase this lust of irregular
acquisition, and to invite the whole nation to a practice which the laws
condemn, which policy disapproves, and which morality abhors? For what is a
lottery but a game? The persons, who risque their money in lotteries, are I
believe for the most part the needy or extravagant; those whom misery makes
adventurers, or expense makes greedy. And of these the needy are often ruined
by their loss, and the luxurious by their gain. He, whose little trade,
industriously pursued, would find bread for his family, diminishes his stock to
buy a ticket, and waits with impatience for the hour which shall determine his
lot; a blank destroys all his hopes, and he sinks at once into negligence and
idleness. The spendthrift, if he miscarries, is not reclaimed; but if he
succeeds, is confirmed in his extravagance, by finding that his wants, however
multiplied, may be so easily supplied. It is universally allowed that reward
should be given only to merit, and that as far as human power can provide,
every man's condition should be regulated by his merit. This is the great end
of established government, which lotteries seem purposely contrived to
counteract. In a lottery the good and bad, the worthless and the valuable, the
stupid and the wise, have all the same chance of profit. That wealth which
ought only to be the reward of honest industry, will fall to the lot of the
drone, whose whole merit is to pay his stake, and dream of his ticket.

With indignation it was observed, that no less than two lotteries in one year,
( A. D. 1763,) were now, for the first time, without any urgent necessity, to
be established in the days of peace, to the encouragement of the pernicious
spirit of gaming, which cannot be too much discountenanced by every state that
is governed by wisdom, and a regard for the morals of the people Speech in
Parliament, Alm. DEB. COM. VI.198.
.

Gaming is so dreadful a vice (says Mr. Gordon TRACTS, I.325.
,) especially in those who are any way entrusted with our liberties, that I
cannot pass it over in silence. A man who will venture his estate, will venture
his country. He who is mad enough to commit his all to the chance of a dye, is
like to prove but a faithless guardian of the public, in which he has perhaps
no longer any stake. It is a jest, and something worse, in a man who flings
away his fortune this way, to pretend any regard for the good of mankind. His
actions give his words the lie. He sacrifices his own happiness, and that of
his family and posterity to a sharper, or an amusement, and by doing it, shows
that he is utterly destitute of common prudence, and natural affection; and on
the contrary, an encourager and example of the most destructive corruption; and
after all this, ridiculously talks of his zeal for his country, which consists
in good sense and virtue, joined to a tenderness for one's fellow creatures.
When he has wantonly reduced himself to a morsel of bread, he will be easily
persuaded to forsake his wretchedness, and accept of a bribe. Who would trust
their property with one who cannot keep his own? The same vicious imbecility of
mind, which makes a man a fool to himself, will make him a knave to other
people. So that this wicked proneness to play, which is only the impious art of
undoing or being undone, cuts off every man who is possessed with it, from all
pretense either to honesty or capacity. I doubt England has paid dear for such
extravagances. A lawmakers, who is at the same time a gamester, is a character
big with absurdity and danger. I wish that in every member of either house,
gaming were attended with expulsion and degradation; and in every officer,
civil or military, with the loss of his place. A law enjoining this penalty
would be effectual, and no other can.

One of the greatest mischiefs of gaming is, that the gamester, like the
dropsical patient, becomes more and more attached to it.

The ancient Germans became at last so bewitched to gaming, that they would
play for their liberty, which liberty they yet valued so much, that they would
sooner die, than suffer it to be taken from them ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIX.42.
.

It is common among us for a gentleman to sit down in easy circumstances, and
rise a beggar. But among those foolish people, it was common for the men to fit
down free, and rise slaves for life. That was a wretched government, which
allowed such proceedings.

Casimir II. of Poland, when he was ^ince of Sandomir, won a considerable sum
of a nobleman, with whom he was at play. The nobleman, fretted at his loss,
struck the prince, and immediately fled. He wa^ apprehended, and condemned to
death. But Casimir would not suffer the sentence to be executed. It wa^ no
wonder, he said, that the nobleman, losing his money, and enraged against
Fortune, whom he could not come at, should revenge himself on her favorite. He
owned, that he himself was most to blame for encouraging gaming by his example.
He restored the nobleman his money MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV.^0.
.

Mohamm^d forbid gaming and drinking Ibid. XVIII.413.
. Henry IV. of France, had a great passion for play, which had terrible
consequences, as it rendered this destructive vice fashionable, which is alone
sufficient to throw a kingd^m into confusion Ibid. XXXIV.436.
. John I. king of Portugal used to say, conversation was the cheapest of all
diversions, and the most improving Ibid. XXII.126.
* Cards have destroyed all conversation in England. Our quality show so little
natural affection, and so much delight in gaming, that there is reason to
expect they will soon, like the Tonkinese in India, play away their wi^^^ and
children Ibid. VII.463.
. The rage of gaming has indeed changed our great folks into another species of
beings than those who filled that station last century. A ruffian lord, who
will make no hesitation to bribe, and (for ought he knows) damn hundreds of
electors, makes a point of paying his game debts, though it be penal by law;
and yet will cheat and abuse an industrious tradesman for asking a debt due for
necessaries; just to sharpers, who ruin him; unjust to honest men, who feed and
cloth him.

The excellent Gordon thus exposes the mischiefs arising from the example of
the great encouraging this ruinous vice, at the same time that the laws (made
by the great) point their vengeance against it.

Ridicule and contempt have been cast on the laws, and principally by those
whose influence and power should have given them countenance and effect: the
recent prohibition of gaming, calculated to extirpate that offspring of
avarice, that parent of selfishness, that enemy to humanity, compunction, and
every social virtue, has been shamefully baffled by the shelter afforded to
that enormity, under the privileged roofs of the great, and met with an open
and contumelious disregard from personages invested with the most sacred
ensigns of autho^ity, in places of public resort among the gay, the giddy, and
the young, where the native allurements of vice have long been too prevalent to
want aid and encouragement from such venerable and powerful auxiliaries: the
flagrant example of those in high station, has necessarily extended its
pernicious effects to the lowest; then who has most right to complain either to
God or man, a people abandoned by th^i^ superiors to corruption, or those who
have encouraged the example of profligacy to complain of the people? Severity
and decency of manners in high life, would command a similar behavior in the
multitude; a strict execution of the laws would come in aid; since the virtuous
great must know, that the due exertion of the legal power is a principal part
of their duty: I^leness, debauchery, and wanton recreations, would not then
have a being among us, to become the objects of animadversions and censure,
which leaving the fountainhead of vice untouched, and attempting the
impracticable task of restraining the torrent at a distance from its source;
most clearly denote the parade of reformation, without the reality, or even the
intention Gord. TRACTS, II.269.
:

Si vouz supposes, etc. Reckoning in Paris 2000 persons, who lose every day
three hours each at play, the number of lost hours in a day is 6000, which,
employed usefully, would be worth to individuals and the state more than 1000
livres a day, or 365,000 livres a year. If you estimate Paris to be a seventh
part of the kingdom, this loss amounts to 7,300,000 livres a year S. Pierre
OUVR. POLIT. X.326.
, which at 10 d. halfpenny per livre, is about 304,513 l. 1 s. English money
lost annually by the who^e people of France by gaming, and nothing got, but
anger, quarrels, and duels.

Our ancestors have not overlooked the dangerous vice of gaming. By 2 and 3
Philip and Mary, all licenses for carrying on unlawful games are to be void
STAT. AT. LARGE, II.121.
.

See an act for preventing excessive and deceitful gaming DEB COM. X.13.
; and a bill to restrain the excessive increase of horse-races Ibid. XI.296.
; and another for preventing wagers about public affairs. Designing men injured
the unwary, and many kept up unlawful correspondences on purpose to win wagers
Tind. CONTIN. II.118.
.

James I. granted power to the groom-porter to license a certain limited number
of taverns, in which cards and dice might be played, and a certain number of
bowling allies, tennis-courts, etc. in London and its neighborhood Anders.
HIST. COM. II.5.
.

Whereas lawful games and exercises should not be otherwise used, than as
innocent and moderate recreations, and not as trades or callings to get a
living, or to make unlawful advantage thereby; and whereas by the immoderate
use of them, many mischiefs and inconveniences do arise, and are daily found,
to the maintaining and encouraging of sundry idle, loose, and disorderly
persons, in their dishonest, lewd, and dissolute course of life, and to the
circumventing, deceiving, cozening, and debauching many of the younger sort
both of the nobility and gentry, to the loss of their precious time, the utter
ruin of their estates and fortunes, and withdrawing them from noble and
laudable employments: be it therefore enacted, etc. Preamble to the statute 16
Charles II. cap. 7 STAT. AT LARGE, II.655.
. It enacts, among other things, that no game debt shall be recoverable by law;
and that the winner shall forfeit treble the sum won by him at play.

An act, A. D. 1657, for punishing persons who live at high rates, and have no
visible estate, profession or calling answerable thereunto WHITEL. MEM. 662.
.

By 18 G^o. II. cap. 34. restraints are laid on several games; the sums, which
may be p^ayed for at one time, are limited; offenders discovering others, are
discharged, etc STAT. AT LARGE, VIII.181.
. But what do laws avail against the example of the lawmakers themselves?

CHAP. IV. Of Duels.
OUR laws forbid murder: our manners legitimate duelling.

In deliberate duelling, says the admirable Blackstone COM. IV.129.
, both parties meet avowedly with an intent to murder; thinking it their duty
as gentlemen, and claiming it as their right, to wanton with their own lives,
and those of their fellow creatures, without any warrant or authority from any
power, either divine or human, but in direct contradiction to the laws both of
God and man; and therefore the law has justly fixed the crime and punishment of
murder on them, and on their seconds. Yet it requires such a degree of passive
valor to combat the dread of even undeserved contempt, arising from the false
notions of honor too generally received in Europe, that the strongest
prohibitions and penalties will never be entirely effectual to eradicate this
unhappy custom, till a method be found out of compelling the original
aggressor, to make some other satisfaction to the affronted party, which the
world shall esteem equally reputable as that which is now given at the hazard
of the life and fortune, as well of the person insulted, as of him, who has
given the insult.

The abbe S. Pierre insists OEUVR. POLIT. VIII.240.
, that it is cruel and unjust to punish with loss of fortune and life an
unhappy man, who cannot obey the law [that is, cannot refuse a challenge]
without infamy and disgrace; as the law of nature, on the other hand, enjoins
him never to dishonor himself, and to prefer death to infamy. Ie soutiens
qu'il est cruel, etc. The abbe therefore proposes, that there be a military
academy established, before which all differences between gentlemen, on points
of honor, shall be decided.

The same author proposes Ibid. X.53.
that a solemn oath be administered to every officer, on receiving his
commission, by which he should abjure duelling, and promise to discover all
such designs among his acquaintance. Were duelling left off among officers, it
would soon become unfashionable every where else. These are some of the
advantages we gain by our standing army. They teach us, that it is polite to
lie with other men's wives, to debauch innocent virgins, and to murder one
another about points of honor.

Though challenging in consequence of an insult upon a person's honor, or what
is so called, is a very ancient custom, it is not easy to explain the
reasonableness of the practice. A person has injured me. The laws of my country
give me no redress. (A most scandalous deficiency on the part of government!)
To endeavor to avenge myself, and to vindicate my violated honor by an attack
upon him, is natural, though not magnanimous, nor christian. But because a
person has slightly injured me, am I to give him a chance for doing me an
infinitely greater injury? Here, then, comes in, I suppose, the pretense, that
a duel is an appeal to providence, as if it were certain, that providence would
give success to the party who has the right on his side. But who has told our
duellists, that providence will certainly give success to him, who seeks to
shed the blood of his fellow creature, cold, in defense of the virtue of a wh
-- or of the honor of a liar, or even in defense of the chastity of a really
virtuous woman, or of the honor of him, who has spoken the truth? We know,
that scripture represents the present as a state of discipline, not of
retribution, and expressly warns us against rash conclusions concerning the
different lots of men in this life. And where else our duellists should find
their doctrine, of certain success to him who has the right on his side, I
cannot imagine. For experience shows, that in duels the best swordsman, or best
marksman has the best prospect of victory; as in war, generally speaking, the
ablest general, and best appointed army, gain the victory.

The grand plea for duelling is, that he, who refuses a challenge, is presently
set down for a coward. And who can bear to be thought a coward? But it is very
easy to escape the imputation of cowardice, and yet refuse a challenge. A
hotheaded young officer sends a challenge to a gentleman, no matter whether in
the army or not. The gentleman directly refuses the challenge upon principle.
The officer posts him for a coward. He posts the officer for a liar. The
officer must not bear this. He attacks the gentleman. The gentleman defends
himself, which he has a right to do against any ruffian. He, being cool, and
the officer worked up to rage, it is natural to expect victory to declare
herself on his side in the scuffle. And as the officer must use no weapon, but
a cane, unless the gentleman draws upon him, which he is not, by any law of
honor, obliged to; there is no great danger of murder on either side. And at
the same time the gentleman's honor and courage are as effectually cleared
before the public, as if he had fought the officer with twenty different mortal
weapons.

Conquest in single combat is no more a proof, which party was in the right,
than the old superstition of trial by fire ordeal, etc.

It would not be cowardice in an officer to refuse to hazard his life, by going
to sea in an open boat, by encountering a wild beast, etc. for a sum of 20 or
30 guineas. Therefore it is not always cowardice in an officer to show a due
care for his life. If one officer owed another a large sum, and the debtor
proposed to try by duel, whether he should pay it or not, who would call the
creditor a coward for refusing so ridiculous a challenge S. Pierre, OEUVR.
POLIT. X.12.
?

In the affair between lord Rea and Ramsay an officer, it was declared, that
the sending of a challenge is a presumption of guilt WHITEL. MEM. 16.
.

The rule, that every man who refuses a challenge, must be a coward, is very
disputable. A man may refuse a challenge, not because he fears his
fellow creature, or is afraid to die; but because he fears the Almighty, and
does not choose to hazard damnation for the sake of preserving the good opinion
of the ladies.

This rule is of modern date. The ancients did not pronounce every man a coward
who refused a challenge.

The ancient Greeks and Romans, the models of courage to all ages and nations,
attached the idea of courage and cowardice to a man's readiness or reluctance
to fight the enemies of his country, not to his shedding the blood of his
countrymen. Highwaymen often show great intrepidity.

Pyrrhus challenged Antigonus to fight him for the kingdom of Macedon.
Antigonus declined the challenge. Yet we do not find the ancients have branded
Antigonus for a coward.

Marius, challenged to single combat, flatly refuses. Yet nobody has ever
thought of branding Marius with the name of coward ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.13.
.

The Duke of Orleans challenged Henry to single combat, or with 100 knights
each side. Henry answers, that he cannot as a king accept a challenge from any
subject; but that a time might probably come, when they might measure swords in
battle. The Duke of Orleans sends a bitter answer, calling Henry traitor,
usurper, and murderer of his king. Henry, in return, gives him the lie in form;
and charges him with sorcery, by which he had thrown his father, the French
king, into his present distemper. Henry complains to the ambassador, but in
vain Rap. I.493.
.

We have in history the famous challenge between Edward III. of England, and
Philip de Volois of France; which certainly produced no fight. Yet neither of
those princes is accounted a coward.

Lewis VI. of France challenged Henry I. of England, to single combat MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXIII.29^.
. Henry laughed at the challenge. Yet nobody, even in our times, thinks him a
coward.

Henry II. of France, permitted a duel in his presence between two of his
lords, about a love affair. The conquered would not suffer his wounds to be
dressed; and accordingly died. The king vowed to suffer no more duelling Ibid.
XXIV.199.
.

Christian IV. was challenged by Charles IV. of Sweden, A. D. 1612. Refused.
Yet not thought a coward Ibid. XXXII.456.
.

Francis's sending Charles V. a challenge Roberts: CHAPTER V.II.302.
, promoted the folly of duelling so much, that war itself hardly made more
havoc of the species. Yet Charles did not accept the challenge. Therefore
those who did accept challenges, did not imitate the Emperor; nor did the
example of that affair render it necessary to accept challenges; for the
hot-brained fools saw, that the Emperor was not reckoned a coward, though he
declined.

The lie direct was given by Francis of France to Charles V. on which Charles
sends the French king a challenge. But still there was no duel fought.

Among the Turks, the Chinese, and the Persians, it is no disgrace for an
officer to refuse a challenge, and to submit the punishment of any one who has
insulted him, to his superior. On the contrary, his regularity of conduct, and
his prudence are honored. Null officier n' est deshonore, etc S. Pierre, OEUVR.
POLIT. X.8.
.

The Czarina thinks all deliberate offenses ought to be punishable by law, from
treason down to the slightest injury or affront to an individual Instr. 128.
. If that were the case, there would be no pretense for duels, as now there is.
And therefore that when a duel is fought, the challenger only, and not the
accepter, ought to be punished; because the latter was through fear of shame
forced to do what he knew to be unjustifiable, and is therefore pitiable Ibid.
130.
.

The great and good Duke de Sully, who had as just notions of the point of
honor as any of our modern heroes, who are daily fighting duels, has declared
himself very strongly against this practice, as inconsistent with civilisation,
decency, humanity, and all the laws of God and man. He even reflects with some
severity on the remissness of his patriot King Henry IV. in neglecting to
enforce the laws already standing, or to promote the framing of others more
promissing of success.

Beccaria, p. 38, 39, thinks death an absurd punishment for duelling, because
they that will fight, show that they do not fear death. He thinks the aggressor
should be punished, and the defendant acquitted, because the law does not
sufficiently secure his honor, and leaves him in a state of nature to defend
it by himself. But ought not then the law rather to be amended, and duelling
rendered altogether inexcusable?

Supposing proper provision made by law for checking petulancy, giving
satisfaction for affronts, and deciding all matters of honor, it would not be
amiss to bring in every giver and receiver of a challenge, though no blood has
been spilt, lunatic, to send him by authority to Bedlam for life, and give his
estate, real and personal, to his heir.

Duelling was originally an appeal to Heaven. It is highly absurd in our times,
when nobody thinks of Heaven, and especially as it is commonly practiced by
those who set Heaven at defiance ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVIII.492.
.

Duels are supposed to have received their first establishment by a positive
law (the practice is immemorial), from Gundebald King of the Burgundians, A. D.
501. See his edict Ibid. XIX.435.
. His design seems to have been, to put a check to perjury. For he supposed,
that obliging all persons to defend with their sword^ what they had sworn,
would make them more careful what oaths they took. But in this he showed
himself no great reasoner. For the natural effect of this law was, to put all
people on learning the sword.

See a minuate account of the whole ceremony of trial by combat, in Spelm.
Gloss. voc. Campus.

Brady II. 147, gives a clear account of the origin and manner of duels.

The following by Verstegan is very concise and clear ANTIQU. 64.
.

For the trial by camp-fight, the accuser was with the peril of his own body to
prove the accused guilty, and by offering him his glove, to challenge him to
this trial, which the other must either accept of, or else acknowledge himself
culpable of the crime whereof he was accused. If it were a crime deserving
death, then was the camp-fight for life and death, and either on horseback or
on foot. If the offense deserved prisonment, and not death, then was the
camp-fight accomplished, when the one had subdued the other, by making him to
yield, or unable to defend himself, and so be taken prisoner. The accused had
the liberty to choose another in his stead; but the accuser must perform it in
his own person, and with equality of weapons. No women were admitted to behold
it* nor no men children under the age of thirteen years. The priests and people
that were spectators did silently pray that the victory might fall unto the
guiltless; and if the fight were for life or death, a bier stood ready to carry
away the dead body of him who should be slain. None of the people might cry,
shriek out, make any noise, or give any sign whatsoever; and hereunto at Hall
in Swevia (a place appointed for camp-fight) was so great regard taken, that
the executioner stood beside the judges, ready with an ax, to cut off the right
hand and left foot of the party so offending. He that (being wounded) did yield
himself, was at the mercy of the other to be killed or to be let live. If he
were slain, then he was carried away and honorably buried; and he that slew
him reputed more honorable than before: but if being overcome, he were left
alive, then was he by sentence of the judges, declared utterly void of all
honest reputation; and never to ride on horseback, nor to carry arms.

Time was, when the seconds were to fight, and kill one another i^ ^he quarrels
of their principals. That folly is happily abolished. A little firmness in
government would abolish the remaining folly of the principals fighting and
murdering one another.

S. Pierre estimates the number of duels in France a 600 in a year, or 30,000
in every half century OEUVR. POLIT. X.47.
.

Duels were got to such a height in France, that 4000 gentlemen in a year fell
by them. Laws were made against that destructive practice, which restrained it
in some measure. But the king, very unthinkingly, though so wise a man,
speaking with some contempt of some who had, in consequence of the laws,
refused challenges, the laws present lost their effect. So much more powerful
is fashion than law MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV.404.
.

The wise and good Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, made severe laws against
duelling Ibid. XXXIII.226.
. Two general officers begged his leave to decide a dispute arisen between them
by single combat. The king gives them leave, and desires to be present. Before
the fight begun, he sends for the executioner with his ax. The gentlemen asking
his Majesty why he called in that efficacious officer; Gustavus answered, Only
to cut off the head of the conqueror. The gentlemen made up the quarrel without
fighting Ibid.
.

In Cromwell's parliament, A. D. 1654, there was an act made for preventing and
punishing duels PARL. HIST. XX.311.
. For challenging, or accepting, or knowingly carrying a challenge, prison for
six months, without bail, to give security for one year afterward; not
discovering in twenty-four hours, to be deemed accepting; fighting, if death
ensues, to be punished as murder, etc. Persons using provoking words or
gestures, to be indicted and fined; to be bound to good behavior, and to make
reparation according to the quality of the person insulted.

A bill for abolishing the impious practice of duelling was ordered into the
house of commons, A. D. 1713 DEB. COM. IV.338.
. It was twice read; but dropped after all Ibid. V.38.
.

Voltaire ESS. SUR L'HIST. II.234.
mentions a pompous battle fought by a s^t of knights-errant of France and
England, ab^ut the beauty of certain ladies; and observes, that if the Scipios
and Aemiliuses h^d fought about beauty, the Romans had never been the
conquerors and lawgivers of the world.

James I. used often to say, he could not help lamenting (like Xerxes, when he
reviewed his army, and considered, that in 100 years not one of so ma^y myriads
would be alive) when he surveyed the noble attendance round him, that not one
of them was safe for twenty-four hours together from being murdered in a duel.
For if a mistake happened, aff^ont was taken, the lie given, and immediate
combat and bloodshed followed Lord B^c. L^TT. 193.
.

There was a legal duel fought, A. D. 1571, the last, I suppose, upon record
Spelm. voc. Campus, 103.
.

In the days of chivalry, they often fought for fighting sake, to distinguish
themselves. John de Bourbonnais came from France into England, with sixteen
other cavaliers, to fight whomever he could meet, all to distinguish himself,
and win his mistress's heart V^lt. ESS. SUR L'HIST. III.37.
. The tournaments in those times were often very bloody. Henry II. of France,
Henry de Bourbon, Montpensier, etc. were killed at tournaments. Why could not
those bloody minded fellows hire themselv^s as journeymen to some honest
hog-butchers? In that profession they might, without sin, have washed their
hands to the elbows in blood as often as they please^*

It is the business of parliament to redress all suc^ grievances; and an
incorrupt parliament would cer^tainly make such laws as would effectually
redre^^ them.

CHAP. V. Of Lewdness.
UNDER the head of MANNERS, I could not avoid making some remarks on this most
epidemical vice.

The breach of the most awful vows, the debauching of a virtuous wife, the
destruction of a family's peace for life, the introduction of a bastard instead
of the lawful heir to an ample estate, the provocation of an injured husband to
that rage which no husband can promise to restrain, the hazard of murder and of
damnation -- these are what we of this elegant eighteenth century call
gallantry, taste, the bon t^^, knowledge of the world, scavoir vivre, etc.

No statesman will look with an indifferent eye on the prevalency of lewdness
in his country, if he has any regard for his country, and knows that this vice
is not less mischievous by debasing the minds, than by enervating and poisoning
the bodies of the subjects. A people weakened by the foul disease, are neither
fit for sea nor land service, for agriculture, manufactures, nor population.

It is notorious, as above hinted, that a certain late reign exhibited from the
throne a very gross example of broken matrimonial vows. The effects of that
evil example remain still, though the behavior of the present king (whom God
preserve) is the very opposite of that I refer to. It will appear hereafter,
that the examples of kings do not make right and wrong. And our wicked wits may
rack their brains till doomsday; but will never be able to prove, that the
promiscuous commerce of the sexes is consistent with the order of nature, while
the numbers of both that are born are so nearly equal, which effectually cuts
off the pretext of any one to carry on a commerce with a plurality, and obliges
every one to keep to one.

Would any of our modern wits choose to be thought the son of a wh --, rather
than born in wedlock? Would any of them choose to have his sister or his
daughter debauched? Do we not pronounce the contented cuckold, the wretch, who
will bear with patience the defilement of his bed, a disgrace to the species?
Is it not then manifest, that every man who is guilty of lewdness is
self-convicted, of doing that by others which he will not bear at the hand of
any other? This is acting directly contrary to the golden rule, which all
nations have adopted, viz. What you would not have done to you, do not that to
others. If any man will fairly stand forth and declare, that he will do what he
pleases, whether right or wrong, he declares himself the enemy of all order,
and unfit to be suffered to exist among rational and moral beings.

That every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband, is the
voice of nature as well as of scripture.

Polygamy is unnatural. By the Mahommedan law any man may have four wives. But
few men take the advantage of the law. They who have the greatest number, are
always the most jealous MOD. UNIV. HIST. VI.247.
.

Young men would do well to consider, that the indulging of those desires only
inflames their rage.

Remarkable is the story of a beautiful Arabian woman, taken by force from her
husband by the governor of Casa, who told the khalif, ordering him to restore
her, that if he would give him leave to keep her one year, he would be content
to have his head struck off at the end of the year Ibid. II.84.
.

A man's leaving the bed of his worthy spouse, who perhaps now begins to v^rge
toward age, and his inv^ding that of his friend, who trusts him, what does it
show, but that he is capable of the basest treachery, if he can but get the
pruriency of his filthy lu^^ scratched upon a finer scrubbing post. And the
woman, whose l^bidinous disposition (^um tibi flagrans amor et libido,
Quae solet matres furiare equorum,
Sae^iet circa jecur ulcerosum
Non sine questu.
HOR. drives her from her home and her husband, raging, a^ H^race here
describes some ladies of his times, with the lust of mares s^ampering over the
meadows, -- what elegance, what taste, does she exhibit? It is granted, that
love, where the ornaments of the mind more than those of the outward form are
the object, is a passion full of elegant sentiment. But love can have no place
where one of the parties is engaged to another person. The only sentiments,
which can enter into such a connection are those of lust and of remorse. Where
the elegance of them lies, I own I do not understand. Neither party can think
of the other but with disapprobation.

Our great folks seem to affect to be the contrasts of the philosopher in A.
Gellius, who would not be conscious to himself of sin, though he could conceal
it from both gods and men. They seem to be above regarding either
self-consciousness, or the knowledge of gods or men.

By the most ancient and honorable of all lawgivers, Moses, adultery, in both
sexes, was made capital EXODUS XXII.16.
. And if a LEVIT. XX.10.
virgin was seduced, the man was obliged to marry her, or find her a husband.

Adultery by consent was punished in Egypt, in the man, with a thousand lashes
with rods; a punishment incomparably worse than hanging or beheading; and in
the woman with the loss of her nose. I don't know from whence I had this; but I
known I did not write it, nor any other fact, without authority.

Solon the Athenian legislator, gave the court of Areopagus power to correct
all idle persons Ubb. Emm. DE REP. ATHEN. I.100.
. The same lawgiver allowed a husband, or any person, who surprised an
adulterer in the act, to kill him on the spot Plut. in Solon.
.

Among the Athenians, if a husband caught his lady tripping, he was obliged to
divorce her. The law did not allow him to receive her again. An adulteress was
not allowed to enter the temples. Romulus likewise made a law, which is
recorded by Aulus Gellius. PELLEX ASAM JUNONIS NE TAGITO. SI TAGET, ARNUM
FOEMINAM CAIDITO. Let not the harlot of a married man touch the altar of Juno
[the goddess of marriage]. If she does, let her offer a female lamb [by way of
expiation]. Among the Spartans there was no such crime as infidelity to the
marriage bed, nor did Lycurgus use any precaution against it; but the virtuous
education he prescribed for the youth of both sexes.

Among the Athenians, fornication, adultery, and celibacy, were punishable
crimes. The debaucher of a virgin was obliged to marry her himself, or find her
a suitable husband, says Potter. And Athenaeus tells us, that at the
Lacedemonian religious feasts, it was customary for the woman to seize all the
old batchelors, and drag them round the altar, beating them.

Such as frequented infamous women, Solon did not allow to harangue the people;
thinking, that men without shame were not to be so far trusted ANT. UNIV. HIST.
VI.314. Plut. in Solon.
. An archon, or magistrate, overtaken with liquor, he ordered to be put to
death, for bringing disgrace upon the office Ibid.
.

Romulus punished adultery in women with death Ibid. XI.292.
.

Domitian, in his first years, showed an attention to the manners of the
people. He restr^ined licentiousness, degraded a senator for being too fond of
dancing, deprived lewd women of the privilege of being carried in litters, or
of enjoying legacies, and punished adultery with death Ibid. XV.52.
.

Several vestal nuns were found guilty of lewdness. They were buried alive, and
their gallants whipped to death Ibid. XII.451.
.

The Emperor Macrinus made an edict, by which every adulterer and adulteress
were to be tied together, and burnt alive [to cool their lust] Ibid. XV.344.
.

Manilius was struck out of the list of senators for saluting his lady, on his
return from a journey, in the presence of his daughter. A high delicacy of
manners among heathens ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.355.
. We Christians do not strike a man out of any of our lists for saluting his wh
-- in the presence of both wife and daughter. The Mahometans punish severely
simple fornication MOD. UNIV. HIST. I.
. Among us Christians, adultery is only gallantry, an amusement for princes and
grandees.

We often meet with extraordinary degrees of modesty in heathen countries.
Young Scipio, by his virtue and aimable behavior, gained over many of the
little African kings and states in Spain, from the Carthaginian to the Roman
interest. The Carthaginians besides, were very tyrannical to their provinces,
which contrast was of advantage to the Roman general ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVIII.44.
. We shall turn over history long enough, before we meet with an instance of as
much good consequent upon whoring, as Scipio and his country gained by chastity.

Cavades king of Persia projected a law for making all women common. Produces
an insurrection, which ends in his deposition from the throne Ibid. XI.98.
.

A sachem's wife shows a great regard for her honor, when taken in war by the
English MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIX.284.
. O shame to the English wh -- es of quality of our enlightened days!

All public brothels were suppressed in the city of Constantinople, by order of
the Empress Claudia, A. D. 428 ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVI.544.
.

The Goths allowed no brothels Ibid. 551.
.

Montesquieu L ESPR. DES LOIX, II.69.
doubts the fact reported by Dion of Halicarnassus, Valerius Maximus, and Aulus
Gelli^^, viz. That though at Rome the law allowed divorce, no man took the
advantage of the law during the space of 520 years. And if the fact was true,
it was not, he thinks, to be wondered at, because, though the law allowed
divorce, yet it clogged it with terrible inconveniences.

Corruption of manners threatens a decline of empire. About the times of Sylla
and Marius, when the Roman republic was tottering to its fall, it was observed,
that there was an universal degeneracy of manners prevailing; particularly,
that the women were very scandalous in their behavior at Rome, while those of
the countries called by them barbarous, were remarkably exemplary in this
respect ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.13.
.

It seems to have been an old English law, that an adulterer should be
mutilated of the offending part. For in the year 1248, a person having been
punished in that manner for fornicatio simplex, the King ordered by
proclamation, that only adulterers should suffer emasculation Hody's HIST. OF
ENGL. COUNCILS, p. 330.
.

By the old heathen laws of Iceland, adultery was punished with death, and even
lascivous behavior between single persons was severely punished. IONAE ISLAND.
TRACT. p. 406. Where the author observes, that our modern Christian legislators
may learn, from these ignorant barbarians, a lesson useful for exciting them to
restrain such behavior between the sexes, as tends to produce effects highly
prejudicial to states.

By the laws of King Kenneth of Scotland, adultery was punished with the death
of both the offenders Spelm. COUNCIL. I.341.
. About the same time, viz. the ninth century, the same crime was punished in
England by fine only Ibid. 367.
.

Adultery was made capital by the incomparable Yncas, who first polished the
Peruvians MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIX.4.
.

Among the ancient Germans, infidelity was punished with the death of the
woman. Alfred inflicted a fine, and Canute fined or banished the man, and
punished the woman with mutilation of nose and ears, and loss of her portion
DISC. GOV. ENG. P. 1. p. 63.
.

Adulteresses, among the Portuguese 700 years ago, were burnt alive, unless the
husbands were pleased to pardon them MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXII.27.
.

A rape committed on a woman of quality of the same country, was punished with
death. The ravisher of a woman of inferior rank was obliged to marry her, if
both single, be his rank ever so much superior to hers Ibid.
.

Adultery in either sex was made death April 1650, (in the interregnum) unless
when the man offending did not know that the woman was married, or the woman's
husband was beyond sea, or generally supposed dead PARL. HIST. XIX.257.
. In those days they went roundly to work. Our laws are not so severe; for a
glasier was lately fined 20 l. and costs of suit for crim. con. with a taylor's
wife WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, June 5th, 1773.
. And we have seen a great person mulcted 10,000 l. for a transgressing with a
lady of quality: by these two extremes may be calculated what will be the
charge of cuckolding any man according to his rank from a nobleman to a tailor.
Tables of these expenses might be constructed by able mathematicians, and
copies of them hung up at Mrs. Cornellys's on masquerade nights, in the same
manner as at Vau^chall and Ranelagh, the rates of provisions.

Adultery is punished with death among the Moguls, though the poor women have
often but the fourth part of a husband; the law allowing any man, who pleases,
four wives MOD. UNIV. HIST. VI.247.
.

Among the Tonkinese in India, an adulteress and her lover are both punished
with death Ibid. VII.482.
.

In Persia an adulterer is punished with emasculation; and the lady is thrown
headlong from the top of a tower De Laet DESCR. PERS. 154.
.

By the laws of Hoel Dha king of Wales, in the 10th century, a married woman
might be divorced from her husband only for wantonly saluting a gentleman
Spelm. COUNCIL. I.411.
.

A widow guilty of frailty was, in the Saxon times, to pay 20 s. an unmarried
woman 10 s. Seld. TIT. HON. 619.
These were heavy fines. For the fine for murder was, in some cases, no higher.

Incontinency in an unmarried heiress was punished with loss of her estate Lord
Lyttelton's HIST. HEN. II. III.119.
.

Adultery was always punished with death among the ancient Goths ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XIX.264.
.

By the laws of Canute, the Dane, and adulteress was to lose her nose and ears,
and the man was banished Spelm. COUNCIL. I.558.
.

Among the ancient Saxons, adultery was so odious, that all the women of the
neighborhood where an adulteress lived, were used to fall upon her, and after
tearing off all her clothes above the waste, whipped and cut her with knives,
till she almost expired Spelm. COUNCIL. I.234.
.

In the old English laws, we find punishments for wanton behavior, as touching
the breasts of women, etc Ibid. I.36^, 373, ^t pas^.
.

By the ancient laws of France, the least indecency of behavior to a free
woman, as squeezing the hand, touching the arm or breast, etc. was punishable
by fine.

In Swisserland they executed, in Burnet's times, all women, who were five
times convicted of fornication, or three times of adultery Burn. TRAV. p. 22.
.

See Charles Ist's pardon to the countess of Castlehaven for adultery,
repeatedly committed by her Ry^. FO^D. XIX.^^1.
, by which she is exempted from all ecclesiastical censures, public penances,
fines, etc.

Philip de Bell of France had three sons, whose wives were all suspected of
infidelity. Their supposed gallants were flayed alive MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXIII.39^.
. If this were the punishment for gallantry in England, I should advise, that
the hides be confiscated, and disposed of by public auction. They would sell at
a great rate, and the money might be of service, when the house was upon ways
and means. Nay, I do not know whether this elegant vice might not, supposing a
due attention paid to the revenue arising from it, go some considerable length
toward paying the debt of the nation. Let it be considered, at what a rate a
rich virtuoso, or a person of taste, would value a pair of gloves made of the
hide of a lady of quality, or a blood royal hide. They must indeed be much more
beautiful than the finest French kid. I know not whether a pin-cushion made of
such rich stuff, might not fetch 100 guineas. And a hide of any size would make
a great many pin-cushions. It is true, the frequency of adultery among us would
bring to the market a prodigious glut of the article. But our engrossers of
corn would presently show us the way of keeping up the price, notwithstanding
the plenty of the commodity. I am likewise aware of another obvious objection
to my project, viz. That hides of rank are generally liable to be tender,
occasioned by a polite malady very epidemical among the great, which would
render the ma^ufacturing of them difficult. But I have not the least doubt, but
a premium proposed would presently find us out a method of getting over that
difficulty. It would be natural for the ministry to turn this scheme to their
advantage by setting up a hide-office, with commissioners at 2000 l. a year,
clerks at 500 l. a year, etc. And I doubt not, but slaying our adulterers and
adulteresses (not alive; that would be too severe) would soon bring into the
treasury as much clear revenue as we are like to get by taxing our colonies.
And though our governments are not used to show much zeal in suppressing vice,
on account of the mischiefs it produces, perhaps the prospect of somewhat to be
got by checking of the polite sin, might excite them to exert themselves.

Thus (to draw toward an end of this chapter) we see, that the violation of
marriage vows, which we look upon as only a piece of polite vivacity, or at
worst a venial sin, has in most ages and nations been considered as a very
serious affair, as ever deserving the severest punishment. All which is humbly
recommended to the consideration of our statesmen and governors, or
whore-mongers and adulterers.

Jane Shore did penance at St. Paul's in a sheet, and a wax taper in her hand.
A good and wholesome discipline, and would be useful in our times Rap. I.635.
.

When it was proposed to punish adultery with death, a gentleman observed, that
such a law would only make people commit the crime with greater secrecy. But
even with this view, such a law would be useful. For open vice is more
atrocious than secret, and more mischievous by its example. It is a great evil
for a people to be accustomed to hear often of gross crimes committed among
them. It familiarises them to vice, and hardens them against the horror which
every well disposed mind should have at wickedness. Wise statesmen will
therefore endeavor to keep up an outward appearance of decency in the practice
of the people. We have had statesmen in this christian, this reformed, this
protestant country of ours, who, so far from giving any attention to the
general manners of the people, have themselves been the grand corruptors and
debauchers of the people, setting shame and decency at defiance.

By one of the laws of Hoel Dha, king of Wales, in the tenth century, a marri^d
woman might be separated from her husband if he was leprous, impotent, or had a
stinking breath Spelm. COUNCIL. I.410.
.

In Riley's Plac. Parl. p. 231, is the copy of a deed, 30 Edw. I. by which John
de Cameys gives up his wife Margaret to William Pagnel, to have and to hold,
with all property belonging to her, Omnibus Christi fidelibus, etc. On this
account she was deprived of her dower, which she sued for after the death of
John her husband; there being an express law to that purpose. Quod si uxor
sponte reliquerit, etc. Ibid. 232.

A. D. 1660, under the debauched Charles II. a bill was brought in for
preventing wives quitting their husbands, and demanding separate maintenance
for frivolous reasons PARL. HIST. XXIII.9.
. Such a bill seems much wanted now.

The emperor Sigismund often caught his empress with her gallants; but always
forgave her, because he was himself guilty in the same way MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXIX.406.
.

There is great reason to think many of the divorces of our times are obtained
by mutual collusion, like Bothwel's, in order to get rid of his wife, and
espouse queen Mary of Scotland; against which Craig, a Scotch clergyman, gave a
brave and open testimony; and being called before the council, so struck them
with his virtuous firmness, that they did not dare to punish him Hume, HIST.
TUD. 47^.
.

Lord Strange, in the debate on the divorce-bill, A. D. 1771, observed, that
the only means of stopping the prevalency of adultery, is to reform the manners
of the women. That whilst Coteries, Cornelys, Almack's, and other places of
rendezvous for company were (...) much encouraged, reformation would be
impossib^^.

It is to be expe^^ed, that among our other improvements in politeness, we
shall soon introduce the Italian elegancy of Cicisoeos, which was derived, says
Voltaire ESS. SUR L'HI^T. IV.87.
, from the romantic times, when gallant knights defended distressed ladies; but
now means rank and open adulterers, seen in all public places with married
women. Every married lady in Italy has one, two, or perhaps three of these
attendants, who is to wait on her to and from all places of entertainment with
the most careful assiduity, for which she rewards them in what she thinks a
proper manner.

One great cause of the gross debauchery of our times, is the putting off of
marriage to so late a period in life, because our gentlemen must, when they set
up housekeeping, live in a certain taste, and all are striving to outvie one
another in splendour and expense. In the mean time the calls of nature are
powerful, and foul water quenches fire as well as clean, which sends our youth
raging to the brothels, though they soon find to their cost that, as Milton
says, it is only in virtuous wedlock that -- Love his golden shafts employs;
here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings;
Reigns here and revels: not in the the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unendear'd,
Casual fruition: not in court, amors,
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball.
PARAD. LOST, B. I^^ ver. 763. But while our gentlemen are going on in this
course of debauchery, their sentiments with respect to the fair sex become
gross and sordid; and they come at last to look upon womankind as merely
objects of lust, and every handsome woman, married or single, is an object of
lust.

Suppose the custom of a country were, for every father of a son to marry him
at the first rise of desire, and before he could have time to think of rambling
after lewd women, or of debauching innocence. A youth of seventeen or eighteen
would choose rather to cohabit with a virtuous young lady of his own rank, than
with a whore. And men ought in all countries to be restrained from debauching
innocent virgins by a law obliging them to marry them, or find them husbands. A
youth of seventeen or eighteen might continue to live with his parents after
marriage as before, and his young wife with hers, visiting from time to time.
The children might remain with the parents of the young woman. The expenses of
their maintenance to be defrayed by both parents, till such time as the young
couple were of age to keep house together. If the reader should start
objections to such a scheme, I will engage to find as many, and of equal
weight, (to say the least) against whoring, the other side of the alternative.

The ancient Cretan youth were obliged to marry as soon as they were of age;
but they did not live constantly with their wives till they were both arrived
at the time of life when the constitution is formed Ubb. Emm. II.66.
. Every State ought to punish voluntary celibacy.

The Turks are more civilized in respect to observance of the matrimonial vow,
than the English and French. Lady M. W* Montague says, A gallant (in Turkey)
convicted of having debauched a married woman, is held in the same abhorrence
as a prostitute with us; he is certain of never making his fortune, and they
would deem it scandalous to confer any considerable employment on a man
suspected of having committed such enormous injustice.

One vice introduces others, and every vice is hurtful in a State; therefore
wise statesmen discourage all vices.

No court (says Voltaire ESS. SUR L'HIST. II.282.
) has ever given itself up to debauchery, but seditions have followed.

King Dagobert of France made his first departure from virtue by repudiating
his Queen, on pretense of barrenness. Afterward he became so licentious, as to
keep three wives at once. The mound once broken down, it is not easy to stop
the inundation MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIII.74.
.

Every body knows to what wickedness this passion drove Henry VIII. and Charles
II.

Governor Baleins, of Gascoyne, killed an officer, who had debauched his sister
on promise of marriage. The King pardoned him.

The law of Moses ordains, that the seducer of a virgin shall find her a
husband EXODUS XXII.16.
.

In Spain, according to Baretti, if a young woman is debauched, the man, whom
she charges as the author of her disgrace, is by law obliged to marry her, or
go to prison, and to suffer endless vexation.

In respect of seduction, our law leaves us quite lawless. A rape is death. But
is not the injury to me the same in the end, whether my daughter is seduced
into the arms of a whoremaster, or forced? Of the two, seduction is on some
accounts a greater injury than force. A young woman deflowered by main force
may still be considered as undefiled in mind; whereas she who yields, must be
accounted in some degree guilty. And as the law has left us in a state of
nature, with respect to the seduction of our daughters, I own, I should be
inclinable to take into my own hands the punishment of the man who had ruined a
daughter of mine: For I should think he had done her and me as great an injury,
in some respects a greater, than if he had murdered her. And if I were upon a
jury to try a father, who had killed the seducer of his innocent daughter, I
should certainly not bring him in guilty of murder.

To the disgrace of the present century, a miscreant lord decoyed an innocent
young milliner of the city from her family under pretense of business; confined
her several days in his own house; terrified her into compliance with his
villainous desires; and was accused of a rape, and punished, with -- a hearty
fright: for he knew he deserved the death of a ravisher. But it could not
legally be brought in a rape. I should be glad to understand what difference it
made to the injured young woman, to her father, or to the young man who courted
her, whether she was put into the ruffian's bed by force, or terrified by
threats; or whether one proceeding, or the other, argued the greatest
malignity, and deserved the severest punishment.

There was (says Chancellor Bacon PARL. HIST. II.435.
) an excellent law framed under Henry VIII. by which the taking and carrying
away women forcibly, and against their will (except female wards and
bond-women) was made capital; the parliament wisely and justly conceiving, that
the obtaining women by force into possession (howsoever assent might follow
afterward by allurements) was but a rape drawn forth into length, because the
first force drew on all the rest. Lord B. did not carry away Miss W. by force;
but he detained her in his own house by force. And it was in consequence of
this force, and of his threats, that he would get her trapanned away out of the
kingdom, and carried to Maryland, of which he was proprietor, that he debauched
her; and yet he suffered no material punishment. The jury were, I suppose,
quibbled out of their senses by the lawyers: for a more atrocious rape was
never committed.

In the year 1699, there was a debate in the House of Peers concerning a
separation, on account of cruelty, and a maintenance, for the Countess of
Anglesea. Lord Haversham protested against it, and said, There never was such a
bill proposed before DEB. PEERS. II.21. And see PARL. HIST. XXIII.33.
.

It is certainly not sound policy to suffer what may make the matrimonial tie
seem less binding; and yet married women ought to be protected against the
brutality of surly husbands. In this our police is miserably deficient. There
ought to be a court for such causes. And yet I think nothing less than
infidelity, or danger of life, can warrant a separation; nor can even those
offenses (in my opinion) justify a divorced person in marrying again; the vows
being absolute, not conditional. A husband or wife, with whom one cannot live,
is a misfortune; but does not, I think, void the matrimonial vow. Besides, it
is to be considered, that allowing separated persons to marry again is giving
them another temptation to separate.

It is the interest of almost every man and woman in England that
street-walkers be suppressed, and lewd women confined to some obscure parts of
great towns. Our ancestors thought it necessary to license public stews, for
fear of violence from sailors, and other debauched people, upon their wives and
daughters. But there is no occasion for suffering the main thorough-fares of
towns to be invested with those women, to the destruction of all sense of
modesty, the discouragement of marriage, and drawing away into vicious courses
the younger part of the male sex. And it is certain, whatever may be pretended,
that the streets may be kept clear of loose women by the same people, who now
keep them clear of carts, coaches, etc. during parliament time.

The court of Spain observing the miserable depopulation of that country after
the imprudent expulsion of the Jews and Moors, among other regulations for
encouraging marriage, took care to prohibit public stews De Laet. HIST. DESCR.
105.
. There ought to be no way of coming at women, but by marriage; and then men
would find it necessary to marry.

Why should the popish police of Paris carry reformation farther than the
protestant police of London? In the WHITEHALL EVENING POST, September 1, 1772,
is the following article in a letter from France: Within these few days, near
700 women of the town have been confined in different hospitals and prisons;
when cured, to be sent to Corsica, and the West India Islands.

Marriage is often kept back in England by gentlemen's going abroad upon their
travels. They set out to visit foreign countries before they have acquired any
knowledge of their own, and get their minds infected with foreign vices before
they have established in them any good and virtuous habits.

No nobleman, or gentleman, ought to travel, if improvement be his object, till
the heat of youth be over; and as every nobleman and gentleman of fortune can
afford to marry young, they may travel with their ladies along with them. It is
notorious, that ladies, in our times, travel almost as much as gentlemen. Any
nobleman, or gentleman, may spend two or three summers in foreign parts with
his lady, and the rest of the year at home; and the business is done. So that
travel need not hinder marriage.

It has been said, that a toast has of late been commonly drunk at the other
end of the town, by the men of wit and gallantry, of which Satan himself need
not be ashamed to be thought the inventor, viz. May elegant vice prevail over
dull virtue. I have, not without some struggle, forced my pen to write it; but
now I see it upon paper, I know not whether, for the honor of human nature,
and of the eighteenth century, such a scrap of infernality ought not to be
condemned to annihilation. Every purchaser of this book may, however, if he
thinks it disgraces the page, blot it out of his own copy. The unthinking rake,
whom the pursuit of pleasure draws into innumerable indefensible follies, is a
saint compared with the deliberate well-wisher and promoter of vice in others,
by which he is to gain neither pleasure nor profit. This latter may boast, that
he has attained the summit and pinnacle of moral depravity. For it is
impossible to exceed in wickedness the being, who loves vice for its own sake.

L'amour des femmes, etc. The love of women can never be a vice, but when it
leads to bad actions VOLT. ESS. SUR L'HIST. II.162.
. Is not the making a woman a whore, or continuing her in a vicious course, who
otherwise would have been an honest woman, or a penitent, a bad action? I am
afraid, our polite people think not.

Augustus punished with death many who had received the favors of his
dissolute daughter Iulia ANT. U^IV. HIST. XIII.5^0.
. Our youth, if they acknowledge the guilt of debauching an innocent virgin
(few of them show even so much sentiment) conclude, that to encourage a
prostitute in her wicked course of life, is no crime.

CHAP. VI. Influence of Education upon Manners.
IT is observed above, that among the ancient Spartans there was no such crime
as infidelity to the marriage bed; and that Lycurgus, in framing his laws, had
used no precaution against it, but the virtuous and temperate education he
prescribed for the youth of both sexes.

And indeed the influence which education has upon the manners of a people is
so considerable, that it is not to be estimated. But by education it is to be
observed, we must understand not only what is taught at schools and
universities, but the impressions young people receive from parents, and from
the world, which greatly outweigh all that can be done by masters and tutors.
Education, taken in this enlarged sense, is almost all that makes the
difference between the characters of nations; and it is a severe satire on our
times, that the world makes most young men very different beings from what
their educators intended they should be.

The difference between the behavior of the grave and regular Quakers, even in
youth, and that of all other sects among us, which is brought about chiefly by
the management of parents, shows what is in the power of parents. The Quakers
hold frugality and industry for religious duties. They accordingly thrive
better, and people more than other sects. See an excommunication and separation
of John Merrick, a Quaker, from their society, on account of his irregular
behavior LAND. MAG. May 1766, p. 241
.

The authors of the ANCIENT UNIVERSAL HISTORY celebrate the wisdom of the
Persians, in respect to education, as follows: As to their laws, [the Persian]
they are greatly commended by Xenophon, who prefers them to those of any other
nation whatsoever, and observes that other lawgivers only appointed
punishments for crimes committed; but did not take sufficient care to prevent
men from committing them; whereas the main design of the Persian laws was to
inspire men with a love of virtue, and abhorrence of vice, so as to avoid the
one, and pursue the other, without regarding either punishment or reward: to
attain this end, parents, were not, by their laws, allowed to give their
children what education they pleased; but were obliged to send them to public
schools, where they were educated with great care, and never suffered, till
they had attained the age of seventeen, to return home to their parents. These
schools were not trusted to the care of common mercenary masters, but were
governed by men of the first quality, and best characters, who taught them by
their example the practice of all virtues; for these schools were not designed
for learning of sciences, but practicing of virtue. The youths were allowed no
other food, but bread and cresses, no other drink but water, at least from the
age of seven to seventeen. Those who had not been educated in these schools,
were excluded from all honors and preferments ANT. UNIV. HIST. V.136.
.

Dio Cassius insists, that Burrhus and Seneca were unfaithful guides of Nero's
youth, in not restraining his licentious passion for Act. Their apology was,
that they were glad to divert him from greater crimes ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIV.373,
390.
. But there is no safety in doing, or in conniving at evil, that good may come.

Hormouz king of Persia had by nature a bad disposition; but Buzurge Mihir, his
tutor, 'took such pains with him, and knew so well how to set folly and vice in
their true lights, that he vanquished his natural proneness to evil, and made
him, in spite of himself, a great and good man. For the first three years of
his reign, while his old tutor remained about his person, he as far transcended
Nouschirvan, as Nouschirvan did all his predecessors. His discourses were
fraught with wisdom. His actions were all beneficent. He carried his respect
for his tutor so far, that he would not wear his regal ornaments in his
presence. And when some of the courtiers intimated, that his reverence to him
was excessive, since it was more than was due to a parent; he answered, You say
well, my friends. But I owe more to him, than I do to my father. The life and
kingdom, I received from him, will remain with me but a few years; but the
reputation I shall acquire in virtue of my tutor's instructions, will survive
to the latest times. Happy had it been for this prince, had he always adhered
to these notions. But when old age had rendered Buzurge Mihir unfit for the
great employment he held, he requested, and obtained, leave to retire; and with
him retired the happiness of his royal pupil. The young courtiers, who were
about Hormouz, begun, from that moment to gain a visible ascendency over him,
and to influence him to do many things alike injurious to his interest and his
reputation. He afterward became such a tyrant, as to murder his subjects by
thousands; the consequences of which proceedings were the hatred of his
subjects; revolts; invasions; battles; and the deposition of Hormouz, and
putting out of his eyes MOD. UNIV. HIST. XI.186.
.

If education be of such consequence, it ought to be a great object with
statesmen; so much the rather because the private educators of youth, who alone
have it in their power to discharge, in any tolerable manner, that momentous
trust, are but indifferently encouraged by those who employ them.

Educators of youth had formerly, in some countries, the authority of ministers
of state, being thought of equal consequence; and justly, says the author.
Youth staid in the seminaries till fit to enter on public employments Ibid.
XXXVIII.472.
. He who is completely qualified for educating youth (who can say what it is to
be completely qualified?) may undertake any thing. The abilities of the angel
Gabriel would find hard exercise in forming a few human minds.

The Chinese laws make parents answerable for the misbehaviour of children,
concluding, that they must have neglected their education ANT. UNIV. HIST.
VIII.266.
.

S. Pierre has reckoned up the advantages of an education in a school, compared
with those of a home education, and has, very judiciously OEUVR. POLIT. XI.108.
, given the preference to that education, which puts young people out of the
way of fond parents, their greatest enemies.

Marshal, in his travels, speaking of the Dutch seminaries of learning,
observes, that there is not in them such a variety of dissipation and expense,
as are the disgrace of our universities of Oxford and Cambridge. That a youth,
by being placed at Leyden, or Utrecht, runs no other hazard, than that of
perhaps acquiring a more studious turn, than what would be suitable to active
stations in life. But that at our English universities, a youth will acquire
such a turn to extravagance, as will ruin all prudence and economy in him for
life. He adds, the morals of the youth are incomparably purer at the Dutch
universities, than the English, which are little better than seminaries of vice.

If statesmen understood rightly their proper function, they would apply a
great part of their time and attention to education, as a matter of great
consequence toward forming right principles and manners in persons of rank,
from whom the lower people receive theirs. Universities and public schools,
especially those situated in great towns, seem to be a constitution incapable
of proper regulation. The multitude of the youth assembled together, makes it
unreasonable to expect other than dissipation and neglect of studies, if not
vice and debauchery. They consider themselves as (what they really are)
formidable to their masters and governors, and they will obey only when they
please. But, if we must speak the truth, the error begins earlier than schools
and universities. In England parents encourage that in their sons, which they
ought to suppress, and contrariwise. The most amiable, and most useful
disposition in a young mind is diffidence of itself, a sense of its own
insufficiency, and consequent need of instruction and guidance, and a constant
fear of offending. But we do all we can to rub off this lovely delicacy of
sentiment, and to give our sons instead of it, a bold and fearless disposition,
which naturally leads them to licentiousness and disobedience, with a daring
contempt and resistance of advice and instruction from those who alone have a
right to regulate their manners and habits.

But to point out fully the errors, deficiencies, and abuses of the times, with
respect to this one article of forming the manners of the youth, would fill
this whole volume.

It is commonly reckoned, that kindness is the natural growth of the human
heart. Yet we find, that savages are almost universally rather devils than men
in respect of cruelty, and that they only come to acquire some degree of
humanity, in consequence of civilisation.

Scalping was in use among the Alans and Huns Clarke's CONNEX. OF COINS, p. 415.
.

In modern times we do not expect a whole army, or other numerous set of
people, to be restrained from irregularities by principle. A man of real honor
or conscience, is one of a thousand. We meet with various instances among the
ancient Heathens, of great multitudes restrained by their oath, by gratitude to
a public benefactor, or by reverence for the gods. To what is it owing, that
with a better religion, we see worse manners prevail?

Lazy statesmen excuse their neglect of this important part of their duty by
alleging, that the multitude of any people is incapable of being formed to any
principles of virtue or delicacy of sentiment. But it is not true, that the
majority of a people must be of gross sentiment. The Athenians are a proof to
the contrary. They would not agree to Themistocles's unknown proposal, though
Miltiades told them it would be very serviceable to the state, because he at
the same time told them it was dishonorable Cic. OFF. Corn. Nep. VIT. THEMIST.
.

Plato employs a great part of the IVth dialogue of his DE REPUBL. in showing
what care ought, for the security of states, to be taken of the education of
youth, and speaks of it as almost sufficient of itself to supply the place of
both legislation and administration.

And Aristotle POLIT. VII.17.
lays down very strict rules concerning the company young people may be allowed
to keep, the public diversions they may attend, the pictures they may see, and
against obscenity, intempeance, etc. And the VIIIth book of his POLIT. i^
employed wholly on education; in which he shows, that youth ought to be
strongly impressed with the idea of their being members of a community, whose
good they are to prefer to their own private advantage in all cases where they
come in competition. He commends the Spartan wisdom in paying such attention to
this great object. Such is the delicacy of this old Heathen, that he hesitates
about the propriety of young men's applying to music, as being likely to
effeminate and enervate the mind.

We Christians let our youth loose to all encounters, and hardly teach them any
thing thoroughly, but the necessity of getting money, in order to make a figure
in life.

Lycurgus did not allow his Spartans to travel, lest they should be tainted
with the manners of other nations. We should keep our gentry from making the
tour of Europe, in mere compassion to our neighbors, who cannot afford to be
as debauched as we are. Time was when the English went abroad to learn the
continental vices; but we have outdone our masters. The English are not
reckoned great in invention, but they are famous for improving on the
inventions of others.

There ought to be a large fine imposed on every person who goes needlessly
abroad, and spends his income in foreign countries. This alone, carried to a
considerable excess, would ruin the nation. It has been computed, that in one
year our truants of the nobility and gentry have spent, in France alone, to the
amount of near a million. If the French were as foolish as we are, and would
come and throw away their money among us, as we do ours with them, the account
would balance itself between the nations. But they know better things.

Polymnis, the father of Epaminondas spent most of what he could give his son
upon his education. Let history be answerable, whether he did not lay it out to
the greatest advantage ANT. UNIV. HIST. VII.205.
.

The Roman censors expelled from the city certain unqualified schoolmasters
Ibid. XIII.34.
. Our law prohibits all persons educating youth (not who are ignorant,
negligent, or vicious) but who will not subscribe certain self-contradictory
doctrines, which every man of sense in our times gives up, and which no man
ever really believed, because no man ever understood them.

Hieronymus, successor to the good king Hiero of Sicily, a wicked prince, so
grieved some of his guardians, that they laid violent hands on themselves,
choosing death rather than the pain of seeing the bad behavior of their
quondam pupil Ibid. VIII.108.
.

In the time of James I. A. D. 1620, a motion was made in the house of peers
for an academy for the education of persons of quality. This shows, that the
conduct of the Universities was, in those times, disapproved PARL. HIST. V.337.
.

The excellent Abbe S. Pierre holds education to be of great consequence both
to princes and subjects toward the peace and happiness of states. See
particularly tom. VII.219, where he shows the great importance of good habits
and customs in a country, and the great importance of education toward forming
the habits and customs of a people.

Montesquieu lays great stress on education and manners L'ESPR. DES LOIX, I.47.
seq.
. What he writes is too long to quote without prejudice to his sense.

The Czarina does not extirpate vice by stern justice, but prevents it by the
more effectual means of virtuous education CZARINA'S INSTR. Pres. XV.
.

Every thing in Poland favors frequent robberies and murders. But such is the
honesty of the people, there are very few. So much more useful are good morals
than good laws MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLIII.529.
.

S. Pierre thinks it strange, that in England education should be neglected by
parliament Ibid. 165.
. However, that has not always been the case. For we find a bill ordered to be
brought in, A. D. 1711, for preventing the education of children in popish
countries DEB. COM. IV.261.
. But indeed, excepting the article of religion, it is to be questioned whether
English children would be great losers by going abroad for education. The
conduct of English parents in respect of indulgence, even to the voluntary and
inexcusable perverseness of their children, makes it much to be desired, that
they and their children be separated as early as possible.

A noble scheme was proposed in the time of Henry VIII. when the crown had so
much in its power, viz. A foundation for educating ambassadors, counselors,
and public officers. The students to be trained up in the knowledge of history
and politics, and to go abroad with ambassadors. Others to write the history of
all public transactions. This would, however, answer no end in our times. Our
politics are reduced within a very narrow compass. Packing a house of commons
Rapin, I.824.
.

Statesmen ought to keep as constant an eye upon the manners of their people,
as the most prudent parents upon those of their children. The manners of a
people are very changeable. One would hardly imagine any thing more remote from
the national character of the English than inhumanity. Yet the Newspapers of
the beginning of April 1771, were filled with accounts of the most infernal
cruelties committed by them in the East Indies.

CHAP. VII. Of Punishments.
THERE are two principal means for drawing mankind to decency of behavior, and
deterring them from those actions which are hurtful to society, viz. Rewards
and Punishments. As to the former of these, it is but a little way that
statesmen go in conferring them. In poor countries, governments have but little
in their power, and in rich ones they give the honors and emoluments not to
those who deserve them, but to those whom it suits them best to gratify; and
then they exchange the name of rewards for that of bribes. It is therefore not
necessary to say much of rewards. As to punishments, the most indispensable
requisite is their being adequate. A murder committed with the sword of
justice, is the most horrid phenomenon in a state. And in all well-regulated
states, the maxim, Better ten guilty escape, than that one innocent be
punished, has been held unquestioned.

Another essential in punishments is, that they be calculated to deter
offenders, and prevent farther transgression. For this is, in fact, the sole
end of punishments. And if a sanction does nothing toward preventing farther
violation of the law, it is totally useless.

Malefactors in Russia are now condemned not to death, but to work in the mines
MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXV.3^0.
. A regulation not less prudent than humane; since it renders this punishment
of some advantage to the state. In other countries they only know how to put a
criminal to death with the apparatus, but are not able to prevent the
commission of crimes. The terror of death does not perhaps make such an
impression on evil doers, who are generally given to idleness, as the fear of
chastisement and hard labor renewed every day.

Catharine the Czarina, on ascending the throne, promised, that no person
should in her reign be punished with death. We punish every thing with death,
and with death of the same sort; so that two fellows shall go together to be
hanged at Tyburn, the one for cutting his wife's throat, or worse, starving her
to death, the other for taking a guinea of a rich man a stranger to him MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXXV.556.
.

Caput amputare, etc. Beheading, racking, mutilation, breaking on the wheel,
are not legal punishments in England, and yet in no country are fewer murders
committed. Thom. Smith. DE REPUB. ANGL. Perhaps it is not strictly true, that
there is no country in which fewer murders are committed, than in England. I
imagine Scotland and Holland are exceptions; to mention no others. But be this
as it will, it is certain that in no countries are atrocious crimes more
frequent, than in those in which the punishments are the most inhuman.

Let us hear Mr. Fazakerly on this subject, who spoke as follows in the house,
A. D. 1744:

Some people confess that forfeitures and confiscations, when annexed to
capital punishments, are inconsistent with religious justice, and the spirit of
our law; but these additional punishments, say they, are necessary for the
preservation of government, and preventing conspiracies and civil wars. Did
they ever do so in any country? Did the severity of the punishment ever prevent
the frequency of the crime? Does breaking on the wheel prevent robberies in
France? Do the punishments of treason prevent treasons and rebellions in Asia,
where traitors are put to the most tormenting and cruel deaths, and their whole
families destroyed? Sir, there is something in the nature of man that disdains
to be terrified; and therefore severe punishments have never been found
effectual for preventing any sort of crime. The most effectual way to prevent
crimes is, to prevent the temptation: if you would prevent thefts and
robberies, you must take care to have your people educated in virtuous
principles, and every man brought up and enured to labor and industry, that
has no estate to subsist on: if you would prevent treasons, you must do it by
the mildness of your government, in order to prevent the ambitious from having
any matter to work on, or any prospect of success, and to prevent any number of
men from being rendered desperate; for desperate men no laws can restrain, no
punishment frighten; and no man ever yet conspired against a government,
without some prospect of success. I am therefore fully convinced that
punishments always promote, instead of preventing, conspiracies and civil wars;
and I have the experience of all ages, and all countries, for supporting my
opinion. Nay, if we have any faith in providence, we must expect that a
government shall not go unpunished, which injures and oppresses the fatherless,
the widow, and the orphan. These severe punishments upon treason, Sir, serve
for nothing but to lull a government into a fatal and mistaken security, that
no man will venture to conspire or rebel against them. In arbitrary
governments, this emboldens ministers to tyrannize over, and oppress the
people; and in limited governments it encourages them to encroach upon the
liberties and privileges of the people. In both they continue their oppressions
or encroachments, till the people are become generally discontented. Then some
desperate, or some ambitious man sets fire to the train, and the ministers too
often with their masters are blown up by the combustibles which they themselves
have collected for their own destruction. It was to this cause chiefly, I am
convinced, Sir, that we owed all the civil wars, and all the revolutions that
have happened in this country almost ever since the conquest; and if we remove
the cause, I may venture to prophesy, that both our civil wars and revolutions
will be less frequent.

One would think nothing was more natural, than that murder be punished with
death, according to Moses's law, he, who sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed GENESIS IX.6.
.

-- Nec lex est justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
It seems strange, that any nation wise enough to propose punishments, should
propose any other punishment for every injury, than formal retaliation, where
it can be inflicted. Why should he, who mangles an innocent person, in such a
manner that he is three days in the pains of death, be neatly tucked up, and
put out of pain in the time of pronouncing, one, two, three? A few years ago, a
merciless monster in human shape, starved his wife to death, keeping her tied
with her hands behind her in constant anguish, for many weeks, if I rightly
remember. He was only hanged; that is, he was punished, as if he had only
stolen a sheep. This is not common sense. His guilt was as much beyond that of
a sheep-stealer, as this globe of 25,000 miles round is larger than a hillock.

At Taunton a man was lately executed as usual [that is, he was hanged] for
murdering his own father LONDON MAG. 1768, p. 228.
.

Our laws are grown to be very sanguinary. In the Saxon times, they were quite
contrary. For the lives of all ranks of men were valued at a certain fine;
though some authors think those fines were for accidental killing; not for
murder of malice forethought See Seld. TIT. HON. p. 603. The weregild [or fine
for killing] an archbishop and an earl, is 15,000 thrymsas, [a thrymsa about a
third of a Saxon shilling] of a bishop and an ealdorman 8000, of a hold and a
highgereeve 4000, of a massethane, or spiritual lord, and a worldthane, or
temporal lord, 2000. And see Ibid. 6^9, the fines for murder committed on
certain holidays.
. In those times they distinguished the rank of a person by the fine for
killing him. One was a 200 s. man; another a 300, and so on Spelm. GLOSS. VOC.
Were, Maegbota, Weregildum, etc.
.

Had due care been taken, it is impossible, that in the 18th century, it could
ever have been made a capital crime to break down (however maliciously) the
mound of a fish pond, or to cut down a cherry-tree in an orchard, or that it
should still be felony to be seen for one month in company with the people
called Egyptians or Gipseys Blackstone, IV.6.
. Add to these the game-acts, the dog-act, the smuggling-acts, the penal laws
against dissenting preachers officiating without subscription to human articles
and creeds, etc.

By 10 Geo. III. c. 19, every unqualified person taking or killing a partridge
in the night is to be whipped publicly. This law is so cruel, that, I suppose,
no magistrate will venture to put it in execution.

The good emperor Antoninus was so cautious of too great severity, (the worst
error of the two) that he promised never to punish capitally a senator; which
promise he kept so faithfully, that he spared several murderers of that rank
ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.199.
.

It is not the severity of punishments, but the certainty of not escaping, that
restrains licentiousness. Czar. INSTR. 127.
.

When laws and sanctions are ill contrived, it is necessary to make laws to
punish crimes occasioned by former laws: but this is the height of injustice
Ibid. 128.
.

Public executions, if they do not strike the people with fear, instead of
being exemplary, do harm, by hardening them against punishment. Whenever a
people come to show themselves unmoved, or not properly affected at those awful
scenes, a government, who had common sense, or any feeling of their proper
function, would immediately put a stop to such exhibitions, and confine
executions to the bounds of the prison. In Scotland at an execution, all appear
melancholy, many shed tears, and some saint away. But executions there are very
rare. It is the same in Holland.

It may not be unseasonable, says Davenant, in this place to offer to public
consideration, whether it would not be more religious, [more agreeable to the
spirit of christianity] to transport many of those miserable wretches, who are
frequently executed in this kingdom for small transgressions of the law; it
being peradventure one of the faults of our constitution, that it makes so
little difference between crimes; for experience tells us, that many
malefactors have, by after-industry, and a reformation in manners, justified
their wisdom, whose clemency sent them abroad Daven. II.4.
.

Voltaire says the English only murder by law. He makes repeated reflections on
this nation as bloody, cruel, rebellious, etc. More crowned heads, he says,
have been cut off in England, than in all Europe besides. How few kings in
Europe have been cut off, compared with those who have deserved cutting off! If
the English have shown less patience under tyranny, than the other nations of
Europe, I wish they had shown still less. That, for instance, they had unheaded
Henry VIII. his bloody daughter Mary, and James II. tyrants and murderers all,
as well as Charles I. on whom they did justice in an exemplary manner. I wish
our law was less sanguinary in punishing theft. But it very ill becomes a
Frenchman to reflect on English severity. Did not their tyrant tell them a few
years ago, that the whole power, legislative and executive, is in him alone? Do
the English ever put any person to the torture to force them to confess? On the
contrary, is it not a maxim in our law, that no man is obliged to accuse
himself? Do the French try accused persons by their peers? Has not their
tyrant, or their tyrant's tool, or their tyrants whore, power to send to the
Bastile whom they please? Is there a man in France secure of his liberty, or
his property, one day to an end?

The severest punishment, under a mild administration, would be, to convince
the offender, that he has committed a foul crime Czar. INSTR. 86.
. It is the fault of government, if a people are less delicate to offend
against the laws of their country, and of morality, than a well-brought up son,
or daughter, against those of their parents. In England we have little notion
of obeying either our maker, our laws, or our parents.

Punishments operate according to the dispositions of the people. Severe
punishments harden their tempers, and defeat their own intention. There are
more offenders among the Turks, who bastinado their people to death for slight
faults MOD. UNIV. HIST. XVIII.205.
, than in England. The rigorous punishments of martial law do not restrain the
soldiery from licentious behavior. The youth of the public schools, where the
discipline is severe, are more unruly, than those in private houses of
education, where they are corrected with more gentleness.

The only punishment denounced against the transgressors of the Ogulnian law
was, that they should be deemed guilty of a dishonorable action. A slight
punishment indeed for a more corrupt age; but sufficient at this time to
restrain the Romans, who piqued themselves on their virtue, and were never
chosen for great employments, unless they had preserved their reputation pure
and untainted ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.115
.

A violent administration will be for sudden and violent remedies, in case of
public disturbances; and by and by these violent punishments become familiar,
and are despised Czar. INSTR. 86.
.' A people are to be led, like rational creatures, not driven like brutes.

The shame of being punished ought always to be the principal part of an
offender's punishment. And a person, who is punished, will suffer severely from
shame, unless either the punishment be unjust, which is the fault of the
government, or himself, and those, who are witnesses of his punishment, be
hardened and abandoned; which is a greater fault of the government. For it was
the government's business to take care, that the people should not become thus
ill-disposed.

The Czarina proposes Ibid. 82.
that all punishments flow naturally from the respective crimes. If this rule
were observed, thieves and highwaymen would be punished with hard work and hard
fare, because they became guilty through idleness and luxury.

If a government is mild, and a country happy under it, banishment will be a
sufficient punishment for most offenses.

Crimes, which tend to corrupt the morals of the people, ought always to bring
this punishment upon the offenders; because the morals of the people ought
above all things to be secured.

Hanging is a punishment as ancient as King I^^, says Sir William Dugdale ORIG.
JURIDIC. p. 88.
. William the Bastard punished with putting out of eyes, emasculation, cutting
off hands or feet, etc. Henry I. introduced hanging for theft and robbery.
Beheading criminals of quality was first practiced, he thinks, in 8 Will.
Conqu. Drowning was a punishment used in the time of Edward II. and before. In
the county palatine of Chester they used beheading instead of hanging, in the
time of Edward I. A murderer was, in those days, dragged to execution by the
relations of the murdered by a long rope Ibid. 89.
.

Among the ancient Germans, and, after them, among our Saxon ancestors, a
murderer was obliged to pay damages to the King for the loss of a subject; to
the Lord for the loss of a vassal; and, as Tacitus observes (de mor. Germ.
recipit satisfactionem, etc.) to all the family of the deceased for the loss of
their father, son, brother, etc Spelm. GLOSS. VOC. Cenegild.
.

It was enacted in this parliament that the King should not pardon murder Rap.
I.466.
.

A man was boiled to death in Smithfield (on an old statute since repealed) for
poisoning Ibid. I.792.
.

Beccaria, p. 102, holds capital punishment wholly unnecessary, excepting only
where the life of the offender is clearly incompatible with the safety of the
state.

When an offender is hanged, he is made an example to a few hundreds, and is
forgotten. Put him in a state of slavery, confinement, or continually returning
correction, during many years, or for life, and you make him a constant example
to a succession of individuals during the whole period of his punishment,
besides that his labor may in some degree compensate for the injury he has
done society.

Too severe punishments affect the people with compassion for the sufferer, and
hatred against the laws and the administrators of the laws.

There are in England no less than 160 crimes declared by law capital, without
benefit of clergy Blackst. IV.18.
.

If severity were the certain means for curing some faults in a people, it does
not follow that it ought to be used, because it may leave a worse distemper
than it removes. It may force them out of one wrong track into another more
wrong. It may break and dastardise their spirit; or it may harden and brutify
them.

The Iapanese are afraid of hardening their children by severity; but the
Iapanese government is not afraid of hardening the people by accustoming them
to rigorous punishments. Yet the maxims by which a family of children, and
those by which a people are to be formed, and to be governed, are no way
essentially different.

There was a bill brought into parliament under James I. for exempting the
gentry of this realm from the slavish punishment of whipping PARL. HIST. V.448.
.

Punishments are indispensable in states; and a proper application of them
produces valuable effects. P^invine's execution for cowardice, at the beginning
of the Dutch war, was of considerable service. He was tried twice by his
brother officers; but acquitted, to the great disgust of the states, who saw,
says Burnet HIST. OWN TIMES, I.470.
, that the officers were resolved to be gentle to one another, and to save
their fellow-officers, how guilty soever they might be. The Prince of Orange
brought him to a third trial before himself and a court of the supreme
officers, in which they had the assistance of six judges. He was cast for his
life.

Nothing seems clearer, if we compare Admiral Byng's conduct, A. D. 1755, with
that of Blake, Vernon, or any of our truly brave commanders, than that he
deservedly suffered the punishment due to cowardice. Yet we find several of the
officers, who could not decently avoid condemning him, afterward pretending
great uneasiness about his fate, and desiring to disclose their reasons for
passing the sentence of death on him, which would discover, they said, such
circumstances as might, perhaps, show the sentence to have been improper ALM.
DEB. COM. V.204.
. The King respited Byng: And a motion was made for bringing in a bill for
releasing the officers from the obligation of secrecy; but the Lords wisely
rejected it, approving the old rule, Hang well and pay well, and you shall be
well served.

We punish many very atrocious crimes too slightly, as well as several
inconsiderable crimes too severely. Perjury in England is only the pillory.
Among the Russians, it is punished with severe whipping, and banishment MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXXV.124.
.

A bill was brought in A. D. 1694 to make perjury felony. Thrown out. Several
lords protest, because there was great need of a severer punishment for perjury
DEB. P^ERS, I.434.
.

Our laws are too gentle to perjury; to adultery; to seduction of modest women;
to insolvency occasioned by overtrading or extravagance; to idleness in the
lower people; to bribery and corruption; to engrossing and monopolizing the
necessaries of life; to giving and accepting challenges; to murders with
aggravations of cruelty, etc.

Preventive wisdom suggests the necessity, 1. Of an incorrupt legislature. 2.
Of clear and simple laws, digested in a short code. 3. Of the certainty of
punishment in case of transgressions. Pardons, even from the Throne, are of
doubtful consequence. They invite offenders, especially persons of rank; for
they trust they shall always have interest to obtain their pardon. Laws ought
to be so just and so mild, that they may be put in execution, which would
supersede the use of the royal prerogative, and save the King the trouble of
much solicitation and reflection when he refuses. 4. Of liberty. A slave has no
veneration for his country or its laws. His country does nothing for him, that
may allure him to obedience: freemen have a hand in making the laws, and
therefore may be supposed to be prejudiced in their favor. Men naturally
oppose laws made by those who assume an unjustifiable authority over them. 5.
Of sound education, useful public instruction, and a free press, with what ever
else tends to spread light and knowledge among the pe^^le. A savage or
uncultivated people are only obedient as far as fear carries them. Knowledge
enlarges the mind, and leads it to the love of order and regularity. Education
furnishes the mind with what takes it off from the sordid pursuit of riches,
power, and sensual pleasure. 6. Of rewards rather honorary than pecuniary. 7.
Of associations, as that in Poland called the commonwealth of Babina; which
consisted of all the most considerable people of the country, who met from time
to time to enquire into the general behavior of the people, and promoted good
behavior by their countenance and other invitations; discouraging the contrary
by general disgrace. But indeed we need go no farther than our own wise and
judicious Quakers; who do more by their manner of educating their youth, and
their treatment of them in consequence of their behavior, than all the Kings
of Europe with their laws and sanctions piled on one another to the height of
mountains.

CHAP. VIII. Able Statesmen apply themselves to forming the Manners of the
People.
IF manners be, as we have seen, so essentially necessary to the safety of a
State, no wise Prince, Minister, or Statesman, will neglect attending to the
general manners and morals. No part of the function of Statesmen is more
honorable, none more useful, none more indispensable, than a due attention to
the general manners of the people. If a wise and good man were to wish to be in
a high station, it would be for the sake of being thus serviceable to his
fellow creatures. But a little knowledge of the world shows us, that grandees
of all denominations, as Emperors, Kings, Grand-dukes, Popes, Cardinals, Peers,
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. are great enemies to manners. Their height above the
rest gives them an opportunity of daring, without fear of punishment, or almost
of censure, to strike out from the limited path of virtue into the wilds of
licentiousness; and the silliness of mankind, who admire a laced coat, whether
it be a man or a monkey that wears it, leads them to imitate what reason
teaches to abhor. There must be less of this in a well regulated republic,
where all are nearly upon an equality, than in a monarchy, where the false
glare of a court misleads the unthinking into the paths of ambition and
corruption.

Do our great men consider how they expose themselves in setting such an
example before the public?

How absurd titles without corresponding characters! To call a drinking, wh --
ring, perfidious tyrant, as Charles II. his sacred, or his most excellent, or
most religious Majesty; a debauched Villiers, and his trull, the Countess of
Shrewsbury, right honorable; what grosser inconsistency in language can be
imagined?

-- Grant that those can conquer; those can cheat,
It Is phrase absurd to call a villain great.
What can ennoble sots, or slaves, or cowards?
Alas, not all the blood of all the Howards.
POPE. Chartres, the basest of all rascals, was wont to say, he cared not one
farthing for real virtues; but he would give 10,000l. for a character, because
he could get by it 100,000l.

A person of quality thinks he may do what a cottager must not attempt. A worm
of distinction crawling upon the higher protuberances of this dunghill may
rebel against the eternal laws of the infinite Governor of the universe, while
the base-born reptile, that is confined to the lower parts, must be obedient.
Do our great worms consider, that he, whose laws they are resisting, has only
to arm with his vengeance one atom, and a world, a system, with all its
inhabitants, great and small, are destroyed? Is a King, or an Emperor, a match
for such power?

Men of narrow minds, when reproached upon their want of public spirit, cry
out, what shall I get by serving those who show no inclination to benefit me in
retur^?

It is true, that mankind in general are a worthless and ungrateful set of
beings, for a man to wear himself out in serving. But I am myself a worthless
being, compared with my own Ideas of worth, and with those in scripture; and if
I do not lay myself out in the service of mankind, whom shall I serve? My
insignificant self? That would be sordid indeed. If I apply myself with
diligence, I may do good to several. If I regard only my single self, I serve
but one, and him, perhaps, one of the most indifferent of the set.

But it is not true, that there is nothing to be gained by public spirit, or
lost by the want of it. For there is a very serious light in which this matter
is to be viewed, viz. That we are all embarked on the same bottom; and if our
country sinks, we must sink with it.

But suppose there were literally nothing to be got by serving our country,
antiquity exhibits a multitude of examples of great and good men serving their
country without advantage, and in spite of unjust treatment. Phocion, though he
had often commands in the army, was condemned to an undeserved death, and died
poor, at a time when corruption was at a great height at Athens ANT. UNIV.
HIST. VI.512.
. When his friends lamented him, he comforted them by putting them in mind,
that his fate was the same with that of all the great and good men of Athens.

Xenophon got so little from his churlish countrymen, though he conducted the
wonderful retreat of the ten thousand, that he found himself necessitated to
engage in the service of Seuthes King of Thrace, and to sell his horse.

There is no end to the examples of this kind in the Grecian and Roman
histories.

When we urge our rulers to begin a reformation, a thousand difficulties start
up immediately. But when Lycurgus undertook to reform Sparta, did no
difficulties lay in the way? And was not the case the same at Athens, when
Solon set up his legislation? To persuade the great and rich to give up their
possessions, and voluntarily descend to a level with the meanest, what could be
more difficult? Yet Lycurgus accomplished it. The force of his legislation, and
the manners introduced by it, are not quite vanished even in our times. The
modern Spartans have more courage than any of their neighbors MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XII.572.
.

Confucius, the Chinese philosopher, produced a reformation in one of the
oriental kingdoms in a few months MOD. UNIV. HIST. VIII.105.
.

Aristotle thinks, a regard for the virtue of the people is an essential part
of the duty of governors Arist. POLIT. III.9.
. It would be endless to quote what is written by Plato, and the other ancients
to the same purpose.

If government be the parent of manners, where there are no heroic virtues,
there can be no her^^c government Harringt. OCEANA, 198.
.

One judicious regulation will often produce an effect of very salutary
importance to a whole people; as experimental philosophy shows us, that a wire
will secure a castle from the once supposed irresistible force of lightning,
and that a muslin cover will stop the whole effect of a burning speculum, whose
focus would melt an iron bar in a few seconds.

Human nature is originally the same in all ages and nations. Only in some it
is more, in others less, debauched from its original tendencies.

It is certain, that by wise contrivance, honor might have been made, even in
our luxurious and degenerate age and country, the most powerful of all
incentives to good behavior.

An able statesman can change the manners of the people at pleasure Stuart's
POLIT. OECON. I.12.
.

It was a saying of Solon, the wisest of the Greeks, That by rewards and
punishments states were kept up Ubb. Emm. II.244.
.

Tacitus DE MORIB. GERM.
observes, Plus ibi honos mores, etc. That good customs were more effectual for
keeping up good behavior among those ancient barbarous heathens, than good
laws among other people, [among civilized Christians.]

When Alexander's men mutinied, and he could not quiet them by gentle means, he
sprung from his tribunal, seized with his own hands twelve of the most
outrageous, and delivered them to his generals to be put to death. The rest
returned to their duty Qu. Curt.
. When Caesar's army refused to march, and to fight, he shamed them into
obedience by bidding them be gone; for that he scorned their service, and would
pursue his wars at the head of his own tenth legion. It so happened, that this
braggadocio produced the desired effect Caes. COM.
.

When Mohammed Almanzor saw his army on the point of betaking themselves to
flight, he dismounts, sits down with his arms across, and declares his
determination not to fly like a coward, happen what would; that if his army
chose to leave him in the hands of his enemies, they might. Shame prevailed
over fear MOD. UNIV. HIST. XIX.534.
. These bold strokes are only to be struck in cases otherwise desperate.

Mankind may be brought to hold any principles, and to indulge any practices,
and again to give them up.

The Thracians allowed their daughters to debauch themselves with men before
marriage as much as they pleased; and only taught the necessity of restraining
lust after marriage. Yet the Thracians were, to say the least, not so barbarous
as many other nations; Orpheus, Linus, Musaeus, Thamyris, and Eumolpus, were
Thracians. Some nations allowed their young women to get, by prostitution,
fortunes for marriage.

Herodotus tells us of an ancient people who ordered all their young women to
prostitute themselves in the temple of Venus as a religious rite. The priests
in some countries taught, that a young woman's being debauched by a holy man,
sanctified and rendered her acceptable to the gods. In some countries it is
fashionable for gentlemen to offer their wives to their guests, and to take it
as a slight if the stranger declines the compliment. In some countries it is
not more indecent to enjoy women in public, than among us to eat and drink in
public. The ancient Thracian and modern Indian women, strive which shall be
burned or buried alive with their deceased husbands.

Is there any notion of right and wrong about which mankind are universally
agreed? If not, is it not evident, that by management, the human species may be
molded into any conceivable shape? How come we to know that antimony, or
quicksilver, may, by chemical process, be changed into twenty different states,
and again restored to their original state? Is it not by experiment? Are not
the various legislations, institutions, regulations of wise or of designing
statesmen, priests, and kings, a series of experiments, showing, that human
nature is susceptible of any form or character?

Romulus was so desirous of peopling his kingdom, that he admitted into Rome
all sorts of people, even the most wicked ANT. UNIV. HIST. XI.282.
. Yet there was not one parricide in Rome for 600 years, nor, according to some
authors, one divorce (though every husband might put away his wife at pleasure)
in 500 years. But they had censors, and the senate gave a constant attention to
the behavior of the people.

The Roman nation (says the excellent Davenant Davenant II.43.
) was first composed of thieves, vagabonds, fugitive slaves, indebted persons,
and outlaws; and yet by a good constitution and wholesome laws, they became and
continued for some ages the most virtuous people that was ever known. So that
as loose administration corrupts any society of men, so a wise, steady, and
strict government will, in time, reform a country, let its mannners have been
ever so depraved.

Every reader knows the story of Zaleucus, lawgiver of the Locrians, who having
made a law (much wanted at present in a certain country), that every man
convicted of adultery should lose his eyes; and seeing his own son regularly
condemned for that offense, that he might at the same time show himself the
father of his son, and of his people, consented to have one of his own eyes,
and one of his son's, put out. In England, we seem to think laws want only to
be made and printed.

The same wise legislator applied his chief care to impressing the minds of the
people with a sense of a Deity, the author and governor of all things; his
attributes, goodness, justice, purity; who sees and regards human characters,
and loves and rewards good men, who are obedient to the laws, and abhors and
punishes the wicked and licentious Ubb. Emm. II.204.
. But Zaleucus was an ignorant Heathen, and imagined that men would be better
subjects for being pious. Our governors (the reader will see I do not mean the
present) are Christians, and live in an improved age. Therefore they lead their
people to laugh at religion and conscience; they play at cards on Sundays,
instead of countenancing the public worship of their Maker; they have made
adultery a matter of merriment; they cheat at play whenever they can; they lead
their inferiors into extravagance and dissipation by encouraging public
diversions more luxurious and more debauched than all that ever the orientals
exhibited; and lest shame should in some degree restrain them, they put on
masks, and set it at defiance; they go to Italy to learn s -- y; they appear in
public with their drabs by their sides; they are the first and most extensive
violators of the laws themselves have made; they are the destroyers of the
constitution, for by openly bribing electors and members, and by leading both
clergy and laity into dissimulation and perjury, they destroy the virtue of the
people, without which no constitution ever stood long. And after all this, they
complain of the people's want of respect for them, and their disobedience to
the laws.

Zaleucus made great use of the innate sense of shame in enforcing his laws and
establishing virtuous practices. For instance, in order to repress extravagance
in the ladies, he ordered, with severe penalty, that no woman should go out
with more than one attendant, unless she was drunk; nor be a night from home,
unless she was with a gallant; nor dress herself gorgeously, unless she was a
prostitute by profession. He likewise forbid the men's dressing themselves in
an effeminate manner, unless they were whore-mongers and adulterers Ubb. Emm,
II.296.
. These were good contrivances in a country in which shame had an influence.
But such regulations would answer no end in a country where gentlemen were not
ashamed of being thought adulterers, nor ladies of being known for professed wh
-- s. Governments, therefore, which suffer the sense of shame to be lost in
their people, lose the best handle for governing them by, and must thank
themselves if they find them ungovernable.

O shame to debauched Christians! Such was the sanctity of manners of the
ancient Heathen court of Areopagus, that the members of it were not allowed to
enter a tavern. If they did, they were expelled without mercy Ant. This. DE
REPUB. ATHEN. 249.
.

No man could be an Athenian archon, or magistrate, unless his character and
life could bear the strictest examination Ubb. Emm. DE REP. ATHEN. I.27.
. And to be of the high court of Areopagus, was an unquestionable testimonial
Ibid. 31.
. Even in the degenerate times of the republic, when a few persons of
indifferent characters got into that sacred society, it was observed, that they
reformed their manners Ibid 33.
. The court of Areopagus preserved the dignity of its character to the last,
even under the dominion of tyrants, and after the Athenian liberty was gone
Ibid. 36.
The Athenians did not suffer any man of an infamous character for lewdness,
impiety, cowardice, or debt, to vote in the assembly of the people Ibid. 50.
.

When one of the Athenian the smothetae was out of his office, and was to be
advanced to the court of Areopagus, proclamation was made, that any one might
accuse him of any mal-administration he could prove against him, while in
office. If it was only found, that he had been too niggardly in his manner of
living, so slight an objection excluded him.

It was not to be wondered, that an ar^^pagite was reverenced by the people.
And it would be wonderful, if the members of one of our highest courts, (be
sure I cannot mean the present) were esteemed by the people, while many of them
openly profess to be as much beyond their inferiors in wickedness as in station.

The authors of the ANCIENT UNIVERSAL HISTORY, vol. viii. p. 2. ascribe the
long continuance of the Spartan commonwealth to the virtue of the people.

At Sparta, the poets could not publish any thing without license: and all
immoral writings were prohibited.

The liberty and other emoluments which were enjoyed at Athens drawing thither
a great concourse of people from other parts, Solon foresaw, that this would
have bad consequences, if some means were not devised to make these people
industrious; he therefore established a law, that a son should be released from
all obligation to maintain an aged father, in case that father had not bred him
up to some trade. He vested the court of Areopagus with a power of examining
how people lived, and of punishing idleness: he allowed every man a right to
prosecute another for that crime, and in case a person was convicted of it
thrice, he suffered Atimia, i. e. infamy.

Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus agree, that a law of this kind was in use in
Egypt. It is probable, therefore, that Solon, who was thoroughly acquainted
with the learning of that nation, borrowed it from them, a practice for which
the Greeks were famous, though at the same time they styled those nations
barbarous from whom their own laws and policy were borrowed -- He enacted, that
whoever refused to maintain his parents, or had wasted his paternal estate,
should be infamous. It seems, Solon did not conceive that a man could be
privately bad, and publicly good, that one who neglected his duty to his
parents should preserve it to the estate, or be frugal of his country's revenue
who had spent his own ANT. UNIV. HIST. VI.312.
.

When the Athenians became corrupt, they grew irreligious, and assisted the
Phocaeans to plunder the temple of Delphi, though they could not confute the
general opinion of Apollo's being really a god Ibid. 511.
. So our governors laugh at the Christian religion, which they have never so
fully considered, so as to be able to produce any good reasons against its
credibility, or rather whi^^ they are so ignorant of, as not to know the most
plausible objections against it.

Nec numero Hispanos, etc. We have neither conquered Spain by numbers, nor Gaul
by martial power, nor Carthage by craft, nor Greece by art; but we have
prevailed over all nations by our being wise enough to know, that all human
affairs are directed by the Divine Providence Cic. PEO RULLO.
. So says Cicero. But Cicero was an ignorant heathen. Our modern Christian
statesmen are wiser than to regard the doctrine of their own scripture, That
righteousness exalts a nation; and that sin is the reproach of a people.

Aristotle thinks a government compounded of monarchy, aristocracy, and
democracy, the best. I suppose he thought that form of government the best,
which had the broadest foundation, as least likely to throw the power into the
hands of one, or a few, which are proper tyrannies. For my part, what I have
read and seen, convinces me, that the great danger to liberty arises from a
court possessed of a large revenue, and united together into a compact junto
under a tyrant* who either actively supports them in their conspiracy against
the people, or passively permits them to screen their villainies under his name.

Aristotle blames the Carthaginian constitution, because they would not choose
into a station of power the most virtuous and able man, unless he was likewise
rich. This led, he thought, too much to aristocracy. A needy man, they
pretended, could hardly be supposed to have a mind sufficiently vacant for
attending to public concerns. But the philosopher observes, that then the
business was, to find honest and able men, to put them in easy circumstances,
and then give them the management of public affairs.

Lycurgus's intention Ubb. Emm. DE REP. LAC^. I.217.
was to limit within proper bounds the power of the commons; to keep up
equality among the people, the best nurse of concord, and strength of
republics; to accustom the Spartans, from their childhood, to obey law and just
authority, to live temperately, to subdue inordinate desires, to bear labor,
to be patient under hardships, to be ready to run hazards for their country,
and to suffer death rather than act a part unworthy of a Spartan.

Solon made idleness penal at Athens Plut. in Solon.
Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus say, the Egyptians had a law to the same
purpose.

The Castilians obliged every man to live agreeably to his rank, that there
might be no temptation to expense, and consequent dependency and corruption
MO^. UNIV. HIST. XX.287.
.

The Athenians publicly rewarded merit, as well as punished guilt. The honor
of the first seat at the public shows must have had great effects. We give
seats in the house of peers, as well as in the playhouse, to the richest, not
to the worthiest. Even learned degrees are given at our universities to men of
quality, on account of their birth and fortune, in spite of the grossest
ignorance. The Athenians punished ingratitude.

In the early ages of the Roman republic, no man openly canvassed for places of
power and trust. In the degenerate times of Cinna, Sylla, C^^sar, and Pompey,
this modest reserve was thrown off, and the open contentions for honors and
employments ran high. In the early ages of Rome, men placed their notions of
honor in living frugally and serving their country. In the degenerate times,
it was honorable to live expensively on the spoils of their country.

Plato says DE REPUBL. V. in fine.
, unless philosophers undertake the government of states, or statesmen put on
the character of philosophers, so as that wisdom and power may be in possession
of the same persons, there will be no end to the distresses of mankind.

It is impossible, says Plato Ibid. VIII.
, that both riches and virtue should be held in supreme estimation in a state.
One or the other will prevail; and according as one or the other prevails, the
security or the ruin of the state is confirmed.

It is hard for a state to be secure, unless it be either made impossible, as
in Sparta, for individuals to grow dangerously rich and powerful, or provision
be made against the evil effects of overgrown riches and power in subjects.
With this view the ancient republics subjected to banishment for a time, by the
ostracism, or petalism, those citizens, whose overgrown riches and excessive
popularity, seemed dangerous to manners or to liberty.

Vice and ignorance are the only support of tyranny, as virtue and knowledge
are the only support of freedom. Tell a wise man what kind of government is
established in any particular society, and he will tell you what are the
manners, and what the understandings of the members of that society Macaul.
IV.182.
. The court-sycophant Clarendon, makes a matter of wonder, that the
parliament's army was more orderly than the tyrant's. But the excellent Mrs.
Macaulay shows, that it was to be expected, the better cause should have the
better defenders, and contra^^wi^^ Ibid.
.

Rousseau endeavors to depreciate knowledge, as the cause of pride and other
vices, which deform the species. But he is diametrically wrong. For it is not
knowledge, but the want of knowledge, that produces pride. The most ignorant
clown is not more modest than were Socrates, Newton, Boerhaave, Hales.
Extensive knowledge naturally leads to a just sense of human weakness.

In parts superior what advantage lies?
Say (for you can) what is it to be wise?
It Is but to know how little can be known,
To see all others wants, and feel our own.
POPE. It might be of good use to take care, that enormous riches be
discountenanced, and made an objection to the advancement of individuals.

If there were a ne plus ultra, beyond which individuals could not go, they
would, after attaining the limited sum, turn their ambition into another
channel. As it is, there remains no object of pursuit, but money, money, money,
to the end of life.

Whoever contrives to make a people very rich and great, lays the foundation of
their misery and destruction. -- No condition is durable, but such as is
established in mediocrity Fletcher, p. ^38.
.

The first decline of the Spartan commonwealth was caused by the introduction
of riches in consequence of Lysander's conquests Ubb. Emm. I.3^9.
. The Roman virtue begun to decline from the time of Lucullus's conquests in
the East. The Spartans chose their ephori out of the meanest rank, if they
could not find proper men in the higher Ibid. I.63.
. It Is true, there was but little variety of ranks among the Spartans.

Tiberius Gracchus proposed the revival of the law, by which no person was
permitted to possess more than 500 acres of land ANT. UNIV. HIST. XII.403.
.

A very salutary law was proposed by Licinius for preventing exorbitant riches
Ibid. 24.
.

Yet the same Licinius was afterward fined for having 1000 acres of land,
while the law limited him to 500. He had falsely given in half the land as
belonging to his brother.

Exorbitant riches in the hands of individuals, while the public treasures are
exhausted, like swelled legs with an emaciated body, are a symtom of decline in
a state.

Who can imagine, that Crassus could, by justifiable means, amass the enormous
sum of 1,356,000 l. sterling Ibid. XIII.127.
.

When Curious Dentatus was offered, for his great service in conquering Pyrrhus,
50 acres of land, he refused it, saying, That a citizen, who cannot content
himself with seven acres, is dangerous to the community Ibid. XII.150.
. Cornelius Ruffenus, who had been consul and dictator, was struck out of the
list of senators for having in his house ten pounds weight of plate Ibid. 151.
. The Roman ambassadors were presented by Ptolemy with a golden crown each.
They declined his present, and set the crowns on the heads of the king's
statues. Which superiority to riches gained the Romans great respect in Egypt
Ibid. 152.
.

Montesquieu L'ESPR. DES LOIX, I.74.
thinks equality ought to be preserved in a state, by all possible means.

By our constitution, a part of a gentleman's estate may be taken from him for
the advantage of a public road, and a value set upon the damage by jury. Yet
that price may be much below what he would choose to take for the land; but
private advantage must yield to public.

No subject in any country ought to be exorbitantly rich. It is a thing of ill
example, and excites unbounded desires, which lay men open to corruption.

Would it be any great hardship, if there were a law, that no British subject
should have above 10,000 l. a year? My opinion, says the Czarina INSTR. p. 174*
, inclines most to the division of property, as I esteem it my duty to wish,
that every one should have a competency. The state will receive more benefit
from several thousands of subjects, who enjoy a competency, than from a few
hundreds immensely rich.

Most men are ruined by growing rich. Here follows, however, an instance to the
contrary, which I insert for the sake of the noble example and instruction it
exhibits.

In the year 1464, died Cosmo de Medici, who, though the private subject of a
republic, had more riches than any king in Europe, and laid out more money in
works of taste, magnificence, learning, and charity, than all the kings,
princes, and states of that, the preceding. or the subsequent age; those of his
own family excepted. The riches he was possessed of would appear incredible,
did not the monuments of his magnificence still remain, and did not his
contemporaries give us unquestionable testimonies both of them and his
liberality. They were such that we are tempted to believe, that he and his
family knew of some channels of commerce that have been lost, probably by the
discovery of America, and the frequency of the East Indian commerce by sea, to
which the Europeans, in his time, were almost strangers. He lent vast sums of
money to the public, the payment of which he never required; and there s^arcely
was a citizen in Florence whom he did not at one time or other assist with
money, without the smallest expectation of its being returned. His religious
foundations were prodigious. Not contented with having founded so many
religious edifices, he endowed them likewise with rich furniture, magnificent
altars, and chapels. His private buildings were equally sumptuous. His palace
in Florence exceeded that of any sovereign prince, in his time; and he had
other palaces at Coreggio, Fesole, Cafaggivolo, and Febrio. His munificence
even reached Jerusalem, where he erected a noble hospital for distressed
pilgrims.

In those works of more than royal expense, he might have been equalled by men
equally rich; but his deportment and manner were unexampled. In his private
conversation he was humble, unaffected, unassuming. Every thing regarding his
person was plain, modest, and nothing differing from the middling rank of
people; thereby giving a proof of his virtue, and wisdom, because nothing is
more dangerous in a commonwealth than pomp and parade, His expenses begot no
envy, because laid out in embellishing his country, of which all his
fellow-citizens partook. Cosmo, with all that simplicity of life, had towering
bold notions of his country's dignity and interest. His intelligence was beyond
that of any prince of Europe, and there scarcely was a court where he did not
entertain a private agent. His long continuance in power, viz. for thirty one
years, is a proof of his great abilities, as the modest use he made of his
power is of his disposition MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.302.
.

It is to little purpose, that we multiply systems, doctrines, and moral
treatises. Till government shall connect honor and prosperity with virtue, and
infamy and unhappiness with vice, little will be effected. That country stands
most in need of rewards and punishments, where patriotism is at the lowest ebb
LAND. MAG. July 1771, p. 347.
.

A wrong disposition in a people may be corrected by playing contrary passions
against one another. Are they proud and lazy, like the Spaniards? Let the
government give honors to the industrious, and disgrace the idle, etc. Are
they (like the French) too much given to war? Let a Fleury encourage the arts
of peace among them, attaching to those arts all the honors and advantages,
and withdrawing the people from a delight in the art of murder. Are they, like
the English, degenerating from that love of liberty, which was the glory of
their ancestors, and sinking into the sordid love of riches and pleasure? Let a
patriot king insist on laws and regulations for gradually abolishing places and
pensions, and restoring the nation to the condition it was in, when bribery was
impossible; and so on.

I have often thought (says Lord Bathurst in his LETTER to Swist) that if ten
or a dozen patriots, who are rich enough to have ten dishes every day for
dinner, would invite their friends to only two or three, it might perhaps shame
those, who cannot afford two, from having constantly ten, and so it would be in
every other circumstance of li^e. But luxury is our ruin.

No nation ever was very corrupt under a long continued virtuous government,
nor virtuous under a long continued vicious administration. Whether this
country is, and has long been very corrupt, let the reader determine, after he
has impartially considered the contents of these volumes.

He who formed the human mind, and who therefore must be the best judge of the
proper means for influencing it, has shown us, that he judges those to be, the
proposing of rewards and punishments, the former to act upon the hopes, and the
latter upon the fears of our species. And though it be true, that beings, who
attach themselves to a right course of action, and avoid the contrary, from
motives of this kind, are less praiseworthy than those who love virtue and
abhor vice for their own sakes merely, yet is it equally certain, that in this
early state of moral discipline, no incentives more efficacious could have been
found. What so likely to startle a mad miscreant, and stop him in his vicious
career, as the denunciation of punishments both in this world and the next,
those punishments to be inflicted by a hand that is omnipotent and
irresistible. The disinterested love of virtue and hatred of vice must come
afterward.

As to moral character, mankind may be divided into three classes: 1. The
meaner and more sordid, who are a great part of the species, whose minds, or
the earthy substance they have instead of minds, are capable of being drawn to
decency only by the gross allurement of pecuniary rewards; and of being
deterred from open wickedness only by the fear of prisons, fines, and corporal
punishments. 2. The next rank above these, are persons of a nobler character,
who are capable of great and good actions, when attended with fame and glory.
3. The highest, or those few of our species, who are more angels than men, are
they, who love virtue for its own sake, without glory, and even with infamy and
suffering, and who abhor vice though attended with profit, and surrounded with
the false glare of honors, titles, and preferments. It is only with the first
and second of these classes, that the statesman can have any thing to do. Those
of the third are infinitely above his arts, and want neither allurements to
virtue nor determents from vice; as they find both in the happy dispossitions
of their own godlike minds.

Il est du plus grand interet, etc. It is of supreme consequence to the state,
that through the wise providence of the government, the people of all ranks
observe the rules of justice in their intercourse with one another. It is
evident, that if men accustomed themselves to do to others, as they might, in
reason, expect others to do by them, either there would be no injury done, or
every injury would be more than repaired, which would render life infinitely
happier for all ranks, high and low, than we see it S Pierre OEUVR. POLIT.
XI.30.
.

By the laws of Geneva, the son of a person who died insolvent, is excluded
from the magistracy, and even from a seat in the great council, unless he pays
his father's debts Monte^q. L'ESPRIT D^S LOIX, II.173.
.

The true love of liberty, (says Mrs. Macaulay) is founded in virtue HIST.
V.386.
.' She therefore generously apologizes for the seeming preciseness of manners,
which appeared in the republican parliament, by urging in their favor, that
they had sincerely at heart the promoting of virtue and religion among the
people.

Many useful bills were left depending when Cromwell dissolved the parliament.
As, for uniting Scotland and England. For county registers. For compelling able
debtors to pay, and relieving insolvents. For preserving and increasing timber.
For regulating weights and measures. For amending and reducing into one, the
laws against fornication and adultery PARL. HIST. XXI.203.
. For suppressing the detestable sins of incest, adultery and fornication
Macaul. HIST. V.
. For prohibiting cock-matches Ibid.
. Against challenges and duels, and all provocations thereto. For contribution
of one meal in the week for raising and arming forces against the tyrant. For
punishing such persons as live at high rates, and have no visible estate,
profession, or calling answerable. Against drinking healths PARL. HIST. XX.398.
, etc.

The oath in Cromwell's time runs thus, I A. B. do, in the presence of Almighty
God, promise and swear, etc. Much more solemn than the unmeaning oath we use
Ibid. XXI.128.
; which is worse than useless; as unthinking people are in no degree awed by
it; and damn themselves before they are aware. The Irish form of an oath is
very awful. The oath among the Siberians is a most terrible string of
imprecations; May the bear tear me to pieces in the wood; may the bread I eat
stick in my throat, etc. if I do not speak truth. The Tungusians in Russia kill
a dog, and burn his body, and imprecate on themselves the same fate, etc MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXXV.73.
.

The form of the oath at Athens was very terrible, consisting of dreadful
imprecations; and at Athens a false witness was punished in the same manner as
the accused would have been, if regularly convicted. To make an oath too cheap,
by frequent practice, is to weaken the obligation of it, and destroy its
efficacy Czar. INSTR. 96.
.

Themistocles did once say, that of a small city, he could make a great people.
This he spoke from the right sense he had of his own abilities and skill.
Governors and magistrates that are the reverse of him, and who rule weakly, can
render a potent country in a short time poor, despised, and miserable. Such to
whom government is entrusted, should endeavor to hinder the growth of all kind
of vices, as intemperance and luxury: for luxury is the parent of want, and
wants begets in the minds of men disobedience and desire of change. To see that
impiety be not countenanced, nor books scattered among the vulgar, which tend
to the overthrow or weakening of the general notions of religion, should be no
less their care. It is no less their duty to promote virtue, and to encourage
merit of any kind, and to give it their helping hand: such as have been counted
great and able statesmen in all countries have so done; and judged that to
propagate what was good, and to suppress vice, was the most material part of
government. They should discountenance immoralities of all sorts; they should
see them exposed in public; they should cause the pulpits to declaim against
them; they should make them a bar to preferment, and the laws should be all
pointed against them Dav^n. II.44.
.

If philosophy will not suffice to bind the common people to their duty, what
must be said of some modern politicians who show no desire of setting up
morality, and yet are pulling down revealed religion? Statesmen have been
accused of being uncertain themselves in religious points; but, till lately
they were never seen to countenance in others such a looseness; and till of
late years it was never known a recommendation to preferment. Would it any
thing avail the public to have the settled opinions concerning divine matters
quite altered by the law? If not, why do such as propose innovations in
revealed religion, find so many open advocates, and those of the highest rank?
How comes it to pass that the majority suffer themselves to be guided, and
often with hard reins, by a small number? Can it be imagined this is brought
about merely by a right disposition of power, whereby the weak come to hold the
strong in their dominion? Or can it be thought that laws are sufficient to
subject the bodies of men to government, unless something else did constrain
their conscience and their minds? It is hardly to be doubted but that if the
common people are once induced to lay aside religion, they will quickly cast
off all fear of their rulers. But such as object against revealed religion, as
it is now transmitted to us, have they another scheme ready? When they have
pulled down the old frame, can they set up a better in its room? Most certainly
by their own lives, either in private, or in relation to the public, they seem
very unfit apostles to propagate a new belief. When the common people all of a
sudden become corrupt, and by quicker steps than was ever known; when they do
not revere the laws; when there is no mutual justice among them; when they
defraud the prince; when they prostitute their (...) in elections, it may be
certainly concluded that such a country is by the artifice of some, and the
negligence of others, set loose in the principles of religion. Nothing
therefore can more conduce to correcting the manners of a depraved people, than
a due care of religious matters; a right devotion to God will beget patience in
national calamities, submission to the laws, obedience to the prince, love to
one another, and a hatred to faction; and it will produce in the minds of all
the different ranks of men, true zeal and affection to their country's welfare ^
. The preventive remedy against such distempers is to be had from the precepts
of morality, which writers upon all sorts of subjects should endeavor to
inculcate. For the vices or virtues of a country influence very much in all its
business; so that he who would propose methods, by which the affairs of a
kingdom may be any ways bettered, should at the same time consider the
predominant passions, the morals, temper, and inclinations of the people (...)
.

Cest le sublime de la politic, etc. It is the height of political sagacity
to establish society on such principles, that it shall preserve itself, and
shall continually tend to its own improvement. For this purpose it is necessary
that each member in the governing part of such a society, shall find, that he
gets more profit or honor by consulting the common interest, than he could by
attending only to his own private advantage.

From this maxim, that the most powerful motive for setting mankind to work,
is, duly rewarding abilities and virtues, may be deduced, and explained all the
causes of the rise and fall of states, and a probable conjecture of their
future fate, and on what side their decline will begin. I invite my
philosophical successors to pursue this thought, and to apply this maxim to the
ancient states, which have perished, and in whose ruins the foundation of new
ones has been laid S. Pierre. VI 51.
.

Let any man, who has knowledge enough for it, first compare the natural state
of Great Britain, and of the United Provinces, and then their artificial state
together; that is, let him consider minutely the advantages we have by the
situation, extent, and nature of our island, over the inhabitants of a few salt
marshes gained on the sea, and hardly defended from it; and after that, let him
consider how nearly these provinces have raised themselves to an equality of
wealth and power with the kingdom of Great Britain. From whence arises the
difference of improvement? It arises plainly from hence: the Dutch have been,
from the foundation of their common wealth, a nation of patriots and merchants.
The spirit of that people has not been diverted from these two objects, the
defense of their liberty, and the improvement of their trade and commerce,
which have been carried on by them, with uninterrupted and unslackened
application, industry, order, and economy. In Great Britain, the case has not
been the same in either respects (...) ID. PATR. KING, 1^^.
.

On the necessity of attention to the manners of the people, the following
protest against the gin-act, 1742, is excellent.

Because the act of the 9th of his present Majesty, to prevent the excessive
drinking of spiritous liquors, which is by this bill to be repealed, declares,
that the drinking of spiritous liquors, or strong waters, is become very
common, especially amongst the people of inferior ranks, the constant and
excessive use whereof tends greatly to the destruction of their healths,
rendering them unfit for useful labor and business, debauching their morals,
and inciting them to perpetrate all manner of vice; and the ill consequences of
the excessive use of such liquors, are not confined to the present generation,
but extend to future ages, and tend to the devastation and ruin of this
kingdom. We therefore apprehend, that if an act designed to remedy such
indisputable mischiefs, was not found adequate to its salutary intention, the
wisdom of the legislature ought to have examined its imperfections, and
supplied its defects, and not have rescinded it by a law, authorizing the
manifold calamities it was calculated to prevent. 2. Because the refusing to
admit the most eminent physicians to give their opinions of the fatal
consequences of these poisonous liquors, may be construed without doors, as a
resolution of this house to suppress all authentic information of the
pernicious effects of the health and morals of mankind, which will necessarily
flow from the unrestrained licentiousness permitted by this bill. 3. Because,
as it is the inherent duty of every legislative to be watchful in protecting
the lives, and preserving the morals of the people, so the availing itself of
their vices, debaucheries, and consequential miseries to the destruction of
millions, is a manifest inversion of the fundamental principles of natural
polity, and contrary to these social emoluments, by which government alone is
instituted. 4. Because the opulence and power of a nation depend upon the
numbers, vigor, and industry of its people; and its liberty and happiness on
their temperance and morality; to all which this bill threatens destruction by
authorizing fifty thousand houses, the number admitted in the debate, to retail
a poison, which by universal experience is known to debilitate the strong, and
destroy the weak; to extinguish industry, and to inflame those intoxicated by
its malignant efficacy, to perpetrate the most heinous crimes: for what
confusion and calamities may not be expected, when near a twentieth part of the
houses in the kingdom shall be converted into seminaries of drunkenness and
profligacy, authorized and protected by the legislative powers? And as we
conceive the contributions to be paid by these infamous recesses, and the money
to be raised by this destructive project, are considerations highly unworthy
the attention of parliament, when compared with the extensive evils from thence
arising, so are we of opinion, that if the real exigencies of the public
required raising the immense sums this year granted, they could by no means
palliate the having recourse to a supply founded on the indulgence of
debauchery, the encouragement of crimes, and the destruction of the human race
DEB. PEERS. VIII.470.
.

Let us hear the lord Hervey on the same subject.

In the time of the late ministry, it has been observed that drunkenness was
become a vice almost universal among the common people; and that as the liquor
which they generally drank, was such, that they could destroy their ^eason by a
small quantity, and at a small expense; the consequence of general drunkenness
was general idleness: since no man would work any longer than was necessary to
lay him asleep, for the remaining part of the day. They remarked likewise that
the liquor, which they generally drank, was to the last degree pernicious to
health, and destructive of that corporeal vigor, by which the business of life
is to be carried on; and a law was therefore made, by which it was intended
that this species of debauchery, so peculiarly fatal, should be prevented.
Against the end of this law, no man has hitherto made the least objection; no
one hardened to signalize himself as an open advocate for vice, or attempted to
prove, that drunkenness was not injurious to society, and contrary to the true
ends of human being. The encouragement of wickedness of this shameful kind,
wickedness equally contemptible and hateful, was reserved for the present
ministry, who are now about to supply those funds which they have exhausted by
idle projects, and romantic expeditions, at the expense of health and virtue,
who have discovered a method of recruiting armies by the destruction of their
fellow subjects, and while they boast themselves the assertors of liberty, are
endeavoring to enslave us by the introduction of these vices, which in all
countries and in every age, have made way for despotic power DEB. PEERS,
VIII.270.
.

Manners, religion, and education are articles in Richlieu's POLIT. TESTAM.
which shows that he thought them a part of the concern of government. Our
ministers would laugh in any body's face, who proposed to them any regulation
upon any of these subjects.

The Czarina desires her grandees to prepare the people for the reception of
new laws ^
. Our grandees (the reader sees I do not mean the present) would be the most
improper set of men in the nation, to be employed in preparing the people for
receiving a set of new and better laws. Themselves the great violators of all
laws divine and human, they would be more likely to teach the people to be
lawless, than more regular in their behavior.

My worthy friend Mr. Professor Ferguson, of Edinburgh, thus describes the
character and manner of life of men in higher stations, who are void of public
spirit Ferg. CIV. SOC. p. 399.
.

Men of business and of industry in the inferior stations of life retain their
occupations, and are secured by a kind of necessity in the possession of those
habits on which they rely for their quiet, and for the moderate enjoyments of
life. But the higher orders of men, if they relinquish the state, if they cease
to possess that courage and elevation of mind, and to exercise those talents
which are employed in its defense and its government, are, in reality, by the
seeming advantages of their station, become the refuse of that society of which
they once were the ornament; and from being the most respectable, and the most
happy of its members, are become the most wretched and corrupt. In their
approach to this condition, and in the absence of every manly occupation, they
feel a dissatisfaction and languor which they cannot explain. They pine in the
midst of apparent enjoyments; or by the variety and caprice of their different
pursuits and amusements, exhibit a state of agitation, which, like the disquiet
of sickness, is not a proof of enjoyment or pleasure, but of suffering and
pain. The care of his buildings, his equipage, or his table, is chosen by one;
literary amusement, or some frivolous study, by another. The sports of the
country, and the diversions of the town; the gaming table, dogs, horses, and
wine, are employed to fill up the blank of a listless and unprofitable life.
These different occupations differ from each other in respect to their dignity,
and their innocence: but none of them are the schools from which men are
brought to sustain the tottering fortune of nations; they are equally
avocations from what ought to be the principal pursuit of man, the good of
mankind. They speak of human pursuits as if the whole difficulty were to find
something to do. They fix on some frivolous occupation, as if there was nothing
that deserved to be done. They consider what tends to the good of their
fellow creatures as a disadvantage to themselves. They fly from every scene on
which any efforts of vigor are required, or in which they might be allured to
perform any service to their country. We misapply our compassion in pitying the
poor; it were much more justly applied to the rich, who become the first
victims of that wretched insignificance, into which the members of every
corrupted state, by the tendency of their weaknesses and their vices, are in
haste to plunge themselves.

The perverseness of statesmen, in almost all ages and countries, with respect
to this part of their duty, is very unfortunate for mankind. Governments have
it not in their power to do their subjects the least service as to their
religious belief and mode of worship. On the contrary, whenever the civil
magistrate interposes his authority in matter of religion, otherwise than in
keeping the peace amongst all religious parties, you may trace every step he
has taken by the mischievous effects his interposition has produced (of which
more elsewhere), at the same time, that he has it in his power to do
inexpressible service to the people under his care, by a strict attention to
their manners and behavior. A king, a statesman, or a magistrate, who does not
know this, is very improperly situated in the high station he fills; yet all
history exhibits proofs of their misconduct in this respect. They have
perpetually harassed themselves and their people about matters of belief, and
forms of worship, and have neglected the most important duty of their function,
the regulating of the moral and political principles and manners of the people.

The reason of this wrong-headed conduct is very shameful for our rulers, viz.
because by joining forces with those of the priesthood, and laboring for the
establishment of what they are pleased to call the true church, the true faith,
etc. (which are different in almost every different country) they open to
themselves a direct path to enslaving the people; whereas by guiding them into
right, moral, and political principles and manners, they might enable them to
judge soundly of the conduct of those in power, and inspire them with a noble
spirit of resistance to tyranny, the most formidable of all dispositions to the
greatest part of statesmen.

At the same time that our rulers show great zeal for the true church, that is,
a great desire to keep up the sacerdotal power, that the priesthood may in
return keep up theirs, we see them make no hesitation to declare their
disbelief of all religion. Christianity, according to them, is a fiction; but
yet the church of England is the only true christian church. The inferior
people seeing those of higher stations ranging themselves on the side of
infidelity, are very much hurt in their manners. But christianity, for any
thing the greatest part of our nobility and gentry know, may be either true or
false. They do not know the strongest objections, having never given themselves
time to examine the subject, so that their belief or disbelief are of very
little consequence to the people; but the declaration of their disbelief shows
very little regard to the good of their country.

Whether it be agreeable to sound policy for the rulers of countries to throw
contempt upon the religion of their countries, let the excellent Montague
M^ntog. ANT. REPUBL. p. 294.
decide.

The Romans founded their system of policy at the very origin of their state
upon that best and wisest principle, the fear of the Gods, [what we should
call] a firm belief of a divine superintending providence, and a future state
of rewards and punishments. Their children were trained up in this belief from
tender infancy, which took root and grew up with them by the influence of an
excellent education, where they had the benefit of example as well as precept.
Hence we read of no heathen nation in the world where both the public and
private duties of religion were so strictly adhered to, and so scrupulously
observed, as amongst the Romans. They imputed their good or bad success to
their observance of these duties, and they received public prosperities or
public calamities, as blessings conferred, or punishments inflicted, by their
Gods. Their historians hardly ever give us an account of any defeat received by
that people, which they do not ascribe to the omission or contempt of some
religious ceremony by their Generals. For though the ceremonies there mentioned
justly appear to us instances of the most absurd and most extravagant
superstition, yet as they were esteemed essential acts of religion by the
Romans, they must consequently carry all the force of religious principle. We
neither exceeded (says Cicero, speaking of his countrymen) the Spaniards in
number, nor did we excel the Gauls in strength of body, nor the Carthaginians
in craft, nor the Greeks in arts or sciences. But we have indisputably
surpassed all the nations in the universe in piety and attachment to religion,
and in the only point which can be called true wisdom, a thorough conviction
that all things here below are directed and governed by Divine Providence. To
this principle alone Cicero wisely attributes the grandeur and good fortune of
his country. For what man is there, says he, who is convinced of the existence
of the Gods, but must be convinced at the same time, that our mighty empire
owes its origin, increase, and its preservation, to the protecting care of
their Divine Providence. A plain proof, that these continued to be the real
sentiments of the wiser Romans, even in the corrupt times of Cicero. From this
principle proceeded that respect for, and submission to their laws, and that
temperance, moderation, and contempt for wealth, which are the best defense
against the encroachments of injustice and oppression. Hence too arose that
inextinguishable love for their country, which, next to the Gods, they looked
upon as the chief object of veneration. This they carried to such a height of
enthusiasm as to make every human tie of social love, natural affection, and
self-preservation, give way to this duty to their dearer country, Because they
not only loved their country as their common mother, but revered it as a place
which was dear to their Gods; which they had destined to give laws to the rest
of the universe, and consequently favored with their peculiar care and
protection. Hence proceeded that obstinate and undaunted courage, that
insuperable contempt of danger, and death itself, in defense of their country,
which complete the idea of the Roman character, as it is drawn by historians in
the virtuous ages of the republic. As long as the manners of the Romans were
regulated by this first great principle of religion, they were free and
invincible. But the atheistical doctrine of Epicurus, which insinuated itself
at Rome under the respectable name of philosophy, after their acquaintance with
the Greeks, undermined and destroyed this ruling principle. I allow, that
luxury, by corrupting manners, had weakened this principle, and prepared the
Romans for the reception of atheism, which is the never failing attendant of
luxury. But as long as this principle remained, it controuled manners, and
checked the progress of humanity in proportion to its influence. But when the
introduction of atheism had destroyed this principle, the great bar to
corruption was removed, and the passions at once let loose to run their full
career, without check or control. The introduction, therefore, of the
atheistical tenets, attributed to Epicurus, was the real cause of that rapid
depravity of the Roman manners, which has never been satisfactorily accounted
for either by Salust, or any other historian.

The same author, in his 308th page, writes as follows on the same subject:

Polibius firmly believed the existence of a Deity, and the interposition of a
divine superintending Providence, though he was an enemy to superstition. Yet
when he observed the good effects produced amongst the Romans by their
religion, though carried even to the highest possible degree of superstition,
and the remarkable influence it had upon their manners in private life, as well
as upon their public counsels, he concludes it to be the result of a wise and
con^^mmate policy in the ancient legislators. He, therefore, very justly
censures those as wrong-headed and wretchedly bungling politicians, who at that
time endeavored to eradicate the fear of an after reckoning, and the terrors
of a hell, out of the minds of a people. Yet how few years ago did we see this
miserably mistaken policy prevail in our own country, during the whole
administration of some late power-engrossing ministers. Compelled at all events
to secure a majority in parliament, to support themselves against the efforts
of opposition, they found the greatest obstacle to their schemes arise from
those principles of religion, which yet remained amongst the people. For though
a great number of the electors were not at all averse to the bribe, yet their
consciences were too tender to digest perjury. To remove this troublesome test
at elections, which is one of the bulwarks of our constitution, would be
impracticable. To weaken or destroy those principles, upon which the oath was
founded, and from which it derived its force and obligation, would equally
answer the purpose, and destroy all public virtue at the same time. The bloody
and deep-felt effects of that hipocrisy which prevailed in the time of Cromwell,
had driven great numbers of the sufferers into the contrary extreme. When,
therefore, so great a part of the nation was already prejudiced against
whatever carried the appearance of a stricter piety, it is no wonder that
shallow superficial reasoners, who have not logic enough to distinguish
between the use and abuse of a thing, should readily embrace those atheistical
tenets which were imported, and took root, in the voluptuous and thoughtless
reign of Charles II. But that solid learning which revived after the
Restoration, easily baffled the efforts of open and avowed atheism, which from
that time has taken shelter under the less obnoxious name of deism. For the
principles of modern deism, when stripped of that disguise which has been
artfully thrown over them to deceive them who hate the fatigue of thinking, and
are very ready to admit any conclusion in argument which is agreeable to their
passions, without examining the premises, are in reality the same with those of
Epicurus, as transmitted to us by Lucretius. The influence, therefore, which
they had upon the manners of the Greeks and Romans will readily account for
those effects which we experience from them in our own country, where they so
fatally prevail. To patronize and propagate these principles was the best
expedient which the narrow, selfish policy, of those ministers could suggest;
for their greatest extent of genius never reached higher than a fertility in
temporary shifts and expedients, to stave of the evil day of national account,
which they so much dreaded. They were sensible that the wealth and luxury,
which are the general effects of an extensive trade, in a state of profound
peace, had already greatly hurt the morals of the people, and smoothed the way
for their grand system of corruption. Far from checking this licentious spirit
of luxury and dissipation, they left it to its full and natural effects upon
the manners, whilst, in order to corrupt the principles of the people, they
retained at the public expense a venal set of the most shameless miscreants
that ever abused the liberty of the press, or insulted the religion of their
country. To the administration of such ministers, which may justly be termed
the grand era of corruption, we owe that fatal system of bribery, which has so
greatly affected the morals of the electors in almost every borough in the
kingdom. To that too we may justly attribute the present contempt and disregard
of the sacred obligation of an oath, which is the strongest bond of society,
and the best security and support of civil government. I have now, I hope,
satisfactorily accounted for that rapid and unexampled degeneracy of the
Romans, which brought on the total subversion of that mighty republic. The
cause of this sudden and violent change of the Roman manners has been just
hinted at by the sagacious Montesquieu, but to my great surprise has not been
duly attended to by any one historian I have yet met with. I have showed too,
how the same cause has been working the same effects in our own nation, as it
invariably will in every country where those fatally destructive principles are
admitted. As the real end of all history is instruction, I have held up a just
portrait of the Roman manners, in the times immediately preceding the loss of
their liberty, to the inspection of my countrymen, that they may guard in time
against these calamities which will be the inevitable consequence of the like
degeneracy.

Unhappily the most simple, the ^asiest, yet the wisest laws, that wait only
for the nod of the legislator, to diffuse through nations, wealth, power, and
felicity; laws which would be regarded by future generations with eternal
gratitude, are either unknown, or rejected. A restless, and trifling spirit,
the timid prudence of the present moment, or a distrust and aversion to the
most useful novelties, possess the minds of those who are empowered to regulate
the actions of mankind.

Do magistrates and governors consider how they increase the difficulty of
their own task by neglecting the necessary attention to manners, till it be too
late? When the manners of a people once deviate from the standard of rectitude,
it is impossible to foresee how far they will ramble into the wilds of
irregularity and vice.

Who could imagine it possible ever to bring a whole people, once the patterns
of virtue, humanity, delicacy, to such a degree of infernality, as to be
capable of exercising cruelty on beautiful and innocent young virgins, on whom
one would think it was impossible for a male of the human species, even of the
age of fourscore, to look with any other eye than of love? Yet the Turkish
history is full of instances of such hellish barbarities.

Those statesmen are inexcusable, in whose time any good custom is suffered to
go into desuetude, or any salutary law to lose its efficiency. For it is very
easy to keep up a good custom once established, and very difficult to get rid
even of a bad one, as appears from the difficulty of bringing about
reformations of all kinds, whether in civil or religious matters. The power of
custom has kept up for ages in the East, and keeps up still, the horrid
practice of burning wives with their deceased husbands. One would imagine, that
either women would give over marrying, or give over the ambition of suffering
the most cruel of all deaths, if their husbands happen to die first. Instead of
which, those wives of the deceased, who are not adjudged worthy to be burned
alive, think themselves very unhappy MOD. UNIV. HIST. VI.280.
. A Tarter conqueror ordered the Chinese, on pain of death, to cut off their
hair. Many thousands chose rather to lose their heads Ibid. VIII.480.
. Peter the Great found it infinitely difficult to prevail with his Russians to
part with their beards. To gain his point, he was obliged to order his soldiery
to cut off, any how, every beard they saw.

The people at Cape Komorin, in India, are barbarous enough; yet there is among
them such a sense of honor, that if a traveller, under the protection of one
of the sentinels on the roads is murdered, while in his care, he will not
survive the murdered person. And, if one of those guards violates his trust,
his wife, or son, will be his executioner. How strongly must a sense of
fidelity be impressed upon the minds of these heathens, that even conjugal
affection, or filial duty, is not sufficient to restrain from punishing the
violator of it! In England, very few wives or sons would put to death a
husband, or father, though they knew him to be guilty of the most unheard of
villainy MOD. UNIV. HIST. VI.556.
.

The public robbers in that country will not hurt children, nor those who are
with them. Therefore children are the best guard for travelers in those roads,
where there are no sentinels. This is again another wonderful effect of manners
among a barbarous people Ibid.
.

The London mob will not suffer in boxing the least foul play; as, for
instance, two to fall upon one. Yet this very mob will set upon the house, or
person, of an obnoxious minister, five thousand against one, and would, in
their fury, tear him to pieces, without thinking of the foul play.

Queen Margaret, after the defeat of the Lancaster party, escaping with her
son, is attacked by robbers; flies into a thick wood; sees one of them coming
toward her with his sword drawn; she runs to him, and begs his protection. The
ruffian, inspired with a sudden sentiment of humanity and honor, preserves
them, till they escape to France Hume, II.391.
.

Degenerate manners in the people are a severe reflection on the government for
the time being. In the days of Will. Conq. there was no robbing. In his
predecessor's every wood was a nest of banditti Rap. I.177.
.

We know that Henry II. was a weak Prince; accordingly an extreme
licentiousness prevailed in London in his time. Bands of citizens, to the
number of 100, took to housebreaking, robbing, and murdering; forced their way
into houses through the very walls Hume, HIST. I.326.
. Their numbers and rank were such, that they grew at last too big to be
punished Ibid. 332.
.

In Alfred's days the internal police of the kingdom, and the manners of the
people, were in so good a state, that a golden bracelet might have been hung
upon a hedge, and nobody would have touched it. Is it not the fault of our
kings, parliaments, ministers, etc. that in our enlightened times, instead of
improving, we have lost this noble police, and those virtuous manners? Yet our
kings, parliaments, ministers, etc. are always putting us in mind of the
respect with which we ought to treat those, who have neglected our manners,
overthrown our police, corrupted our honesty, taught us to laugh at all love of
our country, plunged us in debt, lengthened our parliaments, loaded us with an
infinite multitude of placemen and pensioners, etc.

The insolence of the common people at this time [viz. A. D. 1737] was in a
great measure owing to the discredit which some of the magistrates had fallen
into. Most of the acting justices being men in needy circumstances, sought to
mend their fortunes by making a trade of their duty, which was no secret to the
commonalty. Statesmen are wont to excuse their own laziness and negligence of
the manners of the people by alleging, that it is impossible to draw them to
obedience. It is in part true, that the subjects are naturally prejudiced
against laws made by governors, who show plainly, that they have somewhat else
in view than the good of the people. Let governors act the part of kind
parents, and subjects will quickly assume that of dutiful children.

In China, the police resembles that of King Alfred. Communities are answerable
for offenses committed within their respective authorities MOD. UNIV. HIST.
VIII.153.
* And when gross crimes are committed, the magistrates of the district in which
they happened are severely punished and incapacitated, and the whole community
disgraced Ibid. 172.
. In the Mogol's country, the emperor's spies and officers are answerable for
all irregularities in the people.

Gaming, and extravagance in dress, were prohibited under Edward IV PARL. HIST.
II.370.
. One of the fashions of those times, for its silliness, seems almost
incredible, viz. of long, small pointed shoes, like skates, so slender, that
they were obliged to support the points of them with siver chains, or silk
laces fastened to their knees.

Drunkenness, swearing, and obscenity in conversation, were the fashionable
vices of the times of Charles II. They were introduced by the court, as the
much more odious ones of cant and hypocrisy were by Cromwell. This shows how
much is in the power of the great.

Her Majesty's pleasure is, that you do not keep with you notorious persons,
either for life or behavior, desperate debtors, pettifogging solicitors, who
set dissension between man and man PARL. HIST. IV.427.
Elizabeth's speech at the opening of her last parliament.

The king, in his speech A. D. 1751, recommends means for putting a stop to
robbery and violence about the metropolis, owing to irreligion, idleness,
gaming, and extravagance Alm. DEB. COM. V.3.
.

The extreme misery brought on the French nation [by the contest between the
Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy in the time of Charles VI.] were owing to nothing
but the corruption of their manners, which having, on one hand, introduced a
luxury unknown to former times, excited a passion for wealth and power, which
quickly stifled all principle. Instead of seeking to break off their
party-disputes, they aimed only at deceiving one another, and kept faith no
longer than they thought it their interest to keep it MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXIII.521.
.

Atheism prevailed in Italy, says Voltaire ^
, in consequence of wickedness. For many superficial people argued, after
Lucretius, in whose times the Romans were very debauched, that if there were a
God, he would not suffer mankind to be so wicked. And if atheism was a
consequence of corrupt manners, there can be no doubt but it was a cause of
immorality, as tending to weaken the effect which the apprehension of a future
judgment naturally produces.

The Kings and Queens of Britain, at their coronation, promise, among other
things, to maintain, to the utmost of their power, the laws of God ^
.' If any King, or Queen, keeps in a station of dignity and power any person,
or number of persons, who have been public and notorious violators of the laws
of God, and who never have publicly declared their repentance or intended
reformation, I affirm, that such King, or Queen, have broke their coronation
oath; for that to employ in important stations such characters, is the
diametrical contrary of maintaining to their utmost power the laws of God; is
indeed the most effectual means our crowned heads can use for overthrowing the
laws of God, excepting one, viz. Their showing a bad example in their own
persons.

The commons addressed the King, A. D. School, against profaneness and
immorality, and particularly request him, that all vice, profaneness, and
irreligion, may be discouraged in those who have the honor to be employed near
his royal person, and in all commanders by sea and land DEB. COM. III.82.
.

An able legislator, or administrator, knows how to gain his great and good
purposes by the proper application of every passion, every disposition, custom,
prejudice, virtue, vice, folly, in human nature.

If you propose to our modern ministers to encourage industry and good
behavior by rewards, they will answer, They have not the necessary funds. Yet
they can find wherewith to reward those who do their dirty work for them. They
can buy boroughs, maintain an useless army of soldiery, another of
tax-gatherers, and a third of placemen and pensioners.

The town of Zharras was besieged, A. D. 1675, by the Turks. The garrison
mutinied against the governor, because he would not yield the place, when he
knew he could hold it out. They threw him over the walls. The Turkish general
takes the town, and punishes the mutineers with the galleys and death. You have
deprived me, says he, of the honor of conquering a hero; but you shall not of
the satisfaction of punishing cowards MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIV.234.
. The manners of that people, as to courage and military discipline, must have
been neglected.

To prevent crimes, to supersede the necessity of punishment, and to make
administration easy, let the governors convince the people that it is their
good they seek, and not the filling of their own pockets. This they may do at
any time, and they have one certain method of gaining this point, viz. serving
their country gratis. Then let them give orders for the education of the youth,
and regulating the morals of the people; then will parents, relations, the
clergy, the magistracy, and inhabitants of districts, emulate one another in
their obedience to commands so salutary given out by persons of such
disinterested characters. But our statesmen pretend a sort of necessity for a
certain competent quantity of art and craft, or if you choose plain English, of
knavery. This doctrine, however, is wholly erroneous. Don Alonzo V. always
acted fairly and openly. He did not understand intrigues or reasons of state,
or the arcana imperii. Yet he was so esteemed, that 60 different authors wrote
his history.

The founders of the ancient republic of Venice, if we may believe the
historians, would not admit to citizenship any but men of the most exemplary
morals Ibid. XXVII.12.
.

No man ought to be employed in any place of power or trust, ^ho is known to
have been immoral or wicked, and is not known to be penitent and reformed.
Virtue ought to be above all other considerations at all times, and on all
occasions. Besides the danger that a man void of principle runs in betraying
his trust, and bringing affairs into confusion, the evil example of placing a
bad man in an honorable station, tends to damp all desire of keeping up a
character. And what can be imagined more ruinous to a state, than to kill
emulation in the people -- the noblest of all emulation, the emulation of being
virtuous?

Officers of justice were established in Galicia by Ferdinand and Isabella,
where things were gone into terrible disorder during the interregnum. The whole
country was full of strong castles, inhabited by a set of despotic chiefs of
clans. The commissioners, however, behaved with such firmness, that 1500 of
those chiefs, who had committed actions which they could not answer, fled the
country. Ferdinand and Isabella pursued the same scheme throughout Spain, which
restored peace, and brought back many who had preferred exile to the tyranny of
the chiefs MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXI.163.
. Magistracy will always be too strong for licentiousness, where magistrates
are wise, just, and, from consciousness of rectitude of intention, fearless.

The people of Benin in Africa are humane, civilized, so charitable, that they
have no beggars among them, and keep up so good a police, that they have no
idle people. At the same time the Ansikans, in the same country, are barbarous
cannibals, who go to war merely to get captives to eat, whose flesh is
regularly sold in the shambles. They never bury their dead relations, but eat
them. Mothers eat their newborn children; and if a family grows numerous, they
kill the fattest for food MOD. UNIV. HIST. XVI.350, 363.
. What can make such a difference between the manners of these two nations, but
different management in their government?

All savages are not cruel, but most are. Is humanity then the natural growth
of the human heart? Or is it that men will be cruel, if they be not led by
civilisation to better habits? The dark places of the earth are full of the
habitations of cruelty, says Scripture PSALM. LXXIV.20.
. The American savages are more devils than men, delight in cruelty and blood,
as if the great murderer Satan JOHN VIII.44.
had been let loose among them, and ruled in them. Their ignorance and idolatry
are brutish. Some worshipped red rags, all adored beasts, serpents, etc. They
go to war about nothing, and then torture their captives in the most wanton
manner, as if they sought only for the pleasure of getting so many of their
fellow creatures into their power to glut their infernality: for they did not
always eat them. If they had, they might have pretended they went to war to get
a belly-full; though even then there was no occasion to put their captives to
more torture than we do our sheep and bullocks. There is a wonderful similarity
between the American savages and those of the East Indies, though at so great a
distance, in putting to death the wives and attendants of their great men when
they die, and often to the number of 100 at once MOD. UNIV. HIST. XL.255.
.

The ancient Peruvians, before the Incas, were the most brutish of all
barbarians. They wandered about like beasts, dwelt in caves and woods, knew no
towns or societies, or government; human flesh their highest luxury; no
cultivation of lands. Their captives they tied to trees, cut into slices, and
ate the living flesh; the screams of their tortures were the sweetest music to
their tormentors. Women wetted their nipples in the hot blood, to give their
infants a relish for it. They copulated like bullocks in the open air, the
first man with the first woman; brothers with sisters, fathers with daughters,
the most libidinous women were the most esteemed. Sodomy, bestiality, sorcery,
poisoning, were common among them. This is the character given of the ancient
Peruvians by Garcilasso de la Vega, whose mother was a Peruvian. Yet these
savages had a notion of gods and spirits MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIX.4.
.

It was a silly fancy of Peter the ^reat, to compel the Russians to shave their
beards. What matter whether a set of brave and free men have the chins of men
or of women. Shaving is no part of civilisation Ibid. XLIII.540.
. The ancient patriarchs, with beards down to their girdles, were men of better
manners and principles, than many of our modern nations with chins scraped to
the quick. It is bad policy to attempt to altar that by law, which should be
altered by custom INSTR. 81.
, says the Czarina.

Adultery, blasphemy, striking or cursing a parent, and perjury in matters of
life and death, in New England, are capital MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIX.343.
.

Great care is taken in New England of the morals of the Indians, and
particularly to prevent drunkenness. In Old England, the government gains by
the drunkenness of the people Ibid.
.

The timidity, or laziness, if not somewhat worse, o^ magistrates and
governments, are a great hindrance to reformation of manners. The constables of
London and Westminster do effectually keep the streets clear of carts, coaches,
etc. in parliament-time, so that the members do actually go, without stop or
interruption, every day to the house. Yet it is pretended, that there is no
possibility of keeping the streets clear of lewd women; which is a very heinous
evil under the sun. For there is a close connection between the virtues and
between the vices; and a modest youth, once deprived of delicacy with respect
to chastity, will soon become daring and hardened with respect to others.

A single geni^ changes the face and state of a whole country, as Gustavus
Adolphus of Sweden, and Peter the Great of Russia.

The great difference we see between the behavior of the sagacious people
called Quakers, and all others; the difference between English, Scotch, Irish,
West Indian, French, Spanish, Heathen, Mohammedan, Christian, Popish, Protestant
manners and characters, etc. the regular and permanent difference we see
between the manners of all these divisions of mankind, shows, beyond doubt,
that the principles and habits of the people are very much in the power of able
statesmen.

In the beginning of Queen Anne's reign, an act was passed for giving liberty
to magistrates to take up idle people for the army Burn. IV.54.
.

In pressing time, a neighborhood is often cleared of idle and disorderly
persons by an information's being sent them, and their securing such persons
for the service. There might be a stated press-gang at all times to seize all
idle and disorderly persons, who have been three times complained of before a
magistrate, and to set them to work during a certain time, for the benefit of
great trading, or manufacturing companies, etc. The profit of their work would
be a temptation to put the law in execution. The fleet might be manned in this
manner. I say nothing of the army, because a free people ought to have no army,
but the militia, or the whole people.

By 5 and 6 Edw. VI. no person was to keep an alehouse without finding sureties
for the observance of decency in his house STAT. AT LARGE, II.76.
. I should be glad to know what would, in our times, be reckoned indecency in
an alehouse, tavern, masquerading-house, etc. Perhaps sodomy or murder. We know
that gaming, raking cheating, swearing, blasphemy, drunkenness, obscene talk,
adultery, and incest, are not reckoned indecencies, but are the common and
regular amusements of such places.

By 1 Iam. I. cap. 9. it is penal to suffer any person's sitting and tippling
in alehouses and inns, longer than the time necessary for refreshment Ibid. 341.
. Made perpetual by 21 of the same reign, cap. 7. In our times the innumerable
multitude of alehouses, taverns, masquerading houses, etc. is not restrained,
because the debauching and depopulating the land, the enfeebling, the sickness,
the death, and damnation of the people, are the great supports of the civil
list.

The common people were suffered by our worthy ministers, Walpole and the
Pelhams, to poison themselves with spiritous liquors, many thousands every
year, for many succeeding years, in spite of innumerable authentic proofs laid
before them of the frightful effects of dram-drinking. At last, A. D. 1760, a
prohibition was laid on the distillery, and afterward it was resolved in
parliament, that the raising the price of spiritous liquors [by the stop of the
distillery*] was a principal cause of a diminution of the consumption of them,
and had greatly contributed to the health, sobriety, and industry, of the
common people. That in order to continue the high price, a large additional
duty be laid on them, to be drawn back on exportation LAND. MAG. Sept. 1760.
. There were many petitions presented to the commons against taking off the
prohibition, once particularly, from the city of London, because it had proved
so salutary. And many who considered corrupt parliaments as capable of any
thing, scrupled not to say, the laying on of a high duty, on pretense of the
people's good, was neither more nor less than a villainous imposition on the
common sense of mankind, and was in reality giving the wretched people a
license to poison their bodies and damn their souls, for the good of the
revenue.

9 George II. was the first act licensing the retail of spiritous liquors STAT.
AT LARGE, VII.73.
. The bishop of Worcester calls this act raising money for the supply of
government, by what ^^st the people their lives and their souls L^^T. TO L.
MAYOR.
. A thorough-paced statesman will raise money from any thing, however hurtful
to the people.

The debauchery of the people, as above observed, is supposed to support the
revenue. Therefore the boundless multitude of alehouses is not restrained. But
this is a short-sighted kind of politics. For drunkenness, especially in
spiritous liquors, enfeebles the people, defeats population, shortens life,
cuts of multitudes in infancy, lessens the quantity of labor, and hurts the
revenue much more than it benefits it.

The act 9 Anne, cap. xiv. STAT. AT LARGE, XIV.352.
for the better preventing of excessive and deceitful gaming, would effectually
root that vice out of the nation, if the sober part of the subjects would
associate against it, and keep one another in countenance in informing,
prosecuting, etc. And the case is the same with respect to other epidemical
vices.

By 1 Edw. VI. cap. 3. a person loitering idle three days, might be taken up by
any body, and carried before two justices, marked with a hot iron, and enslaved
for two years, to the person who apprehended him, etc. Expired and repealed
Ibid. II.4.
. And see 3 and 4 of the same reign, cap. 16. Ibid. 53.
.

By 39 Eliz. cap. 4, rogues and vagabonds, besides other punishments, might be
condemned to the galleys Ibid. II.29^.
.

It is a monstrous absurdity in the English law, that the person injured by a
thief or a cheat is obliged to bear the expense and trouble of prosecuting the
thief or cheat, and recovers no damages, or however, is a loser upon the whole.
We pay taxes on pretense of being protected by government. But government
protects us so well, that we are obliged to pay for protection besides our
taxes. This inconvenience, and the extreme severity of our punishments in some
cases, deter people of gentle natures from prosecuting offenders, which gives
courage to the licentiousness of manners, and impunity to crimes.

The care of the manners of the people may be said to be the very business and
calling of the clergy, in such manner, that if they neglect it, it is no matter
what they attend to. The errors, deficiencies, and abuses in the clergy of
established churches merit a very copious display in these collections. And
very copious is the quantity of materials I have, in the course of my reading,
collected on this subject. At present I shall only observe, that what the
clergy bestow their principal attention upon, is, comparatively of the least
service for the important purpose of improving the manners of the people; I
mean preaching. In the New Testament we read much of the importance of the
apostles as heralds by divine commission, proclaiming the good message. That is
the true meaning of the Greek phrase, which we translate preaching the gospel.
But every body must see the difference between the importance of publishing to
the world the amazing history of Christ, which history was either unknown to,
or misunderstood by those to whom the heavenly heralds proclaimed it, and our
explaining and inculcating a doctrine or a precept of a religion, of which we
have the beautiful and simple code in our hands, and have been brought up in
the belief of it. The business of the apostles was the same with that of
missionaries sent from Europe to convert the heathens to christianity. The
function of the modern clergy of Europe must be supposed to be different from
this, as the state of the people of Europe is different from that of the
heathens in Asia, Africa, and America. They clergy of England ought, therefore
to apply themselves to teaching in more ways than one. They ought not to think
they have discharged the duty of their function, when they have read over a
velvet cushion a learned and elegant discourse on some point in theology or in
morals: a true and faithful pastor will consider it as the principal part of
his duty to be intimately acquainted with every individual of his flock, to
obtain and keep the first and highest place in the esteem of every inhabitant
of his parish, in such manner, that the advice of their faithful, laborious,
and disinterested spiritual guide shall, upon all occasions, be acceptable to
them. In all which there is no other difficulty, than the difficulty of showing
his people that he is more desirous of b^ing serviceable to them, than of
improving his income, of obtaining a fatter living, or a plurality, and for
that purpose currying favor with those who have livings in their gift, by
plunging into party-quarrels, and doing dirty work at elections, etc.

A benevolent disposition revolts against every discouragement to the exercise
of the godlike virtue of charity. But truth is truth, and it must be
acknowledged, that the profusion of our charities is hurtful to the manners of
our people. Even in this rich country, the number of those who have it not in
their power, without strict care, constant labor, and severe parsimony, to
save any thing for old age, is very great. All that policy is sound, which
tends to improve and increase industry and frugality among the working people;
and all that economy is hurtful, which tends to produce in the poor people a
contrary spirit, and which occasions their becoming more burdens^me to their
richer fellow subjects, than is absolutely necessary; because this lays an
additional burden upon all our exports, and hurts our trade at foreign markets,
upon which all depends. Let our innumerable and exorbitant public charities be
considered in this light. If the poor are led by them to look upon industry and
frugality as unnecessary, they will neither be industrious nor frugal; and the
consequence will be, that they and their children will come upon the parish,
instead of being maintained by labor and industry.

Besides the general hurtful consequences arising from the excessive number of
our public charities, our manner of conducting them, and of admitting
individuals to the benefit of them, are obnoxious to various censures, too
numerous to be particularly specified here. Were the admission of individuals
to the benefit of our charities put upon a proper soot, our charities might be
of great benefit in improving (instead of hurting, as they do at present) the
manners of the people. Did magistrates keep an attentive eye upon the behavior
of individuals, and were they to keep a register of the complaints made against
the idle and debauched, the register to be inspected upon every individual's
applying for the benefit of a public charity, that it might appear, whether he
had lived a life of labor and frugality, or brought himself to want by his own
fault. Did an individual among the lower people know, that he should be
provided for in his old age, not in the present promiscuous way, but according
to his behavior through life; we should see him more attentive to his conduct,
lest the justice's book, upon his applying for relief in his old age, or in
case of an accident, should rise in judgment against him, and exclude him from
the best provision.

Hospitals abound, says Lord Bacon LET* 234.
, and beggars abound never a whit the less. This was written A. D. 1618.

A native of Holland is hardly ever seen begging in Holland.

The excellent Montesquieu thinks hospitals hurtful to industry; and that the
best charity to the poor is to set them to work. He commends Henry VIII for
dissolving the religious houses, which maintained multitudes in idleness, not
only of those who resided in them, but of pretended poor, who resorted to them.
At Rome, he says, the number of hospitals is the cause that every body is in
easy circumstances, but the industrious, the land-holders, and traders; because
they must maintain the hospitals.

Judge Blackstone condemns the present management of the poor COM. I.362.
.

A. D. 1760 a committee, appointed to inquire into the state of the poor,
reported to the house of commons their resolutions, viz. That the present
method of providing for the poor in the parochial way, is unequal and
burdensome to parishes, and distressful to the poor. That giving money to poor
people out of the parish-workhouse, to prevent their claiming a settlement, is
an abuse. That the employing of the poor will be of great advantage to the
public. That the placing of the poor in county-workhouses, under the direction
of chosen trustees, will answer all purposes better than parish-workhouses.
That this will improve waste lands, will put an end to expensive lawsuits
about settlements, will render the intricate laws relating to the settlement of
the poor useless, etc. These wise resolutions produced no new regulation. For
the parliament was prorogued in the mean time LONDON MAG, May 1760, p. 238.
.

Besides what might be done by a government setting itself in earnest to
correct and form the manners, it is certain that the morals and principles of
all ranks, high and low, might be improved in the same way, that natural
knowledge has been improved. If a set of gentlemen of respectable characters
were to form a society, like the Royal Society, to meet statedly at London, to
be wholly unconnected with government and with magistracy, to publish from time
to time transactions analogous to those of the Royal Society, I mean, moral
d^scourses, observations, reasonings, examples from history and the best
political writers, ancient and modern in all languages, with strictures upon
the manners of the times, sati^es upon the indecencies and crimes of eminent
individuals, without names, etc. and if the correspondent members of this
society were to use their endeavors in their respective countries to promote
decency of behavior, and agree to withdraw from, and disgrace persons of
unexemplary characters. If, I say, a numerous and respectable set of gentlemen
were to form themselves into such an Areopagus, there is no doubt, but they
might give a very advantageous turn to the manners of the people of this
nation, though they be so far gone in debauchery and corruption. The members
must be balloted in, and any of them misbehaving, be turned out in the same
manner. It would d^mp the boldness of a debauched lord, to see his picture
drawn by this society of voluntary and uninfluenced censors, and held forth to
the view of the nation in its true colors, and striking likeness. -- Abashed
the devil ^^ood,
And felt how aw^ul goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her own shape how lovely.
MILT. And on the contrary, it would excite men to a laudable emul^tion, to see
am^able and respectable characters set in a bright and fl^ming light before the
public by the pen of a man of prime genius employed by the society. Every man
would be afraid of being stigmatized by a set o^ judges so unbi^ss^d and so
venerable. They mig^t extend their censure and their approbation to authors and
their works, espec^ally those which were likely to affect the general
character. The censure or praise of such a society would be more awful to
writers, than that of a bookseller's hireling, or a bookseller himself in the
shape of a Reviewer. The society, by drawing into their circle all the men of
genius, but the openly abandoned, and professedly negligent of the safety of
their country, might form a party much too powerful for the defenders of
debauchery and corruption. For virtue supported by abilities, will always be
too hard for vice and stupidity. And men of parts, acting upon principle, will
keep together, when weak and worthless men will quarrel and divide. A numerous
set of virtuous and able men associated, and corresponding together, and all
independent in temper and circumstances, would be a formidable check on wicked
ministers and corrupt parliaments. See the account given in the MODERN
UNIVERSAL HISTORY, XXXIV.135, of the commonwealth of Babina, a society erected
in Poland upon this foot, and with this view, which proved highly serviceable,
and was encouraged by kings and emperors.

And let it be recollected, what affects were produced by the humorous romance
of Don Quixotte, by the silly song of Lillibullero, and the like, which
occasioned a person's saying, that if he had the making of the ballads in a
country, who would might make the laws.

It is an incontestible truth, that the virtues of the citizens constitute the
most happy dispositions that can be desired by a just and wise government. This
then affords a certain index from which the nation may judge of the intention
of those who govern. If they endeavor to render the great and the common
people virtuous, their views are pure and upright; and it is certain that their
sight is fixed alone on the great end of government, the happiness and glory of
the nation. But if they spread a corruption of manners, a love of luxury,
effeminacy, the rage of licentious passions, and excite the great to engage in
ruinous expenses, the people ought to take care of these corruptors; for they
endeavor to purchase slaves, in order to rule over them in an arbitrary manner
Va^tel's LAW OF NATIONS, quoted LAND. MAG. Sept. 176^, p. 456.
.

Though it must be owned that our liberties have made a small acquisition by
the late demolition of general warrants, and seizure of papers; yet there is,
and will be great reason to complain, so long as the riot-act is kept in force.

The first sketch of the riot-act was made in the time of Edward VI. and is
thought by Burnet too severe PARL. HIST. III.248.
.

Soldiers armed with firelocks are particularly improper for quelling riots.
There is a necessary jealousy between them and the people; so that their
encounter is likely to widen, not close the breach. They are the slaves of the
court: the people, therefore, naturally conclude, that whenever they are
employed, tyranny is going forward. The soldiers being all dressed alike, it is
impossible to distinguish which of them is guilty of any violence against the
people; this indeed, there is reason to suppose, the court cares little about,
but to us it is an object. Muskets are not certain to hit the guilty persons
in a riot; but may destroy the innocent in their own houses, or passing about
their lawful business.

At Rome it was not lawful to enter forcibly a citizen's house, even to carry
him to justice for a crime Montesq. L'ESPRIT DES LOI^, III.202.
.

Charlemagne, the son of Pepin of France, always endeavored to quiet
seditions, and oppositions, by gentle means, before he made use of the sword.

The lord chief justice Holt, hearing of a mob, went among the people, and
telling the soldiers, who were come to disperse them, that he would have every
man of the party hanged, if one person was killed (all are principals who are
present at a murder), quelled the mob himself LIFE OF LORD CHIEF JUSTICE HO^^.
.

When Henry IV. of France took Paris, which was in rebellion against him, there
were two or three citizens killed. The king was extremely concerned that any
lives should be lost, and said, he would rather have given 50,000 crowns, that
posterity might read that Paris was taken by Henry IV. without blood. We have
long complained, but in vain, that the military are called in to quell every
trifling riot, where the peace officers would have done the business as
effectually, and with more safety. We have seen the men of blood, the pretended
keepers of the peace, but real butchers of the innocent, some reprieved, others
thanked, for destroying their counrymen.

The riot-act was made with a view merely temporary, and therefore ought to
have been repealed, when the occasion of making it was at an end. It is too
cruel and bloody. A peaceable subject may chance to be wedged in the middle of
a mob, so that he cannot extricate himself at the reading of the riot-act, The
man may be lame; he may be overtaken with liquor; he may not even know, that
the riot-act has been read, if the mob around him was noisy, if he was at a
distance from the place, or if he was hard of hearing. Is the unhappy man to be
seized, imprisoned like a fe^on, tried, and put to an infamous death, only
because he was so unfortunate, as to get himself entangled in a mob? So says
the riot-act. Yet we know, all good government is founded in paternal
principles. But what should we think of that father, who should murder his son,
because he would not go out of the room when ordered? Disobedience in children
or subjects is highly culpable: but cruelty and injustice in parents, or
governors, in punishing disobedience, is infamous. The intention in making
penal laws, ought to be, to prevent a greater evil by a less. Is the riot-act
constructed upon this principle? I happen to offend the mob. Two or three
hundred idle fellows assemble, and break my windows. Twenty shillings will
repair the damage. No, says the riot-act. A magistrate shall send for the
standing army. They shall seize all they can lay hold on, after reading the
riot-act. Those they seize shall be hanged. And if, in apprehending the
offenders, any one, or more, are killed, it shall not be murder. See the Act.
This last clause may be said to be, like Draco's laws, written in blood. For it
naturally suggests to a cowardly magistrate (cowards are generally cruel), that
the readiest way to disperse the mob is, to order the soldiers to fire upon
them. This is indeed a gross abuse of the intention of the law. For, absurd and
ill framed as it is, the intention of it was quite different from this. The
meaning of the law is, that all persons, soldiers as well as others, should
assist the civil magistrate in quelling riots. And, lest the magistrate should
be intimidated in the discharge of this part of his duty, he, and all who are
aiding to him, should be indemnified from prosecution, on account of any
person's being unavoidably killed in the scuffle. The riot-act, bloody as it
is, was not so bloodily intentioned, as to mean, that whenever a disturbance
happens in the middle of a great town, which such is the well-known goodnature
and good-understanding of the people of England) may almost always be quieted
by a few civil words from any man, who is in favor with them; immediately a
band of ruffian soldiers shall be brought to fire in at windows, and murder
women and children. This was not, I say, in any degree, the intention of the
riot-act. But it is so ill contrived, that it is very easily abused to this
cruel purpose. There ought to have been an express prohibition of fire arms in
the hands of those who were to assist the civil magistrate, with capital
punishment of any person on the side of the insurgents, who should use those
dreadful instruments of destruction. At Constantinople, the Ianizaries are
armed only with clubs. Firearms are not the proper implements for quelling the
unruly dispositions of our own children. They are very proper indeed, if our
scheme be to murder them, and thin the land. Nor ought the soldiery to be, on
any account, called in on such occasion. The veriest court sycophant in the
nation does not pretend, that a standing army, numerous enough to conquer the
world, is kept up in profound peace, merely for the purpose of keeping the
people quiet. This he knows to be too gross to pass; because he knows, that it
is but very lately that we had a standing army; that in Henry VIIth's time the
yeomen of the guards were the whole regular force under the king's command,
except in war time. No; he pretends, that the necessity of a standing army
arises wholly from the practice of the other crowned heads of Europe; and that,
because they who live on a vast continent together, and are liable to be
attacked at any time by their neighbors, must keep up a military force for
their defense, therefore we, who are surrounded by a sea, and a fleet equal to
all the naval force of Europe, must keep up a standing army, as numerous as
that of Alexander the Great. Let this be for a moment admitted (though nothing
can well be imagined more palpably absurd) does it not follow, that to call in
the standing army, with their murderous firearms, to keep the peace within the
realm, is a gross misapplication of them? If the army can at any time quell an
insurrection of the people, why may they not quell the spirit of liberty in the
people? And then a complete tyranny is established. For every government will
be tyrannical, if they dare. Had the riot-act been m^de before the Revolution,
we had probably never seen that glorious event.

The intention of the riot-act being, to seize, and bring to regular trial by
jury (see the Act), nothing can be more absurd (besides the cruelty of it) than
the application of firearms for quelling mobs; because firearms do not seize
people, but murder them: a nett, a rope, a shepherd's crook would be natural
instruments for seizing or apprehending.

The undersheriff of Dublin, A. D. 1738, was brought in guilty of murder for
ordering a file of musketeers to fire upon a mob, and killing one man. He
absconded; fled to England; was outlawed; died for want in a ditch in Marybone
fields LAND. CHRON. NO. 1786.
.

Sir Stephen Theodore Ianssen, when sheriff of London, kept the pe^ce at
executions, and on other occasions, when the populous were expected to be
unruly, without any military force. He raised a body of 1000 men, armed, and
some of them mounted on horseback. Others, on like occasions, have called in
the soldiery, and shed innocent blood.

Is it no grievance, (says Sir I. Hind Cotton in the debate on the repeal of
the septennial act, A.D. 1734 DEB. COM. VIII.179.
) that a little dirty justice of the peace, the meanest and vilest tool a
minister can make use of, a tool who, perhaps, subsists by his being in the
commission; and who may be turned out of that subsistence whenever the minister
pleases; is this I say, no grievance that such a tool should have it in his
power, by reading a proclamation, to put perhaps 20 or 30 of the best subjects
in England to immediate death, without any trial or form of law?

In the year 1747, an act passed for trying the rebels (not according to
ancient custom in the county, where they committed the offense, but) before
such commissioners, and in such country as the king should appoint. In
consequence of the riot-act, four persons were executed in Salisbury court, who
would otherwise have been only punished with fine and prison. And a jury in
Southwark, which had acquitted two gentlemen, were dismissed, and another
impanelled U^E AND ABUSE OF PARL. I.334
.

Lord Bacon says, what chiefly kept the peace in his times, when riots were
apprehended, was drawing up and mustering the trained bands, giving charge to
the lord mayor, alderman, justices, etc. and strengthening the commissioners of
the peace with new clauses of lieutenancy L. Bac. LECT. 2^2.
.

There is (says lord Bathurst DE^. LORDS, V.152
,) a very great difference between a magistrate's being assisted by the posse
of the county, and his having a body of regular troops always at command. In
the first case, he must in all his measures pursue justice and equity, he must
even study the humors and inclinations, and court the affections of the
people; because upon them only he can depend for the execution of his orders as
a magistrate, and even for his safety and protection as a private man; but when
a civil magistrate knows that he has a large body of regular well disciplined
troops at command, he despises both the inclinations and the interest of the
people; he considers nothing but the inclinations and the interest of the
soldiers, and as these soldiers are quite distinct from the people, as they do
not feel the oppressions of the people, and are subject to such arbitra^y laws
and severe punishments, they will generally assist and protect him in the most
unjust and (...) m^asures; nay, as the interests of the (...) always distinct
from, and sometimes opposite (...) ^nterests of the people, a civil magistrate,
(...) oppressive in his nature, is sometimes (...) to oppress the people, in
order to humor (...) the army. To imagine, my lords, that we (...) ^^ways be
under a civil government as long as our army is under the direction of the
civil magistrate^ is to me something surprising. In France, in (...), and many
other countries, which have long (...) under an arbitrary and military
government, (...) the outw^rd appearance of a civil (...) in Turkey, they have
laws, they have (...) have civil magistrates, and in all cases (...) nature,
their services are under the (...) the civil magistrates; but, my lords, we
(...) in a^l such countries, the law, the (...) the civil magistrates, speak as
they are (...), by those who have the command of the (...) law^ers have often
occasion to make (...) speech that one of our judges made to (...) earl o^
Suffolk, in Richard the Ild's reign, (...) upon signing it as his opinion, that
the king (...) the laws, said, -- If I had not done this, (...), I should have
been killed by you; and now (...) done it, I well deserve to be hanged for
(...) ^^ainst the nobles of the land. I am afraid, my lords, some of our civil
magistrates, at least those of an inferior degree, begin to put too great
confidence in their having a military force at their command, and therefore
make a little too free with the lower sort of people, or at least do not take
proper measures for reconciling the people, in a good natured and peaceable
manner, to the laws of their country: a man who has power, is but too seldom at
the pains to use argument.

In the riot act STAT. AT LARGE, IV.600.
, there is no mention of military, nor of firing; but if any person happens to
be killed in the apprehending, or endeavoring to apprehend him, it shall not
be murder, etc.

The liberty of firing at random, says a speaker in the house of peers, upon
any multitude of his majesty's subjects, is a liberty which ought to be most
cautiously granted, and never made use of, but in cases of the most absolute
necessity; and in this way of thinking, I am supported by the whole tenor of
the laws of England. It is now three or four hundred years since firearms
first became in use among us; yet the law has never suffered them to be made
use of by the common officers of justice. Pikes, halberts, battle-axes, and
such like, are the only weapons that can be made use of according to law. by
such officers; and the reason is extremely plain, because, with such weapons
they can seldom or ever hurt, much less kill any but such as are really
opposing or assaulting them; whereas if you put fire arms into their hands, and
allow them to make the proper use of such arms, they may as probably hurt or
kill the innocent as the guilty; nay in cities and towns, where such tumults
generally happen, they may kill people sitting in their own houses, or looking
innocently over their windows, which all persons are apt to do, but especially
women and children, when they hear any hubbub or n^ise in the streets; and
which was really in the affair now before us; for one woman was killed in her
master's house, by her being unfortunately, but innocently, at the window when
the soldiers fired D^^. PEER^. V.172.
.

There are two sorts of mobs, or assemblies of the people; one is when a
multitude of people assembles together upon any lawful or innocent occasion,
and afterward happen to become riotous; and the other is when a multitude of
people assembles together with a design to commit some unlawful or wicked
action. With respect to the former, the most gentle measures ought to be made
use of for dispersing them, because many innocent persons being inveigled into
the crowd, it may be some time before they can possibly get away; but with
respect to the latter, as all that are assembled together upon such an occasion
must be some way guilty, therefore more rough and violent measures may be made
use of for dispersing them, and for preventing the mischief they intended. But
in both these cases the law is now certain and indisputable. Your lordships all
know that by a late statute, which is in force in Scotland as well as in
England, the power of the civil magistrate, in the case of any mob, or riotous
assembly, is fully and distinctly regulated; yet even by that law, which I have
often heard complained of, as a law not tolerable in a free country, there is
no express power given to the magistrate or his assistants, to make use of
firearms; so cautious was the legislature, even at that time, when tumults
were more frequent and more dangerous than they are at present, of giving a
legal authority for the making use of such weapons. After reading the
proclamation, and after giving the mob an hour's time to disperse themselves,
and to depart to their habitations, or lawful business, the peace-officers may
then, by that law, seize or disperse them who shall afterward continue
unlawfully assembled; and if any person, by resisting them, shall happen to be
killed, maimed, or hurt, the peace-officers and their assistants are
indemnified; but I doubt much if a magistrate would be indemnified, even by
this law, should he take the short way of dispersing a mob, by ordering his
assistants to fire among them, and should thereby kill any person who had
committed no overt act of resistance DEB. PEERS, V.173.
.

A law was made for preventing or quelling riots and tumults within the city of
Edinburgh; for which purpose the magistrates of that city are enabled. with the
King's allowance, to raise soldiers on pay, to use haquebuts, and all other
arms, when they shall think expedient; and if any person resisting the said
magistrates in the quelling of any riot, shall be hurt or slain, the
magistrates and their assistants are indemnified; provided such hurt or killing
was with long weapons, and not by shooting haquebuts or the like. I need not
acquaint your lordships, that haquebut was the name then used in that country,
and formerly in this, for fire arms; that by long weapons was meant halberts,
battle-axes, and such weapons as are commonly used by all assistants to officers
of justice in that part of the island, as well as this. Thus your lordships
see, that killing with any sort of fire arms was expressly excepted out of that
law Ibid. 174.
.

Upon occasion of the debate about Porteus's affair, the Duke of Argyle
proposed, that the Judges should deliver their opinions upon the following
questions relating to the above act, viz. 1. If an execution should be
performed in Stocks-Market, where a guard of the regular troops should be drawn
up by lawful command to prevent a rescue of the criminal, and should several
stones, thrown from among the crowd, light among them, by some of which several
soldiers should be bruised and wounded; would such a guard be guilty of a
crime, if, by firing among the crowd, they should kill several persons? And if
guilty of a crime, what crime would it be? 2. Upon occasion of a riot in or
near a town where a regiment is quartered, should the Sheriff of the county
order the commanding officer to assemble the regiment, and march to his
assistance against the rioters, is such officer obliged to obey, or may obey?
And what penalty is there, if he should refuse? 3. If a detachment of the army
is ordered to prevent a number of people from pulling down of houses, or
committing any other illegal action, and that the commanding officer of such
detachment has orders to repel force by force, can such detachment lawfully
make use of force by firing, unless they are attacked by the rioters? 4. In
case ri^ters should be pulling down houses, or doing any other mischief in one
part of the town, and a detachment of the army should be ordered, in aid of the
civil magistrate, to march thither to disperse them, and a number of people
should assemble, and stop up the passages through which such detachment must
necessarily pass, whether such detachment may use force to disperse the people
so assembled, in order to pass that way, without being first attacked by them
DEB. PEERS, V.179.
?

When the three justices, Blackerby, Howard, and Lediard, were rebuked by the
Speaker, A. D. 1741, for bringing a party of soldiers, on pretense of quelling
a riot at the poll for Westminster, he asked them as follows:

Has any real necessity been shown for it? There might be fears, there might be
some danger; but did you try the strength of the law to dispel these fears, and
remove that danger? Did you make use of these powers the law has entrusted you
with, as civil magistrates, for the preservation of the public peace? No. --
You deserted all that; and wantonly, I hope inadvertently, resorted to that
force the most unnatural of all others in all respects to that cause and
business you were then attending, and for the freedom of which every Briton
ought to be ready almost to suffer any thing DEB. COM. XIII.105.
.

The riot-act, says the author of Use and Abuse of Parliaments I.201.
, which passed likewise this session, no doubt the distempers of these times
made necessary; but then surely it ought either to have been temporary, or
should have been long since repealed. For while that yoke is upon our necks,
though we are at liberty to preach resistance, we have little or no power to
practice it; under whatever grievances laboring, or by whatever provocations
compelled. A circumstance which, I fear, these in power are but too well
acquainted with.

Sir, I declare upon my honor (says Mr. Pulteney, in the debate on the repeal
of the septennial bill, A. D. 1734 DEB. COM. VIII.202.
) that of all the actions I ever did in my life, there is not one I more
heartily and sincerely repent of, than my voting for the passing of that law
[the riot-act]* I believe I am as little suspected of disaffection to his
Majesty, or his family, as any man in the kingdom. It was my too great zeal for
his illustrious family, that transported me to give that vote for which I am
now heartily grieved. But even then I never imagined it was to remain a law for
ever. No, Sir! This government is founded upon resistance; it was the principle
of resistance that brought about the revolution, which cannot be justified upon
any other principle. Is then passive obedience and non-resistance to be
established by a perpetual law, by a law the most scarce and the most arbitrary
of any in England, and that under a government which owes its very being to
resistance? The Hon. Gentleman who first mentioned it, said very right; it is a
scandal it should remain in our statute-books; and I will say, they are no
friends to his Majesty, or to his government, who desire it should: for it
destroys that principle upon which is founded one of his best titles to the
crown. While this remains a law, we cannot well be called a free people; a
little Justice of the Peace, assisted perhaps by a sergeant and a parcel of
hirelings, may almost at any time have the lives of twenty gentlemen of the
best families in England in his power.

I shall never be for sacrificing the liberties of the people, says a Speaker
in the House of Peers, in order to prevent their engaging in any riotous
proceedings; because I am sure it may be done by a much more gentle and less
expensive method. A wise and a prudent conduct, and a constant pursuit of
upright and just measures, will establish the authority as well as the power of
the government; and where authority is joined with power, the people will never
be tumultuous; but I must observe, and I do it without a design of offending
any person, that ever since I came into the world, I never saw a^
administration that had, in my opinion, so much power, or so little authority.
I hope some methods will be taken for establishing among the people in general
that respect and esteem, which they ought to have for their governors, and
which every administration ought to endeavor, as much as possible, to acquire.
I hope proper methods will be taken for restoring to the laws of this kingdom
their ancient authority; for if that is not done, if the Lord Chief Justice's
warrant is not of itself of so much authority, as that it may be executed by
his tipstaff in any county of England, without any other assistance than what
is provided by the law, it cannot be said that we are governed by law, or by
the civil magistrate: If regular troops should once become necessary for
executing the laws upon every occasion, it could not then be said, that we were
governed by the civil power, but by the military sword, which is a sort of
government I am sure none of your lordships would desire ever to see
established in this kingdom DEB. PEERS, V.142.
.

What Lord Carteret said in the House of Peers, A. D. 1737, on occasion of the
affair of Porteous, is very just.

The people seldom or ever assemble in any riotous or tumultuous manner unless
when they are oppressed, or at least imagine they are oppressed. If the people
should me mistaken, and imagine they are oppressed when they are not, it is the
duty of the next magistrate to endeavor first to correct their mistake by fair
means and just reasoning. In common humanity he is obliged to take this method,
before he has recourse to such methods as may bring death and destruction upon
a great number of his fellow-countrymen, and this method will generally prevail
where they have not met with any real oppression: But when this happens to be
the case, it cannot be expected they will give ear to their oppressor, nor can
the severest laws, nor the most rigorous execution of those laws, always
prevent the people's becoming tumultuous; you may shoot them, you may hang
them, but, till the oppression is removed or alleviated, they will never be
quiet, till the greatest part of them are destroyed DEB. PEERS, V.138,
.

The court cant, in support of the practice of calling the soldiery to quell
riots, is, That the soldiery are the king's subjects, as well as other men; and
all subjects are obliged to assist the magistrate in case of need. But why must
the soldiery, rather than any other subjects, be sent for from an hundred miles
distance, to quell a disturbance, if it be not that the soldiery are more
formidable to the people than any other subjects? Is it not therefore manifest,
that every argument for calling in the military is a two-edged one? The more
fit the military are for quelling riots, the more fit they likewise must be for
quelling the spirit of liberty, and enslaving the people. If disciplined troops
be necessary, it is not necessary that those troops be the hirelings of the
court, enslaved for life.

The law means, even when it punishes, not revenge, but example. The magistrate
is not to mix his passions with the execution of justice; nor is he to enforce
the execution of the best laws at all hazards. He is not to fire a city in
order to force a nest of thieves out of their lurking holes. Violence on the
part of government tends to irritate, not to quiet, the minds of the people.
Better fifty were punished legally, than five massacred. Musquet-balls against
brick-bats are an unequal match, and cowardly on the part of government. If the
train-bands, town-guards, peace-officers, and posse comitatus be not
sufficient, let the laws concerning them be mended. But let not an army, the
bondslaves of a corrupt court, find, that they have the people under their
command, lest they first subdue the people, and then, like Cromwell's men, turn
upon their own masters.

The way to prevent mobs (every government shows its sagacity more by
prevention than by punishment) is, to keep up a good police, to take care that
the people be employed and maintained, and that they be well principled, which
requires punishing an idle, or incendiary priesthood (as those in Sacheverel's
time) and making them, and the community where disorders are committed,
answerable, according to King Alfred's institution; and by a mild and fatherly
government's taking care that the people have no just ground of complaint.

By 13 Henry IV. it is enacted, that in case of a riot, the Sheriff may come
with the posse comitatus, if need be, (not with a regiment of soldiers) and
arrest the disturbers of the peace, as was ordained by two statutes of Richard
II. The Sheriff and two Justices are to present the guilty, and they are to be
punished (as upon the presentment of twelve jurors) at the discretion of King
and Council. But the accused may traverse, and the cause may be tried before
the King's Bench. If the accused do not appear, they are to be held guilty.
Sheriffs and Justices neglecting to quell riots to be punished STAT. AT LARGE,
I.448.
.

The learned Judge Blackstone reckons the riot-act among the causes of a great
accession of power to the court since the Revolution COM. IV.434.
.

CHAP. IX. Of the Liberty of Speech and Writing on Political Subjects.
IN an inquiry into public abuses no one will wonder to find punishment
inflicted by government upon complainers, reckoned as an abuse; for it
certainly is one of the most atrocious abuses, that a free subject should be
restrained in his inquiries into the conduct of those who undertake to manage
his affairs; I mean the administrators of government: for all such are
undertakers, and are answerable for what they undertake: but if it be dangerous
and penal to enquire into their conduct, the state may be ruined by their
blunders, or by their villainies, beyond the possibility of redress.

There seems to be somewhat unnatural in attempting to lay a restraint on those
who would criticize the conduct of men who undertake to do other people's
business. It is an offense, if we remark on the decision of a court of law, on
the proceedings of either house of parliament, or of the administration; all
whose proceedings we are immediately concerned in. At the same time, if a man
builds a house for himself, marries a wife for himself, or writes a book, by
which the public gets more than the author, it is no offense to make very
severe and unjust remarks.

Are Judges, Juries, Counselors, Members of the House of Commons, Peers,
Secretaries of State, or Kings, infallible? Or are they short-sighted, and
perhaps interested, mortals?

In a petition to parliament, a bill in chancery, and proceedings at law,
libellous words are not punishable; because freedom of speech and writing are
indispensably necessary to the carrying on of business. But it may be said,
there is no necessity for a private writer to be indulged the liberty of
attacking the conduct of those who take upon themselves to govern the state.
The answer is easy, viz. That all history shows the necessity, in order to the
preservation of liberty, of every subjects having a watchful eye on the conduct
of Kings, Ministers, and Parliament, and of every subjects being not only
secured, but encouraged in alarming his fellow subjects on occasion of every
attempt upon public liberty, and that private, independent subjects only are
like to give faithful warning of such attempts; their betters (as to rank and
fortune) being more likely to conceal, than detect the abuses committed by
those in power. If, therefore, private writers are to be intimidated in showing
their fidelity to their country, the principal security of liberty is taken
away.

Punishing libels public or private is foolish, because it does not answer the
end, and because the end is a bad one, if it could be answered.

The Attorney General De Gray confessed in the House of Commons, A. D. 1770
ALM. DEB. COM. IX.22.
, that his power of filing informations ex officio is an odious power, and that
it does not answe^ the purpose intended; for that he had not been able to bring
any libeller to justice.' Mr. Pownal showed that power to be illegal and
unconstitutional; for that, according to law, no Englishman is to be brought
upon his trial, but by presentment of his country; a few particular cases
excepted.

When the lawyers say a libel is criminal, though true, they mean, because it
is, according to them, a breach of the peace, and tends to excite revenge. They
allow, that the falsehood of the charge is an aggravation Blackstone, IV.150.
, and that, therefore the person libelled has no right to damages, if the
charges laid against him be true. But by this rule it should seem, that the
truth of the libel should take away all its criminality. For if I have no right
to damages, I have no pretense to seek revenge. Therefore to libel me for what
I cannot affirm myself to be innocent of, is no breach of the peace, as it does
not naturally tend to excite revenge, but rather ingenuous shame and
reformation.

Let us hear on this subject the excellent Lord Chesterfield, on the bill for
licensing the stage, A. D. 1737.

In public, as well as private life, the only way to prevent being ridiculed or
censured, is to avoid all ridiculous or wicked measures, and to pursue such
only as are virtuous and worthy. The people never endeavor to ridicule those
they love and esteem, nor will they suffer them to be ridiculed. If any one
attempts it, their ridicule returns upon the author; he makes himself only the
object of public hatred and contempt. The actions or behavior of a private man
may pass unobserved, and consequently unapplauded and uncensured; but the
actions of these in high stations, can neither pass without notice nor without
censure or applause; and therefore an administration without esteem, without
authority, among the people, let their power be ever so great or ever so
arbitrary, will be ridiculed: the severest edicts, the most terrible
punishments cannot prevent it. If any man, therefore, thinks he has been
censured, if any man thinks he has been ridiculed, upon any of our public
theaters, let him examine his actions he will find the cause, let him alter his
conduct he will find a remedy. As no man is perfect, as no man is infallible,
the greatest may err, the most circumspect may be guilty of some piece of
ridiculous behavior. It is not licentiousness, it is an useful liberty always
indulged the stage in a free country, that some great men may there meet with a
just reproof, which none of their friends will be free enough, or rather
faithful enough to give them. Of this we have a famous instance in the Roman
history. The great Pompey, after the many victories he had obtained, and the
great conquests he had made, had certainly a good title to the esteem of the
people of Rome. Yet that great man, by some error in his conduct, became an
object of general dislike; and therefore in the representation of an old play,
when Diphilus the actor came to repeat these words, Nostra miseria tu es
magnus, the audience immediately applied them to Pompey, who at that time was
as well known by the name of Magnus as by the name Pompey, and were so highly
pleased with the satire, that, as Cicero tells us, they made the actor repeat
the words one hundred times over. An account of this was immediately sent to
Pompey, who, instead of resenting it as an injury, was so wise as to take it
for a just reproof. He examined his conduct, he altered his measures, he
regained by degrees the esteem of the people, and then he neither feared the
wit, nor felt the satire of the stage. This is an example which ought to be
followed by great men in all countries DEB. PEERS. V.214.
.

Even the cruel Tiberius, when in good humor, could say, In a free state, the
mind and the tongue ought to be free. Titus defied any one to scandalize him.
Trajan published absolute liberty of speech and writing. Constantine, when he
was told that some ill-disposed persons had battered his head and face, meaning
those of his statue, felt himself all about those parts, and told his
courtiers, he found nothing amiss; desiring that they would take no trouble
about finding out the violators of the statue.

Mr. Gordon Cato's LET. I.246.
allows the maxim, that a libel is not the less a libel for being true. But
this holds, he says, only in respect of private characters; and it is quite
otherwise, when the crimes of men affect the public. We are to take care of the
public safety at all adventures. And the loss of an individual's, or a whole
ministry's political characters, ought to be despised, when put in competition
with the fate of a kingdom. Therefore no free subject ought to be under the
least restraint in respect to accusing the greatest, so long as his accusation
strikes only at the political conduct of the accused: his private we have no
right to meddle with, but in so far as a known vicious private character
indicates an unfitness for public power or trust. But it may be said, this is a
grievous hardship on those who undertake the administration of a nation; that
they are to run the hazard of being thus publicly accused of corruption,
embezzlement, and other political crimes, without having it in their power to
punish their slanderers. To this I answer, It is no hardship at all, but the
unavoidable inconvenience attendant upon a high station, which he who dislikes
must avoid, and keep himself private. Cato was forty times tried. But we do not
think the worse of Cato for this. If a statesman is liable to be falsely
accused, let him comfort himself by recollecting, that he is well paid. An
ensign is liable to be killed in war; and he has but 3 s. 6 d. a day. If a
statesman has designedly behaved amiss, he ought to be punished with the utmost
severity; because the injury he has done, is unboundedly extensive. If he has
injured the public through weakness, and without wicked intention, he is still
punishable; because he ought not to have thrust himself into a station for
which he was unfit. But, indeed, these cases are so rare (want of honesty being
the general cause of mal-administration), that it is scarce worth while to
touch upon them. If a statesman is falsely accused, he has only to clear his
character, and he appears in a fairer light than before. He must not insist on
punishing his accuser: for the public security requires, that there be no
danger in accusing those who undertake the administration of national affairs.
The punishment of political satyrists gains credit to their writings, nor do
unjust governments reap any fruit from such severities, but insults to
themselves, and honor to those whom they prosecute.

A libel is in fact (criminally speaking) a non entity, i. e. there is no such
offense as scandal. For if the punishment was taken away, the whole of the evil
would be taken away, because nobody would regard scandal; but people would
believe every person's character to be what they knew it. The old philosopher
said all in a sentence, Live so that nobody shall believe your maligners.

Filing informations by rule of court on motion of counsel, tends to set aside
the old constitutional method of indictment and presentment by jury. But
informations filed ex officio by the Attorney General, are not more consistent
with libels than letters of cachet.

A. D. 1765, a motion was made in the house of commons, That general warrants
for apprehending the authors of seditious or treasonable libels, and for
seizing their papers, are not warranted by law, though they have been
customary. Nothing done in the matter. The house was too tender of the power of
the court to make a resolution so favorable to the liberty of the subject.

General warrants are not a whit more reconcilable to liberty, than the French
king's Lettres de Cachet. A general w^rrant lays half the people of a town at
the mercy of a set of ruffian officers, let loose upon them by a secretary of
state, who assumes over the (...) and papers of the most innocent a power which
a British king dares not assume, and delegates it to the dregs of the people;
in consequence of which the ^^st delicate secrets of families may be divulged;
a greater distress to the innocent than the loss of liberty, or in some cases
even of life.

Mr. Pit issued out two general warrants, but neither on account of libels.
One was, to stop certain dangerous persons going to France, and the other, for
(...) a supposed spy, both in time of war Alm. DEB. COM. VI.270.
.

The Duke of Newcastle issued innumerable warrants on frivolous occasions, as
libels on the ministry, etc.

In all cases of danger to the main, there ought to be a regular and legal
suspension by parliament of the Habeas Corpus act, as is usual in times of
rebellion; which (supposing parliament incorrupt) would secure the state, and
at the same time save the liberty of the subject inviolate. If it be objected,
that it is not worth while to have the Habeas Corpus act suspended by
parliament for the sake of apprehending a single incendiary; be it answered,
that then it is certainly not worth while on that account to issue an illegal,
unconstitutional general warrant, to the violation of the subject's liberty, as
often as a capricious secretary of state shall think proper.

In the arguments against the privy-council's arbitrary power of committing to
prison by an anonymous member, A. D. 1681, he quotes laws for restraining this
power as old as 9 Henry III. 5 Edw. III. c. 9.25 Edw. III. c. 4.28 Edw. III. c.
3.37 Edw. III. c. 18.38 Edw. III. c. 9. and 42 Edw. III. c. 3. Besides Magna
Charta, Habeas Corpus, bill of right, petition of right, etc. which ordain,
that no man shall be imprisoned, or stripped, or distrained, or outlawed, or
condemned, or corporally punished, but by presentment and trial by his peers,
etc. That informers, who deceive the king into unjust commitments, shall be
bound over to prosecute, and be answerable for damages by suffering the
punishment they designed to bring on the innocent, or be obliged to satisfy the
injured. But all these have been violated by the privy-council's sending for
gentlemen from very distant parts, to their great vexation, and imprisoning
arbitrarily, without other authority or proceeding than order of privy council,
and no redress or punishment inflicted on the false informer, according to 37
Edw. III. c. 18. DEB. COM. II.140.
.

Shippen makes a speech against the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act.
Overruled DEB. COM.. VI.60.
. The king did certainly make no bad use of his power. And in a time of open
rebellion, it seems necessary that there be such a power somewhere. But I think
it would be better in the hands of a committee of the house of commons, who
should alw^ys sit; but this supposes an independent house of commons.

A. D. 1766, Sir W. Meredith moved the house of commons, that it might be
resolved, That general warrants and seizure of papers are violations of the
rights of the subject. Instead of which, almost the direct contrary was
resolved LAND. MAG. Aug. 1766. p. 396.
. Yet it seems manifest, that nothing can be imagined more inconsistent with
freedom (to say nothing of the right which every free subject has to speak and
write of public affairs), than putting a discretionary power into the hands of
a set of low-bred, unprincipled, and beggarly officers or messengers, who may
be expected to abuse their power, and are incapable of answering the damages of
seizing the persons and papers of the innocent instead of the guilty. No man
ought to be hindered saying or writing what he pleases on the conduct of those
who undertake the management of national affairs, in which all are concerned,
and therefore have a right to enquire, and to publish their suspicions
concerning them. For if you punish the slanderer, you deter the fair inquirer.
But even supposing real and justly punishable guilt, no subject is to be
molested but on well-grounded suspicion declared upon oath. Suppose the
coroner's jury, upon a person found dead with marks of violence, brings in
their verdict wilful murder against persons unknown; we are not immediately to
let loose a set of ruffian officers to seize and imprison the persons, rummage
and expose the most secret papers, and carry off the bank-notes they find in
the bureaus of the next twenty housekeepers. No; nor have our secretaries of
state ever proceeded in this manner on such occasions. They have only broke
loose upon the liberty of the subject when their maleadministrations have been
exposed. Nor is this unnatural for such a sort of me^. But what shall we think
of a house of commons (once the constant and faithful guardians of our liberty,
once our never-failing protectors against regal and ministerial encroachments),
who refused to declare the lawless proceedings of secretaries of state
unwarrantable, and supported their tyranny over the people, till a more
faithful expounder of the law Lord Camden.
wrenched it out of their hands?

The same year, 1766, a motion was made -- but in vain -- for abolishing the
custom of the attorney general's ex-officio-informations, as oppressive to the
subject, because that officer cannot be called to account for the damages
suffered by innocent persons informed against by him.

It has been pretended, that it is impossible to administer government without
general warrants. But this is a mistake. For all that is necessary, even when
treasonable designs are suspected to be carrying on, is watchfulness in
magistrates and officers to find out the guilty persons, who, when found or
reasonably suspected, are to be apprehended by a special warrant from a
magistrate, who is supposed to be a person of such fortune, as to be
responsible for whatever damage an innocent person may suffer, if unjustly
apprehended and imprisoned. Whereas to trust this power in the hands of a set
of brutal and beggarly officers, is needlessly putting the safety of the best
subjects in the power of the lowest of the people, unless the person who grants
the general warrant be answerable for the behavior of his officers, which is
laying him at their mercy. If this be disputed, let it be considered, that
supposing a set of persons taken up by general warrant, if they cannot be
convicted, they must be set at liberty, whether guilty or innocent. And if
they, or any of them, proves to be guilty, there must have been ways and means
of fastening upon him sufficient suspicions to justify the issuing out a
special warrant against him; else we must suppose the whole set taken at
random, and the guilty afterward found among them by chance. To issue a
warrant for apprehending all persons who shall be found in the actual
commission of punishable actions, may be at sometimes necessary; and this
necessity does, in no respect, defend general warrants; because the confining
of a warrant to those who are taken in circumstances of guilt, makes it a
special warrant, and secures the innocent, (which is all that is wanted) from
trouble.

To seize all the papers indiscriminately of the supposed writer of an
accusation against a statesman, probably a just accusation (for there is little
danger of accusing a statesman undeservedly), is treating the friend of his
country, and detector of villainy, worse than we treat a thief or a highwayman.
For we seize nothing of what we find in the possession of such people, but what
is likely to have been unfairly come by. But the truth is, neither thief nor
murderer, is so much the object of a statesman's vengeance, as the man who
detects and exposes ministerial rapacity.

In the pleadings for Almon against a writ of attachment, it was observed, that
in prosecuting by attachment the court exercises the peculiar and distinct
provinces of party, judge, evidence, and jury LAND. MAG. June 1765, p. 310.
.

It was, among other things, argued in defense of him against a writ of
attachment, that Lord M -- had several methods of doing himself justice without
this unconstitutional one; he was a member of a most illustrious body, who
would never suffer the slightest reflection on the character of any of their
members to pass unnoticed or uncensured; that as a peer of the realm, he was
entitled to his action of scandalum magnatum, wherein he need not fear but that
a jury would give him a proper satisfaction for any injury he should prove to
them he had received.

Let us observe how differently different men have behaved in respect to
liberty of speech, and writing on political subjects.

Timoleon, when he was advised to punish one who had scandalized him, answered,
So far from punishing on such occasions, I declare to you, that it has long
been my prayer to the gods, that Syracuse might be so free, that any man might
say what he pleased of every person Corn. Nep. VI^. TIMOL.
.

Domitian encouraged the informers as much as Titus discouraged them ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XV.54.
.

Constantine punished the delatores, or informers, with death Ibid. 563.
.

Theodosius repeated the laws against seditious words. If,' says he, such words
proceed from levity, they are to be despised; if from folly, to be pitied; if
from malice, to be forgiven. [I suppose, because the malicious are sufficiently
punished, by leaving them to their malice, and because the more injurious the
offender, the more humanity, and the more christian spirit appears in forgiving
him ANT. UNIV. HIST. XVI.440.
.]

Augustus used to say, in libera civitate, etc. In a free state, the tongues of
the subjects ought to be free.

The Abbe de Thou compliments Henry IV. of France, that his subjects might
speak, as well as think, freely. Tacitus celebrates the Emperor Trajan on the
same account.

Caligula rejected an information of a pretended conspiracy against his life,
saying, I am not conscious to myself of any action that can deserve the hatred
of any man, therefore I have no ears for informers Ibid. XIV.266
. Happy for himself and Rome, had he kept in this way of thinking! How pitiful
the case of a prince or a statesman listening after railers and scribblers! How
glorious that of the prince or statesman, whose rectitude of conduct enables
them to rise superior to the malignancy of the envious and seditious!

Titus never showed severity, but against informers Ibid. XV.42.
. If libellers attacked him unjustly, he held them more pitiable than blameable
(because they made themselves odious); if they accused him justly, nothing
could be more unjust than to punish them.

Mild means for this purpose are much preferable to severities. The intriguing
Spanish ambassador Gondomar bribed even the ladies, to keep up such discourse
at their routs as suited his purposes. Omits a present to Lady Jacobs. She
resented it, and instead of returning his salute from her window, only gaped at
him several times. He sends to know her meaning. She answered, She had a mouth
to stop, as well as other ladies Rapin, II.200.
.

The Czarina Czar. INST. p. 186.
says, Great care ought to be taken in the examination of libels, how we extend
the crime beyond a misdemeanour subject to the police of a town or place, which
is inferior to a crime; representing to ourselves the danger of debasing the
human mind by restraint and oppression, which can be productive of nothing but
ignorance, and must cramp and depress the rising efforts of genius.

Burnet makes no hesitation about the necessity of the government's, having
power to confine suspected persons in times of danger; but not of security
Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, III, 141.
. It was proposed by the lords, to make some limitations for seizing persons,
A. D. 1690. But it was rejected by the commons and they thought it was better
to leave the whole to parliament, that they might indemnify violations of Magna
Charta, when they thought the ministry justifiable in seizing and confining
suspected persons.

On occasion of Plunket's conspiracy, A D. 1723, several lords protested on
passing the bill of attainder against him, for the following reason* which
express a noble spirit of liberty, and an amiable ^^nderness for the safety of
accused subjects.

1. Because bills of this nature, as we conceive, ought not to pass but in case
of evident necessity, when the preservation of the state plainly requires it,
which we take to be very far from the present case; the conspiracy having been
detected so long since, and the person accused seeming to us very
inconsiderable in all respects, and who, from the many gross untruths it now
appears he has written to his correspondents abr^ad, must appear to have been
an impostor and deceiver even to his own party. 2. Proceedings of this kind,
tending to convict and punish, are in the nature, though not form, judicial,
and do let the commons, in effect, into an equa^ share with the lords in
judicature, which the lords ought to be very jealous of doing, since the power
of judicature is the greatest distinguishing power the lords have; and there
will be little reason to hope, that if bills of this nature are given way to by
the lords, the commons will ever bring up impeachments, or make themselves
accusers only when they can act as judges. 3. This bill, in our opinion,
differs materially from the precedents cited for it; as in the case of Sir John
Fenwick, it is plain, by the preamble of that bill, that the ground most relied
on to justify proceeding against him in that manner was, that there had been
two legal witnesses proving the high treason against him, that a bill was found
against him on their evidence, and several times appointed him for a legal
trial thereon, in the ordinary course, which he procured to be put off, by
undertaking to discover, till one of the evidences withdrew; so that it was
solely his fault that he had not a legal trial by jury; all which
circumstances, not being in the present case, we take it they are not at all to
be compared to one another. 4. As to the acts which passed to detain Counter
and others concerned in the conspiracy to assassinate the late King William* of
glorious memory, we conceive these acts were not in their nature bills of
attainder, as this is; but purely to enable the crown to keep them in prison
notwithstanding the laws of liberty, whereas this is a bill to inflict pains
and penalties, and does import a conviction and sentence on the prisoner, not
only to lose his liberty, but also his lands and tenements, goods and chattels,
of which he having none, as we believe, we cannot apprehend why it was
inserted, and this bill not drawn on the plan of Counter's, etc. unless it was
to make a precedent for such forfeitures in cases of bills which may hereafter
be brought, to convict persons who have great estates, upon evidence which does
not come up to what the law in being requires. 5. If there be a defect of legal
evidence to prove this man guilty of high treason, such defect always was, and,
we think, if bills of this nature brought to supply original defects in
evidence do receive countenance, they may become familiar, and then many an
innocent person may be reached by them, since it is hard to be distinguished,
whether that defect proceeds from the cunning and artifice, or from the
innocence of the party. 6. This proceeding by bill, does not only, in our
opinion, t^nd to lay aside the judicial power of the lords, but even the use of
juries; which distinguishes this nation from all its neighbors, and is of the
highest value to all who rightly understand the security and other benefits
arising from it; and whatever tends to alter or weaken that great privilege, we
think, is an alteration in our constitution for the worse, though it be done by
act of parliament; and if it may be supposed, that any of our fundamental laws
were set aside by act of parliament, the nation, we apprehend, would not be at
all the more comforted from that consideration, that the parliament did it. 7.
It is the essence of natural justice, as we think, but is most surely the law
of the realm, that no person should be tried more than once for the same crime,
or twice put in peril of losing his life, liberty, or estate; and though we
acquiesce in the opinion of all the judges, that if this bill should pass into
a law, Plunket cannot be again prosecuted for the crimes contained in the
preamble of the bill, yet it is certain, that if a bill of this kind should
happen to be rejected by either house of parliament, or by the king, the person
accused might be attacked again and again in like manner, in any subsequent
session of parliament, or indeed for the same offense, notwithstanding that
either house of parliament should have found him innocent, and not passed the
bill for that reason; and we conceive it a very great exception to this course
of proceeding, that a subject may be condemned and punished, but not acquitted
by it. 8. We think it appears in all our history, that the passing bills of
attainder as this, we think, in its nature, is, (except, as before is said, in
cases of absolute and clear necessity) have proved so many blemishes to the
reigns in which they passed; and therefore we thought it our duty in time, and
before the passing this bill as a precedent, to give our advice and votes
against the passing it* being very unwilling that any thing should pass which,
in our opinions, would in the least derogate from the glory of this reign. 9.
We apprehended it to be more for the interest and security of his Majesty's
government, that bills of this nature should not pass than that they should
since persons who think at all, cannot but observe, that in this case, some
things have been received as evidence, which would not have been received in
any court of judicature; that precedents of this kind are naturally growing, as
we think, this goes beyond any other which has happened since the Revolution,
and if from such like observations they shall infer, as we cannot but do, that
the liberty and prosperity of the subject becomes, by such examples, in any
degree more precarious than they were before, it may cause an abatement of zeal
for a government founded on the Revolution, which cannot, as we think, be
compensated by any of the good consequences which are hoped for by those who
approve this bill DEB. PEERS, III.280.
.

A. D. 1640, the Earl of Warwick and Lord Brook were appreh^^d^d, and their
papers seized, on suspicion of rebellious designs, by warrants from the
secretaries of state. They comp^ained of breach of privilege, which it was not,
because the supposed crime is not covered by privilege. The warrant was
declared illegal; and the proceeding a breach of privilege, because the two
lords were in parliament. Satisfaction was made to them, and the clerk of the
council brought on his knees before the lords, and afterward committed to
prison.

A. D. 1680, the Lord Chief Justice Scragg's general warrants for seizing
libels, books, pamphlets, etc. were declared by the house of commons arbitrary
and illegal, and he was impeached.

A. D. 1692, complaint was made by Lord Marlborough and others, of a breach of
privilege, they being committed to the Tower, without information upon oath,
and bail refused, in time of privilege. On this occasion, a bill was proposed
to indemnify secretaries of state for such commitments, in treasonable cases,
and to limit their powers by law. But that incorrupt house of commons would
only resolve, that such powers being illegal, secretaries of state should
exercise them at their own peril, to be condemned or justified according to the
case Alm. DEB. COM. VI.282.
.

One Spence, was taken up at London, A. D. 1684, on suspicion of being
concerned in a plot against Charles II. He was sent to Scotland to be examined.
There he was required to take an oath to answer all questions that should be
put to him. This, says Burnet, was done in direct contradiction to an express
law against obliging men to swear, that they will answer super inquirendis. The
poor wretch was struck in the boots, he was kept from sleep nine days and
nights, and afterward put to the torture of the thumbkins, till he fainted
away Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, II.252.
. See also the horrible cruelties inflicted, about the same time, on Baillie
and others Ibid.
.

Three peers and the bishop of London, publicly opposed James's dispensing
with the test for papists Ibid. 356.
.

Even under James II, the judicious part of the house of commons proposed to
demand redress of grievances, before they granted supplies Ibid. 358.
.

Mr. Cook, a member, was sent to the Tower for saying, We are Englishmen. We
are not to be threatened. He was an Englishman. But what were they who sent him
to the Tower for such a speech?

A. D. 1728, a bill was brought into the house of commons, to prohibit lending
money to foreign princes, etc. with a clause, that the attorney general be
empowered by an English bill in the court of exchequer, to compel the effectual
discovery on oath of any such loans, and that in default of answer to such
bill, the court shall decree a limited sum against the defendant refusing to
answer. This was like examining by interrogatories.

Walpole said, the same strictness was observed before, in prohibiting commerce
with the Ostend Company. But Sir I. Barnard said, the liberties of Englishmen
were weightier than any arbitrary precedent.

A D. 1690, when the subscriptions of several lords were forg^d to certain
treasonable papers, which was a direct attempt on the very lives of those
noblemen, the offenders, though clearly convicted, were only punished with
whipping and the pillory, which, to the reproach of our constitution, is the
only punishment our law has yet provided for such practices Burn. HIST. OWN
TIMES, III.141.
.

Some lords protested, A. D. 1692, against subjecting the press to the
arbitrary will of a mercenary, and perhaps ignorant, licenser, to the checking
of learning, the damage of literary property, and encouragement of monopolies
DEB. PEERS, I.419.
.

Many printers were indicted for scandalous and seditious libels, A. D. 1681.
The juries brought them off by not finding the writings malicious or seditious,
and returned for verdict ignoramus Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, II.136.
. They did not bring in for their verdict Guilty of printing and publishing
only, or, Guilty of what has no guilt in it, which we have lately seen done by
a learned jury.

In the reign of George I, was industriously spread into many parts of the
kingdom, soon after his accession, a pamphlet, entitled, English Advice to the
Freeholders of Great Britain. Government offered 1000 l. for discovering the
author, and 500 l. for the printer. In vain it was supposed to have been
written by Atterbury. Answers were published; which was wiser than setting a
price on the author and printer Tind. CONTIN. I.414.
.

A. D. 1770, it was matter of much speculation, that a bookseller should be
punished for his servants's selling a book which was brought into his shop,
while he was out of town, and though proof was offered, that the bookseller
disallowed the selling of the book Alm. DEB. COM. IX.74.
. The bookseller was put to 140 l. expense, and obliged to find bail to the
value of 800 l.

These severities upon private persons, who write and speak freely of
ministerial conduct, would, by an incorrupt parliament be immediately
restrained, and the subjects be set at liberty to remark as they pleased, upon
the conduct of those who undertook the management of their affairs; but while
ministers have a scheme of iniquity to carry on, it is not to be wondered that
they endeavor, by all manner of severities, to drive away those who come with
prying eyes to inquire into their proceedings.

CONCLUSION.
Addressed to the independent Part of the People of GREAT BRITAIN, IRELAND, and
the COLONIES.
My dear Countrymen and Fellow Subjects,
I HAVE in these volumes laid before you a faithful and a dreadful account of
what is, or is likely soon to be, the condition of public affairs in this great
empire. I have exposed to your view some of the capital abuses and grievances,
which are sinking you into slavery and destruction. I have shown you, that as
things go on, there will soon be very little left of the British constitution,
besides the name and the outward form. I have shown you, that the house of
representatives, upon which all depends, has lost its efficiency, and, instead
of being (as it ought) a check upon regal and ministerial tyranny, is in the
way to be soon a mere outwork of the court, a French parliament to register the
royal edicts, a Roman senate in the imperial times, to give the appearance of
regular and free government; but in truth, to accomplish the villainous schemes
of a profligate junto, the natural consequences and unavoidable effects of
inadequate representation, septennial parliaments, and placemen in the house.
All which shows the absolute necessity of regulating representation, of
restoring our parliaments to their primitive annual period, and of
disqualifying dependents on the court from voting in the house of commons.

I am mistaken, if there be not many persons of consequence in the state, who,
by reading these collections, will see the condition of public affairs to be
much more disorderly than they could have imagined. For my own part, though I
have long been accustomed to look upon my country with fear and anxiety, I own
frankly, that till I saw the abuses and the dangers displayed in one view, I
did not see things in the horrid light I now do. Nor can I expect the readers
of these volumes to see them in the same light, because these volumes do not
contain all the abuses I have collected, though they contain enough to put out
of all doubt the necessity of redress; as a prudent person, if he observed one
of his outhouses on fire, would extinguish it in all haste, though he did not
think his dwelling house in immediate hazard. I wish we could say, it is only
an out-work that is in danger. The main body of the building, the parliament
itself, on which all depends, is in a ruinous condition. Accordingly, I have
not in the foregoing part of this work amused you, my good countrymen, with a
set of frivolous or trifling remarks upon grievances which, though removed,
would still leave others remaining, to the great distress and disadvantage of
the subjects. The grievances I have pointed out, are such as all disinterested
men must allow to be real; and such as, if redressed, would insure the redress
of all other grievances of inferior consequence; which is more than can be said
of many of those that have been pointed out in our late petitions and
remonstrances. Concerning them wise and good men, and true friends to liberty,
have differed; but no wise and good man or true friend to liberty, can doubt,
whether England can be safe with a corrupt parliament, and the various other
disorders and abuses above pointed out, remaining unredressed and uncorrected.

Nor have I, my good countrymen, advised you to repose your confidence in one
set of men rather than another. I have not told you, that the Rockingham party
can save you any more than the Bedford party. I have not advised you to put
your trust in Lord Bute rather than Lord Chatham. The truth is, that any set of
ministers must misconduct the affairs of the nation, so long as the nation
itself is upon a bad footing. And it is equally true, that an incorrupt
parliament will make any ministry upright.

The wisdom of these latter times in prince's affairs, is rather fine
deliveries, and shiftings of dangers and mischiefs when they are near, than
solid or grounded courses to keep them aloof Bac. ESSAYS.
.

Have I, my good countrymen, imposed upon you in the least article? Can you
seriously bring you^selves even to doubt, whether the grievances I have pointed
out, be really such? Do you sincerely b^lieve it possible to go on in the track
we are now in? Is there a shadow of consistency between the present state of
our public affairs, and liberty, safety, peace, or the British constitution?
While the enemies of your liberties are active and vigilant to seize every
opportunity for increasing their own emoluments, and their own power, and you
are timid and thoughtless of your own safety, will your public grievances
redress themselves? Will corruption and venality die away of course, or will
they spread wider and wider, and take still deeper root, till at last it will
become impossible to eradicate them? Look into the Roman history, and see how
corruption in the people, and tyranny in the emperors, went on increasing from
Augustus to Didius, who fairly bought the empire, when it was put up to sale.
Look back but a little way into your own history. It is but 86 years since the
Revolution, a very short period, a lifetime! Yet we have not been able, or have
not been willing, to keep up, for this short time, the constitution then
settled, because indeed it was so imperfectly established at that time, and
because we have been almost ever since in the hands of a set of foreign kings,
and of flagitious ministers, which last have traitorously abused your easy
generosity, and have, by introducing corruption, in great measure undone what
was done by expelling the Stuarts. The standing army, the number of placemen in
the house, the extension of excise-laws, and various other abuses, have crept
on still increasing, till at last they are settled into a part of the
constitution, and what formerly produced severe remonstrances, and violent
debates in parliament, pass now unquestioned, and without debate or division.

Some unthinking, or interested or timid people among us, insist, that there is
no need of any reformation; that all is safe and secure; whilst others of a
more dejected disposition allege, that all is gone past recovery; that
reformation is chimerical and impossible; and that we have nothing left, but to
sink as quietly as we can into ruin, bankruptcy, slavery, and whatever else we
have brought upon ourselves. These opinions cannot both be right, because they
are diametrically opposite; but they may, and I hope are, both wrong.

It is the cant of the court. Representation has always been inadequate;
parliaments have long been septennial; place-men have sat long in the house. So
king John told his barons, The privileges granted by Henry I. have been long
lost; you have been long in a state of very imperfect liberty. So at the
Revolution the Iacobites might have said, The Stuart government has been long
established. Why should the house of Orange be brought in, etc.? This way of
arguing is all heels uppermost. The longer grievances have continued, the more
reason for redressing them.

Ministers think themselves in duty bound to their utmost to persuade you, my
good countrymen, that all is safe. Yet it is strange, that they should think
you so very easy of belief, that they should put into certain speeches
assertions so very liable to contradiction. I can have no other interest, than
to reign in the hearts of a free and happy people SpEECH, A. D. 1771, Alm. DEB.
COM. IX.308.
That a particular prince may actually have, upon the whole, no interest
different from that of his subjects, may be affirmed; but to say, he can have
no other, or, that it is not possible, he should think himself interested in
pursuing measures hurtful to his subjects; is asserting what all history
confutes. If there were a natural impossibility in the prince's gaining by the
subject's loss, (as it is impossible, for instance, the king of Bantam should
be advantaged by Britain's being too heavily taxed) this might have been
affirmed. But will any man say, it can be no more advantage to one of our
kings, than to the king of Bantam, that the civil list revenue be double? If
this cannot be said, neither can it be said, that our kings can have no other
interest, than to reign in the hearts of a free and happy people.

Again, in the same spirit. The support of our constitution is our common duty
and interest. By that standard I would wish my people to try all public
principles and professions. Excellent! If it were but well f^unded. But what is
our constitution? Ans Government by king, lords, and commons. Do we enjoy the
spirit and efficiency of this constitution? The king does no evil. But does not
the court influence the greatest part of our elections? Do not many of the
lords extend their power beyond their own house, Can the house of commons be
called even the shadow of a representation of the property of the people? Are
septennial parliaments the constitution? Is a house of commons filled with
placemen and pensioners the constitution? Is the ministry's assuming in
parliament the power and place of king, lords, and commons, the constitution?
Will any man deny, that this has of late years been too much the state of
things? Is not then a ministry's recommending the support of our constitution,
while our constitution is almost annihilated, a solemn mockery? Is there any
means for supporting the constitution, besides restoring it to its true spirit
and efficiency by shortening parliaments, by making representation adequate, by
incapacitating placemen and pensioners, etc. Ought not these salutary
reformations to have been the burden of this speech, of every speech, and not
recommendations to the members to lull the people in their several countries
into a fatal security, which the speeches call submission to government, and
supporting the constitution? Does not this show you, my good countrymen, what
hands you are in?

Compare the lullaby strain of this speech, with the complaints in the petition
of the livery of London to the king, in the year 1769, two years before the
date of the above speech. The speech represents all as safe and secure. But the
speech is penned by those whose interest it is to have you believe that all is
well. The petition comes from the independent, unbiassed people, who feel, that
all is not well.

The chief complaints in it are, that the ministry had invaded the right of
trial by jury; had made use of the illegal courses of general warrants, and
seizure of papers; had evaded the Habeas Corpus act; had punished [ Bingley]
without trial, conviction, or sentence; had used the military, where the
peace-officers were sufficient, and had murdered the subjects, whom they ought
only to have apprehended; had screened murderers convict of their own party;
had established unjust and arbitrary taxes in the colonies; had procured the
rejection from a seat in parliament, of a member no way unqualified by law, and
the reception of one not chosen by a majority of the electors; had procured the
payment of pretended deficiencies in the civil list without examination; had
rewarded, instead of punishing, the public defaulter of unaccounted millions,
etc. Heavy grievances all! But these were not the worst. What they should have
dwelt upon, was, inadequate representation, septennial parliaments, ministerial
influence in parliament, etc. Can it then be said, my good countrymen, that all
is safe, and there is no need of any reformation?

Mr. Page, member for Chichester, in his very judicious farewell to his
constituents, says, the British constitution is going to ruin faster than
perhaps appears to the common eye LAND. CHRON. October 2, 1767.
.

Again, it is said, by the lullers, what probability that 800 men of property
should enslave their country?

Who would have thought that the Roman senate, men of great property, would
join the triumviri, whose visible design was to enslave their country? Who
would have thought, that, when Julius was cut off, and a door again opened for
the restoration of liberty, the men of property would not all join the party of
Brutus and Cassius? Who would have thought, that, when the men of property saw
the army of Brutus and Cassius equal to that of the tyrant at Philippi, they
should not all, as one man, repair to the standard of liberty?

The destroyers of the virtue and liberty of the Romans, brought that once
virtuous and free people to think the imperial form of government necessary. A
corrupt government in England may bring the people to wish to be rid of
parliaments.

The crown of Denmark was elective, and subject to a senate. In one day, it
was, without any visible force, changed into hereditary, and absolute, no
rebellion, nor convulsion of state following Burn. HIST. OWN TIMES, I.377.
. So soon may a nation lose its liberties. This was mentioned to Charles II. by
his courtiers, when they encouraged him ^o make himself absolute Ibid.
.

The crown of Sweden was formerly elective, with narrow powers and
prerogatives. Nobles and clergy, encroaching and tyrannical, used to decide
their quarrels by private wars; which produced continual scenes of confusion
and cruelty. Gustavus Ericson being successful against the tyrannical Danes,
who lorded it over Sweden and other countries, gains the affections of the
Swedes. They enlarge his privileges, to render him more powerful against the
Danes. They give him church lands, and humble the tyrannical clergy. The
reformation prevailing in Sweden, Gustavus takes the opportunity of demolishing
the Roman catholics, on pretense of favoring Luther. Gustavus thus becomes
absolute, and the crown of Sweden hereditary. Afterward the crown was reduced
again. After that, the senate was abolished by Charles IX. who becomes one of
the most absolute princes of Europe, in consequence of a pretended misbehaviour
of the senate. Thus the Swedish monarchs were once limited and elected; then
absolute, and hereditary; then limited again; then absolute again; then limited
after the tyrant Charles IX. and then absolute in the time of Charles XII. and
then limited again, and now totally enslaved. For Eleonora Ulrica, upon Charles
XIIth's death, offered the states of Sweden conditions, if they would elect
her, and set aside the duke of Holstein, the more lineal heir. They elected and
limited her effectually. But the people are enslaved still to the nobles, and
the nation to the sovereign MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIII.10, 13, 14.
. So unsteady and fluctuating has the political barometer of Sweden been; and
so variable and so precarious a thing is liberty. Have you not then, my good
countrymen, reason to be jealous of your liberties?

I cannot help considering judge Blackstone as one of the many among us, who
endeavor to lull us asleep in this time of danger. I own I do not understand
his ideas of free government.

Wherever, says he COM. I.244.
, the law expresses its distrust of abuse of power, it always vests a superior
coercive authority in some other hand to correct it; the very notion of which
destroys the idea of sovereignty. If, therefore, for example, the two houses of
parliament, or either of them, had avowedly a right to animadvert on the king,
or each other, or if the king had a right to animadvert on either of the
houses, that branch of the legislature so subject to animadversion, would
instantly cease to be part of the supreme power; the balance of the
constitution would be overturned; and that branch or branches, in which this
jurisdiction resided, would be completely sovereign. The supposition of law
therefore is, that neither the king, nor either house of parliament
(collectively taken) is capable of doing any wrong; since in such cases the law
feels itself incapable of furnishing any adequate remedy. For which reason all
oppressions, which may happen to spring from any branch of the sovereign power,
must necessarily be out of the reach of any stated rule, or express legal
provision; but if ever they unfortunately happen, the prudence of the times
must provide new remedies upon new emergencies.

Here the learned judge tells us, that, because neither can the king exercise
an arbitrary restraining power over either of the houses of parliament, nor
either or both h^uses of parliament over the king, -- therefore what? --
Therefore the supposition of law is, that none of the three branches of the
legislature can do wrong, because the law feels itself incapable of furnishing
an adequate remedy. If the law, or the lawyers, suppose, that none of the three
branches of the legislature is capable of doing wrong, for that they are
supreme, and whatever the supreme power establishes must of course be right, as
none can say to the supreme power, what do thou? yet history shows, that
king, lords, and commons, have often (as was to be expected from the weakness
of human nature) done very wrong things. And though the law feels itself
incapable of furnishing any adequate remedy; does it therefore follow, that
there is no adequate remedy? The judge says, the prudence of future times must
find new remedies upon new emergencies; and afterward adds, that we have a
precedent in the Revolution of 1688, to show what may be done if a king runs
away, as James II. did. Insinuating, that, if we had not such a precedent, we
should not know how to proceed in such a case; and says expressly, that so far
as this precedent leads, and no farther, we may now be allowed to lay down the
law of redress against public oppression. Yet he says, p. 245. that necessity
and the safety of the whole, may require the exertion of those inherent (though
latent) powers of society, which no climate, no time, no constitution, no
contract, can ever destroy or diminish.' For my part, I cannot see the use of
all this hesitating, and mincing the matter. Why may we not say at once, that
without any urgency of distress, without any provocation by oppression of
government, and though the safety of the whole should not appear to be in any
immediate danger, if the people of a country think they should be, in any
respect, happier under republican government, than monarchical, or under
monarchical than republican, and find, that they can bring about a change of
government, without greater inconveniences than the future advantages are
likely to balance; why may we not say, that they have a sovereign, absolute,
and uncontrolable right to change or new-model their government as they please?
The authority of government, in short, is only superior to a minority of the
people. The majority of the people are, rightfully, superior to it. Wherever a
government assumes to itself a power of opposing the sense of the majority of
the people, it declares itself a proper and formal tyranny in the fullest,
strongest, and most correct sense of the word. I must therefore beg leave to
submit to the public, whether the learned judge is not clearly erroneous in his
meaning, as well as his words, when he says, p. 251, that national distress
alone can justify eccentrical remedies applied by the people. I think I may
safely defy all the world to prove, that there is any necessity of any
distress, or of any reason assigned for a people's altering, at any time, the
whole plan of government, that has been established in their country for a
thousand years; besides their will and pleasure. I am not speaking of the
prudence of such a step; nor do I justify a people's proposing to alter their
constitution, if such alteration is likely to be followed by worse evils, than
it is likely to redress; nor have I any thing to say concerning the difficulty
of obtaining the real sense of the majority of a great nation. But I assert,
that, saving the laws of prudence, and of morality, the people's mere absolute,
sovereign will and pleasure, is a sufficient reason for their making any
alteration in their form of government. The truth is therefore, that the
learned judge has placed the sovereignty wrong, viz. in the government; whereas
it should have been in the people, next, and immediately under God. For the
people give to their governors all the rightful power they have. But no body
ever heard of the governors giving power to the people. If the teachers of the
exploded doctrine of the divine right of kings, had taught the divine right of
the people, they had stated that point in a just and proper manner.

The more impudent part of our court-men, if you express anxiety about the
state of public liberty, will ask you, Whether you think the ministry are a set
of Turks, who want to introduce at once the bamboo, and the bow-string, or a
set of cannibals who want to eat all the friends of liberty? Hear the excellent
lord Strange on the gradual and imperceptible, and therefore more formidable
progress of tyranny in countries once ^ree DEB. COM. XIV.41.
.

Whilst arbitrary power is in its infancy, and creeping up by degrees to man's
estate, no doubt it will, it must, refrain from acts of violence and
compulsion. It will by bribery gain the consent of these it has not as yet got
strength enough to compel; but when it is by bribery grown up to its full
strength and vigor, even bribery itself will be neglected, and whoever then
opposes its views will be ruined, either by open violence, or false
informations, and cooked up prosecutions. I shall grant, Sir, that if the
question were put in plain and direct terms, no man, or at least very few,
would agree to give up their property in their estates for the sake of a much
greater estate or pension depending upon the will of an arbitrary sovereign.
But such a question never was, nor ever will be, put by those who aim at
arbitrary power. They always find specious pretenses for some new powers, or
some little increase of power, and then another new power, or another little
increase of power, till at last their power becomes by degrees uncontrolable;
and men of corrupt hearts, are by mercenary motives prevented from considering
or foreseeing the consequences of the new or additional powers they grant. It
is, I think, highly probable, that Julius Caesar had laid the scheme of
enslaving his country, before he obtained the province of Transalpine Gaul. For
this purpose he rightly judged, that it was necessary to get a great army under
his command, and by his continuance in success in that command, to render that
army more attached to him than to the laws and liberties of their country. For
obtaining that command, and for continuing in it, he knew he must depend upon
the votes of his fellow-citizens, If he had told his fellow-citizens, that he
wanted from them such an army as might enable him to oppress the liberties of
his country, they would certainly have refused it. Notwithstanding the avarice,
luxury, and selfishness then prevailing amongst them, he could not by all his
bribery have got them to agree to such a direct question. He therefore at first
proposed to them only to give him the command of Cisalpine Gaul, with Illyria
annexed, which by bribery, and by having insinuated himself into great favor
with the people, he obtained; and by the same means he got the Transalpine Gaul
added to it. This gave him the command of a great army, and the people being
blinded by his largesses and his successes, they continued him in that command,
till he made his army so absolutely his own, that it established him in
arbitrary power, and so effectually destroyed the liberties of the people, that
they could never again be restored; for the short interval between his death
and the establishment of his successor, Augustus Caesar, was no free or regular
government, but a continued series of usurpation, murder, and civil war. If the
people of Rome, Sir, had foreseen the consequences of their favors to Julius
Caesar, they would certainly have refused granting him so many; but they were
so blinded by their corruption, that they did not consider the consequences.
This destroyed irrecoverably that glorious republic, and this will destroy
every republic, where any one man has wealth or power enough to corrupt a great
number of the people.

It is the common cant of the court-sycophants, The army has never yet enslaved
you. The laws, which you thought so dangerous when first enacted, have not
ruined you. What do you fear from the government?' etc.

Now though we were to own that we are not yet ruined; though we should go so
far as to hope against hope, that the national debt, for instance, instead of
going on increasing, will, by some unknown means, be reduced; though we should
grant the possibility of corruption's falling into disgrace, instead of its
spreading wider and wider, as it has done in all the states where it has to a
great degree prevailed; granting all this, and more, must we therefore say we
are in a state of safety? The army is composed of Englishmen; the magistrates
and peace officers are Englishmen. There is a native generosity in the hearts
of ninety-nine in every hundred Englishmen, of the middling and lower ranks of
life, which prevents their making a violent or unjustifiable use of power. But
are we therefore obliged to traitorous ministers, who bribe worthless
parliaments to keep up armies, and enact laws, which our goodnature only
prevents our applying to mischievous purposes against one another? What should
we think of those parents who gave their children leave to beat one another?
Should we justify the parents because the children, being of gentle tempers,
had made no bad use of their liberty? Should we not every day, and every hour,
expect to hear of some bad consequence from such management?

Suppose the people to have had as little humanity as their governors, what
havoc would not have been made by the smuggling act, the game acts, the
intolerant acts, etc.!

The French King had an army, and consequently power to compel the parliament
of Paris to register his edicts, long before he actually attempted it. When he
did attempt it, he found he could do it. Now he has swept the parliament
themselves away. Who can t^ll what a daring and flagitious ministry in England,
with the advantages now in their hands, could effectuate to the prejudice of
liberty, and what they may effectuate very suddenly?

Is th^s state of dependence upon the generosity of the individuals, who fill
the throne and the seats round it, who compose the army, the magistracy, etc.
fit for this great empire to continue in? Will the British people be contented
to lie at mercy?

Some persons, says lord Bolingbroke, are often calling upon and defying people
to instance any one article of liberty, or security for liberty, which we once
h^d, and do not still hold and enjoy. I desire leave to ask them, whether long
parliaments are the some thing as having frequent elections? -- Is the
circumstance of having almost 200 members of the house of commons vested with
offices or places under the crown, the same thing as having a law that would
have excluded all persons who hold places from sitting there? -- Is an army of
above 17,000 men at the expe^ce of 850,000 l. per Annum, for the service of
Great Britain, the same thing as an army of 7000 m^n at the expense of 350,000
l. per Annum for England; and I will suppose there might be about 3000 men more
for Scotland? -- Is the riot act, which establishes passive obedience and
non-resistance by a law even in cas^s of the utmost extremity, the same thing
as lea^i^g the people at liberty to redress themselves, wh^ they are g^^^vously
oppressed, and thereby oblige t^^ prince in some measure to depend on their
aff^^tions Bolinbr. POLIT. TRACTS, 295.
?

Upon a moderate computation (says Mr. Hume Hume, I.86.
), there are near three millions at the disposal of the crown. The civil list
amounts to near a million; the collection of all taxes to another million; and
the employments in the army and navy, together with ecclesiastical preferments,
to above a third milli^n. An enormous sum, and what may fairly be computed to
be more than a thirtieth part of the whole income and labor of the kingdom.
When we add to this immense property the increasing luxury of the nation, our
proneness to corruption, together with the great power and prerogatives of the
crown, and the command of such numerous military forces, there i^ no one but
must despair of being able, without extraordinary efforts, to support our free
government much longer under all these disadvantages.

Judge Blackstone says Blackst. COM. IV.432.
, The constitution of England had arrived to its full vigor, and the true
balance between liberty and prerogative was happily established by law in the
reign of Charles II. And that the people had as large a portion of real liberty
as is consistent with a state of society, and sufficient power residing in
their own hands, to assert and preserve that liberty, if invaded by the royal
prerogative,' is evident, he thinks, from the people's effectually resisting
James II. in his attempts to enslave them, and obliging him to quit his
enterprise and his throne together. Now we know, that since the days of James
II. a great deal has been pretended to be done for enlarging and strengthening
liberty, and enabling the people to assert and preserve it. Judge Blackstone
fills two large pages with only the heads of what has been done since the
Revolution for the advantage of public liberty, and of private justice; as the
bill of rights; the toleration-act; the act of settlement; the union of the two
kingdoms; the confirming and exemplifying the doctrine of resistance;
establishing the authority of the laws, and maintenance of the constitution
above the royal prerogative; overthrowing the sovereign's dispensing power;
religious toleration, [which however is still miserably defective] exclusion of
many placemen from the house of commons [another improvement likewise very
defective], and many others. So that in our times, the people ought to have
much more power of redress in their own hands, than they had in those days. How
is it then, that it is so common to hear the condition of our country given up
as desperate? Are we in a worse situation than in the days of James II.?

If we be more corrupt than in the days of James II. if the court has more to
give, and the members of the house of commons are more ready to receive, than
in those days; and if, besides, we have more to fear from the army than our
fathers before the Revolution, we are in a worse situation for resisting
tyranny than they were, and are only in a more eligible state, in as much as
the character of the princes of the house of Hanover is less form^dable to
liberty than that of the Stuarts. This, then, is the slender thread upon which
the freedom of the once illustrious British empire is suspended. Our liberties
lie at the footstool of the throne, but our kings and ministers have hitherto
been either too timid or too good to seize them.

Even the learned commentator himself, who shows no disposition to find fault
without reason, finishes his encomium on the improvements which law and liberty
have gained since the Revolution, with the alarming words which follow: Though
these provisions have nominally, and, in appearance, reduced the strength of
the executive power to a much lower ebb, than in the preceding period; if, on
the other hand, we throw into the opposite scale (what perhaps the immoderate
reduction of the ancient prerogative may have rendered in some degree
necessary) the vast acquisition of force arising from the riot-act, and the
annual expedience of a standing army; and the vast acquisition of personal
attachment, arising from the magnitude of the national debt, and the manner of
levying those yearly millions that are appropriated to pay the interest; we
shall find that the crown has gradually and imperceptibly gained almost as much
in influence as it has apparently lost in prerogative Blackst. COMM. I.334, 5,
6, 412, 13, 16.
.

Upon this paragraph I cannot help making a few strictures. What may the
learned judge mean by the immoderate reduction of the ancient prerogative? Have
not the people power to fix the prerogative of their kings where they please?
Is that immoderate, or in any respect wrong, which pleases the people? If a
king thinks his prerogative too much retrenched by his people, has he any thing
to do but decline the crown, and leave it to one who will accept it with such
limitations as shall please the people, who have a right to be pleased?

Again, when the learned judge was summing up the disadvantages to liberty,
which have arisen since the Revolution, how could he miss taking notice of the
greatest, viz. The total loss of the parliament's efficiency (the present
always excepted) for resisting court influence, and obtaining for the people
whatever laws and regulations they may think necessary for their safety?

The difference between the condition of the British empire with an independent
parliament, and with a parliament influenced, not to say enslaved, by a
designing court, is so great, that it may be said to be the whole. The former
to be, humanly speaking, absolute safety, and the latter certain ruin. How then
could our learned commentator overlook the mountain, and fix his eye upon a set
of molehills?

The court-sycophants, whose business it is to lull us asleep, are wont to
sooth us by telling us, that no harm is yet come of the army, or the excise, or
parliamentary corruption. Were this true, which is far from being the case, it
would be nothing to the purpose; for so it might have been said at the
beginning of almost every tyranny. No people, ever from free, became absolute
slaves in one day, but the Danes.

Some among us are ever magnifying the great advantages we gained by the
Revolution; thereby insinuating, that we do not want any farther improvements
upon public liberty.

So our bishops, and other high-church-men, are always celebrating the great
advantages which religion gained by the Reformation, in order to damp our
pursuit of what (as has lately been made fully to appear) we still want to set
us upon a foot tolerably favorable to truth, and liberty of conscience.

But without disparagement to the great and undeniable advantages we gained by
the expulsion of the Stuarts, it must be owned, that the Revolution was but an
imperfect redress of grievances.

Let us hear Lord Perceval on the subject:

The Revolution, says he in the house of Commons, A. D. 1744, was brought about
so suddenly, and in such a manner, that it is rather a wonder, that we gained
what we did, than that we gained no more. The Prince of Orange was in effect
our King the moment that he landed; backed with a great army, supported by men
who, having called him in, could not quarrel with him without ruining
themselves. It was too late to make terms with a Prince who was already
possessed of the regal power, and who plainly showed, that though he desired to
be ruled by law, he still intended that the law should not bear much harder
upon the crown during his reign, than it had done in former times Alm. DEB.
COM. I.273.
.

Whilst some false brethren among us sooth us to repose by telling us all is
well, others on the contrary affect, as above ob^erved, to conclude all
endeavors vain for recovering a state so far gone as the British in luxury and
corruption. Thus we find a pretense, of one kind or another, for deserting our
country.

States, they cry, have their old age, decay, and death, as individuals. And
when the fatal hour is come, the efforts of the physician, and of the patriot,
prove equally ineffectual.

We know, that the health and life of the individual are limited within the
boundaries of seventy or eighty years; that a few, a very few, exceed those
limits; and that no individual since the deluge has reached two hundred. But
the durations of states regulate by no laws of nature; nor can my inestimable
friend Dr. Price construct any tables of the physical probabilities of the
continuance of kingdoms or commonwealths. His sagacity can reach no farther
than to affirm, that any country will continue free, while it deserves to be
free, and contrariwise.

The affairs of nations seldom continue long in the same condition. When
tyranny goes beyond a certain pitch, it sometimes draws upon itself the united
vengeance of the people, which crushes it. When liberty degenerates into
lawless corruption of manners, a nation becomes the prey of the ambition and
tyranny either of an overgrown subject, or of a foreign invader. This
unsteadiness of human affairs is caused either by a constitution originally
deficient, and ill-balanced, or by a deviation from the intent and spirit of a
constitution originally good.

Mr. Hume is of opinion, that the British constitution must come to an exit;
and thinks it is more to be desired, that it should end in absolute monarchy,
than in such a republican scheme as that set up by Cromwell, which he thinks
the best we have to expect in case of a dissolution of the present ESS. I.89.
.

The constitution of the Republic of Venice is represented by some historians
as having continued free, with very little variation, excepting some of the
improving sort, these thirteen hundred years. Others differ with respect to the
period.

The means which have kept the Venetians so long free, in spite of ambition
within, and the attacks of potent neighbors, are alleged by historians to be,
1. Their attachment to the original principles on which the Republic was
established. 2. Their wisdom in keeping clear of quarrels among other States.
3. The senators being obliged to rise gradually through all stations, so that
they never come to the management ignorant of business. 4. The impossibility of
coming to power in any indirect manner. 5. The total exclusion of priests from
all stations of power and trust. 6. The judicious distribution of the public
revenues, and impossibility of embezzling them. 7. Punishing strictly, but
always according to clear and explicit laws, excepting in the case of
information of treason against the state, on which occasion they break through
law, justice, and humanity. 8. The dreadful danger of the least attempt toward
a change in the state. 9. Punishing capitally every degree of corruption; even
the ambassadors from foreign countries being obliged to give a strict account
of all moneys, or presents, received by them. 10. Profound secrecy of all the
Republic's measures, and severe punishments inflicted on the betrayers. 11. The
strict limitation of the doge, senate, and all persons in power, so that they
can do nothing, but what is warranted by law and constitution. 12. Voting by
ballot. 13. Above all, their invariable plan of education, which plants at the
bottom of every Venetian heart, from the highest to the lowest, an insuperable
love of their country MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXVII.5.
.

The Abbe S. Pierre thinks, the opinion, That states, like individuals, are
naturally perishable, and that the greatness of a state naturally brings on its
ruin, is a vulgar error. The permanency of states depends, he thinks, on their
original good constitution, and subsequent faithful administration O^UVR.
POLIT. IX.12.
. To which I will add, that most depends on an original sound constitution,
securing effectually the exclusion of corruption. For, as to administration,
most kings will be tyrants, and the greatest part of ministers corruptors, if
the people will suffer them.

The excellent Davenant (ii.294.) writes on this subject as follows:

Men, when they are worn out with diseases, aged, crazy, and when besides they
have the mala stamina vitae, may be patched up for a while, but they cannot
hold out long; for life, though it is shortened by irregularities, is not to be
extended by any care beyond such a period. But it is not so with the body
politic; by wisdom and conduct that is to be made long lived, if not immortal;
its distempers are to be cu^ed, nay its very youth is to be renewed, and a
mixed government grows young and healthy again, whenever it returns to the
principles upon which it was first founded.

So great, says Mr Hume, is the force of laws, and of parti^ular forms of
government, and so little dependence have they on the humors and tempers of
men, that consequences almost as general and certain may be deduced from them,
on most occasions, as any which the mathematical sciences afford us Hume,
POLIT. ESS. IV. p. 27.
.' And again, Legislators ought not to trust the future government of a state
entirely to chance; but ought to provide a system of laws to regulate the
administration of public affairs to the latest posterity. Effects will always
correspond to causes; and wise regulations in a commonwealth are the most
valuable legacy that can be left to future ages. In the smallest court, or
office, the stated forms and methods in which business must be conducted, are
found to be a considerable check on the natural depravity of mankind: Why
should not the case be the same in public affairs? Can we ascribe the stability
of the Venetian government, through so many ages, to any thing but its form?
And is it not easy to point out those defects in the original constitution,
which produced the tumults in Athens and Rome, and ended in the ruin of those
Republics Hume, POLIT. ESS. IV.37.
?

Whilst a people continue capable of liberty, the pe^iod of their ruin will
never approach.

It is therefore more melancholy to see public virtue lost in a people, where
the people, as in England, have power in government, than to see a tyrant on
the throne, with the people's liberties under his feet. He may reform. He may
die. The fury of a brave and incensed people may rise, like a whirlwind, and
scatter him and his enslaving crew like chaff. But the manners of ten millions,
when they come to be so degenerate as to invite slavery, are not easily to be
corrected, and if not corrected -- my blood freezes at the thought of what must
follow.

Nothing can be imagined more dastardly than the disposition of those men who
despair of their country. They make me think, I see a graceless son, after
supporting a little while the languid head of his sick mother, toss her back
upon the bed, and cry, 'she will die, and why then should I give myself any
trouble about her?

Very different was the spirit of young Scipio.

After the battle of Cannae, which proved so fatal to Rome, when several young
officers in his presence talked of the state of affairs as desperate, and
seemed inclinable to give all up, and abandon Italy, that young hero drew his
sword, and solemnly vowing never to forsake his country, forced all the others,
by threats of immediate death, in case of refusal, to enter into the same
solemn engagement.

When the great and good Scaurus was, by the contests between Caepio and
Mallius, betrayed into the hands of the Gauls, and saw one
hundred-and-twenty-thousand Romans cut in pieces, with the Consul's two sons,
he ^id not even then despair of his country. Being consulted by the Gauls about
a descent into Italy, which they were then meditating, he advised them against
it, telling them, that they would find the Romans invincible, though they had
lately been, through an unhappy difference among their commanders, unfortunate.
His bold answer so provoked one of the Gaulish generals, that the barbarian run
at him, and stabbed him on the spot ANT. UNIV. HIST. VOL. XII. p. 499.
.

Plutarch says, Cato's virtue would have saved Rome, if the gods had not
decreed her fall. The truth of the matter is, the gods never decree that a
state shall be enslaved, so long as there remains in it a competent number of
Catos to preserve its liberties; one is not sufficient. For, as Mr. Addison
says, -- What can Cato do
Against a world, a base degenerate world,
Which courts the yoke, and bows the neck to Caesar?


In Sully's Memoirs we find that Henry IV. of France turned his whole
application to every thing that might be useful, or even convenient to his
kingdom, without suffering things that happened out of it to pass unobserved by
him, as soon as he had put an end to the civil wars of France, and had
concluded a peace with Spain at Vercins. Is there a man, either prince or
subject, who can read, without the most elevated and the most tender
sentiments, the language he held to Sully at this time, when he thought himself
dying of a great illness he had at Monceaux? My friend, said he, I have no fear
of death. You who have seen me expose my life so often when I might so easily
have kept out of danger, know this better than any man. But I must confess that
I am unwilling to die, before I have raised this kingdom to the splendor I
have proposed to myself; and before I have shown my people that I love them
like my children, by discharging them from a part of the taxes that have been
laid on them, and by governing them with gentleness.

The state of France (says Bolingbroke on the passage) was then even worse than
the state of Great Britain is now: the debts as heavy, many of the provinces
entirely exhausted, and none of them in a condition of bearing any new
imposition. The standing revenues broug^t into the king's coffers no more than
thirty millions, though an hundred and fifty millions were raised on the
people; so great were the abuses of that government in raising of money: and
they were not less in the dispensation of it. The whole scheme of the
administration was a scheme of fraud, and all who served cheated the public
from the highest offices down to the lowest; from the commissioners of the
treasury, down to the under farmers and the under treasurers. Sully beheld this
state of things when he came to have the sole superintendency of affairs with
horror. He was ready to despair; but he did not despair. Z^al for his master,
zeal for his country, and this very state seemingly so desperate, animated his
endeavors; and the noblest thought that ever entered into the mind of a
minister took possession of his. He resolved to make, and he made the
reformation of abuses, the reduction of expenses, and frugal management, a
sinking fund for the payment of national debts, and the sufficient fund for all
the great things he intended to do without overcharging the people. He
succeeded in all. The people were immediately eased, trade revived, the king's
coffers were filled, a maritime power was created, and every thing necessary
was prepared to put the nation in a condition of executing great designs,
whenever great conjunctures should offer themselves. Such was the effect of
twelve years of wise and honest administration.

John Duke of Braganza was the most unlikely man in the world to produce a
revolution. Gentle, meek, peaceable, fond of pleasure and company. But he was
esteemed and trusted by the nobles; of which he was the most considerable, and
related to the family who were competitors against Philip for the crown of
Portugal. And the people (whose patience is only not boundless) were irritated
beyond all pitch by the wanton tyranny of their Spanish masters, who seemed to
intend by all possible means to enrage, and force them, if any cruelty would
force them, to shake of the yoke MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXII.280.
. The unanimity was so great, when once the people found a proper person to
head them, that the whole business was done in a day. The shops in Lisbon were
shut in the morning; but they were opened again in the afternoon. The Duke of
Braganza was crowned king of Portugal, and the people declared free from the
Spanish yoke; and the Spaniards, knowing, that there were then in Portugal
210,000 fighting men, did not attempt to dethrone their deliverer again Ibid.
282.
.

The reformations made in the corrupt city of Rome by Vespasian, show that
governments, if they were in earnest, could do great things even in a corrupt
state ANT. UNIV. HIST. XV.23.
.

Andros was a tyrannical governor of New England. The people attempted to get
rid of him. James II. liked tyrants, therefore refused the repeated requests of
Sir William Phipps against Andros. At last the principal men of Boston got a
report spread at the north end of the town of Boston, that the people at the
south end were in arms, and the same at the south end that those of the north
were risen. Andros's creatures were immediately secured in jail. The governor
flies to the east. The leading men send him a letter, desiring him to resign
immediately, else they could not answer for the consequences. He takes their
advice. The principal inhabitants call a general assembly, and, without consent
of the governor, resumed their charter, which King William confirms. Thus the
Revolution of Old England was attend^d with one in New England MOD. UNIV. HIST.
XXXIX.310.
.

Farther, in favor of the proposed restoration, and against despairing of our
country, please to observe* my good countrymen, that every tyranny is founde^
in wickedness; that it has in itself the seeds of its own dest^uction, and the
curse of heaven hanging over it; and that it wants only a shock from the heavy
hand of the people, to bring it down in ruins on the heads of its supporters.

Mr. Sandys, in his speech in favor of a place bill, A. D. 1739, observes,
that a good bill, or motion, once proposed in parliament, and entered on the
journals, can never die, unless our constitution be absolutely and
irrecoverably destroyed; but will, by its own merits, at last force its way
through the houses DEB. COM. XI.202.
.

Lord keeper Finch says, Neither Romans, Saxons, Danes nor Normans, who
conquered the land of England, could conquer its laws or constitution PARL.
HIST. IX.59.
.

I would therefore hope, even if need were, against hope, that, though it will
soon, it is not yet too late, to retrieve all, and to set things on a foot as
much surer than what the Revolution left them upon, as the
Revolution-settlement exceeded the times of James II.

There are lengths, which our kings and ministers would be afraid to go; which
shows, that they stand in some fear of the people. They would not venture upon
authorizing a massacre, nor upon setting up edicts for laws, nor upon taxing
the subjects without authority of parliament; though they have come mighty near
to such proceedings.

Whenever any reformation or improvement is proposed, the answer of some is,
This is not a proper time. It was not a proper time to disband the army, while
there was a Pretender to the throne; nor is it a proper time now that there is
none. It was not proper in war, nor is it now proper in peace, though our
kings, that is our ministers, tell us in their speeches, that the peace will be
lasting. It was not a proper time to abolish articles, subscriptions, and
test-acts, when bigotry to those absurdities prevailed, and the cry, that the
church was in danger, was in the mouths of the clergy, and priest-led part of
the laity. Nor is it now a proper time, when no body, besides the half-popish
part of the bishops and clergy, care one farthing about such matters.

The courtiers pretend, that it is dangerous to alter any thing. Quietum non
movere, they say, is a good maxim. Did they observe this rule, when they
bethought themselves of enraging the colonists, by taxing them, without giving
them representation? When they extended the excise laws? When they laid
restraints upon marriage and population?

Antiquity is no plea. If a thing is bad, the longer it has done harm the
worse, and the sooner abolished the better. Establishment by law is no plea.
They who make laws can repeal them PARL. HIST. IX.367.
.

Our modern court-sycophants are many years too late in applying their maxims
of Quietum non movere, nolumus mutari leges Angliae, and the like. These rules
are good, while a kingdom or commonwealth stands firm upon its original
foundation. But when the constitution is unhinged, when the first principles on
which a state was established, are annihilated, when the only security of the
people's liberties is turned against the people, to insist, that nothing shall
be altered, is to insist, that whatever is gone into disorder, shall remain in
disorder. The time to urge those maxims was, when the first disorders were
introduced, when bribes, places, and pensions were first given to members of
parliament.

Montesquieu observes. that it was constitutional among the ancient Cretans to
correct the abuses which crept into their government, by the people's rising in
arms, and forcing their corrupt magistrates to resign. The Polish constitution
admits the same kind of remedy. But such a cure seems worse than the disease.
He says, the ancient Cretans were so strongly tinctured with love for their
country, that they were thereby restrained from carrying redress too far
L'ESPRIT DES LOIX, I.190.
.

The Prince of Orange was not King of England, when he ordered letters to be
written to the protestant lords, spiritual and temporal, to meet him in
parliament, and to counties, cities, and towns to send members. There never
were seventy-six citizens to represent London, but in the convention
parliament. Yet did that parliament, so irregular in its construction, bring
about for us the greatest thing that ever was done for this island, I mean the
Revolution. Let no man, therefore, object to a salutary proposal, that is new,
unusual, or unheard of.

Machiavel says, that to render a commonwealth long lived, it is necessary to
correct it often, and reduce it toward its first principles, which is to be
done by punishments and examples. If the wild proceedings of rash and giddy
ministers are now and then looked into and animadverted upon, it creates fear
and a reverence to the laws; and in great men strong examples of clean hands,
self-denial, personal temperance, and care of the public treasure, do awaken
the virtue of others, and revive these seeds of goodness which lie hid in the
hearts of most people, and would spring out, but that they are choked up for a
time by avarice and ambition Daven. II.72.
.

Those commonwealths have been most durable, which have oftenest reformed, and
re-composed themselves according to their first institution: for by this means
they repair the breaches, and counter-work the natural effects of time Pym's
SPEECH IN PARL. 4 Car. I. A. D. 1628. PARL. HIST. VIII.173.
.

It was enacted in the time of Henry VII. that in case of a revolution in the
kingdom, no man should be questioned for his loyalty to the king for the time
being Hume, HIST. STUARTS, II.151.
. This shows, that the people of those days had no idea of such a stubborn
immutability as we often hear of in our times, admitting no reformation of any
thing, however universally allowed to be wrong.

To restore what is, through lapse of time, degenerated, is not altering the
constitution.

To alter the British constitution would be, to change the form of government
from king, lords, and commons, into somewhat else, as a republic. So the
constitution was wholly changed under Edward I. by the barons, who oblige the
king to give them and the bishops a commission to elect twelve persons, whose
power should be supreme in legislation and administration Hume, HIST. II.130.
. This was throwing out all the three estates at once.

To propose to restore parliaments to their original period of one year; to
attempt to obtain a more adequate representation, and the effectual exclusion
of placemen from the house of commons, is certainly not proposing to alter the
constitution, because it is not proposing to abolish either king, lords, or
commons; but to preserve and re-establish them, on their original and proper
foot.

It is the common cry of the friends of arbitrary power, A prince is in duty
bound to deliver down to his posterity the prerogative undiminished, as it was
delivered to him by his ancestors. No. It is the duty of a prince to consult at
all adventures, the greatest good of his people, his children; and if the
diminution of his prerogative will increase the happiness of his people, the
superfluous power of one is certainly to yield to the happiness of millions.
Some men of slavish principles affect a mighty anxiety about the danger of
innovations. To depart, they say, from the the ancient constitution, is opening
a door for endless faction and dissension. Not, if the majority of the society
are for the reformation proposed. Nor has any power on earth a right to hinder
the majority of a people from making, in their form of government, what
innovations they please.

It is the constant speech of the court dependents, when mention is made of
redressing any thing, that by lapse of time is got into disorder, The king is
bound by his coronation oath, not to alter any thing, etc. But, in one
particular, if not more, the oath itself speaks a contrary language. For the
king promises, that he will preserve to the bishops all their rights and
privileges which do, or shall by law appertain to them. So that if it should
happen, that some future parliament should be wiser than any of the past, and
should think three thousands pounds a year might be better bestowed than upon a
bishop, and should legally strike off two of the three, the king will then be
obliged to preserve to him only one thousand a year.

One of the questions put to Edward II. at his coronation was, Sir, Will you
govern according to the laws and customs, quas vulgus elegerit, in the old
French, les loyes et customs les quieles la communaute aura eslu, and this was
the form after him. Prynne thinks elegerit and aura eslu, are in sense as well
as sound, the future tense, and that therefore the kings promised to govern
according to the laws and customs established, and to be established. But Brady
thinks elegerit, and aura eslu are to be understood as elegit, and a eslu;
which is strange grammar Brady, I. GLOSS. 36.
.

Sidney englishes quas vulgus elegerit, such laws as the people shall propose
DIS. GOV. 458.
.

By the treaty of Troyes after the battle of Agincourt, which was regularly
ratified and confirmed, and no opposition m^de to it either by England or
France, the two kingdoms were for ever unrepealably united under Henry V. Where
is now the unrepealable union between England and France?

Some of our ancient kings swore, at their coronation, that they would abrogate
and disannul all evil laws and wrongful customs, and make, keep, and sincerely
maintain those that were good and laudable. The archbishop charged the king in
God's behalf, Not to presume to take upon him this dignity, unless he resolved
to keep inviolably the vows and oaths he had then made; about the end of the
12th century Rap. I.245.
.

Oaths were heaped on oaths to bind the nobility of England, never to violate
any of the constitutions of Richard II PARL. HIST. I.520.
. Where are his constitutions now? He and his constitutions were sent a packing
a very short time after they were established by these oaths.

An act 11 and 21 Richard II. unrepealable by any future parliament. Such acts,
s^ys Bishop Williams, are felo de se, because no parliament can preclude the
power of a future Ibid. IX.354.
.

The exclusion bill was a greater change than the restoration of independency
to parliament. So was the reformation from popery, the dissolution under Henry
VIII, the changes under and after Charles ^; the Revolution in 1688, etc. But
our forefathers had more spirit than we DEB. COM. I.435.
.

Magna Charta says, Distringent et gravabunt nos, etc. The barons complaining,
and failing of redress, shall lawfully distress and aggrieve the king all
manner of ways, as by taking his castles, lands, possessions, etc. till redress
is granted. After the restoration comes the corporation-act, and declares all
resistance unlawful. The same doctrine is preached in the act of attainder. and
militia-acts. Not thirty years after this comes the Revolution, and abolishes
the whole system of passive obedience and non-resistance; sends the whole royal
family a packing, and brings in the house of Nassau. The liberty of the press
was taken away 13 Car. II. The liberty of petitioning was abolished the same
year; and then the corporation charters taken away. All these were restored by
the bill of rights. In short, as Mr. Hume says HIST. II.264.
, the history of England is little else than a history of reversals, every age
overthrowing what was done by the former.

That author therefore HIST. STUARTS, II.243.
thinks, there was somewhat peculiarly absurd in one clause of the test, which
was framed under Charles II. and required swearing, that they would not alter
the government either in church or state; since all human institutions, being
imperfect, must from time to time, want amendments; and amendments are
alterations.

How did the Newcastle ministry twenty years ago, rage against the salutary
remonstrances of the friends of mankind on the destructive cheapness of gin.
The duty, they said, (which amounted to the hideous sum of near four hundred
thousand pounds) was appropriated as part of ways and means. Experience shows
us, that the nation can subsist, though the people do not now, as in those
times, destroy themselves, by thousands and myriads, with that liquid fire.

Great things are often brought about very easily, as the deliverance of Athens
from the thirty tyrants by Thrasybulus, of the Sicyonians by Aratus, and of
England at the Revolution, all with hardly the loss of a drop of blood.

Philip II's ordering Count Egmont to be beheaded at Brussells, A. D. 1568,
enraged the people of the Low Countries to madness, and determined them never
to submit more to the Spanish yoke, says Strada Rap. II.82.
.

It is not easy to understand how so clear-headed a man as judge Blackstone
should write, that the union must be dissolved, before any reformation can be
made either in the church of England or Scotland, because the king has sworn to
maintain both churches. Is it possible, that the judge should imagine, a
coronation oath binds a king to maintain any establishment whatever, at all
adventures, even though it be found, by consent of the people, necessary, or
convenient, to abolish it? A coronation oath only binds a king not to alter any
thing fundamental, of his own authority, and contrary to the will of the
people. And it seems inconceivable, that the learned and able judge should
imagine, that the meaning of a coronation oath is, to fix upon the people all
the present establishments, however inconvenient the change of circumstances in
aftertimes may render them; and to make all improvements and reformations
impossible. Suppose every king, from the conquest to our times, to have
understood his coronation oath in this sense. We must have been now no
forwarder in political improvements, than we were 700 years ago. It is wasting
words to expose such absurdity.

It is really pleasant, says Lord Sandys, to hear some lords talk of
innovations in our constitution. For God's sake my lords what are the laws we
pass yearly? Is not every public law an innovation in our constitution? Do we
not thereby add to, allow, or abridge some of the powers on prerogatives of the
crown? If we had not made many laws for the purpose, could it be said we should
now have any liberty left? Criminals are every day inventing new crimes, or new
methods for evading the laws that have been made for punishing or p^eventing
them, which obliges us almost every year to pass new laws against them: by
these the power of the crown is generally enlarged. Ministers again are amost
always contriving new methods for extending the prerogatives of the crown, to
the oppression of the people, which obliges us to be often contriving new laws
for restraining them: by these the power of the crown I shall grant is
lessened. What then? Is not our government a limited monarchy? Is not the power
of the crown limited by our constitutions and laws? If by experience it be
found that the power of the crown is not in some cases sufficiently limited by
the laws in being, must not we, ought we not, to contrive new laws for that
purpose? Some lords may, if they please, call this an encroachment upon the
prerogatives of the crown: I shall not fall out with them about the term,
because I think the prerogative may, and ought to be, restrained as often as
experience convinces us that it is turned to a wrong use Lord Sandys, 1742.
DEB. PEERS, VIII.519.
.

The horror which some among us have against what they call an innovation,
resembles that of the ancient Poles, when their king Stephen having conquered
Livonia, a part of the Russian empire, proposed to new model the government of
the country, and among other particulars, thought to change an accustomed
punishment of whipping with rods, till the blood came, for one more humane. The
wretched peasants threw themselves at his feet, and begged, that nothing might
be altered; for that innovations are dangerous MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXV.261.
.

Men of timid natures are startled at every proposed alteration, however likely
to be of advantage. Lord Nottingham, when the union was in agitation, boggled
at the change of style from England to Great Britain, alleging, that it was
such an innovation as would totally subvert all the laws of England. He
therefore moved, that the opinion of the judges should be asked. They very
sensibly answered, that they did not see how a word should alter, or hurt the
constitution, whose laws must remain the same after the union, as before DEB.
PEERS, II.169.
. Lord Nottingham concluded, however, that the union must utterly ruin all
Ibid. 176.
.

Lord Haversham was against the union because of the diversity of religion,
laws, and government between the two kingdoms. The united kingdom of Britain,
he said, would be like Nebuchadnezzar's image, part iron, part clay Ibid. 170.
.

So wise a man as Cicero ridiculed Caesar for proposing to reform the calendar
ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.257.
.

It is chiefly weakness, or laziness, that puts princes and statesmen upon
declining to redress what is amiss, on pretense of its being impracticable. If
Lycurgus could persuade the Spartans to give up their property, and agree to
his levelling scheme, what can be called impossible to an able and willing
prince, or statesman?

That illustrious legislator altered the whole national character of the
Spartans. Why might not a genius in politics do the same in England? It will
perhaps be answered, Sparta was but a county, compared with England. Let us
then see a county of England (the county of Middlesex, for instance, which is
but a small one) as much reformed as Sparta was by Lycurgus. Have we no person
in the proper station public-spirited enough to make the attempt? Printing,
good roads, and post-chaises make it as easy to commmunicate any thing to the
whole people of England, as formerly to those of Sparta.

All schemes are not romantic, which are called so, when first started. For all
improvements are objected to at first. How many rebuffs did Columbus meet with,
in his attempt to discover America? Men therefore, of courage and perseverance
are of inestimable consequence to mankind. How few would have gone through what
he did? And how meanly was he rewarded for doing mankind so prodigious a
service! America ought to have been called after him; not after Americus
Vesputius; for the latter went out six years after the former.

Whatever is, (says Pope) is right. Whatever is law, is just. Whatever is
creed, is true. Whatever is in the state, is constitutional.

The worldly ecclesiastic cries, no innovations (reformations he means, and
reformations he dreads) in the church. They will produce disturbances. He is
pretty sure of this fact: for he intends to produce disturbance by opposing
every salutary proposal. Yet we know, that christianity was an innovation upon
heathenism, and the protestant religion upon popery. The reformers of states
and churches, the deliverers of mankind from tyranny and bigotry, the friends
of human nature, the prime benefactors of our world, thought it worth while to
risk a temporary disturbance for a lasting advantage.

There is as much difference between proper liberty, and anarchy, as between
the state of things at Athens or Rome, in the best times of those republics,
and that which Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, intended to have introduced into
England Brady, III.349.
; which was a total demolition of all subordination, and all rule; so that
every man was to be detached from every man, and all legislation, and all
obedience, at an end. Wat and Jack carried their scheme of liberty and equality
to an extravagant pitch on one side, and the exorbitant power of one, or a few,
which we commonly see in monarchical governments, carries government and
subordination beyond pitch on the other. The legislative and executive power
diffused among several hands, in such a manner, as to keep up a proper balance,
and sufficient restraint on every person possessed of power, that he may not be
able (for, such is the nature of man, he will certainly be willing) to carry it
on to tyranny; -- this only can be called just government, safe for the People,
and sufficient for the rulers. And surely, it is pity, my good countrymen, that
mere inactivity and timidity should deprive you of this great advantage.

It is the common cry of the courtiers, look back to the times of Henry VIII.
and his bloody daughter, Mary; and be thankful for the liberty you enjoy. But
the friends of liberty ought to call upon the people, to look back to those
days of darkness and cruelty, that they may learn to dread slavery more than
death, and to keep a watchful eye upon the first approaches toward it.

One rash law, says Mr. Gordon Cato's LETTERS, III.291.
, may overturn our country and constitution at once, and cancel all law and
property for ever.

Rome (says the author of GRAND. ET DECAD. DES ROMANS p. 99.) was so constituted,
that it had in itself the means of correcting its own abuses. The Carthaginians
perished, because they could not bear the hand of even Hannibal himself to
reform them. The Athenians sunk, because their errors were so pleasing to them,
that they could not find in their hearts to quit them. The Italian republics
can only boast the long continuance of their errors. They have neither strength
nor liberty. The government of England (says he) is such, that there is a set
of examiners [the parliament] who are always attentive to abuses, and the
mistakes they fall into are seldom of any continuance, and are often useful.
[This would be the happy case of England, were our parliaments incorrupt.]

I hope therefore, my good countrymen, you will not let yourselves be
discouraged from using the proper means for restoring the constitution, by such
frivolous objections as these; and that you will remember, that restoration is
not alteration, and that antiquity is a reason for removing abuses, not for
keeping them up.

As, on one hand, it is absolutely necessary, that a due subordination be kept
up in states and kingdoms, that the people be willing to regulate their conduct
according to the laws, which themselves, or their uninfluenced representatives
have framed; so on the other, nothing can be conceived more base and
despicable, than a voluntary submission to slavery. To stand in fear of a worm
like myself! What can be imagined more dastardly and spiritless? Were indeed an
archangel, or other being of a superior nature, to require of us implicit
obedience to all his dictates, it might be said, there is somewhat decently
modest and suitable to our inferior station, in our yielding to so great, so
wise, and so good a master. But when we consider the character of most kings,
and most ministers; when we view them and their actions in the light in which
they stand in the faithful page of history, their flaterers and their
slanderers alike silent, it is then that we are filled with indignation at the
dastardly spirits, who sat still, and suffered a handful of men of contemptible
abilities and odious characters, to gain so shameful an ascendency over them.

Let us, my good countrymen, act a more manly part, and avoid the disgrace,
which we see come upon those, who support, or submit, to the impotency of a set
of tyrants, whose power owes its existence to the cowardice, or the corruption
of the people.

Tyrants, says Aristotle POLIT. V.11.
, do what they can to debase the spirit of the subjects. For no mean-spirited
man rises against tyranny, or promotes redress of grievances.

Octavius makes a feint to resign his power. Is prevented by the worthless
senators, who had rendered themselves so obnoxious to the people, that they
dreaded the loss of his protection against their injured country ANT. UNIV.
HIST. XIII.486.
.

Cowardice became common in the latter times of the Romans when the spirit of
liberty was gone. Defeats and losses were the consequence. Domitian, the
emperor, agreed to pay the obscure Dacians ^ ^ribute, to prevent their
attacking the empire Ibid. XIX.493.
.

It is probable, that if the Romans ^^d been, by means of printing, then
unknown, accustomed to read the history of the free and heroic times of their
own country, they would not have suffered their precious liberties to have been
wrested from them, or would have been animated by the example of their
illustrious ancestors, to rise and recover them. Instead of which, the
execrable senators passed an edict, exempting Augustus from all submission to
the laws of his country. Ibid. XIII.496.


A melancholy consideration it is, that, from the very nature of things,
arbitrary and despotic forms of government tend to perpetuate themselves by
enervating the mind; whereas free forms of government, if not carefully watched
over and cherished, tend to destroy themselves by introducing riches, luxury,
vice, a want of due subordination, and in consequence a general corruption of
manners King's ESS. ENGL. CONSTABLE. 193.
.

Nations lose their liberties, because a single tyrant, at the head of a
compacted body of slaves, acts against an innumerable, divided, incoherent,
jarring multitude.

Does not this show the necessity of dividing power, and not trusting too great
a force, or too much influence, in one or a few hands?

Surely the people ought to have at least as good a chance for preserving their
liberties, as the leviathans of power for robbing them of them.

Have mankind constituted their governments upon this obvious principle? Have
they not, on the contrary, voluntarily, and with their eyes (if eyes they had)
open, thrown all the advantage against themselves into the hands of kings and
priests? Even when the friends of liberty have gained considerable advantages,
how easily do they lose those advantages? Such is the laziness and timidity of
the species.

Thus a confederacy [the protestant] lately so powerful as to shake the
imperial throne, fell to pieces, and was dissolved in the space of a few weeks
Robertson's CHARLES V. III.108.
.

Mr. Clem. Coke, in the time of Charles I. said in the house, It was better for
the subjects to die by the hands of a foreign enemy, than to suffer at home
WHITEL. MEM. 3.
. There is undoubtedly somewhat very abject in a people's suffering themselves
to be cheated out of their liberties by a handful of the most worthless men in
the country, a few ministers. A foreign power may invade a state with a
superior force, which will oblige the latter to yield, and no disgrace to their
courage or conduct. But a nation has almost every natural advantage against its
own court; many millions against a few hundreds. And yet we see that the
hundreds always prevail against the millions. The reason is, generally, that
the court is a junto closely compacted, and acting in concert, ( -- Devil with
devil damned
Firm concord holds. --)
MILT. while the people are a rope of sand. So that instead of exclaiming on
the danger of embarrassing government, and the necessity of strengthening the
hands of government, etc. the eternal cant of the tools of power, the friends
of mankind will advise the strengthening the hands of the people, as all
history, and every day's experience shows us, that government is too strong for
the people.

The people can never be too jealous of their liberties. Power is of an elastic
nature, ever extending itself and encroaching on the liberties of the subjects.
And it has accordingly, in most ages and nations, overwhelmed them. The inertia
of the people is the opportunity of the government. And the people have ever
been too inactive in their own defense; which is incomparably the more
dangerous error of the two. For if the people secure the power in their own
hands, their dethroning a king, oversetting a government, or even massacring a
court, with all its connexions (though such scenes revolt humanity) these are
only temporary horrors, thunderstorms which soon clear off; and the people
restore the serenity of a better state of things. Whereas tyranny is a
permanent evil, distressing and debasing the human species from generation to
generation, and deluging the world in a never ebbing sea of blood.

It is difficult to rouse the people to an apprehension of danger. And if,
headed by a spirit of an unusal boldness, they do rise like a whirlwind, and
sweep away the combination against their liberties; they often, by trusting
power too far or too long in the hands of their deliverers, give them the hint
to erect themselves, like Cromwell and others, into tyrants, and to rivet on
the unhappy people the very fetters they had just before knocked off. But
desperate diseases require desperate remedies.

A vote of credit given a king of Spain, suggested to him, with the help of the
d -- l, the inspirer of all such thoughts, that he had no occasion to depend on
the cortes, or parliaments, for supplies. This ruined the Spanish liberties.

As every instance of timidity which has given tyranny an opportunity of
seizing the liberties of a people, reflects disgrace on that people, so every
instance of resistance to unjust domination shines in history with a
distinguished luster.

The ancient Argives, like the Romans, irritated by their tyrants, expelled
them, and changed their form of government into republican Ubb. Emm. II.76.
.

The ancient Corinthians were always admirers of liberty, and enemies to
tyrants. They waged many wars, not through desire of power, nor for the sake of
plunder, but in defense of the liberties of Greece. Therefore the Sicilians,
when under the tyranny of Dionysius, and in fear of the Carthaginians, chose to
apply to the Corinthians rather than any other people. And when Dionysius was
expelled from Syracuse, and banished to Corinth, and when Timoleon had
successfully terminated the war, and restored liberty, the Syracusans extolled
to the skies the Corinthians, their glorious deliverers. And those praises were
heightened afterward when Timoleon, a second time, drove out the
Carthaginians, and restored liberty to the other cities as well as to Syracuse
Ubb. Emm. II.110.
.

Arminius (says Tacitus ANNAL. lib. II. cap. 88.
), aspiring to dominion over his country (Germany), and encroaching upon her
liberty, raised civil wars with various success, and, at last, was privately
cut off by his own relations, though he had delivered Germany, and had
successfully resisted the Roman invasions, at a time when Rome was in the
zenith of her power. Those brave savages would have no master, not even an
illustrious or a gentle one.

Statilius and Favonius thought slavery preferable to civil war about liberty
ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.273.
. A way of thinking very different from Salust's, who, speaking of liberty,
uses these words, Quam nemo bonus nisi cum vita amisit.

Brutus declared he would never be a slave to the mildest master Ibid. 311.
. The point is not merely, Whether the people are actually groaning under
oppression, and expiring by hundreds in a day in the hands of the tormentors;
but whether the free constitution is safe. If that is unhinged, if the mounds
are thrown down which stood between the people and power, no one can say how
soon oppression may rush in upon them like a deluge. Of that great patron of
liberty, the Ancient Universal Historians write as follows:

Thus fell Brutus, in the 43d year of his age, and with him fell the liberty of
Rome, and of the Roman people. He was a man in whom the malice of his enemies
could discern no fault, in whom the virtues of humanity were eminent; in whom a
constant, firm, and inviolable attachment to the public good, formed the
principal and most distinguishable part of his character, and the uninterrupted
business of his life ever in view, ever pursued from the inherent equity of his
mind; for he was, as his historian well observes, by nature exactly framed for
virtue, without one breach of that never to be omitted distinction of fas and
nefas, right and wrong. And here it may not be altogether foreign to our
purpose, to illustrate this transcendent rectitude of his mind, by instancing
his refusal, contrary to the opinion of Cicero and his other friends, to employ
the arts of oratory in gilding over the fairest cause, when after the death of
Caesar he addressed himself to the Roman people. It cannot be supposed that
Brutus, who had long been famed for eloquence, could be ignorant of speaking to
the passions of men, an art too successfully made use of by Antony on the same
occasion. Such, then, was the integrity of Brutus's mind, that he could not
stoop to employ any indecent means even in the pursuit of virtue. The death of
Caesar was undoubtedly justifiable under the government which then prevailed in
Rome, notwithstanding all the dirt that has been thrown at this transaction by
the mean and grovelling abettors of arbitrary power. We may see what the Romans,
and Tully the least adventurous of men, thought of this action by a passage in
one of his letters to his friend Atticus, bemoaning the misfortunes of the
times, when he says, But notwithstanding the cloud that hangs over us, I
console myself in the ides of March. Our heroes have done every thing within
their power, and with a resolution by which they have acquired immortal glory.
Nor was the putting the destroyer of their constitution and liberties to death,
by violent hands, without precedent in the Roman history. And as to the method
they made choice of, it appears adequate to the dignity of the action; for who
more proper to compass such an event, than a number of senators distinguished
by their attachment to liberty? Or what place could be more justly fixed on for
the tyrant of Rome to expire in, than than dictatorial chair which he possessed
in violation of the laws of his country? We often see the love of one's country
the bent and inclination of very different men, influenced either by passion,
acrimony of temper, vanity, resentment, a lust of power, or any other
inducement; nor were all those who joined in that glorious cause, altogether
free from such suspicions; for an uniform, steady, constant attachment to the
public good, was to be met with in Brutus alone. Men generally differ from
themselves as much as from one another; Brutus was always the same. If we have
dwelt too long in considering the virtues of this great man, the mighty
excellence of his character, and his inviolable attachment to the public cause,
may plead our excuse. We are not only indebted to history for the enlargement
of our minds, but likewise for the improvement of our moral virtues; and to an
Englishman, the foremost of the rank is the pursuit of liberty. Who then more
properly can become the object of our contemplation than Brutus, the genius of
liberty ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.408.


The Swiss fought 60 battles against the Austrians for liberty Volt. ESS. SUR
L'HIST. II.59.
.

Every country of small extent, says Voltaire Ibid.
, that is poor, and governed by good laws, will continue free, if once
enfranchised. I should rather say, Every country that is once free, will
continue free so long as it continues virtuous and incorrupt.

Quinimo asseverare verissime, etc. We can positively assert, that Holland and
Zealand have not, in the space of 800 years, been subdued by any force,
internal or external. In which it is to be doubted, whether any kingdom or
commonwealth can be compared with us, unless Venice may be excepted. DECR. OF
THE STATES ESTABLISHING THEIR LIB.
.

I am an old man, upwards of eighty, and have seen more difficult times, than
these, even the French at our gates; but, by the blessing of God, on our
firmness and resolution we have hitherto preserved our own state. -- If at last
we are overpowered, let us lay our cities under water, betake ourselves to our
ships, and sail to the East Indies, and let those who see our country laid
waste say, There lived a people who chose to lose their country rather than
their liberties Tind. CONTIN. I.275.
.' Words of old Corverin in the assembly of burgomasters, A. D. 1712.

The emperor Henry, A. D. 1110, offended with the Bolognese for the resistance
they had made, built a citadel to bridle them. Countess Matilda animated them
to demolish it. Henry, far from resenting, honored them for their brave
spirit, and gave them a charter of immunities MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVII.5.
.

The people of the republic of Sienna in Italy fled from their native country,
when taken by Cosmo, general to Charles V. A. D. 1555, not because they had
then lost their liberties; but because they feared they should lose them. They
went and settled at Monte Alcino, and other places Robertson's CHAPTER V. III.318.
.

The first funeral oration is said to have been spoken over Du Guesclin, who
dethroned Peter the cruel of France Volt. ESS. SUR I. 'HIST. II.142.
.

Clovis, king of the Franks, going to give the archbishop of Rheims a piece of
plate, taken among the plunder, was prevented by a common soldier, who hewed it
in pieces with his battle-axe, and divided it equally, not allowing the king
the prerogative of dividing in an arbitrary manner. Nor was the man punished
for it, though the king found an occasion against him afterward. A plain proof
of great liberty among the Franks. See likewise the Aragonian manner of
electing their kings Rap. I. PREF. IV.
.

An elegant writer observes, that the Florentines made the same figure in the
14th century in Italy, as the Athenians had done in Greece. The fine arts
appeared in no part of Europe but amongst them; and they were by far the most
respected people in Italy. Their civil dissentions, however unhappy, increased
their courage, and added to their experience. In matters of religion, though
they professed themselves votaries to the sea of Rome, they exercised the
independency that became a free people, and were, perhaps, the most void of
superstition of any we read of in history. When the Pope touched upon the
string of sovereignty over them, they acted with the same spirit against him as
they had done against the emperors and their own tyrants; and what is most
incredible in that bigoted age, his fulminations and interdicts served but to
increase their unanimity in despising them, while in other countries they were
dethroning princes, and subverting constitutions. Next to this the great
character of the Florentines consisted in the good faith with which they
fulfilled all their engagements, and in their passion for freeing all the other
states of Italy from tyranny. The Florentines always took the lead amongst the
states of Italy; but it ought to be mentioned, to their honor, that we have
not upon record any act of unprovoked oppression, that they were guilty of,
toward their neighbors; nor do we know one instance of their infringing the
terms upon which any people came into their alliance, or under their protection
MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.151.
.

Florence in a manner supported the liberty of Tuscany. She paid immense
subsidies. Kept armies on foot. And yet her citizens out-vied all Europe, in
the splendour and elegance of their equipages, in their manner of living, in
their buildings, and public exhibitions, in which they imitated the Trojan
games, so finely described by Virgil, and common amongst the Romans, who were
the patterns of the Florentine policy, both in peace and war; but with this
advantage in favor of the latter, that they were a commercial state Ibid. 175.
.

Florence was, at that time, at a very high pitch of happiness and prosperity.
Her people were rich, powerful, united and flourishing in learning, arts, and
sciences; all this prosperity was owing to the wisdom and virtue of a private
citizen, Lorenzo de Medici. The tranquillity of this country was such, that it
afforded no events proper for history to record, unless we mention the
encouragement given to men of learning, who filled the country with writings,
and works, that will ever be the admiration of mankind. Lorenzo resembled his
illustrious predecessors in their public and private virtues, but exceeded them
in personal accomplishments, He had a turn for military affairs, though peace
was his darling object. Compositions are still extant, that prove him to have
been both a poet and a critic. He was a good judge of architecture, which in
his time was commonly combined with painting; and of music. He founded the
university of Pisa, to which he brought the most learned and ingenious men in
Italy. He is said to have been more amorous than was consistent with the strict
practice of virtue; and like other great men of antiquity, unbent his more
serious hours with juvenile recreations. To amuse his busy pragmatical
countrymen, and to render Florence more populous, he exhibited justs,
tournaments, plays, and other diversions, which reconciled them, in a great
measure, to that aristocracy of which they were so naturally jealous.

Upon his death, all the Italian states and princes sent compliments of
condolance by their ambassadors to Florence MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.341.
.

The Florentines were, at last, split into a thousand factions about resettling
their form of government. They seemed to look back with surprise and horror at
their situation, under the family of the Medici; they did not consider the
advantages brought to their country, as an equivalent for the interruption
which they had given to the power of the people. They had preserved the forms
of the constitution, but had deprived them of the substance.

Soderini proposed, that all the magistrates, should be chosen by an assembly,
who were legally qualified to partake of the government. This method, he
thought, would be an incentive for citizens, to aspire to public offices, by
virtue and merit. As to extraordinary powers, and matters of high importance,
he proposed the people should choose a separate magistracy for that purpose, who
were to deliberate independently of them. He thought that on those two points
depended the true form of popular government.

The madness of a Dominican friar set at naught all their wisdom; his name was
Savanarola, he was perpetually haranguing from the pulpit, but from his
enthusiasm the foundations of a noble constitution was laid, by placing the
legislative power in the hands of citizens, legally qualified for posts in
government, who were to dispose of the executive power, as they saw proper MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.356
.

In the year 1766, a terrible insurrection was made in Iamaica by the negroes,
upon the same principle as the bravest people of ancient or modern times have
struggled for recovery of their liberties. They killed many of their tyrants,
who never have been used to hesitate about killing them. They were however
immediately suppressed, and those who were taken (I can scarce hold my pen to
write it) were burnt alive, says the account, on a slow fire, beginning at
their feet and burning upwards, while those hardy creatures, like so many
Scaevolas, smiled with disdain at their tormentors, and triumphantly called to
the spirits of their ancestors, that they should quickly join them LAND. MAG.
1767, p. 258.
.

I ask any human being, who has in him any thing human, whether all the yellow
dirt of this world is an object of consequence, enough for men -- for
Englishmen -- to turn themselves thus into fiends of hell, and to break loose
upon their fellow creatures with such infernal fury, for doing what no people
in the world are more ready to do than themselves, I mean, resisting tyranny.

A. D. 1730, the brave Corsicans, galled by the cruel yoke of the tyrannical
Genoese, rose in arms, and published a manifesto, importing, that their
intention was only to assert their liberty CONTIN. RAPIN, VIII.80.
.

No revolution, says Voltaire VOLT. ESS. SUR L'HIST. III.18.
, was ever brought about with so little trouble and bloodshed, as that of
Sweden, when Christiern received from a single unarmed magistrate, Man's, the
order to quit the throne, and abdicated immediately. But he had made himself
thoroughly odious to the people by his cruelty, of which one example shall be
given instar omnium, viz. his ordering the mother and sister of the great and
good Gustavus, in revenge for his endeavors to rescue his country, to be put
in two different sacks, and thrown into the sea.

The human mind ( Buchanan DE JURE REGNI, etc.
says) has something sublime and generous implanted in it by nature, which
impels it to resist unjust power. The Scots, he says, never failed to restrain,
or punish their kings for maladministration. Baliol, particularly, was
dethroned for giving up his kingdom to the English. The Scots, he says, bound
their kings to the observance of the laws and customs by a very strict
coronation oath. He labors to show, that the apostolical directions to the
christians, concerning submission to kings and magistrates, are no argument
against resisting tyrants; but a caution to the professors of the new religion,
that they must not think themselves exempted thereby from the duty of peaceable
subjects; and he shows, that what is said in honor of the supreme magistrate,
as appointed of God, and bearing the sword for punishing the wicked, etc. does
not relate to the infamous Roman tyrants of those times; but to the office,
abstracted from him who bore it. He mentions the divine order, 2 CHRONICLES.
XVIII.19. for killing king Achab, as a proof that scripture does not require
absolute submission to tyrants; and observes, that if the slaves of power
should argue from one set of texts, that tyrants are never to be resisted, they
must, to be uniform, allow that other passages authorize the dispatching of
wicked princes. And he insists, that, as in holy writ, there are general orders
for cutting off all irreclaim^bly wicked persons, without any exception in
favor of kings; it must follow, that tyrants are, in obedience to scripture
authority, to be cut off. He approves of the putting to death of James III. of
Scotland, for his cruelty and wickedness, and of the regulations made for
securing those, who destroyed him, and mentions, that twelve, or more of the
Scottish kings, were condemned to perpetual prison, or banishment, or death,
for their crimes.

It is an unsurmountable argument against slavery, that nature, in every human
being, revolts against it, when it comes to touch himself. We wonder to read of
dastardly people, and crafty priests, standing up for the divine right of
tyrants, as if they forgot, that by and by themselves may come to be sufferers.
But the partisans of tyranny keep always a mental reservation in their own
favor. They are for enslaving all mankind, and intend that themselves shall be
little tyrants under the great one. Even among the ecclesiastics, the zealous
trumpeters of passive obedience in all ages and countries, whenever those
clumsy kings, who had not sense enough to keep to the fundamental maxim, That
the king and the priest are to play the game into one another hands, or those
few, very few noble minded princes, who have been above the meanness of both
king craft and priestcraft, have broken in upon what churchmen call their
sacred prerogative, and proposed to put them, either as to taxes or incomes,
nearly upon a foot with the laity, we always find, that slavery is a very
terrible affair; kings, who use freedom with their sacred order, are tyrants;
and heaven is appealed to in vindication of their quarrel. Of this the reader
will see instances in these collections.

There is always a somewhat, where human nature, even in the most feeble
spirits; vindicates to itself its unalienable right. The following private
anecdote, told me by one who knew the parties concerned, illustrates this.

In the mad times of Sacheverel, when many seemed willing to go all lengths in
obedience to authority, a man of sense took some pains to give a lady, a friend
of his, juster notions than she had of the limits of obedience. Suppose, says
he, Madam, that the king should seize, by a quo warranto, your husband's
estate, and make him, and yourself, and children, beggars; would you think
resistance unlawful? I should have much cause of complaint, says the lady; but,
(raising her pretty eyes to heaven) we must not resist the Lord's anointed.
But, Madam, I will put a harder case still. Suppose the king should force your
ladyship into his bed, don't you think your husband might lawfully promote an
associatio^ for extirpating such a brutish Tarquin? The lady, with downcast
eyes, and a countenance covered with a rosy blush, answered: The case you now
put, Sir, is undoubtedly harder than the former. But, as the whole sin should
be the king's, and kings are answerable to God only, I do not think, my husband
could lawfully do any thing toward vindicating his honor by violence. The
gentleman knowing, that the lady was, as all the votaries of passive obedience,
staunch for the established church, and bitter, if a lady can be bitter,
against the dissenters, resolved to put to her one question farther, which he
did as follows: Give me leave, Madam, says he, to ask you once more; Suppose
the king should order your ladyship to go to meeting? What, (says she, rising
in a lovely passion, which enlivened every feature, with eyes sparkling, lips
quivering, and bosom heaving) me to a wicked schismatical presbyterian meeting!
(These opprob^ious words she had learned from the parson of the parish.) I
would kill him, (says she, clenching her little, weak, soft hand, which made
the gentleman hope he should have the pleasure of a box on the ear, of which
however he was disappointed) if I were to die for it, sooner than he should
make me enter the door of a conventicle.

If a weak delicate woman could be thus roused in defense of what she called
her religious liberty, surely a man ought to suffer emasculation as soon as to
yield himself a voluntary slave.

Hardly any people ever were so sordid, as not to show some love of liberty.
Even the Polish peasants, A. D 1620, oppressed by their tyrannical lords, fled
to the Ukraine, where there was more freedom MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXIV.198.
.

However indifferent about the welfare of his country a man may be in his
heart, it seems strange, that any man should fairly declare himself so. For he
who owns himself unconcerned about the liberty and happiness of so many
millions of his fellow creatures, (many of whom are persons of amiable
characters, and connected with himself by the most endearing ties,) declares
himself an unfeeling, sordid, selfish brute, hardened against natural
affection, and incapable of every generous, every tender, and virtuous
attachment. One would think, instead of making such a character a man's boast,
there should not any where be found a human being, who should not be enraged at
the imputation of such baseness of disposition.

Here let it be observed, at what a frightful rate of velocity we degenerate.
The love of our country, or public spirit, (says Mr. Gordon Cato's LET. II.11.
,) is a phrase in every body's mouth, but it is talked of without being felt.
Mr. Gordon wrote this, A. D. 1721. So miserably are we sunk in half a century,
that scarce any body now mentions love of country for any other purpose than to
turn it to ridicule

Whatever character we may have, says Mr. Alderman Heathcote, in his speech in
the house, A.D. 174^, or whatever character we may deserve among foreigners, I
hope we shall always take care to preserve the character of being a brave and a
free people. Foreign slaves may think as highly as they please, Sir, of the
steadiness of their public councils; but among such, I hope, we shall always be
deemed a turbulent and unsteady people. This character must always necessarily
attend a free government; because in all such governments, there have been,
there will always be, some minister, or some set of ministers, forming schemes
for overturning the liberties of the people, and establishing themselves in
arbitrary power. Such men are generally at first the idols of the people, and
before their latent designs come to be discovered, they generally prevail with
the people to enter into such measures, or to make such regulations as may
contribute to the success of their designs. But if the people are wise enough,
and sufficiently jealous of their liberties, as the people of this country,
thank God! have always hitherto been, they never fail to discover these designs
before they are ripe for execution. As soon as they have made this discovery,
they begin to see the evil tendency of the measures or regulations they have
been led into, and of course they must alter the former and repeal the latter.
This therefore which foreign slaves, as most of the people around us, impute to
a turbulency or unsteadiness in our temper, is nothing but the natural effect
of the freedom of our government; and whilst the cause lasts, which I hope it
will always do, the effect must continue the same.

And will you, my good countrymen, will the brave and generous spirited
English, so soon after the expulsion of popery and slavery, will you submit to
be enslaved by a handful of your fellow subjects? You, who have so often made
the mighty monarchs of France and Spain tremble on their thrones, and so lately
have made Europe stand aghast, are you not ashamed to show yourselves afraid of
a Harley, a Walpole, a Pelham, a Bute, a North? For either you were afraid of
them, or you suffered yourselves to be deceived by them, which is almost as
shameful; or you would, before now, have demanded, and obtained, either by
petition or by force, the correction of the ruinous abuses I have, in these
volumes, pointed out.

Besides the general reluctance in the people against commotions or alterations
in public affairs, occasioned by their timidity, indolence, and want of public
spirit; there are certain bodies of men in the nation, who think themselves
particularly interested in opposing all such proccedings, viz. the proprietors
of stocks, the placemen, pensioners, expectants, and other dependants on the
court, the established clergy, the army, and the inhabitants of the rotten
boroughs, who now make a rich harvest, every seven years, by sending up a
majority of the house of commons.

Whenever opposition is made to an apparently wise reformation, let the people
look that corruption be not at the bottom. When the Marshall d'Humieres had
overrun the Netherlands, and Holland appeared to be in the utmost danger from
the arms of France, the villainous magistrates of Amsterdam, Leyden, Delft, etc.
bribed (as by intercepted letters appeared) with French money, still opposed
the raising of an armament, fearing, as they pretended, to trust the Prince of
Orange with an army. The Prince, from despair, and fear of utter ruin to his
country, attempted to obtain authority for raising an army by a plurality of
voices, whereas by the constitution unanimity is absolutely necessary. This
proposal had almost lost the Prince his whole popularity. His enemies alleged,
that, from motives of ambition, he meant to overthrow the constitution of his
country. Shortly after this, he intercepted letters from D'Avaux, the French
ambassador, to the king his master, with accounts of money disbursed by him in
corrupting those patriotic magistrates, so jealous of the Prince of Orange's
ambition. This turned the tide in favor of the Prince and his proposed
armament against France. In the same manner, my good countrymen, whenever you
observe men expressing great fear lest the redress of undoubted and ruinous
grievances should produce fatal consequences; look, whether those cautious
patriots are not already, or do not expect to be gainers by present measures
and present men. If you find this to be the case, let every word those
gentlemen say against measures for redress, go for nothing. They are interested.

If it be urged, that those who now depend on places will be undone by the
proposed reformation, it may be answered, That it is easy to provide in a
moderate way for the necessitous; and that the others may drink port instead of
claret. The dependents on the court, though very numerous, much too numerous,
are but a handful, compared with the great multitude, who have neither hopes
nor fears from the ministry. In the year 1714, most of the merchants and monied
men were for the Hanover succession, and against the Jacobites; because they
thought their property would be most likely to be safe under protestant kings.
In our times, we see many of the monied men against their country's good. Our
men of property in the public funds, oppose whatever can be offered for
restoring independency to parliament, which alone can give hope of getting our
finances put into order. If you go to altering any thing, they cry, it will
produce disturbance, and then public credit may suffer. But will public credit
be safe, if you do not alter any thing? Such men as Price, and Hume, and
Grenville, who have hea^s for calculation, will tell you, that in the way we
have hitherto conducted our money-matters, there is the highest probability of
a national bankruptcy. And the excellent Price, particularly, tells you, that
it is not yet too late to save the nation. But he tells you, at the same time,
that nothing will save it but the faithful application of a fund for diminshing
the debts and taxes. And every body knows, that nothing make a ministry
faithful, but the fear of an independent parliament. Yet our men of property in
the funds are afraid of proposals for rendering our parliaments independent.
This is literally ne moriare mori. It is resolving to sit still, till the house
tumbles in ruins upon our heads, because being old and crazy, we are afraid of
propping it up.

It is true, that many of those whose property is chiefly in the funds, are
disposed to put the negative on all proposals for alterations even for the
better. They are apprehensive, that in the concussion of reformations and
restorations, public credit may be affected, by which they may come to be
losers.

Were public credit upon a sure foundation at present, it might be pretended
that it is prudent to avoid what may be likely to shake it. If a patient is in
a fair way toward recovery, there is no occasion to disturb his slumbers, for
the sake of his taking medicines. But if he is in a lethargy, it would be
strange practice to let him sleep on. Can any man of common understanding look
upon our public funds as in a state of safety, while the nation, with all that
belongs to it, lies at the mercy of a profligate court, and in the power of a
set of blundering ministers, who are pursuing measures, the natural tendency of
which is, To prejudice trade, and consequently to lesson the national income,
on which public credit depends? No certainly. On the contrary, the only means
for securing public credit, are, first, to associate for its support, as was
done on occasion of the rebellion in 1745, (this ought not to be put off one
day,) and then to associate for such redress of grievances, and such a
restoration of the constitution, especially respecting the house of commons, as
will of course put public credit and every thing else, upon a very different
foot from the present. In forming a national association, it will not be amiss
to make a proviso, that all public creditors who join the association, shall
have certain preferences, and other advantages, not to be allowed to those who
decline.

The established clergy in every country, are generally the greatest enemies to
all kinds of reformations, as they are generally the most narrow-minded and
most worthless The oppositon lately shown by the clergy of England to an
enlargement of religious liberty proves, that this maxim is equally just, when
applied to the clergy of this, as of other countries. In the course of my
reading, in order to make the collection, of which I have published a part, I
could not help setting down as many proofs of this observation, as would make
two volumes in octavo. Had our clergy behaved themselves as they ought on the
late occasion, I should have had thoughts of mercy toward them, and probably
should have suppressed what I had collected to their disadvantage. But as they
have lately shown themselves enemies to religious liberty, I think it is every
honest man's duty to do all he can to detect and defeat their mischief. At the
same time that I am thus severe on the body of the established clergy of this
and other countries, I own with pleasure, that I have been happy in the
friendship of many excellent men of that order, who really believed what they
subscribed and professed, which was the case of my most venerable parent, whose
memory will ever be sacred with me.
set of men in every country. Fortunately for the present times, the wings of
clerical power and influence are pretty close trimmed; so that I do not think
their opposition to the proposed reformations could be of any great
consequence, more of the people being inclined to despise than to follow them
blindly.

The most formidable opposition to the proposed redress of grievances may be
apprehended likely to come from the standing army, the great instrument of
slavery, without which no people ever were enslaved* But even this formidable
difficulty does not appear ^nsurmountable; of which in the sequel.

A tyrant, says Aristotle POLIT. V.11.
, cannot be overthrown, but by agreement among the people. Therefore all
tyrants [whether kings, grandees, or ministers,] labor to keep up dissensions
and parties among the people. Aristotle Ibid. V.12.
thinks the most precarious species of tyranny is that which is supported by a
few, as being particularly exposed to the envy of the people, and liable to
contests among themselves. A corrupt parliamentary government is a sort of
oligarchy, and if we will take Aristotle's word, not so formidable as some
other kinds of tyranny.

I wish it may not be found, that the wickedness of some and the folly of
others among us, have produced a ground of opposition and party-spirit of a
peculiar kind, the effects of which may disturb our measures for procuring
redress.

It is an old and vulgar error, That opposition and party are necessary in a
free state. It is true, that when the government is of the common character of
governments, that is, a junto of artful and pushing grandees, who have thrust
themselves into the management, in order to enrich themselves and their
families; it is very necessary that there should be a party to detect and
expose their schemes and machinations against the country. But this is only
saying, that one evil is necessary to balance another evil. Nobody ever thought
an opposition necessary in a private family, where the heads have nothing but
the good of the family in view. Sound politics therefore direct, not to set up
one party against another, the one to battle against the other; but to take
away the fuel of parties, the emolumentary invitations to the fatal and
mischievous strife, in which every victory is a loss to the country.

It is amazing, says Schoock RESP. ACHAEOR, p. 79.
, that though history shows so many kingdoms and commonwealths ruined by civil
discord, yet we see, in many countries, a set of men, blinded by pride and
ambition, forcing their country upon this fatal rock; and the people still as
thoughtless of the danger, as if there were no warnings of it upon record.

We treasure up money, and lay in store of provisions; we build walls and
fortifications, and form magazines of arms against our enemies; and we neglect
what is at all times in our power, and is incomparably more useful for our
defense, viz. the arts, by which, as history teaches, we may secure the state.
From history we should learn, that Cyrus, called in by the Carians to quell a
civil broil, enslaved that country; that the Romans took the same advantage of
subjecting to their yoke the states of Greece; many others involved in domestic
quarrels, which that ambitious people artfully fomented; that the aristocracy
of the Rhegians in this manner lost their liberties; that the Seleucians, while
they agreed among themselves, despised the Parthians, but when discord
prevailed among them they were ruined; that the ancient ^ritons, calling in the
Saxons to assist them against their neighbors the Picts and Scots, were
oppressed by their auxiliaries RESP. ACHAEOR. p. 80.
. In commune non con^^lunt, etc. They do not consult the common interest. It is
seldom that two or three states will assemble to repulse the general danger.
Thus while they resist ^ingly, they are all conquered Tacit. IN AGRIC.
Caesar had not made so easy a conquest of Gaul, had not that country been torn
with intestine divisions Caes. BELL. GALL. LIB. I. PASS.
.' Civil discords, says Livy, have been, and will be, more ruinous to states
and kingdoms than foreign war, pestilence, and all the calamities which the
wrath of heaven sends down upon mankind.' Nulla quam vis minima, etc. No nation
(says Vegetius) however inconsiderable, can be totally overthrown by its
enemies, unless it be divided within itself. But intestine divisions arm one
party against the other, and disqualify both for opposing the common enemy
Schoock. RESP. ACHAEOR. 78.
.

A writer in the London Magazine, July 1762, p. 377, treats this subject as
follows:

Attempts have been made to excite jealousy and ill will between one part of
the nation and another. The northern part of the kingdom has been represented
as less worthy of the royal countenance and protection than the southern.
People, whose dwelling is parted from ours only by a wall or a rivulet, are
mentioned as a different species; and every one who happens to be born on the
farther side, is stigmatized as being destitute of honesty and parts, incapable
of public service, and unworthy of public confidence: but the same difference
might with the same reason be made between a native of Lancashire and one of
Kent, as between a native of York and of Edinburgh. And a man might with as
much propriety reject the advice of a physician, because he lives in another
parish, as a prince the service of an honest and able subject, because he was
born in a particular county. It is indeed the characteristic of a wise and good
prince to avail himself of integrity and parts wherever they happen to be
found, without any regard to external circumstances, least of all to the
particular spot of his dominions where they were produced. These who labor to
spirit up intestine bro^ls and divisions, at a time when our utmost united
strength is necessary to support us against the united force of foreign and
intestine enemies, cannot surely be considered as the friends of their country;
for it is impossible to give a stronger proof that their interest is not that
of the public.

Eating oatmeal, scratching for the itch, lousiness, and beggary, are what an
English porter would very readily apply to a Scotch nobleman of the most
independent fortune. Even this hackneyed and vulgar abuse, which one would
expect to hear only in ginshops and alehouses, was for years the standing topic
of wit and raillery in a political paper, professing to handle the most
important concerns of the state; and the Scots had the good fortune to hear
themselves reproached every day for beggary. Every vice and bad quality, which
could render the Scotch people the obj^ct of hatred and abhorrence to the human
race itself, and to Englishmen in particular, was imputed, and boldly charged
to them. In short, the very ^ame of Scot was made a term synonimous to every
thing that was rascally and dishonorable in character, excepting only that of
coward. Why this imputation among innumerable others equally false and
ridiculous, was always carefully avoided, I can only see one good reason, and
that was, the writer's regard for his own personal safety. He knew that this
charge was the only one he could make which might be directly, and in point
confuted, by send^ng him a challenge. Amidst all his folly he was wise enough
not to give every Scotchman, who bore the appearance of a gentleman so very
fair a pretense, which he suspected many would gladly lay hold on to call him
out, and, if he refused a meeting, to use him according to the rules
established among men of honor. LAND. MAG. 1768, p. 309.


Lord Chatham shows a nobler way of thinking; who, in the debate on the
Stamp Act, spoke as follows: I have no local attachments. It is indifferent to
me, whether a man was rocked in his cradle on this side of the Tweed, or on
that. I sought for merit, wherever it was to be found. It is my boast that I
was the first minister that looked for it; and I found it in the mountains of
the north. I called it forth, and drew it into your service. A hardy race of
men! men, who, when left by your jealousy, became a prey to the artifices of
your enemies, and had gone nigh to overturn the state in the war before the
last. These men were, in the last war, brought to combat on your side. They
served with fidelity, as they ^^ught with valor; and conquered for you in
every part of the world. Detested be the national reflections against them! They
are unjust, groundless, illiberal, unmanly. When I ceased to serve his Majesty
as a Minister, it was not the country of the man by which I was moved; but that
the man of the country wanted wisdom, and held sentiments incompatible with
liberty, etc.

The minds of the railers against our northern brethren are so narrow, that
they can take in but half this little island. A generous spirit, according to
our elegant poet, embraces all human kind.

Our times have, I suppose, exhibited the first instance of persons setting up
for patriots upon the avowed principle of making one half of their country
enemies to the other half. All patriots before those who published a series of
writings entitled The North Briton, which very title was intended to make North
Britain odious to South Britain, have contented themselves with making a
tyrant, or his tools odious to the people; but never thought of teaching the
people to hate the people.

This jealousy, industriously fomented by certain partisans, shows itself in
various ways, and, among others, in an affectation of calling the British
parliament the English parliament, as was usual and proper before the union;
but ridiculous, so long as the union subsists. This attachment to the terms
England and English, in preference to Britain and British, is peculiarly absurd
in men, who profess themselves admirers of liberty; because we received the
name of England from the Angles or Anglo-Saxons, who conquered us, in exchange
for the name we were known by, when free, and before the Romans set foot on our
island.

The South Britons ought not to be too narrow-hearted to their northern
brethren. Time was when the English, flying from the oppressions of William the
Conqueror, received protection in Scotland Hume, HIST. I.175.
.

It is held by true politicians (says Sir R. Steel in his speech A. D. 1719,
against a bill for altering the Scotch Peerage) a most dangerous thing to give
the meanest of the people just cause of provocation, much more to enrage men of
spirit with downright injuries DEB. COM. VI.206.
. And afterward, We may flatter ourselves that property is always the source
of power; but property, like all other possessions, has its effects according
to the talents and abilities of the owner. And as it is allowed that courage
and learning are very common qualities in that nation, it seems not very
advisable to provoke the greatest, and, for ought we know, the best men among
them.

The direct tendency of libels is the breach of the public peace, by stirring
up the objects of them to revenge, and perhaps to bloodshed Blackst. IV.150.
. But the wicked man scatters firebrarnds, arrows and death, and says, Am I
not in sport PROVE. XXVI.18.
.

The Sicilian vespers are a sufficient warning against fomenting national
quarrels. In that massacre eight thousand French were butchered in one night in
Sicily. The head of the conspiracy was Procida, whose wife had been debauched
by a Frenchman. The bloody project was kept secret three years, and its
execution hastened by the rudeness of a Frenchman to a Sicilian bride. The
Sicilians massacred several of their own country-women, because they had
married Frenchmen; and dashed out the brains of many infants, the issue of
those marriages MOD. UNIV. HIST. 147.
.

One would suspect that they who set up, and keep up, the division between the
two kingdoms, must have a warm side to France. For the union between the two
kingdoms, which some among us seem desirous to be dissolved, was one of the
severest blows France has ever suffered, as being the effectual shutting of the
back door, by which she annoyed England the most fatally.

It is remarkable that in Charles's time, the patriotic parliament blame the
papists and bishops for sowing divisions between Scotland and England PARL.
HIST. X.LI.
. In our times the patriots are the sowers of divisions. And it is to be
observed, that in those times the nation appeared in defense of Scotland, and
threw the blame upon the incendiaries. In the late squabble we have not seen
such a spirit of justice exerted by any national act, though all men of sense
and breeding have execrated the railers in private conversation. This neglect
ought to be made up, in order to heal the breach, and pave the way for
unanimity, without which it will be impossible to procure redress of grievances.

An incendiary (says Whitelock, in his speech at a consultation concerning
danger apprehended from Cromwell, A. D 1644) is one that raises the fire of
contention in a state. Whether Cromwell be such an incendiary between the two
kingdoms [ England and Scotland] cannot be known, but by proofs of his words,
or actions, tending to the kindling of this fire of contention between the two
nations, and raising differences between us Whitel. MEM* 112.
.

Surely, (says Mr. Maynard) Ibid.
he who kindles the coals of contention between our brethren of Scotland and
us, [this was long before the union] is an incendiary, and to be punished as it
is agreed on by both kingdoms.

No wise and public-spirited citizen of this great and growing empire will
think of disgracing any part of it; but, on the contrary, of improving all. But
our portentous times have produced ministers who have labored to alienate our
colonies; and patriots, who have sought popularity by acting the part of
incendiaries. If we do not gain sufficiently by our colonies, let us encourage,
not oppress them. If our northern brethren have not such high notions of
liberty as we have (what nation ever had?) let us improve their conceptions;
not enrage their minds by illiberal reflections. We shall find a corrupt court
but too hard for us, if we even keep ourselves ever so well united. How much
more, if we become a chaos of jarring and furious factions?

Do we not look back with horror on the times, when we were at enmity with
Scotland, Wales, and France, or when we were sheathing our swords in one
another's bosoms, the father massacring the son, and the son the father, in the
cursed contest between the roses? What Englishman would wish to see those
dreadful times return?

There was a shameful riot against foreigners A.D. 1517. The complaint against
them was, that there were such numbers of them employed as artificers, that the
English could get no work. But it is probable (says Mr. Anderson HIST. COM.
I.348.
) that the true cause of complaint was, their working cheaper, and being more
industrious than our own people, who trusted to their exclusive privilege.

The first and chief article against Lauderdale was, that he had contrived and
endeavored to raise jealousies and misunderstandings between your majesty's
kingdoms of England and Scotland, whereby hostilities might have ensued and may
arise, if not prevented DEB. COM. I.354.
. 1679.

An article against Radcliffe was, that he and Strafford directly conspired to
stir up enmity and hostility between his majesty's subjects of Ireland and of
Scotland PARL. HIST. IX.193.
.

If I should but touch upon the usage we [the Scots] continually meet with from
this nation [ England] I should not be believed, if all Europe were not
sufficiently informed of their hatred to all strangers, and inveterate
malignity against the Scots. I know very well, that men of gravity and good
breeding among you [the English] are not guilty of scurrilo^s reflections upon
any nation. But when we are to consider the case in question, we must have a
regard to the general temper and disposition of the people FLETCHER, p. 372.
.

When James I. came into England, it was alleged, that he too partially
encouraged the Scots, who came with him, by giving them places and pensions;
and that many of them established themselves in England by rich matches. This
excited the jealousy of the English, and not without some appearance of reason,
because Scotland was then a foreign country to England. But it would be as
absurd, in our times, to object to our united northern brethren's coming to the
southern part of the island, as for the people of Sussex to complain of some
Surry men coming to settle among them, to earn, and spend money, and to raise
families among them. The people of North Britain have, indeed, great reason to
complain of the continual emigration of the flower of their youth, which thins
and impoverishes their part of the island. And if the northern parts lose the
southern must certainly gain: and the greatest of all gains to a country is
people.

If what King James I. had given the English had been as carefully examined as
what was given the Scots, it would have been found ten times more, by the
confession of the historians themselves; but herein was not seen the same
inconvenience. And Weldon tells us, that Lord Salisbury used to make the Scots
buy books of fee-farms of perhaps one hundred pounds a year, and would compound
with them for one thousand pounds, which they agreed to, because they were sure
to have them passed without any control or charge. Then would Salisbury fill
up these books with such prime land, as should be worth ten or twenty thousand
pounds, which, as treasurer, he might easily do, and so enriched himself
infinitely, and cast the envy on the Scots, in whose names these books
appeared, and are still on record to all posterity RAP. II.186.
. The consequence was, that the commons resolved, A. D. 1614* to pray the king
especially to prevent future settlement of the Scots in England, the very
contrary of what a due attention to their own interest would have taught them
to request Ibid.
. By such arts as these, it is easy to make any set of people odious.

If Scotland pays to England a balance of a million yearly, I insist upon it,
that country is more valuable to England than any colony in her possession,
besides the other advantages I have specified. Therefore they are no friends
either to England or to truth, who affect to depreciate the northern part of
the united kingdom Sm^l^et, que^^d LAND. MAG. July 1771, p. 370.
.

Sir Christopher Pigot was severely handled by the commons in the time of James
I. for speaking scandalously of the Scotch nation in the debates about the
union. He was committed to the Tower, and expelled the house. He begs to be
released on account of his health. He was set at liberty; but no more received
into the house PARL. HIST. V.179.181.
. No Scotchman will speak dishonourably of England in the Scotch parliament,
said James I. on this occasion Ibid. 200.
. James told the parliament he understood, there was a great jealousy among the
commons, that the Scots would have all the lucrative places; while, on the
contrary, the Scots thought the union would prove a grievous degradation from
being an ancient independent monarchy (three hundred years before the christian
era, according to ^ome authors) down to a set of remote, disembodied,
neglected counties, an appendage to the English dominion. He tells them, he
wonders they should not be proud that the empire, of which they were subjects,
should comprehend a great many different nations, England, Scotland, Wales,
Ireland, Am^^ica, etc. He mentions the happiness which had already been
produced by the union of the crowns only. That the bordering counties of
Cumberland, Northumberland, and Westmoreland, which used, for many ages, to be
a scene of blood and devastation, were now in peace. He asks them, if they wish
the former disorderly state of things renewed, or for ever abolished PARL.
HIST. V.194, 199.
? If we had nothing of James I. but these thoughts on the union, we should say.
he was a very judicious prince.

The happy union of Scotland with England, has ever since the accomplishment
of it flourished in interchangeable blessings, plenty, and mutual love and
friendship; but of late, by what fatal disasters and dark underminings we are
divided and severed into Scotch and English armies, let their well-composed
preambles speak for me, which I wish were printed as an excellent emblem of
brotherly love, which discovers who has wounded us both, and how each should
strive to help the other in distress, seeing their and our religion and laws
lie both at stake together. Think of it what you will, your subsistence is
ours; we live or die, rise or fall together. Let us then find out the boute-feu
of this prelatical war, and make them pay the shot for their labor, who no
doubt long for nothing more than that we should break with them who worship the
same God and serve the same master with us Ibid. IX.204.
. Sir John Wray's speech on the demands of the Scots, A. D. 1640. See other
speeches showing a great desire of unity between the two nations Ibid.
.

On his let us hear lord Bolingbroke Bolingbr. REM* HIST. ENG. 255
:

King James Ist's design of uniting the two kingdoms of England and Scotland
failed. It was too great an undertaking for so bad a workman. We must think
that the general arguments against it were grounded on prejudice, or false and
narrow notions. But there were other reasons drawn from the jealousies of that
time, and from the conduct of the king, who had beforehand declared all the
post nati, or persons born since his accession to the English throne,
naturalized in the two kingdoms; and these were without doubt the true reasons
which prevailed against the union.

March 1645, a formal complaint was sent from the Scotch parliament to that of
England, of accusations written by one Wright, tending to divide the two
kingdoms, and desiring that he may be found out and punished PARL. HIST.
XIV.273.
. The parliament of England orders inquiry to be made after this incendiary.
Another letter was sent from the Scotch commissioners to the house of peers to
the same purpose Ibid. 303.
. The Scots might justly have made such a demand not long ago. Resolved, That
the book entitled, SOME PAPERS OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF SCOTLAND, etc. does
contain matter false and scandalous, and the lords and commons do order that it
be burnt by the hands of the hangman, and do declare, that the author thereof
is an incendiary between the two kingdoms of England and Scotland Ibid. 318.
.

The Scotch army came into England in defense of the cause of liberty, against
great promises made them by the king, at the time when his party was uppermost
in the winter season; they continued in the field night and day skirmishing
with the enemy, who possessed all the forts and places of lodgment, pursued the
king's army to York, joined the parliament's forces, and beat prince Rupert;
took York, took Newcastle by storm, blocked up Carlisle, sent part back to
Scotland to oppose the Irish and disaffected Scots. They were ill fed and ill
paid in England. A month's pay promised January 4, not received till April
PARL. HIST. XIII.474.
. Parliament shows great anxiety about the Scotch army's advancing southward,
and sends letters about it to the Scotch commissioners, which shows how much
they depend upon it. They send two members of the house of commons with the
letter signed by the Speaker, full of acknowledgments of past services Ibid.
496.
. -- The Scotch army, by whom the northern counties were reduced and kept in
obedience. The Scotch army gains advantages in Herefordshire, for which a
jewel, value 500 l. was voted to general Lesley Ibid. XIV.28.
. Commissioners repeatedly sent to the Scotch parliament, full of the great
importance of a good understanding between the two nations. -- The common
soldiers begin to be sick with eating of fruit. Letter from the Scotch army to
parliament from Herefordshire Ibid. 36.
. Subsisted on pease, apples, and what they found on the ground Ibid.
. They were fourteen months in arrears Ibid. 46.
. Parliament always acknowledges, but pleads poverty. A remonstrance afterward
from the Scots to parliament says, they must perish or disband; not being paid,
nor allowed to have free quarters, nor any means of subsistence. That the
English parliament sent for them, and starved them when they came. The Scotch
army lying in the northern parts, undoubtedly kept the king from going into
Scotland, by which he might have gained a great advantage. When the Scots came
into England, the parliament had nothing in the north parts but Berwick; soon
after Sunderland was taken and garrisoned for the parliament. Then the army
under the earl of Newcastle was driven into York, and the north cleared of the
king's party. The town of Hartlepool and castle of Stockton were taken and
garrisoned for parliament. The Scotch had likewise their share in the defeat of
Rupert at Long Marston. They stormed Newcastle, took Tinmouth. All this they
did in a manner gratis; for they had neither pay nor maintenance, nor clothes,
to defend them from the injuries of the weather. The Scots, in November 1645,
were in garrison in Carlisle, Newcastle, Tinmouth, Hartlepool, Stockton,
Warkworth, and Thirleston. Parliament insisted on their evacuating those places
immediately, without their pay; which they promise to make good to them PARL.
HIST. XIV.130.
. In one of their remonstrances to parliament, they beg to have clothes to
cover their nakedness Ibid. 132.
. Parliament publishes a declaration, in which they excuse themselves as well
as they can, saying, they had done every thing in their power for paying and
entertaining the Scotch army.

We find in the PARL. HIST. XV.59. a remonstrance from the Scotch
commissioners, vindicating their nation, and offering to withdraw their army.
They complain of many calumnies and execrable aspersions cast upon the kingdom
of Scotland, in pamphlets, expecting from the justice of the honorable house
that they would of themselves vindicate the Scots, as the Scots had them.
Accordingly the lords afterward made a resolution, that the Scots at Newcastle
had behaved in every respect properly, and with perfect fidelity to England.
That they (the lords) are resolved to use all means that may clearly evidence
to the world their good affections to that kingdom, and care to preserve
inviolably the happy union. Resolved, that all devisers or printers of any
scand^lous pamphlets or papers that shall, from this day, be printed against
the kingdom of Scotland, or their army in England, shall be punished in a
parliamentary way according to their demerits. A committee appointed for
managing all matters concerning the peace and union of the two kingdoms.

The following are the words of the freemen and citizens of London, in their
petition to parliament, A. D. 1646:

We cannot but with sorrowful and perplexed hearts, resent the devilish devices
of malignant, factious, and seditious spirits, who make it their daily
practice, and would rejoice in it as their masterpiece, if they could once
effect to divide these kingdoms of England and Scotland so firmly conjoined by
a blessed, and we hope, everlasting union PARL. HIST. XV.232.
. They request that by the justice of parliament, condign punishment may be
inflicted upon such firebrands, the greatest enemies to the church and state;
with more to the same purpose.

We have likewise a petition of the mayor, aldermen, and commons of London, to
the lords, desiring that jealousies against the Scots may be abolished, to whom
they acknowledge great obligations for coming so readily, when at peace, to the
help of England, at so unseasonable a time of the year, when England was so
weak, and to whose interposition the success against the king was greatly
owing, and how necessary for future happiness to keep the amity between the two
kingdoms.

We are confident that a curse from heaven shall be upon those persons, who,
for their own ends and interests, colored with specious pretenses, apply
themselves to sow discord between brethren, to make divisive motions, and to
create and increase differences between the kingdoms. Scotch committee at
London to parliament, June 16th, 1646 PARL. HIST. XIV.418.
.

The kingdom stands involved in many engagements and debts both to their
brethren of Scotland, (who, like true christian brethren, came to our aid
against the common enemy) as also to a multitude of officers. Petition of the
lord mayor, aldermen, etc. of London, to the lords, July 1647 Ibid. XVI.53.
. And afterward one o^ the articles of their petition is, that by just and
good means, the correspondence with our brethren of Scotland may, according to
the national covenant, be maintained and preserved Ibid. 57.
. When this kingdom [ England] was in difficulties, if the kingdom of Scotland
had not willingly, yea, cheerfully sacrificed their peace to concur with this
kingdom, your lordships all know what might have been the danger: therefore let
us hold fast that union which is so happily established between us, and let
nothing make us again two, who are so many ways one, all of one language, in
one island, all under one king, one in religion, yea in covenant, so that in
ef^ect we differ in nothing but in name, as brethren do, which I wish were also
removed, that we might be altogether one, if the two kingdoms shall think fit.
For I dare say, not the greatest kingdom upon earth can prejudice both, so much
as one of them may the other. Marquis of Argyle's speech at a committee of both
houses Ibid. XIV.464.
.

In the famous protestation, A. D. 1641, all the members of both houses
solemnly swear to keep up the union among the three kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and this before the union of the two kingdoms of
Britain. [In those days, people understood the importance of un^on.] The
commons wanted the lords to agree to a bill for the general taking the
protestation PARL. HIST. IX.503.
. The lords rej^ct the bill, though they th^ught it right for both houses to
take the protestation. The commons conclude that this was done by the influence
of the popish members and bishops. They resolve that no pers^n refusing it, is
fit to be in any place of trust. Order this resolution to be sent by the
members to their several counties, cities, and boroughs, and to be printed and
published.

This king expected parliament to support him against the Scotch army at
Newcastle. But it was the leading men of the party against the king that
encouraged the Scotch army to enter England, and this party was so superior in
parliament, that few of the king's friends durst open their mouths to support
his interest. It was this Scotch invasion that compelled the king to call a
parliament, and enabled the parliament to break all the king's measures, and
oblige him to suffer a redress of grievances. In a word, it was solely by means
of the Scots that the parliament had it in their power to restore the
government to its ancient and natural state. They (parliament) would have acted
against their own interest, and directly contrary to the end they proposed, if
they had supplied the king with means to drive the Scots out of the kingdom.
Accordingly they took not one step tending to that purpose. On the contrary, it
evidently appeared that they considered the Scots as brethren, who having the
same interest as the English, were come to assist them, and act in concert with
them Rap. II.365.
. The English ought never to have forgot this Sir William Widrington member for
Northumberland, happening to call the Scotch army rebels, would have been sent
to the Tower if he had not retracted, and promised never more to offend in like
manner. Parliament (instead of opposing the Scots) voted them 300000 l. in
reward for their brotherly assistance, and prolonged the treaty with them till
the triennial bill was passed, and more of the grievances redressed, 1641, the
very contrary of the tyrant's hopes, and a treaty was made with the Scots for
securing and restoring their liberties. Rap. II.365.


Had the Scots been as tame as the English, for ought that appears, Charles I.
might have avoided calling a parliament as long as he lived HIST. ESS. ENGL.
CONSTABLE. p. 101.
.

The approach of the Scotch army was the cause of the king's calling a
parliament; and their presence kept the king in awe. We cannot do without the
Scots, said Strode in the house Hume, HIST. STUARTS, I.252.
.

We, the lords and commons assembled, in the parliament of England, considering
with what wisdom and public affection our brethren of the kingdom of Scotland
did concur with the endeavors of this parliament, in procuring and
establishing a firm peace and amity between the two nations, and how lovingly
they have since invited us to a nearer and higher degree of union, -- cannot
doubt but they will with as much forwardness and affection, concur with us in
settling peace in this kingdom, and preserving it in their own, that so we may
mutually reap the benefit of that amity and alliance so happily made, and
strongly confirmed between the two nations* etc. Wherefore we have thought good
to make known to our brethren, etc. Parliament's declaration to the Scots,
November 1642. The Scots in those days, when the spirit of liberty ran highest,
were always called by the parliament, our brethren; not as now, the slavish
beggarly, itchy, thieving Scots PARL. HIST. XII.31.
.

By the assistance of the Scotch nation, reality was given to those schemes of
government, which had long been the ardent wish of the generous part of the
English Maccul. HIST. V.384.
.

It is certain that Scotland began the solemn league against the tyranny of
Charles, and that England and Ireland came into it after PARL. HIST. XVI.18.
.

The solemn league and covenant, A. D. 1638, was occasioned by the king's
attempt to introduce the liturgy in Scotland; it contained an engagement to
support religion, as it was established in 1580; all, Scotland, but the court,
subscribed it Rap. II.303.
. The malcontents were reckoned 1000 to one. The Scots showed twice the spirit
the English showed against the kings innovations. They brought him to make
proposals. Not being content with the proposals, they protest publicly against
his declaration, in which they positively insist on a general assembly and
parliament, that they were not guilty, as pretended by the king of any unlawful
combination or rebellion; that the king did not disallow nor discharge any of
the innovations complained of, etc. They tell the commissioner that if the king
refuses to call a general assembly, they will call one themselves Ibid. 305.
. They reject eleven propositions from the king. He reduces them to two. They
reject them: An assembly is called. The commissioner orders them to break up.
They sit by their own authority. It is therefore unjust to blame them as if
their whole motive for resisting the king had been the support of
presbyterianism. They meant liberty as much as the English did. It was as much
a point with them not to receive the liturgy, when forced upon them, as with
the English not to receive popery. It was the very wantonness of tyranny to
impose the liturgy upon them, because they could do without it. They made
almost twenty acts directly opposite to the king's intention Rap. 307.
. Among others, an act condemning the clergy's holding civil offices, as of
justices, etc. and sitting and voting in parliament. They boldly annulled (says
Rapin) things established by parliament.

The king raises an army in England, to suppress the Scots. Pretends (in order
to prevail with the English to go to war against the Scots) that the Scots were
going to invade England. And the deluded king-rid^en English rise at the call
of the tyrant, to crush the spirit of liberty in their brave brethren of
Scotland. The Scots publish papers in England, calling on the English to bestir
themselves against the tyranny, instead of taking part with it. And they order
their forces not to approach within ten miles of the borders which, overthrows
the king's pretense of their intending an invasion. The Scots intimidated
suddenly, send to the king in his camp, offering proposals of peace, which,
however, make the king's pretenses of the rebellious spirit of the Scots, and
their intended invasion, appear very ridiculous Ibid. 309.
. A peace is patched up, on very precarious terms Ibid. 311.
. A new assembly. They make several acts directly opposite to the king's
intentions. A parliament. They do the same, 1639. Thus the wings of prerogative
were very close cut in Scotland; which demonstrates that the Scots valued civil
liberty as well as religious. See the titles of those free acts Rap. 312.
. The king accordingly prorogues them suddenly. They protest against the
prorogation. The king published his pretense for breaking the late peace with
the Scots. The real reason was, their opposition to his tyranny. The king makes
a mighty noise about a letter said to have been sent to the French king, by the
malcontents for his assistance Ibid. 314
.

Among other things, the popular leaders were encouraged by the example of the
Scotch, whose encroachments had totally subverted monarchy Hume, HIST. STUARTS,
I.292.
. All this ought to give our northern brethren great honor in the estimation
of the friends of liberty. Instead of which we have seen some, whose pretenses
to that character have been very loud, setting themselves at the head of the
disparagers of that people; how consistently, let themselves explain, if they
can.

Charles I. lost all his power in Scotland, long before his authority in
England was annihilated. The Scots now considered themselves as a republic, and
made no account of the authority of their prince, says Mr. Hume Ibid. I.291.
.

It is true, Mrs. Macaulay insists, that the Scots, by their interposition in
the time of Charles I. meant chiefly the establishment of presbyterianism. So
Mr. Hume thinks, the English, in their struggle for liberty, meant chiefly
religious liberty Ibid. I.254.
.

Whatever our modern patriots may think, it is certain, that our wise ancestors
in all ages had thought the union between the two kingdoms a matter of great
advantage for England.

The union of the two kingdoms was proposed so long ago, as Edward Ist's last
parliament at Carlisle. A. D. 1307 PARL. HIST. I.146.
.

The union between the kingdoms was attempted by Henry VIII. by Edward VI.
though England had lately conquered a great part of Scotland. Repeatedly by
James I. in whose time several articles were agreed on. No mention of it under
Charles I. He wanted rather to conquer both kingdoms, than unite them. There
was a strong confederacy between the kingdoms during the civil wars. After the
battle of Worcester, commissioners were appointed by parliament. All Scotland
was then for the union. Cromwell's turning out the parliament, prevented its
establishment. Cromwell's scheme for a general parliament of the three kingdoms
was in fact an union; and Cromwell, April 12th, 1654, published an ordinance
for uniting England and Scotland, by which wards, services, and slavish tenures
were taken away. They were restored at the restoration, to the great damage of
the country. Under Charles II. the Scotch make overtures toward union.
Difficulties were started by lawyers, particularly that the constitution would
be altered, and that it was treason to attempt altering the constitution by 8
Iac. VI. Thus the Scotch first moved this treaty, and first broke it off. Under
James II. nothing was done. The times too busy, and too turbulent for union.
William afterward recommended it; but it could not be brought about till Queen
Anne's time. And now some patriots want to have it broken again. It was thought
necessary to abolish the Scotch parliament, because two parliaments would be
always battling it, and the Scots would demolish the union whenever they
pleased, and the intention was, a lasting and incorporating union, that should
put an an end to all distinctions and unite all interests. Queen Anne was so
earnest about it, that she went twice to the meeting of the commitee, to see
how they went on, and to press the execution. An union of the two kingdoms has
been long wished for, being so necessary for establishing the lasting peace,
happiness and prosperity of both nations.' Commissioners words. Queen's answer.
I shall always look upon it as a particular happiness if the union, which will
be so great a security to both kingdoms, can be accomplished in my reign Tind.
CONTIN. I.734.739.740, 741.
.

I believe most impartial men have blamed the conduct of England in the affair
of the Darien colony, and think we owe the Scots a good turn toward making up
for our ill usage of them on that occasion, I do not say, the injury we did
them, because I write with healing views.

The question was put concerning the Darien colony, in the house of peers, A.
D. School. Several lords protested against severe proceedings, because there was
not time enough to judge of the merits of the cause. The house, however,
addressed the king against it, because it was likely to be hurtful to the
English plantation-trade, and to break the good correspondence between Spain
and England. [Therefore England was to do an unjust thing.] They acknowleged,
that the case of the Scots was pitiable; for that they must be great losers by
being disappointed of the advantage they proposed, and by the loss of the great
sum they had laid out. They wish [kind souls!] that the Scots may desist,
because they will only be greater losers in the end. They put the king in mind,
that there had been a former address to him, which showed the sense of the
nation. [The nation did not certainly approve of the Scotch nation's becoming
considerable in commerce. Neither did the Dutch approve of the English
settlement at Amboyna.] This address, however, was carried by only four or five
votes; and sixteen lords protested against it, and the commons refused to
concur with it. The king very humanely took notice, in his answer, of the
hardship to which the Scots were to be reduced by this opposition from England,
and of the clashing of interests, which would probably continue, while the two
kingdoms remained separate, and again recommends to them the union. Steps were
accordingly taken toward it; but nothing done effectually DEB. PEERS, II.8.
.

Queen Anne, in her first speech, had renewed the motion made by the late king,
for the union of both kingdoms. Many of those who seemed now ( A. D. 1702,) to
have the greatest share of her favor and confidence, opposed it with much
heat, and not without indecent reflections on the Scotch nation. Yet it was
carri^d by a great majority, that the queen should be empowered to name
commissioners for treating of an union. It was so visibly the interest of
England, and of the present government, to shut the back door against the
practices of France, and the attempts of the pretended prince of Wales, that
the opposition made to this first step toward an union, and the indecent
scorn, with which Seymour and others treated the Scots, were clear indications,
that the posts they were brought into, had not changed their tempers; but that,
instead of healing matters, they intended to irritate them farther by their
reproachful speeches. The bill went through both houses, notwithstanding the
rough treatment it met with at first.

It is with the greatest satisfaction, that I have given my assent to a bill
for uniting England and Scotland into one kingdom. I consider this union as a
matter of the greatest importance to the wealth, strength, and safety of the
whole island, and at the same time as a work of so much difficulty and nicety
in its own nature, that, till now, all attempts, which have been made toward it
in the course of above a hundred years, have proved ineffectual, and therefore
I make no doubt, but it will be remembered, and spoken of hereafter to the
honor of those who have been instrumental in bringing it to such a happy
conclusion. I desire and expect from all my subjects of both nations, that from
henceforth they act with all possible respect and kindness to one another; that
so it may appear to all the world, they have hearts disposed to become one
people. This will be a great pleasure to me, and will make us all quickly
sensible of the good effect of this union Queen Anne's SPEECH TO PARL. A. D.
1700
.

The lords and commons answer, That they thank her Majesty for her gracious
approbation of the share they had in bringing the treaty of union between the
two kingdoms to a happy conclusion; a work which (after so many fruitless
endeavors) seems designed by Providence to add new luster to the glories of
her majesty's reign DEB. COM. IV.59.
. And see another speech and answer, to the same purpose Ibid. 70, 72, 73.
.

In the year 1714, a virulent pamphlet was complained of in the house of Peers,
exclaiming against the union as very advantageous to Scotland, and the contrary
to England. The printer was taken into custody of the black rod. Said, he had
the MS. from Barber's, printer of the Gazette and Votes of the Commons. Barber
would answer no questions tending to strengthen the charge against himself.
Lord Oxford was suspected for the author. A peer [anonymous] said, They had
nothing to do with the printer or publisher; but that it highly imported the
house to find the author, in order to do justice to the Scotch nation. Barber
and Morphew were thereupon enlarged from the custody of the black rod. The
house of peers address the Queen, and observe, That the pamphlet was highly
dishonorable and scandalous to her subjects of Scotland,' etc. They take
notice, that the Queen had often been pleased to declare from the throne, that
the union of the two kingdoms is the peculiar happiness of her reign. They
humbly request the Queen to publish her royal proclamation, with reward and
promise of pardon to accomplices, in order to the discovering of the author.
This was accordingly done, and a reward of 300l. proposed DEB. PEERS, II.404.
.

Small, member for Gloucester, obliged to ask pardon of the house, for
reflecting on the Scotch nation, A. D. 1716, just after the rebellion Tind.
CONTIN. I.495.
. Our incendiary writers reflect on them immediately after a glorious war,
which, (if Lord Chatham is to be believed,) we could not have carried on
without them Ibid.
.

There has been a great outcry made by some, about the supposed mischief which
has been the consequence of the union. North Britain sends (they observe,)
sixty-one members to both houses. They are particularly obnoxious to
court-influence. They are, therefore, a dead weight on every vote for liberty
and the public good, etc. But suppose it were true, that all the members for
North Britain have always voted on the court-side, (the contrary of which may
be easily seen by turning over the debates,) what are 61 to 800? The Scotch
members are but a thirteenth part of the whole legislature. Let the English
members on all occasions vote for their country's good, and leave the Scotch to
stand by the court alone. This will more eff^ctually expose them, than writing
ten thousand incendiary papers against them. And if I live to see all the
English members of both houses, without exception, vote for those restorations
of the constitution, which are necessary for its preservation, (viz. annual
parliaments, with exclusion by rotation, etc.) while all the Scotch members
unite in opposing those salutary measures, and are not reproved by their
constituents; I will give up the North Britons for a nation of slaves, and will
be the first to propose that they be deprived of all share in the legislature
of the united kingdoms. But, so long as I observe some Scotch members, as well
as some English, voting against the interest of their country, I cannot, in
conscience, single out the former as alone guilty; nor can I look upon those
who are thus grossly partial, in any other light than that of a set of
shameless and determined mischief-makers.

The Earl of Findlater laid the Scotch grievances before the house of peers, A.
D. 1713, viz. Their being deprived, since the union, of a privy council. The
laws of England, in cases of treason, extended to Scotland. Scotch peers, made
British peers, not allowed to sit in the house of peers, as Englishmen made
peers. The malt-tax, which fell very unequally upon Scotland, because Scotch
malt was not worth a third part of the price of English, and yet was to pay the
same tax. Besides, it was said to be a violation of the XIVth article of union.
He moves* that, as the effects of the union had not answered expectation, it
might be dissolved again. The Duke of Argyle seconds him. They were opposed by
Lord North and Gray, and others. Lord Oxford said, he did not see how the union
could be dissolved, because the Scotch parliament which had m^de it with the
English, was now no more. Lord Nottingham answered, that the Scotch parliament
was included in the British; and that the British parliament could do any
thing, but destroy the constitution. Sunderland, Townshend, and Halifax were
all for dissolving. Several Scotch lords said, If the union was not dissolved,
their country would be the most miserable under heaven. Carried against
dissolving by only four voices DEB. PEERS, II.313.
.

The Earl of Rochester thought the disgrace of the Scotch peers losing their
birthright after the union, and being reduced to representation by a few in
the legislative assembly, instead of sitting of course, as the English, was so
great, that he declared in the house of peers, he wondered they should ever
submit to it Ibid. II.174.
.

If Scotland [when united to England] sends fewer representatives to parliament
than England, the former is enslaved to England, says Harrington Harringt.
OCEANA, 518.
. Therefore he was rather for having England and Scotland confederated in the
manner of the States of Holland, than united by an incorporating union.

If Scotland be a gainer [by the union] in some particulars, we [of England]
are infinitely recompensed by the many advantages accruing to us upon the
whole. Lord Halifax on the union DEB PEERS, II.173.
.

At the union, it was agreed, that Scotland should have 398,085 l.
equivalent-money, in consideration of England's being in debt, and partly to
make up for the Darien loss. But Lord Nottingham justly observed; that the
money would not come into the hands of the individuals who were the losers; but
would be swallowed up by a few Ibid.
.

We are now, says Lord Bolingbroke Bolingbr. REM. HIST. ENG L.195.
, [since the union,] one nation under one government, and must therefore always
have one common interest: the same friends, the same foes, the same principles
of security and of danger. It is by consequence now in our power to take the
entire advantage of our situation; an advantage which would make us ample
amends for several which we want; and which some of our neighbors possess; an
advantage which constantly attended to, and wisely improved, would place the
British nation in such circumstances of happiness and glory, as the greatest
empires could never boast. Far from being alarmed at every motion on the
continent; far from being oppressed for the support of foreign schemes; we
might enjoy the securest peace and most unenvied plenty. Far from courting or
purchasing the alliances of other nations, we might see them suing favors. Far
from being hated or despised for involving ourselves in all the little wrangles
of the continent, we might be respected by all those who maintain the just
balance of Europe, and be formidable to those alone who should endeavor to
break it.

Sir Edward Coke (no Scotchman) observes 4 INST. 345.
, how mavelous a conformity there was, not only in the religion and language
of the two nations, but also in their ancient laws, the descent of the crown,
their parliaments, their titles of nobility, their officers of state, and of
justice, their writs, their customs, and even the language of their laws. So
that in attacking the Scots we reflect on the English Blackst. COM. I.95.
.

It is one of the articles of the union, (of which the English were more
desirous than the Scots) that there shall be a communication of all rights and
privileges between the subjects of both kingdoms, except where it is otherwise
excepted. But there was no exception against any Scotch nobleman's being
employed by the king. Yet they who set up and kept up the late clamor, openly
avowed their dislike to a particular nobleman, merely because he was a
Scotchman.

Montesquieu calls it an admirable contrivance of the Tartars, the conquerors
of China, that they have incorporated Chinese and Tartars together, in their
civil and military establishment. It unites, he says, the two nations, it keeps
up a spirit and power in both, and one is not swallowed up by the other, etc.
L'ESPR. DES LOIX, I.235.
Some farsighted politicians among us, are against allowing our united brethren
of North Britain the privileges, which Montesquieu thinks a victorious nation
ought to grant a conquered people. He says Ibid. I.125.
, England was not arrived at her highest relative greatness, till the union.

Exclusive of other motives, says the author of a LETTER TO LORD TEMPLE, p. 31,
[for the union between England and Scotland,] we see present expedience, and
the like causes interfere. And the event having taken place, all measures for
producing that likeness and cordiality, which is the strongest political band,
should be pursued by every honest man; and to this we are warmly admonished by
the example of Rome, where the want of affection between the new and old
citizens, threw the weight of the former into the scale of every corrupt party
that arose in the state, and attached them not to their country, but to a
Marius, a Cinna, a Caesar. The same author goes on to show, that irritating the
people of North Britain tends to make them either unserviceable friends or
resolved enemies. He shows how hurtful their hostility has been, and may be
again to England, by joining with France. He then touches, but in a humane and
gentleman-like manner, upon the national failings of our northern brethren, (we
are not ourselves without failings) who emerged into light, and knowledge, and
liberal sentiment, later than England, and may therefore be supposed a little
backwarder in political knowledge. As I write says he, without any design of
lowering that brave and prudent people in the estimation of their neighbors,
and my strictures being on their government, not on individuals, I hope I shall
stand acquitted in endeavoring to remove prejudices against any systems which
may promote that assimilation with England, for which I have contended. Let
Scotland discern, acknowledge, and imitate, where England is confessedly her
superior. It derogates not from the merit of any single person to make the
concession. For it is time, circumstances, and situation, that have conferred
the superiority. Let not England value herself too much upon this accidental
superiority, nor despise her northern fellow subjects for being inferior as a
people, whilst, as individuals, they are incontestibly their equals; and let
them consider, that the less merit they allow the Scotch, the more it is to be
expected, that they, as a brave and spirited nation, should insist on a Ibid.
p. 45.
.

To this natural principle of resistance to injury, ought, in common candor,
to be ascribed the proceeding of the people of North Britain, in sending up
addresses of a spirit and tendency contrary to those of the remonstrances
presented by a vast multitude of the people of England. The North-Britons are
farther from being slaves in their disposition, than any people in the world,
if those of South Britain be excepted; but they saw, or thought they saw, a
very unjustifiable spirit of national prejudice, acting in many of those
concerned in the remonstrances; and they thought themselves obliged to oppose
them on this very account. And this is the only public step they have taken on
the occasion; while the scatterers of firebrands, arrows, and death, whose
unpatriotic and diabolical labor has been to divide the united kingdom, by
reviving the long^buried animosity between those whom nature and interest
direct to cultivate peace and unanimity; have been but too much countenanced by
many unthinking and narrow-minded people on this side the Tweed. It must be
confessed, that the late remonstrances were, to say the least, founded on a
narrow bottom, and were in their tendency but frivolous. Had they been what
they ought; had they proposed steps toward the restoration of independency to
parliament, which will effectually secure, and which only can secure the
redress of all internal abuses in administration; had this been done, and had
any community in North, or South Britain, addressed on the contrary side, I
should not have hesitated to declare my opinion of such community to be, That
they were traitors to their country, and the bribed slaves of a designing
ministry.

Lord Clarendon, in his speech on James II.'s abdication, lays great stress on
the bad consequences of the possibility of a rupture with Scotland. Which
shows, that the people of England had, in those days, some regard for their
northern brethren. I hope, Gentlemen, says he, you will take into your
consideration what is to become of the kingdom of Scotland, if they should
differ from us in this point. Then will that kingdom be again divided from
ours. You cannot but remember how much trouble it gave our ancestors, while it
continued a divided kingdom. And if we should go out of the line, and invert
the succession in any point, I fear you will find a disagreement there, and
then very dangerous consequences may ensue DEB. COM. II.241.
. It so happened, however, that the Scots were of the same mind with the
English in this point. See Declaration of the Estates of Scotland concerning
the misgovernment of James VII, and filling up the throne with King William and
Queen Mary Ibid.
, in which all his irregular proceedings are condemned with as little reserve
by the Scots as the English.

On occasion of Porteous's affair, A. D. 1737, it was thought necessary to send
for the Scotch judges. A long debate arose in the house of peers, about the
honors to be shown them in the house. One lord, not named DEB, LORDS, V.180.
insists on their being received in the same manner as the English judges, and
placed on the woolsacks, etc. The Scots, says he, p. 182, have a right to
claim, that the same honors, the same respect, may be shown by this house to
the judges of Scotland as are shown to the judges of England, excepting only,
that a preference is to be allowed to the latter with respect to their ranks or
degrees. And afterward, p. 183, This is the first time it has ever been
thought necessary to ask the Scotch judges any questions; and if your lordships
now oblige them to attend, I hope you will show them the same honors, the same
respect you would show the judges of any of the courts of Westminster Hall, if
they should be ordered to attend for the like purpose. And again, p. 184, The
right now in dispute before your lordships, is not the right of a private man,
nor is it a right of a private nature; it is the right of a whole people, it is
the right of a nation once free and independent; and it is a right stipulated
by one of the most public and most solemn contracts that was ever made; a
contract, which, on our parts, we are obliged to observe and fulfill with the
greatest nicety, because the people of Scotland trusted entirely to our honor
for a faithful performance; a submitting to be governed by one and the same
parliament, in which they knew we would always have a great majority, was
really, in effect, submitting every thing to our honor; and I hope, they shall
never have the least occasion to repent of the confidence they have reposed in
us. For this reason, in all cases where the rights or the privileges of the
people of Scotland, by virtue of the articles of union, come to be questioned,
I shall always have a strong bias in their favor, especially when the matter
in question relates to a piece of ceremony. But in the present case I must
think, there can be properly no question; for whether the judges of Scotland
ought to be in this house as assistants to give their opinions upon such
matters of law, as may arise in the course of our proceedings, in the same
manner as the judges of England do, is a question, I think, determined not only
by the articles of union, but by the very nature of the thing itself; because,
while Scotland continues to be governed by laws different from England, it will
be impossible for us to do our duty without such assistance. My lords, as
nothing contributed more than the union between the two kingdoms, toward the
securing the protestant succession in the present illustrious family, so there
is nothing can contribute more to the preservation of that succession, than the
rendering that union every day more firm and unalterable; which can no way be
done more effectually than by cementing the people by an union in hearts and
affections, as well as an union established by law. While we have such a
majority in both houses of parliament, the people of Scotland will always find
it impossible to break through, or diss^lve the legal union which subsists
between us; but if we should ever make use of that majority, which I hope we
never shall, to break through, or encroach upon those articles, which have been
stipulated between us, then the legal union will be of little force, it will
only serve to make them desperate, and to run the risk even of their own
perdition, in order to rid themselves of the yoke they groan under. They will
be apt to ascribe to the present royal family all the ills they feel, or
imagine they feel; and if they should unanimously join in a contrary interest,
we know they would be supported by a numerous party in this part of the island,
as well as by a powerful party beyond seas; for which reason we ought to take
all possible care, not to give them any just ground of complaint; we ought even
to avoid a measure which may be made use of by the enemies of government for
sowing discontent and disaffection in that part of the island. And again, p.
186, As I am not of that country, [ Scotland,] I have spoken with the more
freedom in this debate, because I think I cannot be suspected of prejudice or
partiality. If I have any, I confess it is upon that side, on which I think my
own honor, and the honor of my country most deeply concerned, which I take to
be in a most exact observance, not only of the words, but of the spirit and
intention of the articles of union. We contracted together as nations quite
independent of one another, and by the whole tenor of the contract it appears,
that the subjects of both kingdoms are entitled to equal honors, privileges,
and advantages. We have no pretense to any pre-eminence, but only that those of
any rank in England, shall have precedence of those of the same rank in
Scotland. This they have always, since the union, allowed us, and I hope we
shall never dispute conferring upon any gentleman of rank in Scotland these
marks of honor or respect, which are bestowed upon gentlemen of the same rank
in England.

Mr. Hume has remarked, that the hatred between France and England, subsists
more on the part of the latter than the former. And I think it must be
acknowledged, that in the quarrel between England and Scotland, the English
have often, especially of late, shown the greatest inveteracy of the two. A
narrowness against strangers is indeed the only national disposition we could
wish altered in the English. It has sometimes happened that England has
su^fered by this narrowness. As in the case of the rupture between the two
nations, when Cromwell was made general against the Scots. Had the English
treated their northern brethren with the generosity they show to one another,
the war had never happened. A very short time before, there was the strictest
amity possible between the two kingdoms. But that being interrupted, by
unjustifiable conduct on the side of the English, (see the historians of those
times) and war between the two kingdoms following, General Fairfax declined the
command, fairly declaring that he thought the war against Scotland unjust. On
this Cromwell (whose conscience was not so rigid as Fairfax's) was employed. He
was successful; gained honor; came into high power; and at last overset the
glorious scheme of a republic, which, but for him, would probably have been
established in this country.

But after all I have said with a view to suggest the necessity of correcting
the narrowness of the English to strangers, and even to their northern
brethren, let me add, That their incorporating the Scots, whom they had
conquered at the battle of Worcester, and their giving them such advantageous
terms at the union, notwithstanding their strong attachment at that time to
what are called Tory principles, are proofs of great magnanimity in the people
of England.

To pretend that a native of North Britain has not a right to hold the place of
secretary of state, or any other of the great offices, would be to assert, that
there ought to be a peculiar mark of disgrace put upon the northern inhabitants
of the united island, to place them in a worse condition than those of Ireland
or the Colonies; in short, to make them Helotes, slaves, hewers of wood, and
drawers of water. If there be any reason for this disadvantageous distinction,
it ought to be produced.

If the Scots had a spark of spirit or of love of their country left, if they
were worthy of being admitted to the honor of an union with this great and
illustrious nation, they ought, every man of them, to submit their throats to
the sword of the English, rather than suffer the oppression, the injustice, the
indignity, the ingratitude of such a doctrine prevailing against them, that
their country is held so infamous, so accursed of God and man, that it is not
entitled to the same chance with the English, of a promiscuous election of its
natives to civil and military posts LAND. MAG, October 1774. p. 524.
.

This silly narrowness has, in all times, been a prejudice and not an
advantage. Time was when every little town insisted on monopolizing its own
manufacture. Bridport, in the time of Henry VIII. petitioned and (such was the
ignorance of the legislature) obtained an act prohibiting the making of ropes
any where out of Bridport; and the towns of Worcester, Eversham, Droitwich,
etc. the same for the woollen manufacture Anders. HIST. COM. I.359, 363.
. Has not England improved more since these restraints were removed, than while
they took place?

Partiality for our own country, and contempt of others, arise from a
disposition as thoroughly despicable as the same partiality in an individual in
favor of himself. How much more magnanimous does the modesty of Horace appear,
when he advises the Roman writers to study the Greek models, than if he had
preferred those of his own country? -- Vos exemplaria Graeca
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
How graceful is Cicero's (even the vain Cicero's) acknowledgment of the
superiority of the Gauls to his countrymen in bodily strength, of the
Carthaginians in cunning, and of Greece in the arts? And when Virgil owns, that
other countries may produce abler orators and artists than those of Rome,
Excudent alii sperantia, etc. do we not esteem his candor much more than if he
had set his country above all others? It is, in short, always to be concluded,
that he who disparages other countries, is both conceited and ignorant. He
overpraises his own country because it is his; and he despises other countries,
because he does not know them. Accordingly national prejudice appears always
strongest in the vulgar.

Operae pretium foret, etc. It would be worth while to recite the tragical
proceedings which our national inhospitality of disposition, and our hatred and
contempt of strangers, have produced, as well in the reigns of King John,
Henry, Edward II. Henry VI. as lately, that we may hereafter extinguish this
infamy, and now that we are enlightened with the beams of a better religion, we
may behave ourselves with more humanity to strangers Lambard. DE MORI^. ANGL.
107.
.

Anglis ut plurimum, etc. The English in general admire themselves, their
national manners, genius, and courage, above all others. This disposition
occasions such a bluntness in the behavior of those of them who have not
traveled, that, in speaking and writing, they disdain to use the common terms
of politeness, as thinking them too slavish Iohau. Bar^l DE MORI^. ANGL. 98.
.

Even the Spaniards, though famous for their narrow and suspicious temper,
observing the depopulation of their country by the expulsion of the Moors and
Jews, invited all foreign manufacturers and farmers of the Roman catholic
religion to come and settle in Spain, offering them perpetual immunity from
taxes De Laet HISP. DESCR. 105.
.

The states of Holland and West Friseland, in their decree for establishing
their liberty, after observing, that they have remained unsubdued either by
internal or external force for 800 years, assert, that this is singly owing to
a constant harmony among themselves.

By 4 James I. c. 1. the laws of hostility between England and Scotland are
utterly repealed, seeing all enmity and hostility of former times between the
two kingdoms and people is now happily taken away, and under the government of
his Majesty, as under one parent and head, turned into brotherly friendship,
STAT. AT LARGE, II.397.
etc.

May it not be, with justice, affirmed, that though the English, take them for
all in all, as Hamlet says, are such a people that we can no where look upon
their like, yet they would be improved by a little French politeness, a little
German steadiness, a little Dutch frugality, and a little Scotch education? In
other words, Are we not too rough in our manners, too impatient under
adversity, too prone to luxury and pleasure, too much attached to money, and
too negligent of the improvement of the mind?

Let us hear Lord Lyttleton Lord Lyttelton's Works, p. 503.
on the subject.

England has secured by the union every public blessing which was before
enjoyed by her, and has greatly augmented her strength. The martial spirit of
the Scots, their hardy bodies, their acute and vigorous minds, their industry,
their activity, are now employed to the benefit of the whole island. He is now
a bad Scotchman who is not a good Englishman, and he is a bad Englishman who is
not a good Scotchman. And To resist the union is to rebel against nature. --
She has joined the two countries, has fenced them both with the sea against the
invasion of all other nations; but has laid them entirely open the one to the
other. Accursed be he who endeavors to divide them. -- What God has joined,
let no man put asunder Lord Lyttelton's Works, p. 504.
.

The justice of the late accusation against our northern brethren as if not
sufficiently attached to liberty, will appear from the following paragraphs:

The president Bradshaw, before passing sentence on Charles I. observed, that
many kings had been, for misgovernment, deposed and imprisoned by their
subjects; and particularly that in Scotland of 109 kings, the greatest part
were proceeded against, deposed, or imprisoned, particularly Charles's
grandmother Whitelock's MEM. 368.
.

Scotland had trial by juries of 9, 11, 13, 15, or more, men of known
character, as early as A. D. 840 King Kenneth's Laws. Spelm. COUNCIL. I.341.
.

Scotland, through all ages till the battle of Worcester, maintained her
independen^y against the force and fraud of the English and French monarchies
Macaul. HIST. V.76.
.

I must take leave to put the representatives of this nation [ Scotland] in
mind, that no monarchy in Europe was, before the union of the crowns, more
limited, nor any people more jealous of their liberties Fletcher's speech in
the Scotch parliament, A. D. 1703, p. 277.
.

These principles [of arbitrary power] were first introduced among us [the
Scots] after the union of the crowns, and the prerogative extended to the ruin
of the constitution, chiefly by the prelatical party Ibid. 278.
.

No legate from the Pope ever entered Scotland.

It is well known, that in the time of Queen Elizabeth the flame of liberty
burnt very dim in England. Yet in those very times, the Scotch commissioners at
London presented memorials, containing reasons for deposing their queen, and
seconded their arguments with examples drawn from the Scotch history, the
authority of laws, and the sentiments of the most famous divines. The lofty
ideas which Elizabeth had entertained of the absolute indefeasible right of
sovereigns, occasioned her being shocked at these republican topics Hume, HIST.
TUD: II.520.
.

James I. complained sadly of the sauciness of his Scotch subjects, and
expected to do what he pleased when he came to England. The Scots had murmured,
and actually taken up arms, when the king or his ministers did not govern to
their mind. They had dethroned his mother, and put him in her place, during her
life: Therefore they considered him as dependant on them. James was infatuated
with the notions of absolute power.

Their steady resistance against the foolish and tyrannical fancy of James I.
and Charles I. of imposing upon MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXV.474.
them the liturgy, shows a spirit very far from slavish See Whitel. MEM. 25.
. When the Marquis of Hamilton, by the king's orders, asked them what would
satisfy them, they answered, Nothing but a parliament and general assembly,
which they would call of their own authority, without waiting for the king's;
and that they would as soon renounce their baptism, as the covenant Ibid. 26.
. I wish we saw such a spirit in England on a proper occasion. This was the
fountain from whence our ensuing troubles did spring, says Whitelocke Ibid. 27.
. So that the resistance, which in the end overthrew the tyranny of Charles I.
took its rise in Scotland.

A Scotch gentleman, who came into England with king James I. observing how the
English flattered him, said, Their foulke wull spull a good keeng.

There was more sense in the Scots pinning down Charles II. too much (if too
much could be) at his arrival in that country, than in the English leaving him
too much at large at the Restoration. Does not this show that the Scots are not
enemies to liberty more than the English?

The city of Edinburgh had from King William a grant of its guard of 300 men,
on account of the laudable zeal they discovered, when religion and liberty were
at stake DEB. PEERS, V.205.
.

The people of Scotland showed themselves friends to liberty in the year 1760
See the Edinburgh instructions, and sense of the royal burghs, in favor of a
militia in Scotland* LAND. MAG. Apr. 1760. p. 194.
; elected a Peer last vacancy, A D. 1770, in direct opposition to the court,
which had, as always, the modesty to interpose on that occasion See Lord
Elibank's [a Scotch nobleman] Considerations on the present state of the
Peerage in Scotland. Printed for Cadell, A. D. 1771, a piece which breathes as
high a spirit of liberty as any in the English language.
.

If James I. and his son Charles I. and James II. had read Buchanan's works,
they might have lived and died in peace. There they would have learned, that
kings are the protectors not masters of their kingdoms; that a kingdom is a
stewardship, not an estate. That if princes were republicans, subjects would be
royalists; and that the more authority princes challange; the less free
subjects will grant, and contrariwise.

What country has produced more strenous advocates for liberty than Buchanan
and Fletcher? Bishop Burnet was a very active promoter of the Revolution, as
well as an able writer on the side of liberty. The late earl of Stair was
turned out of all his employments by Walpole, on account of his free
principles. The great duke of Argyle was a constant champion in parliament
against all the enslaving measures of his times. And in the year 1741, the
approaching session (says Tindal CONTIN. Rap. VIII.471.
) being the last of the parliament, great efforts were made to have one
returned which should be against the minister. Though these endeavors were
general all over the kingdom, where the opposition had any interest, they were
most prevalent in Scotland, where the duke of Argyle exerted himself with
extraordinary vigor -- and soon acquired influence enough to procure a great
majority of the Scotch representatives against the court at the next election.

The earl of Marchmount was a constant opposer of Walpole and his corrupt
measures.

And see the brave speeches of Messrs. Erskine and Dundass against the army
DEB. COM. IX.69.
.

To conclude this head, you may depend upon it, my good countrymen, that
neither railing against the Scots, nor even breaking the union, nor massacring
the whole inhabitants of North Britain, (for who can tell how far our
incendiaries wish to carry their animosity) nor any popular cry against lord --
or for Mr. --, nor any other party-object, is of consequence enough to be named
in a day with the restoration of independency to parliament. They who are for
this indispensible measure are undoubted friends to England; they who are
against it, no matter what banners they list under, they are more desirous of
the emoluments of places and pensions, than studious of the good of their
country. But to return;

It may be objected, that it will be difficult to find gentlemen properly
qualified to send into parliament, when so many, must be new men every new
parliament. To this may be answered, That if the possibility of bribing were
taken away, which I have above shown may be done, any man of common sense and
common honesty may be a member; because his constituents may instruct him how
to vote, and he will have no interest separate from that of his country, and
the speaker, clerks, officers, etc. who may be permanent, will be masters of
forms and the routine of business.

If it be said, the boroughs, which send in the majority of the house, cannot
be deprived of a right they have enjoyed by so long prescription; which must
for ever shut the door against all proposals of rendering parliamentary
representation adequate; the answer is easy: The rotten boroughs obtained their
right through the indirect views, or the caprice, of a set of crowned heads.
General good is to be secured, though to the prejudice of unjust privilege. The
more ancient the grievance, the more is redress wanted. If this objection be
valid in this case, there can be no reformation, nor any new law or regulation
made; for every new law brings prejudice to some individuals. See above, vol.
1. p. 62, et alibi.

It is, and always has been, the cry of the defenders of present measures, What
would you have? Is not every person free to do what he pleases? Would you
possess a greater degree of liberty than that which all enjoy at present? But
may not this be said in a country, and at a period when the constitution of
that country is overturned? For that will always be the case, where the genius
of the government, though absolute, is mild. I doubt not, but the partisans of
Augustus lulled the Romans to submission with such discourses as these; for the
individuals were as free at Rome the very next year after the bloody
proscription was at an end, as in England now. But would a Brutus or a Cassius
have let themselves be deceived by such means into a submission to Augustus?
No. They would have rewarded him for violating the constitution as they did
Julius.

Pour la populace, etc. As to the common people, it is never from a desire of
attacking that they rise, but from impatience of suffering MEM. Sully I.272.
.

The inertia and timidity of the people are the great difficulties in the way
of every reformation. It is not statesme^ ^or clergymen that promote
reformations either in the state or the church; it lies upon the people, and it
is very hard to drive the people to it. This is well known to all tyrants in
church and state; and their hope is that the people will not stir, till they be
violently abused: and unfortunately it is then commonly too late. For the
tyrant and his tools must have a considerable confidence in their own strength,
and the weakness of the cause of liberty, before they will venture on those
violences; and then there is but little hope of procuring a revolution.

Far from being ready to protect the rights of others, every one must have seen
his own many times flagrantly attacked, before he resolves to defend them; and
it is difficult to conceive how great an advantage government takes from that
want of spirit to oppose its criminal attempts, and how much it concerns public
liberty, that subjects be not too patient.

When we peruse attentively the history of despotism, we sometimes behold with
astonishment a handful of men keeping a whole nation in awe. That inconsiderate
moderation of the people, that timidity, that fatal propensity to separate
their common interests, are the true causes of this surprising phenomenon. For
what is the voice of the people, if every one is to continue silent CHAINS OF
SLAVERY, 74.
.

Whatever excuses or delays may be interposed by the interested, or the timid,
one thing is indisputably clear, vi^. That, as above observed, if there be now
difficulties in the way, those difficulties will not be lessened by time, but
increased and multiplied. As a presumptuous sinner, by putting of repentance,
renders his own restoration more and more difficult, so it is with nations.
Corruption and venality, if they be not rooted out, will increase more and
more, and the power of the court will increase with them.

The principal difficulty in all such cases arises from the inertia of the
people. Would all the independent people of England set themselves in earnest
to begin and carry on the great work, what could prevent their success?

The excellent Sidney employs his whole 41st section in proving, that the
people, for whom, and by whom the magistrate is created, can only judge whether
he rightly performs his office, or not. -- The people, says he, p. 438, cannot
be deprived of their natural rights upon a frivolous pretense to that which
never was, nor ever can be. They who create magistracies, and give to them such
name, form, and power as they think fit, do only know, whether the end for
which they were created be performed or not. They who give a being to the power
which had none, can only judge whether it be employed to their welfare, or
turned to their ruin. They do not set up one or a few men, that they and their
posterity may live in splendor and greatness, but that justice may be
administered, virtue established, and provision made for the public safety. No
wise man will think this can be done, if those who set themselves to overthrow
the law, are to be their own judges. Again, p. 439, It is as easy for the
people to judge whether their governors, who have introduced ^^rruption, ought
to be brought to order, and removed if they would not be reclaimed, or whether
they should be suffered to ruin them and their posterity; as it is for me to
judge whether I should put away my servant, if I knew he intended to poison or
murder me, and had a certain facility of accomplishing his design; or whether I
should continue him in my service till he had performed it. Nay the matter is
so much the more plain on the side of the nation as the disproportion of merit
between a whole people, and one or a few men entrusted with the power of
governing them is greater than between a private man and his servant. This is
so fully confirmed by the general consent of mankind, that we know no
government that has not frequently either been altered in form, or reduced to
its original purity, by changing the families or persons who abused the power
with which they had been entrusted. Those who have wanted wisdom and virtue
rightly and seasonably to perform this, have been soon destroyed.

It has been the general unhappiness of countries, in which corruption has
prevailed, that the bad men are bold and enterprising, forward and active;
whereas such as keep their integrity, are unactive; cold and lazy; contented
with the barren praise of not being guilty themselves, they suffer others to
invade so much power, as that they can do hurt, and do it safely, and in a
nation debauched in principles, many parts of the state may be filled by
persons of high knowledge and virtue; but their love and zeal for the public,
and their vigilance for its safety, their prudence, foresight, and caution,
shall be all rendered ineffectual by the overruling madness of others. The
side which would tread in the path of honesty and wisdom, shall be overborn and
shoved out of the way, by the crowd and strong faction of those who find their
account in promoting disorder and misgovernment. Such as maintain their
understanding in this general frenzy, shall be admired but not followed;
esteemed, but not consulted; heard, but not regarded. Mend things they cannot;
if they will be quietly wise and say nothing, they are endured; and if
inactive, they are suffered; when their superior, skill is forgiven and
connived at, when such as have more than common endowments are allowed to
subsist and preserve themselves, thou^h they cannot save their country, it is
thought a sufficient favor; but all the while they shall be made uneasy;
pursued with malicious whispers, blackened as disaffected, and made obnoxious
to the people; till at last they are forced to retire, and let their brethren
of the state ruin and betray the nation in quiet Daven. II.70.
.

There is nothing to be done, say worthless lazy statesmen. It is impossible to
amend any thing either in the state or the church. With how much more reason
might the great Czar Peter have excused himself from the glorious labors he
undertook for the good of his vast dominion! These Russians, he might have
said, are grown inveterate in their errors and bad customs. What chance is
there of drawing a set of unreasoning and bigoted savages from their old
prejudices, to which they have been inseparably attached for an innumerable
series of ages?

See Charles I.'s proclamation against stirring new opinions Rym FOED.
XVIII.719.
. Old errors were preferable to new truth.

The political constitution of Poland has been the source of continual
misfortunes. Yet the natives are attached to it to a degree of enthusiasm, and
especially to those parts, which produce the greatest inconveniences MO^.
UNIV. HIST. XXXIV.6.
.

Even such salutary regulations as the reformation of the Calendar, demolishing
the city-gates, and new paving the streets, improving the roads by setting up
turn pikes, establishing county-workhouses, have been strenuously opposed by
wrong-headed, or interested men.

A French gentleman, who resided some time in England, returning to his own
country, among other remarks on the character of the English, observed, That
they never redressed any nuisance, till some notable mischief consequent upon
it, compelled them DEB. LORDS. IV.241.
.

How can the people be too jealous of their liberties, when they know, that the
best of kings and governments, are, to say the least, more solicitous about
their own power than about the people's liberties; that the best kings and
governments are unwilling to give up the power they find within their reach,
however unjustly acquired by their predecessors; so that the evil done by a
tyrannical government is seldom effectually excluded by a good one, while the
good done by a just government is often overset by a succeeding tyranny.

I have shown you, my dear countrymen, that it is in vain to think of going on
in the way we are in, without timely redress; that we have nothing before our
eyes, but the diminution of our trade, and consequently of the national income,
which must produce a deficiency of that which ought to go to the payment of the
dividends, after which may be expected to follow the despair and rage of
thousands reduced to beggary, against those who shall be the supposed causes of
this mischief; all which may lead on to insurrections of the people, to burning
of houses, cutting of throats, and this horrible confusion may be expected to
end, as those in Denmark did lately, in a general request to the reigning
prince, to give the nation peace, by taking into his own hands the whole power,
which is now in king, lords, and commons, and making himself what the king of
Denmark is now,

Why must slaves be chained; but because slavery is a state of such misery,
that no person will continue in it, if he can extricate himself.

The Spartan helotes, the Roman slaves in the ergastula, the negroes in the
West Indies, all have at times struggled for the recovery of their liberty.
Shall it be said, that the English only are to be brought to bear slavery
tamely?

Germany and Rome continuing, the one in a state of liberty, the other of
slavery, yield the most illustrious and evident proof of the consequences that
attend those conditions. That great city, which from small beginnings in a free
state, extended its empire so widely, that as Livy expresses himself, it
labored under its own greatness; that city, whose inhabitants whilst it was
free, notwithstanding its continual wars, multiplied so fast, that it sent
colonies into the remotest parts of its far extended command; when reduced to
slavery, soon became depopulated, as did its provinces: though many means were
tried to allure and compel the inhabitants to marry, yet they all proved
ineffectual, and well they might, for who would exert his industry in acquiring
a property, that was insecure, or get children, who could be certain of no
other inheritance but slavery, and were sure of that? The strength of the
empire was not only decayed in numbers, but more in spirit; for slavery debases
the minds of men: and it fares with nations as with private persons: both by
oppression grow stupid and decline, even as low as the brutal part of the
creation, unless they have spirit enough to relieve themselves. And then the
causes of their woe, as in justice they ought, and ever will, meet with an
ample retribution St. Amand, PARL. HIST. 8.
.

The authors of the ANCIENT UNIVERSAL HISTORY thus describe the lamentable fall
of the mighty Roman empire ANT. UNIV. HIST. XIII.489.
.

Thus ended the greatest commonwealth, and at the same time began the greatest
monarchy, that had ever been known, a monarchy which infinitely excelled in
power, riches, extent, and continuance, all the monarchies and empires which
had preceded it. It comprehended the greatest, and by far the best part of
Europe, Asia, and Africa, being near four thousand miles in length, and about
half as much in breadth. As to the yearly revenues of the empire, they have by
a modest computation been reckoned to amount to forty millions of our money:
but the Romans themselves now ran headlong into all manner of luxury and
effeminacy. The people were become a mere mob; those who were wont to direct
mighty wars, to raise and depose great kings, to bestow or take away potent
empires, were so sunk and debauched, that if they had but bread and shoes,
their ambition went no higher. The nobility were indeed more polite than in
former ages; but at the same time idle, venal, insensible of private virtue,
utter strangers to public glory or disgrace, void of zeal for the welfare of
their country and solely intent on gaining the favor of the emperor, as
knowing that certain wealth and preferment were the rewards of ready
submission, acquiescence, and flattery. No wonder therefore they lost their
liberty, without being ever again able to retrieve it.

Slaves lose all courage for war. When Lucullus was told how numerous
Tigranes's army was, No matter, says he, the lion never hesitates about the
number of the sheep. His army was but 14,000. Agesilaus invaded the Persian
empire with 14,000 men, and drove all resistance before him. The little free
state of Athens was always an overmatch for that vast enslaved empire. In the
war between Cyrus and Artaxerxes, 13,000 Greeks routed 900,000 Persians. The
same Greeks, reduced to 10,000, made good their retreat under the command of
Xenophon, through a hostile country of 2300 miles.

The Greeks and Romans, because free, conquered the enslaved nations. The only
formidable enemies the latter had were the free Carthaginians. With the
liberties of the Greeks and Romans sunk their valor. What are now the
descendants of those conquerors of the world?

Xerxes, with his world in arms, was defeated by a handful of Greeks, and fled
with such rapidity, that he took only a month to perform the same journey
homeward, in which he spent six from his setting out to his arrival in Greece.

The free trading city of Tire cost Alexander the Great more trouble to
conquer, than all Asia. And though he demolished it in such a manner, that he
thought it could never more lift its head, in 19 years afterward it was in a
condition to stand a siege of 15 months by Antigonus.

Where liberty is restrained, commerce languishes. Compare old Tire, Carthage,
England, Holland, Venice, the free Hanse towns, with all other countries in
which commerce has been attempted. The proud tyrants of France have never been
able to establish an East India company, while those of England and Holland
astonish the world, and overawe the greatest of the eastern empires See
Davenant, Gee, Child, Decker, Postlethwayt, Anderson.
.

All the best writers on trade labor to show, that even in this free country
trade is too much cramped by duties; and that it would be greatly for the
general advantage, that the revenues were raised rather any other way.

Naval power cannot subsist without commerce, nor commerce without liberty. The
naval force of the great but enslaved kingdoms of France and Spain is
contemptible, while that of the little republic of Holland has long been
formidable. In two months after their defeat in Cromwell's time, they fitted
out a fleet of 140 men of war. Whereas the Spaniards have never recovered the
loss of their armada in the days of queen Elizabeth.

France has almost every advantage above England toward thriving, yet England
hitherto thrives better than France. Holland labors under every disadvantage,
yet makes almost as good a figure as England. Were England as well governed as
Holland, would not she be greatly superior to Holland? Were France governed as
Holland is, would not she be still more superior to both England and Holland as
to wealth and commerce? How foolish then the cry of the court-sycophants, Your
thriving is a proof that you are well governed. No: on the contrary, our not
thriving in proportion to Holland, is a proof that we are not so well governed.

All the kingdoms of Europe, as the Goths and Vandals settled them, were free
Robertson's HIST. CHAPTER V.I.13.
; yet the most complete slavery grew out of the feudal tenures set up by them,
with the design of securing themselves against foreign enemies, by giving lands
to those who served in the wars, which gave landholders an opportunity of
erecting themselves into despots, and destroyed all internal happiness. So
naturally does slavery steal upon mankind, and so precarious is the hold they
have of liberty.

Where liberty is lost, property there is none. In the enslaved parts of Italy,
the people perish with hunger in the midst of plenty, because the fruits of the
earth are not their own. In France, if a peasant has saved 5l. he must bury it
in the ground, lest the fermier general, hearing of it, tax him accordingly.

In an enslaved country, there may be magnificence; but it is confined to the
capital, the seat of the tyrant. All besides is poverty and desolation.

The authors of the Antien^ Unniversal History AN^. UNIV. HIST. XIII.353.
describe as follows the horrors o^ slavery:

These three tyrants, Antony, Lepidus, and Octavianus, went on adding daily to
the number of the proscribed, till it amounted to 300 senators, and above 2000
knights. It is impossible to paint the horrors of this bloody proscription. By
it every considerable man in Rome. who was disliked, or suspected by the
triumvirate to disapprove their tyranny, who was rich, and had wherewithal to
glut their avarice, was doomed to die. As it was death to conceal or help them,
and ample rewards were given to such as discovered and killed them, many were
betrayed and butchered by their slaves and freed men, many by their treacherous
hosts and relations. Many fled to the wilderness, where they perished for want
with their tender children. Nothing was to be seen but blood and slaughter; the
streets were covered with dead bodies; the heads of the most illustrious
senators were exposed upon the rostra, and their bodies left unburied in the
streets and fields, to be devoured by the dogs and ravenous birds. This looked
like dooming Rome to perish at once. Many uncondemned persons perished in this
confusion; some by malice or mistake, others for concealing or defending their
friends. Several of the ancient historians seem to take pleasure in describing
the horrors of this bloody and cruel proscription, which reduced the populous
capital of the world almost to a wilderness. They produce many remarkable and
moving instances of the affection of wives for their husbands, and of the
fidelity of slaves toward their masters; but few, very few, as they own with
great concern, of the love of children toward their parents. However, the
dutiful behavior of Oppius may stand for many, who, like Eneas, carried his
old and decrepid father on his shoulders to the seaside, and escaped with him
into Sicily. His piety was not long unrewarded; for on his return to Rome,
after the triumvirs had put an end to the proscription, he found the people so
taken with that generous action, that all the tribes unanimously concurred in
raising him to the aedilship; and because he wanted money to exhibit the usual
sports, the artificers worked without wages; and the people not only taxed
themselves to defray the necessary charges attending such shows, but gave
proofs of the esteem they had for so dutiful a son, by such contributions as
amounted to twice the value of his paternal estate, which had been confiscated
by the triumvirs. Caius Hosidius Geta was likewise saved by his son, who spread
a report, that his father had laid violent hands on himself, and to render the
fact more credible, spent the poor remains of his fortune in performing his
obsequies. By this means Hosidius, not being searched after, made his escape,
but lost one of his eyes, which he had kept too long covered with a plaster,
the better to disguise him. As for the barbarous impiety of those children, who
by a strange apostasy from nature betrayed their own parents, it ought to be
buried in oblivion. Nothing can reflect greater infamy on the memory of the
triumvirs, than their countenancing such impious monsters. Several slaves chose
rather to die on the rack, amidst the most exquisite torments, than discover
the place where their masters lay concealed; others, not caring to outlive
them, fell by their own hands upon their dead bodies. Many illustrious matrons
gave remarkable proofs of their conjugal love in those times of calamity, which
ought not to be passed over in silence. The wife of Q. Ligarius, seeing her
husband betrayed by one of his slaves, declared to the executioners, who cut of
his head, that she had concealed him, and consequently ought, in virtue of the
decree, to undergo the same fate. But they not hearkening to her, she appeared
before the triumvirs themselves, upbraided them with their cruelty, owned she
had concealed, in spite of their decree, her husband, and begged death of them
as a favor. Being driven away by their officers, she shut herself up in her
own house, and there, as she was determined not long to outlive her husband,
starved herself to death. Acilius was betrayed by one of his slaves, and
apprehended, but redeemed by his wife who readily parted with all her jewels to
save his life. Apuleius Antistius Antius, Q. Lucretius Vispallis, Titus
Vinnius, and many others, were saved by the ingenious contrivances of their
wives, after they had given themselves up for lost. Lucius, the uncle of
Antony, was saved by his sister Iulia, in whose house he had taken refuge.
Though the country, as well as the city, swarmed with informers and assassins,
yet many illustrious citizens found means to avoid the fury of the
proscription, and to get safe, either to Brutus in Macedon, or to Sextus
Pompeius in Sicily. The latter kept constantly a great number of small vessels
hovering on the coasts of Italy, to receive such as made their escape, and
treated them with great kindness and civility. As to Cicero, he had not the
good luck to escape, but fell a sacrifice to the implacable rage of Antony. The
great reputation of that orator, the obligations which all men of learning owe
to his memory, and the inimitable works he has left behind him, require of us a
particular account of his death, and the most minute circumstances attending
it. He was with his brother Quintus, who was likewise proscribed, at his
country house near Tusculum, when the first news were brought him of the
proscription, which he no sooner heard, than he left Tusculum with his brother,
taking his route toward Austura, or as some call it, Stura, another of his
country-houses on the sea side, between the promontories of Antium and
Circoeum. There they both designed to take shipping, and endeavor to join
Brutus in Macedon. They traveled together each in his litter, oppressed with
sorrow, and often joining their litters on the road to condole each other. As
they had in the first alarm and hurry forgot to take with them the necessary
money to defray the expenses of their voyage, it was agreed between them, that
Cicero should make what haste he could to the sea side, and Quintus return home
to provide necessaries. Then they embraced each other, and parted with
reciprocal fear. Quintus returned to Rome, and got to his house undiscovered,
where he thought himself safe, at least for a short time, since it had been
lately searched by the ministers of the triumvirs. But as in most houses there
were as many informers as domestics, his return was immediately known, and the
house of course was filled with soldiers and assassins, who not being able to
find him out, put his son to the torture, in order to make him declare where
his father lay concealed. But filial affection was proof in the young Roman
against the most exquisite torments. However, the tender youth could not help
sighing now and then, and groaning in the height of his pain. Quintus was not
far of; and the reader may imagine, though we cannot express, how the heart of
a tender father must have been affected in hearing the sighs and groans of a
son dying on the rack to save his life. He could not bear it; but quitting the
place of his concealment, he presented himself to the assassins, begging them
with a flood of tears to put him to death, and dismiss the innocent child,
whose generous behavior the triumvirs themselves, if informed of the fact,
would judge worthy of the highest encomiums and rewards. But those inhuman
monsters, without being in the least affected with the tears either of the
father or the son, answered, that they must both die, the father because he was
proscribed, and the son, because, in defiance of the decree of the triumvirs he
had concealed his father. Then a new contest of tenderness arose between the
father and the son who should die first: but this the assassins, destitute of
all sense of humanity, and no way affected with such melting scenes, soon
decided, by beheading them both at the same time. Though Quintus Cicero's wife
was not perhaps without reproach, his death, it must be owned, was truly
glorious: as for that of his son, it has been, and ever will be, celebrated by
the writers of all nations and ages as an instance of the most heroic
affection, and filial duty. But to return to the elder brother, Cicero having
reached Austura, and by good luck found a vessel there ready to weigh anchor,
went on board with a design to pass over into Macedon, and join Brutus. But
either dreading the inconveniences of such a voyage, or still depending on the
friendship of Octavianus, whom he had all along supported with his credit and
eloquence, he soon changed his mind, and ordered the master of the ship to set
him ashore at Circaeum, whence he took his route toward Rome by land. But
after he had gone about two hundred furlongs he altered his resolution anew,
and returned to sea, where he spent the night in a thousand melancholy and
perplexing thoughts. One while he resolved to go privately into Octavianus's
house, and there kill himself upon the altar of his domestic gods, in order to
bring upon him the wrath of those furies who were deemed the avengers of
violated friendship. But the fear of being taken on the road, and the
apprehension of the cruel treatment he expected, if taken, soon made him drop
that resolution. Then falling into other thoughts equally perplexing, and
wavering between the hopes he had in Octavianus's friendship and the fear of
death, he at last suffered his domestics to convey him by sea to a
country house, which he had in the neigbourhood of Caieta; where he had not
been long, when his domestics carried him again in a litter toward the
seaside. They were scarce gone, when a band of soldiers under the command of
Herennius a centurion, and Popilius Laenas a military tribune, came to the
house. Cicero had formerly undertaken the defense of Popilius, when he was
under a prosecution for the murder of his own father, and by his triumphing
eloquence, had got him absolved by those very judges, who a little before were
ready to condemn him to a most cruel death. But the ungrateful wretch,
unmindful of farmer obligations, and wholly intent on currying fav^ur with
Antony, had promised to find out Cicero, wher^ver he lay concealed, and bring
him his head. He found the doors of his house shut, but breaking them open, and
searching in vain every corner, he threatened to put all the slaves in the
house to the torture, if they did not immediately declare where their master lay
concealed. But the faithful slaves, without betraying the least fear, answered
with great constancy and resolution, that they knew not where he was. At length
a young man, by name Philologus, who had been slave to Quintus, and afterward
enfranchised by him, and instructed by Cicero in the liberal arts and sciences,
with all the tenderness of a father, discovered to the tribune, that Cicero's
domestics were then carrying him in a litter through the close and shady walks
to the sea side. Upon this information Popilius, with some of his men, hastened
to the place where he was to come out, while Herennius with the rest followed
the litter through the narrow paths. As soon as Cicero perceived Herennius, he
commanded his servants to set down his litter, and stroking, according to his
custom, his head with his left hand, he put out his head, and looked at the
assassins with great intrepidity. Th^^ constancy, which they did not expect
from him, his face disfigured and emaciated with cares and troubles, his hair
and beard neglected, and in disorder, etc. so affected the soldiers who
attended Herennius, that they covered their eyes with their hands, while he cut
of his head, and pursuant to Antony's directions his right hand, with which he
had written the Philippics. With those trophies of their cruelty, Herennius and
Popilius hastened back to Rome, and laid them before Antony, while he was
holding an assembly of the people for the election of new magistrates. The
cruel tyrant no sooner beheld them, than he cried out in a transport of joy,
Now let there be an end of all proscriptions: live, Romans, live in safety; you
have nothing more to fear. He took the head in his hand, and looked on it a
long time with great satisfaction, smiling at a sight, which drew tears from
all who were present. After he had satiated his cruel and revengful temper with
so dismal a spectacle, he sent, as we are told by several writers, the head of
the orator to his wife. Fulvia was naturally more cruel than the triumvir
himself, and had born an implacable hatred to Cicero, ever since the time of
her first husband P. Clodius who was slain by Milo. That fury, after having
insulted the poor remains of her enemy with the most injurious reproaches, took
that venerable head in her lap, and drawing out the tongue of the deceased
which had uttered many bitter invectives against both her husbands, pierced it
several times with a golden bodkin which she wore in her hair. When Fulvia had
satiated her impotent rage, Antony ordered both the head and the hand to be set
up on the rostra, where Rome could not without horror behold the remains of a
man who had so often triumphed in that very place, by the force and charms of
his eloquence. Thus fell the greatest orator which Italy, or any other country,
ever bred; a man, who, as Caesar the dictator used to say, had obtained a
laurel as much above all triumphs, as it was more glorious to extend the bounds
of the Roman learning than those of the Roman empire. In his consulate, which
was truly glorious, he discovered with wonderful sagacity the most secret plots
of the seditious Cataline, defeated his best concerted measures, and saved, we
may say, Rome from utter destruction; whence he was deservedly honored with
the glorious t^tle of the father of his country. The Roman people no doubt owed
him much, and he took care ^o put them frequently in mi^d of their obligations;
for he was quoting on all occasions, in and out of season, the nones of
December, as M. Brutus observed in one of his letters to Atticus. He loved his
country; but his zeal did not carry him so far as to make him sacrifice his
private interest to the public welfare. But after all, the intrepidity with
which he offered himself to death, ought to make us in a manner overlook the
timorousness, pusillanimity, and irresolution, which he betrayed in most
occurrences of his life. He died on the seventh of the ides of December, in the
sixty-fourth year of his age, and was greatly lamented by all ranks of men.
Antony himself made some sort of reparation to his memory; for, instead of
rewarding the perfidious Philo^ogus, who betrayed his master and benefactor, he
delivered him up to Pompona, the widow of Quintus Cicero, and sister of
Pomponius Atticus, who after having glut^ed her impotent rage, and desire of
revenge with the most exquisite torments cruelty itself could invent, obliged
the miserable captive to cut off his own flesh by peace-meal, boil it, and eat
it in her presence. But Tiro Cicero's freeman has not so much as mentioned the
treachery of Philologus, as we have observed above out of Plutarch. Octavianus,
who shamefully s^crificed Cicero to his most cruel and bitter enemy, declared
several years after, the esteem he had f^r him: for visiting one day his
daugh^er's son, and finding him with a book of Cicero's in his hand, the boy
for fear endeavored to hide it under his gown; which Octavianus perceiving,
took it from him, and turning over a great part of the book standing; gave it
him again, saying, This, my child, was a learned man, and a lover ofhis
country.

Such are the miseries, which the Romans brought upon themselves by not
securing their liberties in time. And it is impossible to say what distresses
any country may come into, which, through want of a due attention to the
smallest in roads upon their liberties, suffer the floodgates to be once opened.

In our country, if a chimney-sweeper is murdered, especially with the sword of
justice, all England is ala^med. In the imperial times of Rome, 500, or 5000
people were destroyed in a single insurrection of ^he army, or massacred by
order of a hell-hound emperor, and no notice taken.

In the assembly of the states general of France, A. D. 1614, the clergy (ever
enemies to liberty, ever trumping up church power) hollowed out for the
reception of the council of Trent; and the tiers-etat, which answers to our
commons, who are naturally, if not debauched by a corrupt and corrupting court,
friendly to liberty, as knowing that their own happiness depend^ on it,
opposed, as they, and all mankind ought to do, the enslaving schemes of the
priesthood; and demanded a declaration against the pope's power over kingdoms,
and against the assassinating of heretical kings. Neither obtained their
demands. Many grand points were disputed; but nothing decided. The whole proved
confused, turbulent, and ineffectual. There has no free assembly of the
states general of France met since that time. Then the benign and cheering
beams of the sun of liberty set on that unhappy country, never more to rise.
Since that time a sudden gloom of darkness and despotism, from a terrible
throne, has overshadowed that people, and a frowning tyrant, in one hand
brandishing a bloody sword, and clanking a bundle of fetters with the other,
chills their souls with slavish horror, damps all manly spirit, and kills all
hope of emancipation. Accordingly our times have seen the only remaining
appearance of a citadel, from whence a national effort for recovery of liberty
could have originated, at one stroke of regal power reduced to nothing, by the
total suppression of all the parliaments of France. Which final heart-stab to
the constitution, the poor enslaved people have seen, and resented only by
shrugging up their shoulders.

O Britain! See here the consequence of suffering power to pass from the hands
of the people into those of kings and ministers; and remember, a corrupt and
enslaved parliament is in no degree a more effectual check upon the power of
kings and courts, than no parliament.

Victory is more especially founded upon courage, and courage upon liberty,
which grows not without a root planted in the policy or foundation of the
government Harringt. OCEANA, p. 289.
.

The richest soil in Europe, Italy, is fu^^ of beggars; among the Grisons, the
poorest people in Europe, there are no beggars Burn. TRAV. p. 97.
. The balliage of Lugane is the worst country, the least productive, the most
exposed to cold, and the least capable of trade of all Italy, and yet is the
best peopled. If ever this country is brought under a yoke like that which the
rest of Italy bears, it will soon be abandoned, for nothing draws so many
people to live in so bad a soil, when they are in sight of the best soil in
Europe, but the easiness of the government Burn TRAV. 108.
.

Italy shows, in a very striking light, the advantage of free government. The
subjects in all the Italian republics are thriving and happy. Those under the
pope, the dukes of Tuscany, Florence, etc. wretched beggars.

Lucca, to mention no other at present, is a remarkable instance of the happy
effects of liberty. The whole dominion is but thirty miles round, yet contains,
besides the city, 150 villages, 120,000 inhabitants, and all the soil
cultivated to the utmost MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.6,
. Government, a gonfalonier, or standard bearer, whose power is like that of
the doge of Venice, and nine counselors, whose power is only for two months,
(and those two. months they were in some troublesome times obliged to live all
together in the town hall, without even going to their own houses Ibid. 36.
,) chosen out of 240 nobles, and they chang^d every two years.

The city of Fez in Africa has the strange privilege of being allowed to yield
to any enemy, who shall get within half a mile of its walls. Every king, at his
coronation, confirms this privilege. So dastardly does slavery make a people
Ibid. XVIII.132.
.

Many of the Chinese nobility, on the decisive sea fight between the Chinese
and Tartars, in which 100,000 of the former were killed, A. D. 1279, would not
submit to the Tartar government, though they might have enjoyed all their
honors and advantages. They preferred, like Cato, or Brutus, an honorable
death to shameful servitude Ibid. VIII.467.
.

Asia has greater riches than Eur^pe. But sl^very makes that vast quarter of
the world despicable, compared with our little spot of Europe.

The sl^ve trade produces, among the Africans infinite cruelty, d^ceit, and
oppression. Parents sell their children; creditors their debtors by families at
a time; false accusers the unjustly condemned; ^avas, or l^^ds, whoever offends
them MOD. UNIV. HIST. XVI.195.
.

While the Spaniards were masters of Portugal, they oppressed it much in the
same manner as the Egyptians the Israelites, or the Spartans the Helotes. Since
the Portuguese became independent, they have grown rich, flourishing, and
ungrateful Ibid. XLIII.382.
.

It is constantly (said a member in Queen Elizabeth's time) in the mouths of us
all, that our lands, go^ds, and laws, are at our prince's disposal Hume, HIST.
TUD. II.640.
.

The English s^em hardly to have deserved the name in the time of Philip and
Mary, so abject and slavish they were, beyond most other nations of Europe.
Caseley, a member, was put in custody of the sergeant at arm^, only for showing
some anxiety, lest the queen, from her necessitous circumstances, should
alienate the crown from the lawful heir Ibid. II.3^8.
.

In Britain, an industrious subject has the best chance for thriving, because
the country is the freest. In the Mogul's dominions, the worst, because the
country is the most effectually enslaved MOD. UNIV. HIST, VI.301. et pass.
.

Liber homo, etc. The title of freemen was formerly confined chiefly to the
nobility and gentry, who were descended of free ancestors. Far the greatest
part of the common people was formerly restrained under some species of
slavery, so that they were not masters of themselves SPELM. Gloss. voc Liber
homo.
. To what a low degree of slavery must a people be reduced, who were obliged to
give the first night of their brides to the lord of the manor, if he demanded
it Ibid. voc. Marchet.
?

What has been in England may be again. If liberty be on the decline, no one
knows how low it may sink, and to what pitch of slavery and cruelty it may grow.

Martial law was the most horrible of all tyranny. By it any man was punishable
without judge or jury, who became suspected to the lieutenant of a county, or
his deputy, of treason, or of aiding or abetting treason. It was used by bloody
Mary in defense of orthodoxy Hume, HIST. TUD. II.718.
. Edward (or rather his villainous ministers, for he was but a boy) granted a
warrant for martial punishments, at a time when there was no rebellion
apprehended, viz. A. D. 1552, and the judges were to act as should be thought
by their discretions most necessary. Elizabeth ordered the importation of
bulls, indulgences, or even prohibited books, to be punished with martial law;
and rioters and vagrants to be hanged upon the spot where taken; so that almost
any body might hang any body, any how, or any where Ibid. 719.
. Imprisonment in those days was arbitrary at the pleasure of the privy
council, or secretary of state, and the torture might be used upon the
secretary of state's warrant: so that the government of England was, in the
days of Henry VIII. Mary, Elizabeth, and James I. upon much the same arbitrary
principles as that of Turkey is now. The crown had every power but that of
laying on taxes; and the subject was not the less oppressed for the court's not
having that power. Elizabeth's arbitrary proceedings made up for this. She gave
patents and monopolies, she extorted loans, she forced the people to buy off
expensive offices, she demanded benevolences, she increased arbitrarily the
duties upon goods, she obliged the sea port towns to find a certain number of
ships, and the counties a certain quota of men, clothed, armed, and sent to the
place of their destination; she laid arbitrary embargoes upon merchandise, she
demanded new years gifts, she victualled her navy by purveyance, that is, her
officers seized whatever they could of provisions, and paid what price they
pleased; the crown enjoyed all rents during the minority of heirs and
heiresses. The good lord Burleigh proposed to the queen an inquisitorial court
for correcting all abuses, which court should profit her revenue more than her
father's demolition of the monasteries did him, which court should proceed
according to law, and to her absolute power, from whence law proceeded Hume,
HIST. TUD. II.722.
. All these proceedings were unwarranted by authority of parliament; and the
legislative authority of parliament was of no avail, because it might at any
time be set aside by the dispensing power of the crown, and the royal
proclamations had the force of laws. Elizabeth went so far as to prohibit the
cultivation of woad, a very useful dyeing material, because she was possessed
with a whim against the smell of that plant. She sent about her officers to
break every sword, and trim every ruff they found, that were larger than she
allowed, in the same manner as the Czar Peter ordered his men to shave by
force, and with a blunt razor, all the old-fashioned beards they met Ibid.
. Penry was hanged for some papers found in his pocket, which allowed the
queen's absolute power, but did not assert it quite so strongly as the court
desired. Yet all this tremendous power did not prevent shocking misrule among
the people; for severe punishment hardens, instead of making subjects obedient.
Two or three hundred criminals, or pretended criminals, were to be tried at the
assizes in single counties, and innumerable multitudes of vagabonds and
ruffians filled the whole nation with rapine, terror, and confusion. These last
particulars are a very considerable derogation from the praise of Elizabeth's
wisdom as a sovereign Hume, HIST. TUD. II.727.
.

See, in Rymer, a noate of all causes, which the most honorable court of
starchamber does from time to time here and determyne, together with the
manner and form of the proceedings in the same causes, as well by process, as
otherwise Rym. FOED. XVIII.192.
; according to which nothing could be more inconsistent with liberty, because
it excluded all trial by peers, and left the subject at the mercy of the
persons who composed it, viz. the great officers of the state, the creatures of
the court; the very persons in the whole nation the least fit to have such
power.

The court of star chamber, of which Mr. Hume says, he doubts whether there be
so absolute a tribunal in Europe, had unlimited power of finding, imprisoning,
and inflicting corporal punishment for all manner of offenses. Privy
counselors and judges were the members of it, who depended immediately upon
the court. If the prince was present, he was sole judge HIST, TUD. II.717.
.

The high commission court had power of punishing, as heresy, any practice
offensive to the court.

When sergeant Maynard, almost ninety years old, went to compliment the prince
of Orange on his arrival, You have, I suppose, says the prince, outlived all
the lawyers of your time.' The old gentleman answered, I have; and if your
Highness had not come, I should have outlived the law itself Burn. HIST. OWN
TIMES, II.550.
.

On the contrary, the advantage of liberty appears in a very striking light in
the following narration:

In the year 1708 happened an accident, the more disagreeable to the Russians,
as Peter was at that time unpro^perous in war. Matueof, his ambassador to the
court of London, having obtained an audience of leave of queen Anne, was
arrested for debt in the public street by two bailiffs, at the suit of some
tradesmen, and obl^ged to give in bail. The plaintiffs asserted, that the laws
of commerce were of a superior nature to the privileges of ambassadors; on the
other hand, Matueof, and all the other foreign ministers who espoused his
cause, maintained that their persons ought to be sacred Peter, by his letters
to queen Anne, strongly insisted upon satisfaction; but she could not comply
with his desire, because, by the laws of England, the creditors had a right to
sue for their just demands, and there was no law to exempt foreign ministers
from being arrested for debt. The murder of Patkul, the Czar's ambassador, who
had been execut^d the preceding year, by order of Charles XII. was in some
measure an encouragement to the people of England not to respect a character so
grossly abused* The other foreign ministers residing then in London were
obliged to be bound for Matueof, and all that the queen could do in favor of
the Czar, was to prevail on the parliament to pass an act whereby it was no
longer lawful to arrest an ambassador for debt. But after the battle of
Pultowa, it became necessary ^o give a more public satisfaction to that prince.
The queen, by a formal embassy, made an excuse for what had passed. Mr.
Whitworth, who was pitched upon for this ceremony, opened his speech with the
following words, Most high and most mighty Emperor. He told the Czar that the
queen had imprisoned the persons who had presumed to arrest his ambassador, and
that the delinquents had been rendered infamous. This was not true; but the
acknowledgment was sufficient; and the title of Emperor, which the queen had
not given him before the battle of Pultowa, plainly showed the degree of
estimation to which he was now raised in Europe. This title had been already
granted him in Holland, not only by those who had been his fellow-workmen in
the dock (...) at Sardam, and seemed to interest themselves most in his glory,
but even by the chief persons in the state, who unanimously styled him Emperor,
and celebrated his victory with rejoicings in the presence of the Swedish
minister. The Czar (says the preface to lord Whitworth's account of Russia) who
had been absolute enough to civilize savages, had no idea, could conceive none,
of the privileges of a nation civilized in the only rational manner by laws and
liberties. He demanded immediate and severe punishment on the offenders; he
demanded it of a princess, whom he thought interested to assert the sacredness
of the persons of monarchs even in their representatives; and he demanded it
with threats of wrecking his vengeance on all English merchants, and subjects
established in his dominions. In this light the menace was formidable;
otherwise happily the rights of a whole people were more sacred here than the
persons of foreign ministers. The Czar's memorials urged the queen with the
satisfaction which she herself had extorted, when only the boat and servants of
the earl of Manchester had been insulted at Venice. That state had broken
through their fundamental laws, to content the queen of Great Britain. How
noble a picture of government, when a monarch that can force another nation to
infringe its constitution, dare not violate his own. One may imagine with what
difficulty our secretaries of state must have labored through all the ambages
of phrase in English, French, German, and Russian, to explain to Muscovite ears
and Muscovite understandings, the meaning of indictments, pleadings,
precedents, juries, and verdicts; and how impatiently Peter must have listened
to promises of a hearing next term? With what astonishment must he have beheld
a great queen engaging to endeavor to prevail on her parliament to pass an act
to prevent any such outrage for the future? What honor does it not reflect on
the memory of that princess to own to an arbitrary emperor, that even to
appease him she dared not to put the meanest of her subjects to death
uncondemned by law. There are says she, in one of her dispatches to him,
insuperable difficulties with respect to the ancient and fundamental laws of
the government of our people, which, we fear, do not permit so severe and
rigorous a sentence to be given as your imperial majesty at first seemed to
expect in this case. And we persuade ourself that your imperial majesty, who
are a prince famous for clemency and exact justice, will not require us, who
are the guardian and protectress of the laws to inflict a punishment upon our
subjects, which the law does not empower us to do. Words so venerable and
heroic, that this broil ought to become history, and be exempted from the
oblivion due to the silly squabbles of ambassadors and their privileges. If
Anne deserved praise for her conduct on this occasion, it re^^ects still
greater glory on Peter, that this ferocious man had patience to listen to these
details, and had moderation and justice enough to be persuaded by the reason of
them MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXV.454.
.

That the states of Holland are what they are in consequence of their being
free, appears by the following:

The duke of Parma succeeding to the government of the Netherlands, upon the
death of Don John of, Austria, he began his government with the taking of the
strong town of Mastrecht from the States, and next by his reducing the Walloon
provinces of Artois H^inault, and Walloon-Flanders, by capitulation to the
dominion of Spain. Hereupon, and for other r^^sons, the prince of Orange duly
considering the emulation amongst the great men, as well as that the difference
of religion in the several provinces could h^rdly ever be reconciled; and being
at the same time desirous to secure himself, and to establish, as far as
possible, the protestant religion, he procured the states of Guelderland,
Holland, Zealand, Friesland, and Ut^echt, to meet at the last-named city in
this year, 1579; when they mutually and solemnly stipulated to defend one
another as one joint body, and with united consent to advise of peace, war,
taxes, etc. and also to support liberty of conscience, And to complete the
present number of seven provinces now of the united Netherlands, Overyssel, and
Groninge^, were soon after admitted into the union; an union which, in a few
years, formed the most potent republic which the world had seen since that of
old Rome; and of the greatest commerce and maritime power that (as a republic)
ever was on earth. For, that so small a state should between this year 1579 and
1600, not only preserve its independency against the then mightiest potentate
in Europe, but likewise get footing in Flanders, by mastering the strong and
important towns of Sluyce and Hulst, etc. to ruin the trade of the most famous
city of Antwerp; to conquer the strong forts of Bergen-op-zoom, Breda, and
sundry other places on the Mease and Rhine, etc. also to attack and annoy so
great a monarch in his own ports at home; and maugre all the vast expense of
such great exploits, to grow rich and opulent as well as potent, will, perhaps,
scarcely obtain an historical credit in another century; but with us it serves
only to show the immense effects of an universally extended commerce, an
indefatigable industry, joined to an unparalleled parsimony and economy. Soon
after this famous period, the industrious and parsimonious traders of these
united provinces pushed into a considerable share of that commerce to several
parts of Europe, which, till then, England had solely enjoyed. Yet the great
and happy accession of the fugitive Walloons into England about the same time,
whereby the old English drapery was so greatly improved, and sundry new and
profitable manufactures introduced, did more than counter-balance the loss of
some part of the English commerce to the said Dutch traders. Nevertheless, the
immenseness of the fi^hery of these Netherland provinces, with which they about
this time supplied the most part of the world, is almost incredible; and could
only be described by so great a genius as Sir Walter Raleigh. Their East India
trade soon after this time commenced, and, like all new trades, brought most
profit in the beginning, frequently so far as twenty times the original outset.
In brief, the Hollanders soon thrust themselves into every corner of the
universe for new means of commerce, and for vending their vastly improved
manufactures; whereby Amsterdam soon became (what it still is) the immense
m^gazine or staple f^r almost all the c^mmodities of the universe. Sundry,
indeed, were the grounds or cau^es of so great a change in the condition of
these Netherland provinces in about less than half a century: One very great
one was, what Sir William Temple ob^erves, viz. That the persecution for
matters of religion in Germany under Charles V. in France under Hen. II. and in
England under Queen Mary, had forced great numbers of people out of all these
countries, to shelter themselves in the several towns of the seventeen
provinces, where the ancient liberties of the country, and the privileges of
the cities, had been inviolate under so long a succession of princes, and gave
protection to these oppressed strangers, who filled their cities with people
and trade. But when the seven provinces had united, and began to defend
themselves with success under the conduct of the prince of Orange, and the
countenance of England and France, and when the persecution began to grow sharp
on account of religion in the Spanish Netherland provinces, all the professors
of the reformed religion, and haters of the Spanish dominion, retired into the
strong cities of this new commonwealth, and gave the same date to the growth of
trade there, and the decay of it at Antwerp. It would be too tedious to
instance all the other causes of the said vast increase of the wealth and power
of the united Netherlands in those early times, and afterward: Such as, 1st,
the long civil wars first in France, next in Germany, and lastly in England;
which drove thither all that were persecuted at home for their religion. 2.
Moderation and toleration to all sorts of quiet and peaceable people, naturally
produce wealth, confidence, and strength to such a country. 3. The natural
strength of their country improved by their many sluices for overflowing it,
and rendering it inaccessible to land armies. 4. The free constitution of their
government. 5. The bank of Amsterdam's safety, security and convenience for all
men's property, etc. Anders. HIST. COM. I.419.


Venice has preserved its liberty, says Voltaire ESS. SUR L'HIST. II.107.
, by being surrounded by the sea, and wisely governed. Genoa conquered Venice
about the end of the fourteenth century; but Genoa sunk, and Venice rose.
Venice has, he says, but one fault, viz. the want of a counterpoise to the
power of the nobles, and encouragement to the plebeians. A commoner cannot rise
in the state, as in ancient Rome, or in England. Voltaire therefore, I suppose,
thinks England as safe as ancient Rome, which we know lost its liberties.

The Swiss keep the same unchanged character of simplicity, honesty, frugality,
modesty, bravery. These are the virtues which preserve liberty. They have no
corrupt and corrupting court, no blood-sucking placemen, no standing army, the
ready instruments of tyranny, no ^mbition for conquest, no debauching commerce,
no luxury, no citadels against invasions and against liberty. Their mountains
are their fortifications, and every householder is a soldier, ready to fight
for his country Ibid. 60.
.

Before the government of Denmark was made hereditary and absolute in the
present royal family, by that fatal measure in 1660, the nobility and gentry
lived in great splendour and affluence. Now they are poor, and their number
diminished. Their estates will scarce pay the taxes. They are necessitated to
grind their poor tenants. They often give up an estate to the king, rather than
pay the taxes laid upon it. Sometimes the king will not have them; the tax is
better; the best parts being obliged to make up the deficiencies which the
worst cannot. Very different from their condition, when they voluntarily
contributed to the public expense according to their abilities. They now retire
into obscure and cheap places, unless when they can obtain court-places, of
which there are but few, and of small value. And many of them are given to
foreigners, rather than natives; as the court thinks it can better depend on
those, whose fortunes it has raised, than in those whom it has ruined. This
policy likewise served the purpose of a ministry, who wanted to break the
spirit of the nobles. Therefore they give the court-employments chiefly to the
meanest of the nobility, as the fittest instruments for executing their
tyrannical schemes. And when such persons grew rich by extortion upon the
people, and clamours began to rise, they stripped them of their ill-gotten
wealth, reduced them to their former condition, and increased the revenue by
the bargain, giving themselves an air of patriotism in plundering the people by
proxy. So the leviathans of power deceive and rob the subjects in almost all
countries. The consequence of this oppression is, that the people of Denmark,
finding it impossible to secure property, squander away their little gettings,
as fast as they gain them, and are irremediably poor. Oppression and arbitrary
sway beget distrust and doubts about the security of property; doubts beget
profusion, men choosing to squander on their pleasures what they apprehend may
excite the rapaciousness of their superiors; and this profusion is the
legitimate parent of that universal indolence, poverty, and despondency, which
so strongly characterize the miserable inhabitants of Denmark. When Lord
Molesworth resided in that country, the collectors of the poll-tax were obliged
to accept of old feather-beds, brass and pewter pa^s* and instead of money,
from the inhabitants of a (...), which once raised 200,000 rixdollars for
Christiern IV, on twenty four hours notice MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXII.13.
.

In Zealand (says Lord Molesworth) the peasants are as absolute slaves as the
negroes in Iamaica, and worse fed. They and their posterity are unalterably
fixed to the land in which they were born; the landholders est^m^ting their
worth by their stock of boors. Yeomanry, the bulwark of happy England, is a
state unheard of in Denmark; instead of which the miserable dru^ges, after
laboring hard to raise the king's taxes, must pay the overplus of the profits
of the lands, and of their own toil, to the greedy and necessitous landlord. If
any of them, by extraordinary labor or skill, improves his farm, he is
immediately removed to a worse, and the improved spot let to another at an
advanced rent

The quartering and paying the king's troops (in all absolute dominions, vast
armies are kept up,) are another griev^n^e no le^s oppressive. The late
experience o^ our own i^n keepers, and their complaints to parliament. A. D.
1^58, may give us an idea of the condition of the Danish peasants, oppressed by
those insolent i^mates, who lo^d it over all wherever they have power Ibid. 16.
. The authors afterward add to the oppression (...) the wretched (...), by
obliging them to furnish the king, and ev^ry little insolent courtier, with
horses and wagons in their journeys, in which they are beaten like catt^e. In
consequence of this misery, Denmark, once very populous, as appears from the
swarms of the northern nations, which in former ages overran all Europe, is
become thin of inhabitants; as poverty, oppression, and meagre diet do
miserably check procreation, besides producing diseases, which shorten the
lives of the few who are born. MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXII.16.
All this the rich, and thriving, and free people of England may bring
themselves to, if they please. It is only letting the court go on with their
scheme of diffusing universal corruption through all ranks, and it will come of
course.

The Scots and Welsh climbed their churlish mountains, to escape from Roman
chains, and their remained unconquered. The Dutch escaped to the stinking bogs
of the Low Countries, to get free from the tyranny of Spain. The Pennsylvanians
and New-Englanders abandoned the fruitful plains of their sweet native country,
crossed the vast Atlantic, and pierced the haunts of savages and wild beasts,
rather than submit to ecclesiastical tyranny. Don Pelayo, with all the brave
spirits of Spain, betook themselves to the inhospitable rocks, and dreary dens
of Liebana, to escape the Moorish fetters, and expelled the tyrants. The brave
Corficans a handful of men, maintained, in our times, a stubborn and bloody war
of some years continuance, against the haughty Genoese, and the mighty monarchy
of France, the sworn enemy of the liberties of Europe.

In Turkey there is no written law; no parliament; no property; no rank, but
that of serving the Grand Seignor. And the family of the emperor's first slave,
or prime vizier, sinks into their former obscurity, the moment he is dispatched
by the mutes, which is the common end of those ministers of state.

The descendants of the heroes, philosophers, orators, and free citizens of
Greece, are now slaves to the Grand Turk. The posterity of the Scipios and
Catos of Rome are now singing operas, in the shape of Italian eunuchs, on the
English stage Bolingbr. POLIT. TRACTS, 270.
. Whence th^s grievous fall? Ans. Greece and Rome have lost their liberties.

Reflect, my dear countrymen, on these instances of resistance to tyranny,
which do so much honor to human nature, think of the glorious struggles of the
ancient Grecian republics. Think of the resistance made by Carthage, by Spain,
and other ancient free nations, to the unbounded ambition of the all-conquering
Romans. Remember the height of glory to which freedom has raised so many
people, which otherwise would have continued in obscurity. Think of the free
states of Holland, of Venice, of Malta. Remember the riches and power of the
free Hanstowns. But above all, reflect on the glorious figure your ancestors
make in history.

Remember, O my friends, the laws, the rights,
The generous plan of freedom handed down
From age to age, by your renowned forefathers;
So dearly bought, the price of so much blood.
ADDISON. Shall it be said, that the history of England during the greatest
part of the 17th century is filled with instances of resistance to the tyranny
of kings, and that the following century exhibits little else than a series of
shameful concessions to the encroachments of corrupt courts?

Here is the natural limitation of the magistrate's authority: he ought not to
take what no man ought to give; nor exact what no man ought to perform: all he
has is given him, and these that gave it must judge of the application. In
government there is no such relation as lord and slave, lawless will, and blind
submission; nor ought to be amongst men: but the only relation is that of
father and children, patron and client, protection and allegiance, benefaction
and gratitude, mutual affection and mutual assistance Cato's LET. II.229.
.

It is not bellowing out for liberty alone, that will keep a people free.
Poland is a republic, and the people are passionately fond of liberty, yet live
in a perpetual state of servitude to their own avarice, profusion, and
necessities, whereby they are rendered the infamous pensioners of foreign
states, the creatures of their own kings, or the hirelings of some faction MOD.
UNIV. HIST. XXXIV.5.
.' The peasants are the most perfect slaves on earth. If one lord kills
another's peasant, he is only obliged to make good the damage. They have no
property. They have no possible means for becoming free; and have no redress
against the most cruel and unjust usage of their lords Ibid. 6.
. We have seen this wretched people sunk, if possible, still lower in our
times. Liberty seems indeed to be bidding mankind farewell, and, like Astraea,
to be taking her flight from the earth. All Europe was once free. Now all
Europe is enslaved, excepting what shadow of liberty is left in England,
Holland, Switzerland, and a few republics in Italy. And such is the encroaching
nature of power, and so great the inattention of mankind to their supreme
worldly interest, that the states of Europe, which still boast themselves free,
are like to be soon in the same condition with the others, which do not even
pretend to possess any degree of liberty.

Pursuing these gloomy ideas, I see, -- how shall I write it? -- I see my
wretched country in the same condition as France is now. Instead of the rich
and thriving farmers, who now fill, or who lately filled, the country with
agriculture, yielding plenty for man and beast, I see the lands neglected, the
villages and farms in ruins, with here and there a starveling in wooden shoes,
driving his plough, consisting of an old goat, a hidebound bullock, and an ass,
value in all forty shillings. I see the once rich and populous cities of
England in the same condition with those of Spain; whole streets lying in
rubbish, and the grass peeping up between the stones in those which continue
still inhabited. I see the harbors empty, the warehouses shut up, and the
shopkeepers playing at draughts, for want of customers. I see our noble and
spacious turnpike roads covered with thistles and other weeds, and scarce to be
traced out. I see the s^udious men r^ading the State of Britain, the Magazines,
the Political Disquisitions. and the histories of the 18th century, and
execrating the stupidity of their fath^rs, who, in spite of the many faithful
warnings given them, sat still, and suffered their country to be ruined by a
set of wretches, whom they could have crushed. I see the country devoured by an
army of 200,000 men. I see justice trodden under foot in the courts of justice.
I see Magna Charta, the Habeas Corpus act, the bill of rights, and trial by
jury, obsoleted, and royal edicts and arrets set up in their place. I see the
once respectable land-owners, traders, and manufacturers of England sunk into
contempt, and the placemen and military officers the only persons of
consequence.

This is a fearful and horrid prospect. I wish it could be, upon ^ure grounds,
alleged, that it is merely visionary. If all history be not fable and fiction,
so far from visionary, it is the very condition, my dear countrymen, into which
you are sinking, and where you will soon be irrecoverably fixed, if you do not
bestir yourselves and prevent it, while it is in your power to prevent it.

Be the consequences what they will, I thank Heaven, I have endeavored to
honor virtue and truth, and to detect and disgrace corruption and villainy. I
have unburdened my own conscience. I have delivered my own soul. I have sounded
a loud and distinct alarm. I have endeavored to raise the standard of liberty
higher, and to unfurl it wider, than has been attempted by any private person
before. Whether my well-meant attempt will prove effectual for rousing you from
your long and dangerous lethargy, remains to be seen. Of what I have myself
written, I say nothing; but surely I may affirm, that far the greatest part of
the matter I have collected is highly deserving of the public attention. And I
think hardly any person will pretend to publish on political subjects any thing
more interesting, or to treat those subjects in any better, or indeed in any
other manner, than is done by the illustrious writers and speakers, from whom I
have made my collections.

The nation will hold as long as our lives will hold, is the heroic and
patriotic way of speaking among some. But who told them how long the nation
would hold? The Danes were free one day; slaves the next.

What mortal (who does not pretend to be master of the black art) will pretend
to determine how long the British empire may last?

A country may lose its liberties in a very short time, though there were now a
very high spirit of liberty appearing in it, which is far from being the case
in England. In the minority of Lewis XIV. A. D. 1647, the parliaments and
supreme courts of France continued sitting in spite of the king's order to
dissolve them. On this Mazarine orders Blancmenil the first president, and the
counselor Broussel, to be arrested. All Paris rises. The streets are
barricaded. The queen regent finds herself obliged to set the prisoners at
liberty. Mazarine afterward arrests others. The parliament persists in, and
heightens its demands. Mazarine finds himself obliged to recall those he had
banished. The court is forced to yield: to remove taxes, and to make a
regulation, that persons, accused of state crimes, shall be tried according to
law, not punished arbitrarily by order of the court. Many new lords were
created, to strengthen the court-party. The insurrections of the people force
the royal family to make their escape from the palace of the Louvre, at four in
the morning, and fly to S. Germains en Lay. Turenne saves the young king and
queen mother twice from being taken. Mazarine is declared, by the parliament of
Paris, a public disturber of the peace, and enemy to their kingdom, a price set
on his head, and all cardinals forbidden to be of the king's council. Other
parliaments and provinces revolt. The mob force their way into the queen's
apartments, and undraw the young king's curtains at midnight, to see whether he
was safe, suspecting, that she had conveyed him away again. All France is in
rebellion against an encroaching and tyrannical court.

Would any one in those times, when the flame of liberty blazed so high, have
allowed it to be possible, by any management whatever, to quench it so
effectually in five years, that Lewis XIV. with an army of only 1200 men, then
but a youth, on his return from hunting, having been informed, that the
parliament of Paris was met without his leave, went directly, booted and
spurred as he was, and turned the members of it out of the house; and no
resistance made either at the time or afterward? MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXV.36, 38,
40, 45, 51, 52, ^4.
.

The appearance of a spirit of liberty in a nation is no argument, that its
liberties are absolutely safe. There was a great appearance of a spirit of
liberty at Rome in Sylla's time. There was enough of the spirit of liberty in
Caesar's time, to lay the invader of liberty weltering in his own blood in the
open senate house. There was enough of the spirit of liberty, after his
execution, to produce the battle of Philippi. Yet all considerate Romans saw
the liberties of their country to be in danger, as early as the days of
Lucullus's conquests in Asia.

The liberties of a country can only be safe in the difficulty of enslaving it.
It is folly to trust to such securities, as, that the grandees know if the
state is ruined, they must be ruined with it. The officers of the army will not
promote slavery, because they are gentlemen of families, and will not enslave
their own families. There is a great spirit of liberty still in the nation. We
have a good king on the throne. We have good laws, etc. If these securities had
been sufficient, how many enslaved states in ancient and modern times had
preserved their liberties!

A nation is then, and only then, secure against foreign invasion, when it has
within itself, by means of a fleet, or of the people's being generally trained
to arms, a greater force than any that can probably be brought against it; and
when there is such a prevalency of public spirit, integrity and contempt of
riches, that the government are not likely to betray it to a foreign enemy. A
nation is then, and only then, secure against the encroachments of its own
government, when there is no such prevalency of luxury and corruption, as to
give reason to apprehend danger from the court, and when the people have in
themselves a sufficiency of public spirit to prevent their being bought, and a
sufficiency of force in their own hands, and ready for immediate exertion, to
prevent their being violently crushed by a tyrannical court or nobility.

As soon as any one of these barriers is removed, there remains nothing but the
fearful expectation of the enslaving chain, that is to gall every free and
stubborn neck.

Men, says the excellent Davenant, do as industriously contrive fallacies to
deceive themselves, when they have a mind to be deceived, as they study frauds
whereby to deceive others, and if it leads to their ends, and gratifies their
present ambition, they care not what they do, thinking it time enough to serve
the public when they have served themselves; and in this view very many betray
their trusts, comply, give up the people's right, and let fundamentals be
invaded, flattering themselves, that when they are grown as great as they
desire to be, it will be then time enough to make a stand and redeem the
commonwealth. The same notion led Pompey to join with those who intended to
subvert the Roman liberties; but he found them too strong, and himself too
weak, when he desired to save his country. In the same manner, if there be any
in this nation who desire to build their fortunes upon the public ruin, they
ought to consider that their great estates, high honors, and preferments, will
avail them little, when the subversion of liberty has weakened and impoverished
us so, as to m^ke a way for the bringing in of a foreign power Daven. II.302.
.

People, who know human nature, do not expect from mankind much disinterested
public spirit.

Nec reperire licet multis e millibus unum.
Virtutem precium qui putet esse suum.
SIL. ITAL. But while the worthless and sordid affect to sneer at the anxiety
of those who see farther than themselves; they would do well to consider, that
to say, What care I for politics? is to say, What care I for my liberty, my
religion, my house, my lands, my ships, my commerce, my money in the funds, my
wife, my children, my mistress, my bottle, my club, my plays, operas,
masquerades, balls, pleasures, profits, honor and life? For on the safety of
our country depends the safety of all we have; or hope to have in this world. A
tyrannical government can deprive a man of every thing, but his soul. They
cannot send him to hell; but they can do every thing short of that. They can,
and do make this world a hell. If our country comes to be enslaved, any one of
these, or all of them, may come into danger. And, that this country may come to
be enslaved, cannot seem improbable to any one, who knows, that this country,
and almost all the countries in the world, have been enslaved; much less will
it seem improbable to any person who knows a little of history, and sees, that
this country has upon it every symptom of a declining state, especially that
most decisive one, of an universal decay of public spirit.

In most histories, different proceedings produce different catastrophes: but
in the history of our parliamentary proceedings there is a corrupt sameness,
which makes the perusal execrably stupid. A good motion made by the opposition;
quashed by ministerial influence. An impudent demand made on the people to fill
the pockets of the minister's dependents, granted. A king's (that is, a
minister's speech trumping up the happiness of an enslaved, corrupt, and ruined
nation; echoed back by the house, that is, by the minister's tools in the
house; and so on to the end of the chapter. Whenever we read the motion, we
know beforehand its fate. We peruse the arguments on both sides; we see on one
side massy sterling sense; but we see it weighed up by massy sterling guineas.
These are shocking symptoms of a tendency to ruin in a state. But lord Bathurst
in his following letter to Dean Swift, goes still farther Lord Bathurst to Dean
Swift, LAND. MAG. 1768, p. 114.
.

I am convinced, says he, that our constitution is already gone, and we are
idly struggling to maintain, what in truth has been long lost, like some fools
here, with gout and palsies at fourscore years old, drinking the waters in
hopes of health again. If this was not our case, and that the people are
already in effect slaves, would it have been possible for the same minister who
had projected the excise scheme (before the heats it had occasioned in the
nation were well laid) to have chosen a new parliament again exactly to his
mind? And though perhaps not altogether so strong in numbers, yet as well
disposed in general to his purposes as he could wish. His master, I doubt, is
not so much beloved, as I could wish he was; the minister, I am sure, is as
much hated and detested as ever man was, and yet I say a new parliament was
chosen of the stamp that was desired, just after having failed in the most
odious scheme that ever was projected. After this, what hopes can there ever
possibly be of success? Unless it be from confusion, which God forbid I should
live to see. In short the whole nation is so abandoned and corrupt, that the
crown can never fail of a majority in both houses of parliament, he makes them
all in one house, and he chooses above half in the other. Four and twenty
bishops, and sixteen Scotch lords, is a terrible weight in one. Forty-five from
one country, besides the West of England, and all the government boroughs is a
dreadful number in the other. Were his majesty inclined tomorrow to declare
his body coachman his first minister, it would do just ^s well, and the wheels
of government would move as easily as they do with the sagacious driver, who
now sits on the box. Parts and abilities are not in the least wanting to
conduct affairs; the coachman knows how to feed his cattle, and the other feeds
the beasts in his service, and this is all the skill that is necessary in
either case. Are not these sufficient difficulties and discouragements, if
there were no others, and would any man struggle against corruption, when he
knows, that if he is ever near defeating it, those who make use of it, only
double the dose, and carry all their points farther, and with a higher hand,
than perhaps they at first intended.

Some are of Lord Bathurst's opinion, that our liberties are already gone:
others think them only in extreme danger. Whichsoever is the case, no friend to
England will advise you, my good countrymen, to sit still. If your liberties
are going, you ought to bestir yourselves for their preservation; if they are
gone, for their recovery.

Let no free people deceive themselves by the false persuasion, that it must
take up a long series of years to wear out their liberties, because it was the
work of ages to establish their constitution. Great works require long time in
finishing, A short space destroys them. A first rate ship of war is several
years in building. She slips a plank, or founders at sea; is swallowed up in a
moment. The great city of London was many ages in building; the conflagration
in 1666, in four days reduced the work of ages to ruins.

Farther, have you considered, my dear countrymen, that it is not in your
option to preserve, or give up your liberties as you please, any more than your
lives. Liberty, and ^^fe, are the rich gifts of all gracious Heaven. And you
cannot think it lawful to spurn from you your Maker's godlike bounty, which he
gave you in trust to be preserved, and enjoyed by you. Besides, if it were
lawful for you to sell yourselves for nothing, you will certainly not pretend
that you have power to enslave your posterity No people can alienate their
posterity's immunities.

LOCK.
for ever. I therefore charge you before Almighty God, and as you shall
hereafter answer to him, to take care how you trifle in a matter of such awful
importance. If you be not absolutely certain (which is impossible) that there
is no account to be given hereafter, you run yourselves into the most dangerous
condition that can be imagined, by making yourselves partakers of the guilt of
those who are actively concerned in enslaving your country. In what light do we
look upon him, who knows of a murder to be committed, and makes no attempt to
prevent it?

He who pretends to exempt himself from all concern for his country, may as
well reject all obligation to do his duty to God, to his neighbor, or himself.
Yet every man knows, that he is obliged to perform these duties; and that he is
obliged to obey the laws of his country, preferably to those of his parents,
and in neglect of, and opposition to his own interest.

It is undoubtedly dangerous for the people to be employed in redressing
grievances. It is not safe to teach them to unite, and to give them the means
of knowing their own strength. When they go to redressing, they generally do
great mischief, before they begin redressing. But this is the fault of those
who resist them. They are generally in the right, as was the case at Florence,
in the 14th century MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXVI.149.
. The tyranny of the eighth field deputies was intolerable, and the people were
right in demanding the abolition of it; all that was wrong was the magistrates
refusing the people redress, and the people's redressing themselves, in too
violent a mannner. Commotions of this kind, with all their terrible
consequences, are almost always ^wing to the unreasonable difference made
between princes, or nobles, and the people, by prerogative or privilege. The
people may be brought, by inveterate tyranny, to bear patiently to see the most
worthless part of mankind (for surely the great by mere birth, in all ages and
countries, are commonly among the most worthless of mankind) set up above them,
and themselves obliged to crouch. But sometimes the people grow uneasy under
this. And if the people rouse to vengeance, woe to those who stand in their
way. Let merit only be honored with privilege and prerogative, and mankind
will be contented. The wise ancients understood this, and therefore were very
cautious of making differences. A crown of grass, or a couple of twigs, was the
reward of the most heroic actions. I do not like that Aristides should be
distinguished by the title of Just, any more than myself, says ^^e Athenian,
and puts in his shell for banishing that great and good man. This indeed was
the very design of the ostracism, viz. to prevent unreasonable inequalities,
and the desire of power and pre-eminence, which always produces disturbance.

Nothing is much more formidable, than a popular insurrection. When 60,000 men
in the time of Richard II. assembled, and demanded redress of grievances, they
made the king and nobles tremble. The government was glad to quiet them by any
means; and granted them charters after charters Braay, III.346.
. There were many lives lost, and much mischief done on that occasion. All wise
governments will carefully avoid irritating the people beyond measure. And all
sound patriots will avoid rousing the people, if redress can be any other way
obtained. Therefore I do not propose having recourse to force. What I propose
is, to apply the power of the people, guided, limited, and directed by men of
property, who are interested in the security of their country, and have no
income, by place or pension, to indemnify them for bringing slavery and ruin
upon their country -- to apply this power (if found absolutely necessary) to
prevent the application of the same power unrestrained unlimited, and directed
by mere caprice, or the spirit of party. Perhaps, when things come to a crisis,
which most probably they will soon, our government may recollect themselves so
far as to grant voluntarily, and with a good grace, that redress, to which the
people have an undoubted right, and which they see the people resolute to have.
I will, therefore, attempt to draw the sketch of such a plan for retrieving the
nation, and restoring the constitution, as (...) me seems the most promising.
Might the hand of an angel guide my pen, or rather an abler pen -- my country
might yet be saved. Or might I have for a rostrum the highest of the Peruvian
Andes; could I borrow the angelic trumpet, whose blast is to break the ^^umber
of ten thousand years; and might I have for my audience the whole human race;
on what subject could I address them, that would be more interesting to them,
than warning them to preserve their liberty and their virtue?

But I need not have recourse to a mountain for a pulpit, nor to the angel's
trumpet to swell my voice. If the still small voice of reason will not move
you, all the terrors of mount Sinai, or of the day of judgment, will not
produce the proper effect.

In the mean time, for our encouragement, that the spirit of liberty is not
totally extinct in the people, we observe that some of the constituents have
required their candidates to promise solemnly, that if elected, they would
promote certain reformations, and the correction of various gross abuses.

It were to be wished that those who first drew up the terms of the
engagements, had not overloaded their demands; but that they had confined
themselves to one only article. I mean the endeavoring to get an independent
parliament. An independent parliament would at all times secure the rights of
the people, as has been shown in the foregoing volumes. A candidate's refusing
to promise his best endeavors in the house, if elected, for obtaining
independent parliaments, would be an open declaration, that, in aspiring to a
seat, his object was not the service of his country, but the gratifying his own
ambitious or avaricious private views.

One set of readers will pretend to have found me inconsistent with myself This
writer, they will say, must either mean to show us that we are in danger, and
how to escape that danger, or his labor can be of no service. And yet in
several parts of his work he magnifies the peril, from the army, as if a
tyrannical prince or ministry could at any time, by its means, seize our
liberties at their pleasure. If this be true, how can this writer pretend to
talk of our extricating ourselves? If this be true, the point is decided, the
case is desperate, our liberties are gone; we have nothing left, but to bear
patiently what we have brought upon ourselves? But do not you, my good
countrymen, suffer yourselves to be duped by such quibbles as these. I have not
absolutely pronounced upon the-state of our liberties. It is the very point
which remains to be determined. If a nation is in the condition in which we now
see France; there can be no doubt concerning its liberties; they are utterly
gone. And yet no wise man will say that they are irretrievably gone. On the
contrary, if a nation were in the condition we now see Holland, or rather on a
much better footing as to liberty than that commonwealth is now upon; we should
consider the liberties of that state as in no immediate danger. But the
condition of England is neither that of France, nor that of Holland, which
renders it on the one hand highly improper to sit still unconcerned, as if all
was well; or on the other to give all up as if irretrievable and desperate.

And now -- in the name of all that is holy -- let us consider whether a scheme
may not be laid down for obtaining the necessary reformation of parliament.

Before all other things, there must be established a GRAND NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR RESTORING THE CONSTITUTION. Into this must be invited all men
of property, all friends to liberty, all able commanders, etc. There must be a
copy of the ASSOCIATION for every parish, and a parochial committee to proc^re
subscriptions from all persons whose names are in any tax book, and who are
willing to join the Association. And there must be a grand committee for every
county in the three kingdoms, and in the colonies of America.

The people at large, when they lose their constitutional guard, are like a
rope of sand, easily divided asunder; and therefore when the acting parts of the
constitution shall abuse th^^r trust, and counteract the end for which they
were established, there is no way of obtaining redress but by associating
together, in order to form a new chain of union and strength in defense of
their constitutional rights. But instead of uniting for their common interest,
the people have suffered themselves to be divided and split into factions and
parties to such a degree, that every man has rose up in enmity against his
neighbor; by which they have brought themselves under the fatal curse of a
kingdom divided against itself, which cannot stand HIST. ESS. ENG. CONSTABLE. 151.
.

By the readiness of the people to enter into the associations, it may be
effectually determined, whether the majority are desirous of the proposed
reformations. This, as has been observed before, is a matter of supreme
consequence, for resistance to government, unless it be by a clear majority of
the people, is rebellion. Therefore, with all due submission to the judgment of
Bishop Burnet upon that point, the true criterion between rebellion and
reformation consists not in the atrociousness of the abuses to be reformed, but
in the concurrence of the people in desiring reformation. For wha^ever the
majority desire, it is certainly lawful for them to have, unless they desire
what is contrary to the laws of God.

Confederacies and associations have been usual in all countries, especially in
England.

A confederacy of the nobility of France was formed against that weak and
worthless prince Lewis XI. in which 500 were concerned; and their places of
rendezvous were the most public, as the church of Notre Dame. At last they
assembled an army of 100,000 men. Yet the king's part^ never found them out
till they had got together a great force MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXIV. 53.
.

King John summoned the barons to pass the seas to him in Normandy, and assist
him to quell his rebellious subjects. They refused, unless he would promise to
restore and preserve their liberties. This was the first attempt toward an
association for a plan of liberty, according to Mr. Hume Hume, HIST. I.356.
.

Lord Lyttelton mentions an association in the time of William the Bastard, to
defend that blessed saint, and all his teritories, both within and without the
realm HIST. HEN. II. III.85.
.

The opposition in those days was between a solitary tyrant (for John could not
command the army without the concurrence of the barons) and all England. In
Charles Ist's time, the opposition was between a frantic bigoted king, and a
brave and free parliament. In our times, the opposition is between a corrupt
court, joined by an innumerable multitude of all ranks and stations, bought
with the public money, and the independent part of the nation.

The general association all over England for the defense of Elizabeth, A. D.
1586, and afterward for that of William and Mary. Catholic leagues, protestant
leagues, the Hanseatic association, the solemn league and covenant, and the non
importation association in America, etc. are all acts of the people at large
ACT. REG. IV.40.
.

Upon the lords throwing out the exclusion-bill, another was brought into the
house of commons for an association for the support of the protestant religion,
and exclusion of the duke of York Hume, HIST. STUARTS, II.329.
. They voted that till the exclusion-bill should pass, no supplies ought to be
granted the king; and lest he should raise money on credit, they threatened
their vengeance on those who should lend the king on the credit of any tax. The
sequel showed how much the commons were in the right in all these proceedings;
and of what consequence an uncorrup^ house of commons is.

A grand national association against popery was proposed in the house of
commons, A. D. 1680. A tyrannical government is an association with a
vengeance. Why should not the people associate against it? Resolved, that it is
the opinion of this house, that the house be moved that a bill be brought for
an association of all his majesty's protestant subjects for the safety of his
majesty's person, the defense of the protestant religion, and for preventing
the duke of York, or any other papist, from succeeding to the crown DEB. COM.
II.30.
.

A D. 1744, the merchants of London, to the number of 520, associated
themselves for the support of public credit, and effectually supported it at a
very perilous conjuncture CONTIN. RAP. VIII.24.
. The whole county of York was associated against the rebels, and several
noblem^n raised regiments at their own expense.

See the act for associating the kingdom in defense of king William III. A. D,
1696 STAT. AT LARG, III.236.
. The court was glad to encourage such an association of the people in a time
of danger. They did not then insist, as has been done since, that the people
are annihilated, or absorbed into the parliament; that the voice of the people
is no where to be heard but in parliament; that members of parliament are not
responsible to their constituents, etc. The association was begun by the
people, and parliament gave it sanction afterward. Surely it is as necessary
to associate for preserving the kingdom, as it was then for preserving the
king. The associated engage to stand by and assist each other to the utmost of
their power in support and defense of king William; and if his majesty comes to
a violent or untimely death, they oblige themselves to stand by each other in
revenging the same upon his enemies and their adherents, etc. But instead of a
design by papists, against the life of the king;' a design by courtiers,
against the life of the constitution;' and you have here a model for the
association for restoring annual parliaments, adequate representation, and an
unbribed house of commons.

The next question is, Who shall set himself at the head of this grand
association?

In a monarchy, we know full well who ought to be at the head of all schemes
for the general good. And would to God, the Father of his people would lay hold
of such an opportunity of declaring himself a friend to independent
parliaments! How glorious would the character of Augustus have appeared to all
posterity, had he really intended what he only affected to intend; I mean the
restoration of the republican government upon the fall of Julius, which he
certainly had power to bring about, notwithstanding his pretenses to the
contrary? In the same manner, would not every worthy British bosom glow with
affection, would not every angel in heaven tune his lyre to the praises of that
monarch, who, shaking off and trampling under his feet the ministerial
trammels, should dare to think for himself, and to speak for himself, should
astonish both houses of parliament, and all Europe, by opening a new
parliament, or a new session, with a speech composed by himself, in which he
should condemn the long prevalence of corruption in the legislative assemblies,
and should earnestly recommend to them the making and bringing in effectual
bills for restoring annual parliaments, for making representation adequate, for
exclusion by rotation, and for limiting the number of placemen and pensioners
sitting in the house. But if our sovereign for that time being should judge
such interposition improper, the great privileges of our nobility are to be the
king's counselors, the protectors of the constitution, and the people's
example. Ought not therefore our independent nobility to take care that such a
scheme be properly headed? But should our nobles think otherwise of this
subject, and decline assuming to themselves a principal part in the conduct of
this infinitely important, though not infinitely difficult, business, let the
great, the rich, the independent city of London take the lead.

The corporation of London has, since the Restoration, usually taken the lead
in petitions to parliament for the alteration of any established law. Blackst.
COMMENT. IV.147.
.

In the famous association signed by the illustrious Seven, for inviting over
the prince of Orange, A. D. 1688, it is observed, that the people were
generally dissatisfied. The Seven lay great stress on this, as likely to be a
support to the prince in his enterprise, if they (the people) could have such a
protection to countenance their rising, as would secure them from being
destroyed before they could get into a posture of defense. They observed that
the army was divided, the officers discontented, and the men strongly set
against popery. And that the seamen were almost all against the king Dalr.
II.228.
.

The objects of such a general association as I propose are, 1. The securing of
public credit. 2. Obtaining the undoubted sense of the people, on the state of
public affairs. 3 Presenting petitions, signed by a clear majority of the
people of property, for the necessary acts of parliament. 4. To raise, and have
in readiness, the strength of the nation, in order to influence government, and
prevent mischief.

If any person is alarmed at the boldness of this paragraph, let him remember
that it is less than what was done at the Revolution. For it was not certain,
at that remarkable period, that the majority of the people were for the
exclusion. Besides, the restoration I propose is a much less considerable
alteration, though like to be of much greater public advantage, than the
setting aside the whole royal family of the Stuarts. And let it be ever
remembered, that rebellion is not merely opposition to government; if it were,
than was the Revolution direct rebellion. The opposition of a minority to
government, backed by a majority, is proper rebellion. The opposition of a
majority of the people to an obstinate government is proper patriotism. You
have therefore, my good countrymen, only to make it certain beyond all
possibility of doubt, that you have the majority on your side. Whatever they
choose is right.

Let the first business of the London association be, as I said, securing
public credit; the next, for petitioning, exclusive of all views to any thing
farther, and as taking for granted, that the petitions will be effectual. Let
this example be followed by all the great cities, towns, counties, corporate
bodies, and faculties throughout the island, and the same in Ireland and the
colonies.

The people of Ireland extorted the passing of the bill for limiting the length
of their parliaments, by assembling to the number of twenty thousand men,
securing all the avenues to the parliament house, and threatening vengeance on
all the members, if the bill was not passed. But for this spirited behavior,
they had been jockeyed out of that salutary act LAND. MAG. 1768, p. 132.
.

A. D. 1588, the year of the Barricades, the Parisians rose, and drove out six
thousand regular troops, chiefly Swiss, and defeated the king's guards MEM.
Sully, I.267.
.

A large mob, A. D. 1773, surrounded the palace at Madrid, and insisted, that
the effects lately taken from some Jesuits should be restored to their
relations. The guards were called to disperse them; but would not fire upon the
people. The court was obliged to yield WHITEHALL EVEN. POST, March 27, 1773.
.

It is always to be expected that, as Sallust says, men should act with more
earnestness for the preservation of their all, than the partisans of tyranny
for superfluous power.

In the decisive battle of Marston Moor, the tyrant's army and the parliament's
were nearly equal, about fourteen thousand each. But of the former four
thousand were killed, and fifteen hundred taken; of the latter only three
hundred lost in all Macaul. IV.119.
.

Provocation will sometimes rouse valor, when a sense of honor will not. In
the year 1746, when Botta, the Austrian general, demanded a severe contribution
of the Genoese, they begun paying, and all went on quietly, though it was with
the utmost difficulty that the second payment was made; but the Austrians being
possessed of a notion which was not groundless, that though the government of
Genoa was exhausted, yet that many of their individuals were immensely rich,
still advanced in their demands; and the senate ^^ok care that all the sums
paid to the Austrians should be carried with great parade to their quarters in
full view of the people. This had the effect they secretly desired, which was
to render matters ripe for a revolt, without their being openly concerned in
it; though some of the senators were bold enough to disguise themselves in
Plebeian dresses, and mixing with the common people blew the flame of
discontent, which, notwithstanding all the terror of the Austrian general and
army, at last broke out. For the siege of Antibes being resolved upon, Botta,
amongst other pieces of artillery, which he designed to be put on board the
British fleet for carrying on that siege, ordered a large mortar, which
happened to be overturned in the streets, and an Austrian officer endeavoring
to oblige some of the inhabitants of Genoa to assist in dragging it down to the
harbor, they refused; and he striking one of them with his cane, a shower of
stones from the rest obliged the Austrians for that night to retire. Next day,
when Botta prepared to chastise the insurgents, he found them grown to a
formidable head, and without entering into the particulars of the insurrection,
all the intripidity and discipline of his troops could not withstand that
spirit of liberty which once more animated these republicans, who for many
years had been looked upon as degenerated, even to a proverb. According to
Bonamia, a British man of war had been sent thither by his Sardinian majesty to
bring off for him part of the plunder; and we are told, that that monarch was
by no means pleased with the independent negotiation which the Austrians had
entered into with the Genoese. However that may be, it is certain, that Botta
in his turn made application for some respite of hostilities. But the
inhabitants of the neighboring villages, seized with the same spirit as these
of Genoa, had by this time taken arms, and poured into the city. The effect
was, that the Austrian regulars, notwithstanding some advantages they had
gained at first, were drawn from one strong post to another, till Botta applied
to the senate, and under pretense of the capitulation, demanding that they
should unarm their soldiers, and join with him in suppressing the insurrection.
The doge and senate of Genoa, upon this occasion, behaved with wonderful
address, and temporised so well, that they neither discouraged the insurgents,
nor did they give Botta any just handle to accuse them of breach of faith. By
this time the insurgents, by the help of some French and Spanish officers, who
were prisoners to the Austrians, but had mingled themselves in disguises with
the Genoese, were disciplined and rendered excellent troops, and they had
regularly fortified all the strong posts of the city; nor would they longer
hear of any terms, but that the Austrians should evacuate the city, restore
their artillery, and give them an acquittance of all further demands of any
kind. Upon this Botta, after another desperate but fruitless attempt to recover
possession of the city, found himself obliged to evacuate the same, which he
did with great loss to himself, and satisfaction to the Genoese CONTIN. RAP.
IX.279.
.

Put no trust in any living man, or set of men, farther than you yourselves
see. The dead have no design upon you. Therefore have I called them up to warn
and alarm you. Pay no regard to what I have written, otherwise then as
supported by fact and the judgment of your wise ancestors.

Members of parliament would hardly dare to reject the proposed
reformation-bill, as knowing themselves not to be invulnerable, and remembering
that they could not command a guard of 500 soldiers each at their country
houses at all times.

Let the petitions be drawn up and presented in the most respectful and most
unexceptionable way that is possible, so that the fault may all come upon
government (if they reject the petitions) and none upon the people.

Petitioning, in better English, is no more than requesting or requiring, and
men require not favors but their due MILT. EIKON, 109.
.

If the government show themselves so wise and so friendly to the people as to
grant the petitions, all is safe and secure. For an honest parliament will make
every body else honest, and all will go well.

A government which opposes and refuses the undoubted demands of the people, in
such manner that the people come to be defeated of their desire, be the subject
matter what it will, is no government, but a proper tyranny. Supposing the
government to be really and bona fide persuaded that the demand of the people
is unreasonable, in this or any other case, and would prove hurtful to them if
granted, they are only to remonstrate against it; and if the people still
insist upon it, the government ought to a man to resign, not to resist the
supreme power, the majesty of the people. Whoever undertakes to manage any
person's or any people's affairs in spite of the proprietors, is answerable for
all consequences.

Whenever the fundamentals of a free government are attacked, or any other
schemes ruinous to the general interest of a nation are pursued, the best
service that can be done to such a nation, and even to the prince, is to
commence an early and vigorous opposition to them; for the event will always
show, as we shall soon see in the present case, that those who form an
opposition in this manner, are the truest friends to both, however they may be
stigmatized at first with odious names, which belong more properly to those who
throw the dirt at them. If the opposition begin late, or be carried on more
faintly than the exigency requires, the evil will grow; nay, it will grow the
more by such an opposition, till it becomes at length too inveterate for the
ordinary methods of cure; and whenever that happens, whenever usurpations on
national liberty are grown too strong to be checked by these ordinary methods,
the people are reduced to this alternative: they must either submit to slavery
and beggary, the worst of all political evils, or they must endeavor to
prevent the impending mischief by open force and resistance, which is an evil
but one degree less eligible than the other. But when the opposition is begun
early, and carried on vigorously, there is time to obtain redress of
grievances, and put a stop to such usurpations by these gentle and safe methods
which their constitution has provided; methods which may and have often proved
fatal to wicked men, but can never prove fatal to the prince himself. He is
never in danger but when these methods, which all arbitrary courts dislike, are
too long delayed. The most plausible objection to such proceedings, and by
which well-meaning men are frequently made the bubbles of these who have the
worst design, arises from a false notion of moderation. True political
moderation consists in not opposing the measures of government, except when
great and national interests are at stake; and when that is the case, in
opposing them with such a degree of warmth as is adequate to the nature of the
evil, to the circumstances of danger attending it, and even to these of
opportunity. To oppose upon any other foot, to oppose things which are not
blameworthy, or which are of no material consequence to the national interest,
with such violence as may disorder the harmony of government, is certainly
faction; but it is likewise faction, and faction of the worst kind, either not
to oppose at all, or not to oppose in earnest when points of the greatest
importance to the nation are concerned Bolingbr. REM. HIST. ENG. 274.
.

When an injured nation calls aloud for redress, and can have none from
government, the people may be expected to do themselves justice, says Shippen
on the South Sea affair.

Parliament has declared it no resistance of magistrates to side with the just
principles of law, nature, and nations. The soldier may lawfully hold the hands
of that general, who turns his cannon against his own army; the seaman the
hands of that pilot, who wilfully runs the ship on a rock. So our brethren of
Scotland argued, in the remonstrance of the army in June 1646 PARL. HIST.
XV.460.
.

Britain, according to our present constitution, cannot be undone by
parliaments; for there is something which a parliament cannot do. A parliament
cannot annul the constitution; and whilst that is preserved, though our
condition may be bad, it cannot be irretrievably so. The legislative is a
supreme, and may be called in one sense an absolute, but in none, an arbitrary
power. It is limited to the public good of the society. It is a power that has
no other end but preservation, and therefore can never have a right to destroy,
enslave, or designedly to impoverish the subjects; for the obligations of the
law of nature cease not in society, etc. -- If you therefore put so extravagant
a case, as to suppose the two houses of parliament concurring to make at once a
formal cession of their own rights and privileges, and of those of the whole
nation, to the crown, and ask who has the right and the means to resist the
supreme legislative power; I answer the whole nation has the right, and a
people who deserve to enjoy liberty will find the means. An attempt of this
kind would break the bargain between the king and the nation, between the
representative and collective body of the people, and would dissolve the
constitution. From hence it follows, that the nation which has a right to
preserve this constitution, has a right to resist an attempt that leaves no
other means for preserving it but those of resistance. From hence it follows,
that if the constitution was actually dissolved, as it would be by such an
attempt of the three estates, the people would return to their original, their
natural right, the right of restoring the same constitution, or of making a new
one. No power on earth could claim any right of imposing a constitution upon
them, and less than any that king, those lords, and those commons, who having
been entrusted to preserve, had destroyed the former. -- But to suppose a case
more within the bounds of possibility, though one would be tempted to think it
as little within those of probability; let us suppose our parliaments in some
future generation to grow so corrupt, and the crown so rich, that a pecuniary
influence constantly prevailing over the majority, they should assemble for
little else than to establish grievances instead of redressing them; to approve
the measures of the court without information; to engage their country in
alliances, in treaties, in wars, without examination, and to give money without
account, and almost without stint; the case would be deplorable. Our
constitution itself would become our grievance whilst this corruption
prevailed; and if it prevailed long, our constitution could not last long;
because this slow progress would lead to the destruction of it, as surely as
the more concise method of giving it up at once. But in this case the
constitution would help itself, and effectually too, unless the whole mass of
the people was tainted, and the electors were become no honester than the
elected. Much time would be required to beggar and enslave the nation in this
manner. It could scarce be the work of one parliament, though parliaments
should continue to be septennial. It could not be the work of a triennial
parliament most certainly; and the people of Great Britain would have none to
blame but themselves; because, as the constitution is a sure rule of action to
those whom they choose to act for them, so it is likewise a sure rule of
judgment to them in the choice of their trustees, and particularly of such as
have represented them already. In short, nothing can destroy the constitution
of Britain but the people of Britain; and whenever the people of Britain become
so degenerate and base as to be induced by corruption (for they are no longer
in danger of being awed by prerogative) to choose persons to represent them in
parliament whom they have found by experience to be under an influence arising
from private interest, dependents on a court, and the creatures of a minister,
or others who are unknown to the people that elect them, and bring no
recommendation but that which they carry in their purses; then may the enemies
of our constitution boast that they have got the better of it, and that it is
no longer able to preserve itself, nor to defend liberty DISSERT. UPON PARTIES,
210.
.

Ten millions of people are not to sit still, and see a villainous junto
overthrow their liberties. Formalities are then at an end. The question, in a
season of such extremity, is not, who has a right to do this or that? Any man
has a right to save his country. In such cases, says Sidney DISC. GOV. 421.
, every man is a magistrate, and he, who best knows the danger, and the means
of preventing it, has the right of calling the senate or people to an assembly.
The people would, and certainly ought to follow him, as they did Brutus and
Valerius against Tarquin, or Horatius and Valerius against the Decemviri. To
wait for formalities, while our country lies bleeding, would be as foolish as
the stiffness of the officers about Philip IV. of Spain, who let him catch a
violent cold and fever, because the person whose place it was to help the king
to his cloak was out of the way, in time of a storm of hail and rain, when he
was a hunting.

The law does not, neither can it, permit any private man, or set of men, to
interfere forcibly in matters of such high importance, [the redress of public
grievances] especially as it has established a sufficient power for these
purposes in the high court of parliament. Neither does the constitution justify
any private, or particular resistance for private or particular injuries;
though in cases of national oppression, the nation has very justifiably risen
as one man, to vindicate the original contract between the king and people
Blackst. COM. IV.82.
.

The Spanish grandee^ resisted Charles V. their sovereign, though he commanded
an army of 40,000 men. Nor did he dare to show resentment. Nemo potest odio
multorum resistere Robertson's HIST. CHAPTER V. II.430.
.

Wise nations have always insisted on redress of grievances, before they gave
money. A free gift from the cortes of Castile to Charles V. without the
previous conditions, occasioned A. D. 1530, a most furious insurrection
Robertson's HIST. CHAPTER V. II.156.
. On this occasion the society called the Junta, set up the lunatic queen
Ioanna against Charles, and shook his throne. The Junta remonstrates, requiring
not only redress of disorders, but new regulations; among other particulars,
against foreign troops, a foreign regent, or foreigners in employments; against
free quarters for soldiers; against alienation of royal demesnes; against new
erected places; for an adequate representation in the cortes, or parliaments;
against court-influence in electing those representatives; a member's receiving
for himself, or any of his family, any office, or pension, to be confiscation,
or death; each community to pay a competent salary to its representative; the
cortes to meet, whether summoned by the king, or not; the unequal privileges of
the nobles to be abrogated; inquiry to be made into the disposal of the royal
revenues, by the cortes, if the king does not order it in a certain time. Ibid.
II.106.
The same demands were made by the people in many of the other countries of
Europe, in their struggles for liberty.

Park, governor of Antigua, about the beginning of this century, provoked the
people to such a pitch by his tyranny, lewdness with the wives of some of the
principal men of the island, and other debaucheries, that they rise upon him,
attack him in his own house, and murder him. Remarkable that when Park seemed
willing to give security for a change of conduct, the people would not quit
their purpose, fearing that if the difference was made up again, he might have
interest to bring some of them to punishment, as was the case of Charles I.
MOD. UNIV. HIST. XLI.307.
People in power had better avoid driving things to such an extremity, as to
render their destruction necessary, or seemingly so. When the people take
redress into their own hands, woe to the tyrants.

Blackstone's cautions for the choice of able men, as so much power is lodged
in the parliament, are most certainly obvious and just; but his quotations from
Burleigh, Hale, Montesquieu, and Lock, and his conclusions therefrom, require
a more close examination. Burleigh said England could never be ruined by a
parliament. Sir Matthew Hale, The parliament being the highest court, over
which none other can have any jurisdiction, if this government should fall
then, the subject is left without remedy, by any appeal to any higher court.
Montesquieu, England must perish when the legislative shall become more corrupt
than the executive. All this from such eminent writers must certainly bespeak
the higest regard due, as it points at the greatest danger, and the saddest
consequences. Consider the evils attending such a scene of things, is the
language these sages speak. Whilst your parliament continues as it ought, that
great master which might soon be hoped to set at rights all less obstructions
from any quarter; but if that fails, what can you expect to follow but the ruin
of the machines; -- and here these sages, and this writer seem at a full stop.
-- In ruins we are, and there we must lie; but Mr. Lock, who is never at rest
till the subject he is treating of is exhausted, and whose comprehension and
precision can never enough be admired, though he sees and acknowledges the
danger, distress, and wretchedness of such a case, yet he carries his reader a
step farther. Suppose the parliament do so abuse their trust, exceed their
power, and are as so many tyrants and leechworms to the people; what then is
there no remedy? Yes, says he, there remains still inherent in the people, a
supreme power to remove or alter the legistature. In case of such, their
flagrant abuse of the trust reposed in them, there is a forfeiture, and the
power devolves to those who gave it. This is Mr. Locke's theory, but however
just it may be, we cannot adopt it, says this writer, because it includes in
it a dissolution of the whole frame of government; and reduces all the members
to their original state of equality. Pray how can it be just, if it cannot be
adopted? Why, if government be dissolved can it not be renewed? How did it
begin at first? The power in such case devolves to the people, who may make
such alterations as to them seem meet. Begin again, says Mr. Lock, according
to the original design of government, as instituted by God, the only absolute
sovereign and judge of all. Salus populi suprema lex esto CHRON. NO. 1786.
.

Let us hear bishop Burnet on the Revolution. This was the progress of that
transaction, which was considered all Europe over as the trial, whether the
king or the church were like to prevail. The decision was as favorable as was
possible. The king did assume to himself a power to make laws void; and to
qualify men for employments, whom the law had put under such incapacities, that
all they did was null and void. The sheriff and mayors of towns were no legal
officers: judges (one of them being a professed papist Alibon) who took not the
test, were no judges: so that the government, and the legal administration of
it, was broken. A parliament returned by such men, was ^o legal parliament. All
this was done by virtue of the dispensing power, which changed the whole frame
of our government, and subjected all the laws to the king's pleasure: for upon
the same pretense of that power, other declarations might have come out,
voiding any other laws that the court found stood in their way; since we had
scarce any law that was fortified with such clauses, to force the execution of
it, as those that were laid aside, had in them. And when the king pretended
that such a sacred point of government, that a petition offered in the
modestest terms, and in the humblest manner possible, calling it in question,
was made so great a crime, and carried so far against men of such eminence;
this I confess satisfied me that there was a total destruction of our
constitution avowedly begun, and violently prosecuted. Here was not jealousies
nor fears: the thing was open and avowed. This was not a single act of illegal
violence, but a declared design against the whole of our constitution. It was
not only the judgment of a court of law: the king had now by two public acts of
state renewed in two successive years, openly published his design. This
appeared such a total subversion, that according to the principles that some of
the highest assertors of submission and obedience, Barclay and Grotius had laid
down, it was now lawful for the nation to look to itself, and see to its
preservation. And as soon as any man was convinced that this was lawful, there
remained nothing, but to look to the prince of Orange, who was the only person
that either could save them, or had a right to it: since by all the laws in the
world, even private as well as public, he that has in him the reversion of any
estate, has a right to hinder the possessor, if he goes about to destroy that
which is to come to him after the possessor's death Burn. II.467.
.

When the contest is between a headstrong king, standing by himself, and a set
of good ministers, a parliament, and the whole nation, the strife cannot be
long-lived. A tyrant can do nothing without a powerful junto of ministers, and
an armed force. If the dispute is between a king, surrounded by a set of
ministerial tools, and backed by a mercenary army on one side, and on the
other, a faithful parliament, and a free people, the command, which parliament
has of the purse, will render it difficult for the court to gain their points.
But if the contest is between a designing minister, a mercenary army, and a
corrupt parliament on one hand, and, on the other, the body of the independent
people, the decision may prove difficult, but is most likely to be in favor of
liberty, if the people can only unite, and act in concert. For if the cause be
unquestionably good, the people will soon have purse, and army, and everything
else in their hands.

Voltaire thinks it would be ridiculous for a citizen of modern Rome, to ask
the pope to restore consuls, tribunes, a senate, and all the Roman republic, or
for a modern citizen of Athens to propose to the sultan the restoration of the
court of Areopagus, and the assembly of the people ESS L'HIST. II.199.
. Such transitions as these may be thought too sudden. And a people debased by
inveterate slavery, may be judged unfit for freedom. But surely these
considerations have nothing to do with the restoration of independency to the
British house of commons.

Hugh Capet, to establish himself on the throne of France, which he had
usurped, granted a great value of lands to the nobility of France. By this
means the crown became poor, and the grandees rich. So that when the king
carried on war with the approbation of the grandees, he made a figure. If he
began war of his own head, his forces were inconsiderable. And those great
vassals thought themselves privileged to levy war against their king, in case
of oppression, or even for a bare denial of justice Rap. I.223.
.

Christopher II. king of Denmark made some alterations in a monastery, without
leave of his bishops, and renewed the plough-tax, which, they alleged, was
contrary to his coronation oath, etc. An immediate insurrection followed, and
proclamations were published, inviting all the friends of liberty to join
against the king. He was driven from his kingdom, and with great difficulty
restored; but never afterward enjoyed any peace MOD. UNIV. HIST. XXXII.231.
.

In a debate during the prosecution of lord Oxford, Sir Watkins Williams Win
speaks as follows:

A civil war I shall grant is a terrible misfortune; but it is far from being
the most terrible; for I had rather see my country engaged in civil war, than
see it tamely submit but for one year to ministerial bondage; therefore if this
country should be reduced to the fatal dilemma of being obliged to give up its
liberties, or engage in a civil war, I hope no true Briton would balance a
moment in his choice.

Thus his majesty may be prevailed on, to continue a bad minister at the head
of the administration, notwithstanding the people's being generally convinced
that he is every day undermining their liberties, by means of a venal and
corrupt parliament; and if this should be the case, I must conclude that a
civil war will certainly ensue; or I must form a much more disagreeable
conclusion, which is, that the people of this country are so much degenerated
from the virtue and courage of their ancestors, that they choose rather to
submit tamely to slavery, than to run the risk of ascertaining their liberties
by the sword DEB. COM. XIII.92.
.

If the means for preventing slavery have not been provided in the first
constitution of a country, or from the changes of times, corruption of manners,
insensible encroachments, or violent usurpations of princes, have been rendered
ineffectual, and the people exposed to all the calamities that may be brought
upon them by the weakness, vices, and malice of the prince, or those who govern
him, I confess the remedies are more difficult and dangerous; but even in these
cases they must be tried. Nothing can be feared, that is worse than what is
suffered, or must in a short time fall upon those who are in this condition.
They who are already fallen into all that is odious, shameful, and miserable,
cannot justly fear. When things are brought to such a pass, the boldest
counsels are the most safe; and if they must perish who lie still, and they can
but perish who are more active, the choice is easily made. Let the danger be
never so great, there is a possibility of safety, whilst men have life, hands,
arms, and courage to use them; but that people must certainly perish, who
tamely suffer themselves to be oppressed, either by the injustice, cruelty, and
malice of an ill magistrate, or by those who prevail upon the vices and
infirmities of weak princes. It is vain to say, that this may give occasion to
men of raising tumults, or civil war; for though these are evils, yet they are
not the greatest of evils. Civil war in Machiavel's account is a disease, but
tyranny is the death of a state. Gentle ways are first to be used, and it is
best if the work can be done by them; but it must not be left undone if they
fail. It is good to use supplications, advices, and remonstrances; but those
who have no regard to justice, and will not hearken to counsel, must be
constrained Sidn. DISC. on GOV. 434.
.

This shows clearly the insignificancy of clamouring against ministers, and
requesting the dissolution of parliaments, instead of setting ourselves in
earnest to restore the constitution. We see the same corrupt or impolitic
proceedings going on in the administration of a Harley, a Walpole, a Pelham, a
Pit, a Bute, a Grafton, a North; and we see every parliament implicitly
obeying the orders of the minister. Some ministers we see more criminal, others
less; some parliaments more slavish, others less; but we see all ministers, and
all ^arliaments, the present always excepted guilty, inexcusably guilty, in
suffering the continual and increasing prevalency of corruption, from ministry
to ministry, and from parliament to parliament. Could we have had every one of
our corrupt ministers impeached, and even convicted, would a corrupt parliament
filled with their obsequious tools, have punished them? If we did nothing
toward a radical cure of grievances, and obliging the succeeding to be honester
than the foregoing; what should we have gained by such prosecutions? The
greatest part of the Roman emperors was massacred, and so are many of our
Asiatic and African tyrants. But did the Romans, or do the Turks, and the
people of Algiers, gain any additional liberty by the punishment of their
oppressors? We know they do not. Nor shall we by clamouring, nor even by
punishing; any more than we stop robbing on the highway by hanging, unless we
put it out of the power of ministers to go on abusing us, and trampling upon
our liberties; and this can only be done by restoring independency to
parliament.

It is true, such as would correct errors, and watch that no invasion may be
made on liberty, have been heretofore called a faction by the persons in power;
but it is not properly the name, and ought to be given to another sort of men.
It is wrong to call them the faction, who by all dutiful and modest ways
promote the cause of liberty, as the true means to endear a prince to his
subjects, and to lay upon them a stronger tie, and obligation to preserve his
government. For a people will certainly best love and defend that prince, by
whom the greatest immunities, and most good laws have been granted. They cannot
properly be termed the faction, who desire a war should be managed upon such a
foot of expense as the nation is able to bear; who would have the public
treasure not wasted, the prince not deceived in his grants and bargains, who
would have the ministry watchful and industrious, and who, when they complain,
are angry with things, and not with persons. The name of faction does more
truly belong to them, who, though the body politic has all the signs of death
upon it, yet say, all is well; that the riches of the nation are not to be
exhausted; that there is no misgovernment in all its business; that it feels no
decay; that its economy is perfect, and who all the while are as arrogant and
assuming, as if they had saved that very people whom their folly and mad
conduct has in a manner ruined. They may be rather termed the faction, who were
good patriots out of the court, but are better courtiers in it; and who
pretended to fear excess of power, while it was not communicated to them; but
never think the monarchy can be high enough advanced when they are in the
administration Daven II.303.
.

Perhaps nothing can more contribute to restore peace and order in a
government, than to overlook the persons of men, either in contempt or in
compassion, and to fall to work in earnest upon mending things. A man may
without imputation of blame profe^s ^ friendship, and adhere to this or that
great man, pretending to believe him innocent when accused, and consequently
join with those who are connected in his defense. But can any party be formed,
and can any be so insolent to go along with them, who shall openly declare for
such crimes, and for such and such corruption and mismanagement? Nor indeed can
any thing more disappoint the ambitious and wicked designs of corrupt men, than
to take away their pretenses and false colors, and to leave them without
excuse; which you do, when, without expressing anger or prejudice to the
persons of men, you make it manifest that your only aim is to put it out of
their power, or out of the power of such as will tread in their steps
hereafter, to bring any farther mischiefs upon the commonwealth; and where
these measures are taken, it is difficult, if not impossible, to form or keep
up parties that shall combine to protect and countenance the vices of the age:
for it being the interest of much the major part to be well governed, where the
people plainly see all affairs carried on calmly, and without piques and
personal enmities, they let faction drop, which produces what may be called
right and perfect government Daven. 356.
.

It could not be pretended, that an association for restoring the independency
of parliament, was a party affair.

If no point be obtained, but redress of a personal injury, or particular
grievance, the nation may remain in the same ruinous condition as before. But
if independency of parliament were restored, all personal injuries, and
particular grievances, would of course be redressed.

Unsuccessful attempts to obtain an enlargement of liberty, h^ve often issued
in an abridgment of it. This hazard may be worth running for the sake of a
national object; but it is not worth while to risque it for the sake of
obtaining redress of a particular grievance.

All are not agreed about particular grievances. But all are agreed about the
necessity of an independent parliament, and the certainty of the ruin which
parliamentary cor^uption must bring on. One would expect an association upon a
broad foundation, to attract into its sphere greater numbers, than one set up
with any particular view.

A designing ministry desires no better than that the people's attention be
engaged about trifling grievances, such as have employed us since the late
peace. This gives them an opportunity of wreathing the yoke around our necks,
because it gives them a pretense for increasing the military force.
Instructing, petitioning, remonstrating, and the like, are good diversion for a
court; because they know, that, in such ways, nothing will be done against
their power. A grand national association for obtaining an independent
parliament would make them tremble. For they know, that the nation, if in
earnest, would have it, and that with the cessation of their influence in
parliament, their power must end.

The Romans, in the Imperial times, destroyed many of the monsters who
tyrannized over them. But the greatest advantage gained by their death was a
respite from ruin: and the government, which ought to have been established by
good laws, depending only upon the virtue of one man, his life proved no more
than a lucid interval, and at his death they relapsed into the depth of infamy
and misery; and in this condition they continued till that empire was totally
subverted. All the kingdoms of the Arabians, Medes, Persians, Moors, and others
of the East, are of the other sort. Common sense instructs them, that barbarous
pride, cruelty and madness, grown to extremity, cannot be born: but they have
no other way than to kill the tyrant, and to do the like to his successor, if
he fall into the same crimes. Wanting that wisdom and valor which is required
for the institution of a good government, they languish in perpetual slavery,
and propose to themselves nothing better than to live under a gentle master,
which is a precarious life, and little to be valued by men of bravery and
spirit. But those nations that are more generous, who set a higher value upon
liberty, and better understand the ways of preserving it, think it a small
matter to destroy a tyrant, unless they can also destroy the tyranny. They
endeavor to do the work thoroughly, either by changing the government
entirely, or reforming it according to the first institution, and making such
good laws as may preserve its integrity when reformed. This has been so
frequent in all the nations, both ancient and modern, with whose actions we are
best acquainted, as appears by the foregoing examples, and many others that
might be alleged, if the case were not clear, that there is not one of them
which will not furnish us with many instances; and no one magistracy now in
being which does not owe its original to some judgment of this nature. So that
they must either derive their right from such actions, or confess they have
none at all, and leave the nation to their original liberty of setting up these
magistracies which best please themselves, without any restriction or
obligation to regard one person or family more than another Sidn. DISC. ON.
GOV. 439.
.

I know nothing of war, and therefore can propose nothing concerning the
conduct of it; but to wish that it may be avoided if possible. Of all the evils
to which human nature is obnoxious, none, excepting fixed slavery, is so
formidable as war; and of all wars civil war is the most to be dreaded.

When I proposed, p. 428, to draw out a plan for restoration of independency to
parliament, I intended to prescribe minutely the steps to be taken for that
purpose. But on more mature consideration it occurred to me, that in tracing
out this plan I should naturally be led to touch upon some particulars which
might alarm the more timorous part of readers, and render them less inclined to
join the grand national association. I therefore chose to proceed no farther;
but to leave to the wisdom of succeeding times to determine the particular
steps to be taken from the association to the obtaining of the great object,
excepting what may be learned from the histories and precedents I have here
given of associations for such national purposes.

Look down, O King of kings, and Ruler of nations, from where thou sit
enthroned high above all height, clothed in uncreated majesty, and surrounded
with that light to which none can approach, look down upon this once favored
nation, and behold the difficulties and the dangers which now surround us. Rend
asunder the thick and gloomy cloud which now hangs over us, big with tempest,
and ready to burst upon our heads, and shine forth with brighter beams than
those of the meridian sun on this once happy land, once the abode of peace and
virtue, the temple of liberty, civil and religious.

Open the eyes of this unthinking people, that they may see the hideous
precipice, on the brink of which they stand, and in time regain a station of
security for the commonwealth, before it sinks in ruins never more to rise.

Send forth a spirit of wisdom, and of union, of submission to wise and just
government, and of courage to resist oppression and tyranny.

Save the virtue of this great multitude, in danger of being utterly destroyed
by corruption. Save the protestant religion, for which so many of thy faithful
servants have bravely laid down their lives, and from the blaze of the cruel
fires which consumed their bodies, ascended to celestial glory. Let not the
infernal cloud of popish delusion any more, in this land, obscure the
brightness of that system of truth which descended from thy throne, and which
shows the way thitherward to every faithful votary of religious truth. Time was
when this favored land was the very bulwark of reformed religion. O let it
never lose that glorious title. Let this one country at least possess the
inestimable treasure.

Break thou the iron scepter with which tyrants break and destroy the liberties
of mankind. Let the envenomed worms of the earth know that it never was thy
intention that they should devour their fellow-worms, their subjects. Assert
thy supreme dominion over those who impiously pretend to be thy vicegerents
upon earth, to which honor they know Thou have never called them, and that the
unjust authority they assume they have obtained by wicked craft, or by lawless
violence, and the effusion of human blood.

Thou art thyself the glorious patron of liberty. Thy intention was, that man
should be free. Thy service is perfect freedom. The decrees of the puny tyrants
of this world are often impious and rebellious against thy supreme commands,
which are all righteous and good, and worthiest to be obeyed. Let the
encroaching tyrant, let the corruptor of the people, and the persecutor on
account of religious opinions, cease from this land. Let the voice of perjury
be no more heard; let the damning bribe be no more seen in this country. Or if
any have polluted themselves with the accursed thing which troubles our ^^mp,
may the pangs of conscience seize upon them, may the powers of the world to
come amaze and ter^^fy them, and may they, before it be too late, give up the
wages of corruption, the price of their betrayed country.

Put it into the hearts of those whose station gives them the power, to restore
to the people willingly, and without compulsion, their unalienable rights and
privileges. Inspire them with the wise and humane consideration, that, as the
shepherds of the people, as the fathers of their country, they are obliged to
deny themselves, to mortify their desire of riches, power, and pleasure, and
without waiting for the solicitations of the people, they ought to prevent
their wishes, to offer and hold out to them whatever is for their advantage.

Let the cause of civil and religious liberty prove victorious. May the divine
presence be to the defenders of liberty a pillar of light, and of defense, and
to the host of the oppressors a pillar of cloud, of darkness and confusion.
Arise, and come forth from thy sacred seat, clothed in all thy terrors. Let thy
lightnings enlighten the world. Let thy thunders shake the mountains. Let
dismay and horror overwhelm (...) courage of thine enemies.

In thy hands, O Father and Preserver of all, does thy servant desire to leave
his King and Country, in the hope that they shall be safe under thy heavenly
protection; and to Thee does he consecrate this and all his weak but
well-intentioned labors for the good of his fellow creatures, humbly hoping,
that his infirmities shall be overlooked, and his offenses blotted out; not on
account of any merit in himself, but through the magnanimity of him who is
hereafter to judge the world in righteousness and in mercy.

AMEN.
INDEX.
A.
ABILITIES less necessary than virtue in a public character, iii.57.217.
ABSOLUTE prince, scarce any in Europe till the 13th century, i.21. Charles II.
dssuaded from becoming an, ii.40.383. Lord Clifford's scheme for making him an,
ii.350. ABYSSINIANS, ii.83. ACHAEANS, ruined by taking presents, ii.106.
ACHAIA, ancient, like Holland, etc. i.7. ACT, of Richard II. for punishing
sheriffs, i.58. Septennial, why made, ib. 92. Motion for repealing it, opposed
by Pulteney and Sandys, 93. Against dissolution of parliament by the king
dangerous, i.125. Qualifications for members of parliament, i.347. ii.271.
Against multiplying voices to vote, i.349. Concerning electors, i.353, 354,
355, 360. For preventing the removal of judges at the demise of the sovereign,
ii.61. Against soliciting for, and buying and selling places, ii.86. Mutiny,
ii.346. For arming the people, ii.410. For preventing thefts and robberies, and
for regulating places of public entertainments, iii.108. Against gaming,
iii.119. Against duelling, iii.128. To apprehend idle people for the army,
iii.220. Licensing the retail of spiritous liquors, iii.222. Against gaming,
iii.223. Riot, when made, severe, etc. iii.229.231, 232.285. For trying the
rebels, iii.235. Against riots, iii.243. Habeas corpus, when to be suspended,
iii.253. Test, dispensing with, opposed, iii.264. Against arresting ambassadors
for debt, iii.404. ADAMS, prosecuted, i.250. ADRIAN, emperor, his law against
spendthrifts, iii.94. ADDRESSES, on the treaty of Utrecht, i.418. On the same
i.420. To reduce the number of commissioners, etc. ii.131. On the loss of
Minorca, etc. ii.413. Of the commons against Lauderdale, ii.426. Against
profaneness, etc. iii.215. ALEHOUSES, a nuisance, ii.374. iii.221. ALEXANDER,
corrupted by luxury, iii.67. ALPHONSUS V. of Arragon, his wise saying, ii.101.
AMBITION, ii.167. AMERICANS, ii.56. Set of remarks on, ii.277. More
advantageous to, to settle land than be manufacturers, ii.287. Petition of
several to the king, ii.330. Reason of their increase, iii.30. See Colonies,
Representation, and Taxation. AMPHICTYONS, tribunal of, i.7. ANCESTORS, caution
of ours, in allowing power too long, i.105. Punished their representatives,
i.187.264. Thought parliament would never do wrong in compliance with the
court, i.366. Took means to prevent bribery and corruption, ii.269. Stoped
supplies to obtain redress of grievances, ii.297. Their relish for patriotism,
iii.90. Discouraged gaming, iii.118. ANN, Queen, on the joy of her people,
i.194. Addressed, to know why more troops were not sent to Almanza, i.414. Her
victories prejudicial to England, ii.388. ANSIKANS, their savageness, iii.217.
ARABIAN woman, a remarkable story of, iii.132. ARGYLE, his speech on the treaty
of Utrecht, i.32. Proposed to make the offer of a bribe penal, i.354. His
observation on passing a pension bill, and rejecting a place bill, i.448. His
questions proposed on a riot law in Scotland, iii.240. ARISTOTLE, his cause of
the subversion of free states, i.95. Poor men in his time did not aspire to
places, i.268. Blames pluralities, ii.76. On public officers, ii.80. On arms,
345. Rulers to be chosen for virtue rather than riches, why, iii.13.183. On the
best form of government, iii.183. On tyranny, iii.331. ARMY, general
reflections on standing, in time of peace, ii.341. When became necessary,
ii.343. None mercenary in former times, ii.343.441.463. Dangerous to liberty,
ii.67.344.349.356.357.368.370.390.438.442.444.463.473. iii.26, 234. Lord
Hinton's arguments against a reduction of, ii.346. With answers, incompatible
with a free parliament, ii.348.378.427.460. Tend to the dispeopling a country,
ii.348. Arguments for, ii.352.407.427.429.435.437.443. Horse and foot under
William III. ii.353. Number of our, ib. Superior to that with which Alexander
conquered the world, ii.405. Numerous, a cause of suspicion, ii.355.403.
Dangerous to the throne of tyranny, ii.356.363. Cause of insurrections, ii.357.
Most numerous in slavish countries, and contrariwise in free, ii.360. Number of
the, in several countries, ii.360. Facts relating to the, ii.361. Conduct of
certain Roman emperors, etc. respecting the, ii.365. Instances of the army's
subservience to tyranny, ii.369. Why friendly to tyrants, ii.371. Use of, in
Charles I's. time, ii.373. Of quartering the, ii.374. Inconveniences of
quartering the, ii.470. iii.412. Behavior of, to parliament, ii. 376. Number
of Cromwell's, ii.377. Voted illegal, ii.383. Number of William III's, ii.385.
Number of Dutch, ii 386. Of France, not to be dreaded, ii. ib. 398.463.
Officers of, should not be members of parliament, ii. ib. 56.213.221.438.
Expense of, ib. Gives ministry opportunity of embezzling public money, ii.387.
Not less grievous for being appointed from year to year, ii.389, iii.285. When
the Romans began to put their trust in a mercenary, then military glory
declined, ii.392.441. The Carthaginians suffer from a mercenary, ib. Should be
none in a free country, ii.410. Parliamentary transactions, speeches, etc.
relating to, ii.426. Presented by the grand jury as a nuisance, ii.430. Destroy
the government, ii.431. Why not disbanded, ib. Foreign troops in English pay,
ii.432. Evils of a standing, ii.439. iii.121. Sea affairs mismanaged to magnify
the, ii.440. Not the strength of this country, ii.445. Reduction of, a means to
reduce the price of manufactures, ii.451. Not necessary to execute the laws,
ii.459. iii.273. Though consistent perhaps with freedom in a common wealth, yet
not in a monarchy, ii.465. Fear of an invasion, no argument for, ii.467.
Confidence of ministry in, ii.475. ARRAGONIANS, their conduct, when fearing
kingly power, i.100. ARTS, whether encouraged by liberty or not, iii.65. Not
necessarily the occasion of luxury and corruption, iii.85. ASGILL, expelled the
house of commons for blasphemy, i.213. ASSOCIATION, recommended for redress of
grievances, iii.428. Instances of, iii.430, 435. Objects of, iii.434.
Objections against, groundless, iii.455. ATHEISM in Italy, iii.214. ATHENIANS,
abolished kings and set up archons, i.95. Banished a citizen for popularity,
i.108. Continuance of their state, ascribed to severity against bribery,
ii.106. iii.12. To the genius of the people, iii.6. Thought manners necessary
to a republic, ib. Bad artists while a free people, iii.65. What they did to
prevent luxury, iii.93. Punished celebacy, iii.134. Rewarded merit, iii.184.
ATHLETAE, introduced at Rome, iii.100. ATTILIUS Regulus, the Roman general, his
poverty, iii.78. AUBYN, Sir John, i.151. AUGUSTUS, his behavior in illness,
and recovery. i.99. Incapacitates for bribery, ii.82. Number of his army,
ii.365. Punished his daughter's gallants, iii.1^9. AURELIUS, sells his plate to
relieve his people, iii.94.
B
BACON, ii.84. BAILING persons committed by the house of commons, i.224.240.
BALLADS, a saying on, iii.100.229. BALLOT, i.176. Athenian archons chosen by,
i.177. Used at Rome, ib. At Venice, ib. Motion made to decide questions in the
house of commons by, i.178. Bill for electing Scotch pee^s by, i 179. BARNARD,
Sir John, his speeches on parliaments, i.156.195. BARONS, ty^ants, curbed by
the knights of the shires, i.105. intimidate Mary of Guise, ii.398. BATTLE, a
pompous, mentioned by Voltaire, iii.129. Of Marston Moor, iii.436. BECKFORD,
lord mayor, moves for a bill to stop feasting at elections, i.355. BEDFORD, a
duke of, why degraded, iii.97. BEGGARS, iii.398. BENEN, in Africa, good police
of, iii.217. BEWDLEY, controverted election, i.294. BIDDLE, schoolmaster,
banished by house of commons for an Arian book, i.239. BILL, election, for
rendering merchants eligible into parliament, i.52. For regulating elctions,
put off, i.70. Place, frequently passed, why, i.115. Triennial, Burnet's
observations, i.126. Reason for the septennial, i.137. Against it before and
after. Debates on septennial, i.135, etc. etc. For electing Scotch peers by
ballot, i.178. Concerning elections. i.348. and 352.354.355. Militia, 1661,
i.388. For the French trade proposed, i.417. For quieting corporations, i.457.
Concerning the rights, etc. of corporations, i.465. To enable commissioners to
take account of public moneys, ii.176. To restrain the number of officers in
parliament, ii.177. To prevent members taking places, ii.177.180. For members
to give in a rental, ii.273. To render officers of the army independent on the
ministry, ii.60.432.436. For quartering the army, ii.433. For preventing thefts
and robberies, iii.35. For excluding from parliament men of loose morals,
iii.55. And persons in offices, ii.180. For preventing wives quitting their
husbands, iii.142. Self-denying, ii.184. To make perjury felony, iii.171. many
useful bills left, etc. iii.193. To prohibit lending money to foreign princes,
iii.264. BILL of Rights, reason for, ii.468. iii.253. BLACKSTONE, his remark on
representation, i.25. On legislation, 108. Against deciding questions by
ballot, i.179. His opinion on members consulting their constituents, i.184. An
error of his refuted, i.225. Censured, i.371. ii.39.345. iii.275.285.303. On
the army, ii.344. BOATS, flat-bottomed, ii 414. BOROUGHS, may be deprived of
right to send members, iii.377. BOSTON and Edinburgh, proceedings against both
for a riot, compared, ii.289. Election of council at, complained of, ii.293.
Committee of convention, ii.294. Supposed illegal resolution of the assembly
of, ii.318. Proceedings of, respecting tea, ii.322. BREDA, peace of, i.398.
BRIBERY of, ii.37.42. Augustus of, ii.82. Philip of Macedon of, ii.132. Effects
of, ii.137. BROMLEY, Mr. his speech on long parliaments, i.155. BRUTUS, his
ardor for liberty, iii.314. BUCKINGHAM, his remark on the house of commons,
i.187. BUCKLEY, printer, ordered into custody, i.245. BURNIT, on the triennial
bill, i.126, and 128. On the treaty of Utrecht, i.419. On instructing the
people in morals and religion, iii.31. His account of the gentry, iii.32.
BOROUGHS, buying i.23. And cities returning members before Edward VI. i.58.
Inconveniences from the constitution of, i.76. Market price of one, ii.138.
BYNG, Sir George, his instructions called for, i.428. Several lords protest,
ib. Admiral punished for cowardice, iii.170.
C
CAESAR, Charles, committed to the Tower, i.242. CAESAR, Julius, became
perpetual dictator, i.92. His demerits, yet attended with success, i.100.
iii.18.50. Advances his partisans, why, iii.18. might have reformed instead of
enslaving his country, iii.20. CANDIDATES, why desire to get seats, i.280. Oath
administered to, in the Irish parliament, i.282. Humorous proposal to, i.283.
How incapacitated i.349. CARACALLA, his cruelty, ii.366. CAREW, Mr. Thomas, his
speech on parliaments, i.^60. CAREY, punished for not answering interrogatories
^f ^he c^mmons, i.238. CARTHAGE, military institution of, ii.457. No (...) at,
how long, iii.12. Ruined by the riches of individuals, iii.67. CA^MIR II. of
Poland, his gaming, iii.116. CHARACTER of man, i.106. Of men in power, (...) be
exemplary, iii.10.29.50.108.112.^^^.180. (...), iii.225. (...) V. abolished the
Cortes in Spain, i.18. (...) II. governed by his long pensioned parlia^^^t,
i.1^0. The first who bought votes of ^^mbers, i.389 ii.15. ^^^RLES I. deserved
his fate, i.185. Directions (...) choosing members of parliament, i.281. His
use of soldiers, ii.373. Struggles between him and parliament, ii.6. CHARTRES,
on character, iii.173. CELIBACY, punished by the Athenians, iii.134. Ought to
be punished, iii.144. CHESTER, ii.304. CHESTERFIELD, Lord, his speech on
borough elections, i.^9. On excluding strangers from the house, i.257. His
prudent restriction on his nephew, iii.99. CHINA, police of, iii 213. CHINESE
emperor's wise saying, i.446. How conquered, iii 67.399 Law, iii.1^3. Reformed
by Confucius, iii.175. Incorporated with Tartars, iii.362. CICISBEOS, iii.142.
CICERO, how rewarded, ii.85. CITIES and Boroughs returning members before
Edward VI. i.58. CIVIL war, preferable to slavery, iii.450. CIVIL list revenue,
i.270.474. ii.101. Power sufficient to execute the laws, ii.459. CLARENDON of
Charles II. ii.25. CLERGY, iii.223.241.330.397. COKE, Lord, on the custom of
parliaments, i.200. Who are eligible in parliament, i.213. On parliament's
right to judge in its own concerns, i.231. Parliaments may do wrong, i.233.
COOK, sent to the Tower for saying, We are Engmen, iii.264. COLONY, settling in
a new country, on what they would bestow their chief attention, i.3. COLONIES,
taxing, ii.274.307. View of the ministers in, ib. Loss by, ii.326. Great
advantage of, ii.251. Advantage of naval stores from, ii.235. View of exports
to, ii.285. Oppressed by the mother country, ii.291. Their complaints,
ii.291.296, 297. Hard restraints on, ii.295. Who their master, ii.297.
Precedents respecting, ii.299. Answer to the question, Why may they not be
taxed? ii.306. Stamp duty on, ii.312, iii.273. Always answered the demands of
government, ii.314. Fury of the ministry against, ii.327. Might send over
representatives, ii.319. Their charters, ib. Inconsistent with military
commissions, ii.321. Misconduct with respect to, cause of confusion in credit,
ii.322. Reducing them by military force, ii.327. COMMERCE, languishes where
liberty fa^ls, iii.386. COMMISSION of array, ii.404. COMMONS, house of, the
most numerous meeting of ever known, i.45. Refuse to grant a subsidy to Richard
II. without consent of their constituents, i.189. In Charles I.'s time directed
the judges to inform the people that they had abolished opressive courts,
i.190. Remonstrance to by the commons of England in republican times, i.190.
Assume unwarrantable privileges, i.205. Their bad use of the people's
confidence, i.218. Have no right to imprison any but their own members, i.219.
and 233. Their power of sending for persons, papers, and records, i.223. and
225. Their great objects legislation and inquiring into the conduct of
ministers, i.225. ii.205. Their misconduct made limitations necessary, i.226.
How their assumptions appear to the people, i.227. How contrary to justice,
i.228. What their right of judging, i.231. and 253. Punishments inflicted by,
on irregular proceedings in elections, i.246. Their right of punishing any but
their own members questioned, i.251. Of their excluding the people, and
punishing those that publish their speeches, i.259. Have made strangers take an
oath not to divulge their proceedings, i.256. Resoluti^ns to print their
journals, i.260. Of absentees from, i.562. Make a resolution to hear no more
contested elections, i.295. Proceedings unconstitutional, i.340. Infamous
manner of exercising their jurisdiction on elections, i.356. Guilty of trea^on
in betraying their trust, i.374. and 409. Minister or noseleader of, i.380.
Dependence on in a great measure destroyed, i.389. Always oppose a test of
integrity, i.397. Bribing it when first systematically brought in, i.399.
ii.15. Their servile compliances with the ministry, i.422.425.475. Ashamed to
print their address on the convention 1738, i.446. Vote the orders given to
Hosier just and necessary, i.455. Unanimous under Charles I. ii.31. Have no
right to grant money but for public use, ii.24. Their interest involved with
that of the public, ii.27. Privy counselors, etc. first brought into, ii.53.
Eagerness for seats in how removed, ii.78. No right to tax the colonies,
ii.307. Complain of an army in time of peace, ii.351.355. Vote a standing army
and king's guards illegal, ii.383. Propose to demand redress of grievances,
before they grant a supply, iii.264. What they should do, iii.290. Should not
have the executive power, ii.205. CONCLUSION, addressed to the independent
part, etc. iii.267. CONSTABLES, discretionary power in those of Westminster for
one night, consequence of, i.203. Proposed an act for them to search private
houses, i.325. CONSTANTINE, on being told his statue was defaced, iii.250.
CONSTITUENTS, some argue that members are not obliged to obey their
instructions, i.183. Knights hesitated to grant supplies without consent of, i,
185. Oath of fidelity to them expedient, i.201. May instruct members, iii.377.
CONSTITUTION, not fully established, i.375. and 378. iii.270. Should be
depended on for safety, ii.347. iii.196.290.398.451. Danger of its dissolution,
iii.267.273.283, 284.288.307.422. What, iii.272, 290. Of Venice, how preserved
free, iii.288. Recovery of, not to be despaired of, iii.291. Arguments against
attempting its recovery answered, iii.296. Of innovations in, iii.303. Plan for
preserving it, iii.426. Cannot be annulled by parliament, iii.441. CONTRACTS,
i.277. COPE, Sir John, charges Sir Francis Page with corruption, i.295. COPLEY,
Sir Godfrey, his saying concerning the house of commons, i.230. CORNELLYS,
iii.109.142. CORNISH, expelled the house of commons for acting as a
commissioner of duties, i.411. CORNWALL, his speech in the house of commons,
i.30. CORN, why exported, i.51. CORPORATIONS, concerning charters of, i.466.
CORRUPTION, materials of, i.267. For packing parliaments, i.291. Parliamentary
account of, by a Frenchman, i.372. Provoking to corrupt, and then blame the
people, i.375. ii.43. Brings a government into contempt, i.378. ii.131.
Sidney's letter on, i.389. ii.45. Mischief of, i.400. ii.133. iii.16. and 85.
Sad scenes of, i.411. Apologies for, ii.257. Estate for life no security
against, ii.273. How brought in by luxury, iii.60, 85. Nor a necessary
consequence of commerce, iii.85. At the bottom of opposition to reformation,
iii.327. Grows worse by delay, iii.380. Fatal effects of, iii.413. CORSICA, its
form of government, i.103. Contest for liberty, 321.413. COTTON, Sir John
Hind, observation on pernicious laws, i.154. Sir Robert, his advice on land
and sea forces, ii.410. COUNTY Palatine of Chester, sent no members, i.59. Of
Durham, sent none, ib. COURT influence by officers dangerous, i.118. COURTS of
law have power to enquire into acts of highest authority, i.254. COURT opposed
by the commons, ii.3. Why bribes, ii.38. COUNTRY, love of, iii.36. Duty to,
iii.474. COWARDICE punished, iii.170. CRANFIELD, fined for slandering four
members, i.138. CROWN, money at the disposal of, iii.283. Its influence,
iii.285. Officers of, should not be representatives, ii.56. Pretenses for
expenses of, ii.128. Had anciently few lucrative employments to bestow, ii.242.
CROMWELL deprived small boroughs of the right of election, i.59. His direction
for elections, i.65. His plan for a parliament, i.77. Number of his army,
ii.377. Gets the parliament dissolved, ib. His conversation with Whitlocke
about assuming the regal title, ii.379. CROMWELL, earl of Essex, his hard case,
i.237. CUNNINGHAM, undeservedly promoted, ii.85 CURIOUS Dentatus, his noble
reply, ii.106. CZARINA, her judgment about punishing offenses, iii.125.167.
Inclines to the division of property, iii.188. On libels, iii.259.
D.
DASHWOOD, Sir Francis, proposes a paragraph against undue influence to be
inserted in the address of the house of commons, i.386. DAVENANT, lays no great
stress on the responsibility of members, i.184. On corruption, i.376. On
parliamentary corruption, ii.34. DEBATES the on septennial act, i.5.135, etc.
etc. Right of parliament to, without control from the sovereign, ii.9. On the
place bill, ii.61.212. DEBT, cases of members of parliament in, i.213, etc.
Public, its effects, i.270. National iii.285. DECEMVIRI, i.98. DEERING, Sir
Edward, accused of encouraging a petition derogatory from the authority of
parliament, i.242. Publishes his speeches, i.259. DENBIGHSHIRE election, merits
of, i.333. DENMARK, iii.410.412.450. -- Commons of, throw away their liberties,
ii.370. iii.274. DICTATOR, Roman, some account of, i.96. DIGBY, Lord, his
speech on parliaments, i.124. DISPOSITION, the most amiable in young minds,
iii.154. DISTINCTION between a people incapable of free government, and those
among whom the spirit of liberty is low, iii.20. DIVORCES, obtained by
collusion, iii.142. DIVISIONS, effects of in states, iii.333. DIVERSION, its
influence on manners, iii.98. DISQUALIFICATION, ii.179. DOMITIAN, his strange
insult on the senators, etc. iii.23. DRAKE, Sir Walter, of parliaments, i.125.
DUBLIN, obtained a limitation of the period of parliaments, i.101.
Undersheriff of, iii.234. DURHAM, ii.304. DUTCH East India company, account
yearly to the state, i.101. Their servants, ii.99. iii.63. Education and
seminaries, iii.154. DUELS, iii.119. No equity to be expected in such
decisions, iii.121, 122. How to be avoided with honor, iii.122. Sentiments of
the ancients respecting, iii.123. Several instances of challenges, iii.124. No
disgrace for an officer to refuse a challenge among the Chinese and Persians,
iii.125. Expedients to punish and repress, ib. Originally an appeal to Heaven,
iii.126. First establishment of by law, ib. The origin and manner of, ib. A
legal, fought, 1571, iii.129. In the days of Chivalry, ib. Parliament should
redress the grievance of, iii.130.
E.
EDUCATORS, honored formerly, iii.153. Prohibited by law, iii.157. Anecdote of
some, ib. EDUCATION, influence of on manners, iii.150.155.178. What, iii.150. A
great object with statesmen, iii.153, 154.177. School, preferable to home, why,
iii.153. A scheme for, iii.159. EDWARD I. his maxim, ii.308. EDWARD III.
endeavored to pack a parliament, i.284. EDWARD, king of Portugal, his good
maxim, iii.94. ELLIOT, commissioner of excise, returning officer at an
election, i.295. ELECTION, directions for, by James I. and Cromwell, i.64.
Diverse conditions of, recommended, i.127. By rotation, i.173. By ballot, i.176.
Concerning, many things cognizable by law, i.225. Of corruption in, i.278.
ii.132. Oath, i.283. Abominable proceedings at, in 1685, i.292. Yorkshire,
i.333. Derbyshire controverted, ib. Westminster, ditto, i.335. Contested
between Mr. Trenchard and Mr. Bertie, i.339. Every shilling laid out to gain,
criminal, i.343. Statutes, etc. against corrupt pleadings at, i.345.
R^^oluti^^s against bribery at, i.347. What is un^aw^^^ at, i.349 and 355.
Committee proposed for determining, i.356. Soldiers to be removed at the time
of, ii.433.444.473. ELECTORS, the majority of stated, i.40, etc. Fewer than
twenty in several boroughs, i.47. What they should consider, i.282. Acts
concerning, i.353. Who may not persuade them, ii.194. ELIZABETH, Queen,
enriched no favorites, ii.103. Her fleet and forts, ii.104. Who her guards,
ii.430. Her arbitrariness, iii.401. ELIZABETH, Empress of Russia, dethrones the
Grand Duke, ii.^69. ENGLAND, Saxon government of, i.104. Easily overrun by the
French, ii.423. And France, once united, iii.300. Melancholy state of, iii.416.
ENGLISH, ripe for slavery, ii.354. Addicted to luxury and suicide, iii.66. May
be rendered lazy by the fortunes acquired in India, iii.83. Cruelties by the,
in India, iii.159. Only murder by law, iii.165. Have little notion of
obedience, iii.166. Capital crimes among, how many, iii.169. Punish some crimes
too slightly, and some too severely, iii.170. Conduct of blamed,
iii.352.355.368 370. Commended, iii.369. Inhospitable disposition of, the
effects of, iii.371. How to be improved, iii.372. Never redress nuisances till
mischief happens, iii.83. Republic, ii.18. EPAMINONDAS, his honest answer,
ii.58. His education, iii.157. EPERNON refuses to burden the people, ii.108.
EPICRATES condemned for taking a present. ESTABLISHMENT, political, creatures
of chance rather than of wisdom, i.23. ESTATES forfeited, granted away, ii.32.
EXCLUSION by rotation, i.173. Of strangers from the house of parliament, i.257.
F.
FACTION, what, iii.453. FAIRFAX, general, his behavior, ii.374. FASHION, of
Edward IV.'s time, iii.213. Of Charles II.s time, iii.213. FAVORITES, why
persuade kings to keep standing armies, ii.348. FENWICK, Sir John, i.243.
FLEET, a natural guard of this country, ii.362.467. FLORENCE, choosing
magistrates of, i.101. ii.57. The valor of the citizens of, ii.368. Citizens
of, how made rich, iii.62.317. FORFEITED estates, ii.32. FORTUNE, men of,
withdrawing from the country, evil, iii.46. FOSTER, Dr. an observation of,
i.83. FRANCE, Charles VII. of, anecdote of, ii.95. FRANCE, the parliament of
Paris afraid to sign a compromise without the approbation of their
constituents, i.204. Duels in, iii.128. And England once united, iii.300.
Assembly of the States General of, iii.397. FRENCH excel us in some arts,
iii.65. Their idleness and luxury, iii.84. Insecure in liberty and property,
iii.166. FREEHOLDERS of Middlesex, their resolution in respect to parliaments,
i.172. FUNDS, origin of, i.267. Unsafe, iii.329.
G.
GAMES, Olympic, iii.100. GAMING, its influence on manners, iii.98.111.113,
114.214. Forbidden in Italy, iii.101. Fondness of the Germans for, iii.114.
Forbidden by Mahomed, iii.116. The rage of in our times, ib. Mischiefs of the
example of the great in, iii.117. Loss by, iii.118. And extravagance in dress
prohibited by Edward IV. Law against, iii.223. GARRISON, subjects hearts the
best, ii.355. Danger of having, ii.444. GENTRY, Burnet's account of, iii.32.
GEORGE I. his speech on the treaty of Utrecht, i.420. GOODWIN and Fortes^ue,
their famous contested election, i.287. GOTHS and Vandals, ii.396.
iii.26.137.387. GOVERNORS, character of, iii.179.182 201.203. What they should
do, iii.190.192.194.197.202.209.2^3.216. What they should be, iii.217.220. How
to be judged of, iii.229.380. Tenacious of power, iii.383. Natural limitation
of their authority, iii.414. Should be cautious not to irritate, iii.426.446.
GOVERNMENT, often the principal grievance of the people, i.2. The right design
of, to allow the governed liberty of doing what is consistent with general
good, and to forbid the contrary, i.2. iii.447. The most natural idea of, i.5.
Among the Indians in America, ib. Among the Gauls and Germans, ib. Of Achaia,
i.7. Of Italy before the Romans, i.8. Of Israel, ib. Of Lycia, ib. Of Sparta,
ib. Of Athens, i.9. Of Rome, ib. Of Thebes, i.11. Of Carthage, ib. Of France,
i.15. Of Denmark, i.16. Of Sweden, ib. Of the Bolognese, i. ib. Of Marseilles,
ib. Of Holland, ib. Of Spain, ib. Of Portugal, i.19. Of the Swiss, ib. Of
Poland, i.20. British, a ptochocracy, i.50. Inclines too much to aristocracy,
i.53. and 77. Advantages of, according to Voltaire, i.364. Profussion in,
dangerous, i.379. Clamours against, why, ii.99. Income of places under, ii.102.
How endangered and destroyed, ii.142. Who capable of, ii.162. Good, surer to
keep peace than an army, ii.348. And reform manners, iii.178. In France,
Sweden, Poland, reduced to military, ii.370. Destroyed by the army, ii.431.
iii.26. Manners or virtue necessary to a free, iii.4. Mixed, becomes tyranny,
how. iii.4.277. Our, encourages vice for the benefit of the revenue, iii.6.221.
Signs of its decay, iii.19, 20.22.24.50.79.136. Vicious, iii.38. Should put a
stop to ineffectual punishments, iii.165. Fault of, if the people are not
backward to offend, iii.166. Shame the best handle of, iii.180. What it should
do, iii.190.192.194.200.202.217. Disgraced by the degeneracy of the people,
iii.212. How to be judged of, iii.229. May be changed by the people,
iii.277.300. When tyranny, iii.277.430. When just, iii.307. A difference
between arbitrary and free, remarked, iii.310. Wise, will avoid irritating the
people, iii.426. 346. Opposition to, when serviceable, iii.439. GRATUITIES,
ii.86. GREAT, the character of the, iii.201.475. Power of the example of,
iii.213.217.220. GREAT BRITAIN, the advantage of its situation, iii.197. should
be united, iii.336. GREEKS, would not have the names of their generals
mentioned on occasion of victories, iii.17. Their abject fall, iii.414.
GRENVILLE, to the house of commons, ii.36. GRIEVANCES, iii.272. Revolution an
imperfect redress of, iii.286. Of Scotland since the Union, iii.359. Danger of
redressing, iii.475. Redress of, how demanded in Richard II.'s time, iii.426.
To be redressed before money be granted, iii.445. GRIMSTONE Harbottle,
describes a parliament, ii.32. GUSTAVUS Adolphus of Sweden, his severity
against duelling, iii.128.
H.
HABEAS Corpus act, instructors never sent to watch it, i.197. When to be
suspended, iii.253. Suspension of should be in the house of commons, iii.254.
Evaded, iii.273. HAKEWELL, brings instances of persons punished for serving
members of parliament with subpoenas, etc. i.254, and 258. HALL, Arthur,
committed, i.254. HALES, judge, anecdote, ii.59. HANIBAL, his good conduct when
praetor of Carthage, iii.9. HARDWICK, lord chancellor, explains the liberty of
the press, i.248. On the bill for quieting corporations, 463. HARLEY, his
saying of a lord high treasurer, ii.103. HARRINGTON, his proposal respecting
members of parliament, i.175. For balloting on all occasions, i.179. On
standing armies, ii.362.410. On the ruin of Rome, iii.87. For c^nfederating
rather than uniting Scotland and England, iii.360. HELIOGABALUS, Roman emperor,
his luxury, iii.83. HENRY II. author of a regulation for arming the whole
people, ii.409. HENRY III. demands an aid, and parliament demand conditions,
ii.6. Complains of revenue, ii.101. Refused money by his parliament, ii.305.
HENRY IV. of France, his noble design, iii.292. HEREDITARY titles and honors
hurtful, ii.89. HIGH commission court, iii.403. HINTON, lord, his arguments
against reducing the army, with answers, ii.346. HILSBOROUGH, lord, on the
regency bill, i.164. HOLLAND, iii.407. HOLT, lord chief justice, intrepid in
asserting the authority of law, i.241. and 254. HONOR, extraordinary instances
of, iii.211. HOSIER, sacrificed to the schemes of a minister, i.455. HUSH MONEY
paper, ii.205. HUTCHESON, his speeches on the septennial bill, i.139.
I.
JAMES I. his direction for elections, i.64. Wishes the law were written in the
vulgar tongue, why, i.207. Proposed that undue elections should be punished,
i.281. His behavior on the election of Goodwin, etc. i.288. impowers the groom
porter to license taverns, etc. iii.118. His saying on duels, iii.129. Blamed
unjustly for partiality to the Scots, iii.340. JAMES II. Mischiefs in his
reign, occasioned by refusing to call successive parliaments, i.122. His
influencing elections, i.292. Likes his parliament, i.399. Forsaken by his
army, ii.349. Intended to abolish the militia, ii.409. How driven from the
throne, ii.203. JANSSEN, Sir Stephen Theodore, how he kept the peace, iii.234.
IDLENESS, expedient against, iii.221. Laws against, iii.223. IMPRISONMENT,
without trial, per pares, illegal, i.241. INFANTS, committing them to foster
mothers, (...), iii.92. INF^RMATIONS, filing ex officio, illegal,
iii.248.252.255. INNOVATION, of, iii.304. INSTRUCTIONS, to members of
parliament expedient, i.181. Lord Percival's answer to, i.182. Were sent from
all parts, 1741. For a place and pension bill, and^. i.196. INTERR^GATORIES,
Spence's case on, iii.264. INVASION, information of, ii.41^* 424. When a nation
is secure against, iii.419. JOHN III. of Portugal, his wisdom in rewarding,
ii.83. JONES, Sir William, his opinion against bailing, in case of commitment
by the commons, i.240. IRELAND, the people used to instruct their members,
i.204. Not to be taxed with representation, ii.305. ITALY, government of,
before the Romans, i.8. JUDGES, mulcted, ii.3. On sending for the Scots,
iii.365. JULIAN, reforms the Roman court, ii.130. JURY, trial by, instructions
to prevent attempt against it, i.197. iii.273. Keepers of stews not impanelled
on, iii.58. Trial by, how early in Scotland, iii.373. JUSTICE, its importance,
iii.192. JUSTICES of peace under the direction of the ministers, i.331. Fallen
into discredit, iii. 212. Power of, in the riot-act, condemned, iii.234.
K.
KING, if republican in administration, subjects would be royalists in
obedience, i.1^3. iii.376. Accountable to his subjects, i.192. iii.285.380.
Triable by parliament, i.2^6. Of taking up arms against, i.389. Dignity of,
con^^^^ in, ii.39 128.130. Should not grant bounties, ii.94. Should publish
vacant places, ii.97. Revenue given the, by the Poles, ii.100. How involved in
mean intrigues, ii.141. Imposing taxes, dangerous part of (...) prerogative,
ii.303. Guilty of war, ii.342. Why persuaded by favorites to keep standing
armies, ii.348. Should not keep up an army in the field, when the war is ended,
ii.35^.^84. In danger from an army, ii.356.362, ^63* 364* 395. H^s gua^ds,
ii.408.4^6. What (...) should do, respecting religion, iii.202. Honored or
disgraced by the manners of his people, iii.212. Promises at coronation to
maintain the laws of God, iii 214. (...) of, iii.271. D^ty of, iii.299.376 432.
May be resisted and pu^i^h^d, iii.322.439.441.452. Fond of ^ower, iii.383.
Natural limitation of his autho^^^y, (...). KING^S ^e^ch, dispute with house of
commons, i.224. Appealed to by Shaftesbury, when comm^t^^d by pa^liament,
i.242. KIRTON on pa^liament, ii.33. KNIGHTS, of the shire, have voted
separately from the other commons, ii.305.
L.
LABOR, the good effect of, iii.84. LADY, anecdote of a, iii.323. LAND,
improved in value, i.52. Dependence on trade, 53. LAW, ours sanguinary, but not
so in Saxon times, iii.163.165. Of France, arbitrary, iii.166. Too gentle, in
what instances, iii.171.265. Solon's, against idleness, iii.182. Sumptuary,
iii.94, 95, 97.184. Unknown or r^jected, iii.209. Abs^rdity in, iii.223.281.
Penal, the intention of, iii.232. The intent of, iii.245. Against forging
subscriptions, iii.265. LEAGUE and covenant, sol^mn, iii.351. LEGATE, from the
pope, none entered Scotland, iii.374. LEINSTER, duke of, opposes his brother's
being a member of parliament, ii.79. LETTER, legion, i.31. LEWDNE^S, iii.130.
Dangerous to families and states, iii.134. Inconsistent with the order of
nature, iii.131. Treacherous and indelicate, iii.132. How punished in several
countries, iii.133.136.145.179. Humorous expedients for punishing, iii.139. One
great cause of, iii.143. Expedients against, iii.144.148. Seduction to,
iii.145. LEWIS XII. of France, his good saying, iii.95. LEX MAJESTATIS among
the Romans, i.4. LIBELS, i.472. iii.248.250.254.265.337. LIBERTY, security of,
co^sists in frequent new parliaments, i.118. Of the press, i.248. Endangered by
making a distinct order of the profession of arms, ii.344.356. Odious to a
vicious people, and not to be preserved where manners are corrupt, iii.3.13.73.
Of a nation compared with the chastity of a virgin, iii.10.34. Easily lost,
iii.32. Whether it encourages arts, iii.65. Not to be attacked openly, ii.64.
iii.111.27^. How endangered, iii.183.269.307.421. Of sp^ech and writing,
iii.346. Necessary, 347. Behavi^ur of different persons in regard to liberty of
speech, iii.257. The people cannot be too jealous o^, iii.311.383. Contests
about, iii.312.316. and seq. Difference between it and slavery ex^mp^^fied,
iii.384.398. Failing, commerce langu^sh^^, iii.386. ^he foundation of property,
iii.388. The source of victory, iii.398. Advantages of, iii.404. Seems bidding
mankind adieu, iii.415. Spirit of, in France, when enslaved, iii 417. When
safe, iii.419. Signs of its being not extinct, iii.427. LILBURNE, anecdote of,
i.237. LIVERY of London, their reso^ution of voting for no candidate who will
not engage to promote the shortening of parliament, i.172. LOCK, on the
inequality of representation, i.73. On corrupting representatives, i.279.
LONDON, lord mayor and aldermen complain of protection privilege, i.212. Should
take the lead, iii.433.435. LONG, Thomas, gains a seat by bribery, i.286.
LORDS, thirty, protest against the septennial act, i.92.135.137. In a judicial
capacity, determined that a person's right to vote for a member might be tried
by law, i.233. Protest on rejecting the bill for securing the freedom of
election, i.296. Pledge themselves to obtain relief for injured electors,
i.341. Several protest against overruling the question for calling for Sir
George Byng's instructions, i.428 Several protest against addressing the king
on his speech in particular terms, why, i 451. Against the negative of a place
bill, ii.191. Have given the king money out of their private property, ii.305.
Protest against the augmentation of the army, ii.438. Protest on occasi^n of
the election of sixteen Scotch peers, ii.444. Protest against a bill of
attainder, iii.259. Protest against subjecting the press to a licenser, iii.265
LOTTERIES, i.277. iii.112. LUCCA, election of its magistrates, etc. i.103.
LUXURY, hurtful to manners, and dangerous to states, iii.59.66.85.214. Whether
the avaricious man o^ the spendthrift is the worst member of society, iii, 61.
Not favorable to commerce, iii.6^. Necessity of setting bounds to, ib. Not
favorable to arts and taste, iii.63. English addicted to, iii.66. Among the
Romans, iii.68. The cause of selfishness, iii.70. Of Tarentum, extraordinary,
iii.80. Introduced in Russia, 83. Peter's artifice to reclaim them, iii.94. Of
the French, iii.84. The forerunner of slavery, iii.88. What the Romans,
Athenians, etc. did to prevent, iii.93. Examples of several great persons to
repress, iii.95. LYCURGUS, reforms Sparta, iii.175. His intention in his laws,
iii.184.
M.
MACAULAY, Mrs. on the mischiefs done by Cromwell, ii.380. On the true love of
liberty, iii.192. MAGISTRATES, election of, at Athens, i.95. At Crete, ib. At
Ae^olia, i.96. At Rome, ib. At Tapr^bane and Arragon, i.100. At Venice and
Fl^rence* i.101. At Lu^ca, Corsica, Parma, Dutch East India company, ib. MAGNA
CHARTA, and the bill of rights, ii.310. iii.253.301. Violation of, when to be
indemnified, iii.259. MAN, his character, i.106. Mankind divided into three
classes, iii.191. MANLEY, sent to the tower, i.244. MANNERS, importance of,
iii.1.200.209.291. Necessary in a free, but not a despotic government, iii.3.
Apt to change on preferment, iii.11. The welfare of a^l countries, iii.30. How
influenced by diversion and gaming, iii.98. Reformation of, begins at wrong
end, iii.108. Influenced by education, iii.150. State^men should have an eye
to, iii.159.172.175.197. Grande^s enemies to, iii.172. MARLBOROUGH, duke,
ii.105. MARRIAGE, iii.147, 148. MARTIAL, court, ii.443. Objections to, ii.457.
Law, severe, prevents not licentiousness, iii.167. Tyrannous, 401. Spirit,
broken by luxury, iii.60. MARTIN, Henry committed to the Tower for reflecting
on the king, etc. i.237. MARVEL, Andrew, reward for apprehending him, i.242.
MARY, Queen of William III. anecdote of, i.91. Corrupts parliament, i.286.
MASQUERADE, iii.103. Hand-bills concerning, iii.108. Origin of, iii.109. In
Scotland, iii.^00. MAURICE, prince, attempts the liberties of Holland, ii.370.
MAYNARD, Sir John, fined for contempt of the house of lords, i.239. Sergeant,
iii.403. MAYOR, none can return himself a burgess, i.347. MEMBERS, the number
of, for counties and boroughs, i.46. Accomplishments requisite in,
i.62.193.281. iii.377. Proposals for transferring the members from one place to
another, i.66. Careful of their conduct toward the end of parliament, i.114.
Exclusion of, by rotation recommended, i.127. With various expedients in
electing, i.173. Hold themselves no longer responsible to the people, i.181.
Denial of their responsibility to their constituents, a novel doctrine, i.186.
Not to be chosen except residents, i.189. Arguments for their responsibility,
i.199. Should make an oath of fidelity to their constituents, i.201. Cases of
those in debt, i.214, etc. Formerly published their own speeches, i.258.
Neglecting parliamentary business, i.262. Formerly punished, i.264. Their
ignorance of the common law regretted, i.282. Extraordinary insta^^e of some
rewarded with places, i.221. Qualifications of, ii.269. Ill-^^eated by the
army, ii.377. Places, why given to, iii.18. Of their making fortunes in
p^^liament, ii.207. MERCHANTS, there can hardly be too many in parliament,
i.54. MERIT, ii.83. MIDDLESEX, Lord, punished by parliament for peculation,
ii.33. MILITIA, supersede the necessity of a standing army,
ii.347.351.353.401.^06.429. Natural guard of this country, ii.362.389.412.467.
Voted not to be kept in arms, ii.383. Fletcher's plan f^r a, ii.391. Athenian
and Spartan, etc. etc. etc. ib. H^w settled in Holland and Portugal, ii.395.
Dutch, in India, ii.396. Lacedemonian, ii.400. How to be exercised, ii.401.
First settled here by Alfred, ii.403. Fell into decay under the Stuarts,
ii.404. When put under the command of the crown, ib. 414.425. The power of, in
the sheriff, against insurrections, ii.405. G^ant, records of, in the Tower,
ii.410. Orders to put in readiness on alarm of an invasion, ii.411.425.
New England, the valor of, ii.412. Great saving by, ii.4^3. Laws, observations
on, ii.4^9. Called on to keep the peace, iii.235. MILTON, his definition of a
state, i.71. His remark on triennial parliaments, i.8^. MINISTERS, why tempted
to burden commerce with taxes, i.51. Their motives for seeking power, i.269.
How keep ascendancy in parliament, ib. On a pretense of manning the navy,
propose an act to empower constables to search private houses, i.325. Their
trick in putting people to take up their freedom, i.338 Their influence on
elections, i.359. On parliam^nt, i.367. iii.273. Minister of the house of
commons, new state officer, i.380. Ill effect of ministerial power, at the
peace of Utrecht, i.415. Their influence in the South Sea scheme, i.423. Always
persuade the people that their opponents are disaffected, i.424.
Thorough-paced, hesitate not to carry on views at the peril of the nation,
i.455. What they should do, ii.313.315. Their power increased by officers in
the army, ii.438 475. Conduct of the modern, iii.215.271, 272, 273.225.339
ii.105. MINORCA, ii.412.414. MOBS, a distinction of, iii.238. MONARCHY, and
republic, difference between, ii.41. MONEY, public, a commission appointed to
inquire into the laying it out, i.414. Sent from France and Spain, for the
purpose of bribing parliament, i.414.7000 l. demanded to make up the deficiency
arising from discouraging spirituous liquors, i.445. At the disposal of the
crown, iii.283. MONTESQUIEU, his remark on representation, i.25. MORE, Sir
Thomas his saying on soldiers, ii.3^7. MOTION, in the house of commons, to
decide questions by ballot, i.178. Beckford's to stop feasting at elections,
i.355. For judges to receive no fees, etc. ib. To prevent occasional votes,
i.356. Grenville's for a remedy against the undue exercise of the jurisdiction
of the house of commons at elections, ib. Pulteney's for a peace, i.422. To
enquire what members had places holden in trust; to prevent the translation of
bishops; for an address against the Hessians, i.424. To get facts, proceedings,
extracts, etc. generally quashed by ministerial influence, i.427. To enquire
whether any members sat contrary to law, negatived, i.429. For admitting
admiral Haddock's instructions, negatived, i.430. For an account of ships built
for government service, overruled, i.430. To examine state papers, i.236. To
tax incomes of places and pensions, ii.110.116. On places and pensions, ii.186.
To punish soldiers in time of peace by civil magistrates only, ii.360. For a
bill to limit the time of a soldier's service, ii.406. For a bill to make the
militia more useful, ii.412. To restrain the number of playhouses, iii.102. For
an academy, iii.158. Against general warrants, iii.252.254. Against ex officio
informations, iii.255. For inquiry into Walpole's administration, ii 55. For a
committee to inquire if any member had place or pension, ii.186. MURRAY,
Alexander, tried for breach of privilege, i.249.
N.
NAUNTON, Sir Robert, ascribes the happiness of Queen Elizabeth's days to the
integrity of the house of commons, ii.34. NAVAL force, can be used only for the
country's good, ii.378. NAVY, with militia, the only proper security,
iii.389.458.463.467.469. ii.445. Cannot exist without commerce, iii.387.
NEGROES, iii.320. NERO, iii.80. Ill educated, iii.151. NEWCASTLE, duke of, his
case with admiral Byng, i.456. brought over German soldiers, ii.352.
NEW ENGLAND, the people instruct their members, i.205. Exclude the crown
officers from house of representatives, ii.56. What crimes are capital there,
iii.219. Care of the morals of slaves, ib. A revolution in, iii.294. NOBILITY,
and gentry, should consider the kingdom's foreign traffic, i.52. Should serve
their country gratis, 96, 97. Eagerness of, for military employment censured,
ii.442. Should be noble in their actions, iii.112. Of Denmark, iii. 410. Should
preserve its liberty for their own sakes, iii.420. NORTH and GRAY, lord,
against the union, why, i.71. NOTTINGHAM, earl of, against the septennial bill,
i.136. NUMBER, of the people of England, i.36. Taxable in England and Wales,
i.39. In North Britain, i.46. Of the members for counties and boroughs, ib.
O.
OATH, forms of, iii.197. To be taken by members, if the pension bill had
passed, ii.185. OCTAVIUS, refused to arm the slaves, ii.362. OFFICERS, new etc.
complained of, ii.131. OLIVER, Mr. his speech on parliament, i.171. Sent to the
tower, i.252. OMAZ, Khalif, refuses to nominate his son his successor, etc.
i.102. ONSLOW, Denzil, his remarkable case, i.291. ORDINANCE, self denying,
ii.31.41.172. OXFORD, on the mutiny bill, ii.356. OXFORDSHIRE, four members
returned instead of two, i.336.
P.
PAMPHLET, giving an account of the emoluments of members of parliament, i.392.
PANAETOLIUM, like our house of commons, i.7. PAPER credit in America, why
restrained, i.53. PARENTS, fault of, iii.154.159. PARLIAMENT, curb to kings,
etc. i.6. and 269. Neglect respecting, ib. 1^6. Lengthening, an abuse, i.23.
iii.282. Grievances of, requiring redress, i.24. Not a just representative of
the people, i.29, etc. The most equitable plan of choosing, i.39. Majority of
electors, sta^ed, i.40. etc. Who formerly had or had not suffrages in, i.59.
What is most favorable to court influence in, i.68. Cromwel^'s plan of, i.77.
Duration of, in Saxon times, i.84. Made t^^ennial under Charles I. ib. Motion
for annual, made and rejected, i.93. Limitation o^, obtained at Dublin, i.101.
The king-killing, sensible of the evil of too long parliaments, i.106. Reasons
for an annual, i.10^. Anciently, was frequently called, i.118. Dangers of long
continuing, i.119.128. iii.39.282. Pretense for septennial, invalid, i.130, and
133. Held formerly three times a year, ib. ib. Lord Coke on custom of, ib. 200.
On privilege of, i.207, and 234. Ordered to determine complaints against king,
queen, etc. but not against subjects, i.21^. What power was allowed to, i.217.
Cannot alter the constitution without commission from the people, i.221.
iii.441. Privileges and prosecutions, commonly unjust, i.136. Takes up the
office of criminal judges, i.139. Door of, house of, ought not to be shut,
i.258, and 259. How ministers keep an ascendency over, i.269. Not a good
security to the people, i.360.362. ii.45. Power of, i.361. Should be free from
corruption, i.363. ii.26.34. What symptoms show it totally corrupted, i.366.
Good-sense and patriotism generally against the proceedings of, i.367.
Observations on, ib. Danger from, i.370.395.400. and 422. iii.267.452. Has been
long ago tampered with, i.386. In James I.'s time, showed a spirit of liberty,
i.388. In Charles II.'s time, how corrupt, i.394. and seq. Neglected several
points at the Revolution, i.407. Chief business of, i.442. Idea of, ii.1.
Anciently careful of the people's liberty and money, ii.2.3. Contest of, with
Edward III. ii.4. No placemen nor pensioners in, ii.11. Republican,
observations on, ii.19.43. Too ready to give, ii.95. Lost the respect of the
colonies, ii.294. How assembled in the time of Edward III. ii.316. Free,
incomp^tible with a standing army, ii.348.378.386.427.460. Should not keep up
an army when war is ended, ii.353.384. Transactions, speeches, etc. of,
relating to the army, ii.426. Expelled by the army, ii.431. Ministerial arts in
destroying, ii.438. Takes no care of education, iii.158. Has lost its
efficiency, iii.267.285.452. What it should do, iii.290. Present cannot bind a
future, iii.301. History of, execrable, iii.421. Independent, necessary to be
obtained, iii.427.453. Opinions concerning the, iii.446. PARTIES, indifferent,
iii.269. Oppositions of, when necessary, iii.331. PATRIOT, who, iii.93. Conduct
of some, iii.337. and seq. What he should avoid, iii.426.454. PEERS, eldest
sons of Scotch, incapable of sitting in parliament, i.53. Of English may sit,
ib. Protest against lengthening parliaments, i.135, and 137. Created often, for
what purpose, ii.116. B^amed for excluding strangers from their house, i.257.
Petition against one for influencing elections, i.299. Petition concerning
electing the 16 Scotch, i.310. The same dismissed, and protest entered, i.311.
PELAYO, Don, why he built no towns, etc. iii.68. PELHAM, argues that for a
person to be in power for life is an advantage to the state, i.114. PEOPLE,
number of, in England, i.36. Taxable in England and Wales, i.39. Fourth part
lost, ib. Number of, in North-Britain, i.46. Their danger of being enslaved by
the servants of the crown, i.106. Their right of annually electing deputies
older than magna charta, i.130. Should be accounted to by those in power,
i.201, iii.380. Have the power of determining how long they will continue their
representatives in office, i.222.409. Of excluding them from the house of
commons, i.256. May be entrusted with their own affairs, i.344. Not safe by
having parliaments, i.360. Increase of, between the restoration and revolution,
ii.283. Levity of, made an argument for standing armies, ii.407. Act for arming
the, ii.410. Distinction between those incapable of the government, and those
low in spirit of liberty, iii.20. How depraved by luxury iii.31.35.59.75.
Deceived into slavery by men of shining abilities, iii.34. Not necessarily
enervated by riches, iii.64. Apt to imitate vices rather than virtues,
iii.95.103. Virtue of, destroyed by governors, iii.180. Riches, the foundation
of their misery and destruction, iii.186. Manners of, should be attended to,
iii.1.3.159.172.175.197. Degenerate manners of, a severe reflection on the
government, iii.212.220. May change the form of government, iii.277.447. May
fix the king's prerogative, iii.285. Can never be too jealous of liberty,
iii.211.326.383. Should unite to overthrow tyranny, iii.331.444.449. What makes
them rise, iii.378. Begin reformation, iii.379. Their inertia the chief
difficulty of reformation, iii.380. Judges of the magistrate, iii.380.444.447.
Dangerous in redressing grievances, iii.425. Generally right, ib. Advice to
the, iii.426. Like a rope of sand, iii.429. PERCIVAL, lord, his answer to
instructions from his constituents, i.182. PERSIAN education, iii.151, 152.
PETERBOROUGH, earl of, against the septennial bill, i.136. PETER the Great,
iii.210.219.382.404. PETITION of the Justices, etc. of Kent, to the house of
commons, i.30. The petitioners committed, ib. The letter on that occasion to
the speaker, 31. Of the people of Glocestershire, against the bill for
searching houses in quest of sailors, i.33. To dissolve the parliament, i.35.
Should have been for restoring the independency of parliament, i.50. Against a
peer for influencing electors, 299. Concerning the election of the 16 Scotch
peers, i.310. Dismissed, and protest entered, i.311. Of representatives of
Massachusett's-bay, ii.292. Of London merchants, respecting the colonies,
ii.323. Of Americans to the king, ii.336. Of livery of London to the king,
iii.272. PETITIONS, against taking off the prohibition on spirituous liquors,
iii.222. Of Lord mayor, etc. to the lords, iii.348. Advice for drawing up,
iii.438. PINTO, ii.84. PIT, his speech, i.33. Makes a speech on the colonies,
ii.324. Sends away the German soldiers, ii.352. PIERRE, proposes to choose by
scrutiny to places of power and trust, ii.88. His opinion of hereditary
honors, ii.89. PISO declines a triumph, ii.85. PISISTRATUS, his artifice to
enslave his country, ii.361. PLACEMEN and Pensioners, unfit for members,
ii.37.47.51.54.77.96.208.221. iii.267.272.282. Often hold employments
incompatible, ii.75. Exorbitant number of, ii.128. Bills, statutes, resolutions
concerning, ii.11.168, etc. etc. How they vote, ii.55. Arguments for,
ii.175.179.241. Excluded by law from sitting in parliament, who, ii.193.
PLACES, and Pensions, not given according to merit, ii.80. Consequence of to
kings, ii.90. Buying and selling them destructive of virtuous emulation, ii.87.
Making hereditary hurtful, ii.89. Profusion in, ii.91. Income of government,
ii.102. Motion to tax them, ii.110. Conduct of parliament concerning, ii.104.
False policy, ii.131. iii.190. Why given to members of parliament, ii.54.
iii.18. Given by bloody Mary, ii.54. Taxed, ii.109. PLANTATIONS, ill policy in
not disposing of to foreigners, ii.283. PLATO, his definition of vice and
virtue, iii.5. PLAYHOUSES; iii.102. PLUMMER, his speech on parliaments, i.142.
PLYMOUTH election controverted, i.324. POLE, Michael de la, ii.5. POLAND,
iii.415. POLYGAMY, unnatural, iii.131. Punished by the Mohammedan law, ib.
POMPEY, his trick to enslave Rome, iii.18. His behavior on being ridiculed on
the stage, iii.250. POOR, management of, censured, iii.227. POPE Sextus V. cut
off pensions, ii.100. PORTUGUESE, prohibit digging for gold in the Tagus, why,
iii.96. PORTUGAL, revolution in, iii.294. POWER, Livy's remark on, i.97. The
love of, i.106. Monopoly of dangerous, i.108. iii.310. Danger of unbalancing,
between the three estates, imaginary, i.116. Should never be so far out of the
people's reach that they cannot resume it, i.126. Of the crown, never too much
retrenched, i.128. Should be accounted for to the people, i.201. Of parliament,
i.361. Persons in, should be men of exemplary characters,
iii.10.29.50.108.112.173.180. Dispensing, what, iii.448. PRESENTS, effects of,
and laws concerning, ii.106. PRESENTMENT, remarkable of the grand jury of
Middlesex, i.335. PREROGATIVE, royal, curtailed, i.270. Alderman Heathcote's
speech on, i.438. May be fixed by the people, iii.285. PRETENDER, motion made
by the Duke of Lorrain to remove the, i.115. PRESS, licensing, iii.265. PRICE,
Dr. his estimate of the number of people of England, i.36. On the mischiefs of
luxury, iii.90. PRINTING, the effect of, iii.309. Of libels, iii.265.
PRIVILEGE, a nuisance, whose extent is unknown, i.207. Inconsistency of with
the qualification act, i.210. Has often been dispensed with, i.211. More
concerning it, i.234. and 236. Breach of complained of, iii.263. PROCLAMATION
of Charles I. iii.382. PROPERTY, every man has, i.37. Too sacred to lie open to
invasion, i.206. Who has should have arms, ii.410. Should be duly divided and
proportioned, iii.188. None without liberty, iii.388. As well as merit required
in persons promoted to trusts among the Carthaginians, ii.81. PROPRIETORS of
the redeemable fund petition, i.250. PROSECUTIONS by the commons house, i.237.
etc. PROTEST, i.311. Against the bill for regulating the government of
Massachuset's-bay, ii.329. Against augmentation of the army, ii.438. Against
the gin act, iii.198. Against a bill of attainder, iii.259. PROVOCATION,
effects of, iii.436.445. PUBLIC affairs, condition of, iii.267.288. PUBLIC
spirit, iii.174. Credit, how to be supported, iii.329. PULTENEY, on resigning
his place, ii.55. PUNISHMENTS, iii.159. In Russia, iii.160. The inequality of
ours, iii.160.163.165. Severity of, prevent not crimes, iii.160.165.166.169.
Shame should be the principal part of, iii.1^7. The Czarina's proposition
concerning, iii.160.167. Banishment sufficient, in a happy country, for most
crimes, iii.168. When the first use of diverse, ib. Capital, when necessary,
iii.169. How many crimes capital in England, ib. Indispensable and useful, if
well applied, iii.170. In what cases too gentle, iii.171. And rewards, the use
of, iii.191.196.215. PURITANS, how they got the ascendency in the house of
commons, i.55. PYM on parliaments, ii.25.
Q.
QUAKERS, iii.150.172.220. QUALIFICATION, and privilege of a member of parment,
inconsistency between, i.210. For a member of parliament what, i.214. and 350.
ii.269. Scotch and Universities exempted from, ib. ii.272. Resolutions
concerning, ii.271. QUERIES, constitutional, censured, i.249. QUESTIONS, i.373.
R.
RAPE, iii.146. RAPIN, his remark on British parliament, i.28. REBELLION, in
1745, ii.414. What, iii.429. REFORMATION, always avoided, i.381. iii.175.270.
Who are against it, iii.326. Whence it comes, iii.378. Difficulty from delay,
iii.379. Difficulty of from the inertia of the people, iii.380. Opposed,
iii.382. REGIMENT, at Bretinfield, how treated for cowardice, iii.68. RELIGION,
iii.202.286.303.306. REMONSTRANCE, to the house of commons, i.190.
REPRESENTATION, the most equitable plan of, i.39. Irregularity of, ib. Mode of,
anciently adequate, but now otherwise, i.55. iii.267. Lock on the inequality
of, i.73. King's prerogative to restore an adequate, i.74. Proposals for
altering the mode of by Cromwell, Fairfax, Chatham, Molesworth, Hume, Carte,
i.77. Inadequate, the cause of the house of commons assuming unwarrantable
privileges, i.205. and 265. Adequate, advantage of, ii.270. Of taxation
without, ii.302. Unequal in America, ii.320. Necessity of regulating,
iii.267.272. REPRESENTATIVES, how dangerous, i.123. Punished by our ancestors,
i.187. Gentlemen of the sword not fit for, ii.75. RESISTANCE of, iii.322.
RESPONSIBILITY, arguments for, i.199. RESOLUTIONS concerning persons elected
into parliament, i.351. RETURN, double, a case of, i.306. REVENUE, hurt by the
debauchery of the people, iii.222. Amount of, ii.109. REVOLUTION, an imperfect
redress, iii.286. What was done at the, iii.434. REWARDS and punishments, the
use of, iii.191.196.215. How to be dispensed, iii.425. REYNEL, Abbe, thinks the
custom of giving out in summonses to parliament the business, very useful,
i.137. RICHES, do not necessarily enervate a people, iii.64. Rapacity for in
our times, iii 65. And virtue, the consequence of estimation for either,
iii.185. Enormous, should be discountenanced, iii.186, 187, 188. A ne plus
ultra expedient, iii.186. Ancient laws to this purpose, iii.187. Most men
ruined by, iii.188. An example of the contrary, ib. RICHARD II. tries to
corrupt parliament, i.284. RICHLIEU, condemns appointing governors for life,
i.102. His maxim on taxes, ii.53. RIOT, iii.230. Arguments for calling in the
soldiery to quell, iii.244. ROMANS, their dread of 120 lictors, ii.361. Of
Caesar's army, ii.364. Conduct of several emperors of the, respecting armies,
ii.365. Emperors of deposed by the army, ii.430. Their inscription at the
passage of the Rubicon, ii.44. No citizen among to be scourged, iii.13. Beaten
by the Numantians, iii.14. Proverbial for wickedness, iii.15. Senate of the,
how degenerate, iii.22. Their slavish flattery to their emperors, iii.24.79.
Their empire set to auction, iii.26. How treated by the Goths, iii. ib. An
attempt to restore liberty to by Rienzo, iii.27. Reasons of their ruin,
iii.28.87.136. A remarkable custom of, iii.63. Prevalence of luxury among,
iii.68. Ladies solicit a repeal of the Oppian law, iii.79. The embassy to
Tarentum, iii.80. Horace's complaint of their youth, iii.84. Their shows and
diversions, iii.102. No divorce among for 520 years, iii.136. No parricide for
600, iii.178. Banished unqualified schoolmasters, iii.157. Ogulnian law of
the, iii.167. Originally what, i^i.178. How founded their system of policy,
iii.204. To enter forcibly a citizen's house among the, not lawful, 230.
Brought to think imperial government necessary, iii.274. Became cowardly
through slavery, iii.309. Their fall, iii.385.414. Their misery from slavery,
iii.388. ROTATION, exclusion by, i.173. ii.42. ROUSSEAU, censured, iii.186.
RUMBOLD, his saying, i.3. RUSSEL, Lord, accused of intending to destroy the
king's guards, ii.407.
S.
SACHEVERELL, his affair, i.247. iii.323. SAILORS, voted in 1749, ii.412.
SALARIES, reduction of, ii.99. SAVAGE, Arn^ld, his whimsical idea of the three
estates, i.378. SAVAGES, character of, iii.219. SAVILLE, Lord, committed to the
Tower for refusing to name a person, i.238. SAWBRIDGE, his motion for a bill to
shorten parliaments, i.169. For new writ in the case of Lord Greville, ii 192.
SAXON government of England, i.104. Military force ^hen, ii.345. SCALPING in
use among the Alans and Huns, iii.155. SCOTS, the cause of success in the late
war, iii.60.335. Their right to offices asserted, iii.369. Kings punished by
the, iii.373. Fond of liberty, ib. and seq. SECRET service, i.277. SELFISHNESS,
the effect of, to break every tie, divine and human, iii.70. SELF-DENIAL
attends magnanimity, ii.96. SERVANTS of the crown should be paid by parliament,
i^. 94. SHAFTESBURY, appeals to the court of King's Bench when imprisoned by
parliament, i.242. SHAW Jekan, and his omrah, ii.56. SHERIFFS, the terms of
their office in different reigns, i.105. Have power of the militia, ii.405.
SHIPPEN, for his speech, committed to the Tower, ii.428. SHIRLEY, Sir Thomas,
member, committed for debt, i.214. SHOREHAM, christian club, i.342. SIDNEY,
asserts that members of parliament derive their power from the electors, i.191.
Siam, officers no salaries, ii.100. Governors of, set up for themselves,
ii.370. SICILIAN vespers, iii.337. SINECURES, ii.92. SLAVERY, the abjectness
of, iii.308.311.384.386.388.397.399, 400. Argument against, iii.322.384.398.
Civil war preferable to, iii.450. SMITH, Sir Thomas, his remark on
representation, i.25. SNELL, Mr. his saying on the septennial act, i.72.
SOCIETY, moral, proposed, iii.227. SOLDIERS, abject slaves, ii.346.362. Those
in France and Swisserland discharged after a number of years, ii.358. Reason of
shifting their quarters, ii.429. SOLOMON Shah, iii.24. SOUTH, Dr. his text.,
i.112. SOUTH Sea, exhibits a shocking scence of ministerial influence, i.423.
Spain, the procuradores refuse supplies till they receive consent from their
constituents, i.204. Inflamed by the king's raising a regiment, ii.354. How the
people of became lazy, iii.83. Their effieminacy, iii.84. Regulations demanded
by the people of, iii.445. SPARTA, how enslaved, iii.89. No adultery there,
iii.150. No traveling permitted, iii.157. Reformed by Lycurgus, iii.175.
Immoral writings prohibited, iii.181. SPEAKER, reprimands the magistrates of a
city for bribery at election, i.339. Some lords protest against, ii.175. May be
permanent, iii.377. SPEECH, Cornwall's, i.30. Argyle's on the treaty of
Utrecht, i.32. Pitt's, i.33. On taxing the colonies, ii.324. On the stamp act,
335. An humorous, feigned to be addressed to the electors of a Cornish borough,
i.63. Chesterfield's on borough elections, i.69. On Weymouth election, exposing
the craft of ministers, etc. i.460. Wyndham's, Sir William, on triennial
parliaments, i.85. Hutcheson's, on parliaments, i.139. On a bill for securing
freedom of election, i.297. Plummer's, on ditto, i.142. Wyndham's, Sir William,
i.148. On responsibility of parliament, i.199. On septennial parliaments,
i.372. On a message from the King, desiring the house would enable him to
augment the army, i.442. On parliament, i.447. Bromley's, Mr. i.155. Barnard's,
Sir John, i.156. Carew's, Mr. Thomas, i.160. Hilsborough's, Lord, on the
regency bill, i.164. Oliver's, i.171. House of commons order their speeches not
to be published, i.258. Potter's on corrupting electors by a peer, i.301. On
superior importance of the navy to the army, ii.468. A Lord's, on a petition
concerning the election of the sixteen Scotch peers, i.313. Anonymous, on an
act proposed to empower constables to search private houses, i.325. Davenant's,
on corruption, i.376. Sydenham's, on ditto, i.381. On a motion for annual
parliaments, iii.39. Seymore, on ditto, i.399. Queen Anne's, on the peace of
Utrecht, i.415. On the Union, iii.3^6. George II. i.425. Lord Egmont's, i.426.
Against acquies^ing in the measures of the ministry. -- Against martial law,
ii.359. Waller's, on parliamentary enquiry into the conduct of ministers,
i.431. Barnard's, on ditto, i.432. Pultney's, on examining state papers, i.236.
On granting money the first business in parment, i.449. On the riot act,
iii.241. Heathcote's, on royal prerogative, i.438. Cornwall's, on the
miscarriage at Toulon, and ministerial influence, i.440. Lord Carteret's, on
votes of credit, etc. i.449. On reducing the army, ii.451. Sandy's, on respect
due to the crown and its ministers, i.451. On inconveniences of quartering the
army, ii.470. Lord Talbot, on Walpole's compelling Weymouth to elect his
creatures, i.457. Duke of Bedford's, on ditto, i.458. Lord I^ay's, in favor of
the court, i.462. Lord Strange's, against arbitrary power, ii.62. Vyner's, on
taxing places, etc. ii.110. Southwell's, on ditto, i^.117. SPEECHES on the
danger of placemen and pensioners ^n parliament, ii.195. Grenville's, on taxing
the colonies, ii.325. Harrington's, on standing armies, ii.362. Trenchard's, on
ditto, ii.42^. Chesterfield's, on the fleet and army, ii.445. On licensing the
stage, iii.248. Lyttleton's, on a standing army, ii.452. Shippe^'s, on ditto,
ii.454. Bolingbroke's, on ditto, ii.456. On unity between Scotland and England,
iii.343. Sedley's, on a bill for disbanding the army, ii.462. Philip's, on a
motion for annual parliaments, iii.51. Anonymous, on lotteries, iii.112.
Fazakerly's on punishments, iii.161. Hervey's, on the gin act, iii.199.
Bathurst's, on the riot act, iii.235. Wray's, on the demands of the Scotch,
iii.343. SPIRITUOUS liquors taxed, i.445. Protests concerning, iii.197.
Petition against, iii.222. STAR Chamber, iii.403. STATES General admit no
military officers of their assembly, ii.57. STATE, signs of decay of the,
iii.19, 20.22.24.50.79.333. Seven things necessary to, iii.171. How insecure,
iii.185. Equality ought to be preserved in a, iii.187. How several were
enslaved, iii.274. On the decay of, iii.287.289. How preserved, iii.298.
STATESMEN should attend to education, iii.154, 155.175, 176. Should have an eye
to manners, iii 159.172.194.197.210.213.220. Do little in conferring rewards,
iii.159. Should be what, iii.185 202.216.217. How to be judged of, iii.2^9.
When to be punished, iii.251. STATUTES against corrupt proceedings at
elections, i.345. STEEL, Sir Richard, expelled the house for reflections on the
jacobite ministry, i.248. STRAFFORD, Lord, his observation on his troops,
ii.358. STRANGE, Lord, on the danger of an army to liber^y, ii.67. STREET
Walkers, iii.146. SUBJECTS, triable by law, and not by parliament, i.216.
SULLY, Duke de, repressed importunate courtiers, ii.108. Against duelling,
iii.125. SUMPTUARY laws, common among the ancients, iii.94.184. Charlemagne's,
iii.95. Of Edward III. iii.97. SUPPLIES, voted with limitations, ii.30. SWEDEN,
iii.274.321. SWISS, Cantons, deputies, receive instructions, i.203. iii.410.
SYDENHAM, substance of his speech on septennial parliaments, i.163. SYLLA,
bribes by feasting, etc. ii.133. Armed the slaves, ii.362. ^^ibes the legions
with confiscated lands, ii.364. Made perpetual dictator, iii.19. Won popular
favor by a show of lions, iii.100.
T.
TAPROBANE, or Ceylon, in what manner the inhabitants choose their king, i.100.
TARENTUM, luxury of, iii.80. Roman embassy to, ib. TAX, number taxable in
England and Wales, i.39. Remarks on, ii.105, 106. New raised rebellions,
ii.303. On saddle horses and carriages of great use, iii.96. On places and
pensions, ii.109. TAXATION, without representation, ii.302. TAILOR, Barrister,
expelled and imprisoned for saying the parliament had committed murder, etc.
i.236. THEATER, should be carefully attended to by rulers, iii.98. Licensing,
iii.248. TIBERIUS, emperor of Rome, his law against wearing silks, iii.94.
TOAST, an immoral, iii.149. TRADE, and land, mutual dependence of, i.53.
TRAVELING, iii.148. Spartans not permitted, iii.156. Should not be needlessly
permitted, iii.157. TREASON, against the people, i.374. TREBY, on freedom of
voting, ii.56. TRENCHARD, proposes commission of inquiry into abuses of civil
list revenue, etc. etc. ii.210. TREVOR, his remark on parliament, i.1^5.
TRIBUNES, of Rome, their power, i.^^^. TURKS, abhor matrimonial infidelity,
iii.144. A general of the, anecdote of, iii.215. Government of the, iii.413.
TYNDARIDES, enslaves his country, iii.361. TYRANNY, what, ii.291.
iii.277.295.322.439. Progress of, in several countries, iii.274.279.286. How
established, iii.312. How overthrown, iii.331. Effects of, iii.421. TIRE,
conquered by Alexander, iii.386.
U.
UNACCOUNTED millions complained of, ii.30. UNION, the effect of, iii.338. When
first proposed, iii.354. UNIVERSITIES, iii.154.158.184. UTRECHT, treaty of,
i.417.
V.
VALERIAN, conquered by Sapor, iii.26. VANE, Henry, his moderation, ii.85.
VENICE, the great council of, rendered perpetual, i.101. How governors are
chosen there, i.102. Admitted none but men of morals, iii.216. Continued free
without alteration, iii.288.410. VERNON, on money raised for the army, ii.354.
VERNON, admiral, how treated by the minister, i.455. VICE, the evil of its
being made public, iii.141. The cause of seditions, iii.143. And ignorance the
support of tyranny, iii.185. VIRTUE, and riches cannot both be held in supreme
estimation, iii.185. And knowledge the support of freedom, iii.185.291, 292.
VISIGOTHS, i.18. VOISIN, Monsieur De, his integrity, ii.108. VOTES, printing
them, i.190. How the Polish noblesse consider theirs, i.268. Selling them
wicked, i.268. ii.275. iii.48. Of members of parliament first bought, i.389.
Excellent one of the house of commons, ii.173. VOTERS, who may not persuade
them, ii.194. VOTING, incapable of, those in servitude or receiving alms, i.36.
which is injustice to the poor, ib. Inhabitants of Sandwich, though receiving
alms, have right to vote, 38. How many votes should carry an election, i.38.
The best plan of voting, i.39. Right of, triable by law, and not by the
commons, i.233. Unanimity in, requiring, absurd, ii.137.
W.
WALLER, Mr. answers Hor. Walpole on parliamentary inquiry into the conduct of
ministers, i.431. WALPOLE, his art in flattering the landed interest, i.51.
Endeavors to intimidate the corporation of Weymouth, by threatening their
charter, i.69. Objects to shortening parliaments, why, i.11^. His expulsion,
i.294. His administration brought government into contempt, i.378. Charges
brought against him, i.452. His strokes of parliamentary legerdemain, i.456.
His custom in sending soldiers, ii.349. His saying of vacant places, ii.138.
WALPOLE, Hor. opposes parliamentary inquiries into the conduct of ministers,
i.430. WARRANTS, general, iii.252.254, 255.273. Earl of Warwick and lord Brook
apprehended by, iii.263. Scragg's, declared illegal, 263. WHITEHEAD, his poem,
manners, voted a libel, i.248. WHITELOCK, his saying of a common soldier,
ii.358. On the army, ii.372. WILKES, expelled the house of commons, i.34. and
250. Refuses to attend the house, i.252. WILLIS, Brown, esquire. his notit.
parliament, i.40. WILLIAM III. dislikes limitation of kingly power, i.109.
ii.440. Introduces corruption, i.401. Granted Irish rebels conditions, which
the laws refused them, i.409. Celebrates the parliament, ii.36. Rejects a place
bill, the commons represent, ii.178. Thinks to abdicate, ii.384. Number of his
army, ii.385. WISDOM, what it suggests to a state, iii.171. WITTEKIND,
temporary king, converted by Charles the Great, to the christian faith, i.104.
Made permanent duke, i.105. WOLSEY, effect of his ambition, ii.53. WOMEN,
Cavades projects a law to make them all common, iii.135. To reform the manners
of, the only means of stopping adultery, iii.142. Seduction and force used
with, iii.146. Married, should be protected against surly husbands, iii.147.
Love of, iii.149. Customs respecting, in several countries, iii.177. Laws
concerning, iii.180. WRITER, the, his apology, iii.408. His prayer, iii.457.
WRIT, for choosing burgesses skilled in ship-building and merchandising, i.52.
Of attachment, iii.257. WYNDHAM, Sir William, on parliaments, i.147. and^ 199.
On the septennial act, i.343. and 372. WIN, his speech on parliament, i.142.
X.
XERXES, his defeat, iii.386. XIMENES, cardinal, his behavior to the grandees
of Spain, ii.369. Raised a militia, ii.395.
Y.
YEOMAN, of the guards, ii.343. iii.233. YORKSHIRE, election, controverted,
i.323.
Z.
ZALEUCUS, lawgiver of the Locrians, remarkable anecdote of, iii.179. His great
use of shame, iii.180. ZEALAND, iii.412.
FINIS.
JUST PUBLISHED, [NUMBER I. PRICE FIVE SHILLINGS] Containing Ten COPPER PLATES,
with Explanations in LETTER-PRESS, to be continued Monthly, and published, on
the first Wednesday of each Month, until the Whole of the 120 DESIGNS are
completed.

A COLLECTION OF DESIGNS IN ARCHITECTURE, CONTAINING NEW PLANS AND ELEVATIONS
OF HOUSES, FOR GENERAL USE.

WITH A gr^^t Variety of SECTIONS of ROOMS; from a common Room, to the most
grand and magnificent.

THEIR DECORATIONS, viz. BASES, SURBASES, ARCHITRAVES, FREEZES, and CORNICES,
properly enriched with FOLIAGES, FRETS and FLOWERS, in a NEW and GRAND TASTE.

WITH MARGINS and MOULDINGS for the PANELLING.

All large enough for PRACTICE.

To which are added, Curious DESIGNS of STONE and TIMBER BRIDGES, Extending
from 20 Feet to 220, in one Arch.

Likewise some SCREENS and PAVILIONS.

IN TWO FOLIO VOLUMES.

Each containing SIXTY PLATES, curiously engraved on COPPER.

Designed, by ABRAHAM SWAN, ARCHITECT: And Engraved, by JOHN NORMAN.

An Engraving of the NEW GOAL, of PHILADELPHIA, and another of the CARPENTER'S
HALL, both elegant Modern BUILDINGS, will be given gratis, to the Subscribers,
in the Twelfth and last NUMBER.

N B. Subscriptions for this Work, are received by ROBERT BELL, Printer and
Bookseller, next Door to St. Paul's Church, in Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA.


