AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH FIFTEENTH, 1775 AT THE REQUEST of a Number of the
INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN of BOSTON.

By Dr. THOMAS BOLTON

Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Nam quis iniquae.
Tam patiens urbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se?
JUV. Sat. Et qu^^do (...) V^tiorum copi^?
Ibid. Printed in the Year, M,DCC,LX^^

AT a meeting of several inhabitants of the town of BOSTON, legally assembled
at the British Coffee-House, on Wednesday the 15th day of March, Annoque
Domini, 1775.
IT was moved and seconded, and Voted unanimously, That a Committee should be
appointed to wait upon the ORATOR, and return him thanks for his elegant and
spirited ORATION, and to request a copy for the press.

Upon application made, the copy of the ORATION was sent with the following
message, GENTLEMEN,
THE sense I have of the obligation I am under to obey your commands at all
times, constrains me against my private innformation, to yield to a publication
of this performance; and induce me (undeserving as I am) to throw myself upon
that candor, which (...) with kindness on the feeblest efforts of an honest
mind.

With a heart penetrated with the most lively gratitude for (...), I beg leave
to subscribe myself,

GENTLEMEN, Your most obliged, most (...), most humble, and most devoted
Servant, THOMAS BOLTON.
March 16th, 1775.



AN ORATION.
Ye Friends to justice, equity, and truth,
Ye Foes to falsehood, treason, and rebellion,
-- With patience hear me.

THE flourishes of rhetoric I cannot use, -- these will I (...) the SONS of
LIBERTY of this degenerate age.

I cannot boast the ignorance of HANCOCK, the insolence of ADAMS, the absurdity
of ROW, the arrogance of LEE, the vicious life and untimely death of
MOLLINEAUX, the turgid bombast of Warren, the treasons of QUINCY, the hypocrisy
of (...), nor the principles of YOUNG: -- Nor can I with propriety (...) over
the characters of these (...), (or, to use their (...) phrase, Indians,)
without a few observations on their late (...).

These sachem, or Indian chiefs, though of different titles, all proceeded from
one and the same tribe; who being originally inhabitants of a country a
thousand leagues to the (...) (or in the vulgar (...)) for assuring that claim,
which is the natural right of (...) to a (...) of the good things of this
world; which good things Fortune had most unjustly bestowed upon others in too
large a proportion.

It was a matter of dispute for some time whether they were of the Mohawk kind
or not; and this suspicion, I imagine, first arose from the observation of a
learned physionomist, who perceiving their Os frontis to be uncommonly flat,
burst out into the following exclamation:

"Your sapsculls are neither square, oval, nor round,
"A proof that their judgments can never be sound:
"I really believe they are put wrong way on,
"As they seem to resemble a cobler's lap-stone."
But notwithstanding the above assertion might border upon truth, yet several
of these chiefs denied it, by openly declaring themselves to be neither more
nor less than plain Narragansets; who scorned to scalp any person who would
submit to have his private property destroyed, without complaining.

With regard to their political schemes, I challenge all Hell to match them.
Law they have none, nor any do they want; and could they send to Salem or Endor
to procure a witch to bring MOLLINEAUX from the dead, even HE would condemn
them.

The First of these chiefs is A -- MS, a sachem of vast elocution; (...) being
extremely poor, (...) syllables, sentences, (...) in the multitude; and it can
be attested, that (...) mouth of A -- MS is sufficient to fill the mouths of
millions in America. But it is prophesied that the time is near at hand, when
the frothy food will fail them.

But generous JOHN scorns to let him starve, -- far from it; it is well known
his purse-strings have been at SAM's disposal ever since he assisted in making
the Oration delivered by JOHN on the 5th March 1774, to a crowded audience of
Narraganset Indians.

The Second of these chiefs is H -- CK, who having been possessed of too much
money for a private gentleman, resolved to make a public attempt to become a
Monarch, and having courted popularity and power almost as long as he did
Miss...... Miss...... or Mr Barnard's cook-maid, Betty Price, is at last likely
to be jilted in his turn, and in the end to be wedded to beggary, contempt, and
a g -- s.

The Third of these incomparable Indians is ROW; a chief (according to George
Alexander Stevens) possessed of a great fund of kn -- owledge; but having a
skull of an uncommon thickness, and the futures of the cranium being closely
compacted, he never has never been able to display any rational faculties,
except when he invented the new method of making Tea.

But, oh! for words to grace the character of the most traitorous of men! -- a
modern Bravo. Did not the name of rebel stain the soldier, I could have
afforded him a more brilliant title, and have called him a General. His name is
L --. Oh! beware my friends of his follies! He mounted to almost the height of
preferment but mazed with ambition, he fell from the precipice, burst him (...)
asunder, and exposing his pride, proved (...)

"Pride still is aiming at the blessed abodes,
"Men would be angels, angels would be gods;
"Aspiring to be gods, if angels fell,
"Aspiring to be angels, men REBEL.
The Fifth of these chiefs is now no more. His name was M -- x. He had a strong
aversion to all order, civil or ecclesiastic; he swore the K -- was a tyrant,
the Q -- a --, the Prince a bastard, the bishops, papists, and the houses of
lords and commons, a den of thieves. Through the strength of his own villainny,
and the laudanum of Doctor W -- N, he quitted this planet, and went to a
secondary one in search of LIBERTY.

The Sixth of these worthies is named W -- RR -- N; a man, who by his great
skill in chemistry, could turn water into milk, and sell it for six coppers the
quart. He was bound apprentice to an apothecary, and turned out a Quack, but
thinking this profession too grovelling for so sublime a genius, he has lately
changed it for that of Orator, and is already so great a proficient in the
sough, or true puritanic whine, and his notes are so remarkably flat and
productive of horror, that when he dismisses his hearers, you would swear they
were just come out of the cave of Triphonius. -- There Is an Orator for you!

Oh! that some Son of Liberty would go to hell, and fetch a spark from the
altar of enthusiasm, to kindle in me the reforming and of W -- n! -- then might
I speak his language.

The Seventh of these pillars of the state is Q -- CY, and though I have placed
him only as the seventh sachem, yet it has been asserted that he is worthy of a
higher rank; having lately composed a Treatise, in which he absolved all his
Majesty's subjects from their allegiance; and was one of the first inventors of
mobbing, tarring and feathering, and sundry other modes tending to the
overthrow of all societies, civil and moral.

The Eighth of these heroes is Y -- G, whose character cannot be drawn by any
pen with the consistency that becomes a true limner. Could we raise up the
spirit of one of the murderers of St Stephen, to tell us what a figure Paul
cut, when he breathed out threatening and slaughter against his SAVIOR, then
might we form an idea of Dr Y -- G: but since that is impossible, I can only
refer you to -- his own countenance, wherein you may read his true and genuine
disposition. Suffice it to say, this man stands accused of rebellion, not only
against his Sovereign, but against HIS GOD; -- he makes a mock at the merits of
his Redeemer, and uses his God only to swear by.

Oh! my friends and fellow subjects! what infatuation must possess the deluded
fools who depend on such a race of rascals for their leaders!

I shall pass over many others who are too insignificant to become the subject
of my pen; --

And now to end the infernal group here,
Who is so fit as Doctor C --?
"When gospel trumpeter surrounded
"With long-ear'd rout to battle sounded,
"And pulpit, drum ecclesiastic,
"Was beat with fist instead of a stick;
He, prostituting his religion,
Turns a dispenser of sedition;
And to the greedy, gaping million,
For holy writ, deals out rebellion;
His sacred function quite forsaking,
Smells profit in oration making;
And when with pangs and throws he is dropped it,
Gets foolish, simple John t'adopt it:
By me advised, never mind the nation,
But work at home a reformation;
Leave, against kings and rulers railing,
Give curtain lectures against stealing.
Instead of making an Oration,
Make sermons against fornication;
And with uplifted voice and hand,
Strongly enforce the seventh command.
Of your black crimes against George and heaven
Repent; you may be yet forgiven.
Reform the Rebel, Thief, and W --,
And mercy suppliantly implore;
Then entertain a ray of hope,
T'escape d -- mn -- n and a Rope.
The Boston Whig-maker.
YE freemen of Boston attend to my story,
In spite of lord North or of any such Tory,
He may shuffle or cut, he may strut or look big.
(...) in spite of his doctrines I will be a Whig,
Derry down, etc.
A Whig my dear friends is a notable thing.
(...) on justice, and rail at the king;
We can laugh at religion, nor never care a fig
For law or for gospel, this is a true Whig.
Jack Wilkes the whig-maker first set up the trade,
And many a whig in his time he has made;
But whigs now in London being quite out of fashion,
He thought it most prudent to drop the profession.
But I, his Successor, in Boston well known,
I make all the whigs both in country and town;
Pray send your heads to me, and little or big,
I Have blocks of all (...), I Will make you a whig.
Though many large whigs on the Fort-hill appears,
There are none to be seen amongst the Welsh fuzileers;
Though the folks on the Common affect to look big,
Yet among the whole number there is not one whig.
Though to you, my good friends, it may seem uncommon,
Yet I Will make a whig that shall fit any woman,
For I Have known many ladies who have bottoms as full
As ever yet sat upon any Numskull.
FINIS.

