THE CRISIS. NUMBER XVII.
CASCA's Epistle to Lord Mansfield.
Uni aequres Virtuti atque ejus amicis
To Virtue only just and Virtue's Friends.

CAN you, my Lord, who serve despotic ends,
Can you be "just to virtue and her friends?"
To wanton murderers when did she afford
Protection yet, or alter a record?
Say, does your callous soul receive no shock,
When, conscious, in the hall, you view the clock?
Or can you fill profidious Scroges's place,
Without a pressage of your own disgrace?
Yes -- Yes, to England's shame you're out of reach,
And laugh at him who threatens to impeach.
If Burke should rise, the farce no further goes;
To one just aye, North brings ten impious no's.
In youth, before dissembling was your trade,
To James libations on your knees you made:
Not loyalty, but fear has sheathed your sting;
No Murray can be faithful to his King.
From the black North in famished clans you swarm,
And thawing, feel how Albion's sun can warm;
Your clime you change, your sentiments retain;
In Scotchmen treason is an innate stain;
Like itch and scurvy in their blood it reigns;
He who would cure it must exhaust their veins.
Once against rebels, 'twas your place to plead,
Your mouth condemned, your soul approved the deed.
Whilst round your heart sad disappointment hung,
Dissimulation oil'd your treacherous tongue.
A Murray then (your brother too) was found
In arms, in secret trust, in duty bound,
And principle (like yours) to aid a claim,
Which you affected with a blush to name;
A blush ill-acted; -- to thy ghostly pale,
(Index of guilt) soft nature lends no veil.
No -- we my lord disdains to serve ends;
She Is "only just to virtue and her friends."
On them she smiles, on Chatham's cheek she glows,
When injur's children are assailed like foes;
When famine's called to aid the coward plan,
And North compleats what Bute and you began.
Perish your names! your Thane in fear is fled,
With every curse but Scotland's on his head:
In shade, but not (alas!) in death enshrined,
Whilst you, his faithful proxy speaks his mind;
And (to weak George from soothing flattery dear)
Pour your Laird's poison in the royal ear.
Why do your treacherous actions shun the light?
Why do back-stairs feel Mansfield's steps at night?
To George your councils and yourself convey,
Fraught with infection, in the face of day.
Let not the royal closet's whisper screen,
Your glorious works; but let your light be seen.
Conduct, avow, enforce your patriot plans,
Nor trust their merits to subaltern clans.
Though Bure absconds, yet aid your joint design,
Yourself, my Lord; and help to spring the mine.
Whilst Grafton, Sandwich, Denbig, North stand forth,
And to astonished ears proclaim their worth;
Whilst, with rank nonsense, Suffolk, Pomfret, dare,
Without a blush, to make Plebeians stare;
Why, when your sov'reign's pleased by law to kill,
Step not you forth to gild the desperate pill?
It Is decent, sure, so pension'd, placed and bribed,
To recommend the dose you have prescribed,
But fear, my lord, mean, abject fear, still gives
A check -- in you a lurking traitor lives;
The worst of traitors -- you have sense to see
Fair Freedom's charms, yet blast the soul that is free.
Early and late, incessant in your pains,
For brave America you forge vile chains.
Yet meanly, in your house or court take root,
When you should speak as deputy to Bute.
He still lies hid; perhaps at Clapham lurks,
Whilst you and Apsley carry on the works.
To grant a nation's claim each house is loath,
But you have representatives in both.
Strangely absurd! -- yet this we know and see;
This truth subdued your modest member Leigh.
The man had sense, and felt his own disgrace,
How well an Aston would supply his place!
So represented, with such leaders too,
(North -- George -- obsequious to your Lordship's Cue.)
This war against ourselves will soon be won,
Odious America be soon undone.
Remonstrances are vain, Bute will not relax,
But sternly bids North lay another tax.
The tax of death, by bayonet and ball;
But famine is the hardest tax of all.
From Scotland, could that thought derive its source?
Where is sharp famine felt with greater force?
In all the horrors there the fiend's arrayed;
There her shrunk hand for ever chills the blade.
There with lank sides, the meagre cattle moan;
Their keeper asks for bread and gets a stone.
From this distress yourself and Bute soon fled,
Yet pour it is plagues upon a nation's head.
By vilest means, my Lord, you seek vile ends;
Thus are you "just to virtue and her friends."
In all your strokes a master's hand appears:
Stand forth, claim all your praise, and banish fears.
If conscience dictates every ill you do,
Frankly expose the knave you hide, to view.
Plebeians scorn -- to gain your King'-applause,
Like base De Burgo, fawn and rest the laws.
Despise what faithful history shall say;
Full in your Zenith now, enjoy your day;
Though in times annals your foul name should rust,
Whilst Fame to Hoit's erects a lasting bust.
He had no Smythe; no bias he had shown,
But dragged assassins from behind the throne.
Guardian of England's laws he gave 'em sway,
And held them forth for sovereign's to obey.
Against the people's rights he took no part,
But judged, and counseled with an honest heart.
Prerogative (unpension'd and unbrib'd)
He kept within the bounds that law prescribed,
By freedom's side he firmly took his stand,
Yet held the balance with an equal hand.
Of that fair plant he cherished every shoot,
And, with a parent's fondness nursed the root.
His name, whilst law endures, shall live in praise;
Asby and White, no Mansfield can erase.
But you, my Lord, to infamy still true,
Indulge your King's caprice in all you do.
If citizens their humble plaints express,
You bid him spurn the May'r, and his address.
With pleasantry your sov'reign's heat assuage,
And arm him for the horned cattle's rage.
Instruct him how to speak, to sneer and frown,
To try if tricks will bear a city down:
To be astonished that one voice should sue
To turn a tyrant from his bloody-view.
Death is the word -- let loose the dogs of prey;
Burgoyne's the man, my lord; increase his pay.
Your heart's well known; your voice attention draws
Arise and vindicate your master's cause.
In art supreme, in perfidy not weak,
Show bashful Lordlings what it is to speak.
Let not such fools as Suffolk, when they rise,
Without a word of English, snatch the prize.
Shall Peers, whose infamy is scarce half-blown,
Vaunt Mansfield's schemes, as if they were his own;
In language, which no grammar ever equipped,
Language, for which a schoolboy would be whipped?
No. -- Be yourself, my Lord, and unconfined,
Assert your right of ruining mankind.
Break forth in all your Ciceronian blaze,
And let your front no more than heart amaze.
Equal in private and in public shine,
And dare to be another Cataline.
Should galling Junius make a new attack,
(Whose lashes still are flagrant on your back,)
The libeller by some state blood-hound trace,
And let him feel the terrors of your place.
Grafton in friendship some sure snare will lay,
As friend, and spy, he will join him and betray.
If precedent injustice can anoint,
John Wilkes's case; will be a case in point.
Then, make the senate ring; like Pomfret rave;
And scorn by pension'd proxies to enslave.
"Pomfret! -- there is weight in what such heads advise;
"Madmen in council are to me a prize.
"Since Smith is dead, Pomfret may be endured:
"We loose a vote, should the poor man be cured.
"Besides, he speaks -- in sentiments unites,
"He sometimes raves and stares, but never bites."
"Granted, my Lord" -- but yet (unknown to yield,
As your troops are) why don't you take the field
In person? Clear suspicions, doubts dispell:
No Lord contrives, abetts, or speaks so well.
Does virtuous Camden talk your spirit down,
Or Chatham awe you with a Roman frown?
When patriot Rockingham, or Richmond rise,
Does Freedom's ray annoy your dazzled eyes?
Does Shelburne's boldness shake your dastard soul?
Or Temple's perseverance want control?
Can you, with forces so well paid, and fed,
Despond, unless your thane is at your head?
Can you, his staunch lieutenant colonel, fail
In senate, as in council, to prevail?
Or is your courage checked in it is career,
Because you have lost five thousand pounds a year?
Long in commission you had kept the seals;
Three Judges moving on your Lordship's wheels:
Their mouths pronounced, but yours prescribed the law;
Thus have we kings and judges too, of straw.
If ten such learned triumvirates as that,
With all their law will scarce make half a Pratt;
Who can behold (and not with rage be stirred)
A Praetor sliver'd from the weakest third?
This thought of yours my lord, your power ensures,
The weaker the man is, the more he is yours.
In council, court, and parliament we see
Your faithful shadow moves as you decree;
Witness the cause of Thickness against Leigh.
This project shows your Machiavelian skill,
You're speaker thus (and more than speaker) still.
Profoundly politic in all you do,
Thus are you chancellor and speaker too.
Yet, when you can foresee an hard fought day,
Like Falstaff, from your post you sneak away.
The risque your rag-o-muffin bands may share:
You (like your thane) make self your dearest care.
Boldly you counsel underneath the rose;
But fly the conflict when the armies close.
A war of reason gives your lordship pain:
Virtue alone such conflicts can sustain.
Too free, too pure, to serve oppression's end,
She cannot mistake a Mansfield for a friend.
Some few hard fronts can stand the shock of steel,
But none the thunder of the public weal.
Even Jove himself, great Jove, cannot bear reproach.
Nor pass without a pannic in his coach,
When to North's smuggled parliament he rides,
The God betraying what the Stoic hides.
Fain would he smile -- shrill hoots his muscles check,
Then how he wishes England had one neck!
At every hiss he feels a conscious start,
And groans re-echo'd pierce his tyrant-heart;
A heart, in infancy too soon ensur'd:
To slight those ills his people have endured;
Hardened by female insolence and pride;
To Bute entrusted as it is only guide,
A guide to what? not to the people's love,
(The safest ground on which a King can move)
Nor to the path of honor, truth, or fame,
In which our Edwards won a glorious name;
Not, with discernment, to enforce the laws,
Or yield to subjects in a righteous cause;
To aid the just, to sooth the giddy throng,
And wisely to distinguish right from wrong;
To temper justice with an even hand,
And drive corruption from a sinking land;
But trained (alas!) to act the meanest part,
To speak a language foreign to his heart.
To promise more than Britons ever heard,
Trusting to have his sacred lies revered;
To set his honor and his soul to sale,
As water false, as courtly sunshine frail;
In theory well schooled; in practice taught
To be the sad reverse of what he ought.
Honor and faith in falshood's stream he laves,
And toils to make a freeborn people slaves.
Not so our great Deliverer sought renown,
He knew from whom, and why he had the crown.
But now, the globe and scepter's held for show,
Bute, says that craft is all a king should know;
Quotes bright examples from each Stuart's reign;
To such a scholar not one hint's in vain.
A just petition's answered with a sneer;
And to secure his point he drops a tear.
Unhappy York! too fickle to resist!
Alas! thy death increased the tyrants list!
Not to be won by all that sense could try,
You fell by water from the weakest eye!
If hypocrites and murd'rers, who shall dare
To excuse that guilt, which barefaced thanks declare
When harmless lives were lost, and Rome was burned,
Nero, in form his grateful thanks returned,
Happy to have a cool, obedient Scot
Perform his bloody orders to a jot;
Happy to find two more so bravely warmed,
So hot for blood, to stab one youth unarmed.
O! when in British annals shall this blot,
Of sanguinary power be forgot!
Never whilst brave America can feel
The sense of wrongs, or the redress of steel:
Never whilst liberty and right divine,
Mark the vile Stuart from the Brunswick line
Behold! what Bute's long-labour'd culture brings,
A King of patches! and a shame to Kings!
A baby! who is honored till he thinks
That water sacred, which a monarch drinks.
Taught that the height of piety's to kneel,
He says his prayers, and bids the vulgar feel.
Let meaner souls relent, forgive, forget;
Such weakness never disgraced a Stuart yet.
No -- let the slave that thwarts us be undone,
Long live the mother in the tyrant son!
Thus lectures Bute, -- and this advice embraced;
All sense of virtue in the bud's effaced,
How should kings see in infancy made blind?
Whose manhood's watched, whose knowledge is confined?
To whom no page in history's revealed,
But were they find the subject's cause appealed
To heaven? -- this tame redress Carte's volumes teach
These George may read -- these Bute and Mansfield preach.
True to his trust, the Thane his task begun,
He pleased the mother, and he dup'd the son.
Taught him to fly above the legal sphere,
And by sad Charles's star his course to steer;
To bear no counsel, no sage hint, no guide,
But think all subjects born for kings to ride;
By famine brave resistance to entomb,
And (with Macbeth) to "leap the life to come,"
To wait no tide, attend no rising gale,
But rashly spread prerogative's full sail;
To heed no subject in his bold careers,
But passive pensioners and rotten peers.
To spare no life, if poignant fatyr strikes;
To plan the death of him he most dislikes;
Waiting impatient for the setting sun,
To hear good news from Martin and from Dun.
To give in jest a coronation pledge,
Nor think an oath more sacred than a wedge.
Alas! that offering should suggest a thought,
That charity by former kings was wrought;
That, from the royal cradle to the grave,
The truest piety's to guard and save.
Such acts as these to crown a luster lend;
This, Mansfield, this is being "Virtue's friend."
But, when destruction is a king's command,
And death gains passports from the royal hand;
When carnage is the word -- when generous Gage,
Dreads that his name should blot the historic page,
And, with a tenderness his Prince will blame,
Shrink from rank murder and eternal shame;
When conscience and remorse from court is flown,
Nor dare solicit a despotic throne;
All must be slaves till spirit shall return,
To fire those bosoms where it used to burn;
'Till we consider names far less than things,
Nor care from what sound stem we take our Kings,
Till sceptered pride is taught to bless the hand
That calls her to protect a generous land;
Is taught that British monarchs owe their state,
To those who can depose them or create;
Provoked, insult'd, spurned, can spare, or try;
Or throw with scorn their royal creature by.
Bute! Mansfield! these are doctrines which appear,
Horrid and harsh to your distempered ear;
But there will come a time when you shall rue
That ever you counseled with a heart untrue:
When from those counsels deadly fueds shall rise
To force a tear unfeigned from George's eyes.
Truth even on Kings in that sad hour attends:
Charles found, at last, his people were his friends;
To notions, false as friends, he bid adieu;
These had deceived; the block spoke plain but true.
Never may a Brunswick taste such bitter fruit,
But leave the axe to Mansfield, North, and Bute.
These lines inspired by Churchill's laureled shade,
I write, unknown, unpatronized, unpaid:
Proud of my honest muse, by chance has cropp'd
One slow'r from that fair wreath which Churchill dropped.
Let Johnson toil for hire, with falsehoods please;
(North's fiat feeds, and dubbs him with degrees.)
His be the shame, the generous transport mine,
To goad a villain's heart at every line.
Disdaining pidlers, who for flowrets roam,
Like Brutus rough, I Will plant the dagger home.
Tyrants and traitors Casca never forgives:
Tremble fuch monsters whilst that Casca lives.
The blast he blows their guilty souls shall shock,
And drive them to perdition and the block.
LONDON: Printed and published for the Author, by T. W. SHAW, in Fleet Street.
NEW YORK: Reprinted by John Anderson, at Beekman's Slip.


