THE CRISIS. NUMBER XXVII.
TO THE KING.
Each British Ghost by thee deprived of Breath,
Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy Death.
POPE's Homer.
REFORM thy conduct, Monarch, or attend,
The doom denounced, by virtue's constant friend,
Heavens awful God, his mandate it is I bear,
And call on George's callous soul to hear.
Reform thy conduct, or expect that Heaven,
By whom thy delegated power is given,
Will rouse in wrath, and hurl thee from the throne,
Unworthy Prince, whom Britons blush to own.
See civil rage torment the bleeding land,
Raised and supported by a Monarch's hand;
Permit me Prince, t'unfold the dreadful scene,
And actions that disgrace the name of men,
See British legions reeking from the sword
Of worthless Britons, and their misled Lord,
The orphan'd son, the helpless mother see,
Plunged in the depths of awful misery.
Youth and hoary age lie whelt'ring on the plains,
And desolation and destruction reigns:
Such scenes as these must sure your soul appall,
Thou art the occasion, thou the cause of all;
What ever thy cursed minions can design,
Thou giv'st assent, and the whole guilt is thine;
See Britain wasted by her father's sword,
And France and every foreign aid implored;
Suppose they should be conquered, what remains,
What can be had from captives and from chains;
What large revenues can your coffers boast,
From ruined cities, and a wasted coast,
From nations slaughtered, and from seas of blood,
What gain to make the mighty mischief good.
Remember Prince on what precarious ties,
The uncertain safety of a tyrant lies;
What poor defense will guards and armies yield,
When long insulted subjects take the field;
What safety then can parasites bestow,
Or how elude the long deserved blow;
When justice rises and demands the blood
Of haughty tyrants, and their fawning crowd;
Ah, blush, deluded Prince, with comcious shame
That George should merit that detested name.
Search British annals, and let them declare,
Those truths too harsh to wound the royal ear;
See brave Fitzwalter lead the Barons on,
And force the unwilling deed from coward John;
With iron sway the blustering dastard rules,
The constant dupe of swarming knaves and fools.
"The weakest Athiest wretch all Heaven defies,
Who shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies."
So shrunk the tyrant, when Fitzwalter led,
His warlike cohorts on to Runny Mead,
Then ancient Windsor's lofty towr's beheld,
The blazing standards waving over the field,
The shining jav'lins glittering from afar,
The moony shields and all the pomp of war;
Sheathed in bright steel then Britains saviors stood,
Undaunted, firm, and resolutely good;
Forth in the midst the frowning tyrant came,
And viewed with fear and rage each godlike name.
The coward shrunk at Britain's brave array,
And Magna Charta crowned the glorious day.
Search further yet how Edward's minions fell,
That galling truth, to Bute and Mansfield tell.
May every curse, vindictive heaven can pour,
Descend on them, in one destructive shower,
Perish their names O! let the traitors bleed;
Justice demands, the realm approves the deed.
Proceed and be by faithful history taught,
How Essex labored, and great Cromwell fought;
When haughty Charles disgraced the British throne,
And trod our freedom and religion down.
That dreadful Crisis big with loud alarms,
Called every Briton to assert in arms
The dear bought rights, the violated cause,
Of their dear country and its sacred laws;
They came obedient to the glorious call,
One generous spirit animated all:
Such generous souls may Britain yet afford,
And own again a Cromwell's saving sword;
An Hampden yet, an Essex yet may rise,
And tyrants yet may fall a sacrifice.
Illustrious shades the faithful muse shall crown,
Your glorious names, with honor and renown,
Long as this world with all its splendour stands,
Stupendeous frame, raised by immortal hands.
Long as the annals of eternal fame,
Record each hero's and each patriot's name,
Long as a Briton lives to assert the cause,
Of heaven, of freedom, and the British laws;
So long shall Cromwell's, Hampden's name remain
And times erasing vengeance prove in vain.
Inspire your children, O ye patriot band,
To rush on death, and save a sinking land;
You who could haughty tyranny repel,
Protect the cause, in which you nobly fell,
That glorious cause, which heaven eternal owns,
And fires to vengeance your too tardy sons:
They rise at length, to assert the freedom given,
TO assert the cause of liberty and heaven;
Tremble thou tyrant at the awful day,
When injured Britons give their vengeance way;
Tremble ye minions who your Prince misled,
Uncommon wrath remains for you to dread,
The traitors who your sovereign's heart have steel*
And cur'st him with a soul that cannot yield,
Eternal vengeance must your crimes pursue,
Justice demands you, as the public due.
Unseeling man, if ever thy soul can know,
Steeled as it is, the touch of human woe;
If generous pity can a thought impart,
To shake the horrid purpose of your heart,
If pity harbors in that iron breast,
Call back your cutthroats, give your people rest;
Withdraw your fleets, send no more armies over,
But bid the martial thunders cease to roar.
Do this, and Britain may again forgive,
Again consent to let a tyrant live.
But dare not trifle with a moment given,
Presumptous Prince, nor spurn with awful heaven,
Think not that Britons passive will remain,
Hug the vile yoke, and smile upon the chain;
They have not learnt the faith which cowards own,
"The enormous faith of many made for one,"
Far nobler precepts fire the British breast,
Then yielding freedom for inglorious rest;
Far nobler ends their freeborn spirits own,
Then basely crouching to a tyrants throne;
Such base concessions stained not Britain's fame,
When Charles's death immortalized their name*
Or guilty James his injured subjects fled,
Lay hid in France and trembled for his head;
Remember this, O monarch, nor presume,
On tired out faith and lenity to come.
The sword is drawn and hellish discord roars,
Let loose by Mansfield on North Am'rick's shores,
The traitorous Thane to enslave a nation joins,
And blustering North avows their cur'st designs;
George too consents and signs the horrid deed,
By which innumber'd innocents must bleed.
With tenfold rage, inspire, O muse, the strain,
To paint the horrors of this guilty reign;
Young Allen dies in his paternal field,
And murdered laws, audacious murderers shield,
The sovereign too to enlarge the mighty guilt,
Thanks his dear Scotsmen for the blood they have spilt
Petitions spurned at, with a sulky frown,
The Monarch drives his subjects from the throne,
Astonished that those subjects dare to sue,
For fellow subjects, rebels in his view,
Tells them his firm, his steady soul retains
Its iron purpose, and his heart remains
Inflexible, determined to enslave,
And murder thousands he had sworn to save.
Remember Prince, the throne to George was given,
TO asser, the cause of Liberty and Heaven,
But when he ceases Freedom to maintain,
And dares attempt, unawed by laws to reign,
When Heavens great cause is spurned at and forgot,
And horrid popish superstition taught,
The cause that gave the scepter then demands,
The same again from his unworthy hands,
Resign, proud man, with shame resign the throne,
And let contrition for your faults atone,
Or once again the call of Heaven attend,
And be your people's, not your minions friend,
Do this, and Britain may again forgive,
And let a tyrant thus repenting live.
Your hopes of conquest on North Am'rics coast,
Are blasted, and your expectations lost,
Your armies routed, and your Generals driven
Back to their fleets, the sport of angry Heaven;
On the night the three Generals, Burgoyne, Clinton, and How, embarked for
America, one of the most dreadful storms of thunder and lightning, took place,
that has shaken the British channel in the memory of man.
When they embarked what storms convulsed the pole,
What lightenings flashed, what awful thunders roll;
It Is God against you in his wrath declares,
These are his omens, and his thunder theirs,
Say can your madness stand the dire alarms,
Say can you meet Omnipotence in arms.
But hark, they call you from the realms of dead,
The dauntless souls that for their country bled,
At Concord See the dreadful engagement at that place on the 19th of April,
slaughtered, lay the glorious train,
That met the British Tyrant with disdain,
They call for vengeance from the shades below,
And point at you the author of their woe.
My soul's on fire, distinctions are forgot,
I Will speak to tyrants as a Briton ought.
By thee our plains lie steeped in human blood,
By thee our rivers pour a purple flood,
By thee the British glories are no more,
And vast destruction whelmed the Atlantic shore;
By thee our cities dread the dire alarms,
And horrid slaughters of fraternal arms,
Thy traitorous ministers the deed design,
Thou giv'st assent, and the whole guilt is thine
Wave after wave, the mighty mischiefs flow,
Thick and more thick, the threatening dangers grow;
Impartial ages yet to come will read,
With secret horror each infernal deed;
Rend thee, like Stuart, from the rolls of fame,
And unborn millions curse a G -- e's name.
CATO.

LONDON: Printed and published for the Author, by T. W. SHAW, in Fleet Street.

NEW YORK: Reprinted by John Anderson, at Beekman's Slip.


