THE CRISIS. NUMBER XX.
To the KING.
SIR,
LIKE that fell monster, and infernal tyrant, Charles the first, you are
determined to deluge the land with innocent blood. Fired with rage at the more
than savage barbarity of your mercenary troops, your cursed instruments of
slaughter in America, I can no longer keep within the bounds of decency; the
breast of every true Englishman must be filled with indignation, and that
respect which is due to a king, will be lost in a noble zeal for the
preservation of our country and fellow subjects.

Every man must execrate a tyrant, who can without remorse to satiate his
revenge, and gratify his lust of power destroy millions of his subjects.

The Americans, Sir, are fighting for liberty, the birthright of every man,
they are fighting for the laws and the sacred constitution of their country,
which you are, to your eternal disgrace and infamy, endeavoring to destroy:
Their cause is a just, it is the cause of heaven, and it never will be in your
power, assisted by ten thousand legion of tyrants besides, to fix your bloody
standard of tyranny in America. England must take a part in this bloody, this
unnatural civil war, brought on through your baseness and ingratitude, and the
treachery, corruption, and villainy of your minions; unless she does this, she
is lost forever, your unrelenting cruelty, and desire of being absolute, will
never let you stop, and if once the Americans can be reduced to slavery, we
shall be no longer free; you will not, you cannot rest, till you have brought
the whole empire into the same state of vassalage and bondage: But I hope for
the honor and valor of my countrymen, all your infamous designs will be
frustrated, and that by a noble exertion, in defense of their persecuted
brethren in America, they will soon convince you, how difficult, unsafe, and
dangerous it is to attempt to enslave a brave and free people, and to establish
your throne in iniquity and blood.

I hope fired with the noble spirit of their ancestors, they will speedily
carry to the throne, something more than petitions or remonstrances; I trust
they will tell you in manly terms, in terms, worthy of Britons; in terms that
may shake your tyrant soul that they are determined to be free, that you shall
withdraw your troops from America; that your ministers shall be delivered up to
justice, as some atonement for the blood that has been inhumanely shed in
England and America; that they will have all their rights confirmed to them;
that they will be governed by the laws of the land, and not by the arbitrary
will of you or your minions; that without these just and necessary requisitions
are complied with, they are determined to appeal to heaven, and oblige you, as
their forefathers have other princely tyrants to govern according to law and
the solemn oath you take at your coronation.

Englishmen, Sir, will soon be roused by the inhuman slaughter of their
brethren and fellow subjects in America, from a state of lethargy and
supineness; it will not be long in the power of your infernal tribe of placemen
and pensioners, your ministers and minions, by all the arts of corruption and
debauchery to keep down the glorious spirit of liberty; they will not, they
cannot, if there is any virtue in the nation, longer remain idle inactive
spectators of such cruel and bloody measures, in which they are so nearly, so
deeply interested; measures in which must end in the destruction of liberty and
the constitution, the boast and glory of this, and the envy of every other
nation.

Your whole reign has been one continued series of tyranny, oppression,
cruelty, and injustice; the whole business of your ministers has been to deny
right to the people, to sap the constitution, to establish arbitrary power upon
the ruins of public liberty in every part of the British dominions; to feed
your avarice, to gratify your ambition, and satiate your revenge against
individuals.

A king, weak, obstinate, perverse, and cruel, deaf to the calls of humanity,
and regardless of an oppressed, injured, and loyal people, disgraces the
dignity of human nature; and is so far from possessing any of those attributes
which characterise majesty, that he is only a monster in human shape like the
devil, invested with power, not for the preservation, but the destruction of
mankind.

The breath of a tyrant blasts and poisons every thing, changes blessings, and
plenty into curses and misery, great cities and flourishing kingdoms, into
deserts and gloomy solitudes, and their rich citizens into beggars and
vagabonds. I could name cities, which while they governed themselves, could
maintain armies, and now enslaved, can scarce maintain the poor proud rascals
who govern them. It is certain, that whatever country or place is subdued by a
prince, who governs by his will, is ruined by his government.

You, Sir, like most other princes, have been long introducing the Turkish
government into Europe, and have succeeded so well, that I would rather live
under the Turk, than under the tyranny of George the third. You practice the
inhuman cruelties and oppressions of the Turks, and want the tolerating spirit
of the Turk, and if you are not soon checked through the native bravery of
Englishmen, the whole polity of savage Turkey, will be established by you in
all its parts and barbarity; as if the depopulation which is already so quick,
and taking such dreadful strides, were still too slow.

Tyrants are the common destroyers of mankind; they are for ever inventing new
machines of cruelty, and will, till the destruction of mankind is completed.
They seem to think they shall have enemies as long as one man remains, who
cannot be made a slave. But it is astonishing at first view, that Englishmen
should have so long borne your tyranny, oppressions, and unrelenting slaughter
of their fellow subjects: But, alas! who knows not the force of corruption,
delusion, and standing armies.

Oh liberty! Oh servitude! how detestable are the different sounds! Liberty is
salvation in politics, as slavery is reprobation; neither is there any other
distinction but that of saint and devil, between the chamption of the one and
of the other.

No one can sufficiently show the glorious advantages of liberty, nor set off
the dreadful mischiess of raging, relentless, consuming tyranny. -- A task to
which no human mind is equal; for neither the sublimest wits of antiquity, nor
the brightest genius's of late or modern times, assisted with all the powers of
rhetoric, and all the stimulations of poetic fire, with the warmest and boldest
figures in language, ever did, ever could, or ever can, describe and heighten
sufficiently, the beauty of the one, or the deformity of the other:, Language
fails in it, and words are too weak.

Those who do not groan under the yoke of heavy and pointed vassalage, cannot
possibly have images equal to a calamity which they do not feel; and those
which feel it, are stupefied by it, and their minds depressed; nor can they
have conceptions large, bright, and comprehensive enough, to be fully sensible
of their own wretched condition; much less can they paint it in proper color
to others. The people of England, Sir, who enjoy the precious, lovely, and
invaluable blessing of liberty, know that nothing can be paid too dear to
purchase and preserve it. Without it the world is a wilderness, and life is a
miserable burden: Death is a tribute we all owe to nature, and must pay; and
it is infinitely preferable, in any shape to an ignominious life: Nor can we
restore our being back again into the hands of our great creator, with more
glory to him, more honor to ourselves, or more advantage to mankind, than in
defense of all that is valuable, religious, and praise worthy upon earth.

How execrable then, and infamous are the wretches, who for a few precarious
momentary, and perhaps imaginary advantages, would rob their country for ever
of every thing that can render life desirable; and for a little tinsel
pageantry and survile homage, unworthy of honest men, and hated by wise men,
would involve millions of their fellow creatures in lasting misery, bondage,
and woe; such unnatural royal parricides, unworthy of the human shape and name,
would fill up the measure of their barbarity by entailing, poverty, chains, and
sorrow upon their own posterity: And, Sir, you ought to remember such tyrants
have unpitied, suffered in their own persons, the sad effects of those cruel
councils and schemes, which they intended for the ruin of all but themselves
and their minions; and justly fallen into that pit they had traitorously dug
for others.

He that can levy war with all mankind,
Can cut his subjects throats, and sell his friend;
Ravish the chaste, the sanctified profane,
Can pull down right, and wrong by force maintain,
Mortgage his faith, and trample on his word,
And hew his crown out by his lawless sword,
Like Nero suck the blood that gave him life,
And search engend'ring nature with his knife:
Like Cortez, can a hundred millions stay,
Dream death by night, and finish it by day:
Like pious Peter, cant of heaven's commands,
Pray with his lips, and murder with his hands,
Can sleep with blood, and never start at crime,
And make his mischiefs like his power supreme,
Buy justice, sell oppression, bribe the law,
Exalt the rogue, and keep the just in awe;
Embrace the guilty, innocents condemn,
And execute without pretense of crime.
Can sacrifice whole nations to his lust,
With pleasure kill, and think that pleasure just:
Can burn and sing, dance to the waving flame,
And in his country's ashes raise his fame;
Insult the wretched, trample on the poor,
And mock the miseries mankind endure;
Can ravage countries, property devour,
And trample law beneath the feet of power.
Scorn the restraint of oaths, and promised right,
And ravel compacts in the people's sight;
With indignation scorn to reign by rules,
That King's a tyrant, and the people fools.
[To be continued.]

