General GAGE's CONFESSION, Being the SUBSTANCE of His Excellency's last
CONFERENCE, With his Ghostly Father, Friar FRANCIS.

Explebo nemerum, reddarque tenebris. VIRG. By the Author of the Voyage to
BOSTON. A POEM, etc.

Printed in the Year, 1775.

General GAGE's Confession, etc.
COMPASSION -- it is a stranger to my heart,
Or if it comes -- un welcome guest depart, --
Boston farewell, thy final doom is passed,
North hears my prayers, and I Am recalled at last;
Sailor on high thy canvas wings display,
Howl ye West winds and hurry me away;
Rise boisterous clouds and bellowing from on high,
Whisk me along, ye tyrants of the sky --
Quick, let me leave these friendless shores that shed,
Ten thousand curses on my hated head --
But why so swift, why ask I gales so strong,
Since conscience, cruel conscience goes along,
Must conscience rack my bosom over the deep?
I live in hell while she forbears to sleep;
Come father Francis, be my heart displayed,
My burdened conscience asks thy pious aid;
Come, if confession can discharge my sin,
I will confess till hell itself shall grin,
And own the world has found in me again,
A second Nero, nay another Cain.
FRIAR.
Why swells thy breast with such distressing woe?
Your honor surely has the sense to know,
Your sins are veneal -- trust me when I say,
Your deepest sins may all be purged away --
But if misfortunes rouse this mighty grief,
Sure friar Francis can afford relief:
I thought e're this that leaders of renown,
Would scorn to bow to giddy fortune's frown,
See yon bright Star (the dewy eve begun)
Walks his gay round and sparkles in the sun;
Faints not, encircled by the ambient blaze,
Though pestring clouds may sometimes blunt its rays
But come, confession makes the conscience light,
Confess, my son, and be absolved this night.
GAGE.
First of the first, I tell it in your ear
(For though we whisper, heaven you know can hear)
This faultless country never deserved my hate,
Just are its pleas; unmerited its fate.
When North ordained me to this thankless place,
My conscience rose and star'd me in the face,
And spite of all I did to quench its flame,
Convinced me I was wrong before I came --
But what alas, can mortal heroes do,
They are but men, as sacred writings show --
Though I refused they urged me yet the more,
Nay, even the king descended to implore,
And often with him in his closet pent,
Was plagued to death to rule this armament,
Who could a monarch's favorite wish deny?
I yielded just for peace -- ay faith did I --
If this be sin, O tell me, reverend sage,
What will alas, become of guilty Gage?
FRIAR.
If this be sin -- it is sin I make no doubt,
But trust me honored sir, I Will help you out,
Even though your arms had raged from town to town,
And mowed like flags these rebel nations down,
And joyful hell returned the murdering din,
And you yourself the master butcher been --
All should be well -- from sins like this, I ween,
A dozen masses shall discharge you clean,
Small pains in purgatory you will endure,
And hell you know is only for the poor,
Pay well the priest and fear no station there,
For heaven must yield to vehemence of prayer.
GAGE.
Heaven grant that this may be my smallest sin,
Alas, good friar, I Am yet deeper in --
Come, round my bed, with friendly groans condole,
To gratify my paunch, I Have wronged my soul;
Arms I may wield and murder by command,
Spread devastation through a guiltless land,
Whole ranks to Hell with howling cannon sweep --
But what had I to do with stealing sheep?
I Have read my orders, conn'd them over with care,
But not a word of stealing sheep is there;
Come, holy friar, can you make a shift,
To help a sinner at so dead a lift?
Or must I onward to perdition go,
With theft and murder to complete my woe?
FRIAR.
Murder -- nay, hold -- your honor is too sad,
Things are not yet I hope become so bad,
Murder, indeed -- you have stole and that I know,
But, sir, believe me, you have not struck a blow,
Some few Americans have bled, it is true,
But 'twas the soldiers killed them, and not you.
GAGE.
Well said, but will this subtle reasoning stand,
Did not the soldiers murder by command,
By my command? -- Friar, they did I swear,
And I must answer for their deeds I fear.
FRIAR.
Let each man answer for his proper deed,
From sins of murder I pronounce you freed,
And this same reasoning will your honor keep,
From imputations of purloining sheep:
Wallace, for this to Rome shall post away
And for this crying sin severely pay,
And though his zeal may think his penance slight,
Hair cloth and (...) shall be his bed at night,
Coarse fare by day -- till his repeated groans
Convince the world he for this sin atones.
GAGE.
Alas, poor Wallace, how I pity thee? --
But let him go -- it is better him than me --
Yes let him harbor in some convent there,
And fleas monastic bite him till he swear --
But friar have you patience for the rest,
Half my transgressions are not yet confessed.
FRIAR.
Not half -- you are a harmless man I Am told --
Pray cut them short -- the supper will be cold.
GAGE.
Some devil regardless of exalted station,
In evil hour assailed me with temptation,
To issue forth a damned proclamation,
What prince, what king, from Beelzebub is free,
He tempted Judas, and has tempted me!
This, this O friar was a deadly flaw,
This for the civil, founded martial law,
This crime will Gage to Lucifer consign,
And purgatory must for this be mine.
Next -- and for this I breathe my deepest sigh,
Ah cruel, flinty, hard remorseless I --
How could I crowd my dungeons dark and low,
With wounded captives of our injured foe,
How could my heart more hard than hardened steel,
Laugh at the pangs that mangled captives feel?
Why sneer'd I at may fellow men distressed,
Why banished pity from this iron breast!
O Friar, could heaven approve my acting so,
Heaven still to mercy swift, to vengeance slow? --
O no -- you say, then cease your soothing chat,
Cowards are cruel, I can instance that --
But hold, why did I, when the fact was done,
Deny it all to gallant WASHINGTON,
Why did I stuff the epistolary page,
With vile invectives, only worthy Gage?
Come friar help -- shall I recant and say,
I writ my letter on a druken day?
How will it sound, if men should chance to tell
A drunken hero can compose so well?
FRIAR.
Your fears are groundless, give me all the blame,
I writ the letter, you but signed your Name,
Nor let the proclamation cloud your mind,
'T was I composed it and you only signed --
I friar Francis -- papist though I be,
You private papists cannot but value me;
Your sins in Lethe shall be swallowed up,
I Will clear you if you please before we sup.
GAGE.
Nay, clear me not -- though I should cross the brine,
And pay my vows in distant Palestine,
Or land in Spain a stranger poor and bare,
and rove on foot a wretched pilgrim there,
And let my eyes in streams perpetual flow,
Where great MESSIAH died so long ago,
And wash his sacred footsteps with my tears,
And pay for masses fifty thousand years,
All would not do -- my monarch I Have obeyed,
And now go home, perhaps to lose my head --
Pride sent me here, pride blasted in the bud,
Which if it can, will build it is throne in blood,
With slaughtered millions glut it tearless eyes,
And make all nature fall that it may rise, --
Come let us embark, your holy whining cease,
Come let us away, I Will hang myself for peace:
So Pontius Pilate for his murdered Lord,
In his own bosom sheathed the deadly sword --
Though he confessed and washed his hands beside,
His heart condemned him, and the monster died.
FINIS.

