A VOYAGE TO BOSTON. A POEM.

In peace there is nothing so becomes a man,
As modest stillness and humility;
But when the blast of war blows in your ears,
Then imitate the action of the Tiger,
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood.
SHAKESPEARE. By the AUTHOR of AMERICAN LIBERTY, a Poem: General Gage's
SOLILOQUY, etc.

PHILADELPHIA: SOLD BY WILLIAM WOODHOUSE, IN FRONT-STREET. M.DCC.LXXV.

ARGUMENT.
INTRODUCTORY reflections. A traveller undertakes a voyage to Boston: arrives
in a river of Massachusetts: has there a sight of the native Genius of
North America, who presents him with a mantle, and acquaints him with its
virtue of rendering the wearer invisible: desires him to visit the town in that
state, and remark the transactions there. Accordingly he arrives at General
Gage's mansion, where are several other ministerial tools sitting in council.
The striking familiarity of Gage's temper and conduct to that of Hernando
Cortez. Some account of Cortez. and his horrid devastations in Mexico, etc. The
traveller enters their junto, and gives an account of the chief members of it,
viz. General Gage. Admiral Greaves, General Burgoyne, Lord Percy* General How,
Capt. Wallace, and a numerous fry of dependents and needy favorites waiting
for posts and estates in America, as soon as they shall have compelled us to
resign our liberties: General Gage's surprise at their several defeats in
New England and questions his leaders thereupon. Lord Percy's answer: Greave's
reply to that nobleman: Gage's raillery upon Percy for his nimble retreat on
April 19 1775. Percy's defense of his conduct on that day* and the reason of
his activity; and desires them to forget Lexington for the present and turn
their eyes to their late loss at Bunker's Hill. General Howe's speech
concerning that action. Burgoyne's harrangue, with his invectives against
Colonel Grant, who "pledged himself for the general cowardice of all America:"
Gage's brief reply; and communicates his intention of purloining cattle from
the islands, and plans that right honorable exploit: but being overcome with
sleep dismisses his counselors: The cutting down the Liberty Tree in Boston,
and untimely end of one of the wretches employed in that sneaking affair:
Distresses of the imprisoned citizens in Boston: Dissection of a Tory: The
traveller leaves Boston, and visits the Provincial Camp; meets the Genius of
America again on the way and resigns the mantle, whereby he again becomes
visible; arrives at the camp: View of the Rifle-men, Virginians, etc. Speech of
an American Soldier; his determined resolution, which is that of all America,
to defend our rights and privileges: Grief that he must fight against our own
nation: Mention of Carleton and Johnson; concludes with a melancholy recital
of our present distractions, and sincere hope of reconciliation with
Great Britain, before a wicked ministry render it too late: Conclusion.

A POEM, etc.
HOW cursed the man whom fate's unhappy doom
Confines, unluckly, to his native home,
How doubly cursed by cross-grained stars is he,
Whom fate ties down, though struggling to be free!
Heaven gave to man this vast extended round,
No climes confine him and no oceans bound;
Heaven gave him forest, mountain* vale and plain,
And bade him vanquish, if he could, the main:
Then miser hoard and heap thy riches still,
View the sun rise above thy well known hill,
Vile as the swine enjoy thy gloomy den,
Sweat in the compass of a squalid pen,
'Till sick of life* on terms with death agree,
And leave thy fortune, not thy heart to me.
So mused the bard who this rough verse indites,
Asserting freedom, and his country's rights:
Nor mused in vain; the fruitful musings brought
To practice what in theory he thought;
And gave desire, a keen desire to roam
A hundred or two hundred leagues from home.
Where should he go? The eastern hills reply,
Come, pensive traveller, with thy tearful eye,
Come, and fair Boston from our summit see,
No city sits so widow-like as she;
Her trading navies spread their sails no more,
Remotest nations cease to seek her shore,
Deep are her weeds -- in darkest sable clad,
O come and view the Queen of all that is sad,
Long are her nights, that yield no cheerful sound,
Like endless nights in tombs below the ground,
Low burns her lamp before the insulting rout;
See, the lamp dies, and every light goes out!
O Britain come, and, if you can, relent
This rage, that better might on Spain be spent.
Touched with the mountain's melancholy prayer
(Perhaps a mountain or Dame Fancy there)
Could I refuse, since mutual grief endears,
To seek New Albion's Lady all in tears?
But doubts perplexing hovered over my mind,
Whether to choose the aid of horse or wind;
That suits the best with bards of place and state,
This must us needy Rhymers compensate,
Since Jove his ancient bounty has denied,
And grants no modern Pegasus to ride.
Dark was the night, the winds tempestuous roared
From western skies, and warned us all aboard;
Spread were the sails, the nimble vessel flies
Over Neptune's bosom and reflected skies;
Nor halt I here to tell you how she roves
Over Tython's chambers and his coral groves.
Let some prose wanderer long-sun journals keep,
I haste me, like the vessel over the deep;
Nor tire you with descriptions of the coast,
New mountains gained or hills in ether lost, --
The muse can only hint at scenes like these,
Not stop to spend her poem in their praise:
Three days we cut the brine with steady prore,
The fourth beheld us on New Albion's shore.
Guard me, ye heavens, shield this defenseless head,
While traveling over these sanguine plains of dead;
Nor only me, may heaven defend us all
From the harsh rigor of King George's ball.
Far in the depth of an aspiring wood,
Where rolled its waves a silver winding flood,
Our weary vessel urged its darksome way,
And safely anchored in a shady bay.
Landing, I left the weather beaten crew,
And pensive roved as home-sick travelers do;
When all at once before my wandering eyes,
The Genius of the river seemed to rise;
Tall and erect, untaught by years to bow,
But not a smile relaxed his clouded brow:
His swarthy features vengeful deeds forebode,
Terror marched on before him as he trod,
His rattling quiver at his shoulder hung,
His pointed spear and glittering helmit rung,
The tall oaks trembled at the warlike shade,
When thus the Genius of the water said:
"O curious stranger, come from far to see,
What grieves us all, but none so much as me!
The freeborn Genius of the woods am I,
Who scorn to dwell in lands of slavery;
I, though unseen, command the heart to dare,
And spread the soul of freedom through the air,
That each may taste and value if he can,
This sovereign good that constitutes the man:
Here, in the center of tyrannic sway,
I spread my spirit and forbid dismay,
To every bosom dart my influence round,
Like the sun beams that fructify the ground;
But waft a timorous and ignoble breath
Where conscience, conscience bids them shrink at death.
"O stranger, led by Heaven's supreme decree,
Go, view the dire effects of tyranny,
Strait to the town direct thy fated way,
But hark attentive, listen and obey,
I to thy care commit this magic vest,
To guard thee 'midst yon' spires a viewless guest;
Whenever its wreathy folds thy limbs embrace,
No mortal eye thy roving step shall trace,
Unseen as ghosts that quit the clay below,
Yet seeing all securely thou shall go.
There watch the motions of the hostile lines,
Observe their counsels, search their deep designs;
Trace all their schemes, the lawless strength survey
Of licensed robbers howling for their prey."
So spoke the Genius of the shaded wave.
And then the vest of wondrous virtue gave,
Which scarce my limbs enwrapt, when I began
To move as never before did mortal man,
Light as the air, as free as winds I strayed,
Pierced firmest rocks and walls for prisons made,
Soared high, nor asked the feeble aid of art,
And traced all secrets but the human heart.
Then to the town I held my hasty course,
To Boston's town subdued by lawless force;
Close by a sentinel I took my stride,
The wretch never saw me though I grazed his side:
But for my vest, what pains had been my lot,
What gibes, what sneers, reproaches, and what not?
Or in their place the robbers had constrained
To turn a Tory, which my heart disdained.
Now stalked I on toward the dome of state,
Where Gage resides our western Potentate,
A second Hernando Cortez, one of the original conquerors of Spanish America,
who depopulated many provinces, and slew several millions of the natives of
this continent. See Father Barthol. Du Cases's History.
Cortez sent by heaven's command,
To murder, rage, and ravage over our land;
A very Cortez -- what is the difference?
He wants his courage and he wants his sense,
Even Cortez would our tyrant's part disdain;
That murdered strangers; this his countrymen;
In all the rest resemblance so exact,
No glass Venetian could more true reflect.
In all their rest, congenial souls combined,
The scourge, the curse and scandal of our kind.
Cortez was sent by Spain's black brotherhood,
Whose faith is murder* whose religion blood;
Sent* unprovoked, with his Iberian train,
To fat the soil with millions of the slain:
Poor Mexico! arouse thy sanguine head.
Peru, disclose thy hosts of murdered dead!
Let your vast plains all white with human bones,
That bleeding lie, and ask sepulchral stones,
Force a dumb voice and echo to the sky,
The blasting curse of papal tyranny;
And let your rocks, and let your hills proclaim,
That Gage and Cortez' errand is the same.
Say then what cause this murderous hand restrains?
The want of power is made the monster's chains,
The streams of blood his heart foredooms to spill,
Is but a dying serpent's rage to kill:
What power shall drive this serpent from our shore,
This scorpion swollen with carnage, death, and gore?
Twelve was the hour, -- infernal darkness reigned,
Low hung the clouds, the stars their light restrained:
High in the dome a dire assembly sat,
A stupid council on affairs of state;
To their dim lamps I urged my fearless way,
And marching 'twixt their guards without delay,
Stepped boldly in, and safely veiled from view,
Stood in the center of the black-guard crew.
First. Gage was there -- a mimic chair of state,
Received the honor of his honor's weight;
This man of straw, the regal purple bound,
But dullness* deepest dullness, hovered round.
Next Greaves, who wields the trident of the sea,
The tall arch-captain of artillery,
All gloomy sat, mumbling of flame and fire,
Balls, cannon, ships and all their damned attire;
Well pleased to live in everlasting hum,
But senseless as the echo of a drum.
Hard by, Burgoyne, his ample chair supplies,
And seemed to meditate in studious guise,
As if again to grant the world to see,
Long, dull, dry letters writ to General Lee,
Huge scrawls of words, through endless circuits drawn
Unmeanning as the errand he is upon;
His arm and pen of equal strength we call,
This kills with dullness, just like that with ball.
Lord Percy seemed to snore -- O conscious muse,
This ill-timed snoring to the Peer excuse,
Tired was the Hero of his toilsome day,
Full fifteen miles he fled a tedious way --
How should he then the dews of Somnus shun?
Perhaps not used to walk, much less to run.
Red-fac'd as Sol descending to repose,
Reclined the furious Captain of the Rose;
Skilled to direct his cannonading shot,
No Turkish rover half so murdering hot;
Pleased with base vengeance on defenseless towns,
His forked tongue hissed nothing else but, Zounds!
In Fame's proud temple aiming for a niche,
Amongst those who find it at the cannon's breech.
How, vexed to see his army's fatal doom,
Ceased to beseech the skies for elbow room, Alluding to a well-known anecdote
of this officer.

(How could the skies refuse the pious man,
When half the prayer was blood! and death! and damn!)
He cursed the brainless minister that planned
His sleeveless errand to a distant land;
But, awed by Gage, his bursting wrath recoiled,
And in his inmost bosom doubly boiled.
These, chief of all the Pandemonian crew,
Exalted sat* the rest a pension'd few,
A sample of the multitude that wait,
In dreams of Indian gold and Indian state;
North's friends down swarming (so our monarch wills)
Hungry as hell from Caledonian hills;
Whose endless numbers if you bid me tell,
Ill count the atoms of this globe as well:
Knights, Captains, 'Squires a secondary band,
Held at small wages till they gain the land.
Flocked pensive round; black spleen assailed the crowd*
Black as the horrors of a wintry cloud,
And made them doubt, for doubts had place to grow,
Whether they were invincible or no.
Gage starts, rebounding from his ample seat,
Swears thrice, and cries -- "Ye furies are we beat?
Thrice are we drubb'd? -- pray gentles let me know,
Whether it be the fault of fate or you?"
He ceased, and anger flashed from both his eyes,
While Percy to his query thus replies. --
"Let gods and men attest the words I say,
Our soldiers flinch'd not from the dubious fray.
Had each a head of tempered steel possessed,
A heart of brass, and admantine breast,
More courage never had urged them to the fray,
More true-born valor made them scorn dismay."
"Whoever, said Greaves, their cowardice denies,
Or Lord, or Knight, or 'Squire, I say he lies:
How could the wretches help but marching on,
When at their backs your swords were ready drawn,
To pierce the man that flinch'd a single pace,
From all hell's lightning blazing in his face?
Death on my life! My Lord, had I been there,
I Would sent New-England's army through the air,
Wrench'd their black hearts from this infernal brood,
And turned their streams to Oliverian blood,
Henceforth let Britain deem her men but toys,
Gods! to be conquered thus by country boys! --
Why, if your men had had a mind to sup,
They might have eat this play-thing army up;
Five thousand to five hundred thus to yield,
And fourteen hundred stretched upon the field,
O shame to Britain and the British name,
Shame damps my heart, and I must die with shame."
"Indeed," cries Gage, "'it is twice we have been beat,
You have the knack. Lord Percy, to retreat,
The death you 'scap'd my very blood congeals,
Heaven grant me too, so swift a pair of heels;
In Chevy-Chace, as doubtless you have read,
Lord Percy would have sooner died than fled,
Behold the virtues of your house decay,
Ah how unlike the Percy of that day!"
So spoke the Hero in disdainful guise
To the gay Peer -- the brilliant Peer replies,
"When once the soul has reached old Styx's shore,
My prayer book says, it shall return no more,
When once old Charon hoists his sable sail,
And his boat swims before the lazy gale.
Farewell to all that pleased the man above,
Farewell to feats of arms and joys of love,
Farewell Quadrille* that helps out life's short span,
Farewell to wine* that cheers the heart of man,
Farewell my steeds that stretch across the plain,
More swift than navies bounding over the main,
All, all farewell -- the pensive shade must go
Where dull Medusa turns to stone below,
And Belus' maids eternal labors ply,
To drench the cask that stays for ever dry.
Since then* this truth is by mankind confessed,
That every Lord must yet be Pluto's guest,
Since even Great George must in his turn give place,
And leave his coursers starting for the race,
How blessed is he, how prudent is the man,
Who keeps aloof from Styx -- while yet he can,
One well aimed ball can make us all no more
Than leaky vessels on that leeward shore
But why, my friends, these hard reflections still
On Lexington affairs -- It Is Bunker's Hill --
O fatal hill, thy ghastly sight restrains
My once warm blood* and chills it in my veins!
May no gay flowers or vernal blooming tree,
Scent thy vile air or shade the face of thee!
May no sweet grass adorn thy hateful crest,
That nodded over Britannia's troops distressed!
Or if it does, may some destructive gale.
The green leaf wither, and the grass turn pale;
All moisture to your breast may heaven deny,
And God and man detest you just as I --
It Is Bunker's Hill this night has fixed us here;
Pray query him who led your armies there;
Nor dare my courage into question call.
Or blame Lord Percy for the fault of all."
How chanced to nod, while fluent Percy spoke,
But as his Lordship ceased, his honor 'woke,
(Like those whom sermons into sleep betray)
Then rubbed his eyes* and thus was heard to say:
"Shall those who never ventured from the town,
Or their ship sides, now pull our conduct down?
We fought our best, so God my honor save,
No British soldiers ever fought more brave;
Resolved I led them to the hostile lines,
From this day famed, wherever great Phoebus shines,
Firm at their head I took my bloody stand,
Marching to death and slaughter sword in hand,
'Till met the strength of each opposing force,
Like blazing-stars in their etherial course
That all on fire with rapid swiftness fly,
Then clash and shake the concave of the sky.
Twice we gave way, twice shunned the infernal rout,
And twice you would have cried all hell's broke out.
They fought like those who press for death's embrace,
And laugh the grizly monarch in the face.
Putnam's brave troops your honor would have swore,
Had robbed the clouds of half their sulfurous store,
Called thunder down whence Jove his vengeance spreads,
And drove it mixed with lightning on our heads!
What though Cop's-hill its black artillery played,
Clouding the plains in worse than Stygian shade;
Though floating batteries raised their dismal roar,
Though all the navy bellowed from the shore,
They roared in vain, death claimed from them no share.
But helpless* spent their force in empty air.
Alas! what scenes of slaughter I beheld*
What sudden carnage flushed the glutted field!
Heaven gave the foe to thin my warlike train,
For not a musket was discharged in vain;
Yes that short hour* while heaven forbore to smile,
Made many widows in Britannia's isle,
And showing all what power supreme can do,
Gave many orphans to those widows too.
But Gage arouse* come lift thy languid head,
Full fifty foes we packed off to the dead:
Who feeling death, from their hot posts, withdrew,
And Warren with the discontented crew --
Blessed be the hand that laid his head so low,
Not fifty common deaths could please me so --
But to be short, so quick our men came in,
The hostile army was so very thin;
We fixed our bay'nets and resumed the fray.
Then forced their lines and made the dogs give way."
Next rose Burgoyne and raised his brazen voice,
And cried. "We have no reason to rejoice.
Warren is dead -- in that we all agree,
Not fate itself is half so fixed as he;
But my suspecting heart bids me foredoom,
A thousand Warrens rising in his room --
Heaven knows I left my native country's air,
In full belief of things that never were,
Deceived by Grant, I Have sailed thus far in vain,
And like a fool may now sail back again --
Grant called them cowards -- curse the stupid ass,
Their sides are iron and their hearts are brass --
Cowards he said, and lest that should not do,
He pawned his oath and swore that they were so:
O were he here, I Would make him change his note,
Disgorge his lie or cut the rascal's throat.
But Captains, Generals, hear me and attend,
Say shall we home for other succors send?
Shall other navies cross the stormy main?
They may -- but what shall awe the pride of Spain?
Shall mighty George to make his law obeyed,
Transport ten thousand Russians to our aid?
That allied empire countless shoals may pour,
Numerous as sands that form the ocean shore,
But policy commands my heart to fear,
They Will turn their arms against us when they are here,
Come let us agree, for something must be done,
E're autumn flies and winter hastens on,
When pinching cold our navy binds in ice,
You Will find it is then too late to take advice."
The clock strikes three -- Gage smote upon his breast,
And cried, "What fate determines must be best,
But now attend, a counsel I impart,
Which long has laid the heaviest at my heart --
Three weeks, ye gods, nay three long years it seems,
I Have eat no fresh provision, but in dreams,
In sleep, choice dishes to my eyes repair --
Waking I gape and chew the empty air --
Say is it just that I who rule these bands,
Should live on husks like rakes in foreign lands?
Come let us hold a council ever we sleep,
Some consultation how to filch their sheep,
On neighboring isles unnumbered cattle stray,
Fat beeves and sheep an undefended prey;
These are fit victims for my noonday dish,
These* if the Gods would act as I would wish,
In one short week shall glad your hearts and mine,
On mutton we will sup, on beef we'll dine."
Shouts of applause re-echo'd through the hall,
And what pleased one, as surely pleased them all:
Wallace was named to execute the plan.
And thus sheep-stealing pleased them to a man.
Now slumbers stole upon the chieftain's eye,
His powdered fore top nodded from on high,
His lids just opened. to find how matters were --
"Dissolve he said. and so dissolved ye are."
Then downward sunk to dullest slumbers deep,
And in his arms embraced the powers of sleep.
In Boston's southern end there stands a tree,
Long sacred held to darling Liberty,
It Is branching arms with verdant leaves were crowned,
Imparting shade and grateful coolness round:
To its famed trunk, invisible as air,
I from the sleepy council did repair,
And at its root, fair Freedom's shrine, I paid
My warmest vows* and blessed the virtuous shade.
Now shined the gay faced sun with morning light,
All Nature joy'd exulting at the sight,
When swift as wind, to vent their base-born rage,
The Tory Williams A notable Tory in Boston.
and the Butcher Gage.,
Rushed to the tree, a nameless number near,
Tories and Negroes following in the rear --
Each, ax in hand, attacked the honored tree,
Swearing eternal war with Liberty;
Nor ceased their strokes, 'till each repeated wound
Tumbled its honors headlong to the ground;
But ever it fell, not mindless of its wrong,
Avenged it took one destined head along.
A Tory soldier on its topmost limb --
The Genius of the shade looked stern at him,
And marked him out that self same hour to dine,
Where unsnuff'd lamps burn low at Pluto's shrine,
Then tripp'd his feet from off their cautious stand.
Pale turned the wretch -- he spread each helpless hand,
But spread in vain, with headlong force he fell,
Nor stopped descending 'till he stopped in Hell.
Next, curious to explore, I wandered where
Our injured countrymen imprisoned are,
Some closely cooped in the unwelcome town;
Some in dark dungeons held ignobly down;
Gage holds them there, and all recess denies,
For it is in these the coward's safety lies:
Were these once out. how would our troops consign
Each licensed robber to the gulphy brine,
Or drive them foaming to the ships for aid,
To beg of stormy Greaves to cannonade,
And midnight vengeance point, like Vandeput,
Voiding his hell hounds of their devilish glut.
A deed like that the muse must blush to name,
And bids me stamp a coward on thy fame;
Rage ruffian rage, nor lay thy thunder down,
'Till all our Tories howl and flee the town.
What is a Tory? Heavens and earth reveal!
What strange blind monster does that name conceal?
There! there he stands -- for Augury prepare,
Come lay his heart and inmost entrails bare,
I, by the forelock seize the Stygian hound;
You bind his arms and bind the dragon down.
Surgeon attend with thy dissecting knife,
Aim well the stroke that damps the springs of life
Extract his fangs, dislodge his teeth of prey,
Clap in your pincers, and then tear away. --
Soldier stand by, the monster may resist,
You draw your back-sword, and I Will draw my fist.
Lo! mixed with air his worthless ghost has fled,
Surgeon, his paleness speaks the monster dead;
Part, part the futures of his brazen scull,
Hard as a rock, impenetrably dull.
Hold out his brain, and let his brethren see,
That tortoise brain, no larger than a pea --
Come rake his entrails, whet thy knife again,
Let Us see what evils threat the next campaign,
If ministerial force shall prove too great,
Or if the Congress save their mighty freight:
See on his breast* deep 'grav'd with iron pen,
"Passive obedience to the worst of men."
There to his lights direct thy searching eyes,
"Slavery I love, and freedom I despise."
View next his heart, his midriff just above,
"To my own country I Will a traitor prove."
Hard by his throat, for utterance meant, I spy,
"I Will fight for tyrants and their ministry."
His crowded guts unnumber'd scrawls contain,
The scandal of our country and the bane:
His bleeding entrails show some great design,
Which shall abortive prove, as I divine.
But, freedom lost, nor danger do I see,
If we can only with ourselves agree.
How like St. George invincible I stand,
This home bred dragon stretched beneath my hand!
Here may he lie, and let no traveller dare
The grass green hillock over his carcass rear,
Or heap up piles of monumental stones,
To shield from Phoebus and the stars his bones.
This feat performed, I girt my magic gown,
And marched, unlicens'd, from the guarded town.
To our famed camp I held my eager course,
Curious to view the courage and the force
Of those, whose hearts are flushed with freedom's flame,
Who yet stand foremost in the field of fame,
And deeply grieved with their departing laws,
Arm in conviction of a righteous cause.
But ever I reached the great encampment's bound,
The friendly Genius on the way I found,
Graceful he smiled, his azure locks he shook,
While from his lips these flowing accents broke:
"O mortal! guided by the fates and me,
To view what thousands wish in vain to see;
Now to my care the magic vest restore,
Cheerful return to what thou wast before,
I to the shades this wondrous mantle bear,
And hang it safe in Fancy's temple there;
Nor let its loss provoke thee to repine,
The vest was Jove's, the will to lend it mine."
So said the God, and blending with the light,
I walked conspicuous and revealed to sight,
No more impervious to the human view,
But seeing all, and seen by others too.
Now throngs on throngs on every side surround,
Beneath the burden groans the heaving ground,
Those famed afar to drive the deadly shot,
With truest level to the central spot;
Those whom Virginia's vast dominion sends,
From her chaste streams and intervening lands,
And those who conscious of their country's claim,
From Pennsylvania's happy climate came.
These* and ten thousand more were scattered round
In black battalions on the tented ground,
Prepared whenever the trumpets iron roar,
Should summon forth to all the woes of war,
To hear with joy the loud alarming call,
And rush perhaps to their own funeral.
Just in the center of the camp arose
An elm, whose shade invited to repose,
Thither I roved, and at the cool retreat,
A brave though rough-cast, soldier chanced to meet:
No fop in arms* no feather on his head,
No glittering toys the manly warrior had,
His auburne face the least employed his care,
He left it to the females to be fair;
And though it the men, whom shining trifles sway,
But pageant soldiers for a sunshine day.
Marking my pensive step, his hand he laid
On his hard breast, and thus the warrior said:
"Stranger observe, behold these warlike fields,
Mark well the ills that civil discord yields:
No crimes of our's this vengeful doom require,
Our city ravaged and our towns on fire,
Troops poured on troops to Britain's lasting shame,
That threaten all with universal flame:
These are the kings, the monarchs of the sea,
Exerting power in lawless tyranny,
These hot for power, and burning for command,
Would rule the ocean and subject the land;
But while this arm the strength of man retains,
While true-born courage revels through my veins,
I Will spill my blood yon' hostile force to quell,
And lawless power by lawful strength repel;
This rough, black cannon shall our cause defend,
This black, rough cannon is my truest friend.
This armed with vengeance, belching death afar,
Confused their thousands marching to the war:
Yet deeply grieved the tears bedew my eyes,
For this the greatest of calamities.
That our keen weapons meant for other ends,
Should spend their rage on Britons once our friends;
But Liberty! -- no price have thou below,
And even a Briton's life for thee must go.
Come then, my weapons, rise in Freedom's aid,
Her steps attend and be her call obeyed;
Let Carleton arm his antichristian might,
And sprinkle holy water 'ere he fight,
And let him have, to shield his limbs from hurt. Certain well known relics
among the Papists.

St. Stephen's breeches* Certain well known relics among the Papists.
and St. Stephen's shirt. Certain well known relics among the Papists.

Don Quixote's sword, that valiant knight of Spain,
Which now may grace a madman's side again,
St. Bernard's hose, Certain well known relics among the Papists.
and lest we give too few,
John Faustus' cap, and Satan's cloven shoe;
(These precious relics may defend their backs.
And good Guy Johnson should, I think, go snacks)
Nay let him ere the clashing armies cope,
Procure a pardon from his friend the Pope,
That if his soul should be dislodged from hence,
Heaven may with all his scarlet sins dispense,
And place him safe beyond the reach of ball,
Where Abrah'm's bosom may be had for all.
Some powerful cause disarms my heart of fear.
And bids me bring some future battle near.
When crowds of dead shall veil the ghastful plain,
And mighty Lords like Percy, fly again;
When every pulse with treble force shall beat
And each exert his valor to retreat.
And each shall wish his stature may be made,
Long as it seems at Sol's descending shade:
So tallest trees that tour toward the skies,
From simple acorns take their humble rise.
To see from death their boasted valor shrink,
And basely fly, has sometimes made me think,
The true great heart is often found remote
From the gay trappings of a scarlet coat.
Stranger* in pity lend one pensive sigh,
For all that died and all that yet may die,
If wars intestine long their rage retain,
This land must turn a wilderness again.
While civil discord plumes her snaky head,
What streams of human gore must yet be shed,
With sanguine floods shall Mystick's waves be died,
And tinged* the ocean, with her purple tide,
Enough -- The prospect fills my heart with woe;
Back to the heart my freezing spirits flow,
No more remains; no more than this, that all
Must fight like Romans, or like Romans fall:
O heaven born peace, renew thy wonted charms,
Where Neptune westward spreads his aged arms.
To hostile lands return an honored guest,
And bless our crimson shore among the rest;
'Till then may heaven assert our injured claims,
And second every stroke Columbia aims.
Direct our counsels and our leaders sway,
Confound our foes and fill them with dismay,
So shall past years, those happy years, return,
And war's red lamp in Boston cease to burn:
Hear and attest the warmest wish I bring,
God save the Congress and reform the King!
Long May Britannia rule our hearts again,
Rule as she ruled in George the Second's reign;
May ages hence her growing empire see,
And she be glorious, but ourselves be free,
In that just scale an equal balance hold,
And grant these climes a second age of gold."
He ceased, and now the sun's declining beam
With fainter radiance shot a trembling gleam.
The thickening stars proclaimed the day expired,
And to their tented mansions all retired.
FINIS.

