THE CRISIS. NUMBER XVI.
Parcere Subjectis, et debellare Superbos.

VIRG. To Supplication turn a Princely ear;
Nor MURDER Subjects you have SWORN to hear.

THE motto of this paper gives a specimen of Roman, the proceedings against
America, of English policy. -- There is, and must necessarily be, a compact,
either express, or employed, between every sovereign and subject. Protection and
obedience are the mutual stipulations, if the one is withdrawn, the other
ceases. Now, protection is certainly withdrawn, when subjects, guilty of no
hostile or rebellious act, (I defy the ministry to prove one against them) are
nevertheless treated (like the Americans) as enemies and rebels.
Administration, most falsely and audaciously, stigmatize them with the name of
rebels, merely to color their own base designs, and unjustifiable hostilities
against their fellow subjects; in whom they discern an odious spirit of
liberty, which sets (for them) a dangerous example to the mother country. The
noble flame is dying here, and it would be fatal to ministerial designs, that
it should be cherished in any part of our dominions.

The spirited Americans feel this truth, they foresee, and wisely guard against
the danger. They have convened, and consulted for the public safety, like true
Britons. What then? Is such a national, political congress, a traitorous
association? At such a time too, and in such a cause? Is the situation and
circumstances of America (a nation in point of territory and numbers) to be
compared to that of Truro (a rotten borough) in Cornwall? Buffoonery in serious
cases, Doctor Johnson, dishonours human nature, and degrades human
understanding. Not even the example of your master, Doctor, who played
Falstaff, after he had deluded a late unhappy Lord Chancellor of England into
suicide, can sanctify dramatic pleasantry, at the expense of life, liberty,
property, and a whole country.

"Kill the next Piercy yourself," my lord, is a species of drollery, in a case
of blood, unworthy even of a hackney writer; as to you, Doctor Johnson, -- I do
not expect you will write honestly, but write sensibly. Treat subjects, (which
might even affect the humanity of a Scotchman) no more ludicrously, indecently,
unfeelingly, and abandonly. With your leave, Doctor, I once more call America a
nation, and a great nation; too far distant from her mother country, to receive
from her either colonies, Thus, (says Dr. Johnson) they have defrauded their
creditors here, and condemned our merchants to bankruptcy. If creditors and
merchants suffer, if manufacturers complain, they must recur to the first
cause. These are the pernicious effects of the wise steps, taken first by the
ministerial aggressors in this country. Nor is it to be wondered at, if the
consequence of these rash and unjust proceedings by the harpies of power,
should produce (in case of an approaching war with France and Spain) a general
bankruptcy of this nation. -- A thought by no means chimerical, but truly
melancholy; a thought, which can neither be baffled by the buffoonery of
hackney scribblers, the grave sarcasms of statesmen, or the cruel pleasantry of
thoughtless Majesty itself.

CASCA.

LONDON: Printed and published for the Author, by T. W. SHAW, in Fleet Street.

NEW YORK: Reprinted by John Anderson, at Beekman's Slip.


