THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS MISCELLANY, OR, SIXTY-ONE APHORETICAL ESSAYS, ON SOME
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES AND VIRTUES.

BY HUGH KNOX, D. D. IN ST. CROIX.

-- haec ego mecum
Compressis agito labris, ubi quid datur oti
Illudo chartis.
HOR. Quicquid praecipies, est^ brevis, ut cit^ dicta
Per^^piant animi dociles, tencantque fideles.
HOR. Ars Poet. Scribentem juvat ipse favor, minuitque laborem,
Cumque suo crescens pectore fervet opus.
OVID. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HODGE AND SHOBER. M.DCC.LXXV.

THE PREFACE.
THE following little Essays, were drawn up many years ago, partly as helps to
moral and divine conference, in a religious society, and partly as the result
of such conferences. They are generally the result of free, and pretty enlarged
and comprehensive meditations on the subjects they treat of, and consist of
such thoughts as occurred first and most obviously to the open mind, in its
free and unfettered discursions on said subjects; -- and they were meant merely
as hints to start the conversation, and to keep it alive, and to the business
in hand, that it might not deviate into wild and impertinent digressions.

THIS will account for the Nature and Form of the Essays, which are very
singular and uncommon. They consist of a number of loose, general, and often,
unconnected Aphorisms, or general Maxims, commonly closed by some practical
corollaries or inferences of the greatest moment.

THE primitive design of them, was to convey the most ample, general
instruction to the mind on every subject treated of; yet so, as that
instruction might exhaust the subject in Miniature, as it were, or, in the
narrowest compass consistent with perspicuity, -- and that the method of
explaining the subjects, should be calculated, as much as possible, for
affecting the heart by proper motives, and stirring up men to the diligent
practice of the virtues and duties explained. And I hope the judicious and
intelligent Christian reader will find, upon an attentive perusal of the Essays
themselves, that they are not ill adapted to this purpose; excepting, perhaps,
a few, which are more superficial than the rest.

IT had been easy to have filled up these Skeletons of Doctrine, and lengthened
them out to the ordinary size of pulpit discourses. In this form they would
have had, doubtless, many advantages which they are now necessarily deprived
of: In this form, they would have admitted of Connection, Argumentation,
Illustration, Persuasion, Pathos, and all the Graces and Beauties of fine
Composition; whereas, their present form necessarily precludes these advantages.

BUT on the other hand, in such a form, they would have been very volumnious
and expensive: Few would have purchased them, and perhaps, fewer read them. The
present volatile, irreligious taste, nauseates every thing prolix in divinity.
Five or six pages of a religious book is as much as we can, in conscience
expect, that a modern fine Gentleman or Lady should read at one sitting. The
taste of the times is, therefore, purposely consulted in the shortness of these
Essay

A PERSON of this squeamish disposition, may here read, in eight or ten
minutes, some of the most important things which can be said on each of these
subjects, without breaking off abruptly, in the midst of the sense, and losing
the whole chain of connection.

BESIDES, if the Essays are tolerably executed on this plan, the doctrinal
aphorisms contained in them, should be so plain and self-evident, as to
supercede the necessity of arguments and illustrations; the practical
corollaries should flow spontaneously and consequentially from these aphorisms,
and the whole should be demonstratively built upon the scriptures referred to
in the margin.

AFTER having humbly recommended these imperfect Essays to the public candor
and indulgence, and implored the blessing of GOD upon them, for the general
good; if I might presume to offer my advice to my fellow creatures concerning
the best way of using them, -- it would be as follows: That they would read
them, in their private and devout retirements, as Hints for Meditation on these
important subjects, laying their minds open, without prejudice, to the
influence of divine truth, and earnestly imploring the Father of lights to
write these truths and virtues with sunbeams upon their understandings; convey
them warm to their hearts, and make them powerfully operative and influential
on all the active powers and faculties of their nature.

I HAVE added the Sermons as some compensation to those who may disrelish the
dryness of many of the Essay

THE CONTENTS.
Essay 1. OF Conversion, or Regeneration, Page 9 Essay 2. Of Justification
before GOD, Page 36 Essay 3. Of Faith; particularly, as justifying, Page 45
Essay 4. Of entering into Covenant with GOD, Page 48 Essay 5. A Form of
Covenanting, Page 54 Essay 6. The Nature, Design and Use of the LORD'S Supper,
Page 66 Essay 7. Of Preparation for the LORD'S Supper, Page 70 Essay 8. Our
Duty immediately after the LORD'S Supper, Page 75 Essay 9. Reflections on the
Incarnation of CHRIST, Page 79 Essay 10. Of Adoption into GOD'S Family, Page 81
Essay 11. Of Repentance, Page 84 Essay 12. Of Sanctification, or Holiness, Page
88 Essay 13. The Nature and Effects of Union with CHRIST, Page 91 Essay 14. Of
the final Perseverance of the Saints, Page 95 Essay 15. Of Peace of Conscience,
Pages, 99 Essay 16. Of Joy in the HOLY GHOST, Page 102 Essay 17. Of assurance
of GOD'S Love, in this Life, Page 104 Essay 18. Of the Soul's Immortality,
Pages, 108 Essay 19. Of Death, Page 113 Essay 20. Of the Resurrection of the
Dead, Page 118 Essay 21. Of a future Judgment, Page 119 Essay 22. Of Heaven; or
the future State of the Blessed, Page 121 Essay 23. Of Hell; or the future
State of the Wicked, Page 125 Essay 24. What, as Christians, we should do more
than others, Page 127 Essay 25. Of Heavenly-mindedness, and the contrary Vices,
Page 131 Essay 26. Of Gospel Sincerity, or Uprightness, Page 135 Essay 27.
Christian Zeal, and its Opposites and Counterfeits, Page 140 Essay 28.
Patience, and the contrary Vices, Page 146 Essay 29. Meekness, and the opposite
Vices, Page 149 Essay 30. Charity, and the opposite Vices, Page 154 Essay 31.
Contentment, and the opposite Vices, Page 157 Essay 32. Chastity, and the
contrary Vices, Page 162 Essay 33. Humility, and the opposite Vices, Page 165
Essay 34. Sobriety, and the contrary Vices, Page 169 Essay 35. Christian
Courage or Fortitude, and its Opposites, Page 172 Essay 36. The Christian Uses
of the Tongue, Page 177 Essay 37. Unchristian Abuses of the Tongue, Page 180
Essay 38. The best Method of maintaining Peace, Love and Unity among Christian
Brethren, Page 186 Essay 39. The Rule of judging our Brethren; against Rashness
and Cenforiousness, Page 190 Essay 40. A peaceable Disposition, and the
opposite Evils, Page 195 Essay 41. A merciful Temper, and its Opposites, Page
200 Essay 42. Of Justice between Man and Man, Page 206 Essay 43. Of Christian
Hope, Page 211 Essay 44. Of the Natures and Person of CHRIST, Page 218 Essay
45. CHRIST, our Prophet, Page 223 Essay 46. CHRIST, our Priest, Page 230 Essay
47. The kingly or regal Office of CHRIST, Page 234 Essay 48. On the Shortness
and due Improvement of Time, Page 237 Essay 49. The Consideration of Eternity,
Page 242 Essay 50. The Duty of Masters of Families, Page 244 Essay 51. The best
Way of resisting Temptations, Page 247 Essay 52. Of public Spirit, Page 251
Essay 53. A proper Temper and Conduct toward Enemies, Page 254 Essay 54.
Temptations arising from Company, Page 257 Essay 55. Temptations arising from
Solitude, Page 262 Essay 56. The Use and Abuse of Christian Liberty, Page 265
Essay 57. What Diversions are lawful, and the Way to regulate them, Page 270
Essay 58. The Value and Importance of a Child, Page 276 Essay 59. The
Constraints of CHRIST'S Love: A Sermon, Page 282 Essay 60. Christians, Lights
in the World: A Sermon, Page 307 Essay 61. The aggravated Guilt of Murder: A
Sermon, Page 328
END OF THE CONTENTS.
ESSAY I.
CHAP. I. of CONVERSION, or REGENERATION.
1. RELIGION being a character, must have a principle; and this principle must
supremely govern and predominate in the life. We do not call a man generous and
friendly, unless generosity and friendship prevail in him above churlishness
and unfriendliness, and are fixed principles in his nature. -- So it would be
equally absurd to call a man religious, only because of the performance of a
few outward religious duties, while the main of his temper and character is
irreligious and immoral. He only deserves the character of being religious, who
is such uniformly and predominantly, and in whom morality and religion is a
prevailing and discriminating character!

2. TRUE religion, where it is, must govern the man; and nothing can do this
but an inward principle. Grace, which is this principle, must oppose
corruption, and finally prevail over it.

3. THE word of GOD, and indeed the nature and reason of things, place religion
primarily and radically in the heart, and represent it as flowing thence into
the life and conversation. The heart, as it is the source and fountain of all
external corruption, so it must be of all true religion. The tree must first be
made good before its fruit can be good. A bitter or polluted fountain, cannot
send forth pure or sweet water. Men gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of
thistles. Good principles are necessarily prerequisite to morally or formally
good actions. Accordingly, the whole stress is laid, in scripture, upon
heart-religion; or that which is seated and radicated in the heart, and
proceeds from pure and right principles and motives there Prove. xxiii. 26.
Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. -- xviii. 31. Joel ii. 12, 13. Psalm. li. and cxxxix. 1 Samuel
xvi. 7. 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 9. Deuteronomy. xiii. 3.
.

4. As it has been the general opinion of mankind, as well as the voice of
scripture, that men are born into this world in a depraved, corrupt and
irreligious state, with strong propensities to vice, and a disinclination to
that which appears to be virtuous and good, by the very law of their nature,
written on their conscience, and manifested to them by their moral instinctive
feelings; so it has been generally thought the peculiar work of the Deity, the
GOD and Father of men, to help them, by his grace and Spirit, to rise out of
this state of depravity and corruption, and to return to his obedience, favor
and enjoyment, in the steep and narrow path of virtue and piety. This has ever
been thought a care and work worthy of GOD the Father of spirits, toward his
human offspring; and even a heathen could say, Nullus vir magnus unquam fuit,
sine Divino afflatu.

5. REVELATION represents this change wrought in sinners by GOD, under the
terms, conversion Matthew. xviii. 3. Acts iii. 19. Ezck. xxxiii. 11.
; repentance Isa. lv. 7. Luke xiii. 5.
; regeneration Ti^us iii. 5.
; being born of GOD John i. 13. 1 John v. 18.
; created in Christ Jesus Ephesians. ii. 10. 2 Cor. v. 17.
; having a new heart Ezck. xxxvi. 25 -- 28. Psalm. li.
; a divine nature 2 Pet. i. 4.
; putting off the old man, and putting on the new, and the like Ephesians. iv. 22.25.
.

6. OUR Lord strongly expresses both the nature and necessity of this change in
sinners, by telling them, That unless they are born again of water, and of the
Spirit, and are converted, they not only shall not, but even cannot, enter into
the kingdom of heaven John iii. 3, 5. Matthew. xviii. 3. Luke viii. 5.
.

7. GRANTING these expressions of a new birth by the Spirit, and a becoming
new-creatures, and the like, to be figurative and metaphorical; yet if these
metaphors have any significancy and propriety at all, they must imply the
following truths; namely, (1.) That the change of a sinner by conversion or
regeneration, must be exceeding great, bearing some analogy to the difference
between the circumstances of a child before and after its birth; -- or between
a being in a state of nonentity, and after the commencement of its existence,
in some essential respects at least. -- (2.) That it is not a partial, but an
universal change; a change of the whole bent of the heart and drift and
direction of the affections. -- (3.) That it is not a mere outward, imperfect
change, but one that is inward, essential and complete. -- (4.) That it is a
change not produced by the sinner's own natural powers and endeavors, but
wholly supernatural, the product of a divine agency, effected and produced by
the Spirit of God: And (5.) That it is a change absolutely necessary in every
son and daughter of Adam, in order to their entering into the kingdom of heaven.

8. EITHER these inferences are plainly and clearly deducible from these
metaphors; or, otherwise, the metaphors must not only be supposed highly
improper, but even pernicious; tending to mislead the judgments of men, and
obscuring a doctrine of great importance to men's salvation, otherwise plain
and obvious in itself, which would be a high imputation on the wisdom and
goodness of GOD, and an unanswerable objection against the revelation of Christ.

9. SELF-LOVE, a desire of reputation and fame, and a principle of terror and
slavish fear, often produce a kind of religious character, which is merely
outward and greatly imperfect.

10. ALTHOUGH that seed of grace, which is the principle of the spiritual life,
is infused at once into the whole nature, in the act of regeneration, and gives
it a holy taste, bent, turn, tendency and direction; yet the fruits of it show
themselves but gradually and successively, in the progressive work of
sanctification, as occasions, trials and opportunities elicit and draw them
forth into act and view.

11. IF regeneration, agreeable to the import of the metaphor, be an
instantaneous act or operation of the holy Spirit upon the soul, producing a
radical, essential change in its temper, giving it a new principle of spiritual
life, a general divine bent and tendency: -- And if sanctification and
mortification are only effects of this new and divine principle of life,
carrying on a continual conflict and warfare against the corruptions of nature,
and a gradually strengthening and confirming the habits of virtue and holiness;
-- then may we very easily and rationally account for an imperfect Christian
going directly to heaven, at death, without the necessity of any intermediate
purgatorial sufferings to fit him for that world of perfect purity. The soul,
from the moment of its regeneration, was holy, and was defiled only in
consequence of its union with a corrupt bodily nature, with which it was
carrying on a continual warfare. In the moment of death, it was released from
this corrupt bodily nature, and sprung, immaculate, to its kindred spirits, and
its native heaven. The grave is a furnace which will (...) down, p^^ify and
r^fine this corrupt body, whence it will be raised a glorious, spiritual body,
and a fit companion for the glorified spirit.

CHAP. II. The Subject continued. The corrupt, grulty, lost and helpless State
of Man before Conversion.
1. THE scripture evidence of the wretched state of man by nature, is very
extensive. Among a vast multitude of scriptures, the following may be
consulted; Psalm. li. 5. Ephesians. ii. 1, 3. Job xiv. 4. Psalm. xiv. 1 -- 3. Jer.
xvii. 9. Isa. lxiv. 6. Romans vii. 14, to the end.

2. CHRIST is said to have come as a physician to the sick, and to seek that
which was lost. The prodigal is represented as dead and lost, and his
conversion is termed a coming to himself, a being found, and a coming again to
life. Conversion is termed a new birth, a new creation; and sinners, before
conversion, are said to be dead in trespasses and sins. The unconverted man is
said, not to receive the things of the Spirit of GOD; they are foolishness to
him, neither can he know them. Conversion is represented as a work of great
power; such as GOD exerted in Christ when he raised him up from the dead.

3. FROM all these scripture representations we may infer the exceeding
helplessness of sinners, in an unconverted state. A dead person has no power
to rise. We cannot come to Christ unless the Father draw us. We cannot think a
good thought. All our sufficiency is of GOD, who must work in us both to will
and to do; and without Christ we can do nothing. We cannot be converted without
the Spirit: But the Spirit is the Father's free gift in Christ. He must open
our eyes before we can see, and create us anew in Christ Jesus before we can
spiritually live and act. Faith is the first grace acted by a converted
Christian; and yet this faith we cannot act of ourselves, it is the gift of
GOD. We are naturally corrupt and disinclined to good before our conversion,
and here lies our helplessness, until God by his quickening Spirit gives life
to our souls, and enables us to will and to do, and creates us anew in Christ
Jesus to good works.

4. FROM reason, observation and experience we have the following evidences of
this truth: (1.) We know good and evil by our natural conscience; yet we find
in ourselves a strong disinclination to the good which we approve, and a
prevailing inclination to the evil which we disapprove. -- (2.) We know that we
are very unlike GOD, and that we do not cordially love and choose him and his
laws: But GOD could not form creatures with such a temper: This therefore
proves, that we are now degenerated from our first state, and become corrupt
creatures. -- (3.) If children come into the world such as we may suppose that
God first created man, i. e. holy, and with a propensity to good, or even in a
state of indifference to good and evil; some would surely be virtuous from the
womb upwards; some would surely follow the good principle of their nature,
especially as praise and happiness lie on that side; but universal observation
and experience prove the contrary, as well as the word of GOD Psalm. liii. 1, --
3. Rom iii. 10, etc.
. -- (4.) If men were not born corrupt and impotent, a virtuous and religious
education would bring all who are blessed with it over to the side of virtue,
in spite of evil example: But do we not plainly see that children are backward
to imitate good examples, and prone to follow bad ones? They greedily suck in
evil advice and the knowledge of wicked things; but it requires much labor to
bring them to learn good; they also quickly forget it, and we plainly see that
their heart is still corrupt and strongly inclined to vice, in spite of all the
antidotes we can instill into their minds against it. -- (5.) If we attentively
examine our own hearts, lives and experiences but for one day, we shall have an
overpowering conviction of our dreadful corruption. How readily do we forget
GOD? How averse are our minds to the contemplation of him and his perfections?
How little do we think of the love of Christ? We read or hear with unconcern,
the amazing story of his love, and feel little or no gratitude for it. Our
memories, our thoughts, our meditations, the general bent and tenor of our
affections and passions, even our religious duties, and our very best works,
may convince us of the wretchedness of our state by nature.

5. WE see that a virtuous and Christian education cannot, of itself, recover
our natures, or remove their corruption. -- We see that the study of philosophy
and the knowledge of the scriptures, cannot accomplish this. -- We see that the
most powerful preaching, and best adapted means of grace, cannot effect this
great change. -- We see men making many vows and resolutions, and laboring
hard in the way of outward means, to rise from their corruptions, and yet all
prove ineffectual. -- We have often, in an unconverted state, been convinced of
our guiltiness and danger; we have often resolved to do better, and we have
bound our resolutions with solemn vows: -- We have even (...) a time to begin a
better life; but before that time came, our resolutions have proved as the
morning cloud. And even when we have attempted to mend our life and conduct,
have we not found ourselves so exceeding feeble, as to be unable to effect any
thing to purpose? Have we not felt, as it were, a dead weight pulling us
backwards, and sinking us down into the bed of sloth, carnal security and
inaction? Deplorable but pregnant proofs, and convincing demonstrations, both
of our corruption and impotency by nature!

CHAP. III. The same Subject continued. Corrupton and helplessness, cannot
justify Sloth in the unconcerted Sinner.
1. THOUGH GOD has reserved in his own hands the great work of Conversion, as
his own proper work, and we cannot therefore convert ourselves; yet we ought
not to say that we can do nothing. GOD has given to unconverted sinners a
great deal of important work to do, and put it in their power to do it; -- has
obliged them by commands, persuaded them by exhortations, awed them by
threatenings, engaged them by motives, encouraged them by promises, and given
them reason to expect that he will meet with them and convert them in the
performance of this work. He has also laid their help on one who is mighty to
save.

2. ALTHOUGH unconverted sinners are spiritually dead, yet they are not
naturally so. They have an understanding, a will and a memory: They may know
something of their guilt and danger: They may understand something of Christ
and his saving design: They may read and hear, think and meditate on GOD'S
word; frequent his house, and attend his ordinances. But if sinners will not do
these things, they will not do what they may, and are able to do, and therefore
are inexcusable.

3. A DISPENSATION of GOD'S Spirit attends his gospel, and he has promised to
give his Spirit to them that ask him; to all that ask him, without limitation
or reserve. He has even made it the duty of sinners to ask this Spirit, and to
attend diligently on divine ordinances, which are the walks of the Spirit. Now,
if sinners know that they cannot be converted without this Spirit, and that
they cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, unless they are converted; and
if, notwithstanding they know this, they do not diligently ask it of GOD, nor
attend on those instrumental duties and means of grace, in the use of which
this Spirit is dispensed, then they are wholly to blame for continuing
unconverted.

4. GOD is following sinners with the common influences and operations of his
Spirit; striving with them, and seeking admittance into their hearts. Now, if
sinners would obey and cherish this common operation, and ask the special and
converting influences of the Spirit, he has obliged himself by promise to give
it them Luke xi. 9, -- 13. Rev. iii. 20. -- xxii. 17.
: But if, on the contrary, they resist and grieve this holy Spirit, which would
have sealed them to the day of redemption, they themselves are wholly to blame
for continuing unconverted.

5. IF the case were even otherwise, and there were but a bare probability, or
even a possibility, that the humble and earnest endeavors of a sinner might
meet with acceptance, and be crowned with success, he is wholly inexcuseable
and condemnable in neglecting these endeavors.

CHAP. IV. The same Subject continued. The Duty of unconverted Persons.
1. SUCH ought often and seriously to consider, That it is impossible they
should ever go to heaven in their present state. The scriptures expressly
preclude them Matthew. xviii. 3. Luck xiii. 5. John iii. 3, 5. 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10.
; and in the very reason and nature of things, they are wholly disqualified
both for the employments and enjoyments of the heavenly state.

2. THEY should labor to obtain a deep sense of the danger and misery of an
unconverted state: of the evil and guilt of sin, and of the torments to which
it will unavoidably expose the unconverted sinner, who dies in his iniquities.

3. THEY should frequently consider the shortness and uncertainty of the
present life, which is their only working day, their only period of trial and
preparation for eternity, and that death will shortly put an end to all their
hope, help and endeavors; and therefore, as they value salvation, they should
not delay conversion.

4. THEY should labor for a deep, convictive sense of their own inability to
convert themselves, and that they must perish for ever unless GOD help them,
and that speedily.

5. THEY should endeavor after a thorough and firm persuasion, that there is
hope and help for them in GOD, and that they may, and assuredly will, obtain
the grace of conversion, if they take the right method, and labor diligently
in seeking it. They should set it before them in firm purpose and resolution,
as a settled and determined point, that by the help of GOD, they will be
converted, and that they will never give over seeking the blessing, in all the
appointed means of grace, until they find it; saying with Jacob, I will not let
thee go, until thou bless me.

6. THEY should actually and resolutely set about denying all manner of know
sin, and every tempting companion and amusement, and attempt the performance of
every known duty, as well as they are able, without delay; uncertain how
quickly death may cut them off in their sins, and frustrate all purposes of
future amendment.

7. ALL this should be attempted in the strength of GOD, through Christ,
assuredly depending on, and confiding in his help in the way of duty, and
perpetually keeping up a deep sense of their own impotence; that all their
sufficiency is of GOD, and that, of themselves, they can do nothing; but all
things, Christ strengthening them.

8. THEY should instantly and forthwith make choice of GOD for their portion
and blessedness, and attempt to enter into solemn covenant with him through
Christ. They should bring themselves back to him as returning prodigals; give
themselves, their interest, and all their powers and abilities up to him, as
his long-abused property, and submit to him in all things.

9. THEY should attempt daily and perpetually to accept of Christ, by faith, in
all his saving offices, giving up their polluted, diseased souls into his hands
as their compassionate Physician and Redeemer; assuredly believing, that he
will in no wise cast them out or reject them, and firmly trusting both his
power and his grace.

10. IF, in the course of these endeavors, the unrenewed heart rises up
against these duties, and the world and the devil tempt the sinner to slight
them as needless, or to neglect them as impossible, or too severe, (which will
doubtless be often the case) it would be the wisest course for the person, thus
tempted, to flee instantly to GOD, by prayer, for succor, and to get the
temptation removed. One earnest look unto GOD, upon such occasions, has been
found by experience, to bring more strength into the soul, and to be more
efficacious against temptation, than all the human reasoning and resolutions in
the world. However, it is the duty of the sinner to oppose the temptation by
all means, and with all his might; and it would be wise, beforehand, to be
always expecting such trials, and to be pre-engaging the almighty aid against
the hour of temptation.

11. As the unconverted should never neglect secret prayer, nor any one
ordinance which they can attend; so, when the Spirit of GOD moves upon their
souls, either in convincing them of sin and misery, or in exciting holy
thoughts and good resolutions, they should cherish these motions, and pray GOD,
at the time, to increase and set home these convictions, till they issue in an
effectual and saving coversion: For, if they resist, and quench, and grieve the
holy Spirit, he will leave them, and they are in danger of being undone for
ever.

12. To help them in these duties, they should often set a part seasons for
more solemn meditation, self-examination and prayer.

CHAP. V. The same Subject continued. Symptoms of an unconverted State.
1. WHATEVER characters the scriptures represent as under an impossibility of
entering into the kingdom of heaven, are certainly to be reckoned among the
unconverted. Such are all unbelievers and in penitent sinners; -- all habitual
fornicators, adulterers, unclean, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers,
extortioners, idolaters, envious, malicious persons, strife-makers, sowers of
sedition, and the like 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Call. v. 19 -- 21. Ephesians. v. 5, etc. Rev.
xxi. 8. Mark xvi. 10.
. Yet it should be observed,

2. THAT in order to pronounce men unconverted, we must suppose them under the
dominion of these sins, and to be living customarily and habitually in the
practice of them: Which will appear from their committing them freely, and with
delight; frequently; pleading for them; palliating and extenuating them, and
hating to be admonished and reproved on account of them.

3. MEN who continue wilfully ignorant of their christian duty, and careless
about it (which may be known by their undervaluing, despising and neglecting
the means of knowledge and of grace) are certainly in an unconverted state. All
church-neglecters come under this predicament.

4. MEN who are careless of their hearts and thoughts, and give themselves
little trouble about their hidden sins and heart-plagues, notwithstanding they
may be pretty careful and conscientious in the outward part of moral and
religious duties, are certainly unconverted: For, where there is true grace, it
turns the eye inward to the heart, and the true convert is most watchful
against hidden corruptions.

5. THOSE who neglect the duties of secret prayer, meditation and
self-examination, although they may be scrupulously punctual in attending the
public ordinances of religion, are certainly unconverted: For, secret duties,
more especially secret prayer, is the first, the continued, and the last duty
of the converted soul.

6. WANT of relish for holy actions, and religious duties; a distaste to them;
a desire that they were not necessary, and a being pleased with any excuse to
get rid of them, are very sure signs of an unconverted state; more especially,
when this disrelish for holiness is accompanied with an inordinate desire of,
and hankering after worldly enjoyments and sensual pleasures.

7. MEN, who upon impartial examination, find that they are no better than they
were many years ago, but rather more vicious and depraved, have all the reason
in the world to pass an unfavourable judgment on their state: For grace is of a
growing nature, and where it is, carries forward the soul progressively to
higher seize in virtue and holiness.

8. MEN who have freely indulged vice in their youth, and can remember no time
since when they were greatly humbled before GOD for their youthful lusts;
greatly exercised about deliverance from their guilt and dominion, and made to
abandon them with indignation; and who are not very sensible of some remarkable
change for the better, both in their hearts and lives, may certainly conclude
that they are yet in the gall of bitterness.

9. A MAN who is not rationally assured, and who does not sometimes feel, that
he loves GOD above all things, and that he is ready to part with all things,
his most valued interests, his most beloved lusts, and even life itself, in
obedience to his will, and rather than give up his title to him: -- He who
loves any creature more than GOD -- earth more than heaven -- his body more
than his soul; -- who had rather be rich than good, and prefers the pleasures
of this world before GOD'S favor and enjoyment, is certainly unconverted.

10. THAT man, who upon the most deliberate consideration, is not willing to
deny himself the most beloved gratifications; to take up his cross and follow
his Redeemer through poverty, contempt, persecution and even martyrdom itself;
who does not cordially accept and embrace him in all his characters, submit to
him in all his offices, trust him without reserve, and give up all things to
him and for him, is certainly still in an unregerate, unconverted state.

CHAP. VI. The same Subject continued. The unhappy State of the Unconverted.
1. SUCH are spiritually dead; dead in trespasses and sins; dead to GOD, and to
every good purpose Ephesians. ii. 1. 1 Timothy v. 6.
.

2. SUCH are slaves; slaves to satan, who rules in the hearts of the children
of disobedience; blinds their eyes that they cannot discern the truth, and
leads them captive at his pleasure; -- slaves also to their unruly appetites
and tyrannizing lusts 2 Timothy ii. 26. Tit. iii. 3. Romans vi. 17.
.

3. SUCH are children of wrath, and, if conversion prevent it not, born heirs
to that torment, which is the certain effects of this wrath Ephesians. ii. 3.
: They are styled in scripture the children of the devil, bearing his image,
possessing his spirit and temper; and consequently, heirs of that hell, which
was prepared for the devil and his angels, which is their proper inheritance
John. viii. 41, 42, 44. Matthew. xxv. 41.
.

4. THE unconverted are enemies to GOD by wicked works; full of natural
antipathy and enmity against his being, nature, will and laws. The principle
which prevails in their hearts, would naturally lead them to dethrone and
destroy the blessed GOD, if they had the power, -- And being such, GOD is a
consuming fire to them: His nature and all his laws are against them, and so
are also all his perfections, except his mercy, which indeed waits a while to
be gracious; but, being abused and slighted, will in the end aggravate their
guilt and misery.

5. SUCH continue under the guilt of all the sins they ever have committed.
Every law and threatening in the Bible is against them: They are condemned
already; sentence is already passed against them in numberless places; so that
nothing but the slender and precarious thread of present life suspends the
execution.

6. THEY are on the very brink of perdition, momently in danger of dropping
into a place and state of endless misery. Every night they lie down, there is
even something more than a possibility, that before the morning's light, they
may lift up their eyes, being in torments.

7. THEY have no covenant right or title to any mercy they enjoy. Every
blessing they enjoy has the nature of a curse to them, in the manner in which
they receive and use it. This earth is only their prison, where they are for a
short time, supported by GOD, 'till the time of their execution comes. The
wicked is reserved to the day of destraction; they shall be brought forth to
the day of wrath Job xxi. 30.
.

8. IF they were perfectly known, their case would be pitied, and their nature
hated, by every good person on earth. And the angels and other holy spirits, so
far as they know them, do thus regard them.

9. IF such did thoroughly know their own wretched and perilous condition, they
could not possibly enjoy one moment's peace, tranquillity or happiness in this
life. And, indeed, whatever of this kind they do enjoy, is only a fatal
delusory happiness, founded on false hopes; producing a destructive security,
and issuing in endless despair.

10. THERE is only left for them this comfort, that they are yet out of a place
of torment, and that there is still hope and help for them in GOD, through
Christ, if they will speedily embrace the opportunity. The present moment is
all they can rationally rely upon, in which to better their state, and cast the
die for eternity!

CHAP. VII. The same Subject continued. Mistakes about Conversion rectified.
1. IT has been already observed, that conversion is a thorough and remarkable
change; and therefore, that those persons must be deceived, who imagine
themselves to have been truly converted, merely because of some outward,
partial, and incomplete change which they may have undergone, either from
difference in age and circumstances in life; alterations in their health,
constitution, or interests and connexions; the principles of self-love, honor
and reputation; legal pannies and terrors, or from false and incomplete views
of religion. It may now be observed negatively,

(1.) THAT christian baptism cannot be that conversion or regeneration, to
which the promise of heaven is annexed: For we are expressly told, that unless a
man is born again of the Spirit, as well as of water, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of GOD. Besides, many baptized persons, are amongst the wickedest of
men, and have evident and absolute need of spiritual regeneration.

(2.) THE bare profession, even of a true religion, however specious, is not
conversion: Else all the professors of a true religion would be true converts;
which we know is far from being the case in fact. Much less,

(3.) CAN it consist in a man's changing his religious profession: For this may
be, and often is done from worldly, interested, luerative motives, and false,
erroneous principles, and not from convictions of truth and duty.

(4.) STRONG convictions of sin, and great fear of GOD'S wrath, cannot, of
themselves, prove a sinner to be truly converted. If so, we must conclude, that
Cain, Herod, Pilate, Simon Magus and Judas Iscariot, were true converts, which
is not true in fact; because the terrors of these unhappy men did not issue in
true repentance.

(5.) AN external sober, moral conduct, a life free from the gross outward acts
of sin, and a regular attendance on the ordinances of religion, are no certain
evidences of conversion, though they may justly command the respect and esteem
of our fellow-men. This was the righteousness of the Pharisees: It is also the
righteousness of most hypocrites and formalists: And yet our Savior, who knew
and detected the real characters of these men, has assured us, that unless our
righteousness shall exceed theirs, we shall in no wise enter into the kingdom
of GOD Matthew. v. 20.
.

(6.) A MAN'S really renouncing and abandoning some sin or sins, to which he
has been addicted, cannot prove him a true convert, while he continues in the
love and practice of other sins. Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and did many
things in obedience to his ministry, which were not much against his natural
inclination; but would by no means part with his beloved lust, his darling
Herodias Mark vi. 20, 23.
. Men do many things of this kind from mere prudential motives, and because
these sins are destructive of their health, interest and reputation: But he who
offends wilfully, allowedly and perseveringly in one point, is guilty of the
whole law James ii. 10.
; and plainly shows that he despises the authority by which it is enjoined, and
obedience to it enforced.

(7.) A MAN'S showing remarkable zeal in religion, is no certain proof that he
is a true convert, or a real Christian. Zeal is either good or bad, according
to the objects about which it is employed, the motives from which it
originates, and the spirit and temper with which it is exercised. If zeal be
according to knowledge, it can hardly exceed in the measure of it; for it is
always good to be zealously affected in a good thing Gal. iv. 18.
: But a blind, ignorant and misguided zeal, is the most furious, mischievous
and destructive of all the passions. The apostles knew not what manner of
spirit they were of, when in a paroxism of their frantic zeal, they called for
fire from heaven to destroy the Samaritans Luke ix. 25.
. As touching zeal, St. Paul, when Saul, persecuted the church of Christ, and
destroyed that which he should have built up Read Acts ix. Gal. i. 13, etc.
Phil. iii. 5, 6.
.

2. IT has been already said, positively, and I here repeat it, That conversion
is a great, universal, radical change of the soul, by the regenerating
influences of the Spirit of GOD, -- not of the substance and nature of the
soul; but of its temper and principles; -- not such as to preclude all sin and
corruption in this life; but such as causes piety and virtue to predominate in
the character, and as it lays a foundation for progress in holiness, and final
perfection. It is, in short, a new and divine nature and principle, generating
a new and divine life.

3. THE foreruaners and concomitant attendants of this change, are generally,
as follows: (1.) This change is preceded by such a conviction of guilt and
pollution, as deeply humbles the soul before GOD, and makes it feel itself
exposed to eternal misery; that it is helpless and lying at undeserved mercy,
and that it must perish, if it receives not this mercy. -- (2.) By such a sense
of the evil of sin, as causes the soul to abhor it, and to wish above all
things to be freed from its dominion and pollution. -- (3.) By such a sense of
the depravity and badness of the sinner's heart, as makes him see the necessity
of its being changed by divine grace, and makes him wish, above all things to
be truly regenerated. -- (4.) By such a sense of the sinner's inability to
change his own heart and affections, as makes him feel that it never can be
done, unless GOD is pleased to take the work wholly into his own hands. -- (5.)
By such a sense of the sinner's need of Christ, as makes him see his help in
him alone, so as earnestly to desire to embrace him; to be united to him, and
found in him: -- And finally, by such a sight and sense of the power and grace
of Christ, his all sufficiency to save unto the uttermost, and his fullness and
suitableness to all the sinner's wants and desires, as engages the sinner, as a
lost, sin-sick, perishing creature, to cast himself cheerfully into the hands
of this glorious, compassionate Redeemer, with a full and unshaken confidence,
that he will work the great salvation in him and for him, and give him a
complete victory over every enemy.

CHAP. VIII. The same Subject continued. The Way of discerning true Conversion
by its Effects and Consequences.
1. AS soon as the Spirit of GOD regenerates the soul, it is conscious of a
kind and degree of light and knowledge which it had not before, and is
possessed with correspondent affections. It knows itself in a different manner
from what it formerly did. Unconverted men do little study and little know
their inward man. Their thoughts and observations are chiefly employed about
outward circumstances and external accomplishments: But the light of grace
opens a new scene to the soul, the eye of which is turned inward, backward and
forward; and as light increases, it still sees more and more of its natural
deformity, vileness and guiltiness, and more and more admires that wonderful
mercy, which regarded it in its low condition, and undertook its redemption and
deliverance.

2. THE converted soul knows and sees GOD in quite a different manner from what
was usual. A new and glorious light shines now on all his perfections,
providence, laws and works. In its unrenewed state, it had indeed a
speculative knowledge of GOD, which struck it at times, with wonder and
admiration: But now GOD appears incomparably glorious and amiable; a fit object
of the soul's love and choice, and its desirable portion. Formerly, it could
observe his wondrous works and adorable providence, without considering GOD in
them: But now the whole world seems full of GOD; GOD appears more or less to
the soul in every work, in every providence, in every mercy, and in every
affliction: and the soul sees and approves his glory and beauty, his power and
wisdom, his justice and goodness in all; is charmed with these manifestations
of him, and follows hard after him as its only and all-sufficient portion.

3. THE converted soul has quite a new kind of knowledge and apprehension of
Christ to what it formerly had. Unconverted persons, at the very best, only
consider Christ as a great and worthy person, and a benefactor to a guilty
world; as sustaining a most heroical and benevolent character, and therefore
worthy the admiration and praise of men: But the true convert sees Christ, by
faith, as the chief among ten thousand, and altogether lovely. There is a kind
of secret, unaccountable charm in the very name, and idea of Jesus, that
excites his love and draws his affections; whom having not seen, he loves, and
in whom, although now he sees him not, yet believing, he exults and rejoices,
with a joy unspeakable and full of glory Pet. i. 8.
. He sees an inexpressible beauty in his person and ^aracter, and a wonderful
excellency, fitness and necessity in all his saving offices; and, in this view,
Christ is exceeding dear and precious to him. He tegards him as his Lord, his
love, his life, his friend, his wisaom, righteousness, s^^ctification and
^^omption. When you speak of (...) him, his heart leaps with gratitude and joy,
(...) is ready to cry out, This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O ye
(...) of Jerusalem; -- he ^^o bath loved me, and washed me from my sins in his
own blood; -- he in whom I have believed, and to whom I have committed my soul,
against that day; -- my Savior, my Lord, my Jadge, and my portion!

4. THE real convert has quite a new knowledge and judgment of GOD'S holy law,
and quite new regards and affections respecting it. The Psalmist's prayer is
now answered in him, Lord, open thou mine eyes, h^t I may behold wondrous
things out of thy law Psalm. cxix. 18.
. (...), indeed, beholds GOD'S law with mew eyes, and regard, it with new
affections. As the very best among unconverted persons have very false,
contracted, unworthy (...) of the divine law; so neither are they cordial (...)
to the strictness of its requirements, and that holin^ (...) it enjoins. The
carnal mind is enmity again (...) GOD; for it is not subject to the law of GOD,
(...) indeed can be: For the law is spiritual, and (...) only relished and
delighted in by a removed, spiritual mind; but such are carnal, sold under sin
Romans vii. 14. -- viii. 7
. Some of the divine laws, indeed, which do not cross their beloved lusts, may,
in some measure, gain their liking and approbation, and they may be ashamed to
speak evil of the law in general, which the reason of mankind and the
scriptures of truth, pronounce to be holy, jusi and good Romans vii. 12.
: But still their corrupt hearts and natures reluctate against the purity and
perfection of the divine law; and the more they know of its purity, exceeding
broadness, and the unabating, unremitting strictness of its requirements, still
the more do their hearts rise up against it. Now, converting grace reconciles
both the judgment and affections to the purity of the divine law, both by
opening the sinner's eyes to behold the beauty of holiness, and by conforming
and attempering his heart to that purity and spirituality which the law
requires. He delights in the law of GOD, after the inward man; he consents that
it is holy, just and good; and when his corruptions would lead him to violate
its precepts, he wholly condemns himself, and approves that law, which, through
the momentary prevalence of corruption, he trangresses Romans vii. throughout.
. But that I may be brief,

5. THE renewed soul has quite a new knowledge and judgment of sin, and his
heart stands quite differently affected toward it.

6. THE instrumental duties of religion; divine ordinances and religious
duties, are regarded in a quite other manner than usual by the renewed sinner,
and performed and frequented on quite disterent principles, and for quite
different ends and purposes; namely, to promote the glory of GOD, and obtain
spiritual communion with him in the use of these means.

7. THE passions and leading affections of the renewed soul, have quite a new
tendency, bent and direction. His joys are quite new, as to their objects; and
so are his desires and aversions, his cares and fears, his hopes and sorrows.

8. IN a word, a man, after conversion, may be said to be a new creature; he
has new principles, new ends, new purposes and pursuits, new friends and
enemies, new interests, new pains and pleasures, and consequently, a new
nature; according to that very plain and emphatical declaration of the Apostle,
Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a NEW CREATURE: OLD things are PASSED
AWAY; behold, ALL THINGS are become NEW 2 Cor. v. 17.
.

9. IF these things, therefore, be so; if such is the universal and remarkable
change wrought in the sinner by regeneration, Is it possible that such a change
can have long passed upon men, and yet they be totally ignorant of the matter?

10. IT may indeed happen, that a few are savingly changed in infancy and
childhood, and under the influence of an early Christian education, before
vicious habits have been formed and confirmed in the soul. In others also, the
change (as to the sensible effects of it) may have been slow, gradual, and
almost imperceptible; and so, neither the work itself, nor the time when it was
performed, may be discerned or acknowledged, in a course of many years. It may
also happen, in some cases, that all the symptoms of a saving and effectual
conversion may be felt, and yet those who feel them, may long doubt of their
truth and reality, and suspect that they are fallacious and counterfeit; until
the Spirit himself shines upon his own work, and compels (as it were) a
convictive evidence of its truth; The Spirit witnessing with their spirits Romans
viii. 16.
: However, it is next to impossible, but that all must know, that a great work
has been wrought upon them, and a mighty change has passed in them; and that
"whereas they were once blind, now they see John ix. 25.
."

11. IT may be laid down as a general maxim, to which experience and
observation have furnished very few exceptions, That the greater sinners men
have been, the deeper and more humiliating have been their convictions of sin,
and the more sensible and remarkable this great change in them, both to
themselves and others.

12. WHAT must we rationally and probably infer concerning persons of this
character, who have never yet experienced any such remarkable change in
themselves? -- Either, that they are total strangers to self-examination and
self-knowledge (which is a sure mark of a graceless state;) -- or that no such
change has ever as yet passed upon them!

13. WHAT then must we necessarily conclude, concerning the state of the
generality of nominal Christians? -- That they are not converted, nor born
again of the Spirit; and consequently, that, in their present condition, they
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven John iii. 5.
!

CHAP. IX. The same Subject continued. The Motives to Conversion.
1. THE conversion of a sinner gives joy in heaven. It gives pleasure to the
heart of GOD, and of his dear Son; and every benevolent spirit of that upper
world, partakes in the joy, that a coheir is born to glory Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
Matthew. xxiii. 37. Luke xix. 41, 42. -- xv. 7, 10, 32.
.

2. As far as it is known, it rejoiceth the heart of every good person upon
earth. The whole church militant rejoice in it.

3. To bring sinners to repentance and final happiness, is the chief design of
all the manifestations of GOD to men, and of all his great and memorable
transactions on earth.

4. To effect this was the grand design of Christ's incarnation, ministry,
miracles, labors, sufferings, ascension to glory, and pouring down the gifts
and graces of the Holy Ghost, on his apostles and on the church.

5. To accomplish the conversion of human sinners, the apostles of the Lamb
labored, and wrote, and traveled, and suffered, and died; and this is the
grand business of all the labor and expense of a gospel ministry in the world.

6. GOD'S merciful nature invites, allures, and encourages sinners to
repentance and conversion. He has no pleasure in the final misery of sinners,
but that they should turn from their way and live. -- This he solemnly swears
by his sacred life Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
. He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance 2 Pet. iii. 9.
. He is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and of great compassion,
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin Exodus xxxiv. 6.
. See this merciful disposition of GOD to repenting sinners, illustrated with
an inexpressible beauty and energy, in the conduct of the father toward the
returning prodigal, Luke xv.

7. GOD'S most gracious calls, and exceeding many great and precious promises,
should have an irresistible force to induce us to conversion; especially when
considered in conjunction with those riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering patience, which sinners are despising and abusing, to the
unspeakable aggravation of their own guilt and misery Romans ii. 4, 5.
.

8. THE gates of heaven are set open, and all the riches of its beauty and
glory displayed before sinners, for this very purpose, that they might be
allured by the prospect of celestial glory, to conversion and repentance.

9. WE are apt to think the descriptions given in scripture of hell and
everlasting misery and torment, very disgusting; but the sole design of these
representations is to alarm the fears of sinners by the prospect of this
misery, that so they may be brought to a speedy and effectual conversion. Hell
would never have been revealed to sinners, had it not been, that knowing these
terrors of the Lord, they might be persuaded to repentance.

10. THE safe and happy state which conversion puts us into, and the rich and
glorious privileges which it confers upon us, even in this life, should be a
powerful motive to our getting into this happy state: Pardon, peace and
reconciliation with an offended GOD; deliverance from the indwelling power,
curse and condemnation of sin, adoption, protection; an interest in GOD as our
portion, and the comfortable hope of his eternal enjoyment.

11. GOD'S having brought down the terms of his great salvation so low, and
made it such a possible, feasible and practicable thing for sinners to be
saved, will render them wholly inexcusable, if they continue unconverted, and
so come short of salvation. They are commanded and invited, by a solecism in
language, to buy the great salvation without money or price, to come and drink
of the water of life freely Isa. lv. 1, 2. Rev. xxii. 17.
; only to look unto Christ, from the ends of the earth, and be saved; to come
unto him, to receive him, and to believe in him Isa. xlv. 22. John i. 12.
Matthew. ii. 28.
.

12. ALTHOUGH we cannot fulfill these reasonable and easy conditions of the new
and gracious covenant, by any strength of our own, yet GOD has promised, that
he will put his Spirit into us, and help us, and work in us both to will and to
do the things that are pleasing to him, if we sincerely and importunately
solicit this divine agent by prayer Luke ii. 9 -- 14.
.

13. BUT the most cogent and necessitating motive of all is, That we either
must be converted, or must perish eternally! The scripture is clear, decisive,
and peremptory in in this matter: so that we are under this dilemma; We must
either turn or burn; either be converted to GOD, and born again of the Spirit,
or take up our residence for ever with devils and damned spirits!

ESSAY II.
CHAP. I. JUSTIFICATION: Or the method of a Sinner's being justified before GOD.
1. JUSTIFICATION no where in scripture signifies a sinner's being made
righteous; but it every where signifies his being esteemed, manifested, or
pronounced righteous.

2. THIS word, although it has always this signification, yet it has three
different senses in the scriptures; either, first, it is taken for our present
justification in the sight of GOD, our being pardoned, and accepted into a
state of favor and friendship with him: -- Or, secondly, for our justification
before men, and our own consciences: -- Or, thirdly, for our public sentence of
acquittance and approbation, on the day of judgment, in the presence of the
assembled world Psalm. xxxii. 1, 2. Romans iii. 22. etc. -- iv. 2, etc. Gal. ii.
16. -- iii. 1, etc. Jam. ii. 20 -- 26. 1 John iii. 21. Job xxvii. 6. Matthew.
xxv. 3^.
.

3. JUSTIFICATION is a forensic or law-term, opposed to condemnation. Now
condemnation never signifies the making of men guilty, but only pronouncing
them so; in like manner, justification never signifies making men holy, but
only declaring them to be such in the eye of the law.

4. WE are said to be justified by the imputation of Christ's righteousness:
Now, to impute, is to esteem any character or quality to belong to a person as
his.

5. A THING may be imputed to a person, which was always his own: So sin is
imputed to a sinner, when he is treated as an offender; in like manner,
righteousness is justly imputed to a person, who has always obeyed the law.

6. A THING, quality or character may also be imputed to a person, which was
not always or originally his own, but is only esteemed to belong to him, in the
eye of the law: Thus, a debt is imputed to the surety, and his payment of it is
imputed to the debtor, and reckoned his act and deed.

7. THIS seems to be the proper notion of imputation in the present doctrine.
Christ as our surety, has undertaken to pay our debts, i. e. to atone for our
sins. Our sins are, therefore, imputed to him, and accordingly he suffers for
them, as though they had been his own: And his righteousness is freely and
graciously imputed to us, if we are indeed believers, so that we may plead it
before GOD as our justifying righteousness: And therefore it is that GOD
justifies and acquits us as righteous, even for the sake of his dear Son's
righteousness, which we accept and plead by faith.

8. As sinners we may be said to owe a double or twofold debt to GOD, which
must be paid before we can be justified. We owe him perfect obedience to the
law, through the whole of our lives; and this would indeed justify us, if we
were innocent creatures, and did perfectly fulfill this condition of the first
covenant: But being now sinners, we owe the debt of eternal punishment, and the
debt of perfect obedience also, (our obligations to which, as the creatures and
subjects of GOD, can never be cancelled:) Now, we are equally unable to pay
either of these debts. As the punishment which we owe is eternal, we must be
ever paying it, and never shall have paid off the score. No moment shall arrive
in the course of eternal duration, when we shall be able to say, This debt is
paid. And as to the other debt of perfect obedience, the payment of it becomes
impossible to those who have once sinned; seeing that obedience can never be
perfect, in which there is one failure or defect.

9. SINNERS being therefore thus incapable and insolvent, Christ undertook for
them as their surety; -- first, by suffering, to pay the debt of punishment due
for their sins; and secondly, by his perfect and sinless obedience to the law
of GOD, from his birth to his death, he has wrought out for them a complete
righteousness, answering every demand of the law; and thus he is become THE
LORD THEIR RIGHTEOUSNESS Jer. x^^^^^. 6. -- xxxiii. 16.
.

10. THE righteousness which is imputed to believers for their justification,
is not the personal righteousness of Christ, as man; nor his essential
righteousness, as GOD; but his suretiship righteousness, as GOD- man Mediator;
and is the whole of his obedience and sufferings, from his birth to his death,
which he performed in the room and stead of believers.

(...) imputation, therefore, is GOD'S graciously making over of this perfect
suretiship righteousness of of Christ to believers, and his accepting their
persons, on that account, as righteous.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine of Justification, through the imputed Righteousness of
Christ, continued.
1. IN the doctrine of justification, by the righteousness of Christ, we are
not to apprehend GOD as mistaking our real characters, and esteeming us
perfectly righteous, when indeed we are not: On the contrary, he considers us
as being just what we are, poor, sinful men, who have fulfilled the demands of
his law, only by the obedience of our surety.

2. NOR ought we to esteem ourselves the more righteous or worthy, on account
of our being thus justified, but as unworthy and hell-deserving as ever:
Consequently, this doctrine is so far from ministering to spiritual pride, that,
when rightly understood, it must tend greatly to humble the justified believer;
seeing those who are thus justified, are still ungodly Romans iv. 5.
.

3. THE righteousness of Christ is imputed to none but true believers; i. e.
such as have truly received Christ, and are united to him by faith: For, in
thus receiving him, we receive his person, offices and benefits, and
consequently, his righteousness, which is one of those benefits, freely offered
in the gospel to all who will accept it.

4. THIS righteousness is not imputed to a sinner before he has faith, nor is
the imputation of it delayed till the fruits of faith appear; but the moment a
sinner believes, it is imputed to him, and he is justified Romans iv. 24, 25.
.

5. BUT that this doctrine may appear in a still more clear, convictive and
unexceptionable point of light: (1.) It is evident, that man is naturally and
necessarily under law to GOD; and this is equally true of all created beings.
(2.) Some kind of righteousness is absolutely necessary to man's justification.
(3.) That righteousness which justifies man, must be such as answers to the
perfection of that law under which man is. (4.) The law was at first given to
man for two distinct ends; first, To signify GOD'S will, enjoined by his
authority for the rule of man's duty; and, secondly, As a covenant between GOD
and man, according to which, man was to expect life or death eternal, as he
should or should not fulfill the terms of it. Now, this law, in the last sense
of it, is abrogated by the bringing in of a better covenant; but in the first
sense, the law, as a rule of duty, obliging to obedience, is of perpetual
obligation. In this sense, Christ came to establish the law, and has
incorporated it into his gospel, in its utmost purity, as the law of his
kingdom, and the rule of his subjects. It is therefore a righteousness
answerable to the demands of this law, which alone can justify us. But,

(5.) WE can have no such righteousness of our own; nor can any creature
provide such a righteousness for us: And it is expressly declared by the
Apostle, That by the deeds of the law, no flesh living shall be justified Romans
viii. 3. -- iii. 20, 28. Gal. ii. 16. -- iii. 21.
.

(6.) THE law, an obedience to which the Apostle excludes from having any share
in our justification, is not merely the ceremonial law, as some have imagined,
but the moral law also: -- That law, by which is the knowledge of sin Romans iii.
20. -- vii. 7.
: -- That law which was ordained to life Romans vii. 10. -- x. 5.
: -- That law, by the breach of which the whole world was condemned, and from
the curse of which Christ came to deliver us Romans iii. 19. Gal. iii. 13.
: -- That law against which the Gentiles sinned Romans iii. 9.
; -- and that law which we establish by faith Romans iii. 31.
; all which descriptions, are applicable only to the moral law. Abraham is
declared to have been justified by faith alone, without works done in obedience
to any law Romans iv. 2, 3.
; and the Apostle expressly excludes works of every kind from our justification
Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. Romans ii. 6.
.

(7.) No such NEW LAW of gospel sincerity (taking in faith, repentance and
sincere, though imperfect, obedience, as the ground of our justification under
the new covenant, instead of perfect obedience under the old) has ever been
given by GOD as the term of our pardon and acceptance: For, if we were
justified before GOD by such a patchwork, imperfect righteousness as this, two
absurdities would follow: -- First, GOD must be supposed to abate in the
demands of his law, in favor of our corruptions; and, if GOD could abate any
thing of the perfection of his law, he might abate more; yea, he might cancel
its obligations altogether. In that case, Christ lived and died in vain, who
lived and died to establish and honor the law; and mankind might have been
redeemed and saved without his atonement and mediation! -- Secondly, We are
then still under a covenant of works, and live by doing: For, let the work be
perfect or imperfect, it will still be a covenant of works, so long as works
are the condition of it! -- Both of which are expressly contrary to the
doctrine of the gospel.

(8.) WE cannot possibly be justified by the works, or merit, or righteousness
of any mere creature, however holy or dignified; none being able to pay more
than that righteousness which he himself owes, as a creature, to the law of
GOD: For creatures are obliged to employ all their powers, talents and
faculties in the service of their Creator; and when they have done all that
they are commanded, and all that they can, they have done only their duty; and
therefore can, properly speaking, merit nothing for other creatures Luke xvii.
9, 10.
.

CHAP. III. The Doctrine of Justification continued.
1. WE have already observed, that we have no righteousness of our own whereby
we can be justified, so that if ever we are justified, it must be by the
righteousness of another; and this other, as the scriptures declare, is the
Lord Jesus Christ, who appeared upon earth to fulfill all righteousness; though
he owed no such righteousness on his own account, as Mediator (this being an
office which he voluntarily undertook, and to which he was by no means
antecedently obliged): For this purpose also, he was made of a woman, made
under the law; appeared in the likeness of sinful flesh; gave his life a ransom
for many, and made his soul an offering for sin Gal. iv. 4. Phil. ii. 7, 8.
Matthew. xx. 28. Heb. ix. 28. Isa. liii.
.

AS it appears to me a matter of unspeakable importance that mankind should
well understand this doctrine, so I take the liberty of entreating the readers
of this little Essay, to bestow a close attention to the aphorisms advanced in
it, and to the scriptures in the margin, upon which these aphorisms are
grounded.

2. CHRIST is expressly called the LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, and we are said to
be justified by HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS Jer. xxiii. 6. Isa. xlv. 24. -- liii. 11.
Dan. ix. 24.
.

3. THIS mediatorial or suretiship righteousness of Christ, is expressly said
to be made over, or imputed to believing sinners for their justification Romans
iii. 24. -- v. 18, -- 21. -- viii. 1, -- 4. -- x. 4.
.

4. CHRIST wrought out this righteousness for us, by the appointment of GOD, in
consequence of the covenant of redemption Zech. vi. 12, 13. 1 Pet. i. 19, 20.
Prove. viii. 22, -- 31. Heb. x. 5, -- 10. Isa. xlii. 6. -- xlix. 3, -- 9 -- l.
5, -- 10. -- liii. 10. 2 Timothy i. 9. Tit. i. 2. Gal. i. 4.
.

5. THIS righteousness was wrought out in the same nature which sinned and
fell, and which stood in need of it: He assumed not the nature, nor undertook
the cause of fallen angels, but of the fallen and lost seed of Adam, the
progenitor of human sinners. So that HE, by assuming our nature is become our
kinsman, to redeem our lost inheritance Ruth. iv. 4, -- 15. Levit. xxv. 24.
; and, it is remarkable, that GOD prepared him a body for this very purpose;
which proves, that the design was originally from GOD, and that he is
well-pleased for his righteousness sake Gal. iv. 4. Heb. ii. 14. Psalm. xl. 6.
Romans viii. 3. -- v. 19.
.

6. NOTHING can be clearer and plainer from the whole current of scripture,
than that what Christ did and suffered in our nature, as God-man Mediator, he
did and suffered properly in our room and stead, and that both his obedience
and sufferings were properly vicarious, i. e. for us, and transferable to us,
upon our being enabled to comply with, and fulfill the conditions of the
covenant of grace; i. e. believe in such a manner as to repent and return unto
GOD, by a saving conversion Read and attentively consider Heb. ix. 26, -- 28. 1
Pet ii. 24. John i. 29. Ephesians. v. 2. Matthew. xx. 28 -- xxvi. 28. 1 Timothy ii. 6.
Gal. iii. 13, Romans iii. 25. 2 Cor. v. 21.
; and this alone can account for the greatness of our Lord's dejection,
consternation, terror and agony in the last scenes of his passion.

7. GOD the Father has declared his acceptance of this righteousness for all
the purposes for which it was intended, and in consequence of which, he is
declared to be a just God, while a Savior and the justifier of sinners who
believe in Jesus Romans iii. 26.
. He is represented as delighting in Christ, in the very prospect of his thus
offering himself, and working out a righteousness for men Prove. viii. Isa.
xlii. 1. Matthew. iii. 17.
; and as being actually delighted and well-pleased with that sacrifice which,
in the fullness of time, he offered Ephesians. v. 2.
. GOD'S acceptance and approbation of this righteousness, is also proved by his
raising him from the prison of the grave, and receiving him into heaven Acts
ii. 24. Romans iv. 25. -- viii. 34. Heb. xiii. 20. John xvi. 10.
.

8. THE way in which we become interested in this righteousness, is by faith,
which will be the subject of the following Essay.

9. AS this mediatorial righteousness of Christ is perfect and complete, so if
it be imputed to a sinner for his justification, it must be every way
sufficient for that purpose. It is to the full satisfaction of all the parties
concerned: For, first, as Christ was perfectly holy in his nature, of infinite
dignity in his person, and did and suffered all that the law required, so the
demands of the law are fully satisfied, and the law itself more honored than
it could have been by the perfect obedience of innocent men or angels: --
Secondly, GOD himself is perfectly satisfied, as the whole design was from him,
and all his perfections do most illustriously shine out in this way of
justifying a sinner Job xxxiii. 23, 24. 1 John iv. 10. Acts ii. 23.
: -- It is a method pleasing to Christ: He freely offered himself; he
gloriously revived from under his sufferings, and is highly exalted and
rewarded in consequence of them Philip. ii. 6, -- 11.
: -- Nor surely, can the pardoned sinner himself have any thing to object
against this method of his justification. He had no righteousness of his own,
nor could the whole universe of created beings furnish him with any which could
be available: In this forlorn and destitute condition, GOD pitied him and laid
his help upon one mighty to save; and Christ wrought out a most perfect
righteousness for his justification.

10. AS it is undoubtedly true, that we cannot be justified by any inherent,
personal righteousness of our own; so it is equally certain, that without such
an inherent righteousness, wrought in us by the regenerating, sanctifying
Spirit, we can never enter into the kingdom of heaven. This is a doctrine of
vast importance also, and which is evident from the whole current of scripture
1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Heb. xii. 14, etc. etc.
. Holiness is that preparatory qualification, which is necessary in order to
our possessing the inheritance of GOD'S saints in glory, -- in the same manner
as faith is necessary in order to obtain an interest in the righteousness of
Christ, for the sinner's justification. Faith puts us in a state of favor with
GOD: Holiness qualifies us for his enjoyment. Without faith we cannot be
justified: Without holiness we cannot be glorified.

ESSAY III. The NATURE of FAITH in general, and of JUSTIFYING FAITH in
particular.
1. FAITH is properly an assent of the understanding to the truth of some
testimony: It ought always to rest on sufficient evidence, and is either human
or divine, according to the testimony which it respects.

2. HUMAN faith is an assent to the testimony of men, and admits of various
degrees, from absolute disbelief, to a firm persuasion.

3. THE firmest foundation of human faith, is, when a number of men, of good
character and competent judges of the matter which they testify, perfectly
agree in their testimony; -- when they lay down their lives in confirmation of
it, without any view of interest in propagating a falsehood; -- and when
numbers, who are declared enemies to their testimony, yet confess the principal
matters of it. On this foundation stands our belief of the truth of
Christianity, so far as it is a matter of fact, which recommends itself to our
understandings by external evidence.

4. DIVINE faith rests on the testimony of that GOD, who can neither be
deceived himself nor deceive us; and therefore must be infallibly true.
Wherefore, whenever we come to be assured that GOD has revealed or declared
any thing or doctrine, we are as certain of its truth, as that GOD lives;
however mysterious or incomprehensible the doctrine or matter revealed may
appear to our limited, finite understandings.

5. HUMAN testimony is, in its own nature, fallible, because it is the
testimony of a creature, whose perfections are limited, and who may possibly be
mistaken, deceived, lie or repent: Yet human testimony may, in some cases, be
so circumstanced, as to give the highest degree of moral certainty.

6. SAVING faith begins by receiving, and submitting to the whole testimony of
GOD, recorded in scripture, as true, divine and infallible.

7. IF it be true, that we ought to have reason to believe what we do believe;
or, that we ought to believe only upon sufficient evidence, it will follow,
that every believer of Christianity should endeavor to be well acquainted with
the evidences of the truth of Christianity, both external and internal.

8. THIS general faith of the truth and divinity of the holy scriptures,
includes in it a particular faith of every particular truth, doctrine promise,
law or threatening, contained in these scriptures. Consequently,

9. WHEN we have once paid the obedience of faith to the whole word of GOD, and
known by the contents of this revelation, our own guilty, miserable, helpless
and perishing state by sin, and the glorious remedy provided in a Mediator and
Redeemer; -- his glorious dignity, power, grace, offices and suitableness to
our wants and necessities, we then believe on him as the Son of GOD, and our
Redeemer. This is justifying, saving faith; the faith required by Christ and
his apostles.

10. DIVINES have distinguished faith, as it assents to truth, or receives and
applies a promise: The former they call an act of the understanding; the
latter, an act of the will: The former they call assent; the latter consent.
But faith in the simple notion of it, seems to be only an act of the
understanding, firmly assenting to saving truth. Yet,

11. THE necessity of the consent of the will; -- the act of trust or reliance,
as it is called, or the application of the promise, is, by no means denied: But
this I would rather consider as the fruit of faith, than as faith itself.

12. DIVINES have distinguished and explained historical faith -- temporary
faith -- faith of miracles -- faith of devils, and the like; but as neither of
these is the true gospel faith, to which the promises are annexed, the
consideration of them is here omitted.

13. TRUE and saving faith begins in the belief of GOD, his providence and his
word, and terminates and fixes on Christ and his righteousness, as the great,
saving object therein exhibited.

14. FAITH, in the principle of it, is the gift of GOD to us, and a grace
wrought in us by his holy Spirit Ephesians. ii. 8. Col. ii. 12. 2 These. i. 11.
.

15. FAITH does not justify and save us as it is an act of ours (for so, it is
a work and has no merit for this purpose;) but only as it credits the testimony
of GOD concerning his Son Jesus Christ, so as to receive him in all his
offices, according to the gospel offer of him; -- to unite the soul to him --
and to embrace, rely upon and plead his righteousness, which justifies.

16. FAITH, disposing the soul to embrace Christ and his righteousness, this
righteousness is graciously imputed by GOD to the believer for his
justification, and the Spirit, through Christ, is communicated to the believer
for his sanctification; -- so that Christ dwells in his heart by, or through
faith; and Christ is made of GOD to the believer, both his righteousness and
his strength.

17. THAT faith which is the gift of GOD, ever purifies the heart, works by
love, and is the fruitful principle of holy obedience.

18. THE just live by faith. Their whole life is a life of faith on the Son of
GOD, in which they daily lean and rely on him, and derive strength from him
John v. 1, -- 16.
.

ESSAY IV.
CHAP. I. Of entering into COVENANT with GOD.
1. A COVENANT is a stipulation or agreement between two or more parties,
wherein certain terms and conditions are to be fulfilled, and certain benefits
received upon their performance. But if any of the parties fail to perform
their stipulations they become covenant-breakers; the other party is absolved
from its obligation, and the covenant becomes void.

2. IN all covenants between men, there is a parity or some kind of equality
between the parties contracting; and by reason of that natural liberty, which
is the inviolable, unalienable privilege of every human creature, with regard
to his fellow-men, the contract, stipulation, or agreement must be supposed to
be free and with full consent, and the terms and conditions of the covenant,
such as both parties shall mutually consent to. So that the most dignified or
powerful mortal, can have no right to force any conditions upon his fellow-men,
or bind them to any duties, which they do not freely and voluntarily consent
to; only upon this proviso, that they have by some crime, forfeited their
natural liberty.

3. IT is the most astonishing act of condescension, that ever GOD vouchsafed,
to enter into covenant with man, as his creature, and much more, as his sinful,
obnoxious creature. As his creature and natural subject, it was sufficient that
GOD gave to man a law, with a penalty: As a sinful creature, and rebellious
subject, man had no right to expect any thing else but punishment, without any
covenant-privileges or mercies.

4. GOD, when he created man a moral agent, did, in the state of his innocence,
enter into a covenant with him, the equitable terms of which were, Do, and
live; -- transgress, and die. Man had power to keep this covenant of life; but
if he transgressed it, there was no provision made in the covenant of pardon
for transgressors, or of new strength to obey.

5. WHEN man had broke the first covenant, and forfeited all title, not only to
GOD'S covenant goodness, but even to mercy, -- (wonderful grace!) GOD was
pleased to enter again into covenant with man. And this last covenant is well
termed a covenant of grace; because it is founded on the free, undeserved grace
of GOD, and the merits of the Redeemer; -- and because GOD'S grace and Spirit
are stipulated in it, to enable man to rise from his fallen state, and to give
him strength to fulfill the conditions of it.

6. GOD being not only the Maker and rightful Lord of man, and infinitely holy,
just and good; but fallen man having also forfeited his life, -- GOD, I say,
has a right to propose the covenant to man, and to fix the terms and conditions
of it; and it is infinitely right that man entering into covenant with his
Maker and Redeemer, should be willing to sign a charte blanch. Yet does not
GOD force the will of man to consent to his gracious covenant, but only
proposes it to him; shows him the equity and advantage of his complying with
it, and gently moves him to his duty and interest, by the motives of his gospel
and attractions of his holy Spirit.

7. GOD'S freely tendering this covenant to sinners of mankind, is a sufficient
warrant and encouragement for our taking hold of it, and entering into covenant
with him; which, without this warrant, would seem dreadful presumption in such
creatures as we are.

8. GOD'S part of the covenant is all a free and gracious promise of something
which we do not, and cannot properly deserve or merit by any thing we can do;
-- and our part of it is all duty, which we were bound to perform antecedently
to any covenant promise: -- And even our ability to do this duty, and perform
these conditions, on which we are entitled to covenant blessings, is promised
and offered in the covenant itself. I will be their GOD, and they shall be my
people. -- I will give grace and glory, and no good thing will I withhold from
them that walk uprightly. -- I will take away the hard and stony heart, and
will give them an heart of flesh. -- I will write my law on their heart, and
put my fear in their inward part -- and I will be their GOD, and they shall be
my people.

9. THERE is something very singular in all these forms of GOD'S covenant, ' I
will, and they shall.' In all covenants between men, the parties fulfill their
own conditions, independently on each other. But GOD not only proposes the
covenant, but also gives strength and ability to fulfill the conditions on their
part; -- puts his Spirit into their hearts; writes his law in their inward
part, -- and often makes them a willing people in the day of his power. The
very covenant itself offers and conveys grace and strength to fulfill it.

10. ALTHOUGH we are not properly at liberty whether we shall choose GOD as our
covenant GOD, or enter into covenant with him, or not; -- but are obliged both
by duty and interest to do it, and to do it without hesitation or delay; yet
our choosing him, and entering into covenant with him, must be a matter of
cordial and deliberate choice. Choose ye this day whom ye will serve. I beseech
you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of GOD, that you present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to GOD, which is your reasonable service. --
GOD will have our heart; the approbation of our reason and the free and
cheerful consent of our mind in this matter, -- that it may not be a
constrained, but a reasonable and willing service. If he constrains any to be
thus happy, it is by the constraints of his grace; making them a willing people
in the day of his power.

11. AS sinners, in a natural state, have neither a relish for the promises of
GOD'S covenant, nor a heart and inclination to perform the conditions of it;
hence it follows, that none but gracious persons can or will enter into
covenant with GOD; and that all who make a pretense of doing it, without being
previously disposed and inclined by GOD'S holy Spirit, are only hypocrites and
self-deceivers.

12. WHAT GOD, on his part, offers in this covenant, is himself, principally
and comprehensively: I will be their GOD. And this includes all blessedness
which any creature is capable of enjoying. When GOD promises to be a GOD to us,
he promises to be a GOD all-sufficient to us, to be ours, in all his fullness,
according to our measure and capacity: For, if having this GOD, we are
straitened, it is not in him, (as the Apostle says) but in ourselves 2 Cor. vi.
12.
; in the narrowness of our own capacities, not in his infinite fullness. He
undertakes to be to-us, and to do for us, all that it belongs to him, as an
infinitely wise, holy and good GOD, to be and to do, to his covenant people.

13. WE may see then that all good and happiness is virtually sum'd up in this
covenant offer and promise; I will be your GOD. Accordingly, in other places of
scripture, GOD, in condescension to human weakness, is more particular and
explicit, in this covenant tender: -- I will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will I withold from my covenant people. All are yours. All things shall
work together for good to them that are in covenant with GOD.

14. AS GOD proposes himself in all his fullness in this covenant, according to
the measure and capacities of his creatures; so when he makes his demand from
us, of what we, on our part, are to be and do, in entering into covenant with
him, he demands ourselves and our all, absolutely and without reserve; that we
surrender ourselves and ours; whatever we have, are, or can do, wholly up to
his pleasure and disposal; to do with us, for us, in us, and by us, just what
seems good unto him.

15. AS submission to GOD'S will, and an unshaken trust and reliance on his
power, goodness, veracity and faithfulness, are important conditions of this
covenant, on our part; so, being assured of grace and glory, we are to leave
all inferior goods, which relate merely to our present state of existence,
wholly and entirely to the will of God, endeavoring to subject our will, with
regard to them, wholly to his, firmly believing, that every thing in our lot is
appointed by infinite wisdom and goodness, and being only concerned that all
things may work together for GOD'S glory, and our spiritual and eternal
happiness.

CHAP. II. The Same continued.
1. MEN may be said to enter into covenant with GOD either indirectly or
directly.

2. THE very sustaining of a profession of religion, or appearing not to deny,
but rather to avow, that we are the people of GOD, carries in it an implicit
acknowledgment of a covenant transaction. The bulk of whole Christian nations
appear to be thus in covenant with GOD.

3. IN every prayer to GOD, and acknowledgment of his authority over us, and
right to dispose of us, there is the matter of a covenant with him; and though
we may not intend, or directly avow any such thing, yet we do indirectly and
implicitly give ourselves to GOD in covenant, and bring ourselves under the
penalty of the covenant, if we do violate or break it.

4. THE most solemn acts of directly and explicitly entering into covenant with
GOD, are -- a private surrender and self-dedication of ourselves to GOD: -- The
giving up of our children to GOD in baptism -- and the renewing our baptismal
covenant at the Lord's table.

5. A PRIVATE and solemn surrender and dedication of ourselves to GOD, through
the Redeemer, is one of the earliest duties we should perform in religion,
after we have come to understand the nature of our baptismal vows, and the
obligations we are under to GOD. Forms of this kind may be met with in many
devotional books.

6. THIS kind of covenanting should be performed in a very solemn and
deliberate manner.

7. SOMETHING of the same nature ought to be done by every communicant, both in
his preparation for the Lord's supper, and at the ordinance itself; wherein an
express recognition should be made, of all the principal and essential parts of
our covenant with God, through the Redeemer.

8. THE giving up of our children to GOD in baptism, is an occasion upon which
we are called to an express covenant surrender of ourselves, and all that is
ours to GOD: We do, at that time, expressly acknowledge GOD to be our GOD, and
offer him our children, in virtue of a covenant which is supposed to subsist
between GOD and us: And the vows we make for our children, suppose our own vows
of the same kind.

9. Is it not surprising, that the same covenant which we renew with so much
solemnity at the Lord's supper, is generally so superficially renewed at the
baptism of the children of most Christians?

10. IF a solemn preparation is necessary in order to the right renewing of our
covenant with GOD at the gospel supper; is it less so before we give up our
children to GOD in baptism? Is not equal solemnity, seriousness and devotion
necessary on both occasions?

ESSAY V. A FORM of renewing COVENANT with GOD, at the LORD'S TABLE.
AS our great business in this ordinance is to call into lively and grateful
remembrance, the painful and ignominious death of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
keep up this remembrance of it in the church and world: -- As we are led to
remember it not only as a confirmation of the truth of his doctrines, but also
as a sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the world, and for our sins, and
consequently as the highest and dearest pledge of his and his Father's love to
us, and the sweetest and surest ground of our hope, as believing sinners: --
And as our principal business at this sacrament, (this feast upon a sacrifice)
is solemnly to enter into, and renew our covenant with GOD, over these dear
memorials of his Son's death -- over these signs and seals of the blood of the
everlasting covenant: -- In which solemn transaction we do profess to take and
avouch GOD, to be our GOD -- and to become his people, according to the terms
of the covenant. I have thought it might be exceeding proper and useful upon
these occasions, to rehearse and repeat at large the form of a solemn covenant
transaction, as it ought to be made, in substance, by every communicant, at or
before this sacrament.

I SHALL therefore put this form of covenanting with GOD, in the first person
of the singular number -- that every one of us may, upon this occasion, use it
for himself, and make it his own.

LET me therefore beseech each of my fellow-communicants, as in the immediate
presence of the GOD of heaven, and over the memorials of his Son's sacrifice --
and as, on this solemn occasion, about to enter into and renew covenant with
GOD, to let their hearts and thoughts go along with this form of a solemn
covenant transaction, and cordially and deliberately to make it their own
covenant; -- each saying in his heart with me, and saying it sincerely and
feelingly.

"MOST great and adorable JEHOVAH! Behold! a poor, insignificant guilty worm of
the dust, here prostrate before thee, as it were on the bended knees of my
soul, acknowledging thy glorious majesty and divine perfections, thine eternal
duration, infinity, self-sufficiency, all sufficiency, unchangeableness, and
incomprehensibility -- thine almighty power, all penetrating knowledge,
unerring wisdom, unbounded goodness, unfailing faithfulness, impartial justice
and undissembled truth.

"I DESIRE to rejoice (and O! that the whole world would rejoice!) that there
is such a GOD, and that this GOD rules in the heaven and in the earth, and
does according to his most sacred, sovereign, and holy will throughout the
universe.

"LORD, I acknowledge with gratitude and joy, that I am thy creature, thy
servant, thy subject, under infinite and unchangeable obligations to know,
serve, honor, fear, reverence and obey thee; yea to be and to do just what
thou please. And I would for ever adore thee, that thou have so closely
connected my duty, with thine own glory, and my highest interest: That although
my foundation is in the dust; all my original shame, and my nature sin -- yet
thou art giving encouragement to such a base, guilty wretch as I am and have
been, to approach thee the eternal all, the fountain of all being, holiness and
happiness through Jesus CHRIST, the eternal Son of thy love, with hopes of
being pardoned, accepted and saved by his most precious merit and mediation!
LORD, what am I? what is my original, lineage, descent and nature? what my
conduct, merit and desert, that thou should once condescend to look down
from the throne of thy majesty and holiness, upon such a creature as I have
been, and still am: -- That thou should once permit me to name thy venerable
name with my guilty lips -- much more, that thou should stoop to enter into
covenant with me, or cause me to hope for any blessing from thee!

"VERRILY, O LORD, I blush, am ashamed and even confounded, at the very
thoughts of this matchless grace and condescension! -- And were it not that
thou LORD, have spoken it; -- that it is thine own revealed, declared will, to
regard such sinners through Christ, and that thou can never change, lie nor
repent, I should even now despair of any mercy at thy hands: -- For, I must
confess in the presence of the all-seeing, heart-trying GOD, whom the closest
hypocrisy cannot deceive, that I have been an unprofitable servant, a prodigal
son, a wandering sheep, a barren fruitless tree, a cumberer of the ground, a
vile obstinate rebel, who, by ten thousand aggravated sins, have deserved the
hottest hell! -- How often have thou called thy backsliding creature, while I
have refused? -- How often have thou stretched out thy gracious hand and
merciful scepter, while I have disregarded? -- What commandment of thine have I
not broken? -- What talent or ordinance have I not misimproved? -- What mercy
have I not slighted? -- What instance of thy grace and favor; what gift of thy
providence, have I not turned into wantonness? -- How far have I been from
using this world so as not to abuse it? -- How many duties have I neglected
through sloth and vanity, and other base, low, unworthy motives? -- How many
sins have I committed against light, knowledge, and conscience of duty? -- How
many of my poor fellow creatures (those immortal souls, for whom Christ died!)
have I tempted and drawn into sin, by evil example, wicked solicitations, and
foolish, light, vain, unchristian behavior? -- And therefore have their guilt
to answer for as well as my own! -- How unwatchfully, uncircumspectly, and
unlike a child of light, and a disciple of Christ, I have walked, LORD, thou
know? -- How many foolish, idle words and vain, sinful jests have proceeded
out of my mouth, -- and how little of that which was good for the use of
edifying, or that might minister grace to the hearers? How many of my poor
fellow creatures have I corrupted and defiled; but how few have I edified and
profited? -- How little have I watched over my heart, my thoughts, my lips, my
passions, my temper and spirit? -- How easily have I been provoked to anger, to
revenge, to envy, to slander, to rash and uncharitable judging, and to
injurious and abusive language against my neighbors, yea, against my dear
christian brethren, whom I should love in the LORD fervently and unfeignedly,
and to whom I should do good and not evil, all the days of my life! How
unthankful, ungrateful, impatient, undutiful, unhumble have I been! How
shamefully defective and wanting have I been, in all the relative and social
duties of life, as a child, a parent, a neighbor, a friend, a husband, a wife,
a subject, a Christian! -- O, alas! How cold and stupid in prayer! How
inconstant and indevout in my attendance on holy ordinances and holy duties!
How careless in reading thy holy word, and treasuring it up in my memory!

"O LORD, thou know these things altogether, and now they lie as a heavy
burden upon my soul! Now I see their folly and their baseness; their guilt and
their treachery! And O! that I might see them clearer and clearer, until the
sight might pain my very heart, and make my soul sink in humility, and overflow
with the tears of sincere, unfeigned contrition and repentance! Behold, LORD, I
am vile! What shall I answer before thee? I put my hand on my mouth, and my
mouth as it were in the dust, and cry out unclean before thee. My sins against
light and love; against mercies and corrections; against advices and reproofs;
against vows, promises, resolutions and covenant engagements; against GOD the
Father, GOD the Son, and GOD the holy Ghost; against GOD, my neighbor and
myself. My sins of omission and commission; of thought, word and deed; known
and unknown; remembered and forgotten; of childhood, youth, and manly age: -- My
sins against reason and conscience; against the law and the gospel -- are next
to an infinite sum; they are far beyond my numbering; they are in number more
than the hairs on my head, or than the sands on the seashore, which cannot be
reckoned: -- They have gone over my head; -- they have ascended up even unto
heaven, and bear witness against me, crying for vengeance, like the blood of
righteous Abel. -- And whereas the very smallest of this number is sufficient
to sink me into hell, and for ever to separate me from thy gracious presence,
-- yet, O LORD, they are all ever before thee and in the light of thy
countenance, accompanied with every circumstance of their guilt and
aggravation: -- For there never has been a thought in my heart, a word in my
mouth, or an action in my life, but thou, O LORD, know it altogether.
Although I have often studied to conceal and forget my sins, yet they are ever
in the light of thy countenance, and recorded in the book of thine infinite
knowledge and remembrance, as though they had been but just now committed!

"LORD, be thou therefore merciful unto me a sinner; a great and guilty
transgressor! Mercy, mercy, is my only suit; my only plea! Mercy and pardon
through the blood of Christ, is all my hope and all my salvation!

"O LET the King this day at his table grant me the forfeited life of my soul
at my request, of mere undeserved mercy: For what profit is there in my blood,
O thou GOD of salvation?

"I HAVE no righteousness of my own to plead, wherefore I should be pardoned,
justified and accepted of thee to mercy! All my righteousnesses, even the whole
sum of them taken together, are but filthy rags! They need pardon, but cannot
deserve favor. I do, therefore, from my very heart, renounce and disclaim
every kind and degree of trust and dependence on my prayers, tears, charities,
repentances, good frames, holy duties, and all my other best works, for pardon
and justification with thee, my GOD. Every duty which I have done since I was
born, has been mixed with so much sin, infirmity and imperfection, that they
are utterly unworthy to be accepted and rewarded by a holy GOD; unless it be
through the merit, and for the sake of Jesus CHRIST. I therefore put my whole
trust in CHRIST the Mediator, as my surety and atoning sacrifice; as my wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; as my Lord and Redeemer; my
Prophet, Priest and King; for pardon, salvation and glory: For I know of no
other name given under heaven, whereby I can be saved.

"I BLESS thee, O LORD of heaven and earth, that thou art well pleased with
sinners, in him the Son of thy love; -- that, in him, thou art reconciling a
guilty world unto thyself, not imputing their trespasses to them; -- that
through him sinners have access unto thee the Father; -- that thou have exalted
him by thy right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and
remission of sins; -- that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but
have everlasting life; -- that through his blood we have remission, even the
full forgiveness of all sin; that whosoever comes unto him by faith, he will
in no wise cast out, -- and that I, even I, have liberty to enter into an
everlasting covenant with thee, through him, who is the way, the truth, and the
life; the true and living way unto thee the Father.

"BEHOLD, therefore, with an eye of compassion thy returning prodigal, thy lost
sheep, desiring to come unto thee in this way, which thou thyself have
appointed. I desire to come, LORD draw me by thy holy Spirit! I desire to
believe, LORD help thou mine unbelief! I desire to come weary and heavy-laden
under the burden of my sins; Lord increase a sense of their insupportable
weight, and give me that rest, which thou have graciously promised! I desire to
surrender my soul and body to thee, with all their powers and faculties -- all
that I am, have, and can do, sensible of thy right to them by creation,
preservation and redemption; and sorry, heartily sorry, that I ever strayed
from thee in any instance, or ever served satan or my own lusts. LORD, do thou
graciously accept the surrender through CHRIST, and make me in all things, just
what thou would have me to be. Make me worthy of thee and fit for thy
enjoyment.

"I CALL heaven and earth, thyself, thy holy angels, and my
fellow-communicants, to witness this day, that here, over the memorials of thy
Son's sacrifice, I do take and avouch thee, O thou eternal GOD, to be my
covenant GOD, and my heavenly Father through Christ. -- O save thy creature,
thy servant, thy subject, thine unworthy child, who puts his trust in thee,
and chooses thee as his chief good and everlasting portion! O lift upon me the
light of thy countenance; be reconciled unto me through Christ; manifest
thyself unto me, so as thou do not unto the world: Let all thy divine
perfections be engaged for my protection, support, comfort and direction,
through the straits and difficulties, the dangers and temptations of this
wicked world; through the dark valley of the shadow of death, and into thy
blissful and happifying presence, in the world of spirits above. Let no evil
spirit, or evil lust, be ever permitted to pluck me out of thy gracious hands;
but lead me by thy counsel here, and afterward receive me to glory. And now, O
GOD, that I am thine by this express self-dedication, employ me wholly in thy
service, and use me as an instrument of thy glory. Make me faithful unto the
death, and give me a crown of life. Not my will but thy will be done, both by
me, in me, and concerning me. I trust thy wisdom and mercy with my temporal and
eternal all, and only desire a will to submit and resign to thee in all things,
and to acquiesce in all thy dealings and dispensations, as knowing them to be
infinitely the wisest and the best.

"I CALL heaven and earth to witness this day, over these solemn pledges of
redeeming love, that I do take the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the second person of the
blessed Trinity, to be my LORD and Savior; my head and husband; my surety,
propiciation and advocate; my prophet, priest and king; my righteousness and
strength; my mediator, example and almighty friend! O blessed Jesus, thou Son
of GOD, have mercy upon me! I desire to commit and betrust my guilty, precious,
perishing soul, with all its everlasting concerns, into thy faithful, powerful,
compassionate hands; and would desire above all things, a farther and more
experimental knowledge of thy power and grace, whom I thus trust with mine
eternal all, that so my faith and hope may be yet stronger, and my doubts and
fears fewer in number and of less strength. Lord, I believe; help thou mine
unbelief! -- I know that the Father has committed all power to thee; has made
thee head over all things for the good of the church; has constituted thee a
Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and remission of sins: -- I also know
and believe, that thou thyself art the ^^^-sufficient GOD; and, as Mediator,
art perfect GOD and perfect man, and therefore art every way qualified to be a
Savior for lost and undone sinners: -- And as thou art perfectly qualified, so
thou have often declared thy great willingness to seek and to save those that
are lost. -- LORD, save me, thy lost sheep. -- Save me from my sins which are
many, and from thy fearful divine judgments which they have deserved; for thou,
LORD, art mighty and able to save unto the uttermost, all sinners that come
unto GOD by thee. -- I take and avouch thee for my prophet: O reveal thy word
in my heart -- write thy law there -- put thy fear there, and give me the
spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of thyself, and of thy Father.

"I TAKE thee for my priest: -- O plead the everlasting merit and efficacy of
thy sacrifice and of thy blood with the Father, on my behalf, who have no merit
of my own. -- O thou beloved Son of GOD, thou Lamb of GOD who take away the
sin of the world, whom the Father always hears, and who never prayest in vain
-- intercede for me with thy Father, that my sins may be pardoned for the sake
of what thou have done and suffered, and that I may be clothed with thy most
perfect and spotless righteousness. I would receive thee this day, O thou
bleeding Lamb of GOD, into a broken and bleeding heart; -- a heart pierced with
sorrow for my sins, and flaming with gratitude for the precious fruits of thy
dying love.

"I TAKE and avouch thee this day, O blessed Jesus, for my King and Lawgiver:
LORD, take the possession and dominion of my heart; -- rule supreme there; --
cast out all thine enemies, my lusts, my evil and ungoverned thoughts and
passions; -- bring my will and every affection under the authority and
direction of thy laws and the Spirit.

"I TAKE thee, O blessed Jesus, this day, for my head and husband: -- O make me
a living member of thy mystical body. -- May I daily and hourly derive
strength, vigor, spiritual nourishment and growth in grace from thee, the
living head of divine influences. -- Let this be the day of my spiritual
espousals. -- Betroth me unto thy self: -- Adorn me with the wedding garment of
thy righteousness: -- Let me, with the king's daughter, be all glorious within;
clothed with the garment of holiness, even that white raiment of needle work,
which is the righteousness of the saints, that my soul may be as a bride
adorned to meet her husband: -- Take me into thy banqueting house, and let thy
banner over me be love. -- Awake, O north wind; come thou south, and blow upon
my garden, that the odorous spices of divine grace may flow forth; and then let
my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. Kiss me with the
kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is better than wine! Prepare me for thine
eternal embraces; and make me a welcome and happy guest at the wedding supper
of the Lamb.

"I DO this day, take thee, O blessed Jesus, for my elder brother and
forerunner, who have taken possession of the promised inheritance, in the name
of all thy followers: -- O do thou prepare a place, even one of the lowest and
humblest mansions in thy Father's house for me; that I may be for ever with
thee, to see thy glory, and be a humble and thankful partaker of thy happiness.

"I AVOUCH thee, this day, for mine almighty and everlasting friend; -- as a
friend who art here giving me an amazing and astonishing proof, both of the
reality and greatness of thy friendship, in these memorials of thy bitter
passion, and bleeding, dying love: O do thou enkindle in my heart suitable
returns of love and friendship. Let me die, rather than not to love thee. --
Let me be anihilated, rather than be thine enemy. -- Stand by, and support me,
in a course of faithful, persevering obedience. -- Stand by, and support and
comfort me, when all my earthly friends must leave me, and when all their
kindest wishes and warmest affections, can afford me no succor or relief. --
Stand by, O almighty friend, in the chilling hour of death. -- Let thy flaff
and thy rod then comfort me; and do thou, who have the keys of death and of the
invisible world, be my gracious guardian and conductor, into the cloudless
regions of joy, serenity, peace, and glory!

"I DO call heaven and earth, and all my christian brethren to witness this
day, over these dear and solemn pledges of redeeming love, that I do take the
HOLY GHOST, the third person of the everblessed Trinity, to be my sanctifier,
my enlightener, my renewer, my guide and comforter; praising GOD for the
inestimable gift of his holy Spirit: O thou heavenly dove, do thou descend upon
my soul, as a fuller's soap and refiner's fire: -- Descend, bearing the olive
branch of peace, love, joy and comfort. Make thine abode in my soul, as in thy
spiritual temple: -- Shed abroad thy divine influences in my heart: -- Banish
every lust thence: -- Renew, sanctify, quicken, comfort and seal it, to the day
of redemption: Be in me, a Spirit of peace, love, joy, and of a sound mind; and
do thou, I humbly beseech thee, never be provoked to leave or forsake me, until
thou have sanctified me throughout, and fitted me for heavenly glory.

"AND now O blessed LORD, behold I am thine! -- Thine by creation,
preservation, and redemption! -- Thine by this express covenant engagement,
which I desire in the most serious, solemn and affectionate manner to renew at
thy table, over the dear pledges of that blood, by which it was ratified and
sealed on thy part! I would now embrace the precious promises of it, and choose
them for my portion. -- I would now resolve, in thy strength, to perform the
duties and conditions of it; and to wait upon thee day by day, for fresh
supplies of this strength. I wait, O LORD, for thy salvation! I crave not great
things in this world. Order all things relating to my body and temporal
concerns, just as thy wisdom and goodness will judge most meet for me; only let
my soul be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

"AND as, after I have renewed this my covenant at thy table, I am again to go
forth into a sinful, deluding world, where I shall be surrounded with fresh
temptations: -- O let me ever bear this solemn covenant transaction in my mind,
that I may not prove treacherous to my dearest LORD; -- that I may not add the
guilt of perjury to that of unfaithfulness. O! let me ever bear about with me
such a sense of the dying love of my dear Redeemer, as may engage me to the
most cheerful and universal obedience to his laws. -- Let me never prove a
scandal and disgrace to the Christian name, by apostasy, or infidelity; -- and
to thy name shall be the praise and glory, through eternal ages. Amen."

ESSAY VI. The NATURE, DESIGN, and USE of the LORD'S SUPPER.
1. SACRAMENTS are solemn ordinances instituted by Christ, representing,
sealing and applying Christ, and his purchased benefits to the souls of
believers.

2. THERE are two such in the New Testament, viz. baptism and the Lord's
supper, answering to circumcision and the pascal lamb in the Old Testament
dispensation of the covenant of grace.

3. THESE sacraments are institutions of a positive, and not of a moral nature;
deriving all their worth from the authority which enjoins them, and as binding
upon us as any moral duties whatever.

4. THESE gospel sacraments are not burdensome, expensive and laborious; but
cheap and easy, and yet of useful significancy.

5. BAPTISM fitly represents our need of being washed by the blood, and
sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, which are both emblematically set forth by
the cleansing, purifying nature of the element of water made use of in that
ordinance; and it is to be but once administered as an initiatory ordinance, on
our first entering into the church of Christ.

6. AS, in baptism, we take upon us the profession of Christianity, and submit
to the whole religion of Christ, we do virtually oblige ourselves in this
ordinance, to receive the Lord's supper.

7. THE Lord's supper obliges us to the same duties as baptism, and no more,
nor any other: Both are signs and seals of the same covenant. The specific
difference seems to lie here: Baptism is but once administered as an initiatory
ordinance; -- the Lord's supper often, as a strengthening and nourishing
ordinance: Baptism has a more special reference to the religion of Christ: --
The Lord's supper, to CHRIST, the author and founder of it. How falsely then do
many baptized Christians imagine themselves under fewer obligations to
holiness, than communicants?

8. THE Lord's supper is a sacrament, wherein, by giving and receiving bread
and wine, according to Christ's appointment, his death is showed forth; and the
worthy receivers are (not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by faith)
made partakers of his body and blood, with all his benefits, to their spiritual
nourishment and growth in grace See the Assembly's shorter Catechism.
.

9. THIS sacrament is enjoined on all Christians, as a pledge of their duty,
obedience and allegiance to Christ, the glorious captain of salvation; and to
keep up in their hearts a grateful remembrance of his dying love.

10. IT was instituted by Christ, just before his death, after he had eat his
last passover; is enjoined upon his followers by his dying command, and is to
be continued by them to the end of the world.

11. THE specific nature and proper notion of this ordinance, is, A memorial of
Christ's sacrifice; or a keeping up the fresh remembrance of his death in the
church, together with the cause, design and benefits of it; all which benefits
are sealed and applied to believers in receiving it: This do in REMEMBRANCE of
me, and as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, you do SHOW FORTH
the Lord's death, 'TILL HE COME 1 Cor. xi. 23, -- 29. Luke xxii. 19, 20.
.

12. BOTH the sacraments are standing evidences of our guilty, polluted state
by sin, and of the hope we have of pardon and cleansing through Christ.

13. IN preparing to receive, and in actually receiving the Lord's supper, we
are led to consider the death of Christ, on which it is founded, in the
following important and interesting views -- In contradistinction to Jews, we
are led to consider the cross of Christ as his and our glory; -- we are led to
consider his death as that of a martyr or witness, to the truth of the
doctrines which he taught, and as that of our example living and dying; -- and
also as a sacrifice, by which the sin of man was expiated: And this sacrament
we are led to consider, as a feast upon a sacrifice; from which view of it,
many important considerations arise, -- as, (1.) It naturally reminds us of the
evil and accursed nature of sin, which needed such an expensive sacrifice. --
(2.) Of the incomprehensible love of GOD, who furnished such a sacrifice for
the expiation of human guilt. -- (3.) As those who feasted upon a sacrifice,
were supposed to be in a state of favor with the Deity to whom the sacrifice
had been offered, and to be in perfect friendship one with another; so thus
feasting on the sacrifice of Christ, denotes our fellowship and communion with
the Father and the Son, and that we are united together in the strictest bonds
of Christian charity and love. -- (4.) This sacrament being a feast upon a
sacrifice, we ought to consider it as a proper form of renewing covenant with
GOD, and a sign and means of our participating in the blessings of this
covenant. -- (5.) This sacrament represents the death of Christ as that of a
conqueror, who conquered in dying, and who, by his resurrection, has secured
victory for all his followers. -- (6.) His death, as represented in this
sacrament, should be considered as the ground of his exaltation, and of that
extensive dominion and power which he now holds in the heavenly world, for the
good of his church: -- And, (7.) While we here contemplate his death, our
thoughts should spring upward to his glorified state, and forward, to his
second, triumphant appearance, when we shall have reason to glory in a once
crucified master.

14. THE chief use and design of this sacrament, is to perpetuate, and, as it
were, to eternize the memory of the love of GOD and of Christ to us; to
actuate, enkindle and inflame our love and gratitude to them; to bring
frequently into our remembrance the most powerful motives to universal
holiness, and to unite the hearts of Christians in the firmest and most
endearing bonds of love.

15. NONE seem to have a right to this ordinance, in the sight of GOD, but the
true disciples of Jesus.

16. NONE have a right to it, in the sight of men, but such as appear, in a
judgment of charity, to be real Christians.

17. NONE therefore should be admitted to it, without a due, previous
examination of their Christian knowledge, and some evidence of their sincerity
in religion.

18. THOSE who have been admitted upon mistaken notions of their sincerity, may
be again excluded, when the church receives proof of such mistakes.

19. NO person ought to approach this ordinance, without actual preparation for
it: Though, if they are habitually serious, their actual preparation, (when
unexpected opportunities of communicating offer themselves) need cost them but
little time or trouble; and, it is a childish and a dangerous superstition, to
imagine, that any certain time, or any certain number of devotions, are
absolutely necessary in order to our acceptance in this ordinance.

ESSAY VII. That HABITUAL and ACTUAL PREPARATION which is necessary for
worthily receiving the LORD'S SUPPER, more fully considered.
1. DIVINES sometimes distinguish our preparation for the sacrament of the
supper, into habitual and actual.

2. HABITUAL preparation seems to imply two things; first, A gracious state;
and secondly, A regular, pious, circumspect life.

3. IT seems evident from the very nature and design of this ordinance, that it
belongs only to true disciples and real Christians. It is a nourishing
ordinance; but such only can be nourished as have life: Besides, the graces of
faith, love, hope, etc. which are properly exercised in this ordinance, can
only be exercised by real, living Christians. It is a solemn renewal of our
covenant with GOD; but how can those renew a covenant, which they never entered
into at all? How can such as are in league with the devil and their lusts, be
said to enter into covenant with GOD? What sincerity can there be in such a
transaction as this? Does it not imply the most insolent, barefaced mockery?

4. IT implies also a regular, pious, circumspect life, such as becomes the
gospel of Christ: That a man's life correspond in some measure with his
profession, and the truth and sincerity of his religion appear visible, in the
genuine and examplary fruits of it.

5. THOSE who have this habitual preparation of soul for holy ordinances, need
be under no scruple of approaching the Lord's table upon the shortest warning;
because, having the essentials of religion, and a habitual seriousness and
sobriety of spirit, their sincere endeavors to please GOD in the way of
commanded duty, can never be unacceptable to him, nor unavailable to
themselves. It would, therefore, be sinful in such to abstain from a sealing
ordinance, merely because they have not had much time to make a formal, actual
preparation; because, having already those good dispositions which such a
preparation is intended to beget, such a preparation is not absolutely
necessary; and not to dispense with it, in such circumstances, would be
superstition, not religion.

6. YET where time and opportunity permit, the very best men should by no means
neglect a careful, actual preparation of soul for attending so solemn an
ordinance. For (1.) It is expressly commanded: Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup 1 Cor. xi. 28.
. (2.) The business to be transacted at the Lord's table is of a very solemn
nature: It is no less than entering into, or renewing covenant with the great
GOD, over the memorials of his Son's sacrifice: -- And whoever considers what
kind of creatures we are; the nature, terms and conditions of the covenant, and
how solemnly, and circumspectly every part of it should be transacted, and that
this is the principal business of an actual preparation (which should by no
means be neglected 'till we come to the Lord's table) will surely see reason
for some time and care in this business, when we can command it. (3.) The very
best men are not always in a proper frame of mind, for the most common and
ordinary duties of religion: Good men find it necessary to take some pains with
their hearts for the right performance of the duties of prayer and hearing the
word, and surely proportionably more care should be taken in preparing for the
sacrament of the supper.

7. ACTUAL preparation consists in a careful endeavor, to put the heart and
affections in the best frame and posture possible for approaching GOD in this
holy ordinance; and is expressed in scripture, under the general notion of
self-examination: Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc.

8. THE things concerning which we ought principally to examine ourselves, are
our knowledge, faith, love or charity, repentance, and new obedience.

9. A KNOWLEDGE of ourselves, our sins, wants, weakness, guilt and danger; -- a
competent knowledge of GOD, his perfections and laws, the obligations we are
under to him, and the duties we owe him; -- a knowledge of the Savior, and the
way of salvation by the new covenant; -- and a competent knowledge of the
sacrament of the supper, the graces there to be exercised, and the duties there
to be performed, is indispensably necessary, in order to our rightly and
worthily partaking of the Lord's supper; lest, not discerning the Lord's body,
we eat and drink judgment to ourselves 1 Cor. xi. 29.
.

10. FAITH in Christ, as the Son, and sent of GOD; and in his power and grace
as an all-sufficient and most willing Savior, is a grace, the exercise of
which is of absolute necessity in this ordinance; and as there is no receiving
or applying of Christ, without this grace, it is necessary we should examine
ourselves concerning the reality of it, before we approach this ordinance, lest
we should be found mockers of GOD.

11. As the eucharist or sacrament of the supper, is founded on the
inconceivable love of GOD and Christ, to a lost world, and is intended as a
badge, sign, means and cement of love and unity among Christian brethren, --
love to GOD and man, is a grace of absolute necessity in all worthy
communicants; and therefore, the truth and reality of it in our hearts should
be carefully examined into, before we venture to approach this gospel banquet:
For, to approach this love-feast without supreme love to GOD, and cordial
affections for our Fellow Christians, or while the contrary temper prevails in
the soul, would be the vilest abuse.

12. WE have already observed, that impenitent sinners, or those who live
allowedly in the course or practice of any one known sin, have no right to this
ordinance; and this may show the necessity of examining ourselves of the truth
and reality of our repentance, in order to our approaching this sacrament
worthily.

13. WE can by no means have a satisfying evidence of the truth of our faith,
love, or repentance, unless we are conscious, that our lives are bettered and
reformed, and that we have been enabled, at least for some while past, to pay a
new obedience to the divine laws: For, the only satisfying proof we can have of
the truth of our graces, is the fruit of holiness which they produce in our
lives and conversations; and so from the goodness of the fruit, we rationally
infer the goodness of the tree. It is highly convenient therefore, for all who
design to approach the sacrament, to try their sincerity in religion by this
touchstone,; and not rashly to believe, that they are possessed of the
sacramental graces and qualifications, 'till they feel the energy of them warm
at their hearts, and experience the fruits of them, in some degree of holiness
of life.

14. NOT only must worthy communicants have these graces in reality; but the
principal design of actual preparation is to bring them into lively exercise,
by prayer, meditation, self-examination, reading the scriptures, and other
proper devotional books. By frequent meditations on the heinousness of sin; the
dignity, sufferings, shame and death of Christ, who was the atoning sacrifice
for sin; the wonderful love of GOD in providing such a sacrifice, and freely
delivering him up for us all; the invaluable benefits and blessings procured
for penitent believers by this sacrifice: -- By frequent meditations of this
kind, the faith of communicants should be increased and strengthened; their
love inflamed; their sorrow for sin, indignation against it, and repentance of
it perfected, and their resolutions to holy obedience invigorated: So that when
they actually approach the Lord's table, these graces may not move heavily and
aukwardly for want of use, as though the chariot wheels of the soul were taken
off; but in a brisk, lively, active and vigorous manner, like the chariots of
Aminadab; each acting in its proper sphere, and all of them harmoniously and ^n
concert, lifting up the soul toward heaven.

15. HENCE may be drawn a powerful argument for the frequent receiving of the
Lord's supper: For, if the right receiving of the Lord's supper requires the
vigorous exercise of all the noblest graces of the Christian religion; -- if it
is indeed an epitome or summary of the whole of practical Christianity; -- if
it be necessary for those who would worthily receive this ordinance, to
meditate on the chief, vital doctrines of our holy religion, and to exercise
its noblest graces, by the way of preparation for this duty. -- It may hence be
inferred, that the oftener we receive this sacrament aright, i. e. the more
frequently our souls are employed in those divine preparatory exercises, the
more rapidly must they grow in knowledge and in grace, and be fitted for every
good word and work.

16. SINCE all the benefit to be reaped from holy ordinances, is only to be
expected by a proper preparation for them, and a due attendance on them, it is
not at all to be wondered at, that the souls of those who receive the
sacrament, without due preparation, do decay and go backwards in religion: For,
to trisle with holy things, betrays such an irreverence and atheism of heart,
as must needs, in time provoke GOD wholly to withdraw his good Spirit from such
triflers, and leave them totally under the power of blindness of mind and
hardness of heart. Hence it often happens, in fact, that careless, untender and
uncircumspect professors of religion, turn out, in the end, tenfold more
reprobate, profligate and abandoned, than other sinners, who have never thus
profaned and abused the sacraments.

ESSAY VIII. Our proper DUTY immediately after receiving the LORD'S SUPPER, and
that Course of Life, in Consequence of it, by which we may most effectually
Honor our CHRISTIAN Profession.
1. WE should retire as soon as possible to examine ourselves, of our frames
and exercises of mind at this holy ordinance.

2. IF we find that we have had lively exercises of the sacramental graces, we
should humbly and heartily thank GOD for the aids of his Spirit, and
importunately beseech him to continue these gracious frames, and preserve us
from forfeiting them by fresh acts of sin.

3. IF we find that our frames and affections have been dull, dead, or
trifling, we ought attentively to consider from whence this may have proceeded.
If we are conscious that we have been at due pains to prepare our hearts, and
that we have indulged no wilful sin; and if we find that our dullness and
coldness was matter of grief to us at the ordinance, we ought not to be over
much dejected, but hope that it may have proceeded from bodily indisposition,
and that we may have nevertheless been accepted. We should also beseech GOD to
vouchsafe those comforts now, which were withheld from us at his table, and
that he would enable us perseveringly to seek them. But,

4. IF we find that this uncomfortable frame has been owing to carelessness,
and a want of due preparation on our part, or has proceeded from a
consciousness of guilt from some indulged iniquity or unmortified lust, we
should deeply lament such a criminal circumstance before GOD, apply earnestly
to the blood of sprinkling for cleansing, and implore the divine pardon and
mercy through Christ.

5. IT becomes us immediately after this ordinance, to renew our holy
resolutions, and to call up all our vigilance, for the two following reasons:
(1.) Satan is peculiarly busy, after sealing ordinances, in endeavoring to rob
us of the comforts of religion; to undo what was done at the ordinance; and
either to cajole us into security, or to drive us into despair; and, generally
speaking, the greater sensible comfort we have had in the ordinance, the
greater danger shall we be in of falling into spiritual pride or fatal security
after it. It has been also observed, that men are liable to fall into the
heaviest temptations immediately after sacraments. Satan's most violent
assaults upon our Savior, happened immediately after his baptism, the visible
descent of the holy Ghost upon him, and that signal honor done him, by a voice
from the excellent glory Luke iii. 21, 22. -- iv. 1, etc.
; and it was on the back of his first sacrament, and after the most confident
and sanguine resolutions of Peter, that he was tempted to deny his Lord and
Master, and so scandalously yielded to the temptation Mark xiv. 29, -- 71.
. (2.) It becomes us to renew and strengthen our resolutions, that our
Christian profession may be adorned, and that Christianity may not suffer by
our follies and indiscretions.

6. THESE good resolutions should be formed wholly and only in the strength of
Christ; and indeed, this itself ought to be one of our most solemn resolutions,
that we will live wholly by faith on the Son of GOD. This is that all-important
doctrine of humility and self-denial which is inculcated upon us, throughout
the whole gospel, and which is indeed the very spirit and genius of the gospel
itself, that, renouncing all self-righteousness and self-dependance, we are to
rely wholly on the righteousness and strength of the Redeemer; going forth to
perform all duty, and to encounter all temptation, only in his strength and in
the power of his might; casting all our cares upon him who cares for us, and
desiring to be found only in him, clothed with his righteousness. Had Peter's
good resolutions been formed in this manner, he could never have fallen: The
arm of omnipotence would have been his sure defense, and his head would have
been shielded in the day of battle.

7. IF our souls have been properly exercised at this sacrament, our conduct
and conversation will shine afterward with a peculiar luster. Holy exercises
will probably show themselves by their natural fruits. Our faces will shine
like that of Moses when he returned from conversing with GOD on the mount; and
we shall give the world occasion to take knowledge of us, that we have been
with Jesus Acts iv. 14.
.

8. IT will be advantageous after sacraments, expressly to mention our
sacramental engagements in all our prayers, as an expedient to keep a solemn
sense of them alive on our minds.

9. WHEN we are called out in the course of providence to encounter any trial,
temptation or difficult and self-denying duty (which must frequently be the
case with every Christian) we should call to remembrance, this our solemn
covenant, so publicly transacted, and so lately renewed; and ask our
consciences what conduct will best become us as communicants, who have bound
ourselves by solemn and public vows to be the Lord's, and to live wholly to his
honor and glory.

10. THAT course of life by which we may best honor our Christian profession
after this sacrament, seems to be the following. (1.) Our conversation ought in
all things to be such as becomes the gospel of Christ Philip. i. 27. Ephesians. iv.
1. etc. Col. i. 10. 1. These. ii. 12.
. (2.) We should have a constant eye to the example of Christ, and carefully
study it, as laid down in the gospel, with a particular design of being
conformed to it Matthew. xvi. 24. 1 Pet. ii. 21. 1 John ii. 6. Romans viii. 29.
. (3.) We should endeavor to show the world by our outward deportment, that we
enjoy a serene, cheerful and happy state of mind: Yet at the same time we
should guard in a particular manner, against discovering a relish for sensual,
sinful indulgences, or a disposition to levity, trisling and vanity. (4.) It is
of the utmost importance to the honor of our profession, that we govern our
passions; as Christian professors, who indulge anger, malice, envy,
covetousness, revenge, or the like, are the foulest blots and scandals of
religion. (5.) If communicants would not be guilty of crucifying their Lord
afresh, let them be careful of truth in their words, faithfulness in their
promises, honesty in their dealings, modesty, sobriety and temperance in their
lives, and that on all occasions they speak honorably of religion.

ESSAY IX. PRACTICAL REFLECTIONS on the INCARNATION and BIRTH of CHRIST, proper
before or after the LORD'S SUPPER.
1. FROM the amazing change of circumstances which our Lord underwent in his
incarnation, we have an astonishing demonstration of the riches of GOD'S love
to our world, and of his mercy to lost sinners.

2. ALSO of the unspeakable condescension of Christ: And this is amazingly
heightened by his perfect foreknowledge of every circumstance of pain, shame
and poverty, which should accompany his incarnation, and the long space of time
in which he should suffer this eclipse of glory, and series of ignominious
sufferings.

3. FROM that abasement, poverty and pain to which Christ stooped that he might
save human sinners, and to which his loving Father freely delivered him up for
us all, we may and must infer the unspeakable importance of a human soul, and
of its redemption and salvation: Also, the dreadful evil of sin and eternal
misery, its just wages, to deliver us from which, the Son of GOD condescended
to be born of a woman, and to die on a cross!

4. FROM this wonderful stoop of humility and condescension in the Son of GOD,
and those abasing humiliating circumstances, in which he chose to appear in our
nature, we learn how little value GOD sets on those things which are so highly
esteemed among men; I mean worldly riches, grandeur, honor and high estate. --
And hence we see worldly pride and vanity, worldly ambition and avarice, or
immoderate desire of worldly riches, in their true light, and have the best
antidote against them.

5. FROM the mean and obscure birth and humble circumstances of the Son of GOD,
compared with his amiable and divine character, we are taught not to despise
men on account of their obscure birth, or humble circumstances in life, but to
form our estimate of them, and respect for them, on their moral characters,
personal worth, and the God-like qualities and perfections of the soul and
inward man, which alone are estimable in themselves, and in the critical
discerning eye of GOD.

6. FROM the obscure birth and humble circumstances of the Son of GOD, the
poor, needy and despised things of this world may borrow an argument of
consolation in their mean and straitened circumstances. Why should a real
Christian be mortified by the contempt of the world, when this was precisely
his Master's case? Nay, ought it not rather to be an honor to the pious poor,
that they are in the same circumstances with their divine Master, who was
despised of men, and had not where to repose his venerable head?

7. OUR Savior's mean birth and low circumstances, may teach us how little
account we should make of the things of time and sense in general, and how
little all worldly pomp, honor and splendour can contribute to our true
happiness. Who so happy and blessed as the Son of GOD? Who so contented as he?
And yet who so poor and despised? And this should also teach us how we should
stand affected to worldly things -- That quietness and self-deniedness of
children; that holy indifference with regard to worldly things, and that
meekness, humility and contentedness of mind, which is so distinguishing a
characteristic of the children of GOD, and the disciples of Christ.

ESSAY X. ADOPTION into the FAMILY of GOD.
1. MEN are called the sons of GOD in various senses in scripture, -- as
invested with worldly honors and titles Psalm. lxxxii. 6.
, -- as in external covenant with GOD Exodus iv. 22.
, -- and as GOD'S creatures and offspring Mal. ii. 10. Acts xvii. 28.
. -- The angels are also called sons of GOD Job. xxxviii. 7.
; and Jesus Christ is the Son of GOD by way of eminence, and in a very singular
and peculiar sense: But believing sinners only are the sons of GOD by
regeneration and adoption.

2. ADOPTION is a word borrowed from the civil law, and signifies the choosing
of a stranger by those who have an estate, and no issue, and giving him the
political and legal relation of a son and heir to their estate, and engaging to
deal by him as though he were the issue of their own body.

3. WE are all, by nature, children of wrath, children of the devil, and
strangers and enemies to GOD. GOD'S adopting us, is therefore, a more generous
and merciful act than human adoption, and differs from it in the following
respects. -- (1.) When men adopt, they fix their love on strangers, because
they are destitute of children; but GOD need not have done this, seeing he
sustains the relation of a Father to myriads of holy and happy beings, who have
never, by apostasy, forfeited his paternal love. (2.) Some excellence or
hopefulness in the persons adopted by men, is generally the motive of their
adopting them; but GOD saw nothing in us amiable, excellent, promising or
engaging, but every thing just the reverse Ezekiel. xvi. 5, etc.
. (3.) Men cannot change the temper or disposition of those whom they adopt;
but GOD gives a temper and disposition suitable to the relation: They receive
from him the Spirit of adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, Father Romans viii. 15.
.

4. WE are adopted by GOD in Christ, and all the blessings which GOD gives us,
as his sons, flow to us in and through Christ, as the channel of their
conveyance. Christ, in consequence of his Sonship is made heir of all things
Ephesians. i. 3.
, and the whole inheritance of GOD'S human family, is put into the hands of
their elder brother for them. Indeed, he has purchased the inheritance in their
name and stead, and has the right of dispensing it to his human brethren; so
that adopted sinners are heirs of GOD, and joint heirs with Christ, in whom is
treasured up all fullness for their supply Luke xxii. 29. Romans viii. 19. John
xx. 17. 1 Cor. i. 3.
.

5. THE privileges of believers, in consequence of their adoption, are exeeding
many, gracious and astonishing. Their state and relation is altered: From being
children of the devil, they are become the children of GOD by faith in Jesus
Christ, and have GOD'S name, and his Son's name put upon them Isa. lxiii. 19.
Ephesians. iii. 10.
; -- from being slaves to the devil and their lusts, they are restored to the
glorious liberty of the sons of GOD; they are taken into GOD'S family and
household, are made fellow-citizens with the saints, and, in consequence of
this, are entitled to protection, provision, and communion with their Father.
Particularly, they are promised protection Isa. xxxii. 2, 18.
; plentious provision Psalm. xxiii. Isa. xl.
; sweet intimacy and communion with GOD in Christ John xiv. 21, -- 23. -- xv.
15. Rev. iii. 20.
; bold and free access to him as children to a Father Heb. iv. 16. Gal. vi. 5.
Romans viii. 15.
; and correction when they stand in need of it Heb. xii. 6, -- 11.
. They have, in short, GOD himself for their portion -- Heirs of GOD: All are
yours, and ye are GOD'S, and GOD is Christ's. Rich and glorious inventory! They
are also at length introduced into the immediate presence of their heavenly
Father, in the upper mansions, and fully satisfied with his love, being
according to the capacities of their nature, perfectly assimulated to his image
and likeness; of which glorious event, the apostle John speaks with
astonishment and rapture 1 John iii. 1, -- 3.
.

6. THE marks of the adopted children of GOD, are in general, a reverential,
submissive, loving and obedient temper of mind. If we are indeed the children
of GOD, we have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
We feel that inward reverence toward GOD, and respect and veneration for him,
which a dutiful child does to a loving and respectable father.

7. IF we have the Spirit of adoption, we feel supreme love for our heavenly
Father, and this will show itself in the following things: (1.) We shall
entertain worthy and delightful thoughts of GOD, as a most kind, gracious,
reconciled Father in Christ; the thoughts of him will be very precious, and our
meditations of him will be sweet Psalm. cxxxix. 17. -- civ. 34.
. (2.) We shall delight to draw near to GOD in prayer, with an humble boldness
and freedom of soul -- to hear of him and from him in his word -- and earnestly
desire communion with him in all holy ordinances of worship. (3.) We shall have
a real zeal for GOD'S honor and glory in the world; rejoice to see our Father
honored, and his interest flourishing, and be grieved at heart to see him
neglected, blasphemed and dishonored by sinners: And, (4.) We shall earnestly
wish and long for a full conformity to our heavenly Father, and the full
enjoyment of his love and presence for ever, in his upper house.

8. IF we are indeed GOD'S children by adoption, and do supremely love him that
begat, we shall also love all them that are begotten of him. We shall love the
whole Christian brotherhood, so far as they bear the image of their heavenly
Father, by whatever names known, into whatever sects or parties split and
divided. -- Yea, we shall be linked in bonds of tenderest affection, to the
whole numerous family both in heaven and on earth, whether our human brethren
by adoption and regeneration, or our angelical brethren by creation and
unsinning rectitude and obedience. All who, with us, can call GOD Father, will
have a distinguished place in our benevolent and complacential affections Ephesians.
iii. 15. 1 John v. 1.
.

ESSAY XI. Of REPENTANCE.
1. REPENTANCE partakes both of the nature of conversion and sanctification.
Conversion begins by repentance; and it is the constant daily duty of true
converts, as long as they have finful natures and imperfect characters.

2. REPENTANCE implies in it, a deep and afflicting sense of the evil nature
and desert of sin; an earnest desire to be freed from its guilt, dominion and
condemnation, and sincere endeavors to turn from it to the service and savor
of a holy GOD, through a Redeemer.

3. THEREFORE the proper subject of repentance, is a sinner in the present
life: For, in hell there is no place for repentance; and in heaven, though the
blessed will retain the greatest hatred of sin, yet being guiltless and
sinless, they can have no proper compunction or contrition for sin, nor any
uneasy afflictive sensations of mind on its account. All sin and sorrow will be
then for ever done away.

4. THOUGH all sinners will sooner or later be filled with sorrow and distress
for what they have done against GOD, yet many in this life are hardened past
feeling, through the deceitfulness of sin; have their neck as an iron sinew,
their brow as brass, and live and die in this stupid, hardened, remorseless
state, after having drowned the voice of conscience, and grieved the holy
Spirit of GOD, which would have sealed them to the day of redemption.

5. OTHERS have also some kind of sorrow for sin, which is never effectual;
some kind of repentance which is never true and saving; but, as the Apostle
expresses it, needeth-to be repented of. We have examples of this in Cain,
Pharaoh, Ahab, the Israelites, Nebuchadnezzar, Judas, and many under our own
observation.

6. WE ought, therefore, carefully to distinguish between a false and true
repentance; one that is merely legal, and one that is evangelical. These are
distinguished by their names in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin languages, and by
their motives and effects.

7. THE words necham in the Hebrew, metameleia in the Greek, and poenitentia in
the Latin, are rendered repentance in the English; yet they only signify,
trouble and vexation after sin, accompanied with anguish and torment of mind.
The words shevah in the Hebrew, metanoia in the Greek, and resipiscentia in the
Latin, are also translated repentance in the English, though they are of very
different meaning from the former, and signify a change of mind; a becoming
wise after sin, and consequently, a doing better than before. And this last
only, is saving, effectual, evangelical repentance. In the former sense only,
wicked men are said to repent, when the dread of GOD'S wrath breaks in upon
their consciences, and fills them with the terrific apprehension of their
guilt, danger and misery.

8. CONVICTION of every kind, whether legal or evangelical, effectual or
ineffectual, is wrought by the Spirit of GOD, who convinces the world of sin
John xvi. 8.
.

9. THE Spirit uses various instruments and means in awakening the soul to a
distressing sight and sense of sin, such as reading and hearing the word;
afflictive providence, dreams, public and private remonstrances, reproofs and
admonitions, or serious reflections excited by some of these.

10. THE word of GOD works remorse in the hearts of sinners, by discovering to
them the purity of the divine nature, the extent of the divine law, the evil
and danger of sin, and by leading the sinner to compare his own temper and
actions with the law of GOD; while the Spirit enlightens the understanding, and
sets home these things on the conscience Je^. xx^i. 19. Romans vii. 12. Acts ii.
37. 2 Cor. vii. 10.
; and this is called a law work.

11. REPENTANCE unto life, or evangelical repentance, is wrought by the law and
gospel in conjunction, acting under the influence and energy of the holy
Spirit. The law is made to show the soul its guilt and danger, while the gospel
points out a remedy: The law wounds; the gospel heals: The law is made to
enter, that sin may abound and appear exceeding sinful; the gospel shows how
grace much more abounds through Jesus Christ Romans v. 20.
.

12. A MERE legal repentance may be, and often is ineffectual, as in the cases
of Pharaoh, Judas, and others; yet it is often preparatory to, and issues in an
evangelical repentance Acts ii. 37, etc. -- xvi. 27, 34.
.

13. FALSE and true, or effectual and ineffectual repentance are best
distinguished by their concomitant circumstances and effects; as, (1.) A mere
legal repentance, is a terror of conscience, arising from a sense of guilt and
danger, which often consists with the love of sin, and a hatred of holiness:
But the real gospel penitent truly hates and abhors sin, and himself because of
it Psalm. cxix. 104. Job xlii. 6. Jer. ii. 34, 35. -- iii. 25. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 31.
. (2.) The true penitent forsakes sin and flees from it, not chiefly as it is
damning, but as it is contrary to the nature and will of GOD, and a vile abuse
of gospel grace; and he turns from it to GOD, with a full purpose of, and
hearty endeavors after new obedience Hos. xiv. 8. Acts xi. 23. Luke xv. 18, 20.
. (3.) True repentance is ever accompanied with hope of mercy; with an
apprehension of the mercy of GOD in Christ, and a trust in this mercy 2 Cor.
vii. 10, 11.
.

14. IT is vile and unwarrantable presumption in sinners to hope for pardon or
mercy without repentance.

15. REPENTANCE is sadly mistaken by those, who imagine that it consists in
being sorry or troubled for sin, while they still continue to commit it.

16. LET not distressed mourning penitents despair of GOD'S mercy, which is
particularly promised to such, throughout the whole scriptures Matthew. xi. 28.
Psalm. li. 17. -- xxxiv. 18. Isa. lvii. 15. Isa. lxvi. 2.
.

17. As we daily sin, repentance is our daily duty: No person in this world
will ever be above the exercise of this grace, or above the need of pardon.

ESSAY XII. Of SANCTIFICATION.
1. TO sanctify is to make holy, and to be sanctified is to be made holy; so
that sanctification and holiness, are, for the most part, synonymous terms.
Sometimes, indeed, to sanctify, signifies, to set apart a person for the
service of GOD John xvii. 19. Exodus xxviii. 41.
; which has a near relation to the former sense.

2. SANCTIFICATION, as we are here to consider it, is a being really and
heartily devoted to GOD through Christ: It is the health, beauty and vigor of
the soul, whereby all its faculties being renewed, are enabled to turn from sin
to GOD, and to exert and exercise those graces by which the sanctified person
walks before GOD in righteousness and holiness all the days of his life, until
grace is perfected in glory. In this sense all Christians are called to be
saints, or to be sanctified; however the devil, aided by human blindness and
stupidity, may have turned the term, saints, into ridicule among men Romans i. 7,
etc.
.

3. REGENERATION is an instantaneous work, or rather act of GOD'S Spirit,
giving a new and divine principle of spiritual life to the soul. Justification
and adoption are acts of GOD'S grace without us, whereby a relative change
passes on our state: But sanctification is a continued progressive work of
GOD'S Spirit within us, influencing and cooperating with our endeavors, from
the moment of our regeneration, until our dying day, and the complete
perfection of our holiness.

4. SANCTIFICATION is begun in conversion and perfected in glory: and includes
in it the exercises of repentance, and of all the graces and virtues of the
Christian life. It Is a progressive work, begun, carried on, and perfected by
the holy Spirit of GOD in the human soul; carrying it on from light to light,
from strength to strength, and from one degree of holiness to another, 'till at
length it appears perfect before GOD in Zion.

5. THE two principal branches of sanctification, and which comprehend all the
rest, are mortification and vivification; or, as the scriptures express it, a
dying daily to sin, and living unto righteousness Romans vi. 11, -- 19.
.

6. DYING unto sin, or mortification, implies in it our utmost endeavors to
guard against the prevailing power of sin, and to extirpate or root it out of
our souls, by all gospel methods, and by all the instrumental means of religion
which GOD has appointed for that purpose. And this duty seems (...) imply in
it the following things: (1.) Hearty endeavors to keep up a constant, lively,
believing sense and apprehension of the evil nature and desert of sin, both as
defiling and condemning. -- (2.) Constant watchsulness against the outbreakings
of corrupt nature; with frequent careful examinations whether sin is gaining or
losing ground in our souls. -- (3.) Constant application to GOD in Christ, and
in the use of the means and ordinances of grace, for help against the power and
love of sin: -- And this first, by faith in the propitiation and merit of
Christ for justification, and a sense of pardon; -- and secondly, by faith or
trust in the promises, and more directly, in Christ himself, for power and
strength to conquer every lust.

7. VIVIFICATION, or a living unto GOD, or unto righteousness, as a distinct
branch of holiness or sanctification, consists properly in obtaining,
cultivating, and improving in all the virtues and graces of the Christian life,
upon gospel motives and principles. In order to this, our natures must be
changed by regeneration; our religious actions must be performed according to
the rule of GOD'S word; in obedience to his divine authority; in faith; to the
glory of GOD as their chief end, and with a humble steadfast reliance on Christ
both for assistance and acceptance: -- And this course must be habitual and
persevering; or, as the scriptures beautifully express it, -- a walking with
GOD.

8. WE must act in religion on the following motives, in order to the
advancement and perfection of our sanctification: -- (1.) We must have the
example of Christ habitually in our view as the pattern and model of our temper
and behavior 1 Pet. ii. 21. Philip. ii. 5.
. -- (2.) The love of Christ displayed in our redemption, and the application
of it in all its steps should constrain us to love him: This is the most
powerful inducement to universal gospel holiness 2 Cor. v. 14.
. -- (3.) Our relation to GOD as his children; our professed subjection to his
laws and government; the glorious hope and inheritance set before us, and the
many great and precious promises made unto us in the gospel, are all of them so
many powerful motives inducing and urging us on to perfect holiness in his fear
2 Cor. vii. 1.
. (4.) Our union to Christ, and our bodies and spirits being, in consequence,
members of his mystical body, and temples of the holy Ghost, is a wonderful
cogent motive, both to mortification and vivification; and, to this purpose the
Apostle most beautifully and forceably uses it, 1 Cor. vi. 15, -- 20.

ESSAY XIII. The NATURE and BLESSED EFFECTS of an UNION with CHRIST.
1. UNION with a person or thing, signifies such a connection, as, in some sort,
constitutes sameness or oneness; to be united therefore to Christ, implies,
that the person so united, is in some sense, one with him. Christ is in some
sense one with him, and he one with Christ. This is a great mystery, as the
Apostle tells us; but it is a mystery plainly revealed and taught in the
scriptures, and upon the right knowledge of it depends our right conceptions of
vital religion, and much of the comfort of every Christian.

2. THIS union is not essential, like that of the three persons in the Godhead;
nor personal, like that of the divine and human natures of Christ in the person
of the Mediator; -- nor thirdly, relative, civil or political, like that which
subsists between a king and his subjects, or a master and his servants or
disciples: If this were the nature of this union, as some Christians understand
it, then would it be no mystery as the Apostle represents it Ephesians. v. 32.
; but the plainest and most comprehensible thing imaginable: For the weakest
understanding can easily understand how it is, that a king and his subjects
make one body politic, or a master and his servants one body domestic. But,

3. IT is a mystical union. It is a mystery, and therefore the modus or manner
of it can admit of no clear and and full illustration or explanation, in the
present imperfect state. It is however shadowed forth to us under many figures
or metaphors, which prove, that it is a very close and intimate union, and such
as transforms and assimulates the soul into the very temper, likeness and
Spirit of Christ, and makes it one with him, in some very important respects.
It is compared to the union of a vine with its branches John xv. 1. etc.
, between a husband and his wife Ephesians. v. 30. Romans vii. 4.
; the cornerstone or foundation and the building 1 Pet. ii. 4.
; the head and members of the same natural body Ephesians. iv. 15.
; the union of meat and drink with the body, which they nourish John vi. 56.
; and the union between GOD the Father and Christ John xvii. 11.
. Believers are called the body of Christ, and members in particular, and are
powerfully dissuaded from the sin of uncleanness from this very consideration.
In other scriptures, believers are represented as one Spirit with Christ;
Christ is in them the hope of glory, and their life is hid with Christ in GOD.
St. Paul did not live, but Christ lived in him. Christ and believers are
represented as having one common interest; one GOD and Father, and one common
inheritance as joint heirs 1 Cor. vi. 17. Col. i. 27 -- iii. 3. Gal. ii. 20.
Matthew. xxv. 40. John xx. 17. Romans viii. 17.
.

4. WE are not to form any gross conceptions of this mystical union between
Christ and believers, as though it implied any physical mixture or confusion of
the two beings thus united; and yet these very expressive metaphors prove, that
this union must be something exceeding close and intimate, such as makes the
soul truly a partaker of the divine nature and image of Christ; as leavens,
transforms and assimulates it; such by which the soul imbibes (if I may so
speak) the Spirit of Christ; derives strength, and vigor and nourishment from
him, as its living head, and as the branches do from the parent vine. Christ
dwells and abides in the believer by his Spirit, and the believer grows up into
him in all things, which is the head. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can we, except we abide in Christ;
for without him, (or out of him, disunited from him) we can do nothing; bring
forth no fruit unto righteousness John xv. 4, 5.
.

5. THIS is a spiritual union. They that are joined to the Lord, are one
spirit; and this is true in two important senses: (1.) They partake of the same
divine Spirit with their Lord and Master. To him indeed GOD gives not the
Spirit by measure. In him it has pleased the Father that all fullness of the
Spirit and his graces should dwell; and, through this union, believers derive
from him such supplies of this Spirit, and his graces, as they stand in need
of. It is the very same Spirit which dwells in Christ, as the head, which is
dispensed by him to the living members of his mystical body. All these members,
whether in heaven or on earth, drink in the same Spirit, from the same
neverfailing fountain or repository, and are all united together in love by the
same Spirit. (2.) They have also the same temper and disposition; the same mind
in them which is also in Christ Jesus. His interest is their interest; and his
will is their will. They have the same aims, desires, aversions, delights; the
same love of GOD, zeal for his glory, and charity and affection for his
creatures and children. And hereby they know that Christ abides in them, by
the Spirit which he has given them: But those who have not thus the Spirit and
temper of Christ, may be assured that they are none of his.

6. THIS union of the soul to Christ is formed by faith. The holy Spirit works
this faith in the soul, and draws it to Christ; and faith receives Christ into
the soul, and forms the bond of spiritual union between them; so that
thenceforth the soul lives in Christ, by faith and love, and Christ lives in
the soul by the quickening, sanctifying and comforting influences of his holy
Spirit. Christ, says the Apostle, dwells in our hearts by faith. We dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit Ephesians. iii. 17. 1 John
iv. 13. 1 Cor. xii. 13.
.

7. THE effects of this union are many and exceeding precious: For, (1.) The
moment our souls are thus united to Christ, we are in a justified state, in a
state of acceptance and reconciliation with GOD, and consequently can never
come into condemnation Romans viii. 1.
. (2.) The moment of this union, is the moment of our spiritual regeneration:
We then begin to be partakers of a divine nature, which, by virtue of this
union, we receive from Christ the head of divine influences. (3.) With the
first moment of this union begins our eternal, as well as our spiritual life:
It is our birth to glory. (4.) Our progress in holiness depends entirely on
this union; for severed from Christ, we can do nothing. (5.) Fellowship and
communion with GOD is entirely the fruit and effect of this union: For, we can
have no fellowship with GOD, but in and through Christ. (6.) Fellowship and
communion among Christians is begun and carried on by this union: For, they are
all united unto one another in Christ, and to GOD through Christ; and this
communion is formed by their all partaking the same Spirit from Christ the
head, by which as members, they are united together into one body.

8. LET us never rest satisfied, until this blessed union is formed in our own
souls; and until we know that it is, by the blessed effects of it, purifying
our hearts by faith, and enabling us to bring forth much fruit of holiness. --
I had almost forgot to add, under the foregoing particular, That the
perseverance of the saints in grace, is the blessed effect of this union; and
that this union, is the strongest argument to prove it.

ESSAY XIV. Of the FINAL PERSEVERANCE of the SAINTS.
1. AS every blessing is valuable in proportion to its certainty and duration,
so the final perseverance of the saints in holiness, if it be true, must be a
very comfortable doctrine.

2. THIS doctrine is necessarily denied by all those who imagine they can put
themselves into a state of grace, and put themselves out of it, at pleasure;
and indeed by many who acknowledge the necessity of supernatural and
efficacious influences of the Spirit in conversion, and yet suppose this grace
amissible by the converted sinner, who, by his abuse of his natural liberty,
may totally and finally fall from grace.

3. WHEN we speak of a sinner's persevering in grace, or falling from grace, we
mean true grace, or a real work of regenerating grace in the soul: For, we make
no doubt, that many who have seemed to have had grace, in a judgment of
charity, have fallen from that grace which they only seemed to have, but had
not in reality. We have observed before, that a very specious religious
character is often formed on the principles of self-love, honor, fame,
reputation and fear, or the terrors of conscience, from a sight and sense of
guilt and demerit, which, although it is exceeding hollow, defective and
imperfect, yet often imposes not only on a credulous world, but also upon the
persons who sustain it. None but GOD certainly and infallibly knows whether
persons have true grace or not. Hypocrites often make as fair a profession as
real Christians; and when such fall into a course of gross sins, we are not
rashly to conclude that men may fall from grace, as it is impossible for us to
know whether such were ever truly and really gracious.

4. IT is no objection against this doctrine, that some truly gracious persons
have fallen into very gross sins; yea, into courses of sin, and thereby
dishonored Christ, and their profession of his religion. The question is,
Whether truly gracious persons can ever totally and finally lose the principle
of grace; wholly apostatize from GOD, and fall into reprobacy and condemnation?

5. SOME have imagined, that the saints may fall totally from grace, but not
finally; as in the instances of David and Solomon: But, though this would solve
many difficulties, yet it does not seem to be the scripture doctrine.

6. IF what we have said of conversion be true, it seems by no means probable,
that GOD should regenerate men, and give them his Spirit, and wholly change
their natures, and put his image on their souls, and yet, that either they
themselves, or the devil, should be allowed to destroy and undo this glorious
work, and wholly raze and blot out that image of his, which was engraven by his
Spirit on their hearts!

7. IF GOD, by an act of astonishing grace, justifies us when ungodly; if he
also takes us out of the devil's family by adoption, and gives us the spirit
and temper of sons, whereby we are disposed and enabled to cry, Abba, Father,
and to render a filial and dutiful obedience: Can we suppose him so capricious
(with reverence be it spoken!) as to change his own free acts; recall his gifts
and favors; condemn us again and cast us back to the family of the devil, from
which he had but just taken us by a miracle of mercy; especially when we are
told that his gifts and calling are without repentance Psalm. lxxxix. 28, -- 34.
Romans viii. 32, -- 39.
.

8. IF the doctrine of our mystical union with Christ, through faith and the
indwelling influences of the Spirit, be true; the perseverance of the saints in
holiness, must follow of consequence: For, can we suppose that the mystical
body of Christ can be mangled or dismembered? That his members may be cut off
and made members of the devil? Or that our bodies may be one day temples of the
holy Ghost, and the next synagogues of satan?

9. Is it not something very shocking and absurd to reason, to suppose, that
the states of men Godward should be liable to hourly change; one hour
justified persons, the next under sentence of condemnation; one hour holy
saints, the next profane reprobates; one hour favorites of heaven, the next
confederates with hell: The hour before death in a state of salvation, angels
ready to guard and convey them to bliss; an hour hence, the prey of devils, and
conveyed by them to everlasting torments!

10. WE do not say that the saints are infallible by any power of standing in
themselves; or that divine grace is a thing, which, in its own nature cannot be
lost. We believe, that if believers were left to themselves, they would fall
from grace every hour. But we found this doctrine wholly on the power and
promise of GOD; firmly believing, on the authority of his infallible word, That
his gifts and calling are without repentance; and that all who are begotten
again to a lively hope, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in the heavens for them, SHALL BE KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD, THROUGH FAITH, UNTO
SALVATION, ready to be revealed in the last times 1 Pet. i. 3, -- 6.
.

11. FOR the clear and superabundant scripture evidence of this doctrine, read
with attention the scriptures referred to below in the margin John x. 27, --
29. -- vi. 39, 40. -- xvii. 11. 1 John ii. 19. -- iii. 9. Ephesians. i. 13, 14. 2 Timothy ii. 19. -- iv. 18. Matthew. xxiv. 24. Romans xi. 29. Isa. xlii. 3. -- liii.
11, 12. Philip. i. 6. Heb. vi. 17, 18. Jude i. Psalm. xxii. 30. Isa. live. 10.
Jer. xxxi. 33, 34. Job xvii. 9.
.

12. THE scripture instances or examples alleged against this doctrine, are
either, (1.) Of hypocritical professors, or mere temporary believers, falling
from an outward profession of religion, which we believe to be a very possible
and common case. Or, (2.) Of the casual and temporary defections and falls of
true saints, which we readily grant to be too frequent a case. Or, (3.) Of
conditional threatenings made to true saints, as a means of, and excitement to
their perseverance. And all these scripture instances which are commonly
objected to this doctrine, may, without straining them, be reduced to one or
other of these classes.

13. THE principal objections alleged against this doctrine, from the nature
and tendency of it, is, (1.) That it ministers to carnal confidence and
security, and tends to hinder that watchfulness and circumspection, that holy
fear and trembling with which it becomes such guilty, imperfect creatures as we
are, to work out our salvation: But, the very best of men, can have no ground
of confidence, save in the strength and promise of GOD. We know also, that if
we live not holily, watchfully and circumspectly, we have no true grace. These
are the only certain and infallible signs and marks of true grace, and where
these are wanting, it would be the most irrational and absurd presumption, to
be confident of persevering in a grace which we have not. (2.) It is objected,
that this doctrine renders admonitions and reproofs, vain and needless. But
these are the very appointed means of our standing, and to prevent our apostasy
and ruin. We can have no certainty of perseverance, but what arises from our
certainty of the truth of grace, and this can be only ascertained by a ready
and cheerful compliance with every gospel motive to universal holiness.

14. FEW Christians can or ought to take any comfort from the application of
this doctrine to themselves. None have any right to do so, but such as have the
clearest and most satisfying evidences of the truth of grace in themselves. And
how few real Christians, comparatively speaking, have actually attained to this
satisfying evidence of the truth of grace, from which they may take the comfort
of the doctrine of perseverance?

15. LET it therefore be our first and principal care, to have true grace; let
it be our next to know that we have it, to make our calling and election sure
and certain to ourselves; and then let us freely rejoice in the immutability of
the divine love; -- that his gifts and calling are without repentance; that
where he has once begun a good work, he will carry it on to the day of Christ
Jesus, and that neither earth nor hell, shall be able to pluck us out of his
hand, or out of his Father's hand. Amen.

ESSAY XV. Of PEACE of CONSCIENCE.
1. CONSCIENCE is a comparing of our moral actions with their rule, and a
practical judging of them by this rule; the result of which is, that we either
acquit or condemn ourselves, according to this evidence. When we acquit
ourselves upon this practical judgment, then have we peace of conscience.

2. PEACE of conscience is the fruit and effect of sanctification: For, it is
impossible that an unsanctified, impenitent, graceless person, can, upon true
evidence, acquit himself at the bar of his own conscience; or, in other words,
enjoy true peace of conscience.

3. IN order to true peace of conscience, it is not enough that the matter of
our actions be conformable to the law of GOD: We must also be conscious that
they are done from right motives and for right ends; in obedience to the
authority of GOD, with a view to his glory and the good of our fellow
creatures, or for our own spiritual benefit.

4. IT is one thing to be able to acquit ourselves of some particular crime
falsely laid to our charge by men, which a very wicked person may be able to
do; and quite another thing to be able to acquit ourselves, in our general
conduct, in the sight of GOD. In order to this peace, we must labor to
maintain the testimony of a good conscience, both toward GOD and toward men;
or, as the Apostle elsewhere expresses it, we must have lived in all good
conscience Acts xxiii. 1. -- xxiv. 16.
.

5. A GOOD, quiet, and peaceable conscience is one of the greatest blessings
upon earth; one of the richest and most invaluable privileges of the
sanctified; can be only obtained in the way of circumspect holiness, and should
be pursued with the utmost assiduity by every Christian. Both the nature of it,
and an earnest resolution to pursue it, are well expressed in these words of
Job: My heart shall not reproach me, so long as I live Job xxvii. 6. Read also,
1 John iii. 19, -- 21. 1 Timothy i. 5. 1 Pet. iii. 19. 1 Timothy iii. 9.
.

6. Two things are particularly necessary to peace of conscience: First, That
our sins are pardoned, through faith in the Redeemer's blood: For, where guilt
remains, there can be no ground for peace, and where a sense of guilt remains,
no peace can actually take place Heb. ix. 11, -- 14. -- x. 22.
. Secondly, A holy life: For, there is no peace, says my GOD, to the wicked
Isa. lvii. 21.
.

7. THE pure and ravishing pleasures, the solid joys and extatic delights of a
peaceable conscience, are beautifully expressed by the Apostle 2 Cor. i. 12.
; For this is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
GOD, we have had our conversation in the world. And again Romans v. 1, -- 4.
; Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with GOD, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and rejoice in hope of the glory of GOD. We glory in tribulations
also; knowing that tribulation works patience; and patience, experience; and
experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of GOD is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.

8. THE horrors of an evil, guilty, condemning conscience are, beyond compare,
the most shocking miseries of this life; and too certain preludes of that worm
which dies not, and that fire which is not quenched. Conscience is a lion,
which will one day or other, rise up and tear to pieces, with resistless fury,
the impenitent sinner. We have some instructive and alarming instances of these
horrors of a guilty and awakened conscience, in the cases of Cain, Judas and
Francis Spira.

9. THE dangerous and destructive counterfeit of peace of conscience, is
security, or a false and ill-grounded peace of mind, in a wilful course of sin.
This arises either from false and unworthy notions of GOD'S perfections, or
from a long custom of sinning against light, whereby the conscience becomes as
it were seared and past feeling Ephesians. iv. 18, 19.
: But a piercing light will, one day or other, discover this cheat to the
sinner, and fill his soul with an anguish which he shall neither be able to
support nor divert.

10. LET us labor to obtain an enlightened, well informed conscience, that we
may neither, on the one hand, become the dupes of superstitious fears,
groundless panics, and imaginary terrors, for actions in which there is really
no guilt; nor, on the other, like Saint Paul, bring guilt upon ourselves, by
erring ignorantly through unbelief 1 Timothy i. 13.
.

11. LET us pray and labor for a tender, sensible, faithful conscience; lest
we be given over to the dreadful soul-destroying judgments of blindness of mind
and hardness of heart.

ESSAY XVI. Of JOY in the HOLY GHOST.
1. JOY in the holy Ghost, is a joy proceeding not merely from the testimony of
a good conscience; but also from the chearing influences of the holy Spirit,
the comforter, bearing witness with the comfortable testimony of our own
spirits, shining upon the work of grace in our souls, and making it visible to
ourselves; the consequence of which is, that we are filled with joy unspeakable
and full of glory.

2. IT is a direct fruit of the Spirit, not only as sanctifying, but as
comforting Gal. v. 22.
: It is the love of GOD shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is
given unto us Romans v. 4.
.

3. THIS also is a privilege only of the sanctified: For, although the holy
GHOST operates on the hearts of the wicked, as a renewer and sanctifier; yet he
visits none as a comforter, sheding abroad the love of GOD in their hearts,
except such as are in a state of pardon and reconciliation with GOD, and as are
actually holy.

4. IF we would experience and enjoy within us, that spiritual kingdom of GOD,
which consists in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost Romans xiv.
17.
; we must, by a virtuous, watchful and circumspect life, have our souls always
prepared and adorned, as fit temples for the residence of the holy Ghost: For,
this joy does not seem to be essential to a sanctified state; but seems rather
to depend much on the manner in which we improve our talents, and entertain and
cherish the motions and operations of the holy Spirit on our minds. It may be
also, in many cases, a peculiar and sovereign favor conferred by GOD on some
believers, who may best improve it to his glory, and the comfort and
edification of others, or certain important occasions and emergencies.

5. As, therefore, we would expect this divine privilege, and taste this pure
and heavenly joy, let us be solicitously watchful over every movement of our
hearts and affections, and labor after the utmost purity of soul.

6. MANY poor Christians are so far from enjoying these luxuries of religion,
that through some peculiar infelicity of constitution or external
circumstances, or from some other cause known only to GOD, they walk
continually. in darkness and see no light: Let not such, however, be over much
distressed, provided they are but enabled to trust in the LORD, and stay
themselves upon their GOD Isa. l. 10.
.

ESSAY XVII. Whether CHRISTIANS may be fully assured of GOD 'S eternal LOVE, in
this LIFE?
1. BY a full assurance of GOD 'S love, we mean, Such a firm and well-grounded
persuasion of his love to us, of the truth of grace in us, and of the certainty
of our future glory and happiness, as excludes all doubts and fears, and as
affords just ground of joy and triumph. The Apostle terms it, The full
assurance of hope Heb. vi. 11.
.

2. WE do not suppose that every believer attains to this privilege; for, we do
not suppose that assurance is of the essence of faith. To believe and trust in
Christ, is one thing, and to be persuaded and assured that we do believe and
trust in him, agreeable to the gospel command is another and a very different
thing: The first is a direct, the second a reflex act of faith: By the first we
are actually in the way of salvation; by the second we know and are comfortably
assured that we are so; and the first may be and often is, without the second
Isa. l. 10.
.

3. THIS comfortable assurance of GOD'S eternal love is not, in its own nature
permanent; but may be, and often is lost for a time, either through falls and
miscarriages, or an unwatchful and uncircumspect life, or for other reasons and
purposes known only to GOD. Nay, it may be doubted, whether any Christian ever
enjoyed this privilege uninterruptedly for many years, or even months together.
Nor indeed is it necessary, as it is not essential to salvation. It is
necessary to our salvation, that we should always trust in GOD; but it is not
equally necessary, that we should always know that we do so.

4. GOD may have wise and gracious reasons for withholding this comfortable
assurance wholly from some Christians, and for interrupting it often in others;
namely, to humble and preserve them from spiritual pride; to chastize them for
carelessness and unwatchfulness, and to exercise them in the graces of godly
sorrow, repentance, patience, dependence, and a painful diligence in the work
of religion.

5. CHRISTIANS may also forfeit this comfortable assurance, by their
miscarriages and indiscretions; by grieving the holy Spirit and resisting his
motions and impulses, and by neglecting the duties of meditation,
self-examination, prayer, and the other instrumental ordinances of GOD'S
appointment.

6. BUT this assurance is a privilege certainly attainable by Christians,
because it has been actually attained by numbers of GOD'S people. It appears
that Job Job xix. 23, -- 27.
, David 2 Samuel xxiii. 5. and his psalms passim.
, St. Paul and all the other apostles had this comfortable assurance 2 Timothy i.
12. -- iv. 7, 8. 2 Cor. iv. 17. -- ^. 1, 6, 7, 8. Philip. i. 19, -- 23. 1 John
iii. 2, 3, etc.
.

7. IT was one principal design of writing the scriptures, that we might come
to this comfortable assurance, and we are repeatedly exhorted and commanded to
seek for it and obtain it, which proves that it is attainable John xx. 31. 1
John i. 4. -- v. 13. 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Gal. vi. 3, 4, etc.
.

8. THERE are numberless conditional promises of salvation laid down in
scripture, the conditions whereof, if we can be persuaded that we have been
enabled to fulfill them, we may be equally assured of eternal life, and that we
are in a state of salvation. For instance; he that believes, repents, is
converted and born of GOD, shall be saved. This is the record, that GOD has
given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: He that has the Son,
has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life; but the wrath of GOD
abides on him. If, therefore, I have obtained a rational assurance, that I
have believed, or received the Son of GOD by faith; that I have repented, and
am truly regenerated and born again of the Spirit, I am equally assured of
eternal life.

9. THE scriptures abound with marks and characters of true believers and real
converts. E. g. This is the love of GOD, that ye keep his commandments. We know
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. The
fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, etc. and they that are Christ's,
have crucified the flesh, with its lusts. There is, therefore, now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. To be spiritually minded is life and peace. As many as
are led by the Spirit of GOD, they are the sons of GOD. Every man, who has
this hope in himself, purifyeth himself, as GOD is pure, etc. Now, if we are
rationally and upon good grounds persuaded that we have these marks and
characters, we may be equally assured of spiritual life in possession, and
eternal life in reversion.

10. THE witness of the Spirit may also concur with and shine upon this
evidence, and give us an irresistible persuasion, that this is indeed our happy
case Romans v. 1, -- 5. -- viii. 15, -- 17.
.

11. THE following things seem necessary to this assurance: (1.) There must be
promises of life and salvation revealed, as objects of our faith. -- (2.) There
must be marks and characters revealed, as a rule whereby we may examine and try
ourselves, and know our state. -- (3.) These marks and evidences of grace must
be discovered, in an ordinary way, by frequent, diligent, and impartial
self-examination, which is the only rational expedient on our part to come at
self-knowledge. -- (4.) It is necessary, that we should discern in ourselves
these marks and evidences, to which the promises of salvation are made: And,
(5.) In order to remove all doubt and uncertainty, it seems necessary, in most
cases, that the Spirit should shine upon his own work, and give his concurring
testimony; and for this we should earnestly pray, while we examine.

12. THERE is an extraordinary witness of the Spirit, which seems distinct from
this, and which is much more rare and uncommon; wherein, without any
self-examination, reflection or reasoning, the Spirit of GOD immediately shines
on the soul, with such an irresistible and overpowering light, and with such
sensible first fruits of heavenly glory, as puts the persons thus highly
favored, infinitely above all doubt of the safety of their state. This often
happens to eminently holy men, upon the near approach of death.

13. THE very lowest degree of this assurance is not to be expected without
true faith, and a conscientious regard to GOD'S commandments, accompanied with
self-examination, and careful serious reflections on our temper, frame and
actions, compared with the word of GOD.

14. IT is the duty of every Christian, to labor to obtain this comfortable
assurance of the safety and happiness of his state, for the following reasons:
(1.) Without it he can have no rational hope, or joy in the holy Ghost. (2.) He
cannot, with truth and sincerity, bear an honorable testimony to religion, or
encourage and comfort others from his own experience. (3.) He cannot praise GOD
or rejoice in him, as he ought; nor be so cheerful in his service, or so
examplary in his own life, as he otherwise might. (4.) His death cannot be
honorable to christianity, nor edifying to saints or sinners; as he must go
down to the grave, in a state of doubt and hesitancy.

15. To obtain this comfortable assurance, is, for ordinary, a work which
requires much labor, diligence and perseverance; but when obtained, it will
abundantly recompense the labor of a whole lifetime.

ESSAY XVIII. The IMMORTALITY of the SOUL.
1. THE doctrine of the soul's immortality is of great importance in religion:
For, if the soul perished with the body, self-denial, mortification, and
extreme sufferings in the cause of virtue, would be absurd; -- and the best
Christians would, as the Apostle suggests, be of all men the most miserable.

2. BY the soul's being immortal, we do not mean that it is impossible for him
who made it to destroy it; or that it is, in its own nature, immortal,
independently on GOD; but that it does not perish or die with, or like the
body, nor can be destroyed by any creature; but is appointed by GOD for an
endless existence, and fitted and qualified for this deathless existence in its
own nature.

3. REASON does not assure us, that thought and consciousness are inseparable
and essential properties of human souls: For ought we know, they may be and
exist without continued thought, consciousness and reflection, though the
contrary opinion is highly probable, and seems to be countenanced by scripture.

4. WE know of but two kinds of substances in the universe, matter and spirit.
And these we conceive of as entirely different and distinct from one another.
GOD, we are sure, is a pure spirit; immaterial, without body or bodily parts:
But we are not equally certain that created spirits, either angels or human
souls, are spirits of the same nature with GOD, or wholly immaterial. Though
their being called spirits, and being said to be made after the image of GOD,
and to be his offspring, is a strong presumption that they are immaterial.

5. IF it could be certainly proved that our souls are wholly immaterial, as
GOD is, it would be a strong argument in favor of their immortality: Because,
it would hence follow, that they are incapable of dissolution; that they could
not perish with the body, and that none but GOD could destroy them. But we have
abundant arguments to prove the soul's immortality, laying aside the
consideration of its being immaterial.

6. THERE is much the same reason to believe the spirits of brutes to be
immaterial, as the souls of men. Both are called spirits in the scripture;
though it is said, that the one goes upward at death, and the other downwards.
And it is as difficult to conceive how a merely material substance should
perceive, reason, remember, compare, love and hate in a beast, more than in a
man. Yet there are not the same reasons to believe the immortality of the
spirits of beasts, as of the souls of men.

7. THE strongest and most conclusive arguments for the immortality of human
souls, are of a moral nature, and do not arise from their being immaterial:
For, although we know our bodies to be material, yet we have sufficient reason
to believe, that they shall be raised from the dead, and rendered immortal in a
future state. And if we have reason to believe this of our mortal bodies, why
may we not believe the same of our souls, even supposing them to be material.

8. THERE is a great apparent resemblance between men and brutes in many
respects, both living and dying. They seem to have much the same natural
perceptions of pleasure and pain. All the brute creation seem to have some
portion of reason, forethought, contrivance and memory. So that it is hard to
conceive an essential difference between the souls of men and the spirits of
beasts; only, that the former appear to be a more perfect kind of spirits. Yet
there are many great and essential differences between men and beasts, which
lay a foundation for believing the souls of men to be immortal, whereas the
spirits of beasts may be mortal and perishable at their death.

9. THE souls of men have plainly a capacity for virtue and religion. It is
evident that they have a conscience, a moral sense and feeling, a divine law
written upon them; that they have hopes and fears, relating to invisible
powers, and a future and invisible state. They have naturally hope and joy,
when they are conscious of having acted up to the moral law of their nature;
and fears and forebodings of punishment, when they grossly violate the laws of
their own minds. In other words; it appears, that they are moral agents,
accountable creatures, under law to GOD; and that they know they are
responsible to him for their moral actions. But there is not the least evidence
or appearance of this among the brute creation. Now if GOD has implanted this
law, this moral sense, these hopes and fears in human souls, as the law of
their nature; is it to be thought, that they are vain and false, and have no
real objects?

10. THE spirits of brutes do not seem capable of improvement: Whatever they
know and do seems to be by instinct. The bird builds her nest as ingeniously
the first year, without any instruction, as she does after the experience of
ten years; and knows her food, her enemies and resources as well. But the soul
of man is capable of daily improvement, not only in virtue, but in the
knowledge of arts and sciences. Is it not likely then, that human souls are
made for noble ends, and for higher enjoyments, even for an immortal, ever
improving duration?

11. THE generality of men of all nations, even the most ignorant and
barbarous, have believed the immortality of the soul, and this universal
belief, must be supposed founded on some obvious principles, level to the
capacity of all, which is a strong presumption that it is true and founded in
nature.

12. MEN in general have a strong desire, and a fond hope of immortality; and
the more virtuous and holy they are, the more earnest is this hope and desire
of immortality: But would a good GOD provide gratifications for all the natural
desires of the lowest order of creatures, and leave this noblest appetite in
man ungratified? -- or would he inspire the holiest and best of men with
pantings, breathings and earnest longings, which are vain, imaginary and
delusive?

13. IT seems not consistent with the divine goodness to form so excellent a
creature as man, for so short a duration and such low employments, as are to be
met with in this life. Is it reasonable to imagine, that the human soul, by the
time its noble saculties just begin to be cultivated and fitted for noble
pleasures and enjoyments, should be extinguished and cut off for ever?

14. GOOD men desire nothing so much as to enjoy GOD more perfectly than they
can in their life; and the more they love GOD, the more eager and unsatisfied
is this desire in their souls. Nay, this desire, is the fruit of GOD'S grace in
them, and of his own planting. But if the human soul is not immortal, the best
of men, can never obtain their noblest desire, and the highest enjoyment and
happiness of which their nature is capable.

15. IF the soul were mortal, a desperate villain might deprive the most
virtuous man of his being, and of all the future rewards of his virtue: But is
it consistent with the justice and goodness of GOD, that this should be in the
power of a bad man?

16. IF GOD is a just governor of his rational creatures, the virtuous must and
will be rewarded according to their works, and the wicked punished according to
theirs: But we are sure this does not always happen in the present life;
therefore, there must be a future state of retribution, and consequently human
souls are immortal.

17. OUR Lord Jesus Christ has put this doctrine beyond all doubt, having
brought life and immortality to light by his gospel. The whole of his religion;
all his threatenings and promises, his rewards and punishments, go upon this
suppuration, and all his discourses and parables are full of it.

18. CHRIST's raising the dead bodies of many, and rising himself from the
dead; also, the appearance of Moses and Elias to the disciples on the mount of
transfiguration, were so many occular demonstrations of the immortality of the
soul, and that its existence depends not on the life of the body.

19. IT is no objection to this important doctrine, that the faculties of the
souls of aged or sick persons, are impaired and infeebled by the diseases and
decays of the body; seeing the soul must exert its faculties by and through the
bodily organs. On the contrary also, the souls of some men are uncommonly
active and vigorous when their bodies are in the deepest decays, and just at
the point of death.

20. IF our souls are indeed immortal, and must live for ever^happy or
miserable, is there any care or concern in this life a thousandth part so
important to man, as to provide for the future happiness of his immortal soul?

ESSAY XIX. Of DEATH.
1. THOUGH we can hardly conceive of the natural immortality of a body composed
of flesh and blood; yet GOD could doubtless have made our bodies immortal, if
he had so pleased. And had we continued in a state of innocence, there is no
doubt but that we would have been immortal; for this seems implied in the
promise of the covenant of works.

2. WHETHER this reward and privilege of innocent man, would have been an
immortality on earth or in heaven, is no where plainly revealed.

3. THOUGH man was naturally mortal; yet GOD could have preserved him from
death, by the salubriety of the air and water, the wholesome, restorative and
medicinal quality of the fruits of the earth, and that composure and equability
of the passions and affections, resulting from the innocence and perfection of
the soul.

4. SOME have supposed, that the tree of life, from which man was excluded by
sin, had, in its fruit, the preternatural quality of preserving man immortal,
so long as he had access to eat it: Others, that it was a sacramental pledge of
his immortality so long as he continued in a state of innocence.

5. HOWEVER these things may be, yet we are assured both from scripture and
experience, that fallen, sinful man, is mortal; that death is the wages and
consequent of sin in all the race; and that death has passed upon all, because
all have sinned Genesis ii. 17. Romans v. 12. Job xxi. 23. Heb. ix. 27.
.

6. As death is the wages of sin, and by the unalterable purpose of GOD, all
men are doomed to die; so a great many second causes may have concurred to
secure the accomplishment of this purpose; as the curse of the earth, poisoning
its fruits with the seeds of death; the baneful influences of the accursed air
upon our lungs and juices; the intemperature of the seasons, and the quick
successions from wet to dry, and from extreme heat to extreme cold; the
exorbitancy and irregularity of our passions and appetites through sin; the
sickly and enfeebled constitutions of our forefathers, and the like.

7. WITH regard to beasts, we suppose death to put a period to their pains,
pleasures and very beings. But, as it is attended with some degree of pain, and
deprives these creatures of being, and many pleasurable enjoyments, religion
and even humanity should restrain us from giving them unnecessary pain, and
much more from taking away their lives, where necessity, or the law of
self-preservation, does not require it.

8. WITH regard to man, death in itself considered, or the mere separation of
soul and body, ought not to be greatly dreaded, as probably the pain of it is
much smaller than we imagine: But what renders death peculiarly important and
formidable to man, is its awful consequences. It is appointed for all men once
to die, and after that the judgment.

9. "THE sting of death is sin." A consciousness of guilt, of exposedness to an
impartial judgment, eternal banishment from GOD, and the positive inflictions
of his wrath, render death extremely formidable to the wicked, as it must be to
such, the period of all their pleasurable enjoyments, and the commencement of
eternal misery.

10. EVEN nature, in good men, has an abhorrence of death, in itself
considered, as we may learn from the Apostle himself 2 Cor. v. 2.
; because, say some, death is unnatural, being no part of the original
constitution, but an adventitious consequent upon sin, and part of the
punishment of it. But many other reasons may be assigned for this, such as the
natural fear of the pain of dying, our unacquaintedness with the separate state
and invisible world, and remaining doubts of their unpreparedness, with many.
Besides, the soul and body, who have been long such close and intimate
companions, must naturally have a reluctance to part from each other, though
but for a season.

11. IT is the peculiar privilege of the righteous, that death will redound to
their unspeakable advantage. -- Death is theirs, as the Apostle emphatically
expresses it 1 Cor. iii. 22.
. To them to die, is gain Phil. i. 20.
.

(1.) THE sting of death is taken away, in their justification: For, after
rational evidence, that a person is pardoned, and restored to the favor of
GOD, there is no more rational ground for the fear of death; as that sense of
guilt and fear of punishment which are the sting of death are taken away, and
such a person has ground for that triumphant exultation; O death, where is thy
sting! O grave, where is thy victory 1 Cor. xv.
!

(2.) DEATH changes its nature to the righteous, and, of an enemy becomes a
friend. The king of terrors is changed into a messenger of divine love: As,
first, It frees them from all misery, and from the remainder of indwelling
corruption. It ends the mortal strife and conflict, and gives them a complete
victory and triumph over every enemy. Secondly, It fits and qualifies them for
farther and higher communion with Christ in glory. When they are absent from
the body, they are present with the Lord; see him face to face, and enjoy him
perfectly without a medium. It enlarges and qualifies the soul for more perfect
communion with, and the more perfect enjoyment of GOD, Christ, angels and
blessed spirits. And, as flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven,
it prepares the body for putting on a spiritual and immortal form, without
which it could not be fitted for heaven.

12. THE change of those who shall be alive at the resurrection and second
coming of Christ, will be equivalent to death: There appearing no reason why
such should be privileged above their fellow creatures.

13. THE translation of Enoch and Elijah, are the only two exceptions from the
universal mortality of the human kind; and perhaps were intended as
demonstrative proofs of an unseen world.

14. THOUGH death will be certain gain to the righteous; yet a longer
continuance in the present life may be beneficial to many of them, and answer
great and important purposes in the scheme of providence: Wherefore, an
absolute and impatient desire of death, or peremptory prayers for it, are not
commendable in good men; but all lawful means to preserve and prolong life
ought to be used by them Philip. i. 21, -- 26.
.

INFERENCES. 1st, How ought a sense of universal mortality to humble the pride
of man; and especially that arising from birth, honor, power, wealth, riches
and nobility? We have surely no reason to be vain or proud of any thing, of
which death can rob us.

2. How vain and ridiculous, yea, and unhappy a thing would man be, if he were
wholly under the dominion of death, and had no claim to immortality?

3. FROM the consideration of death, the greatest of all natural evils, and
from its universality, we may infer, the great evil of sin, from which it took
its rise.

4. FROM the shortness and uncertainty of life, and the importance of it, as a
state of probation for eternity, we should learn the importance of improving
our time, and the great guilt and solly of lavishing and squandering it in
foolish and vain, and much more in sinful amusements and pleasures Psalm. xc.
12. -- xxxix. 4.5.
.

5. IF death be so important in its consequences, how dreadful a thing is
murder? and how cautious and circumspect ought judges and juries to be in
matters of life and death?

6. How desperately mad is the wretch who is accessory to his own death, by
which, he not only deprives himself and the world of all the benefits and
advantages of his life, but plunges into an awful eternity, under all the
irremissible guilt of suicide.

ESSAY XX. The RESURRECTION of the DEAD.
1. THIS is a doctrine of pure revelation, seeing there is no principle or
appearance in nature, from whence it can be rationally inferred.

2. THE instance of a grain of corn dying in the earth before it springs, and
like instances, are good illustrations of the doctrine already revealed, and
show that the thing is neither impossible nor absurd; but cannot prove it.

3. THOUGH it appears from many passages of the Old Testament scriptures, that
this doctrine was believed by the Old Testament saints See 1 Samuel ii. 6. 2
Kings iv. 35. -- xiii. 21. -- xvii. 21, 22. Psalm. xvi. 10. Isa. xxv. 8. Hos.
xiii. 14. Compare 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55. Luke xx. 37, 38. Compare Exodus iii. 6. Job
xix. 25, -- 27. Dan. xii. 2. Heb. xi.
; yet the full, clear and circumstantial revelation of it was reserved to be
brought to light by the gospel. Christ raised three dead bodies in the course
of his ministry, and raised himself. He terms himself, the resurrection and the
life John xi.
; and declares, that he is commissioned by GOD to raise up all his people at
the last day John vi. 39, 49.
. See this doctrine established from the resurrection of Christ, and
beautifully explained, 1 Cor. xv.

4. THE bodies both of the righteous and the wicked shall be raised Matthew. xxv.
31, etc. Rev. xx. 12, 13. Matthew. x. 28. Luke xii. 25.
: For, as the body has been a partner with the soul in this state of probation,
it seems equitable, that it should share with it in a state of retribution.

5. THE resurrection body will be the same in substance with that which died,
but will have far different qualities, suited to the state and place of
retribution: For, flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; neither
is it conceivable that they should long endure the torments of hell,
unconsumed, without a perpetual miracle. The bodies of the saints will be
raised spiritual, incorruptible and glorious, like the glorified body of
Christ; and probably those of the wicked, spiritual and incorruptible, but
hideous and deformed.

6. THE objections raised against the resurrection of the same body, are so
futile, when we consider the power and wisdom of GOD, and the true nature of
things, as not to deserve a serious answer.

7. THE bodies of those who shall be found alive on the earth at the last day,
shall be instantaneously changed; in which change there will be the nature and
essence both of a death, and a resurrection.

ESSAY XXI. Of a FUTURE JUDGMENT.
1. IT is appointed for all men once to die, and after that the judgment, Heb.
ix. 27.

2. MANY of the arguments for the immortality of the soul, equally prove a
judgment to come; such as the moral agency and accountableness of man; the
operations of his conscience and moral sense; his unacountable hopes and fears
respecting an invisible power and a future state; the unequal distribution of
rewards and punishments according to men's moral characters in this present
state, and the like.

3. IT is remarkable also, that a belief of a judgment to come, and a future
state of rewards and punishments, according to men's present behavior, has
been as universal, as the belief of the soul's immortality; and is indeed
grounded on the same general principles.

4. THE holy scriptures fully, clearly, and circumstantially establish and
teach this doctrine See Jude 14. and Eccles. xii. 14. Matthew. xxv. Rev. xii. and
xxii. etc.
.

5. GOD will judge the world by Jesus Christ, by whom he made and governs it,
and by whom he has redeemed it. There is a great and evident propriety in this,
from many reasons too tedious here to mention. This also tends powerfully to
prove the real divinity and infinite perfection of our Redeemer Acts xvii. 31.
2 Cor. v. 10. etc.
.

6. CHRIST at the day of judgment, will descend from heaven, in visible pomp
and splendor inexpressible; clothed with his own glory, his Father's glory,
and attended with all the shining retinue of heaven; -- will seat himself on a
glorious white throne in the lower heavens, and having summoned before him, the
whole rational creation, angels, men, and devils, will judge and sentence them
according to their respective works and characters Luke ix. 26. Matthew. xxv. 31.
1 These. iv. 16. 2 These. i. 7, -- 10. 2 Pet. ii. 4. Jude 6, 14, 15. Rev. xx. 11,
12. -- xxii. 12. 2 Cor. v. 10.
.

7. THE important consequence of this judgment is, that the righteous will
immediately enter into a state of endless happiness, and the wicked into a
state of endless misery, in consequence of the public sentence then passed upon
them by the judge Matthew. xxv. 34, 41, 46.
.

8. As we hear of but one judgment, it does not appear that the souls of men,
are immediately judged at their departure from the body; although it is certain
they are then made to know and expect their final doom, and do enter
immediately into some degree of happiness or misery, according to their
respective characters Luke vi. 21, -- 23. -- xxiii. 43. Rev. vi. 9, 10.
.

ESSAY XXII. HEAVEN; or the FUTURE STATE of the BLESSED.
1. WE have already supposed, that the souls of the righteous, during the whole
intermediate state, from the article of death, to the day of judgment, are in a
place and state of blessedness, -- called in scripture Paradise, Abraham's
bosom, heaven, and the like; though it is uncertain, whether this be the same
place and state into which they will enter after the final judgment.

2. THOUGH the sight of their descending Redeemer, and their being placed on
his right hand before the judgment seat, will fill the righteous with
inexpressible joy; yet the sentence passed on them after judgment, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom, etc. -- may be properly deemed the
first part of their public triumph, and of the honor conferred upon them
before the assembled world: This being the first declaration of their title to
the eternal joys of their Lord, in consequence of their judgment and
acquittance.

3. THEY will then go away with Christ and the holy angels into life eternal,
where they will ever be with each other, and with their dearest Lord Matthew.
xxv. 46.
.

4. WE must consider heaven both as a place and a state of blessedness; but
where this place, or what this state precisely is, we are not at present
permitted to know.

5. AS Christ has, and the saints will have glorious bodies, there must needs
be a local heaven, or some place where these bodies will be and reside. But
whether the whole universe may not be turned into a heaven to them; or whether
any particular part of it may be appropriated for their peculiar residence, is
what we cannot certainly tell. True, the heaven of the saints is termed a city,
the New Jerusalem, mansions in GOD 'S house, sure habitations, and the like;
but for all we know, these may be only figurative expressions. GOD may create a
heaven around his saints wherever they are, even in hell; and they may have
intimate communion with each other, from the most distant parts of the
universe. The angels always behold the face of GOD in heaven, and yet they are
represented as ministering to the saints on earth. Wherever GOD graciously
communicates himself to his rational creatures, there is heaven; and, as GOD is
immense and infinite, his creatures can no where be out of his immediate
presence.

6. HEAVEN, wherever it is, must be a glorious place, adorned with every thing
which can gratify and delight the refined and heavenly senses of glorified and
spiritualized bodies; and as, in our perfect glorious state, we may have a
great many more and different senses and capacities, than what we have at
present, and all these may have their proper and adapted gratifications;
therefore, it is impossible for us to conceive at present any thing of the
glory and happiness of that place, which eye has not seen, nor car heard, etc.
1 Cor. ii. 9.
.

7. BUT we can at present conceive something of the heavenly state, as a state
of perfect holiness, exempt from all sin and misery; and indeed, good men enjoy
something of heaven in this sense of the word, or have some foretastes or
prelibations of it in their souls, in this life.

8. HEAVEN is a state of improved knowledge and perfect holiness. The glorified
saints do see and know GOD intuitively, in his own nature, and in a spiritual
manner, as one spirit may be supposed to see and know another. They also have a
clear discernment of the wisdom and contrivance of his works, and of the
holiness, justice and equity of his ways and providence; which is a kind and
degree of knowledge we cannot attain to in this life, and which must afford
inexpressible happiness to the mind, by delightfully gratifying its noblest
powers. The righteous in heaven are also altogether holy; have no propensity to
sin; no struggles with corruption; no conflict with temptation; no remorse for
guilt, nor any fear of displeasing GOD, or enduring his displeasure. They
clearly see and know GOD, and therefore they perfectly love and admire him.
They know the equity of his laws and the beauty of holiness, and therefore they
cannot but delightfully obey him and work holiness, and can be in no danger of
inclining to the hateful ways of sin. Besides, enjoying so glorious a reward of
holiness, and seeing sin so dreadfully punished in the damned, they are
everlastingly guarded against the love of sin in the most powerful manner
imaginable.

9. AS GOD is the perfection of beauty, and the source of all blessedness and
comfort, so the highest part of our heavenly blessedness will consist in the
contemplation and enjoyment of him. In knowing him, we shall know all truth,
and in enjoying him we shall enjoy all good and happiness; for there is neither
truth nor happiness but in and from him; so that he must ever be the supreme
good and chief p^^tion of our souls: Besides, that the knowledge and enjoyment
of GOD are transforming and assimulating; so that to know and enjoy him, is to
be like him; and to be like him in our measure, is to be as holy, happy and
glorious, as our nature will admit 1 John iii. 2.
.

10. THE presence and enjoyment of Christ and of the holy Ghost, will also be
prime ingredients in our heavenly blessedness. Indeed, in enjoying them, we
enjoy GOD 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17, 18. Phil. i. 23. 2 Cor. v. 5, -- 8.
.

11. NOR need we scruple to suppose, that the sweet fellowship and communion of
angels and saints, more especially those whom we have known and loved on earth,
will be ingredients in our heavenly blessedness. But ye are come unto mount
Sion, and unto the city of the living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to GOD the judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than that
of Able See Heb. xii. 22, etc.
.

12. THE happiness of the righteous will be eternal.

13. IT shall also, in all probability, be ever improving, as they grow in
knowledge and holiness.

14. IT is highly probable, that there will be different degrees of glory in
heaven, according to the different degrees of holiness among GOD'S children on
earth 1 Cor. xv. 41, 42. Matthew. xxv. 14.
.

15. WE should now have our conversation in heaven, and be preparing for that
blessed place and state: For, how sad a case will it be, if we are describing
that blessedness which we shall never enjoy, nor even see, but at an
unapproachable distance, as the rich man did Lazarus, through the impassable
gulf.

ESSAY XXIII. Of HELL, or the PLACE and STATE of the WICKED.
1. ALTHOUGH the wicked carry hell in their consciences from the moment of
their death, and are probably doomed to herd among the devils, and to share in
their present punishments; yet their rising from their graves in terror and
deformity; their ranking themselves on the left hand of the judge, and more
especially their receiving that awful sentence; Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, may be reckoned the
beginning of their hell, or eternal torments Matthew. xxv. 41. etc.
.

HELL is both a place and a state. The place or locality of hell cannot be
doubted after the resurrection, as the bodies of the wicked must needs be in
some place. Besides, the scriptures represent it as a lake of fire and
brimstone; a fire prepared for the devil and his angels, and the like; -- and
Dives is represented as lifting up his eyes, being in torments; and an
impassable gulf is said to be fixed between him and Lazarus. But whether the
souls of the wicked are now, in their intermediate state, confined to any such
place, is a question not easy or needful to be answered. Some think, that they
and the devils are suffered to roam at large through the universe. Let it
suffice us to know, that wherever they are, it is hell with them. They are
under a painful sense of the divine displeasure, and have a dreadful
expectation of the judgment, and of greater miseries yet to come.

3. THERE have been many vain speculations about the place and nature of hell's
torments. Some have thought it absurd to suppose, that the positive torments of
damned spirits, of the devil and his angels, should be excited by material
fire. But if we consider, that it is our spirits which feel the pain of burning
through our bodies, we shall not think it incredible, that GOD should excite
the same idea of pain from sire in pure spirits, without the intervention of
bodies. However, fire may be only figuratively used, to signify the most
intense pain and torments. And as for the place of the damned, it better
becomes us to endeavor to shun it, than curiously to enquire where or what it
is.

4. AT the resurrection of the wicked, their souls being united to their
bodies, they shall be judged; and that awful sentence being passed upon them,
Depart from me ye cursed, etc. they shall be dragged away by devils, and with
them, shut up in the prison of hell; thus sharing in the punishment of those
with whom they apostatized.

5. IT appears from scripture, that the misery of the damned will be properly
eternal, everlasting fire; a worm that dies not, and a fire that is not
quenched. It appears agreeable to reason also, that creatures who have despised
and rejected an everlasting heaven of blessedness, should have an everlasting
hell of misery; and that those who have slighted the glorious hope set before
them, should inherit endless despair, which, indeed, upon the whole, was their
own choice and preference.

6. AS to the state of hell, or rather of the damned, it arises in a great
measure from their own wicked and hellish dispositions, which cannot admit of
happiness, but are naturally productive of misery. A wicked man is, and must be
a hell to himself. He is self-fitted and prepared to this destruction; and he
needs only to be out of the body, and out of a capacity of tasting GOD'S
goodness, to be in hell, and to be equally a devil. So that repentance of sin,
and holiness, are in their own nature, necessary to deliver men from hell, and
to qualify them for happiness.

7. THE chief ingredients in the miseries of the damned, are, (1.) Their being
banished from the presence and enjoyment of GOD, the fountain of happiness: --
(2.) The society of devils and other damned spirits, who will be continually
upbraiding them, and exciting their hellish passions: -- (3.) A remembrance of
the good things of this life which they have lost, and a sense of their
desperate madness in rejecting that eternal blessedness which they might have
enjoyed, for the meerest trifles: -- (4.) Envy at the happiness of the blessed:
-- (5.) A painful sense of GOD'S wrath, and the infliction of positive torments
from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power; -- and finally,
despair of ever seeing an end of their misery -- with, perhaps -- a continual
increase and aggravation of it, from their increasing wickedness and guilt.

8. IF any thing can awaken our fears, surely it ought to be a dread of our
falling into this place of torment Luke xii. 4, 5.
.

ESSAY XXIV. What, as CHRISTIANS, we ought to do more than others, from Matthew.
v. 47.
THE other mentioned here, are publicans and sinners, and imply all the wicked
and profane, and all hypocrites and formal, insincere professors of religion:
And it is plainly supposed, that the true and sincere disciples of Christ, who
hope for salvation through faith in him and obedience to his gospel, must do
much more, and go much farther in the duties of religion and sound morality,
than these. The following may serve as a few illustrations of this observation.

1. OTHERS, even publicans and sinners may and do love those that love them:
But we must love and wish well to our enemies; pray for them and do them good.

2. OTHERS may and do take some care of the decency of their outward behavior,
that they may be acceptable before men: But we must watch over the most hidden
movements, thoughts and desires of our hearts; -- labor to approve ourselves
to the eye of GOD, and to keep consciences, as well as appearances, void of
offense both toward GOD and man.

3. OTHERS will sometimes mind religion when they have nothing else to do,
either for their worldly pleasure or profit: But we must make religion the
principal leading business of our lives, to which all things must give way.

4. OTHERS perform the duties of religion, as a disagreeable task, either to
stand fair in the opinion of men, or to satisfy the importunate demands of
conscience: But we must delight and rejoice in them, as our most sweet and
pleasurable enjoyments.

5. OTHERS are ever contriving how little they may do in religion, in order to
shun hell: But we must be ambitious to abound in good works, that we may the
more please and honor GOD, and enjoy a greater measure of his likeness and
favor.

6. OTHERS, walking by sight and sense, take up their rest and portion in the
things and enjoyments of this world; ever anxiously enquiring who will show
them any earthly good: -- But, living and walking by the faith of unseen
things, we must make GOD our only portion and inheritance, seeking and
delighting in the uplifting of his countenance, and the manifestation of his
reconciled favor.

7. OTHERS are most curious in knowing and studying the characters and concerns
of their neighbors: But we must be most diligent in the study and knowledge of
ourselves and of our own proper concerns.

8. OTHERS are indulgent and favorable to themselves and their own failings,
while they are severe and unmerciful observers and censurers of the sins and
failings of their neighbors: But we must be severe to ourselves, and
charitable in our judgment of others, hoping all things and believing all
things in favor of our neighbor.

9. OTHERS, even publicans and sinners, may and do often attend the duties of
public religion: But, we must also be found conscientious in the religion of
the family and closet; in the duties of private and secret devotion.

10. OTHERS perform some duties, and deny some sins: But we must be governed
throughout by a principle of uniform obedience; hating every false way, and
having an equal respect to all GOD'S commandments, as holy, just and good.

11. OTHERS square their religion by the fashion and custom of the places where
they live: But ours must be unfashionably singular in this respect, being
wholly measured by the law of GOD, which is the only rule and model of our
obedience.

12. OTHERS are discouraged and disheartened from duty by the reproaches and
persecutions of the wicked: But we must learn to glory in the cross, and to
rejoice in sufferings and persecutions for the sake of Christ.

13. OTHERS will sin rather than suffer: But we must suffer rather than sin.

14. OTHERS render evil for evil, and railing for railing: But if we would be
the true disciples of Christ, we must render good for evil, after the most
amiable and perfect example of him, who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again: when he suffered, threatened not; but committed himself to him that
judges righteously 1 Pet. ii. 23.
.

15. OTHERS are indulgent to their favorite sins and beloved lusts: But we
must be particularly severe against these, plucking out the right eye, and
cutting off the right hand.

16. OTHERS love their flatterers: But we must love our well designing
reprovers.

17. OTHERS accept of Christ as a Savior from hell: But we must also accept
him as a Savior from sin; embracing him in all his offices, as a king to rule
us, and a prophet to teach us, as well as a priest to offer himself an
atonement, and intercede for us.

18. OTHERS are for a cheap and easy religion which costs them little labor or
self-denial: But we must choose a self-denying religion; a painful, ailigent,
laborious course in the service of GOD.

ESSAY XXV. Of HEAVENLY-MINDEDNESS, and the contrary VICES.
1. HEAVENLY-MINDEDNESS is a very comprehensive virtue, and essentially
necessary to every Christian. It consists in the prevailing bent and tendency
of the mind and heart toward GOD, and the things of God and heaven; and is
directly opposed to worldly-mindedness, earthly-mindedness, covetousness and
sensuality.

2. HEAVENLY-MINDEDNESS necessarily presupposes regeneration, conversion, a
change of mind and heart be renewing grace, or a sanctified nature, in some
degree at least; for every man, by nature, is earthly, sensual, devilish, not
having the Spirit of GOD; -- seeing that that which is born of the flesh is and
must be flesh; -- and seeing that the natural and unrenewed mind, is enmity
against GOD.

3. HEAVENLY-MINDEDNESS will principally show itself in the following instances:

(1.) IN a supreme regard to GOD above the creature. The heavenly-minded man
loves GOD and the Savior, although unseen, above all things in this world, by
means of that faith which is the evidence of things not seen, and the substance
of things hoped for. No object of sight or sense so strongly moves the noblest
affections of his soul, or so powerfully elicites and draws forth his defires,
as an invisible GOD, and an exalted Redeemer, whom having not seen, he loves,
and in whom, although now he sees them not, he yet rejoices with joy
unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. i. 8.
. Tell the heavenly-minded man of enjoying riches, power, pomp or honor; --
recount to him the various gratifications and pleasures of sense -- of women,
wine, luxurious and delicate living; -- place his affections to all these, and
desires of enjoying them, over against his love of an unseen GOD and Savior,
and his desire of enjoying them; -- put it to his choice, and he will despise
the former, in comparrison Psalm. iv. 6, 7. -- xlii. 1, -- 4. -- lxiii. 1, etc.
-- lxxiii. 25.
.

(2.) THE heavenly-minded man sees and enjoys GOD in his works and providence.
His mind is turned to a contemplation of GOD in his vast and wonderful works.
In these he has a deep and affecting conviction of the power, wisdom and
goodness of him who made them all. He tastes the goodness of GOD in every
enjoyment of sense; in every pleasure and refreshment. He eyes and enjoys GOD
in every dispensation of providence. He receives every mercy as the gift of
GOD, and a fresh obligation to gratitude, love and praise; and hears the voice
of GOD in every affliction, reproving, chastening and calling him home from
sin, or quickening him to the performance of some long-neglected duty.

(3.) THE heavenly-minded man, converses with, and enjoys GOD, in his word and
ordinances. He reads the scriptures diligently, with correspondent holy
affections; with gratitude and spiritual desire and appetite. He hears GOD
speaking to his soul in them; trembles at his word; delights in the purity of
his laws, humbly submits to their authority, and feeds pleasurably upon his
promises and offers of mercy. He frequents ordinances, with no other view than
to glorify and enjoy GOD in them. In prayer, he really, humbly and delightfully
converses with GOD. In praise his soul exalts and magnifies the Almighty. He
hears sermons that he may the better know GOD, and his duty, and love them; and
that he may, by this means, cleanse his way, reform his life, and get strength
for both. He prepares for sacraments and attends them, that he may actually
renew his covenant with GOD, and receive comfort and strength to keep it
steadfastly: And he has a pleasure and delight in these duties, superior to any
which he feels in the enjoyments of this earth Psalm. xxvii. 4, 5. -- lxiii. 1,
2. -- lxv. 4. -- lxxxiv. -- xix. 7, -- 10. -- cxix. 73, 127. -- cxxii. 1, -- 4.
.

(4.) THE heavenly-minded man has a turn for spiritualizing all the common
occurrences and events of life. He is disposed to give a useful and edifying
turn to every topic of conversation; and to profit even by the worst, or most
common things that happen to himself, or to others around him. It would be
endless to illustrate this remark.

(5.) THE heavenly-minded man, having his conversation, his heart, his hopes,
his treasure, and the object of his dearest love, and strongest desire in
heaven, must needs have a peculiar and uncommon delight in those companions,
and in that kind of conference and discourse, which are employed about
spiritual and heavenly things. Companions and conversation of this kind,
exactly hit his taste, as his mind is high and heavenly bent. This is so just
and obvious a character of heavenly mindedness, that it needs no farther
confirmation or illustration.

(6.) THE heavenly-minded man may be said to live by the faith and hope of
unseen and heavenly things. He considers this world but as a wilderness through
which he is journeying toward his Father's house, and eternal inheritance.
Hence, present things affect him but little, as present conveniences would a
traveling wayfaring man. He had rather have them than want them; but if he
suffers a little in his journey, he cares not much for it. His Father, his
Redeemer and almighty friend, and his brethren and sisters in Christ which has
left this world, are in heaven before him; his treasure is there; his rest,
reward, crown, and inheritance are there. -- His heart therefore must be there
also. -- He is therefore habitually, believingly, hopefully and joyfully
looking forward to his journey's end. And indeed, the more eagerly that the eye
of his faith and hope is fixed upon the heavenly prize, i. e. the more
heavenly-minded he is, the less will he regard or mind the things that are
around him, or the cross accidents that happen to him on his journey thither.
Hence it follows; that he walks by faith, not by sight; looks not on the
things that are seen and temporal, but at the things which are unseen and
eternal; -- sets his affection on things above, and not on things below. His
fears and cares, hopes and desires, sorrows and joys, are chiefly of the
spiritual and heavenly kind, and but little, seldom, and moderately moved about
this world, and the things of it, which pass away. On the contrary,
earthly-mindedness, discovers itself by the following marks: -- A loving and
preferring the creature above GOD; -- the body and its concerns above the soul
and its interest; -- earth above heaven; -- the objects and enjoyments of sight
and sense, above those of faith and hope. The earthly-minded man, prefers money
before grace; -- earthly honor above heavenly; -- the favor of men before
that of GOD; -- a good living in this world, before the hopes of heavenly
blessedness. He is little moved by the works or providence of GOD; little
affected by his word; -- little delighted with his ordinances or people; has no
pleasurable relish for holiness itself, or the means of attaining it: But
performs these, if he does perform them at all, in a customary, formal, earnal,
lifeless manner, to stop the mouth of conscience; to please the world and
promote worldly ends; or to be seen and praised of men.

ESSAY XXVI. GOSPEL SINCERITY, or UPRIGHTNESS.
1. GOSPEL sincerity is expressed by two words: -- The first signifies a thing
which will stand the test, if it is examined or judged of by the light of the
sun, eilikrinia, and is used by the Apostle 2 Cor. v. 8.
, when he commands the Corinthians to keep the feast with the unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth; or it may allude to the judgment passed on grain when
it is winnowed, which will bear winnowing, and being separated from the chaff,
looks the better. -- Sincerity is something which will stand the test. -- The
other word is aplotes which is commonly translated simplicity; which signifies,
a thing without folds, and intimates an open and undisguised behavior, without
deceit, guile, or dissimulation. -- Thus we are commanded to have our
conversation in this world in simplicity and godly sincerity; not with worldly
or knavish and deceitful wisdom 2 Cor. i. 12.
. And according to this sense of the word we are commanded to lay aside all
guile and hypocrisy 1 Pet. ii. 1.
. And the man is pronounced blessed in whose spirit there is no guile Psalm.
xxxii. 2.
. And Nathaniel is pronounced an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile; --
that is, a plain man, as Jacob is called John. i. 47. Genesis xxv. 27.
.

2. GOSPEL sincerity supposes a single aim and intention of pleasing GOD, in
the whole of our course. And although this intention may not be actually alive
in our hearts, as the moving and producing cause of every single action; yet if
we are sincere, it must be our habitual, prevailing intention; and wherever we
have time to doubt or deliberate about the nature of any action, this must be
our actual intention in it; and that nothing contrary to this intention
prevails with us. This is included in these general precepts of Christianity --
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of GOD. --
Whatever we do, we do it unto the Lord, and not unto men. -- Servants be
obedient to your masters with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart,
as unto Christ; not with eye service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ; doing the will of GOD from the heart; with good will doing service, as
to the Lord, and not to men, knowing, etc Ephesians. vi. 5, -- 9. Col. iii. 22, -- 24.
. The same is also meant by a single eye, and the contrary, namely, insincerity
by the double minded man, who is unstable in all his ways,

3. GOSPEL sincerity, supposes an impartial enquiry into our duty, what it is;
-- a hearty desire and endeavor to know, in every instance, what is the good
and acceptable and holy will of the Lord, and how we may so walk as to please
GOD 1 These. iv. 1.
. The upright man is anxious to know his master's will in every particular
case, and is ever ready to say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? And what I
know not, teach thou me. -- He desires to have no biass, prejudice, or
prepossession against the will of GOD, how cross soever it may be to his own
will or former notions or prejudices. He desires to be excused from no part of
his duty, how difficult or self-denying soever. -- And as this is the sincerity
of his disposition; so he gives all diligence, by prayer, enquiry, reading, and
a close attendance upon ordinances, to know the whole of his Master's good
pleasure, that he may prepare himself to do according to it. But insincere men,
are careless about the knowledge of their Master's will; because they are
prejudiced against the performance of it, and hold the truth in
unrighteousness. Nathaniel's conduct affords a fine illustration of this branch
of sincerity; and our Savior seems to fix the noble character he gives him, on
his impartial enquiry after truth John iii.
.

4. GOSPEL sincerity runs through the whole of a man's religious character and
conduct, and supposes an entire and universal application to the practice of
duty, so far as we know it, without any stated, allowed reserves to the
contrary. The sincere man, as his governing aim is to please and serve GOD, so
he will be as careful of the exercise of every grace and virtue, in the frame
and temper of the heart, as in the outward actions of the life. -- He will be
as careful and watchful over his private conduct, as his public; -- as sorry
for his secret sins, and the follies of his heart, as for his outward offenses;
-- as devout and constant in the religion of the family and closet, as in that
of the church; -- as conscientious in shunning one sin as another, and in
performing one duty as another. And indeed, there cannot be a more clear and
decisive trial of our sincerity than this; namely, to examine and observe how
we stand affected to those parts of morality and religion, to which none but
GOD and our own consciences are privy. If we perform these as carefully and
circumspectly, as we do the most outward and visible duties, which are seen and
praised of men, then may we conclude on just grounds, that we have truth in the
heart, and sincerity in the inward parts.

5. SINCERITY supposes a conformity and agreement between the sentiments of a
man's heart and his words and actions. A sincere man will not say that he
believes a doctrine which he really does not believe, to please, or gain the
good opinion of any man. He will not speak of exercises, feelings, or
experiences which he never had, in order to obtain any privilege: -- He will
not profess a sorrow for sin which he feels not, nor resolution of repentance
and amendment which he never truly nor solemnly made. The sincere man, either
speaks not at all, in matters of religion, or else speaks sincerely what he
thinks. He canteth not, he dissembleth not, he lies not either for, or to, or
concerning GOD, or the things of his soul. -- St. Peter was flagrantly guilty
of this kind of insincerity Gal. ii. 11, -- 14.
, and so are all hypocrites.

6. THE same thing will sincerity produce in all our conduct toward men. A
sincere man will scorn to use trick, artifice, and dissimulation, to gain his
ends with his fellow creatures; he will not pretend friendship or kindness
where he has none; nor make promises which he intends not to perform; nor act
an unfriendly part behind men's backs, after professions of respect and regard
to their faces; -- much less will he stoop to the baseness of making pretenses
of friendship, on purpose to impose on men, or use sly insinuations to draw
things from them in the freedom of discourse, with the murderous design of
divulging these very things afterward to their disadvantage. This is the
wicked cunning and craftiness of the old serpent, and not the openness and
sincerity of a Christian indeed, in whom there should be no guile.

7. WE are obliged to this temper and conduct by numberless considerations:
(1.) It is expressly required by the precepts of our religion Josh. xxiv. 14.
John vi. 24. Romans xii. 8. H^^. ^^.
. (2.) We cannot expect acceptance with GOD, in any duty, without sincerity,
Jam. ii. 10. Matthew. xxiv. 51. Phil. i. 10. (3.) We cannot have peace of mind,
or stand acquitted at the bar of our own consciences, if we are insincere in
religion, 1 John iii. 19, -- 21. 2 Cor. i. 12. Gal. vi. 4. (4.) To be sincere
in religion, would save the professors of it abundance of trouble which
hypocrisy occasions them. The easiest and surest way of seeming to be
religious, is to be so in reality; and it is the most difficult and
disagreeable task in the world to be ever wearing a mask and false disguise.
(5.) Insincerity is the very image of the devil, that subtle, malicious,
deceitful, guileful old serpent, who transformeth himself into an angel of
light.

8. IT is greatly to be lamented, that this noble virtue, which indeed is one
of the most distinguishing badges of true Christianity, should yet be so little
regarded, and so shamefully violated among professing Christians, that under
the warmest professions of friendship, and the most solemn obligations to it,
there should be so little besides trick and artifiee, deceit and dissimulation,
double-dealing and undermining practiced among Christian brethren. A clear, but
melancholy proof this, that we have only a name to live, while we are in the
gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, and doing the works of our father the
devil.

ESSAY XXVII. CHRISTIAN ZEAL, and its OPPOSITES and COUNTERFEITS.
1. ZEAL seems properly to signify, a heat, fervor and impetuosity of mind and
action; and is either good or bad, either a virtue or a vice, either religious
or common and profane, according to its objects, and the proportion it bears to
their importance.

2. EVEN religious zeal is not so much a Christian grace or virtue, as a
qualification which should attend the exercise of every Christian grace and
virtue.

3. THE scriptures give as many instances of a bad zeal as of a good one: We
cannot therefore be too cautious about what objects our zeal is employed, and
in what degree, lest, while we imagine we are pleasing and honoring GOD, we
may in fact be dishonouring and offending him, and increasing our own guilt.

4. As Christian zeal is, however, a very important and indispensible duty, and
as we are expressly commanded to be zealous Rev. iii. 10.
, it may be right to enquire into the properties of a true Christian zeal; to
consider its specious and imposing counterfeits, to speak of the obligations we
are under to be zealous, and of that temper which is contrary to it; and by
doing this we shall exhaust the subject.

(1.) EVEN a religious zeal is no farther good and commendable, than when it is
on the side of truth and virtue. The cause therefore must be good about which
our zeal is concerned, or it will have the most mischievous consequences. To be
zealous, that is, to have a strong and ardent concern, for falsehood, and
against truth; or for vice and against virtue, and to act vigorously in
consequence of this zeal, is to do the very greatest mischief in our power, and
to act the devil, as much as our capacities and influence will admit. Such was
the zeal of the Jews against Christ, his Apostles, and the primitive
Christians. Such, particularly, was the zeal of Saul, afterward Paul, when he
madly, and with uncommon ardor and activity persecuted the church of Christ
Acts v. 17, 18. -- xiii. 45. -- xvii. 5. Romans x. 2. Gal. i. 14. Phil. iii. 6.
. The caution therefore of this same Apostle is extremely apposite and
necessary; It is good to be always zealously affected in a good thing Gal. iv.
18.
.

(2.) IGNORANCE of truth and duty, where there is a possibility and opportunity
of coming to the knowledge of them, will not excuse in this matter, otherwise
it would have excused St. Paul and most of the Jews in their misguided and
mischievous zeal. Therefore, our zeal, especially our religious zeal, should
always be preceded by a careful, serious enquiry into the truth, and
accompanied with knowledge. The reason of this is plain; for, of all zeal,
religious zeal where it is blind and misguided is the most furious and
mischievous. It is increased by the importance of its object; and when it is
blind and misguided, it rages against the cause and glory of GOD, and the
highest concerns of men, which are truth and righteousness. We may see its
dreadful effects in the primitive Jewish and heathen persecutions, and in the
seas of Protestant blood spilt by the church of Rome. If the Jews had known
Christ, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory; yet since they might
have known him, their ignorance was no excuse for their zeal against him. It
was their sin, that their zeal of GOD was not according to knowledge Romans x. 2.
. What things Saint Paul did against Christ, were ignorantly through unbelief;
yea, he verily thought that he ought to have done them; yet was he not thereby
justified in doing them 1 Timothy i. 12, -- 15.
.

(3.) RIGHT and good zeal, must be proportioned to the value and importance of
the objects about which it is employed. As there is diversity in the importance
even of these things which are of divine duty and obligation, so we should be
most zealous about the most important things and duties of religion, and
proportionably less zealous about those things and duties which are of less
importance. It is the way of hypocrites to be mighty zealous about trisles;
about small matters, and ceremonial observances, while they are very lukewarm
and indifferent, about the greater duties of piety and morality. They tithe
mint, anise and cummin; while they neglect the weightier matters of the law,
mercy, judgment and righteousness Matthew. xxiii. 23, 24.
. How preposterous and absurd is it to see a man break charity with his
Christian brother, for the neglect of modes, ceremonies, and human inventions,
while he would caress him, though a drunkard, an adulterer, or a profane
swearer, if he observed these? Reason will teach us, that duties of the highest
importance, should be the most ardently cared for, and the most diligently
performed. We would deem him a fool, who would be more concerned about the
security and welfare of his finger or toe, than of his heart or brain. Every
thing appertaining to true religion merits our regard and observance; but the
vitals of religion merit our warmest zeal. GOD loves mercy more than
sacrifice, and righteousness more than all burnt offerings.

(4.) TRUE zeal always takes its rise in the heart, and is founded on a right
temper and right affections there. It is termed fervency of spirit Romans xii. 11.
. Christian zeal is the sprightly vigor, and strenuous activity of every holy
affection and disposition; and these springs set the active powers of the soul
and body to work in the cause of GOD and goodness. -- And here we may take
notice of the opposites and counterfeits of true zeal, in this view of it; --
such as, first, a Laodicean, careless, indolent, lukewarm temper of mind: The
person is neither hot nor cold; -- he will not wholly throw up a profession of
religion; yet is he too indolent and unconcerned to act up to it with becoming
earnestness and intenseness, spirit and resolution. He, as it were, halts
between two opinions; his mind is in a state of torpid equilibrium, without
heat enough to espouse its interests and perform its duties, or coldness enough
to abandon it and give it up. This is the sad case of millions in the Christian
church Rev. iii. 14, -- 19.
. Secondly, there is a seeming counterfeit zeal for religion, where there is no
warmth of affection, a blustering, noisy, profession, spending itself either in
religious discourse or controversy, or in uncharitable and censorious judgings
and railings against the characters and professions of others, where there is
really no true regard to religion at heart. This seems to have been the zeal or
(hypocrisy) of the scribes and pharisees; and is well described by the prophet
Ezekiel. xxxiii. 31. Psalm. lxxviii. 36, 37. Isa. xxix. 13.
. Or, thirdly, it is a dreadful counterfeit of true Christian zeal, when men
make a great show and stir in religion, merely to deceive others, and to obtain
wicked or secular ends, as was the case with Jehu, when he said; "Come see my
zeal for the Lord 2 Kings x. 16.
."

(3.) TRUE Christian zeal always begins at home; it first casts the beam out of
our own eye; its indignation rises highest at our own faults; it is vigorously
concerned for our own reformation, correction, improvement in knowledge and
grace; perfection and final security and happiness. It is absurd to imagine,
that a man can have any right and true hatred of sin in others, while he has
none against it in himself; or that a man should be anxiously concerned for
another man's reformation, salvation and happiness, while he has no regard to
his own.

(6.) TRUE Christian zeal is ever properly employed about others in the second
place. Christians are zealous of good works, both in themselves and others Tit.
ii. 14.
. We have instances of this kind, Acts xvii. 16. Rev. ii. 2. Charity should
quicken our zeal both against the sins and for the happiness of others. David
was grieved, and shed tears, when he beheld transgressors. -- Lot was vexed by
the filthy conversation of the wicked. Christ cast the money changers out of
the court of the temple, and in this was fulfilled in him that scripture, The
zeal of thy house has eaten me up. Paul's spirit was moved, at the sight of
Athenian idolatry. True zeal will engage us to reprove the sins of others, in a
proper place, time and manner Ephesians. v. 11. Tit. i. 10, -- 13. 2 Timothy iv. ^.
. True zeal against sin, will make us shun sinful companions, Psalm. cii. 4. --
It will also engage us to do all the good for the souls of others that we can,
Eccles. ix. 10.

7. THAT we may shun irregularities in the exercises of our zeal toward
others, we should observe the following cautions: 1. Let us take heed of a
censorious, uncharitable spirit in our reproofs of others. -- This is a zeal
unchristian and without knowledge, and is never likely to do any good. 2. Let
us beware of passion and wrath in our zeal to reclaim and reform transgressors.
Love to the person of the offender, and meekness should accompany our most
zealous endeavors to reform him: For, in this case, as in others, the wrath of
man works not the righteousness of GOD. 3. The instruments of Christian zeal,
are scripture, reason and persuasion. It is a wicked, antichristian,
unwarrantable zeal, to destroy men's bodies, or rob them of their interests,
for the good of their souls. This is the zeal of Popish inquisitors. 4. Our
zeal should be tempered with prudence. The zeal of a private Christian cannot,
with prudence, be carried so far in the reformation of abuses, as that of a
magistrate or public minister of religion. Although every Christian should be
zealous for the propagation of truth and goodness, yet the measure of his zeal
should correspond with his station. -- Besides, the exertions of our zeal
against sin should be regulated, by the character of offenders, and the nature
of their offenses. Public, bold and shameless offenders are to be rebuked
sharply Tit. i.
. Of some have compassion, making a difference: And others save with sear,
pulling the^ out of the sire Jude 22, 23.
. 5. Right zeal is exerted against all sin, both in ourselves and others.

(8.) TRUE Christian zeal is enforced upon us by many reasons and obligations:
1. The importance of religion deserves our zeal. -- 2. The difficulties that
attend the right discharge of our Christian duty require zeal, and render it
necessary. -- 3. We can have no evidence of our own sincerity, without becoming
fervor and earnestness in the duties of religion; for, considering the
unspeakable importance of religion, if we are truly concerned about it at all,
it must be zealously. -- 4. We shall never do much good to the souls of others,
or much honor to our common Christianity, without a proper degree of Christian
zeal. -- 5. We have the examples of the prophets, and of Christ and his
Apostles, and of all eminently good men, to countenance and encourage us in a
zealous adherence to religion, and in the zealous practice of the duties of it.

ESSAY XXVIII. PATIENCE and the CONTRARY VICES.
1. PATIENCE is twofold. It either, (1.) respects the evils of life which we
are actually feeling; or, (2.) some future good, which we have reason to
expect, but which we do not as yet enjoy. The first is expressed in scripture
by the word upomone, which signifies an enduring of afflictions with constancy.
The second by the word makrothumia, a length of mind, which signifies a patient
waiting for a promised good, and is opposed to hastiness of spirit Heb. vi. 12.
James v. 10. Romans ii. 4. -- xi. 22. 2 Cor. vi. 6.
.

2. PATIENCE does not consist in insensibility, nor suppose it. It supposes
that we feel the whole weight of our troubles and afflictions, but bear them
with a Christian spirit and temper; and implies the following things.

3. THAT we have the command and possession of our own souls and are not rifled
or discomposed, by the cross or painful accidents of life; but that we are so
much our own man as to see, and steadily to pursue and perform the duties which
become us as men, and Christians.

4. PATIENCE will prevent us from making hasty judgments either concerning GOD
or man; either against ourselves or others. Impatience makes men fretful and
discontented, and hurries them on in the heat of their spirits, to rash and
wicked judgments both of GOD and man; "I said, in my haste, all men are liars,"
and so Psalm. lxxvii. 7, -- 10. Patience will make us consider, that we may be
mistaken both with regard to the designs and intentions of GOD and man, and
with regard to the justice and propriety of our afflictions, and will save us
from many rash, wicked and uncharitable thoughts, both of GOD and our neighbor.

5. PATIENCE, will preserve us from using unlawful methods both of delivering
ourselves from present afflictions and obtaining the things we desire, -- if we
are endued with Christian patience we will rather suffer than sin: We will
rather continue poor and miserable, than better our state by forbidden and
unlawful means: We will wait GOD'S time and will, in the way of duty and honest
endeavors; being assured, that GOD will deliver us from trouble, and perform
his promise to us in the very best and fittest time and manner, if we do indeed
wait upon him and trust in him.

6. CHRISTIAN patience will engage us to persevere in the way of duty, in the
midst of all discouragement and opposition; because, it proceeds upon a
supposition and firm unshaken belief, That whatever befalls us, is best and
fittest for us upon the whole; that whatever we suffer, we not only suffer
deservedly, but it is proper and needful that we should so suffer, and that
whatever GOD has promised, shall surely be performed in the fittest and
properest time. In a word, it proceeds upon a firm, convictive and practical
belief of the truth, wisdom, goodness and power of GOD, and of the perfect
equity, wisdom and goodness of all his providential dealings with his
creatures, and that if we do but our part, GOD never can nor will fail in his.
Nay, that even his delays in delivering us from affliction, or conferring upon
us his promised blessings, are just and right, merciful and gracious Job vii.
9. Heb. xii. 1, etc.
.

7. THIS grace is perfectly reasonable, and fit and becoming to be exercised by
such creatures as we are, as will (...) the following reasons.

8. IMPATIENCE under afflictions, or in the delay of expected good, can be of
no manner of service to us, but must do us a great deal of hurt. Our fretting
and murmuring under afflictions, discompose us, and make their weight double.
It shows a rebellious temper, and renders us unworthy of the relief which we
desire; while, at the same time, it cannot procure us any relief, but must
needs make our case worse.

9. WE deserve no good thing at the hand of GOD, but all evil, even eternal
misery; and therefore, if we think right, a living man has no right to
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins; but it is his evident duty to
bear the indignation of the Lord, because he has sinned against him. If we had
our deserts, we would be in hell; therefore, we should bear patiently every
affliction, which is short of this.

10. EVEN where GOD has made promises to deliver his people from afflictions,
or to bestow upon them mercies, he has not ordinarily limited himself to any
particular time: but justly expects that we should refer the time and manner
wholly to his own infinite justice, wisdom and goodness, and wait upon him
believingly, confidently and resignedly for the event.

11. GOD'S mercies and deliverances are so full, complete and satisfying in
themselves; and the very smallest of them is so great an honor, when conferred
by so great a being, upon such worthless, undeserving and hell-deserving
creatures as we are, that it becomes us to wait patiently for them, in the most
diligent and selfdenying means, all the days of our lives. What are we that we
should set a time to the great GOD, and be fretful, peevish and impatient if he
does not hear our cries, and gratify ou^ desires, in sending us (...) and
deliverances, which we have not the least claim to of right, and which we have
wholly forfeited by our sins and provocations?

12. IN a word, if we would consult our duty to GOD, and our own highest
interest and happiness, it behooves us to let patience have its perfect work,
under every trial and affliction.

ESSAY XXIX. MEEKNESS, and the opposite VICES.
1. THE scriptures teach us to consider meekness, as referring, in its
exercises, both to GOD and man.

2. MEEKNESS, as it is a right temper toward GOD, respects either his word, or
his providence.

3. As it respects his word or his revealed will, it consists in a humble,
teachable submission to the authority of his word; that the soul bows to it and
acquiesees in it, and sacrifices all its prejudices, carnal reasonings and
preconceived opinions to its dictates. It implies the temper of young Samuel,
Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears. Or, that of Cornelius's household, Behold,
we are all hear present before GOD, to hear what is commanded us of GOD. Thus
we are commanded, to receive with meekness (with the cager, submissive,
obedient temper of humble disciples, and with all readiness of mind) the (...)
word, which is able to save our souls James i. 21.
. Thus Christ was anointed to preach good tidings to the meek: And GOD dwells
with them who are of a humble heart, and who tremble at his word; and guides
the meek in judgment Psalm. xxv. 9. Isa. lxi. 1.
.

4. MEEKNESS toward GOD, implies an humble, complacential submission to his
providential will, in its severest and most afflictive dispensations. And this
is submission or resignation to the will of GOD, in opposition to a fretful,
murmuring, impatient spirit against his providence. The man who is thus meek
toward GOD, is dumb and opens not his mouth; and is still, and submits
quietly to the rod; and humbles himself under the mighty hand of GOD, and
accepts the punishment of his iniquities, and says with Eli, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good.

5. MEEKNESS, as it is a right temper of mind and spirit toward our neighbor,
consists in a sweet and easy, courteous and obliging, peaceable and composed
temper and behavior, and is opposed to a boisterous, unruly, morose,
revengeful, and more especially to a surly and angry temper and conduct toward
others.

6. THE meek person is calm under provocations, and, having a command over his
own spirit, is not hurried on to cursing, railing, reproachful language, or to
hasty resentment and revenge, which always drives people of furious, ungoverned
passions, to sinful, and often to very unjust and injurious extremes. The meek
man will never be angry without a cause, or above measure; will never take an
affront where none is meant, nor resent a real affront above what it deserves.
He is slow to wrath; not easily provoked; thinks no evil; speaks not
unadvisedly with his lips; rendereth not railing for railing; but, by soft and
reasonable answers, turns away wrath, and overcomes evil with good. Anger
rests in the bosom of fools: But it is not so with the meek man; he lets
not the sun go down on his wrath. If his brother sin against him seventy-seven
times in a day, and say, I repent, he forgiveth him, and easily makes up any
breach, upon proper acknowledgment and submission. Peace is his element, and
wrath the aversion of his nature.

7. MEEKNESS discovers itself, in a great cautiousness of giving offense to
others. Proud, angry, wrathful and turbulent men, are not cautious of this:
They are perpetually giving offense, and seem to delight and glory in it, as a
sign of courage. But the gospel teaches us to speak evil, (unnecessarily) of
no man; not to be brawlers, but gentle, kind, tenderhearted, thus showing all
meekness to all men Tit. iii. 2.
. The meek man is ever a civil, affable, courteous man; and a good heart
teaches him that which is the grand precept in politeness and true good
breeding; namely, to give no oftence or uneasiness to any in company; but to
endeavor to give pleasure and satisfaction to all, so far as that may be done
with a good conscience.

8. MEEKNESS will show itself in a modest and becoming deportment in every
different rank, station and relation of life. It will make servants, children,
and all inferiors contented and pleased with their low and inferior stations;
the poor with their poverty, and the afflicted with their afflictions. And it
will make superiors humble in their exalted stations, affable, and courteous,
just and merciful, mild and gentle to those that are under them, in inferior
states.

6. ABOVE all, a meek temper will show itself in things that relate to
religion. Surely the wrath of man works not the righteousness of GOD. We are
to contend indeed earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints, and not
to deny or dissemble what, we take to be the truth of the gospel, even at the
risque of life itself: But to manage religious disputes and controversies with
angry contention and a persecuting spirit, is to defend and maintain truth in a
manner quite opposite to the temper and spirit of the gospel, and which is
never like to make proselytes. It is to offer a holy sacrifice with unhallowed
fire, -- and, like Uzzah, to polute the ark of GOD, by a wrong touch:
Therefore, we are commanded, In meekness to instruct those who oppose
themselves 2 Timothy ii, 25.
. To be ready to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the
hope that is in us, with meekness and fear 1 Pet. iii. 15.
. And even offending brethren are to be treated, and if possible recovered from
the snares of the devil, In the spirit of meekness Gal. vi. 1.
. Nay, the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, (or meek)
full of mercy and good works; -- and a wise and knowing man in religion, is to
rule his tongue and angry passions, and to show, out of a good conversation,
his works, with meekness of wisdom Jam. iii. 13, etc.
. Indeed, the very genius of the gospel is meekness. -- It is the ministry of
reconciliation with GOD and man. -- It proclaims peace upon earth, as well as
good will toward men.

10. WE cannot be Christians without this temper; without all lowliness and
meekness: For, this is the very temper and spirit of Christ, and he has
commanded us to take his yoke upon us and learn of him; for, says he, "I am
meek and low of heart." And this temper he eminently expressed through the
whole of his own life.

11. MEEKNESS is one of the fruits of the regenerating, sanctifying spirit,
without which we are sure, none will enter into the kingdom of heaven. Indeed,
the most of these fruits, as enumerated by St. Paul, are branches of meekness.
Meekness, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness; -- and the
greatest number of the works of the flesh, are directly the opposites of
meekness; such as, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife and envyings.

12. MEEKNESS is a grace exceedingly ornamental to the Christian character. We
are commanded to be clothed with humility (which is a sister grace to meekness)
and to put on the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight or
GOD, of great price 1 Pet. iii. 4.
. It is said also, that he who is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and
he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a city Prove. xvi. 32.
. The meek also are pronounced blessed, by our Savior, and have a promise that
they shall inherit the earth Matthew. v. 5.
.

13. THE meek man has the only chance of going easily, quietly and happily
through the world. Nothing that happens will much rifle or disturb him, and his
temper will render him beloved and admired by all.

14. LET us not mistake an easy, indolent, insensible, cowardly natural temper
for Christian meekness. It is a grace of GOD'S holy Spirit; and the true
Christian is meek, not for want of true courage and sensibility of injuries
received, but in obedience to the laws of GOD, and in conformity to the
doctrines and example of his Savior.

15. IF we would obtain this grace we must pray and strive to obtain it with
all diligence and much self-denial: For, it is directly against the grain of
our corrupt and sinful nature, and the prevailing maxims of the world. Indeed,
no man will ever be endued with true Christian meekness, t^^ he has been
renewed by the holy Spirit, and has learned of Christ to be meek and lowly of
heart.

ESSAY XXX. CHARITY, and the opposite VICES.
1. CHARITY is but another word for love; and when it is used as a term in
divinity, in its largest and most extensive sense, it signifies the whole of
our duty to GOD and man, both in its principle and proper fruits and effects.
In a word, charity is the fulfilling of the whole law, and includes the two
great commandments laid down by our Savior as the sum and substance of the law
and the prophets. Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, etc. and thy neighbor as thy self. Charity, therefore, in this
largest sense, implies a right temper of mind, both to GOD and our neighbor,
and all its genuine fruits and effects, and therefore, is the whole of true
religion and morality.

2. THIS grace or virtue, as it respects GOD, (1.) presupposes a right
knowledge of GOD; that we know him, or have worthy and just conceptions of him
in his adorable and amiable perfections (for there is not a more certain maxim,
than that we can have no love for an unknown object;) and this knowledge,
though it may be obtained in part, and in some degree, from his works and
providence, yet it is most perfectly obtained from his revealed word,
illustrated and set home upon the soul by the influences of his Spirit. (2.) It
implies that we love him supremely, and above all other beings; for if we do
not love him thus, we do not love him as GOD; or the affection does not
correspond with the object of it. (3.) It implies that we are cheerfully and
cordially devoted to his service and obedience: for this is the love of GOD,
that we keep his commandments.

3 THE vices opposite to this branch of charity -- are, (1.) A wilful and
careless ignorance of GOD; a neglecting the means of knowing him and
acquainting ourselves with him, without which it is impossible we should love
him as we ought. (2.) An excessive self-love, or love of any creature, or
creature enjoyment, by which the supreme love and affection of the soul is
stolen away from GOD, and placed on the creature; which is spiritual idolatry.
(3.) All sin and vice is a violation of this branch of charity; but more
especially those sins, which strike most directly at the glory of GOD, such as
blasphemy, profane swearing, atheistical thoughts and speeches, speaking
irreverently and slighting of GOD, his works, word, ordinances, laws, and
people. Indeed, the natural mind is enmity against GOD, and none but such as
are born of him, can truly love him.

4. THE second grand branch of charity, and as essential as the former, is love
to our neighbor. And this may be divided into two branches, humanity and
Christian charity.

5. EVERY man, in scripture account, is our neighbor, be of what nation, or
religion he will, and we owe love or charity to every man as such; as our
fellow creatures; a partaker with us in the same common nature; as sprung from
the same original stock, a creature of the same GOD, an inhabitant with us of
the same world; subject to the same feelings, passions, appetites, wants,
necessities, miseries with ourselves, and bound with us to the same eternal
world. From which relations naturally flow the duties of justice, sympathy,
mercy, compassion, all springing from the root of charity or love to our
neighbor. Hence we are to owe no man any thing but love; and this love is the
fulfilling of the whole law, as far as it respects our neighbor; because it
will naturally and powerfully dispose us to treat our neighbor in all respects
as we ought, wherever it truly takes place, and prevails in the heart.

6. CONTRARY to this branch of charity or humanity, is all injustice,
evil-speaking, evil-thinking, or rash and censorious judging of our neighbor;
all narrow, national prejudices against men; all local, contracted affections
which shut out a party of mankind from our humanity, on account of their being
of a different nation or religion from ourselves; all envy, malice, and cruelty
toward our fellow creatures, and all partiality in the administration of
justice.

7. CHRISTIAN charity or love, properly so called, consists in a peculiar
affection for our fellow Christians, under the notion of their being our
brethren; disciples of the same LORD and Master; spiritual children of the same
GOD by adoption and regeneration; heirs of the same precious hope, and
incorruptible inheritance; fellow-pilgrims in the same strange country, and
fellow-travellers together to the same land of promise. This is still an
advance upon humanity, and unites Christians together in the most peculiar
bonds; so that whatever is a violation of the laws and bonds of common
humanity, is much more so of the laws of Christian charity. Indeed, charity, or
Christian love, is the peculiar genius of christianity, and is that grace which
Christ has honored, by making it the peculiar and distinctive badge of his
disciples. By this, says Christ, shall all men know that ye are my disciples,
if you have love one for another. Nor is the exercise of any grace so warmly
urged upon Christians, as this.

8. A PECULIAR fruit of charity is almsgiving, or relieving the necessities of
the poor, the needy, the miserable and the oppressed; and indeed, this is what
commonly passes in the world by the name of charity, though very unjustly: For,
the Apostle assures us, that a man may give even all his goods to feed the
poor, and yet have no charity. An alms, if it proceeds not from charity, that
is, from a true Christian love to GOD and our neighbor, and from a principle
of dutiful obedience to GOD, is no grace at all.

9. WE have an excellent character and description of charity given, 1 Cor.
xiii. 4, etc. Charity suffers long and is kind; charity envieth not; charity
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, does not behave itself unseemly; seeks
not her own; is not easily provoked; thinks no evil; rejoiceth not in
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; bears all things; believes all things;
hops all things; endures all things: Charity never fails. And now abides
faith, hope and charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity.

ESSAY XXXI. CONTENTMENT, and the opposite VICES.
1. CONTENTMENT is a grace which respects only our outward condition in this
world, and not our spiritual condition here, or our lot and appointment in the
world to come; and it consists in such a moderate value for, and attachment to
the things and enjoyments of the body and of this mortal life, that whether we
have or want them; whether we have little or much of them, we are so well
satisfied, and so little disturbed, that we are thankful to GOD for what we
have, and are at leisure to enjoy both GOD and ourselves. In short, it consists
in such a submission to GOD, and satisfiedness with the allotments of his
providence, with regard to our worldly circumstances, that we may be able to
say with the Apostle, I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
contented; both to be full and to be hungry: both to abound, and be abased and
suffer need Philip. iv. 11, 12.
.

2. CONTENTMENT cannot reach to a man's spiritual condition or future state;
for, although a sinner may have reason to thank GOD that he is out of hell;
yet, it would ill become him to say, Whatever state my soul is in, whether in a
state of grace or sin, converted or unconverted, I am therewith contented. The
design of GOD'S word is, that sinners should have no peace or contentment in
their sinful and perishing condition, and that they should never rest
contented, till their peace is made with GOD.

3. NOR would it become a gracious man to be contented with low seize in
grace and holiness, and an imperfect measure of conformity to GOD. Saints
should be restless in their endeavors to perfect holiness in the fear of GOD;
and forgetting things behind, to reach forward, and press on to the mark for
the prize of their high calling. Phil. iii. 13, 14, and many other scriptures.

4. NOR is it at all to be supposed, that any human creature could, or should
be contented to be demned, and thrust out for ever from the beatific presence
of GOD. All sinners, indeed, ought to acknowledge damnation their just portion,
and approve the law and sentence which condemns them Psalm. li. 4. Romans iii. 4.
: But it is against the law of self-preservation; yea, against our duty to GOD,
to consent to be damned, or to be contented with this allotment. That strong
expression, therefore, of St. Paul, Romans ix. 3. and that of Moses, Exodus xxxii.
32, must have some other meaning.

5. NOR ought we to be so contented with our condition and circumstances in
this life, as to be willing to take up our lot, portion and everlasting abode
here. Christian contentment is consistent with the most earnest wishes and
desires to be in a better country, even an heavenly; to be absent from the
body, and the things and enjoyments of it, and present with the Lord; and only
supposes, that as wise and prudent travelers, we are contented with such
lodgings and fare as we meet with in our journey to our Father's house, and our
heavenly inheritance.

6. NOR does contentment, even with our worldly circumstances, imply an
insensibility of our difficulties and afflictions, or forbid lawful desires and
endeavors to get rid of them by bettering our condition. Such desires are the
foundation of diligence, industry, and the use of means, and therefore cannot
be displeasing to GOD. But, contentment supposes, that if we are disappointed
in the use of means, we acquiesce and are satisfied, without murmuring,
convinced that such is the will of heaven.

7. CONTENTMENT is opposed to covetousness and worldly-mindedness, and supposes
that our desires of the good things of this world are low, modest and
christian; that we seek not eagerly great things for ourselves, but bound our
wishes and views to a moderate competency; resolving, that having food and
raiment we will be therewith contented; seeing that a man's life consists not
in the abundance of the things he possesses Luke xii. 15. Genesis xxviii. 20. Heb.
xiii. 15.
.

8. IMMODERATE worldly cares and anxieties about what may happen to us in time
to come, are inconsistent with Christian contentment, as they render men uneasy
for the present, unfit them for the duties of religion, and speak a distrust of
the providential goodness of GOD Luke xxi. 34. Matthew. vi. 34. Phil. iv. 6.
. Besides, these cares and anxieties, although they destroy our peace, yet they
cannot better our circumstances; for, taking thought, cannot add one cubit to
our stature, or alter the course or allotments of divine providence.

9. ALL murmurings and repinings against the providence of GOD, as though GOD
had dealt more severely with us than he ought or might have done, are
inconsistent with Christian contentment. To remedy this, we should consider
GOD'S universal providence, and the equity and perfect rectitude of his ways, 1 Samuel iii. 18.

10. ENVY against others, who are in more prosperous and honorable
circumstances than we, is inconsistent with Christian contentment. There can be
no contentment in the envious breast. Why should my eye be evil against my
neighbor, because GOD is good to him? If my neighbor is a wicked man, his
prosperity will destroy him: If a good man, why should I envy his prosperity,
and not rather rejoice in it; seeing GOD made him prosperous for wise and good
purposes? Indeed, my envying my neighbor his prosperity or happiness, is a
plain and convincing proof, that I myself do not deserve these blessings at the
hand of GOD; and that if I had them, I would make a very bad use of them.

11. A TRULY contented man, however he may wish his condition better, yet never
will use unlawful means to better it. This is to make haste the wrong way, to
be rich, easy or happy; and shows great discontent. The danger of this is well
painted, in one instance of it, 1 Timothy vi. 8, -- 10. See a good advice also
against this kind of discontent, Luke iii. 14.

12 CONTENTMENT will engage us to make the best of our condition whatever it
be. The contented man will survey his remaining comforts with gratitude to GOD,
and comfort himself by considering how sew and tolerable his distresses and
misfortunes are, compared with those of many others. He will also endeavor to
extract some spiritual advantage out of every affliction.

To engage us to contentment with our present lots and conditions, let us
consider, (1.) That they are appointed by a GOD of infinite justice, wisdom and
mercy. (2.) That let them be as bad as they will, we deserve still worse. (3.)
That it is generally our own fault, that they are not better. (4.) That if we
are indeed GOD'S children, all will work together for good to us; and that our
wants and afflictions are ordered in mercy, and because need so is: And if we
are not GOD'S children, we are punished less, much less, than our iniquities
deserve. (5.) That however grievous or hard and uncomfortable our lots are, our
wants and miseries cannot be of long continuance, but must soon be terminated
by death. (6.) That the best of men, even the Son of GOD himself, have been in
worse present circumstances than we are; and yet were perfectly contented; from
whose examples we should learn this grace.

ESSAY XXXII. CHASTITY and the contrary VICES.
1. GOD has implanted in the sexes such appetites and affections toward each
other as are necessary for the propagation of our kind, and without which,
probably the first command, Multiply and replenish the earth, would not have
been readily obeyed. And it is here worth observing, as a proof of the divine
wisdom and goodness, that a natural pleasure is annexed to those actions by
which our kind is propagated, and life supported and sustained.

2. CHASTITY consists in the regulation of these appetites and desires between
the sexes.

3. As GOD has implanted no natural appetites in his creatures, for which he
has not provided lawful gratifications; so the appetites between the sexes,
may be gratified in a lawful manner. Wherefore, chastity consists not in
eradicating these natural appetites, but in regulating them; restraining them
within the bounds of moderation, and directing them to right objects. Hence
appears the unreasonableness of celebacy and a monastic life.

4. ALTHOUGH brutes, generally speaking, are remarkably moderate in the
gratification of these appetites, yet they cannot be called chaste, having no
conscience, and being under no moral or divine law. Chastity therefore is a
human and Christian virtue, arising from reason, reflection, and submission to
the authority of a divine law.

5. REASON and reflection will quickly convince us that the loose and unbounded
gratification of the appetites between the sexes, would be productive of the
greatest mischiefs in human society; and therefore marriage, (the only remedy
against this mischief) has been held sacred and venerable among almost all
nations, who have had little else than the dictates of natural reason for their
guide. Indeed, other gratifications of these appetites have been tolerated
among some of them. And the more brutish these nations have been, the more
unbounded and unrestrained have they been in the gratifications of these
appetites, (witness the ancient Britons.)

6. THE Christian revelation has limited the gratification of these appetites
to one woman and one man, in a state of marriage, during the life of either of
the parties; and has strictly, and upon the severest penalties, forbid the
gratification of them in any other way: The reasons of which limitation and
prohibition, are very wise, and sufficiently obvious: Hence we may learn what
is unchastity, in deed, word, and thought.

7. UNCHASTITY in deed, is when single and unmarried persons do at all actually
gratify these appetites; or when married persons at all actually gratify them,
with any other persons than their own husbands or wives; and is distinguished
into sins of fornication, adultery, incest, poligamy, sodomy and self-pollution.

8. UNCHASTITY in thought or desire, is when one of either sex, looks upon
one of the contrary sex, which is a forbidden object, so as to lust after them,
or desire criminal converse with them. And how much more criminally unchaste
must it be, so to inflame the heart with an absent, forbidden object, as to act
over the guilty scene in imagination?

9. UNCHASTITY in word, is when we use such filthy obscene language, as has a
tendency to excite unchaste thoughts and desires, either in ourselves, or
others. In order to maintain and preserve our chastity, the following things
seem necessary and useful: -- (1.) To pray for, and endeavor after true
conversion, or a new, clean, and pure heart; for while we have a corrupt
nature, our passions and appetites will ever be inordinate and ungovernable. --
(2.) To shun all unnecessary intimacy and familiarity with forbidden objects of
the different sex, by which we may insensibly contract unlawful desires, which
may in time lead to criminal actions; or, where a friendship is cultivated
between the sexes, to improve it to the promoting of purity and virtue. -- (3.)
To choose and consort with such companions of our own sex, as are most chaste
and modest in their language and deportment; and on the contrary, to shun all
lewd, immodest, profligate companions, who will soon vitiate our taste, and
corrupt our manners. -- (4.) To be much in reading the scriptures, and such
other books, as tend to purify the mind, and inspire chaste and holy thoughts;
and cautiously to shun the perusal of loose plays, songs, romances, and such
trash as corrupt and debauch the mind. -- (5.) Often to examine our own hearts,
and meditate on the extreme evil and danger of unchastity; how unlike it
renders us to the pure and holy GOD; how unfit for his enjoyment, and how
obnoxious to his vengeance; that burning lusts, are fuel to kindle unquenchable
flames, in the place of torment. -- (6.) Fasting and prayer, have been found
excellent and effectual remedies for unchastity; and indeed, all the
instrumental duties of religion should be used in this view. -- (7.) Chastity
agrees well with diligence and sobriety, and often dwells under the same roof
with them. -- (8.) Marriage is to many, the only remedy for unchastity; and it
is a lawful and honorable one. -- (9.) But, in short, without a new and divine
nature, and grace in exercise, nothing will effectually secure either married
or single from unchastity, either in thought, word, or action.

ESSAY XXXIII. HUMILITY, and the opposite VICES.
1. HUMILITY consists in a right judgment of ourselves, compared with other
beings; and is opposed to the vices of pride, arrogance, self-righteousness,
self-conceit, vanity, and boasting and glorying in one's self, with a contempt
of others.

2. HUMILITY, like all the other Christian graces, must be seated in the mind,
and thence display and manifest itself in our words and outward deportment; and
therefore the Apostle exhorts Christians to put on humbleness of mind.

3. HUMILITY does not consist in making a wrong judgment of ourselves or
others, or in thinking less or worse of ourselves than we deserve; but in
making a right and just judgment of ourselves and others on comparrison; and if
we do so, we shall have little reason for pride, arrogance or self-conceit. Nor,

4. DOES humility consist (as many have supposed) in mean clothes, dejected
looks, and a complaisant cringing behavior to our fellow creatures: All these
may consist with the most insufferable pride and ambition, and are often only
cloaks to conceal it. Yet the world makes humility to consist wholly in these
things, and will not allow a man to have any pride, who is negligent or
slovenly in his dress, or affable in conversation.

5. THE humble soul sees that he is nothing before GOD, or in comparrison with
him; that he is but a creature of a day, sprung from the dust, whose breath is
in his nostrils, wholly depending on GOD for his soul and its faculties, his
body and its senses; for every moment of his existence, every support and
comfort of the present life, and every hope of future life; and therefore, he
walks exceeding humbly with his GOD.

6. THE humble soul sees that it is not only a dependent creature, but a
sinful, guilty, helpless, perishing, lost, miserable creature, who has
destroyed itself; who deserves hell, and no kind of mercy or favor from GOD at
all: Therefore, he is contented in all states without murmuring; bears
afflictions with patience; is thankful for every, even the smallest favor;
rejoices in the glad tidings of a Savior and salvation; gladly disclaims and
renounces his own righteousness and merit, and joyfully embraces and pleads the
righteousness and merit of Christ; comes to GOD poor and empty, wretched and
miserable, humble and penitent, and falls down before the throne of his mercy,
willing to accept the free salvation with the utmost gratitude, on GOD'S own
terms; on any terms.

7. THE humble soul, knowing its own natural weakness, blindness, ignorance and
fallibility; how prone it is to errors, mistakes and prejudices; readily
renounces and disclaims its own weak, corrupt, fallible judgment in religious
matters; submits its reason and understanding wholly to the dictates of GOD'S
word and the guidance of his Spirit, and is willing humbly and gladly to learn
from GOD and his blessed Son, the truths and duties of religion. He is not wise
in his own conceit, or wise above what is written, but wholly submits his
understanding to revealed truth.

8. THE humble soul thinks meanly of its own knowledge and goodness, compared
with that of other men of nobler powers, and higher seize and advantages;
esteeming others better than himself, and in honor preferring them. He is so
f^r from (...) such, that he honors and respects them as better and more
useful than himself; thanks GOD for his grace in them and his gifts to them; is
ready to learn from and imitate them; speaks honorably and respectfully of
them to others, and thereby endeavors to promote their usefulness in the
world: Nay, he is not angry or offended, nor is his pride piqu'd, if they are
honored more than him, and at his own expense. To bear this patiently shows
true humbleness of mind.

9. THE humble soul, sensible that all its knowledge and goodness is borrowed
and derived; is the fruit of GOD'S gifts and grace, and of the opportunities
and advantages which he has conferred upon it; and how very limited and
imperfect its knowledge is at the best; how very little it knows of what may be
known, and how imperfect its knowledge is of the things which it knows, how
many degrees of grace and goodness there are between it and the perfection of
holiness of which our nature is capable: The humble soul, I say, knowing and
being convinced of all this, can never despise those who have less knowledge
and goodness than himself; because, he has nothing which he has not received,
and it is GOD who has made him to differ, and he is still but a poor,
imperfect creature, full of ignorance and corruption. This therefore keeps him
from spiritual pride; from self-righteousness and self-conceit; from being
puffed up, and from glorying in a state which is so very far short of
perfection. He is humble, and pities the infirmities of others.

10. PRIDE was the first sin of men and angels, and is still the predominant
vice of sinners, and the last sin which is totally subdued and rooted out of
the human heart by renewing grace.

11. PRIDE toward GOD, shows itself by the following symptoms. Men who will
believe their own vain imaginations, sooner than GOD'S word; who set up their
darkened reason, above the word of GOD, and their own corrupt wills, above the
will and law of GOD; who oppose GOD, and murmur against him, and will not
accept of his Son and his righteousness, but believe they have righteousness
and merit enough for their justification, are excessively proud: And this is
the most hellish and provoking of all pride; yet, it is the pride of every
unconverted sinner.

12. PRIDE toward men, shows itself in undervaluing and despising others, and
preferring ourselves before them; in contradicting and opposing others upon all
occasions; in looking down upon others as beneath our notice, and undervaluing
all their good qualities and accomplishments; in speaking much of ourselves,
praising ourselves, and boasting and glorying in our actions and dispositions.

13. GAIETY and fondness of dress, is a kind of childish, womanish vanity,
which hardly deserves the name of pride. It is a kind of childish folly which
deserves to be laughed at, and which no sinner of good common sense was ever
guilty of. What? Proud of that which covers our nakedness and shame!

14. THE devil affords the highest example of pride; and the blessed Jesus of
humility.

15. PRIDE is the most shameful and absurd vice of a man; and humility the most
amiable and ornamental virtue of a Christian Psalm. xxxviii. 6. Matthew. v. 4. --
xviii. 4. Isa. lvii. 15. Luke xviii. 9, -- 13. 1 Pet. v. 5. James iv. 6.
.

ESSAY XXXIV. SOBRIETY, and the contrary VICES.
1. SOBRIETY is a very extensive virtue, which is not only opposed to
drunkenness and intemperance (as it is commonly understood;) but to all levity
of mind and irregularity of the passions, appetites and affections. -- Indeed,
to be sober, is to perform the third part of our Christian duty. We must deny
all ungodliness and every worldly lust, and live godly, righteously and soberly
in this world Tit. ii. 12.
.

2. THERE is an intoxication or drunkenness of the mind, as well as of the
body; and the scripture or gospel sobriety is particularly, if not chiefly
opposed to this vice. All temperate and abstemious men, are not sober men.
Young women and deacons wives are commanded to be sober Tit. ii. 4. 1 Timothy iii.
11.
; and it would be indecent to imagine, that this was a caution against
intemperance in drinking. Young men are exhorted to be sober-minded Tit. i. 6.
; which shows that this virtue relates to the government of the mind, as well
as to that of the bodily appetites. -- Sobriety is also opposed to gaiety and
vanity in dress in women, and pertness or immodesty of behavior: In like
manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness
and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but
with good works Tim. ii. 9.
. -- It is also opposed to pride and self-conceit Romans xii. 3.
: Let no man think of himself more highly than he ought; but soberly, according
as GOD has dealt to every man the measure of faith.

3. SOBRIETY, therefore, as it is a mental virtue, seems to signify gravity and
decorum of thought and behavior; and consists in a due and prudent regulation
of the passions, appetites, affections and actions, and is opposed to levity,
sickleness and inconstancy of mind; to pride, self-conceit, and extravagant
passions and affections of all sorts. -- So that a sober man, is one who is
discreet, humble, prudent, composed, patient, meek, grave and examplary in all
manner of life and conversation.

4. SOBRIETY is also often particularly opposed to intemperance in drinking 1
These. i. 6, -- 8. 1 Pet. iv. 7. 1 Timothy iii. 2. Tit. i. 8. -- ii. 2, 12. Acts
xxvi. 25.
.

5. DRUNKENNESS which is the opposite to sobriety in this sense of it, is, in
itself, a great evil, and productive of many others Prove. xxiii. 29, 30, 33.
. (1.) It is expressly and repeatedly forbidden in the gospel, under the
penalty of forfeiting the favor of GOD and eternal life, 1 Cor. vi. 10. Gal.
v. 21. Matthew. xxiv. 48, 51. (2.) Christ and his Apostles, have warned
Christians against it, in a very singular, and most urgent manner; and no
wonder, seeing it is in itself so beastly a vice, and attended with so many
hurtful consequences with regard to men's bodies, souls, reputation and worldly
interests. (3.) It is a vice peculiarly Heathen Romans xiii. 12, 13, 14, 1 These.
v. 8.
. (4.) It wholly unmans us; -- renders us stupid and ridiculous, just objects
of ridicule and contempt, even to children, servants, and idiots Prove. xxix. i.
Hos. iv. 11.
. (5.) It incapacitates us for all the duties we owe to GOD, our families, our
neighbors, and ourselves; and puts us in the way of doing the most wicked and
hurtful actions. (6.) It justly renders us unworthy of all trust and confidence
from others. (7.) It lays us open an easy prey to all knavish and designing
men; lays the foundation of many chronical and acute diseases, and generally
brings its votaries to poverty, contempt, and an unpitied and premature death.

6. IN order that we may be preserved from this most disgraceful and most
destructive of all vices, the following maxims and cautions may be found
serviceable. -- (1.) Shun the company of such as are addicted to this swinish
vice Prove. xiii. 20. -- xxiv. 20, 21. -- iv. 14, 15. Hab. ii. 15.
. -- Tarry not long among those who are in the way to excess, how sober soever
their general character may be, lest you should be induced to run to the same
excess of riot, and so contract a vicious habit. -- (3.) Take care never to
exceed that quantity of wine or strong liquor, which you find by experience to
be a proper and moderate refreshment. The boundary of temperance is so very
narrow, that we may easily exceed it; which, if we do, we lose the command of
ourselves, and may quickly be hurried to the greatest length of excess. -- (4.)
Endeavor never to make strong liquor necessary to your refreshment. There is
much wisdom in laying restraints on the appetites, at times, even in the use of
innocent enjoyments. These wholesome restraints strengthen self-power and
self-government. -- (5.) Shun habitual idleness, which is commonly the parent
of drunkenness, gaming and most other pernicious vices. -- (6.) Frequently
consider the shame, the folly and the horrid guilt and danger of drunkenness
Deuteronomy. xxix. 19, 20.
. -- (7.) Pray daily to GOD for a new heart, cleansed from the love of sin, and
breathing after universal purity and perfection Romans xiii. 12, -- 14.
.

ESSAY XXXV. CHRISTIAN COURAGE or FORTITUDE, and its opposites.
1. FORTITUDE or courage, is that temper or disposition of mind which sets a
man upon doing brave and commendable actions in the face of any danger or
opposition which may lie in his way. Nay, the truly brave man is rather
animated than disheartened, by the number or greatness of the dangers and
difficulties which lie in the way of his duty. The righteous is bold as a lion;
and he that has clean hands grows stronger and stronger.

2. CHRISTIAN courage or fortitude, is a being bold, fearless and intrepid in
the cause of Christ, and in our duty and allegiance to him. As bravery in war
has been ever esteemed the highest proof of courage, (because life, the dearest
of all earthly enjoyments, is risked in war) so we borrow our idea of Christian
courage, from the state of christianity in this world, which is very properly
represented as a state of warfare; -- and to exercise Christian courage, is but
another phrase for being good soldiers of Jesus Christ, who is called very
expressively the Captain of our salvation 2 Timothy ii. 3.
.

3. COURAGE naturally supposes difficulties, dangers and opposition; for,
without these, there could be no proper trial or exercise of this virtue. This
therefore proves, that the Christian life, as a state of warfare, is not that
easy, inactive, indolent thing, which the generality of nominal professors seem
to imagine; but a life of conflict, full of hazards, difficulties and
opposition; and that he who has never experienced and encountered these, has
never yet truly enlisted himself under the banner of Jesus, nor wared a good
warfare.

4. COURAGE, in order to denominate it a Christian virtue, must, as well as
zeal, be founded upon knowledge, and a rational conviction, not only of the
goodness of the cause in which we are engaged, but also of the difficulties we
have to encounter; the risk we run; the measure of our strength; the aids and
succors we have to expect, and the wages we have to receive if we come off
conquerors. In short, it supposes that we have counted the cost Luke xiv. 26,
-- 33. Phil. iii. 7, -- 14. Acts xx. 22, -- 24. Romans viii. 18. 2 Cor. iv. 16.
.

5. THE necessity and expediency of Christian fortitude will appear from the
numerous, subtle and powerful enemies of our salvation: (1.) From invisible,
malignant spirits Ehp. vi. 8, etc.
. (2.) From our own lusts and corruptions, which treacherously take part with
these spiritual enemies against us, and being, as it were, our very selves, are
the more difficult to deny, mortify and conquer. (3.) From our fellow
creatures, who too often use every artifice to allure us to sin, or to shame
and fright us from duty.

6. THE nature and number of our Christian duties absolutely require the
exercise of this virtue. What fortitude must it require to comply with that
exhortation of our Lord, If any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself
and take up his cross and follow me? Self-denial and self-conquest are the
noblest feats of courage, and require the exertions of a firm, resolute and
determined soul. He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he
that rules his spirit, than he that takes a city Prove. xvi. 32.
. To be more particular: (1.) Repentance, which is a general and indispensable
Christian duty, requires the utmost degree of fortitude and resolution to
subdue and eradicate old rooted habits, and to deny ourselves such things as we
have long had great pleasure in, and to abstain from which, will be extremely
painful. We must forsake old companions; resolutely withstand their enticements
to sin and vanity, endure their scoffs, and, at length, their rage. It may
happen, that we cannot truly repent without disobliging our nearest relations
and dearest friends; without discontinuing gainful business, as well as
renouncing beloved lusts; or without making acknowledgments for injuries done,
and restoring, with shame, what we have unjustly acquired. But under all these
difficult and self-denying duties, the cowardly and irresolute man must
shamefully succumb.

(2.).THE false opinions and depraved customs of the world make sad havoc
among human souls, and it is the duty of every Christian to oppose them, and to
counteract their mischievous tendency. The evangelical precept is, Be not
conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds.
Now, the false maxims and depraved customs of the world, like irresistible
torrents, sweep the cowardly and irresolute Christian along with them. He hears
his religious opinions ridiculed; his GOD irreverently mentioned; his Savior
traduced, and his pious friends made the laughing stock of fools, yet dares not
reply; fears to be rude; dreads the ridicule or resentment of some fellow-worm
-- nay, perhaps the same pusillanimity leads him basely to lend the smile of
seeming approbation to this wickedness, and at length cordially to fall into it
himself. But the resolute and courageous Christian, dares to be singularly
good; he dares to stem the torrent of popular depravity and chrruption; -- he
dares to be pious and upright, against the example of the multitude who do
iniquity. -- He can bear to be laughed at as an unfashionable fool, by both the
great and little vulgar, with all the fortitude and magnanimity of a Christian
hero. He shines as a light in the world, amidst a crooked and perverse
generation, holding forth the word of life, and counting it all joy to be
persecuted for righteousness sake. We the whole world to deride, to persecute,
to oppose him, he would, with the heroic leader of Israel's tribes, resolve, As
for me and my house, we will serve the Lord Job xxiv. 15.
.

(3.) To be brief: Would we see the excellency and necessity of Christian
fortitude, we must view the Christian in the following stations of duty and of
providence -- Reproving sin -- opposing error -- propagating truth --
conssicting with temptation -- struggling under the pressure of pain and heavy
calamities and afflictions -- exposed to the rage and malignity of persecuting
zeal -- and upon the very verge of eternity, encountering death, the last and
most terrific enemy in the Christian warfare: -- Especially, in the awful hour
of death, and amidst the agonies of dissolving nature, the irresolute man is
stupefied with horror. He dares not take a retrospect of his bypast life, nor
look into the fathomless abyss of eternity. He recollects, that the face of man
has often terrified him so, as to make him do violence to conscience: How then
shall he behold the face of GOD, whom he has offended through a sinful fear of
man, and of whose words he has been ashamed before an adulterous generation?
Fearful he clings to life; reluctant he starts back from the brink of eternity,
and dreads the sight of his almighty judge. Dismal forbodings sill his soul
with distressful agonies, and he quits the world, leaving the spectators under
a painful uncertainty whither he is gone. -- But the Christian who has
courageously served his GOD in life, is generally bold as a lion in the near
prospect of death. -- To him, death is a messenger of peace. He triumphs over
his terrors through the blood of the Lamb; enquires fearless for his sting, and
demands his guidance to the unknown regions of eternity! There he expects
congratulating angels to meet him. There he hopes to see GOD as his reconciled
Father, face to face, and that wonderful God-man Christ Jesus, who was so much
his friend as to die for him; -- to see him exalted to the highest honors, --
exalted to be his judge: -- And recollecting some of the tokens and
manisestations of his love, he desires now to testify to all around him, the
grace, and faithfulness and loving kindness of his Lord. He dies in hope; dies
exulting; moves and instructs the spectators of his exit, and perhaps does more
honor to GOD, and more good to his fellow-men, in his death, than he has been
enabled to do in all his life.

7. FAITH begets this virtue in the soul, and gives vigor to all its acts and
exertions. (1.) By that faith, which is the evidence of things not seen, we
perceive, that the cause we have espoused is good; that it is the cause of GOD
and of Christ; the cause in which the eternal interest of our souls is
embarked. (2.) By faith we see the arm of omnipotence stretched out for our
succor, and may say, with humble confidence, that we have almighty strength,
respecting what we have to encounter with in the way of our duty. How base then
to be dastardly and faint-hearted, with such odds on our side? (3.) By the eye
of faith we see the glorious Captain of our salvation spreading his standard
over us -- standing with a celestial crown in his hand to reward our valor,
and millions of our fellow soldiers, beholding, as it were, from the
battlements of heaven, our behavior in the Christian race and warfare. Seeing
then we are encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses, ought we not, Laying
aside every weight, and the sin which easily besets us, to run with patience
the race set before us, looking unto Jesus 1 Cor. ix. 23. 2 Timothy iv. S. Heb.
xii. 1, -- 4.
? (3.) By faith we look back and behold the gracious army of martyrs, apostles,
prophets, and patriarchs, who were bold to attempt, and resolute to perform the
most arduous things. These have each conquered singly, and triumphed. These
were men as we are, and justly expect that we should behave with equal ardour,
fortitude and perseverance in the Christian warfare. They seem to chide our
sloth, and animate us to activity by observing, that GOD is still almighty; --
that our religion is still divine; -- that our Redeemer is still the same
Jesus, and his gospel worthy as much honor now as ever it has been.

ESSAY XXXVI. The CHRISTIAN USES of the TONGUE.
1. THE noblest use that can be made of the tongue, is to glorify GOD; which is
done by this little instrument, (1.) By praying to him. Thus we acknowledge our
entire dependence on him for all that is needful to our happiness. (2.) By
praising him. Thus we make known his loving kindness to his needy undeserving
creatures. (3.) By expressing our admiration of his infinite perfections: Thus
exalting his great name. (4.) By confessing our iniquities: Thus magnifying his
grace, which continues with us, notwithstanding our so great unworthiness. (5.)
By contending for the truth of his word; testifying our confidence in it, and
discouraging every indecent freedom with it. (6.) By vindicating his
providential government, and displaying the wisdom, goodness and equity of his
ways. These are, doubtless, some of the principal ends for which the tongue is
given to man.

2. A VERY good and noble use of the tongue is, to promote by it the good of
our neighbor; which we may do, (1.) By laboring to instruct the ignorant in
what may relate to the concerns of his body; but more especially in what
respects his soul. (2.) By commendation, in such manner as may be an
encouragement to him to proceed in the way of godliness and virtue, so as to
advance his good name, and extend the sphere of his usefulness: But in this
good office, we should guard in a particular manner against flattery, or
imprudent commendation, which is deadly poison to most men. (4.) By
peacemaking: There being nothing more destructive to religion and virtue than
malicious strife; nor any thing more unseemly in a Christian. Those therefore
who are the happy instruments of removing this hellish evil from between men,
are, in a peculiar manner, considered by the GOD of peace as his children: And,
(5.) By vindicating injured characters and persons. This is doing very great
service to men; discovers a noble spirit, and is an office that procures the
esteem of men, and GOD doubtless regards the discharge of it with complacence
Matthew. xii. 35, -- 37.
. (6.) One of the noblest and most benevolent uses of the tongue, toward our
fellow creatures, after instructing them in the principles of religion, and
animating them to the practice of it; is to pour the balm of consolation into
the wounded spirit. Words fitly spoken to the broken in heart; to those
agonizing souls who are sinking as it were, under the pressure of some heavy
affliction into the black sea of despair, are indeed like apples of gold in
pictures of silver. Can there be a more God-like, Christian-like office than to
sooth the throbbings of the anxious mind; to give it, beauty for ashes, the oil
of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness?
This is one of the most amiable and benevolent offices of the gracious
Redeemer, To bind up the broken hearted and to comfort all that mourn Isa. lxi.
1, -- 3.
. And such as imitate him in this branch of his prophetic office, are, to their
sorrowing distressed fellow creatures, as rivers of water in a dry place, and
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land: They are a strength to the needy in
his distress, a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat, when the
blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall Isa. xxxii. 2. --
xxv. 4.
.

3. ANOTHER Christian use of the tongue, is to manage it so as not to destroy,
but to increase, mutual confidence among men. This must be done by maintaining
a strict correspondence between our words and our thoughts. Whenever we speak,
an honest upright heart should dictate our speech, and we should on no
pretense, tell a lie, not even that good may come Romans iii. 8. Psalm. xv. 1, 2.
. Great regard should be paid in particular to our promises; to promise nothing
or enter into no engagements but such as we are deliberately resolved to
perform at all hazards. -- In short, our words should contain nothing but
truth, and the whole truth, reserving nothing, where the reserve would amount
to the consequence of a lie in prejudicing any. Yet in some cases it may be
lawful to reserve a part of the truth -- or to use something of a feint. See 1 Samuel xvi. 2.

ESSAY XXXVII. The UNCHRISTIAN ABUSES of the TONGUE.
THE unchristian abuses of the tongue, form a strong contrast to the former
subject.

1. As the noblest use of the tongue, consists in those exercises of it which
tend to celebrate, magnify and glorify the blessed GOD, and set forth his
excellencies to our fellow creatures; so whatever has a direct, or indirect
tendency to dishonor GOD, or give our fellow creatures wrong, mean, and
unworthy apprehensions of him, ^^e the most capital sins and abuses of the
tongue -- such (...), (1.) atheistical speeches: As saying, that there is no
GOD; denying or disputing his being, or insinuating such hints and arguments,
as tend to destroy this belief in ourselves or fellow creatures. This is
striking at the glory of GOD with a witness, and erazing the very foundations
of all religion among men. Equally pernicious are those speeches and arguments,
which, while they seem to admit the being of a GOD, insinuate, that he did not
create, and does not rule and govern the world: -- Or, allowing his universal
providence, in giving general laws to nature, while they deny his particular
providence, or his ordering and overruling all the particular actions of his
creatures. -- Nor is it a whit better to deny GOD'S moral government of his
rational creatures; that he is the observer of men; the witness and judge, the
rewarder and punisher of their moral conduct. To this may be added the vile
guilt of robbing GOD of any of his persections, of his omniscience,
omnipresence, his holiness, justice, mercy or truth; -- or of extolling any of
these perfections, to the prejudice of the rest.

(2.) BLASPHEMY: Either cursing GOD, as Job's wife would have persuaded him to
do; or challenging GOD to come forth, and do his worst; or boldly and
insolently defying his vengeance; or charging him foolishly, as cruel and
unjust, and laying more on us than we deserve; or boldly calling down his
vengeance upon ourselves or others; or sporting with his judgments,
undervaluing his mercies, and ridiculing his works, or word, or providence.
This is to do all that we can to debase and vilisy the Almighty, by speaking of
him in a manner that we dared not to do of a dignified fellow-worm.

(3.) PROFANITY, nearly bordering on the former. Speaking slightly and
disrespectfully of holy things and ordinances, and that holiness which is the
image of GOD on his people; -- mimicking and mocking holy actions, such as
prayer, preaching, the sacraments, and the like; -- making a jest of the
scriptures, and using them proverbially to prosane purposes; -- speaking
slightingly of the laws of GOD and the rules of holiness, as not worth our
notice; -- making a mock at sin as a mere trifle, and talking of the most awful
and serious matters, such as death, judgment, heaven and hell, in such a
slight, vain, and sportive manner, as plainly shows that we have no practical
belief of them.

(4.) SOLEMN perjury; or calling GOD to witness a known lie, and praying down
his vengeance upon us, in case our declaration be not true, when we know that
it is not.

(5.) COMMON swearing; which by the frequent and familiar abuse of GOD'S holy
name, lessens our own reverence and that of others for an oath; turns the
venerable name of JEHOVAH, into a mere scarecrow, or an empty sound, to convey
our hellish passions to others, and paves the way to customary, horrid perjury.
This is an abuse of the tongue, which, besides its being forbidden by the word
of GOD, on the penalty of his severest displeasure, is attended with neither
pleasure, profit nor honor; -- is rude, barbarous, uncivil, and unmeaning, and
fit only for devils and damned spirits.

(6.) THE common and profane use of GOD'S name, even where neither cursing,
swearing, nor damning is annexed to it: Such as, O GOD! O LORD! O CHRIST! E
Gad! O Je! and GOD bless us! CHRIST bless us! and the like, when they are
spoken in a light, unmeaning, customary manner: For, as GOD'S name is sacred
and glorious, so every common use of it, is an irreverent abuse of it, and is
expressly forbidden in the third commandment, Thou shall not take the name of
the LORD thy GOD in vain, etc.

2. As the next important use of the tongue, is to promote the good of our
fellow creatures; so, whatever tends directly, or indirectly to hurt or injure
our neighbor, in any of his interests, is a vile, unchristian, diabolical
abuse of it. Indeed, all the abovementioned abuses of it, are against
Christian charity: For, though they directly and immediately tend to dishonor
GOD, yet they mediately and indirectly tend to corrupt and ruin our neighbor.
Indeed, whatever sin comes the length of the tongue, is, and necessarily must
be desiling to all around us, who are disposed to receive infection. But the
abuses of the tongue, which are most immediately repugnant to Christian
charity, are the following: (1.) Direct lying, or untruth: For, as the tongue
and speech were given to be a true and regular index and interpreter of the
mind; so a man who speaks not truth, is like a clock whose hand points to the
wrong hour, or like a compass whose needle deviates from the true pole, useless
and worth nothing. Besides, as truth is the foundation of all right intercourse
between men, so there could be no living in society, or transacting business
with our fellow creatures, if falsehood prevailed universally. Indeed, truth is
so sacred, valuable and important a branch of Christian morality, and so
essentially necessary to the wellbeing of human society, that it should never
be violated, even in jest, or upon the slightest and most trivial occasions.

(2.) DISSIMULATION: Either by wilfully concealing necessary truth, or
speaking in a doubtful, ambiguous, enigmatical manner, with a design to deceive
or mi^lead our neighbor.

(3.) DOUBLE-DEALING; being fair to our neighbor's face, and otherwise behind
his back.

(4.) MISREPRESENTING a story or fact, which is one of the most mischievous
kinds of lying and backbiting; for, by omitting one single word or
circumstance of a story or fact, it may be quite altered to the unspeakable
prejudice of our neighbor and of the truth.

(5.) DECEITFUL-PROMISING: Causing our neighbor to rely on a promise, which we
either do not intend to persorm at all, or which we have no hope of being able
to perform punctually, at the time and in the manner proposed: This makes
unspeakable confusion in the trading world, and in every other department of
life, and tends effectually to ruin our character, and very often our
neighbor's too, who is led to deceive others on the strength of our promise.

(6.) BEARING FALSE WITNESS against our neighbor; either by telling known and
malicious lies to the prejudice of our neighbor, in the way of calumny,
slander and backbiting; or by unnecessarily abetting, propagating and
spreading the slanders of others, whom we have reason to suspect of malice
against him: Much more, by taking away his life, interest, or good name, by
perjury.

(7.) SPEAKING the very worst that we can of our neighbor, consistent with
truth, with a designed concealing any good qualities he possesses, on purpose
to hurt his character or interest, or to impede his usefulness: For, we may do
unspeakable hurt often, even by speaking improper and unseasonable truths: But
nothing short of Christian charity and prudence can direct in this matter.

(8.) DIVULGING and blabbing out such secrets as our neighbor may have, in
confidence entrusted us with, either with a malicious design to hurt him, or
through mere imprudence, and a tatling disposition.

(9.) ALL such abusive, ignominious names and insulting language, either of or
to our neighbor, as tends to break Christian charity, stir up anger, and
occasion quarrels and lawsuits; which besides their provoking nature and
unhappy consequences, prove the want of charity, meekness, humility and
patience, and are a scandal and disgrace to our common Christianity Matthew. v.
21, -- 26.
.

(10.) ALL sporting with, and mocking at the sins and natural infirmities of
our neighbor, and speaking, lessening degrading things of him, on account of
the latter.

(11.) VAIN, idle, unedifying conversation, which neither tends to comfort or
improve either ourselves or others, especially if it is continued long, to the
destruction of our own, or our neighbor's precious time: For, we are told, we
shall give an account of every idle word we speak at the day of judgment.

(12.) PROPAGATING evil, pernicious principles and doctrines, which tend to
poison our neighbor's mind, and to pave the way for a vicious practice.

(13.) FLATTERING our neighbor in his follies and vices, and thereby feeding
his pride and strengthening his hands in folly and wickedness; more especially,
with the detestable view of getting some savor from him, or advantage over
him, as the reward of this iniquity.

(14.) ABUSING our neighbor's confidence in us, by giving him bad or ruinous
advice, when we hope to benefit by his complying with it.

(15.) CORRUPTING our neighbor, and seducing him or her to sin, and thereby
committing the very worst kind of murder, both upon the soul and body of our
neighbor.

(16.) BY filthy songs, or corrupt and profane speeches, polluting and
debauching the minds and hearts of our neighbors, and inducing them to the
love and practice of sin.

(17.) INSTEAD of comforting the sick, afflicted and distressed, laughing at
and insulting their miseries, and thereby doubling the burden of their sorrows.

3. THE sins of the longue are the most numerous class of all our sins, except
those of the heart; and indeed, they will never be much lessened, until the
heart is renewed and sanctified by divine grace.

4. As the sins of the tongue are the most destructive, as well as the most
numerous, we had need to set a double guard over the motions of this unruly
member, seeing that in no way are we like more to disgrace our Christian
profession, than by an unbridled tongue.

5. THE right use and government of the tongue, is one of the least doubtful
proofs of true religion. -- If any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man. If any man among you seem to be religious and bridle not, etc
James i. 26. -- iii. 2.
.

ESSAY XXXVIII. The best METHOD of maintaining PEACE, LOVE, and UNITY among
CHRISTIAN BRETHREN.
1. CONSIDER, that although Christianity is a perfect institution, and tending
to make Christians perfect; yet Christians being only in the way of cure, in a
state of recovery, do not arrive at absolute perfection in this life, at least,
not before death.

2. IT is therefore absurd and unreasonable in one Christian to expect absolute
perfection in the character and temper of another, while here below in the
school of Christ. As long as I live, I will have my failings and infirmities,
and my brother will have his. -- Hence arises,

3. THE duty of, and obligation to, mutual forbearance among Christian
brethren: For, if I hope and expect, that any brother will bear with my
failings and infirmities in temper and conduct, and will have pity and
compassion on my weakness; justice and charity require that I should bear with
his, and not be over rigid and severe in my requirements from him. If not, I do
not unto others, as I would they should do unto me, and am become a
transgressor of this golden rule of equity.

4. IF this Christian maxim of bear and forbear, or of pitying, and, in love,
forgiving one another, is not regarded and observed, there cannot possibly be
any such thing as a Christian society, great or small, held together upon earth.

5. THE failings and imperfections of our Christian brethren, though very
undesirable in themselves, yet are overruled to serve excellent purposes in
this state of trial and probation: Upon them are grafted some of the noblest
Christian virtues, such as charity, meekness, patience, self-denial,
compassion, forbearance, and a forgiving temper; -- and they are excellent
touch-stones, whereby we may examine and prove our own spirits, and discover
whether we are indeed possessed of these Christian graces, i. e. whether we are
Christians.

6. WHOLLY to break society and fellowship with my Christian brother or
brethren, because he or they have offended me, speaks the most unsufferable
pride. -- It is, in plain construction, to presume that I myself am perfect and
blameless, and need no forbearance or forgiveness from my brethren.

7. IF GOD should break with us for every offense, what would become of us? Yet
the example of GOD and of CHRIST are expressly set before us for our imitation
in this duty Ephesians. iv. 2, 32. Col. iii. 13, 14.
.

8. BUT what are the terms and conditions of forgiving, or being reconciled
with our Christian brother, when he offends us? I answer, signs of true
penitence; and to forgive him, and be reconciled with him, and keep up
Christian fellowship and communion with him, upon these signs, is a Christian
duty so indispensably necessary, that our Savior has charged us, if our
Christian brother offend us, not only seven times, but even seventy times
seven, i. e. 490 times in one day, and return, and say, I repent, we must as
often forgive him Matthew. xviii. 15, -- 35.
.

9. BUT are there not some offenses, which, though they claim our forgiveness,
yet give just cause of our quitting all Christian fellowship and society with
our brethren? Answer. No offense can justify private revenge in a Christian. If
my brother should even attempt to take away my life, and turn again and show
signs of true sorrow and penitence, I must as a Christian, forgive him and be
reconciled with him; though, in such cases, public justice must be allowed to
take place for the good of society: But, a man who is called a brother, may, by
the nature and number of his offenses, and by a proud, haughty, impenitent
disposition, render himself wholly unworthy of Christian fellowship and
communion in any society; yet so as to be again received and readmitted, upon
giving proper signs of true penitence.

10. BUT must we so put up with, and forbear the failings and infirmities of
our Christian brethren, as to neglect the duties of reproof and admonition,
lest we break the bond of peace, and provoke or displease our offending
brother? Answer. By no means. This would be to suffer sin upon our brother.
Unity and peace among Christian brethren, must be founded on, and comport with
truth, integrity and a charitable zeal for each other's welfare. We are to
continue rebuking and exhorting, in a Christian manner, but never to break the
bond of Christian fellowship, till men appear to be incorrigible reprobates. I
have one failing, you have another: I must bear with your failing, while I use
every endeavor to correct it; you must do the same by me. No giving up with
this mutual duty, till we both get to heaven; where, being both perfect, we
shall have no need of mutual sorbearance and forgiveness.

11. I WILL not renounce or disown my natural brother, nor quit the family,
though he offends me, or is angry with me without cause. He is my brother, and
a multitude of tender and endearing considerations plead for forgiveness, and a
re-establishment of peace and unity: And shall I renounce and disown a
Christian brother, and quit the fellowship of the saints, for the like reason,
where the obligations to brotherly love are much more numerous, sacred and
noble, and the motives to forgiveness and unity, much more tender and endearing.

12. THE same reasons which will engage us to quit one Christian society,
because of the failings and infirmities of our brethren, should engage us to
quit the fellowship of the church itself; and then we renounce all union and
communion with the body of Christ, and putting ourselves out of the way of all
the means of salvation, do virtually renounce heaven itself, i. e. apostatize!

13. IF we are indeed Christians, we must all meet in heaven, and there live
together as friends, in one society for ever: And shall we part society for
every trisle on the road, where we have so much need of each other's mutual
advice, reproof, forbearance and charity?

14. CONSIDER the damage done to Christianity by schism and divisions among
Christian brethren; the pleasure it gives to the devil; the tendency it has to
prevent others from uniting themselves to those communities, from which
deserters have carried off an evil report, and the malicious and wicked triumph
it gives to the envious enemies of Christian union, communion and peace, and
the injury it does to the great and noble designs of such societies.

15. IF a deserter from a religious society should be asked by an enemy of
religion, what his reason was for deserting? Consider the danger he is in of
wounding religion in the answer he must make. I did not like the men; or, I did
not like their proceedings; or, I got no good, but rather harm, by being of the
number. Here a man speaks at once uncharitably of his Christian brethren, and
falsely and unfavourtably of the ways of GOD: For, few men are so just and
modest as to declare the true reasons of such a conduct, and to lay the blame,
where it properly is, upon their own fickleness, inconstancy, unchristian
disposition, and distaste and disrelish to that which is good; or, perhaps, a
mean and vile ambition to please and gratity some declared and malicious enemy
to so good a design.

16. LET a man consider, whether, on his deathbed, he could approve of having
broken the bonds of Christian peace and unity, and quitted a society, formed on
Christian principles, and in which he might have both done and received some
spiritual good; merely, because all his Christian brethren were not just, in
all respects, such as he would have them; while he himself had possibly as
great failings as any among them.

17. REAL offenses from our Christian brethren cannot justify our quitting
Christian communion: Much less supposed offenses, or real benefits, so
miscalled.

ESSAY XXXIX. The RULE of judging of our BRETHREN; against RASHNESS, and
CENSORIOUSNESS.
THE general rule given by our Savior to this purpose, may be found, Matthew.
vii. 1, etc. "Judge not that ye be not judged, etc." -- It is evident, however,
from reason and from other scriptures, that this rule has a great many
important exceptions, and that our Savior does not mean to prohibit every kind
of judging of our neighbor. -- For,

1. THE words and actions of state criminals, against the laws of their country
and the peace and welfare of civil society, may and ought to be judged,
condemned, and punished by the civil magistrate, whom GOD has set apart for
that very purpose Romans xiii. 1, -- 8.
.

2. THE words and actions of Christian professors, as members of Christian
societies, against the laws of Christ, and the duties of their Christian
calling, may, and ought to be judged, censured, condemned, and spiritually
punished, by the Ministers and other proper officers of such societies, who are
authorized by GOD to this business 1 Cor. v. 11, 12. Heb. xiii. 17.
.

3. IT is so far from being a sin, that it is an eminent proof and branch of
love and Christian charity, to fear for our Christian brethren, and be jealous
over them with a godly jealousy, lest they should be overtaken by the
temptations which surround them, and to warn and admonish them against their
danger 2 Cor. xi. 3.
; -- also, to judge and condemn them for things plainly erroneous in their
principles, or immoral in their conduct, and in tenderness and love, sharply to
reprove and rebuke them Lev. xix. 17. James v. 19, 20.
.

4. WE may and must, yea, we are directed and commanded, to judge of men by
their words, actions, and outward deportment; indeed, it is next to impossible
for us not to exercise our judgment in some way or other, about every action we
see and attend to; and truly, without the exercise of this faculty of judging,
we would have no rule or guide in our transactions with mankind, but should
often be unvoidably exposed to the greatest injuries.

5. CONSEQUENTLY, when our neighbor gives clear proof of his wickedness, by a
continued series of wicked words and actions, and by a manifest disinclination
to that which is good, we have certainly a right to judge of the tree, by the
badness of its fruit, and to condemn such an one as a bad man; yet not
interfering with his future state, as he is still in the place of repentance
Mark vii. 15. James i. 26. -- iii. 11, 12.
.

6. THE kind of judging therefore here forbidden by our Savior, must be rash,
censorious, ignorant, uncharitable judging; a judging, not so much of men's
persons, as of their states, not so much of men's actions, as of their
intentions; and may be confined to the following particulars.

(1.) JUDGING out of our province, or passing a judgment on persons or things
which we have no right to interfere with. Ministers have no right to interfere
in the proper office of Magistrates; nor Magistrates, in those peculiar to
Ministers Luke xii. 13, 14.
. The Apostle would not censure or inflict spiritual punishments on those who
were out of the church Cor. v. 12.
.

(2.) PRAGMATICALLY judging, deciding and determining in-matters above our
knowledge and reach, and where we can have no evidence of the truth, which is
the only ground of right judging: -- Such as ignorant men, censuring deep and
learned opinions, -- or our taking upon us to judge of the thoughts and designs
of men's hearts.

(3.) SEVERE censuring and judging of others, for things in their own nature
indifferent. Pretending that to be wrong in men, which we cannot prove to be
so; requiring that in them, which GOD has not required; forbidding that to
them which GOD has not forbidden, and condemning them for not doing or
forbearing such things.

(4.) BLIND and rash judging of our neighbor, without plain and sufficient
conviction of his guilt. A disposedness to censure, and pass sentence against
him, before we know the crime, or know he is guilty of it: Suspecting him of
evil principles and evil designs in his actions, and raising these suspicions
into accusations against him, before full evidence, or any evidence at all
appears, whereon to ground these suspicions. -- This is censoriousness and rash
judging with a witness; inconsistent with equity or brotherly love.

(5.) TAKING up an evil report against our neighbor, upon hearsay, or mere
common ^ame, and joining with the censorious and malevolent world, in the hue
and cry against our neighbor, before a particular and candid inquiry into the
truth of the allegation. This proves that we have no Christian love for our
neighbor, no tenderness for his good name; but that we delight in scandal, and
are evil disposed to our neighbor.

(6.) CRUELLY and unmercifully making the very worst of our neighbor's
conduct, without making proper allowances for the temptations he lay under, and
the disadvantageous circumstances in which these temptation might attack him.
These often greatly alleviate the guilt of the actions; and sometimes totally
alter their nature, and even justify them. See the show bread eaten by David,
and the ears of corn plucked by our Savior's disciples.

(7.) PREJUDICE and partiality in judging and condemning the actions of others;
censuring them through hatred or dislike of their person, rather than an
abhorrence of their crimes; passing that fault over slightly in ourselves, or
in our friends, which we aggravate and condemn without mercy in our enemies, or
even in indifferent persons; being quick in seeing the mote in our brother's
eye, while we excuse and justify the beam in our own.

(8.) UNCHARITABLE judging of others; which includes a number of cases: -- 1.
All evil-surmisings, and groundless suspicions and jealousies. -- 2. Putting
the worst construction on men's conduct, while it will bear better. -- 3.
Taking upon us to judge of men's thoughts and principles, when there is nothing
reproachful in their actions. -- 4. Judging of men's spiritual state and
condition, that it is evil, upon reasons which GOD'S word does not justify. --
5. Running down a character by the wholesale, when there may be many good and
praise worthy things in it. -- 6. Condemning whole nations or religious sects
of men in the lump, when there are many excellent persons among them. -- 7.
Imputing to men opinions and consequences, which they do not allow nor hold in
order to expose them to hatred and contempt. -- 8. To interpret calamities
which befall people, as judgments from GOD for things we dislike in them; or for
some supposed injuries to us, or to our friends. -- 9. To be backward to admit
fair tokens and proofs of repentance for real injuries done us; and to be
unforgiving and irreconcilable, and rashly to give up all our hopes of sinners,
and all endeavors for their good Cor. xiii.
. -- 10. To publish the real faults of others without occasion, or without a
very good and warrantable design; -- and much more to do it wantonly and
maliciously. -- 11. To slander whole families, kindreds, nations, sects, or
parties of men, for faults done by one or a few of them, which the others could
not prevent, and which they do not approve.

Reasons against Censoriousness, or rash and uncharitable judging.
(1.) IT is iniquitous in itself. (2.) It is against the golden rule; What ye
would that others should do unto you, etc. (3.) It is odious to GOD, being the
very reverse of that charity which he has established as the rule and principle
of all our transactions with our neighbor. (4.) It is so hateful to men, that
censorious persons are generally paid in their own coin, and their own actions
the more strictly scanned and the more severely censured. -- For with what
judgment ye judge ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again Matthew. vii. 1.
. It is a dreadful abuse of our time, and misuse of our talents, turning our
thoughts and judgment uncharitably on the actions and affairs of others, while
we have so much need to study, judge, and condemn ourselves 1 Cor. xi. 31.
.

ESSAY XL. of a PEACEABLE DISPOSITION, and the opposite EVILS.
1. THE very distinguishing spirit and genius of Christianity is peace and
love; and one of the fruits of the spirit is peace; -- not only a sense of
reconciliation and peace with GOD through the merit and intercession of Christ,
and, as a fruit of this peace of consicience, or an inward complacential
well-pleasedness with our own state and frame, arising from the joyful hope
that we are objects of the divine favor, and have passed from death unto life;
-- but also a loving and peaceable disposition toward all men, arising from
Christian principles and motives.

2. THIS peaceableness being a fruit of the holy Spirit, must begin, and be
radicated in the heart and temper. So far as it is truly Christian, it supposes
a change of nature: For, although some men are more indolent and easy in their
temper than others, and are naturally averse to quarrelling, and fond of ease
and quiet, yet they cannot be said to love and study peace, upon gospel
motives, until their natures are changed and renewed by the GOD of peace. Such
persons may be said to slay from contention, as a coward from a man that
bruises him; not from a true and hearty dislike to quarrelling, or love of
friendship.

3. PEACEABLENESS, therefore, as a Christian temper, supposes not only an
hearty love and value for peace, from the amiableness of such a temper in
itself, from the authority of GOD who enjoins it, in imitation of the example
and Spirit of Christ, who set us the brightest pattern of it, and from the
valuable purposes it serves in the world and church; but also, zealous and
unwearied endeavors to maintain as peaceable disposition in ourselves toward
all men, and to promote it among others. A pretense to love peace, while we are
litigious and provoking, impatient, fretful and peevish, stubborn and
refractory, and while we promote the quarrels of others, is the vilest and
basest hypocrisy.

4. THE Apostle tells us, If it be possible, as much as in us lies, to follow
peace with all men. This plainly supposes, that, however we ought zealously and
sincerely to endeavor it, and to let nothing fail on our part, in order to
obtain this universal peace with mankind, yet the thing may be often impossible
to us; and that, in such cases, we cannot charge ourselves with blame.

5. THIS may happen through the perverse humors of those with whom we have to
do. Captious persons often take offense without any occasion, and will hearken
to no reason against their preconceived prejudices. The more you yield to them,
still the more unreasonable are their demands; so that the only way of being at
peace with them, is to break off all intercourse and connection Psalm. cxx. 5, 6,
7.
.

6. WITH others we cannot be at peace without violating our consciences, or
acting contrary to our duty. If we do our duty to them, or upon them, they will
not be at peace with us: But we cannot, we must not buy their peace and
good will so dear, as to sell our own peace with GOD for the purchase. Neither
truth, nor holiness, nor justice are to be sacrificed for peace. To obtain
peace with men, we must not make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience
toward GOD. Consequently, those who in a modest and charitable manner,
maintain and defend their own religious principles against adversaries, -- or
zealously reprove vice, cannot justly be charged with unpeaceableness.

7. To do what in us lies to follow peace with all men, implies, that we humbly
lay aside all pride and prejudice in the pursuit of peace; that we try, and try
and try again, without wearying, as far as we lawfully may, to obtain this
desirable end; and that we labor zealously to promote the peace of our
neighbors, without widening their differences by ill offices Psalm. xxxiv. 14.
. A proud man can never be a truly peaceable man. He who would seek peace and
pursue it, must not be ashamed to humble himself, confess his faults, and make
every needful and reasonable concession, in order to the re-establishing of
peace.

8. THIS Christian grace of peaceableness, is not confined to a few friends, or
to a favorite party, but must extend to all men. Some think, that if they can
live at peace in their families, with their friends, their next neighbors, or
their church, it is immaterial what temper they have to the rest of the world,
those of other islands, kingdoms, or religious professions. But peaceableness,
as a Christian grace, arises from a principle of universal love and charity to
ALL MEN, and therefore has ALL MEN for its object. As we are to love ALL MEN,
and do good to ALL MEN, so, as much as in us lies, we are to live peaceably
with ALL MEN; and for this purpose, our Savior teaches us to consider every
man as our neighbor, and every true Christian in the world, be he of what
denomination he will, as our brother. To this purpose,

9. WE should be careful to behave inoffensively to all men 1 Cor. x. 32.
. A peaceable temper will restrain us from insolence, rudeness, injurious
reflections, and outrageous passions toward others: It will engage us to study
men's tempers, and be tender of using such innocent freedoms, with passionate
persons, as might be no temptation to others who are of a milder temper. It
will restrain us from acting the busy-body, by intermedling unnecessarily in
the affairs of others, or prying into their secrets with a design to reveal
them, whereby they are provoked and others inflamed. It will also engage us for
conscience sake to give unto all, in their several stations, that honor and
respect which is due to them, and the neglect of which might be just matter of
offense 1 Timothy i. 13. Prove. xxvi. 20. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 11.
.

10. A TRULY peaceable man is slow in taking offense: slow to wrath. It is
amazing how many disturbances and contentions happen in the world, by
apprehending offenses where none are either meant or given. A peaceable person,
will be loath to suppose that an affront is designed against him; he will be
ready to put the best construction on doubtful words or actions; nor will he
over-rate a real offense, or be willing to resent it in a hasty and rigid
manner.

11. A PEACEABLE man is not implacable, but is desirous to regain and
re-establish peace as soon as possible. Peace is his element; the very temper
and complexion of his soul; and therefore, when a breach happens, he watches
and lays hold of the very first opportunity of reconciliation; finding himself
unhappy while in a state of variance with his neighbor Matthew. v. 23, 24 Luke
xvii. 3, 4.
.

12. A PEACEABLE man will rather put up with many smaller injuries, than
proceed to the rigor of justice, or commence lawsuits, which are not only
expensive and tedious, but almost ever widen the breach, inflame the angry
passions, and procrastinate and protract the wished for term of reconciliation
Matthew. v. 39, -- 41.
. ABRAHAM affords us a fine example of a peaceable temper. Genesis xiii. 8, 9.
.

13. WE should be most assiduous in cultivating peace and good will, with such
with whom we are most nearly connected, such as our families, neighbourhoods
and churches; for, as from these, we have daily temptations to anger and
contention, so our strongest guard should be placed where the greatest danger
lies. Besides, the maintaining and promoting of peace in these connexions, is
the surest way of promoting our own duty and happiness, and that of others
around us.

14. ABOVE all, Christians are under the highest and most inviolable
obligations to be at peace with one another, by the laws and motives of their
holy religion. They are the children of the GOD of peace; the disciples of the
Prince of peace; peace is the bond of union among themselves; Christ has
bequeathed his peace to them, and, if they are Christians indeed, they are
animated and aided by the Spirit of peace and love: Besides, by an unpeaceable,
strifeful, contentious temper, they at once belie and disgrace their
profession, and injure the interests of their common Christianity 1 Cor. xiv.
33. 2 Cor. xiii. 11. Ephesians. iv. 2, -- 6. James iii. 17.
.

15. AN unpeaceable temper is a carnal, mischievous, diabolical temper 1 Cor.
iii. ^. James iii. 14.
.

16. IT is always the fruit of pride, ambition and passion James iv. 1.
.

17. IT is a temper which brings continual disquietude and torment to a man's
self.

18. ON the contrary; a peaceable temper is an happy temper, and attracts the
regard and esteem of all.

19. IT is the distinguishing temper of heaven, and a necessary qualification
for that blessed place and state Isa. lvii. 2.
.

ESSAY XLI. Of a MERCIFUL TEMPER, and its opposites.
1. MERCY, is a kind, compassionate, sympathising concern for the miserable,
which prompts to a readiness to help, relieve, or at least alleviate their
miseries, when it is in the power of the merciful, and fit and right to be done.

2. AS there could have been no place for the exercise of the divine mercy,
unless misery had made its entrance among creatures; so, nor could there have
been place for the exercise of mercy between man and man, if mankind were not
miserable.

3. MERCY, as it is a Christian virtue, must have its seat in the heart and
temper; therefore, we are commanded to "put on bowels of mercies." It is also
like all other Christian graces, a fruit of the Spirit; a part of that image of
GOD reinstampt upon the fallen soul, in conversion. -- There may be a
counterfeit appearance of mercy in the actions, from ostentation, or base and
unworthy designs, where there are no bowels of mercies, but rather a cruel or
unfeeling disposition. The Apostle puts the highest outward appearance of a
merciful disposition which can be well conceived, and yet supposes, that the
person may be wholly void of the grace of mercy itself 1 Cor. xiii. 3.
.

4. A MERCIFUL disposition, where it is, will give evidence of itself by
outward correspendent actions. A pretense to a merciful disposition, where
there is no outward fruits of it, when proper opportunities offer themselves,
is the vilest mockery; and is finely exposed by the Apostles James and John
James ii. 15, 16. 1 John iii. 17, 18.
.

5. THERE may be a very merciful disposition in the heart, where the person who
has it, has it not in his power to give very convincing proofs of it, by his
actions. However, where it is, it will prompt a person to do all that he can to
give proof of it. He will, at least, pity and sympathize with his suffering
fellow creature, and what he can do more, he will do it to relieve him. Now, if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted of GOD, according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not 2 Cor. viii. 12.
.

6. MERCY, as a Christian grace, has its first and chief respect to men's
souls; the troubles and miseries which they suffer, and the dangers to which
they are exposed by sin: And indeed, this concern for the misery of men's
souls, is the chief character which distinguishes Christian mercy, from mere
humanity. How many good natured men in the world, whose hearts bleed to see a
fellow creature in bodily pain or misery, and who would go almost any lengths
to relieve him; yet have no mercy on their own souls, or the souls of their
fellow-sinners, but would see them go to hell, and help them thither, without
the least attempt to prevent it: But Christian mercy bleeds, and is moved
chiefly by the misery and danger of human souls; does all that it can to
instruct the ignorant, and to reclaim the wicked and erroneous; -- and what it
cannot do itself, it rejoices to see done by others, and gives every
encouragement in its power, to designs and endeavors to reform men's manners
and save their souls, that they may be plucked as brands out of the burning. --
Noble proofs and examples of this merciful disposition, we have in Lot, David,
the Prophets, and especially in Christ and his Apostles.

7. MERCY is not confined to the soul, but reaches to the whole man. Here it
strikes in with humanity, and improves it; weeping with them that weep, and
looking not only at its own things, but also on the things of others. It pities
and sympathizes with the pains and diseases of others bodies; the troubles and
perplexities of their minds; their wants and necessities; their disasters and
disappointments; their oppressions and afflictions. And when in its power, it
labors to mitigate all these afflictions, by drawing out its soul to the
hungry; by clothing the naked; by helping the sick; by pleading the cause of
the oppressed; by administering counsel to the perplexed, and comfort to the
sorrowing and afflicted. And whereas, mere humanity only does these things from
instinct, and to ease the anxiety of the mind on the sight of distress; -- the
merciful Christian does them from love to his neighbor, from a consideration
of duty, and from obedience to the authority of GOD.

8. BUT a merciful disposition is seen in its greatest luster and advantage,
when it pities and forgives persons who, by injurious treatment to ourselves,
are wholly at our mercy, and upon whom we have it fully in our power to glut
our revenge; yea, when we may do so under the color of justice. This is
God-like mercy indeed! But.

9. IT belongs to Christian wisdom and prudence to judge, to whom, and how far,
such acts of mercy should extend. That lenity which would prompt us to give up
our rights upon all occasions to lawless men, might often be of mischievous
consequence: -- It might often tend to harden sinners in their vices, and
embolden them to treat others as they have done us, with hopes of impunity. By
forgiving a man who attempts my life, I may procure the murder of other
innocent persons. By pardoning and giving liberty to a robber, whom I have
caught breaking open my house, and pillaging my goods, I embolden this villain
to rob my neighbor's. Nor is it in all cases proper or prudent for a man to
forgive personal injuries, without legal satisfaction and examplary punishment.
Acts of lenity and mercy to offenders, should always consist with a proper
concern for the public good, and our own personal safety.

10. CHRISTIAN mercy, however, is always sorry for the authors of injuries, and
heartily wishes their repentance and eternal welfare. It will never admit of
cruelty or revenge against an offender. If his crime will admit of it, it is
willing to forgive him, upon proper marks of repentance. If punishment is
necessary, it would have it to be of the mildest and gentlest nature, that the
offense will admit of; and it pities the person of the guilty sufferer, and
would rejoice if the punishment might be wholly remitted; -- having nothing at
heart but the interest of human society, virtue and justice; and, like GOD,
taking no pleasure in the misery of sinners.

11. THERE is also ample room for the display of mercy, in the exaction of
debts. If the debtor is fallen into poverty by accidents or misfortunes, it
will bear with him, if able; or if able, and circumstances allow, will remit
part or whole of the debt: Or, if he is even bankrupt by his own fault, and
therefore, justly deserves to suffer as a criminal, yet it will consider the
necessitous circumstances of his innocent family and connexions, and will remit
what it can on their behalf.

12. THOUGH mercy should extend to all in these instances; yet it will be shown
in the first place, and in the highest degree, to those whom GOD and nature
has connected most intimately with us; such as our families, relations and
friends: For, it would be a preposterous disposition, and not Christian mercy,
to pity and help strangers, while our own household, kindred and friends were
disregarded by us, in their misery. -- Above all,

13. OUR Christian brethren claim a peculiar part in our bowels of mercies. If
one member suffers, all the members should suffer with it. We are to bear one
another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

14. OUR heathen slaves are proper objects and excellent tests of a merciful
disposition. Their case and state is allowed to be very pitiable and miserable
upon almost all accounts. They often provoke us, and needs must. They are, in a
manner, entirely at our mercy, and their very lives in our hands. They are our
fellow creatures, and might and should be our Christian brethren. They are
GOD'S creatures, and our neighbors, whom we should love as ourselves. And
surely, if a merciful man, will be merciful even to his beast, much more ought
he to be so to his human slave! -- It may therefore be depended on, that those
who have no pity for their slaves, but are of an unfeeling, cruel, merciless
temper toward them, are strangers to this grace.

15. THIS is one of the most amiable and GOD-like of all the Christian virtues,
being that temper by which we do, in a most eminent manner, resemble and bear
the image of the blessed GOD, and his Son Jesus CHRIST; who forgive us ten
thousand talents, and are merciful to the evil and unthankful.

16. IT is declared, that they Shall have judgment without mercy, who show no
mercy James ii. 13.
; and, That if we forgive not men their trespasses, neither will GOD forgive us
ours. With the merciful, (says David) GOD will show himself merciful; and
blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain the mercy of GOD Psalm. xviii.
25. Matthew. v. 7.
.

17. IT needs not be added, that a merciful disposition, is one of the most
amiable and endearing accomplishments in a man, and stands the fairest chance
of rendering him universally beloved by his fellow creatures.

18. LET us then, as the elect of GOD, holy and beloved, put on bowels of
mercies.

ESSAY XLII. JUSTICE between MAN and MAN.
1. JUSTICE is a very extensive virtue, and implies a right and fit temper and
deportment toward all beings to whom we stand any ways related, with whom we
are any way connected, and with whom we have any concern. In short, It is to
render unto every one his due. And, in this general view, it may be called,
integrity, uprightness or righteousness.

2. IF we act justly toward GOD, we shall love, reverence, and esteem him
supremely, and above all things; we shall believe, obey and trust him without
reserve, and we shall worship and praise him, according to his glorious
perfections.

3. IF we are just to the holy angels, we shall love them as our
fellow creatures; as the subjects and servants of our Redeemer; as pure, holy,
and benevolent beings; and, more particularly, as ministering spirits sent forth
to minister to them who are heirs of salvation, and as deeply and
affectionately interesting themselves in our good, and in our Redeemer's glory.

4. IF we are just to our fellow men, we shall love them as ourselves; we shall
sympathize with, and help them in their wants and afflictions; we shall
conscientiously abstain from injuring them in their persons, families,
reputation, or interests; we shall deal fairly, truly, heartily and equitably
with them in all dealings and transactions of life; we shall perform to each of
them the honors, duties, or services, which of right belong to them, according
to the various relations in which they stand to us, and we shall do what we can
and ought to promote both their temporal and eternal welfare.

5. IF we are just to ourselves, we shall prefer our souls to our bodies;
eternity to time; and the favor of GOD and eternal happiness, to all the
alluring, deceitful offers of sin. We shall be humble, patient, meek, modest,
just, charitable, self-denied, and every thing else which we ought to be.

6. BUT as justice between man and man, is that branch of equity or
righteousness, which we are here to consider, it may be most beneficial to take
a view of that excellent rule and measure of it laid down by our Savior,
Matthew. vii. 12. Therefore, all things, whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye even so unto them.

7. THE measure of our acting toward others, here proposed, is not what they
actually do to us, but what we would they should do to us. Yet this is the
measure by which most men act toward their neighbors: They render evil for
evil; railing for railing, etc. Nor will they do good to those who will not do
good to them. Nay, many think themselves justified in cheating others, because
they first cheated them. But this is retaliation and private revenge, not
equity. The gospel has taught us a quite different rule of acting, and denies
to Christians the right of private revenge, farther than self-defence requires
Luke vi. 31, -- 35. Romans xii. 19, -- 21.
.

8. IT is not in all cases, lawful to do unto others, what we would they should
do unto us, were we in their circumstances, and they in ours, without
presupposing the lawfulness or fitness of the action. A criminal might be glad
that his judge would acquit him; but could not reasonably expect it. A drunkard
would be glad that his neighbor would intoxicate him, yet he ought not for
that reason to make his neighbor drunk, because it would be unlawful. A poor
man might be glad if his rich neighbor would give his whole estate to him; yet
how could he reasonably expect it?

9. THE spirit of the precept is plainly this: In all our transactions with our
neighbor, we ought, laying aside prejudice and partiality, to suppose
ourselves in our neighbor's place and circumstances, and he in ours; and then
we should attentively consider what we might reasonably and lawfully expect
from him, if he were in our place, and we in his; and accordingly, we should be
the same to him in our thoughts, words and actions, as we would have him to be
unto us, if the tables were turned.

10. WHERE self^s^^ess and prejudice keep the possession of the mind, men will
never act right upon this rule; for, where these are, we shall ever expect more
from others, than we would do unto them, if our circumstances were changed. How
common is it to see persons make very free and merry with the failings of their
neighbors and their families, and think they have a right to do so without
giving offense? Yet when it falls to their turn to be so treated, they resent
highly, and perhaps justly, the same treatment from their neighbor. How many,
who in their necessity, have no bounds in their expectations from their
neighbors, and never think they do enough for them; yet have no bowels of
compassion for the poor, when the tables are turned, and they become rich. All
this proceeds from selfishness and prejudice; a want of considering what is
right and sit to be done.

11. AS to the excellency of this rule, and our obliga^^ons to conform to it,
they are both self-evident. It is founded on the sameness of nature in men, and
their natural equality. The relative and accidental differences between men,
are small in their own nature, and very transient and changeable. He that is
now a king, may be soon a subject: The master may soon be a servant: The rich
may soon be poor; and the honorable may fall into dishonor and contempt. I
may need that justice or kindness from my neighbor tomorrow, which he demands
from me today. It is plain then, that there should be one common rule or
measure of justice and equity for all men. If it is unjust to keep two kinds of
weights and measures, one to buy with, and the other to sell by; it is surely
equally unjust that I should have one law for myself, and another for my
neighbor.

12. THIS is a rule of justice which has obtained among all nations, it being a
clear dictate of reason, and of the law of nature, -- Not to do to others what
we would not bear from them; and to do to others, in all cases, what we would
reasonably expect from them.

13. AS this is a rule, the equity of which is so clear and self-evident, that
none can dispute or deny it; so it is easily carried about with a man in his
memory; and an honest man of the weakest judgment can easily and quickly apply
it, on the most sudden emergencies. Most arts and sciences are so tedious and
intricate, that they are hard to learn, and difficult to retain. The artist and
mechanic can do little without his books and instruments. -- But this art of
doing jusly depends only upon one short single rule, easily retained, and not
easily forgotten. In short, to act justly in all cases for ordinary, needs only
a single honest appeal to the heart and conscience, by the light of this rule;
All things whatsoever ye would that others should do unto you, etc.

14. THIS is the law of the prophets: It is a short and comprehensive summary
of all the directions recorded in scripture, how one man should behave toward
another: For, as that precept, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself, is the
fulfilling of the whole law, in the duty of Christian charity; so this is the
fulfilling of the whole law in the matters of justice and equity.

15. THE use of this precept extends to the whole of our intercourse with our
fellow creatures, and to all our thoughts and words about them. It would
prevent all rash, uncharitable and censorious opinions and judgments of our
fellow creatures, and all injurious actions toward them. -- It would lead us
to usefulness and inoffensiveness in conversation; to integrity and rectitude
in all our dealings and commerce, and to a right method of treating those who
need our compassion or kindness. It would regulate our temper and conduct under
provocations, and teach us a just and charitable way of speaking and acting
toward those who differ from us in their religious or other sentiments. --
And, it would teach us a just and equitable conduct to superiors, inferiors,
and equals.

16. THE excellency and usefulness of this rule, show us the great importance
of self-acquaintance and reflection, on which it is founded, and by the medium
of which it must be practiced on.

17. THE equity of this great law and measure of justice, proves to a
demonstration, the holiness, justice, and goodness of GOD'S laws; how far they
are from deserving the character of being hard and grievous impositions,
tending to deprive us of our natural liberty. He who acts and lives justly,
acts and lives according to the law of his nature, which is the law of eternal
reason: -- And what does the Lord thy GOD require of thee, but to do justly, to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy GOD.

18. WE should pray without ceasing, that GOD may write this law on our souls,
and keep it ever in the thoughts of the imaginations of our hearts, so that we
may never swerve from this universal rule of righteousness.

ESSAY XLIII. CHRISTIAN HOPE.
1. THE Christian hope is a firm expectation of that future and eternal
happiness, which GOD has promised to his faithful obedient people, upon a
rational and well-grounded persuasion, that they have complied with the terms
of his gracious covenant.

2. THE object of Christian hope is the divine promises, contained in GOD'S
word; for, it is upon his word that he causes his servants to hope: And it
ever presupposes, a firm faith in these promises. -- Christian hope, therefore,
is ever built upon faith, and can reach no farther than its foundation: For, we
cannot rationally hope for, or expect that which we do not believe that we
shall receive.

3. I HAVE said, the object of Christian hope is the divine promises; though it
may be rather said to be the blessings contained in the divine promises, the
chief and most comprehensive of which is, GOD himself, as the chief good of our
natures, the comprehensive sum total of all our happiness; and therefore it is
said, by way of eminence, "That our hope may be in GOD," as the ultimate object
of it 1 Pet. i. 31.
. For, if we pursue every promised blessing or happiness to the source of it,
we will find it centered in GOD, and flowing from him.

4. CHRIST is also sometimes called our hope, as the channel of all divine
blessings to us, and the great promulgator and revealer of the divine promises.
And we are said to abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost;
because, as he is the worker of faith, so of hope, in the hearts of Christians;
bearing witness with their spirits, that they are children and heirs of GOD;
confirming their rational inferences as to the goodness and safety of their
state; persuading them of the power and faithfulness of GOD, and the certain
accomplishment of his promises, and sweetly assuring their hearts, so as to
raise them above tormenting fear, anxious doubtings, and distracting despair.

5. THE primary foundations of Christian hope, as well as of Christian faith,
are the unchangeable truth and almighty power of GOD. -- He cannot lie, and he
can do all things which are the objects of power; consequently, he can neither
deceive our faith nor disappoint our hopes. Whatsoever therefore GOD has said
or promised, we can never confidently enough expect and hope for, nor firmly
enough believe.

6. MEN may be strong in the Christian hope, giving glory to GOD; that is, they
may firmly believe the truth of his word, and the sure accomplishment of his
promises to his people, while they may be very doubtful of their own state, and
so be deprived of the joy of hope: For, as hope supposes faith, and faith rests
upon a divine promise; while we cannot clearly and rationally apply this
promise to ourselves, we cannot yet hope for the accomplishment of it to
ourselves. -- Yet we may clearly see our title to the promised blessing on
condition we did but truly believe and apply the promise. Hence it clearly
follows, that our hope must ever keep pace with the evidence of our title to
the promised blessing. Where we have no rational evidence of this, we can have
no rational hope; and according to the strength of our evidence, such will be
the strength of our hope.

7. HENCE it is also clear, that all the hopes of wicked men, and even of men
(however sober, moral, and orderly in their lives) who are yet without any
rational evidence of their being truly religious, are mere wicked, groundless
presumptions, which only serve to keep up their fatal security, and to render
their damnation the more certain and the more dreadful: For, how dreadful must
it be for those men to find all their towering airy hopes, piercing them like
broken reeds, and breading under them like a spider's web, only to render their
fall into endless misery and despair the deeper and more distressing?

8. HENCE it appears, that despair, is a more promising symptom in wicked men,
than the most confident hopes. And that the foundation of a true Christian hope
in all such, must be laid deep in an utter despair of ever seeing the face of
GOD in mercy, while they continue void of true religion, and under the power of
wicked habits.

9. CHRISTIAN hope is distinguished from worldly hopes, by the excellency of
its objects, and the stability of its foundation. Its principal object, as we
observed, is GOD, and an eternal state of glory and happiness; in his presence,
wherein we shall be conformed to the image of his Son; and its foundation is
the divine power and faithfulness; so that it is a sure, glorious and blessed
hope. But all, all sublunary hopes are mean in their nature, uncertain in their
attainment, and deceitful and unsatisfying in their fruition and enjoyment.

10. TO hope for the perfection of our nature, and the full enjoyment of GOD,
is a glorious hope, which by its very nature, tends to raise, purify and refine
our souls, and which when enjoyed, will leave us not a single wish or desire
ungratified: But earthly hopes; the hopes of honors, wealth, power, or sensual
pleasures, are of a low, mean nature, and naturally tend to depress and
sensualize the mind: And, even when they come to be attained, (...) do they
disappoint us? How little do they please^^ (...) us? How often have we cause to
be ashamed of them? And how often does the very fruition of them turn out to be
our greatest evils and vexations? that it is peculiar to the nature of the
Christian hope, that it (...) not ashamed, because the fruition exceeds our
(...) expectations.

11. HOW ^^ce^ain are we of the attainment of our earthly (...) and desires?
How many have eagerly and dilige^^y pursued ^^ne one trifling earthly hope
(that, suppose, of being rich, or being honored or respected) all their days,
and yet could never attain it, but have been per^^^^ally crossed and
disappointed in all their expectations? This is the reason why young men are
generally more sanguine in their hopes and expectations from the world, than
old men, who, by a woeful experience, have so often found all their hopes from
it f^^strated, and that all its most gay and promising appearances, are
extremely flattering and deceitful. But it is the distinguishing
characteristick of the Christian hope, that it is a sure and certain hope; and
those who enjoy it know it to be so. Although the objects of the Christian's
hopes, are future and unseen, yet his hope gives them a presence and reality,
and therefore the patient waiting for this hope, is attended with joy and
comfort. The interval of a thousand years did not weaken Abraham's hope of the
promised Messiah, but he rejoiced to see his day, because he knew that GOD was
faithful who promised. Such also is the Christian's hope of future glory;
though he has not yet seen it, yet believing, he rejoices in assured
expectation of it, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

12. HOPE is exceeding suitable to our present state. -- In heaven it is
excluded by full enjoyment, and in hell, by utter despair: But, as we are here
in a middle state, between the two worlds; -- as we are now in a state of trial
and expectance, it is perfectly fit that we should be governed and influenced
by the hope of a future reward, which tends, on the one hand, to quicken our
diligence in our proper work, and on the other, to preserve us from slothful
despondency.

13. HOPE is highly necessary to the Christian in the present state. Surrounded
with temptations both terrifying and alluring, to draw us away from our duty,
the hope of salvation is our helmet and breastplate; tossed with the storms of
doubts, perplexities, worldly cares and persecutions, hope is the anchor of the
soul, sure and steadfast, that enters within the vail, and, being fixed on the
immortal shore, gives the soul security and rest; harrassed with sore
afflictions, and passing through the dark valley of the shadow of death, what
could support us but the Christian hope? This was the boast of the afflicted
Apostles: They gloried even in tribulations, rejoicing in the hope of the glory
of GOD; they reckoned their greatest sufferings not worthy to be compared with
the glory to be revealed; looking at things invisible and eternal, they knew
their light and momentary afflictions wrought out for them a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. This was the support of the martyrs under all
their sufferings in the cause of Christ: Blessed are ye when all men persecute
you: Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your rew^^d in (...) Matthew. v.
^^
. in short, hope sets all the springs of Christian activity to work; sweetens
the most difficult and self-denying duties of religion, and is that which only
can make men eminent, useful and diligent Christians.

14. TRUE Christian hope, may be distinguished from carnal confidence and
presumption, chiefly by its quickening and purifying effects. He who has this
hope in him, purifyeth himself as GOD is pure. If we believe the many great and
precious promises of the gospel, and are caused to hope for their
accomplishment, We shall cleanse ourselves from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of GOD. When a man's hopes do not
purify his soul, nor make him diligent in his Christian duty, but leave him
wicked, careless and slothful, it may be depended on, that they are mere
groundless presumptions; those hopes of the hypocrite which perish. The
Christian hope is a lively hope; the inward spring of fervent desires, reviving
joys and zealous endeavors. The man who has got a believing view of the high
prize of glory, presses on toward it, with unremitting diligence, and purifies
himself, because he knows none but the pure in heart, will receive it, or can
enjoy it.

15. THE Christian hope tends to purify, cleanse and sanctify all who have it,
in various ways; as, (1.) By the objects of it, which are the pure and holy
GOD, and a state of pure and holy blessedness. Indeed, none but such as are in
some measure purified from their lusts and sins, can entertain or please
themselves with such a hope at all: Whence it follows, that no wicked persons
ever had, or can have a true Christian hope. -- (2.) Those who have this hope
are purified by the frequent and serious thoughts of GOD, and heavenly glory.
As the object of their hope is spiritual and divine; so the frequent
contemplation of it purifies and raises their affections from the earth, and
transforms them into the same likeness: As the Christian's hope, treasure and
heart are in heaven, so it is likely his conversation will be there also.

16. EVERY man will have his hope; but it behooves us to see to it that our's is
rationally founded, and a true Christian hope, that will attend us to death,
and to the gates of heaven. -- If it purifies our hearts and quickens our holy
diligence, it will never deceive us; but if not it is counterfeit; and, what
will become of the hope of the hypocrite, when GOD takes away his soul?

17. HOW great will their fall be, who fall from a conceited and imaginary
heaven into a real hell? Hope, of all the passions, is the most calm and quiet;
but when disappointed, the rage, impatience, sorrow and despair of hell must
follow. Let us therefore examine our hopes, least this should be our sad case.

ESSAY XLIV. The NATURES and PERSON of CHRIST.
1. AS Christ is the end of the law, the sum and substance of the gospel; the
pearl of great price; the author, finisher and object of our faith, trust.,
hope and dependence; our Redeemer, and through GOD, our portion and salvation,
it well becomes us, as Christians, to grow in the knowledge of, and acquaint
ourselves well with this glorious person: For, the better we know him in his
natures, person and saving offices, the more clear and comfortable will be the
grounds of our faith and trust in him; the better shall we love him, and the
more cheerfully shall we follow and obey him.

2. HE is, indeed, a most wonderful and mysterious person; but the holy
scriptures have revealed to us a number of his glories, and given us many rich
materials for the growing knowledge of him, and acquaintance with him.

3. HE is represented in one view, as the wonderful councellor, the mighty GOD,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; the Word which was in the
beginning with GOD, and which was GOD; the Creator of all things, visible and
invisible, by whom all things are and consist: -- And, in another view, he is
represented, as the Son of man; the man Jesus; born of a virgin; appearing in
the form of a servant, and in the likeness of sinful flesh; smitten, wounded
and bruised, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; hungering, thirsting,
weary, sorrowing, bleeding and dying; made of a woman; made under the law, and
the like; -- which plainly proves, that in this mysterious person, there are
two widely different and distinct natures; not only a soul and a body as in
other human creatures, but a truly divine and human nature; by the one of which
he is truly and really GOD, and by the other truly and really man.

4. SOME heretics supposed, that the divine nature of Christ served as a soul
to his human body, and therefore, that he had no human soul, distinct from his
Godhead, or divine nature: but this is an error against scripture, which
assures us, that Christ had a true human soul, distinct from his divine nature,
and that this soul was sorrowful even to death. Now it would be impious to
suppose, that the GODHEAD or divine nature of Christ, suffered, or felt any
uneasy passion. Besides, unless Christ had had a proper human soul besides his
divine nature, as we have, he could not be truly and properly man, as we are;
and therefore not a proper Kinsman-Redeemer.

5. CHRISTIANS are divided about the time of the creation of Christ's human
soul: The generality holding that is was created and joined to his body in the
virgin's womb. But others, with Dr. WATTS, hold, that it was created the first
of all creatures; and that the divine nature of Christ, acting by it, created
all other worlds and creatures; conversed with Adam in paradise; was made
visible to the Patriarchs, and was the grand agent in transacting all the
affairs of man's redemption in all ages of the world; and really descended from
heaven, divested of the glory and happiness it had there enjoyed from the
beginning, and humbled itself, by entering into the virgin's womb Col. i. 15.
-- 18.
.

6. THESE two different natures are so closely united as to make one glorious,
mysterious person; by which means Christ's wonderful humiliation and
condescension appears in uniting his glorious divine nature to our mean and
frail humanity; and his wonderful love, in exalting our nature to a personal
union with the Deity: -- Yet these two natures do, and must continue distinct,
unbl^nded and unmixed. By virtue of this wonderful union, the man Jesus is
spoken of as GOD, and the divine word, which is GOD, is spoken of as man.

7. THAT our Lord Jesus Christ was, and is possessed of a truly divine nature,
or that he is truly and really GOD in one of his natures, appears against
Socinians and Arrians, from the works that he did; the divine names and
attributes ascribed to him, and the divine perfections which were displayed in
his miracles. As we heard above, he is expressly called GOD; the the brightness
of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person: He is said to have
been in the beginning, that is eternal; to have been before Abraham was; to
have created and made all things. He is styled the Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end; the searcher of the hearts and trier of the reins of the
children of men. He is omnipotent, for he raised the dead; turned water into
wine; created bread and fish in the eater's hands, and made all things, visible
and invisible. He is omniscient, for he knew the very thoughts of men. He is
omniscient, for although in heaven, he promises to be where ever two or three
of his disciples are; and to be every where with his servants to the end of the
world. He is therefore the proper object of divine worship, and accordingly all
the angels of GOD, are commanded to worship him. Stephen worshipped him; St.
Paul swore by him, and all sinners are commanded to believe in him, to rely and
trust on him, and to honor him, even as they honor the Father; therefore he
is, in one of his natures, properly GOD Heb. i. Isa. ix. 6. Col. ii. 9. Rev. i.
8. -- ii. 23. -- iv. 11. -- v. 11, etc.
.

8. THAT our Lord Jesus Christ was also truly man, is evident, not only from
his conception and birth, and from his being called the seed of the woman, the
son of David, the man Jesus, and a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs;
but also from every proper character of humanity appearing in him. He increased
in knowledge, and in stature, as other men; he cat, drank and slept; was hungry
and weary; felt all the innocent passions of humanity in all their strength and
delicacy; spoke familiarly of his soul and body, his flesh and blood; suffered,
and at length bled and died; -- thus giving full proof, that in one of his
natures, he was, in all respects, like unto his human brethren (sin only
excepted) and therefore well qualified to be a mere^^ul high priest, and
compassionate elder brother, and kinsman-redeemer; the seed of the woman, and
the Son of David, after the flesh.

9. AS the human nature of Christ was to be the propitiatory sacrifice for the
sins of the world; therefore, it behoved to be perfectly pure and immaculate,
without any taint of inherent or derived corruption (otherwise it could not
have been a sacrifice acceptable to GOD, nor available for us;) therefore, it
pleased GOD to secure the sinless purity of this nature, by its being conceived
and formed by the holy Ghost, in the sanctified womb of a pure virgin. Whence
he was called the holy child Jesus; the lamb of GOD, without spot or blemish;
holy harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners.

10. THERE is no reason to doubt but that the human soul of Christ was the
noblest spirit which GOD ever created, and his body the most perfect human body
that ever was formed; seeing, that in this consecrated temple the DEITY himself
was to reside, and all the fullness of the GODHEAD, to dwell bodily. So that
there is no doubt but this glorious dignified man, considered only as a man,
was, and is the most glorious creature of GOD; and is filled with all the
graces and perfections, whereof a limited, created nature is capable; seeing
that it was by and through this nature, that GOD was to display and manifest
himself to men.

11. AS the divine nature of Christ was not capable of suffering, so neither
was it capable of humiliation, exaltation or reward. CHRIST'S divine nature
could not properly be said to humble itself; to empty itself of its glory, or
to be rewarded for its services, or exalted to a higher degree of glory, or
blessedness, or dominion, than it enjoyed before; therefore, wherever we find
these changes of state ascribed to Christ in scripture, we must understand it
of his human nature, which indeed humbled itself in the work of our redemption,
and has obtained a glorious exaltation and an increase of dignity and
blessedness, as the reward of its humiliation, labors and sufferings Philip.
ii. 5, -- 11. Psalm. ex. 7, etc.
.

12. ALTHOUGH there was a perfect union of the Word or divine nature of Christ
with his human nature, while upon earth; yet the manner and degree in which the
divine nature communicated the perfections of power and knowledge to the human
nature, is, to us, a great mystery. It appears, that Christ, as a man, grew up
from his childhood, and increased in knowledge as other men do: Yet, no sooner
does he enter upon his public ministry, having been thereunto set apart by the
baptism of John, and the anointing of the holy Ghost, but we find him possessed
of amazing, even infinite knowledge and almighty power. From which it would
seem to appear, that during his private life, the divine nature of Christ
communicated little else to his human nature, than sanctifying knowledge and
holy influences, and that his communications became more unlimited and
extensive, as the great work of his ministry required.

13. SUCH is the glorious object of our faith and hope. From which it appears,
how worthy he is of, and how justly entitled to our trust, homage, love and
adoration; For, whatever is amiable, excellent, or a perfection in GOD and man,
he possesses in the most eminent degree. The offices which he sustains and
executes, as our Mediator, are to be considered below.

ESSAY XLV. CHRIST, our PROPHET.
1. ALTHOUGH Christ is, in one of his natures, GOD equal with the Father, yet
in his complex person, as GOD- man-Mediator, he is the Father's righteous
servant, whom GOD has provided, appointed, sanctified and sent into the world,
on the great and gracious errand of redeeming lost sinners; fulfilling and
honoring his law, and promoting his glory; to whom he has (for a time at
least) entrusted the whole management of his mediatorial kingdom; committed all
power and judgment, and made him the head and governor of all things, of all
the scenes of providence, all the kingdoms of the world, and all the angels of
heaven and devils of hell, of which he is the glorious king and head.

2. IN this his mysterious, complex person, as GOD- man-Mediator, he more
especially sustains and executes three offices for the good of the church, and
for the salvation of sinners: -- As sinners are naturally ignorant and blind in
the knowledge of GOD, and in the way of serving him acceptably, in compassion
and relief of this misery of our fallen race, he is become our prophet to
instruct us: -- As they are guilty and subject to condemnation and wrath, and
have no access to GOD or power with him; in this our guilty and rebellious
state, he is become our Priest to atone for our sins by the sacrifice of
himself, and to plead, pray and intercede for us with his justly offended
Father, and to procure us access to him with humble boldness and favorable
acceptance with him: -- As we are by nature bond slaves of satan and of lust,
having numberless enemies which seek our perdition, and neither power nor skill
to oppose them, he is graciously become our King, not only to give laws to our
consciences, but to captivate our hearts to himself; to rule and reign within
us by the power of his Spirit, and having thus rescued us from the power of
inward enemies, to lead us on to the conquest of the world and the devil, with
all their stratagems and temptations.

3. THE prophetic office consists chiefly of two parts: 1. To reveal, preach
and inculcate those truths and doctrines of GOD, which are necessary to the
salvation of sinners: And, 2. To foretell, with certainty, future events,
relative to the church of GOD, or the members of it, or others, which seemed to
depend, for their existence, on uncertain contingencies and events. This was
the twofold business of both the Jewish and Christian prophets; and in the
Jewish church, there were certain established marks of trial, whereby the true
prophets, were distinguished from the false. Now, in both these respects,
Christ is the prime and chief prophet of the church; nay, he may be said, by
way of eminence, to be the only true Prophet of GOD; because all other true
prophets were only his organs or instruments, (if I may so speak) deriving all
their revelations, predictions, gifts and graces, from the light of his Spirit,
communicated to them, illuminating, inspiring them, and speaking and writing by
and in them.

4. WHATEVER revelations, or divine inspirations, Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Job, David, or the prophets and the patriarchs of old, were favored with, or
have recorded in the scriptures, for illuminating, converting and building up
the church; -- or, if any Heathens of old, Socrates, Heraclitus, or any of the
Heathens at this day, have obtained, or do obtain, any just and spiritual
revelations of GOD or his will, or any supernatural light or assistance, all
has proceeded from the Mediator, that fountain of light and grace; that light
of the Gentiles and glory of his people Israel; -- that true light which
lights every man, that comes into the world; -- who, having been from
eternity in the bosom of the Father, and having learned of him, declares him
to his creatures; -- for none has thus known the Father, but the Son; the word
and wisdom of GOD, and him to whom the Son reveals him. In particular, we are
assured, that "all scripture is given by inspiration of GOD;" and that the
prophets spoke in old time, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, which is the
Spirit of Jesus.

5. ALTHOUGH the Mediator was thus the Prophet of GOD in all ages; yet he was
more visibly, sensibly and solemnly inaugurated and set a part to his prophetic
office, at his baptism by John, where, instead of being anointed with oil (a
ceremony used of old at the instalment of propliets, as well as of priests and
kings) he was anointed with a plentiful effusion of the holy Ghost, with which
he was filled without measure; and all men commanded to hear him, under that
character, by a voice from heaven; which seems a surprising, literal fulfillment
of Moses's prophesy concerning him Deuteronomy. xviii. 15, etc.
.

6. IT may be observed, that Christ, in the course of his ministry, remarkably
fulfilled and discharged the two branches of the prophetic office, mentioned
above: 1. He revealed the will of GOD to men for their salvation; and, 2. He
foretold future events.

7. IN the first of these branches, Christ the Mediator, reveals the will of
GOD to men, for their salvation, both by his word outwardly, and by his spirit
applying the word to their hearts. In this respect, how far has he the
pre-eminence above all other prophets? Other prophets can only declare GOD'S
will to men, from the revelation of Jesus Christ, and after this have no more
that they can do, not being able to dispense the quickening Spirit, without
which the outward declaration of GOD'S will, is ineffectual to the salvation of
sinners: But this divine Prophet is not only the original revealer and declarer
of GOD'S will, but also the dispenser of the Spirit, by which he can, when he
pleases, reveal GOD'S will inwardly to the hearts and consciences of sinners,
and make it operative and effectual there for their salvation.

8. BY his personal ministry, and that of his Apostles, he as the Father's
righteous servant, has revealed all truth and duty necessary to the salvation
of sinners. He expressly declares, that what he spoke and taught was from the
Father, and not of his own will John xii. 49.
. He unfolded and cast a new light on the dark prophetic parts of the old
Testament, and showed how all the prophesies and sacrifices there shadowed
forth, prefigured and pointed to himself and gospel blessings, as the substance
Luke xxiv. 27.
. He made those things clear to us, which were not well understood by the
prophets who revealed them, by the secret impulses of his Spirit 1 Pet, i. 12.
. He declared the spiritual nature of GOD, and that worship he requires, and
vindicated the purity, spirituality, and vast extent of the divine law, from
the false glosses, and corrupt interpretations of the Jewish teachers Matthew. v.
vi. and vii.
. He distinctly revealed the way and method of our recovery through himself;
gave a clear revelation of a judgment to come, and of an eternal state of
rewards and punishments; thus bringing life and immorality to such a clear
light by his gospel, as it had never appeared in before, by former divine
revelations.

9. AS a Prophet, he foretold many future events, (which is deemed the highest
proof of the prophetic spirit and character) such as Peter's denial of him; the
treachery of Judas; his own sufferings, death, and resurrection; the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the Jews forty years before it
happened Luke xii. 44. -- xxi. 24.
: The surprising success and spread of his own gospel mark xvi. 17, 18.
: The sufferings and persecutions of his followers, and the degeneracy and
corruption which should prevail among them. And, as all these things have
punctually come to pass, we have abundant ground to believe, that the
prophesies contained in the book of his revelations to his servant John, and
those prophesies, which by his Spirit, he enabled his other Apostles to utter,
concerning the fall of Antichrist; the restoration of the Jews; the gathering
in, and conversion of the Heathen nations; the glory of his church in the
latter days, and the final destruction of our earth by fire, will, all of them,
be accomplished in due time.

10. CHRIST also as a Prophet, teaches not only by outward revelations, but by
the inward operations of the Spirit on the souls of man. He not only spoke as
never man spoke; but his words (when he pleases) are spirit and life; working
powerfully and effectually in them who believe. He opened the heart of Lydia,
that she attended to the things spoken by Paul. He opened the understandings of
his disciples, that they might understand the scriptures, and caused their
hearts to burn within them, by the sacred energy of his Spirit, while he opened
to them the scriptures concerning himself. Thus does he, when he pleases, make
the light of his glorious gospel shine upon the hearts of sinners: enlighten,
transform, and renew them, and thereby give free course to the word of his
grace, and glorify it: And to him we are to look, as our Prophet, for those
inward teachings, and effectual illuminations of his Spirit, to make his word
effectual and saving.

11. CHRIST the Mediator was foretold by Moses, as a Prophet, like unto
himself, to be raised up, to the Jews, from among their brethren, to whom they
should hearken without gainsaying or reserve. And the resemblance between HIM
and Moses is remarkably striking in many respects: (1.) In their birth; they
were both Israelites; both born in obscurity: (2.) In their early exposure to
great risks, dangers and hardships: (3.) Both come to their own with special
commission and miraculous power from GOD, and their own received them not
kindly, but evilly requited them, and perversely rebelled against them: (4.)
Both were exceedingly meek in their temper; exposed themselves to much hardship
and self-denial in their ministry; were zealous, diligent and faithful in all
GOD'S house: showed great signs and wrought great miracles to confirm their
missions: (5.) Both were authors of a new dispensation of religion, and
Mediators between GOD and man: (6.) Both had near access to, and familiar
converse with GOD, and peculiar marks of his favor; and had their revelations
immediately from GOD, and confirmed them with the seal of miracles: (7.) Both
fasted forty days: (8.) Both were very zealous for the LORD GOD of hosts, and
affectionate lovers of an ungrateful people: (9.) Both were rulers and
deliverers, as well as Prophets; the one from the captivity of Pharaoh and the
bondage of Egypt; the other from the captivity of the devil, and the bondage of
their own lusts: (10.) Both chose seventy disciples.

12. LET us see to it, that we hearken to this Prophet, which speaks from
heaven. Let us hear with submissive attention, both what he speaks to us
outwardly by his word, and inwardly by the voice of his Spirit Acts iii. 23.
Heb. xii. 25. Matthew. xvii. 5. Heb. i. 1.
.

ESSAY XLVI. The PRIESTLY OFFICE of CHRIST.
1. THE Aaronical priesthood, was a type of the priesthood of Christ, though
the priesthood of Melchisedec, was a more perfect one: Consequently, the Jewish
highpriests, and Melchisedec, were types of Christ.

2. TWO qualifications were necessary to the Jewish highpriests: (1.) That
they should be of the same nature with their brethren Heb. v. 1. 2. -- iv. 15.
. -- (2.) That they should be solemnly separated and set apart to their office,
by the appointment of GOD, and by consecretion or investiture Heb. v. 1, 4.
. Now Christ, the great high priest of our profession, had both these
qualifications Heb. ii. 14, 17. -- v. 5. 6, 9, 10.
.

3. AS the priest's office, is founded on the fallen state of human nature, and
appointed in relief of the guilty, it consists of two parts or branches: (1.)
To offer sacrifice: And, (2.) To make intercession.

4. SACRIFICES were of two kinds under the law: Either eucharistical, as
acknowledgments of mercies; and these were commonly called gifts, and were
unbloody, consisting of the fruits of the earth, etc. Or, they were expiatory,
or atonements for sin, and these were called sacrifices, and were always
bloody; for, without shedding of blood, there was no remission of sins.

5. CHRIST, in this sense, was a true and real sacrifice. His soul was made an
offering for sin. Thus he is called, The Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins
of the world: -- Our passover sacrificed for us: -- The Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world: -- The propitiation for our sins, and the sins of the
world: -- He was offered to bear the sins of many Heb. ii. 12, 26.
.

6. THE entire human nature of Christ was the sacrifice which he offered up for
the sins of the world. -- He not only gave his soul or life and offering for
sin, but bore our sins in his own body on the tree: -- And this sacrifice
received its dignity and value from his divine nature, which offered the human:
For he, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself up without spot unto GOD
Heb. ii. 14.
.

7. BY this sacrifice has Christ made an atonement for sin; satisfied the
demands of divine justice; confirmed and illustrated the truth, holiness and
justice of GOD, and made his law exceeding honorable; purchased our forfeited
blessings and lost happiness; opened a way for the mercy of GOD to all the
sinful race of Adam; and procured the pardon of sin, the divine favor, the
gift of the Spirit, and eternal life for every soul of man who will fall in
with his saving design, and take him as their Prophet and King 1 John i. 7. 1 Timothy ii. 5. Gal. i. 4. Heb. ix. 12, 15. 1 John ii. 1, 2. Numb. vi. 23. Deuteronomy.
xxi. 5.
.

8. THE intercessory part of the Priest's office, was to offer up the prayers
of the people and to intercede for them. The high priest entered into the
holiest of all on the great day of atonement or expiation, and blessed the
people in the name of the Lord; sprinkling the blood of their sacrifices before
the mercy-seat. Christ, in like manner, having offered himself a sacrifice of
atonement for our sins, has entered into heaven, in the virtue of his most
precious blood, to offer up the prayers of his people, and make intercession
for them Heb. ix. 12, 24. Romans viii. 34. Heb. 7. 25.
.

9. AS Christ was of the tribe of Judah, not of Levi, from whom the Aaronical
priesthood descended, so he is said to be a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. The resemblance between the priesthood of Christ and that of
Melchisedec is remarkable in several cases: (1.) In the ancientness of that
order, and Abraham's paying tithes to Melchisedec, and being blessed by him,
although the father of the Aaronical priesthood. (2.) Melchisedec was a priest
upon a throne, or a king as well as a priest; so was Christ. (3.) The original
and descent of Melchisedec was peculiar Heb. vii. 3.
; so was Christ's: For, who can declare his generation? (4.) The priesthood of
Melchisedec was not encumbered with such a ritual, and so many ceremonies and
carnal commandments and ordinances, as that of Aaron; but was more simple and
catholic: So is Christ's.

10. THERE are several things in the priesthood of Christ peculiar to itself;
as, (1.) He was perfectly sinless, although he transacted with GOD for sinners.
(2.) Other priests offered brutal sacrifices, but Christ offered himself. He
was both the Priest and the sacrifice. His divine nature was the altar on which
he offered up the humanity. (3.) Other priests offered many sacrifices, even
daily; whereas he offered but one sacrifice of infinite value and virtue. (4.)
Other priests and sacrifices, were ineffectual for expiating or taking away
moral guilt: They made not him who did the service, or for whom it was done,
perfect as pertaining to the conscience: They only took away the guilt of
ceremonial pollutions or omissions: But the sacrifice of Christ takes away the
guilt of all sin. This is the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the sin of the
world.

11. THE priesthood of Christ, and his most expensive sacrifice, should put us
in mind of our guilty state, and of the malignant nature of sin; seeing there
could have been no remission of the very smallest sin, without the sheding of
the blood of Christ.

12. HENCE we see the wonderful love of GOD in preparing such a Priest and
sacrifice, for our guilty race, and not sparing him, but freely giving him up
for us all: -- As also the amazing condescension and philanthropy of Christ, in
becoming a sacrifice and victim for the ungodly; for sinners; for enemies.

13. HOW freely, cheerfully, and assuredly should we depend on the merit of
such a sacrifice as this? And how entirely give ourselves over to the guidance
of such an high priest? How should we reverence him? And with what humble
confidence enter into, and approach the holiest, in the new and living way
which he has consecrated by his blood? How compassionate and faithful is he?
How sensible of our infirmities, and how ready to pity them, and able to help
them or remove them?

14. WHAT encouragement have we to faith and prayer, having such an
intercessor? Our prayers are poor and imperfect things, but if offered up by
him, they will prevail and be accepted. How happy also are all those for whom
he intercedes? They must be safe and happy; for GOD ever hears his beloved Son:
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Happy Peter! and equally
happy and safe all for whom Christ intercedes Heb. x. 19, -- 26.
!

ESSAY XLVII. The KINGLY, or REGAL OFFICE of CHRIST.
1. KING is a relative term, and supposes subjects and a kingdom. Christ's
kingdom is twofold; either natural, founded in his eternal DEITY and GODHEAD;
or mediatorial, given to him of the Father by commission Psalm. ii. 6. Isa. ix.
6, 7. Dan. vii. 13, 14.
.

2. THE subjects of king Jesus are, either his friends or his enemies. All were
indeed, at first his enemies; but many are made willing subjects in the day of
his power; and those that continue enemies, shall be broken to pieces with a
rod of iron.

3. IN considering those whom he subdues, and the kingly power he exercises
over them both in subduing and ruling them, the following things may be
observed; (1.) All are at first of satan's kingdom; children of wrath; they
serve diverse lusts, and walk according to the course of this world, often
indeed, they meet with checks of conscience; make resolutions; seem inclinable
to submit to his government, and say, I go, fir -- but go not; the love of sin
still prevailing and rendering them children of disobedience. -- (2.) CHRIST
gives them to understand, that they are rebels, and that if they persist they
must inevitably perish Job ix. 4. Luke xiii. 3. -- xix. 27.
. -- (3.) He makes a proclamation of mercy and pardon to them if they return
and submit; both by his word and Spirit John vi. 37. Rev. iii. 20, 21.
. -- (4.) He shows them by his word and by his Spirit, that it is both their
duty and interest to submit to him as their rightful Lord and Sovereign; and
that in vain they expect the benefits of his priestly office, if they submit
not to him as a king Psalm. xiv. 11, etc.
. -- (5.) He convinces them of the infinite advantage resulting to them from an
entire subjection to his laws and government: That they shall be pardoned; --
received into favor; -- made kings and priests to GOD; -- kept from falling;
and presented faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy. --
(6.) He gives them the laws of his kingdom; -- shows them the duties they must
perform, and the sins they must watch against; that they must be diligent, --
zealous, -- fervent and persevering; that they must wait upon him, and not draw
back by apostasy. And, (7.) He holds out both the crown and the cross: he shows
them what they may expect to lose and suffer in his service; that they must be
willing to part with, and forego all things for the crown of glory in
reversion; that they must be willing to deny themselves; to be hated of all
men, and to lose life itself in his cause and in fidelity to him.

4. WHEN sinners become the subjects of Christ, they cast themselves at his
feet, -- not desiring to capitulate or stand on terms; but give him (as a
victorious prince) a blank paper to make his own terms; resolved, cheerfully
and without reserve, to subscribe them. And this subjection is accompanied with
the greatest love to, and desire after Christ, -- his person and service, as
well as his rewards; with a consent to be the Lords to all intents and
purposes, -- both to serve, to suffer for, and to enjoy him. It is accompanied
with a firm reliance and dependence on him, for all needed grace and help to
fulfill their duties and obligations; -- with resolutions of a perpetual and
unremitting warfare against all his enemies; and with zealous endeavors to
promote the interests of his kingdom, and gather subjects to it.

5. AFTER the subjection of sinners to Christ, he rules him in love; gives them
needed succors and comforts in his service; -- corrects them for their sins;
-- supports them under temptations and sufferings; -- helps them to conquer
their enemies, and leads them on to triumph and a crown.

6. IN his government of enemies, he sets bounds to their power, malice and
wickedness; -- he turns the evil designed by them, into good; and in the end,
he will exercise kingly power and authority over them, in taking vengeance on
all that have continued incorrigible.

LASTLY, Christ has exercised his kingly office in all ages of the world and
church; but he will show it more gloriously in the latter days, when the world
will be full of his dutiful subjects.

ESSAY XLVIII. The due IMPROVEMENT of TIME.
WHEN we shall have considered the shortness of time; its vast importance, and
pointed out the best methods of redeeming and improving it, we shall have
exhausted this subject.

1. THE shortness of time, both absolutely and relatively considered, is so
very obvious to persons who are the least capable of reflection and
observation, that little need be said of it: For, (1.) How small a thing is the
aggregate of time, making one total sum of all its distinctive periods, from
the first birth of created things, to the final dissolution of this world and
the present scene, and till time shall be computed no more? A few thousands of
fleeting years will sum it all. Yet a little while, and the mighty angel shall
lift up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever,
that time shall be no more. (2.) If we consider time as relative to us, or the
measure of our duration; what a span, what an hand-breadth, what a cvpher is
it? How quickly are our years gone, as a tale that is told? A day, how quickly
is it gone; and yet how few are the days of the years of our lives? That mighty
thing a year, which looks so large and extensive before us, how swiftly does it
pass, and how short and trifling does it look in retrospect? Yet how few are
the years of most lives? -- How quickly does a clock tell a second? While we
pronounce the word, it is expired? Yet a short row of figures in seconds, makes
the sum of a long life. When we see the heap of sand in the upper lobe of an
hourglass, and mark how slow it wastes, by running into the lower; we are apt
to say, surely this will be long in expending; yet within the short compass of
an hour, all is fallen! Just such is the life of man. Look forward upon fifty
or sixty years, it seems an immense heap of time; but the fleeting transient
minutes quickly run it out, and bring it to a period. (3.) How comparatively
small is the period of most human lives? It is supposed, that not every tenth
person reaches the age of thirty years. The two thirds of our species die in
infancy, and these are happy? But from that age up, in which all are moral
agents, and accountable for their actions, how many graves do we find of every
length? How many die of every age? The thread of time (short at the very
longest) is suddenly, and alas! unexpectedly cut off, and they drop into their
graves, like unripe fruit.

2. THE necessity of improving time, will appear not only from the shortness of
its duration, but from its vast importance. (1.) Time is our only opportunity
both for doing and receiving good, as accountable creatures. Opportunity is
absolutely necessary to the accomplishment of every great and good design. If
we had all the will and all the power in the world, to do good for ourselves or
others; yet without opportunity, we can do nothing. The being that never
existed, (if such an ideal being is fairly supposable) could never have any
capacity or opportunity, either of enjoying or communicating good. The being
which exists but a short time, though it may have the noblest capacities for
doing and receiving good, yet its opportunity is only as its time. It is owing
to the infinite goodness of GOD, that he ever created any being at all, or gave
unto them capacities and opportunity of giving and enjoying good. The simple
existence of every living creature which GOD has made, is an intentional
favor and mercy to that creature; for, to exist, is to be in a capacity for
happiness. It is better even for ants and the most trifling insects to be, than
not to be; for, even their short and insignificant duration, is filled with a
happiness suitable to their nature. But, where sense, reason and immortality
are supperadded, to such beings, the intentional goodness of GOD is even
infinitely greater; because, to such beings, GOD has not only given nobler
capacities of communicating and receiving a higher and more sublime happiness,
but has also given them an opportunity of enjoying this happiness eternally!
O, then, under what high obligations are men, are human creatures, to GOD, even
for his creating goodness, who has taught them more than the beasts of the
field, made them wiser than the fowls of heaven, stamped upon their nature the
image of his own immortality, and made them capable of eternally enjoying the
chief good? But, (2.) We must consider that the only opportunity which we have
of ensuring the eternal enjoyment of the chief good of our natures, is our
present, scanty, uncertain span of time. When the curtain of time falls, all
opportunity ceases of either doing or receiving that good, which will be
eternal in its fruits, consequences and rewards: For, when the night of death
comes, no man can work the rewardable works of GOD; there is no knowledge,
device or repentance in the grave. The reason is, because we are probationary
creatures, and our present precarious existence, is the only time of our trial.
Hence it appears, how all-important time is to us, as our eternal all depends
on the manner in which we improve our short allotment of it. It is our seed
time for eternity. It is our working, laboring day, wherein we are to lay up
in store a good foundation for the time to come. It is our only opportunity of
providing for, and ensuring a blessed immortality. (3.) Hence it will follow,
that as this is the talent which gives worth to all other talents, every day or
hour of it abused, or not used in subserviency to our eternal interests, though
it may not totally deprive us of eternal happiness itself, yet it will
certainly lessen the degree of that happiness. He who, with one pound, gained
ten, was made ruler over ten cities; and he who gained but two, was made ruler
only over two cities. A plain proof, that a vigorous improvement of this, and
every other talent, will be proportionably rewarded; and that the more slothful
and idle servant (though he may not be altogether unfaithful) will fall short
of the reward which he might have obtained by diligence and circumspection.

3. AS to the best methods of redeeming and improving time, the following may
be worthy our attention: (1.) An habitual daily consideration of, and attention
to the great importance of it, as it stands connected with our eternal
interests.

(2.) DAILY serious reflections on its exceeding shortness and uncertainty, and
how quickly our day of probation may be at an end. And this will naturally lead
us,

(3.) TO consider the greatness of the work we have to do in this our day, and
how dreadful the consequences will be to us, if we should leave it unfinished.

(4.) MOST will find it worth their serious enquiry, whether they have ever, to
this day, considered for what purpose they have had time, and been sent into
this world; and whether they are not yet to learn the very meaning of the
improvement of time.

(5.) PERSONS who have a due sense of the importance and value of time, will
employ as little of it as possible in absolute idleness; or, which is the same
thing, in busying themselves in matters, which contribute nothing to their own
advantage, or that of other persons, much less in mischief.

(6.) TIME employed in worldly business and cares, is not always misspent or
thrown away; for, while we have bodies, families, and the poor and needy to
care for, lawful worldly industry, will ever be an essential part of our
Christian duty. But that the time spent in worldly business be lawfully spent,
it is necessary that we thus spend it in subserviency to a higher, nobler end;
that we do it to the glory of GOD, and in obedience to his command, and that
the world is kept down from the highest place in our affections.

(7.) ALL time spent in diversions and amusements is not lost or squandered;
for, it is needful, that the mind be unbent and the spirits refreshed, in order
to fit both for more important duty. But diversions should never exceed this
measure. A person who is running for a rich prize, should not stop and turn
aside to catch butterflies.

(8.) WHERE persons are conscious, that they have trifled away the prime of
life in idleness; dissipation and pleasure, and in a wretched unconcern about
their highest interests, it becomes them to be more frugal and parsimonious of
time than others; -- first, because much of it is already guiltily squandered
and lost, and in all probability little remains, -- and secondly, because they
have peculiar need to redeem their time by a double diligence in well doing,
that, if possible, they may make some amends for former trifling.

(9.) A RIGHT contrivance and planning of business, would be an excellent
expedient for the better improvement of time: -- So much of every day to the
duties of religion; -- to the improvement of the mind; -- to worldly cares and
labors; -- to company; -- diversion, etc.

(10.) DILIGENCE and dispatch in business, is absolutely necessary to make the
best of time.

ESSAY XLIX. The CONSIDERATION of ETERNITY.
1. ETERNITY, what a vast, amazing, unfathomable, incomprehensible subject! It
is the existence and duration of him, who is incomprehensible to all but
himself! -- As we quickly lose all our ideas in considering immensity, or
infinite space; -- so we are equally lost in considering eternity, or infinite
duration; and no wonder, since they are in some sort attributes of the
incomprehensible JEHOVAH, which none by searching can find out unto perfection!

2. THE word aion, which we English eternity, signifies perpetual existence;
and since we are finite creatures, it is little wonder, that we should be
incapable of forming any adequate conception of it: For, it is not to be
supposed, that a being who has begun to exist, should be able to conceive the
nature of a being who is self-existent, and never had a beginning of existence.

3. ETERNITY is generally distinguished into two periods (if one many be
allowed so to express it;) the first, is the eternity of duration which is
past, and which can be attributed only to GOD, who alone possesses it all: The
second, is that eternity of duration which flows on endlessly from any given
period of time. This last eternity is not peculiar to GOD, but is attributed
also to all immortal creatures, such as angels, men and devils; who, though
they have begun to exist, yet never shall cease to be.

4. THIS last eternity, I mean the eternity of creatures, is not necessary like
the duration of GOD'S existence; but wholly depending on the power and will of
GOD, who has been pleased to form some of his creatures, for an existence
co-eval with himself; i.e. to will and cause their duration to be eternal.

5. HOW wonderful a being is that GOD, who is eternal in his duration, and
immensely unlimited in his existence! his duration and his being admit of no
limits, and therefore admit of no kind of comparison with the existence or
duration of any created being.

6. HOW entirely are we dependent on GOD, from whose necessary existence, we
have borrowed our limited existence; and by the very power of whose will, we
continue to exist every moment?

7. THOUGH absolute eternity belongs only to GOD, yet as we share in all that
eternity which is before us, and must be happy or miserable through this
endless duration, according as we spend our present time; it follows that we
should live here below, with a constant habitual view and regard to our eternal
existence and duration.

8. THIS will enable us upon all occasions to form a proper estimate of things.
For, if any temporary or momentary pleasures, honors or gains, which would rob
us of eternal happiness, should solicit our attention or pursuit, they ought,
at all events, to be forborne and rejected. -- And if any temporary sufferings
or self-denials, which are necessary to our eternal happiness, should fall in
our way, they should at all adventures, be endured rather than we should run
the risk of suffering eternal torments: For, whatever of joy or pain is
temporary, bears proportion to that which is eternal. And it is a maxim of
eternal reason, that lesser inconveniences ought always to be preferred to
greater; and that to sell eternal happiness for the pleasures of a moment, yea,
of ten millions of years, argues desperate folly.

ESSAY L. The DUTY of MASTERS of FAMILIES.
MASTERS of families are pretty universally allowed to sustain the offices of
prophets, priests and kings in their own families, and if we borrow our ideas
of the number and importance of the duties they owe to their families, from the
sustaining these three offices, their duty, in this relation, will appear very
weighty and important indeed.

1. IT is the business of a prophet to instruct; it is therefore the business
of masters of families, to instruct their families, not only in the maxims of
prudential wisdom, but more especially in the doctrines and duties of religion.

2. IT will not excuse parents in the neglect of this duty, that they are
ignorant themselves. They ought to learn and get knowledge for this very
purpose. And there are few, but if they take due pains, may acquire knowledge
enough, to give good, wholesome and necessary instructions to their households.

3. IGNORANT and unlearned parents should be the more conscientious in
providing proper instructors for their families.

4. PARENTS may instruct their families very usefully and effectually by
setting before them blameless, virtuous and religious examples; and the best
instructions without this, will be very ineffectual, if not pernicious.

5. IF it is the duty of kings to give good laws, and to preserve good order
among their subjects; masters of families are obliged to do this in their
families.

6. THE orders and regulations of masters of families, in their families,
should not be more numerous than is necessary, lest they be neglected or
forgotten through the multiplicity of them; and their necessity should be made
apparent, that they may be enforced with firmness and resolution.

7. In the government of a family (a society often made up of persons of very
different tempers and dispositions) great prudence, skill and attention are
needful, and above all, the divine counsel and assistance.

8. IT appears to be of ill consequence for the ruler of a family, to give way
to the petulency or unreasonable humors of a capricious domestic; as this
would be implicitly giving up his prerogative, and fostering ill humors, and
rebellious, lawless dispositions in the subject. It belongs to Christian
prudence to determine when this rule ought to be dispensed with, in order to
prevent greater evils.

9. LENITY, compassion and mercy, should be tempered with firmness, steadiness
and resolution, in him, who would govern a family well. Tyranny in little
domestic societies, is odious; and too much lenity may produce great evils.

10. BODILY punishment should be the last expedient used to reform or correct a
domestic offender; and prudence alone can point out the proper time and place
for this.

11. THE good example of a king is equally binding with his laws, and far more
encouraging and alluring; so it is in the master of a family.

12. THE chief duties of a priest, are sacrifice and intercession. This points
out the obligation of praver, as a duty incumbent on all masters of families,
in their own families.

13. CHRISTIAN masters of families who neglect this duty habitually, act worse
than the heathens did, who daily offered prayers and sacrifices to their gods.

14. IF family prayer and instruction are duties incumbent on all Christian
masters of families, which they indispensably owe to GOD, and to the souls of
their children and other domestics; and if the morning and evening are the
proper seasons pointed out for the profitable performance of this duty; then
the masters of families who, for ordinary, or very often, spend their mornings
and evenings abroad from their families, are not in the way of their Christian
duty, and their families do probably lose more by this absence and neglect,
than they can gain by the cares and worldly labors of the day.

ESSAY LI. How CHRISTIANS may and ought to resist TEMPTATIONS, and make them
turn out to the BENEFIT of themselves and others.
1. AS we are, by nature, and by the prevailing influence of evil example,
exceeding prone to sin; and as temptations to it are scattered thick in our
way, so to resist temptations to evil, is certainly the most important and
difficult part of our Christian duty and warfare.

2. THE difficulty of our resisting a temptation, is in proportion to our
natural or habitual proneness to the particular sin to which we are tempted,
and the strength or weakness of our virtue or grace, taken together.

3. A PERSON who has been, by nature and custom, and may still be by
constitution, exceeding prone to some particular sin; yet, by improvement in
virtue and strength of grace, may much more easily resist a temptation to that
particular sin, than another person of weaker grace and feebler virtue, who is,
and has been naturally and constitutionally less inclined to that sin.

4. SOME very vicious and wicked persons, have little inclination to some
certain sins, and therefore are in less danger of being tempted to commit them
than others of much better dispositions upon the whole; yet whose unhappiness
it is, to be naturally prone to those sins, and easily drawn into them.

5. WORLDLY-MINDED, covetous persons, are not easily tempted to the sins of
idleness, gaming, squandering or luxury, and but seldom have any strong
propensity to carnal, sensual indulgences, or the sins of the flesh; because,
all these oppose and tend to destroy their ruling passion, which is the love
and pursuit of gain. But they are prone to the sins of lying for gain, of
cheating, overreaching, injustice, usury, cruelty, oppression, and immoderate
worldly cares, hazards and toils; and against these their strongest watch and
guard should be placed: For, it is but a vain and empty boast, for a covetous
man to say, I am no gamester, prodigal, or spendthrift; no careless, slothful
man. The world knows he is not, cannot be such, in consistence with his ruling
passion; and that care, diligence and frugality in him, are only ministers and
handmaids of his capital vice.

6. ANGRY, envious, malicious, revengeful persons; as also, vain, boasting,
ambitious men, are seldom prone to the sins of the flesh, or the soft, social,
effeminate vices. This is not the complexion of their nature, or the cast of
their corruption. Their ruling passion leads them to other objects, and renders
them an easy prey to a different set of temptations. Therefore it is little
virtue in them, to be free from a set of sins, to which they have naturally so
little propensity.

7. THOSE who are extremely addicted to the sins of the flesh, are often free
from the sins of pride, vanity, ambition, malice, covetousness and revenge; --
not because they are virtuous, but because they have no strong biass toward
these sins, and because the current of their corruptions hurries them another
way, and leads them to different objects. It would therefore be an empty boast
in such a person, to say, I am just in my commercial dealings, easy in my
temper, affable in my deportment, kind, charitable, and good natured to all, --
because the opposite sins do not clash or interfere with his ruling passion.

8. THE first rule for resisting temptations, is to be perfectly acquainted
with our ruling passion, and our strongest propensities to vice; -- or in the
more nervous language of scripture, To know, every man, the plague of his own
heart; the sin which does most easily beset him; his bosom sin, his beloved
lust. Every man has some sinful passion or propensity which predominates above
the rest. And to know this sin, is to have discovered our greatest enemy, and
our greatest weakness.

THE second rule is, to set the strongest guard upon the weakest avenue of our
soul, and against our most powerful enemy.

THE third rule is, to hold no deliberate parley with this prevailing lust, nor
ever to spare or give it quarter, when it makes its assaults however artfully.

THE fourth rule is, to shun those thoughts, companies and amusements, which we
have found by experience, to prove fuel to the sins which most easily beset us.

THE fifth rule is, to pray and strive in a special manner against these
particular sins.

THE sixth rule is, to consider the danger of falling under the power of these
enemies, and the difficulty of recovering. To all these may be added, a

SEVENTH prudential maxim, namely, to keep ourselves diligently employed in
some honest calling or business, which is a very powerful preservative against
temptation, as it cuts off those occasions and opportunities which minister to
it.

9. TEMPTATIONS may turn to the advantage of those who resist them many ways:

(1.) As conquest over them is a proof of grace, and ground of joy.

(2.) As every conquest of this kind strengthens the habit of virtue; gives
courage and magnanimity to the soul, and renders future victories over the same
enemy more easy.

(3.) As it renders those who have thus conquered, the better qualified to
advise and succor those that are tempted, and gives them a better right to do
so.

(4.) As it shows us experimentally the power put into our hands to conquer
other temptations, and tends to humble and give us remorse for not having
availed ourselves of this power upon former occasions.

(5.) As it tends to beget gratitude in us toward that Being, by whose grace
alone we are enabled to conquer any temptation; and teaches us on whom to rely,
and whence to draw our succors, in future trials. And,

(6.) As it is beating the devil in the field of battle, depriving him of a
triumph, and discouraging him from farther attempts upon us.

10. WE may make the resisting of temptations useful to others, in various
ways: As, (1.) If we are solicited by any particular person to sin, to resist
his solicitation, may be a means of reforming him. (2.) On some occasions it
may be lawful and useful to encourage and support the tottering virtue of
others, by informing them of our success; or by relating it under the
fictitious name of some third person: As, I have known a person, who was thus
tempted, and thus resisted. (3.) If the temptation is of a public kind, he who
resists it, preaches a loud sermon against vice; and it is much if some one or
more, in company, are not benefited by it. (4.) If none for the present are
bettered by such a public testimony against vice, yet it must leave the guilty,
under such a conviction of the power and merit of virtue, as may some time or
other prevail.

ESSAY LII. PUBLIC SPIRIT.
1. PUBLIC spirit, is a generosity of temper, arising from the principle of
universal benevolence, and is directly opposed to a narrow, selfish, contracted
temper, which seeks only its own private interest, pleasure and advantage.

2. A TRULY public spirited person, does not, indeed, neglect himself as an
individual, nor his family, as parts of himself; but he does not live for
himself or his family alone; his generous heart devises liberal things, and
takes pleasure in forming schemes and projects for the good of mankind, with
whose interest he feels his own interest to be closely and inseparably
connected. On the contrary, a selfish person, destitute of the virtue of public
spirit, has his eye chiefly fixed on that dear idol himself (of which he
considers his family as a part.) All his schemes and projects terminate there,
and he takes little or no pleasure in any advantage, or honor, but what comes
in to this dear idol.

3. WHATEVER promotes the public honor or good: whatever scheme brings or
offers benefit to one's country, or tends to promote its credit and reputation
among strangers, gives a peculiar pleasure to the public spirited person, and
he is ready to encourage, support and assist it, to the utmost of his power. If
he has not the talent of projecting such schemes himself, he readily falls in
with them when proposed, and is so far from needing to be prompted to join in
them, that he rejoices in having an opportunity of doing public good, which is
his favorite ruling passion. And if he can do but little himself in gratifying
so benevolent a passion, he labors to encourage others, who are better able.
On the contrary, the selfish man, has a thousand prudential reasons against
consenting to a scheme which might cost him something: It will beggar the
public; it will oppress the poor; it is impracticable; or it will never answer
the end proposed. -- If he is out-voted by a majority, he consents with
reluctance, and is for bringing the terms of expense as low as possible, always
having an eye to self. -- If for shame be is obliged to contribute, the
hesitating manner in which he does it, or the boasts he makes of it, give plain
evidence that he did it unwillingly. -- If the scheme miscarries, or does not
answer the intention, he reproaches and abuses the projectors, and makes this
an argument against all future public spirited projects.

4. A TRULY public spirited person has a real, sensible pleasure in the
prosperity and success of his neighbors, and heartily feels for their
adversity and ill-fortune. It would give his generous benevolent heart a
refined pleasure to see all prosperous, all rich, all healthy, all happy, all
honored and esteemed: -- And when he sees the reverse, he feels for the
calamity of his neighbors, and is himself the less happy amidst his own
health, honor, success and abundance. On the contrary, the selfish man has an
unfeeling heart toward his neighbor. -- Is he happy and prosperous himself?
He hugs and blesses himself in his good fortune: He sacrifices to his own net,
and burns incense to his own dreg. He imputes it to his own industry,
diligence, honesty or integrity, and has no pity for his neighbor's
misfortunes which, according to him, are all owing to some neglect or
misconduct on his part. In short, he feels only for himself, unaffected either
with hearty joy or grief for the good or bad fortune of others.

5. THE public spirit of a place may be pretty certainly inferred, from the
monuments of it in that place. Do we see in a nation or in a neighborhood,
learning, arts and sciences encouraged and flourishing; rich and stately
churches; charity foundations for educating the poor, and healing the sick; the
public roads in good repair and the like; it may be depended on, that public
spirit prevails in such places. -- On the contrary, where public works and
public charities are neglected in places, otherwise rich and opulent, and where
private property abounds, it may be depended on, that there a selfish spirit
and narrow, contracted principles prevail.

6. PUBLIC spirit was cultivated and cherished with the greatest care amongst
the ancient Romans, and had wonderful effects in that commonwealth. It seems
now to prevail much in Great Britain and the British colonies. Wherever true
learning and noble sentiments of liberty prevail, it flourishes. Under the
contrary circumstances, it is starved and perishes. It is at a low ebb among
these Islands, a few only excepted.

7. PUBLIC spirit is a shinning and a useful virtue: (1.) It is the offspring
of universal charity and benevolence. (2.) It is the brightest resemblance of
GOD and his blessed San. (3.) It is the certain mark of a brave, enlarged,
benevolent soul. (4.) It is the parent of noble, generous and useful actions.
-- And therefore, (5.) It is the source of the truest and most rosined delight
and pleasure to those who are possessed of it.

8. THE Apostles of Christ, and those of their successors who propagated the
gospel in foreign nations, at the expense of every thing dear and comfortable
in nature, gave proof of the highest and noblest public spiritedness.

9. NEXT to these, those who charitably contribute to the propagation of the
gospel, stand foremost in the catalogue of the public spirited.

10. THE Christian religion lays down the finest and noblest rules, and the
strongest motives for public spirit; and indeed, a selfish man cannot be a true
Christian.

11. SELFISHNESS is the most despicable of all human vices.

ESSAY LIII. A proper TEMPER and CONDUCT toward ENEMIES.
1. OUR blessed Savior has laid down an express precept to his disciples,
which states and limits their duties toward enemies: But I say unto you love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you, Matthew. v. 44. He
has also enforced this precept, by giving the highest example of obedience to
it, in his own conduct. Yet there is no precept of the gospel, the equity of
which has been more disputed than this, and the impossibility of obedience to
it, more stiffly and publicly asserted.

2. THE reason of the great reluctance of men's minds against this precept
seems to be this, that malice and revenge are the most radical parts of the
devil's image remaining in the minds of men, through their apostasy and the
corruption of their nature; and these together with mistaken notions of
self-preservation, and immoderate self-love, disposed men to imagine, that to
love an enemy is impossible, and to hate him is just.

3. BUT when we speak of the duty of loving enemies, we must carefully
distinguish between the love of approbation and esteem, and the love of
benevolence or goodwill. As to the former, we cannot have it for one who does
not appear amiable to our understanding, even to a child; -- but the latter we
owe, and ought to pay to all men. A parent for instance, is far from approving
a stubborn, refractory, immoral child; yet still his love of benevolence and
good will, shall continue in its full force and efficacy. GOD hates the
workers of iniquity, and is angry with the wicked every day: He cannot
therefore love them with a love of esteem and complacency; yet is he good and
kind to the evil and unthankful; and with such a love of benevolence and
beneficence did he love this sinful, inimical world, as to give his only
begotten Son to it, that whosoever believes on him might not perish, but have
everlasting life Matthew. v. 45. John iii. 16.
. Christ could not surely love with esteem and complacency the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, who killed and stoned the prophets, and were then plotting against
his own life without a cause: Yet how warmly does he express his love of
benevolence and beneficence to them, and even prays for his own murderers
Matthew. xxiii. 37. Luke xix. 41, 42. -- xxiii. 24.
.

4. THE extent and degree of the duties of benevolence and beneficence, either
to friends or enemies, is various, according to merit, circumstances, or
relation. The general scripture rule is, "To do good to all:" -- The
restriction is, to some more than to others, according to a variety of
circumstances and considerations. -- A good maxim in this case, is, to prefer
compassion to an enemy, before a matter of mere generosity to a friend, when we
cannot exercise both together.

5. NEITHER reason nor scripture requires any acts of kindness to our enemy,
which are evidently prejudicial to our own interest, or which might give him an
advantage over us.

6. WE should forgive, and do good to enemies, after the example of GOD and his
Son Romans v. 6, -- 10. 1 John iv. 10.
.

7. WE should forgive them, and consequently do them good, as it is the
necessary condition of our forgiveness from GOD Matthew. vi. 12, 14, 15. --
xviii. 21, 35. Mark xi. 25, 26. Luke vi. 37. -- xxiii. 34.
.

8. BY forgiving and doing good to our enemy, we heap coals of fire upon his
head, and take the most effectual method of recovering and securing his
friendship, from the most winning and engaging motives.

ESSAY LIVE. TEMPTATIONS arising from COMPANY.
1. IT is generally allowed, that we take in most temptations by the ear, or by
the sense of hearing; and if so, we are exposed to numberless temptations in
company: Especially, if we consider, that the eye comes in, in aid of the ear,
and often helps on these temptations.

2. THIS is occasioned by the universal corruption and degeneracy of human
nature, and by the consequent carnal, earthly, impure nature of the passions
and affections, and the ungovernable licentiousness of the tongue which is
actuated by those inward, irregular and impure movements of the soul. Human
society, in its present state, may be compared to a Hospital, where all are
weak and diseased, and where, by a spreading contagion, every one more or less
infects another, and increases his weakness and disorder: So, that every member
of it, is more or less infected and contaminated by others. No two can
associate together, who are in a state of perfect health and soundness.

3. UPON the whole, the wiser and more virtuous our company is, the less will
we be exposed to tempations of any kind; -- and it may happen, that in many
occasional interviews with wise and virtuous persons, all may, upon the whole,
be made better. -- This effect might be expected from religious societies and
conferences, were they rightly conducted. -- But we now chiefly mean, the
common and occasional interviews of mankind with each other, at entertainments,
complimental visits, parties of pleasure, accidential or occasional rendezvous,
and the like, to which we are said to resort for the sake of company.

4. ONE of the first temptations arising from company, which we shall mention,
is to error. It is scarce possible to spend an hour in any company where
religion, morality, or matters of human prudence are the topics, but some
pernicious error is broached and maintained by some, and imbibed and embraced
by others. False maxims are so exceeding common in the world, and so
universally espoused, and adhered to by the multitude, that it is scarce
possible to steer clear of them in any company; and many of them seem, at first
sight, so plausible, as well as recommended by general practice, that the weak
and inc^nsiderate readily swallow them, and he must be a resolute person
indeed, who will dare to controvert them: -- For instance, -- That it is lawful
to hate and persecute our enemy, and take private revenge. That a man is to
study his own ease, pleasure and interest, and the like. These errors though
they may seem, at first sight, of little consequence, yet lead men to the most
pernicious and immoral practices, and confirm them in them.

5. COMPANY tempts to levity. In the gaiety of conversation we are often led
insensibly away from that sobriety and temperance of mind (if we may so speak)
which always becomes creatures in our circumstances. Puns, flashes of wit,
humor, and a thousand hints started in almost every mixed company, intoxicate
and inebriate the mind, and render it volatile and unguarded. And this is most
commonly the case, where good nature prevails, and good cheer abounds; where
the minds of all are opened by mutual love and good cheer, and under no
restraint or reserve. Persons in this situation are often so far hurried off
their guard, as to violate the laws of good morals, either by bearing too hard
upon the weakness or good nature of some person in company; -- by exposing or
ridiculing some absent person, or by smutty jests and double entendres,
offensive to the modest ear, and prejudicial to all. -- And when these come
also to be aided by immodest looks, or gestures, and so, to p^ison the eye, as
well as the ear, -- morality must receive a dangerous would, and corruption be
propagated.

6. COMPANY tempts to profanity. It is very seldom, that matters of religion
are conversed of in company with that decency and discretion which becomes such
subjects. Scripture is often quoted with a levity and indiscretion, which
betrays a great irreverence for it. The great doctrines of religion are
disputed and controverted, with an angry warmth, or a flippant lightness, which
tends to discredit them both in our own minds, and in the minds of others. The
names of GOD and CHRIST, heaven and hell, salvation and damnation, are bandied
about as the meerest trifles. Disrespectful and unbelieving hints are often
uttered, in the heat of passion and discontent, against doctrines or duties,
which we do not like, and which cross the grain of our corrupt nature: All
which tend to destroy our reverence for holy things, an eraze the very
foundations of practical seriousness and piety.

7. WE do not now speak of those companies and societies where profanity, and
irreligion are the professed topics of conversation; nor of those schools of
debauchery and sensuality, where persons meet for the purposes of drunkenness
and lewdness. At such places persons seek temptations, and not temptations
persons. But we speak of those social meetings, which are deemed innocent,
diverting, and even improving, and of the temptations there to be met with, and
guarded against.

8. COMPANY tempts to a sinful mispense of time, in idle and unprofitable
discourse. The danger of company would be still less than it is, if the
conversation could be confined to something rational and profitable of any
kind, though it did not turn much on matters of morality or religion; -- such
as history, geography, the laws and customs of nations, the improvement of
trade, hus^andry, navigation, and the other arts and sciences: But to the
scandal of most companies, the conversation generally turns upon mere
nonsensical bagatelles; degenerates into empty chit chat upon the veriest
trifles, where the hearers have a chance to learn nothing but the most
impertinent nonsense, and where the speakers must run into the same insipid
nonsense, if they would be heard. Thus, much precious time is often thrown away
in those idle words, for which men must give a serious account at the last day;
-- that foolish talking and jesting which is not convenient, by which guilt is
contracted, and a habit of trifling acquired.

9. BACKBITING, calumny and detraction, are other temptations frequently met
with in company. It is of the nature of human corruption, that it drives men
from one extreme to another. If companies are not betrayed into the social and
good-natured vices of levity, dissipation, and intemperate gaiety; or sunk into
the swinish vices of debauchery, drunkenness and lewdness; or carried away by
impiety and profanity; -- they are too generally engaged in the dirty work of
calumny and detraction. The s^bles and weaknesses of absent persons, are put in
the most ridiculous light, and their persons exposed to contempt; -- or their
failings are criticized and magnified, and their characters maliciously torn to
pieces. And while appeals are every moment made to you for the trust and
justice of these slanders, you are put to the sad necessity, either of
quarrelling for your absent friend -- or, which is far more common, of hearing
him traduced in silence, and perhaps, through a weak complaisance, joining
issue with the slanderer, and granting things to the disadvantage of an
innocent, injured person, which your conscience does not approve.

10. THE best methods of shunning the temptations arising from company, are,
(1.) For ordinary to frequent and associate with the best companies: For, man
being a social creature, cannot well be wholly without company. -- (2.) When we
accidentally or on business fall into company of a worse kind, to endeavor as
far as our influence will reach, to give the conversation a profitable, or, at
least, an innocent turn and direction. -- (3.) Where we cannot do this, to be
on our guard against unworthy compliances, and to discountenance, as far as we
can, trifling, profanity and immorality. -- (4.) If we find ourselves unable to
do this, and that we are in danger of sinful compliances, to make our stay as
short as possible. -- (5.) To make reflections after retiring, on the
temptations we have met with, and to fortify our minds against future dangers
of the same kind. -- (6.) To shun, if possible, for the future, those
companies, or kinds of company, in which we have met with temptations too
strong for our virtue and resolution: And, (7.) which ought to have been
mentioned first, To aim our prayers and endeavors against the temptations of
society, and especially of those companies, which, by the nature of our
situation or business in lie, we are obliged most commonly to frequent.

11. SOLITUDE, and a sequestered retirement, as we shall see anon, is no
security against temptations; and man, a sociable creature, could never be
designed for it.

ESSAY LV. TEMPTATIONS arising from SOLITUDE.
1. ALTHOUGH a social life, or a life spent in company, has its snares and
dangers, yet it has its advantages too; and the society of our
fellow creatures, well conducted, may contribute greatly to our improvement in
virtue and happiness. How many noble and useful hints are often started in
conversation, which we would have labored for in vain in the way of private
meditation? How many motives to virtue, and dissuasives against vice? How often
has a tottering resolution been supported and strengthened by a single word; by
a single look or frown?

2. NOR need we imagine, that we can flee from the danger of temptation, by
shunning the society of our fellow creatures; for, there are a number of
temptations which seem almost peculiar to solitude, and which will pursue us to
the most remote and hidden recesses.

3. AS GOD has made man a social creature, and endowed him with social bents,
it appears he is chiefly designed for a social, active life, to give assistance
to, and receive assistance from his fellow creatures; and therefore, that it is
not the duty of men to seek and affect solitude and retirement, unless it be
ocasionally, for the purposes of meditation, self-examination, extraordinary
prayer and devotion.

4. IF it be the intention of GOD, that me should live in society, and employ
their social powers and talents for the purposes of devotion; we may well
suppose that a monkish, recluse life, is against the intention of GOD, and that
he may justly give over men to strong temptations, who thus affect a kind of
life, so contrary to the end and design of their being.

5. IT has been observed, that the first hermits and recluses, did greatly
corrupt Christianity; and that the monks and nuns of later ages, have been,
generally speaking, a very wicked kind of people, infamous for many great
vices: For, by binding themselves up under solemn vows, to austerities which
GOD never enjoined, their corruptions have been the more outrageous, and they
have been suffered to fall into the vilest abominations.

6. IT is remarkable, that the devil pursued our Savior to a wilderness, where
he thought he could more effectually ply his temptations against him, than in
the society of men. And the evil spirit, in the parable, who left the possessed
man, is said to have wandered in solitary and dry places, where he consorted
with many other spirits. Nor is it unworthy of a remark here, that if there is
any truth in w^^^^rast, and the pranks and illusions of evil spirits, they have
generally prevailed in places little frequented and thinly peopled, and have
fled places of concourse in the society of then.

7. SOLITUDE often tempts men to sins, through the advantage of secrecy, which
they would be ashamed to practice in human society.

8. SOLITUDE naturally generates melancholy, and clouds the mind with gloomy
thoughts; thereby darkening and spoiling the judgment.

9. RECLUSES, as they have little society with the world, and know little of
the force of these temptations which accompany a social life, so they are
naturally prone to an over-rigid, uncharitable disposition of mind, and
censorious reflections on the actions and conduct of those who are engaged in
active, social life.

10. THE devil, ever vigilant and active to seduce rational creatures, when he
cannot get the advantage over them, by the temptations which arise from
society, often drives them into sullen solitude; puts them out of temper with
the world, and the proper duties of life, and there pursues them with
blasphemous suggestions, unclean thoughts, and desperate resolutions. And it
has been generally observed, that those whom he drives to self-murder, have
been long haters of society, and lovers of solitude and retirement.

11. UPON the whole. To shun society lest we fall into temptation, is not only
rank cowardice, but also very absurd. There are proper times and occasions when
we should seek solitude, and when retirement is both necessary and useful; but
we should consider the proper duties of our stations as men and Christians, and
never fly society when we have a chance of either doing or getting good by it.

ESSAY LVI. How far CHRISTIANS are obliged to recede from their proper Rights,
and deny themselves some lawful Enjoyments and Amusements, out of Charity to
their weak Brethren, and that they may not lay a Stumbling Block before them.
1. CHRISTIANS, as such, are not abridged of any natural or acquired right as
men and citizens; nor does their religion forbid them and lawful and innocent
enjoyment, or gratification of life, provided it does not fall directly in the
way of some duty of religion, for which it ought to be denied for a time 1 Cor.
ix. 3, -- 7.
.

2. NOT only have Christians such liberty in the LORD, but it is often their
duty to plead for, vindicate and assert this liberty, against those who would
dispute or infringe it; even while, for prudential reasons, or for conscience
sake, they may see it expedient to recede from it, and give it up.

3. THE Apostle, however, gives an important caution in this matter 1 Cor.
viii. 9.
: But take heed, lest by any means, this liberty of yours become a
stumbling block to them that are weak. It is certain, therefore, that this
Christian liberty of ours, may in some instances, be used to very bad purposes;
and things which are lawful in themselves, are not lawful to all men, nor at
all times, -- but ought to be forborne, when, through the ignorance or weakness
of our Christian brother, they may be a means of offending him, or leading him
into guilt. St. Paul speaks of a power or liberty which he and the other
Christians had, to do many things, and yet adds, -- Nevertheless we have not
used this power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of
Christ 1 Cor. ix. 12.
.

4. THERE are, it seems, some instances, wherein the use and exercise of our
Christian liberty, may destroy a weak and ignorant brother. St. Paul, speaking
of meats forbidden by the law of Moses, declares the power and liberty which
Christians have to use them freely: I know, says he, and am persuaded by the
Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of itself; -- yet he adds -- But if
thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably. --
Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died: -- For, through thy
knowledge (of thy Christian liberty, and use of it) shall the weak brother
perish, for whom Christ died: For, when we sin so against the brethren, and
would their weak conscience, we sin against Christ. -- Let no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his brother's way. It is good
neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. But let us follow after the things
which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another See Romans xiv.
and 1 Cor. viii.
.

5. -- (1.) THIS Christian liberty of ours is never to be given up merely to
please, humor, and gratify some at the expense of others. This was the cause
of Peter's base dissimulation, for which his brother Paul withstood him to his
face, and on account of which he declared, that he walked not uprightly
according to the truth of the gospel See Gal. ii. 11, -- 14.
.

6. -- (2.) OUR Christian liberty is by no means to be betrayed or given up, in
order to escape persecution. This treachery seems to have been the chief crime
of the Judaizing teachers, who urged it upon the Gentile converts to be
circumcised, and who themselves observed all the ceremonies of the Jewish law,
that they might pass for Jews, with the Jewish and Heathen persecutors, under
that pretext; and for which St. Paul, so severely reproaches them and their
followers See Gal. ii. 1, -- 6. -- iii. 1, -- 4. -- v. 1, -- 13.
. -- And indeed, all persecution for religion, and among Christians, is founded
on some incroachment on Christian liberty, -- or on imposing some things on the
conscience inconsistent with it.

7. -- (3.) OUR Christian liberty should not be given up to mere peevishness,
humor and caprice. Many persons who know, or ought to know the extent of
Christian liberty, are yet so unreasonable in their humors or unhappy in their
temper, that they will not allow to others the same innocent liberties which
they allow to themselves. or, while they themselves swallow a camel, they lose
all charity and temper with their brother, if he does not strain at a gnat.
Now, to endeavor to please such persons to their good unto edifying, is to aim
at an impossibility. Caprice and contradictory humor can never be pleased,
never be edified. Indeed, every attempt to please it, is to increase the
disorder, and to strengthen its petulancy.

8. OUR Christian liberty ought to be vindicated and adhered to resolutely,
where the giving it up is like to be hurtful to the souls of men, and the
interests of religion, by propagating idolatry and superstition. And in this
case, persons of the greatest note and weight in the church, should be ready to
suffer all things, rather than give it up by base compliance. This was
Archbishop Cranmer's crime. Reformation in religion, and separation from
idolatrous and superstitious communities, can never be accomplished or
justified, but on this principle. Upon this foundation is built the protestant
reformation, and those protestants who still labor to reduce Christianity to
its original and native simplicity, act very commendably on this principle, and
will ever be had in esteem by the proper judges and true friends of Christian
liberty.

9. CHRISTIAN liberty, is in many cases to be given up in compassion to the
ignorance and inveterate prejudices of others, until this ignorance and these
prejudices can be removed. The apostolic decree Acts xv. 22.
was made on this account; and the Jewish converts were allowed to have their
children circumcised, and to abstain from certain meats, and to observe certain
legal ceremonies, until they would be better instructed in the principles of
their Christian liberty: -- Whereas, the Gentile or Heathen converts were not
indulged in these matters, as they had no inveterate prejudices of education in
their favor See the whole Epistle to the Gai^tians, compared with Acts. xvi.
1, -- 3. -- xxi. 17, -- 28.
.

10. OUR Christian liberty ought perhaps in many cases to be given up in favor
of incurable weakness, especially where it is general. Suppose a whole
neighborhood of weak of Christians had got it their heads, from the apostolic
decree, that it was sinful to eat blood, or things strangled; or, from any
other means were persuaded, that it was an unpardonable crime to eat with
unwashen hands, or to shave their heads or beards, or any other whimsy; it
would perhaps become the duty of an intelligent Christian, living among them,
and who could not reason them out of their superstition, to comform to these
customs and usages, lest he might, by his example, induce some of these poor
people to act against their consciences, and so to contract guilt. This is that
giving up of Christian liberty which is plead for by St. Paul Romans xiv. and 1
Cor. viii. and ix.
.

11. BUT if such a community should hold it sinful to marry; or to worship GOD
in public assemblies (as the Familists and Brownists); or to receive the
sacraments (as the Quakers); or should insist on the necessit^ of doing
something forbidden by GOD, or of omitti^^ something commanded by him; in these
cases we ought not to comply, but insist on our Christian liberty.

12. MANY things which are simply lawful in themselves, yet because of the
abuses made of them, ought to be shunned and denied by Christians. There can be
no moral evil in often visiting a tavern, or a house of infamous report,
supposing there is no ill design, or ill practice; nay, perhaps, it may be done
with the best views and from the best motives: Yet, because of the scandal that
might attend this practice, it might be best to refrain it. I know not whether
card-playing and dancing may not be perfectly innocent in themselves; yet if
these practices are generally abused, it were best to discountenance and
refrain them.

13. THE general rule seems to be this, that wherever the use of our
Christian liberty, has a direct tendency to hurt the souls of others (unless in
some capital point where it ought not, and cannot with safety be given up) it
is best to forego it and recede from it; for, our neighbor's good and
edification is a charity we owe him. But, as all things may be abused to evil
purposes, so may the lawful use of our Christian liberty. And after all,
prudence and discretion must be the umpires in this matter.

ESSAY LVII. What DIVERSIONS are lawful, and the WAY to regulate them.
1. THE best moralists have condemned some fashionable diversions, as unlawful
in themselves. Such are games of hazard, and success in which depends in a
great measure on lottery, such as cards, dice, etc. etc.

2. IF there are any other diversions which are either directly sinful in
themselves, or lead unavoidably to the corruption of manners, these are wholly
out of the question at present, as being in themselves unlawful, and therefore
forbidden to Christians; such as rioting and drunkenness, chambering and
wantonness, impure dalliances, lasciviousness, effeminacy, etc.

3. OF lawful diversions, some are calculated to exercise the body, and those
are best suited to sedentary persons, whose callings afford them too little
exercise for the purposes of health; such as running, walking, leaping,
fencing, and all those plays or diversions which give motion and exercise to
the body, and tend to circulate the blood, and promote digestion and
perspiration. Others are calculated to recreate and unbend the mind, such are
chess, and a number of others; and these seem best adapted for those who live
an active, laborious, fatiguing life.

4. THE very words, diversions and amusements, point out the use and design of
these pastimes. They are only intended to unbend the mind, and refresh the body
and animal spirits, that those who use them may be the better fitted and
qualified to discharge the serious, necessary and important businesses of life;
the care of the soul and of the body.

5. FROM this notion of diversions, amusements or recreations, we may learn
many important lessons about the right choice, use and regulation of them. As,

(1.) IT is evident, that a life spent in a continual, or almost perpetual
round of diversions, must be a wicked, ill spent life. This is wholly to
misemploy life, and neglect the proper business of it; and that too, under the
wicked notion, that it is innocent, proper and beneficial to do so.

(2.) IF diversion or amusement may be properly considered as the physic of
life, by which the disorders of the body and mind, contracted by an intense
application to the serious and proper business of it, are relieved and cured,
and their vigor, sprightliness and activity restored, for a fresh application:
Then, to spend one's life in a perpetual round of diversions, is as absurd and
preposterous, as though a person, neglecting all food, should live wholly upon
physic, under a pretense of preserving his health and vigor.

(3.) IF habits are contracted by repeated act; then a life spent in giddy
diversions and amusements, must in course of time so relax and effeminate both
the body and mind, as to render them wholly unfit for any application to the
serious and important businesses of life; must beget an inveterate habit of the
worst kind of idleness; and, in sine, must turn persons, thus devoted to
diversions, into mere whirligigs and useless drones, burdens and nuisances to
society. A life of perpetual diversion, version, is a life of perpetual
intoxication; and persons devoted to it, are generally the most useless and
mischievous members of society. Witness perpetual dancers and gamesters.

(4.) WHEN diversions are turned into the constant business of life, they
wholly change their nature, and lose their good effects; they are so far from
unbending the mind, that they become its only burden; they are so far from
recreating and refreshing the body, that they fatigue it, and exhaust the
animal spirits; they are so far from rendering the body vigorous, and the mind
cheerful, that they injure the health and sink the spirits. This is, with a
witness, to make a toil of a pleasure; and to turn that cordial drop, which
makes life's bitter draught go glibly down, into a rank and deleterious poison.

(5.) IF the proper design of diversions is, by refreshing the body and
recreating the mind, to render both more lively and vigorous, and thereby fit
them for a more vigorous application to the proper, necessary and important
duties of life; then all such diversions and amusements as evidently tend to
hurt the body or the mind, and obstruct the proper end of diversions, must
needs be unlawful and sinful: And the same will hold true of lawful and
innocent diversions continued too long at a time. Although gaming were innocent
in itself, yet it were extremely unlawful to spend whole weeks, night and day,
in that diversion, to the breaking of natural rest, and thereby hurting both
the body and mind, and to the neglect of all duties, civil, social and
religious. Although dancing may be innocent in itself, yet to spend whole
nights in that exercise, to the fatiguing of the body, neglecting all the
duties of the family and closet, and unfitting persons for the proper business
of the next day, is certainly criminal and unlawful. -- For a poor man, whose
family calls for all his time and labor to clothe and feed them, to spend one
day, much more, several days in diversions, is a sin against justice, charity
and mercy.

6. DIVERSIONS which may be innocent and lawful to some, and in certain
circumstances, may be yet unlawful to others, and in certain different
circumstances. As, (1.) It may not be absolutely unlawful in a Christian, to
amuse himself by playing an innocent game, or playing on a musical instrument,
or walking, or riding, or, perhaps dancing; -- yet to mix with swearing,
drinking, or profane company for the sake of partaking in these amusements, as
it would be extremely indecent, so it would also be very criminal; as it would
show, that this love of pleasure was superior to his aversion to vice and evil
example; -- and as his example in this particular instance, would look like a
giving a sanction to the vices of his company. -- (2.) To persons who find,
that by any particular diversions and amusements, they are strongly tempted to
sin; such diversions or amusements must needs be extremely sinful; -- Thus,
supposing dancing and gaming to be innocent and inoffensive in themselves, yet
to persons who, by the one, are tempted to fret, swear and cheat; or who, by
the other, are tempted to other sins, these diversions must be highly criminal.
-- (3.) Where any particular diversion, though innocent in itself, is greatly
abused in a place, and madly pursued by the inhabitants, to the prejudice of
industry and good morals; Christians ought not only to ahstain from, but also
bear a testimony against such diversions, so abused, for the good of society.
-- (4.) Diversions which may be innocent in themselves, may change their nature
and become exceeding criminal, either by being mistimed, or too long continued.
For instance, to indulge to amusements on the Sabbath Day, or in a time of
public distress or calamity which calls for consideration, mourning, prayer and
repentance; -- or, indulge to diversions and amusements, when justice, charity
and merry call us to other and more important business, is doubtless very
sinful. Or when, (as was observed above) we squander much of our precious time
in trifling amusements, and make them the business of life; this is to act the
part of the wicked and unprofitable servant, who was justly condemned to outer
darkness.

7. A LIFE spent in giddy diversions, is utterly incompatible with the hopes of
salvation; being inconsistent with a due and serious concern either for the
soul or the body; for ourselves, or for others.

8. IT might be a good touchstone for such diversions as are suitable and
becoming for Christians; to try within ourselves whether we could seriously ask
GOD'S blessing upon them; or quit them at an instant, and address ourselves to
GOD in solemn prayer: For, as it is our duty always to watch and pray, lest we
enter into temptation, and to be ever in a posture of readiness to meet the
summons of death in the way of our duty; and as we know not the moment we may
be called to give an account of our stewardship, all diversions inconsistent
with this frame of mind, seem improper for Christians.

9. TO render diversions or amusements lawful, they must have these properties:
-- (1.) They must be innocent in themselves: -- (2.) They must be decent and of
good repute, or such as the generality of good people have not condemned (and
this will cut off card-playing, and almost all games of hazard, more especially
all gaming for money, from the list of innocent diversions): -- (3.) They ought
to be such as are not of pernicious consequence, by the bad regulation and
abuse of them in the places where we live: -- (4.) No more of our precious time
should be consumed by them, than is barely necessary for the purpose of
recreation; nor should they be oftener used than is needful, lest the mind be
intoxicated by them, and led off from more important matters, by contracting a
habit of trifling and levity: -- (5.) They should be such as we find by
experience are not attended with strong temptations to ourselves, and as have
no sensible tendency to draw off our minds from the duties of religion, or from
the necessary and important duties of life. Upon the whole, they should be
such, and so used and regulated as not to excite any remorse of conscience in a
sensible, serious and tender mind.

10. THOUGH it does not seem reasonable, or consistent with the present frail
and imperfect state of human nature, to forbid all kinds of worldly amusements
and recreations, as unlawful, yet to persons of a right way of thinking, and of
a spiritual and refined taste; these kinds of diversions will he found very
little necessary; and the very duties of religion, such as reading, singing of
psalms with melody in the heart, meditation and contemplation on the works and
ways of GOD, religius conference, and doing good offices to the souls and
bodies of men, will furnish pleasures and delights, far preferable to any that
can result from worldly pleasures and amusements.

11. IN short, the fashionable diversions are attended with so many snares and
dangers to virtue and innocence, and, at the best, are such thieves of precious
time, that those discover the soundest judgment who have the least taste and
fondness for them, and who least frequent and join in them.

12. RELIGION promises the highest and noblest comforts and pleasures, and
those who betray too fond a desire for worldly pleasures and diversions, either
prove that they have never experienced the pleasures of religion, or, by their
conduct, persuade the world, that the others are equally necessary and
agreeable.

13. THE devil, by a surprising dexterity, has turned some of the most solemn
periods of life, into seasons devoted to the made riot and giddy diversion;
witness our birth-days, and the first day of every New Year.

ESSAY LVIII. The VALUE and IMPORTANCE of a CHILD.
1. IMMORTALITY has stamped an amazing value on man. No conscious being, who is
capable of eternal happiness or misery, can possibly be unimportant or of
little account. Man, who carries about with him a rational, undying soul,
little knows or considers of what a treasure he is possessed. All the beauties,
all the riches, all the stupendous wonders of material nature are, in
comparison with it, less than nothing, and vanity! If man considered this,
would it not be more his endeavor to act up to the dignity of his nature?
Would he not be ashamed of base, mean and ignoble actions, which vilify and
debase his real importance, and degrade him below his rank in the universe?

2. THE moment in which a rational, immortal spirit animates a human foetus, a
spark is kindled which shall never be extinguished. The material sun will grow
old, wax dim with years, and be probably put out as a lamp that burns; the
stars shall fall from their orbits, and be covered with darkness; but this
breath of the Almighty, this intellectual spark once kindled up in the moral
world, shall burn on with undiminished and ever-increasing luster, as long as
GOD himself endures.

3. THE birth of a child we deem to be but a trifling event, and look with
indifference, perhaps with contempt, on the little, helpless stranger. But if
we viewed it with the penetrating eye of reason; if we considered it as
emerging from eternal night into life immortal; -- as an heir of worlds
unknown, and a candidate for an everlasting state; -- as a glimmering spark of
being, just struck from nothing by the all-creating rock, which must burn and
flame on to eternity, when suns and stars have returned to their native
darkness or nonentity; -- which must survive the funeral of nature, and live
through the rounds of endless ages; which must either rise from glory to glory,
ascending perfection's scale by endless gradations, or sink deeper and deeper
into the bottom less abyss of misery, and to which its immortality must either
prove an unsufferable curse, -- or a blessing inconceivable, according to the
manner in which it shall have acquitted ^^self in its present probationary
state -- we shall clearly discern, that the value and importance of a human
infant can scarcely be computed.

4. To illustrate this thought, let us briefly consider, The evil or good which
may be either done or received by a child, in the course of its existence. And,

(1.) PERHAPS this child is an embrio-fiend. Know thou, O man, O parent, to
what this child is born? Of what this child is capable? It is now a pitiable,
helpless infant, but if thou knew the enormous sins and dreadful sufferings
with which its future existence is pregnant, and most of them probably through
thy own sinful example and guilty neglect, thou would be so far from
rejoicing at its birth, that thou would weep and lament for the miseries
which are coming upon it, and upon thyself for thy neglect of the duties which
thou owe it. Perhaps thou have never prayed that GOD might sanctify this
child while in the womb. It has been indeed baptized; but have thou ever
offered up one fervent prayer for it since it has been born? Have thou offered
it up to the holy Trinity by faith, and with that solemnity which the baptismal
dedication requires? Instead of setting before it a pious and virtuous example,
teaching it to pray, inspiring it with a horror against vice, instilling into
its tender opening mind, the principles of piety and good morals, correcting
its errors, and restraining its passions and appetites, have thou not set
before it the very worst example -- taught it the language of blasphemy and
profanity, fostered every malignant passion, and cherishing every budding vice
in its soul? And what is the consequence? It grows up a monster of wickedness,
a devil incarnate. It spreads the baneful contagion of vice as far as its
influence can reach; becomes the tempter, the devil of every company; the
spoiler and obstructer of all good! How many of its fellow-immortals has it
drawn into guilt and misery? Perhaps it at len^th becomes infamous for
wickedness, and blots the annals of history with a character disgraceful to
human nature, and with crimes before unparalelled, unheard of! And O who can
describe the miseries which await it in a state of retribution? The Neros, the
Herod's, the tyrants, the scourges of the earth, were once helpless infants!

(2.) PERHAPS this child is an embrio-angel. Know thou, O man, O parent, to
what this child is born, of what this child is capable? It has been the child
of thy prayers and vows. Thou have solemnly given it up to GOD in baptism, and
he has graciously accepted the surrender. It is thy constant solicitous care to
recommend it daily to the guidance and protection of its Father in heaven; to
set a blameless, pious and virtuous example before it; to instill into its
tender opening mind the principles of piety, integrity and universal goodness.
Indulgent heaven smiles on thine endeavors and renders them successful by the
concurring aids of omnipotent grace, The seed of knowledge and of grace so
liberally sown, will presently grow up into a plenteous harvest of usefulness
here and glory hereafter. The child, like the holy child JESUS, will grow up in
knowledge, as in stature, and in favor both with GOD and man. The implanted
principle of grace, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into
everlasting life John iv. 14.
. He shall bring forth much fruit to the glory of GOD, and to the good of his
fellow mortals. Every day will bring him some good, or make him the instrument
of some good to his fellow men. Nor shall his progress in holiness and
happiness be terminated by this mortal life, but probably go on through eternal
ages. In a word, who can conceive the good of which such a child may be made
the instrument, or the degrees of happiness and of glory to which it may be
advanced? St. Paul, and all those worthies under the Patriarchal, Mosaical and
Christian dispensations, who wrought so much good in the world, and who now
shine in such superior orbs of glory, were once feeble, despised infants! May I
speak it with propriety on this occasion, The blessed JESUS was once a child!

5. SINCE such therefore, is the amazing importance of a child, why should we
wonder, that JESUS took up such in his arms and blessed them, declaring, that
of such was the kingdom of heaven? Why should we wonder, that their guardian
angels continually behold the face of our Father in heaven? Why should we
wonder, that such a stress is laid on their education in the holy scriptures,
and that our risen ascending Lord should have given it so particularly in
charge to his Apostle Peter, to be peculiarly attentive to this, as one of the
highest proofs of his love to him: Simon Peter love thou me? Feed my lambs
Matthew. xviii. 10. Mark x. 16. John xxi. 15.
.

6. IF such is the value and importance of children, can parents, can masters,
can the clergy ever be sufficiently attentive to the unspeakable important
business of their religious education?

7. PARENTS, more especially, are obliged to this duty by a number of the
weightiest motives and considerations. (1.) They have been the immediate
instruments of bringing their children into a tempting, insnaring world, and
have transmitted to them an hereditary taint of corruption, the seed of guilt
and of misery. (2.) Providence has so ordered it, that children are long
continued in a helpless state under the care of their parents, that they may
have a sufficient time and opportunity to form them for usefulness in this
life, and glory in that which is to come; and has implanted a strong storge or
natural affection in their hearts toward their children, which should
powerfully prompt them to this duty. (3.) Their own comfort and the good of
human society, should also powerfully inclin^ parents to cultivate the minds
and hearts of their children with the greatest assiduity.

8. THREE things seem of prime importance in the education of children,
instruction, government and example.

(1.) INSTRUCTION should be begun as soon as children are capable of receiving
it, which is generally very early in life. The plainest and most practical
truths should first be instilled into the tender minds of children, and that in
the plainest and most familiar manner, with such a seriousness and solemnity as
is not forbidding and disgusting, but which may rather convey pleasure and
amusement to the mind. And parents ought to improve their own understandings,
that they may be better qualified properly to instruct their children; which is
no easy task to the wisest.

(2.) IN the article of government, parents should attentively study the
tempers and dispositions of their children; as upon some ingenious tempers,
gentle reproofs will have a better effect than stripes, and with others it is
absolutely necessary to use severe reproof, and the rod of correction. In
government, it is best to begin with mildness in all children, as correction is
a duty which is managed well with great difficulty: When correction is found
necessary, it should not be inflicted rashly, without duly weighing the nature
of the crime and its true demerit. The greatest severity in punishing should be
for immoralities; indiscretions should be passed over with a light correction.
A child should never be punished for dullness or other natural infirmities. In
correcting no signs of revenge or violent passion should ever appear, but the
child who is corrected should be made sensible, that it is done with
reluctance, and purely for its own good; and much care should be taken, to give
it a deep conviction of the evil of the crime, for which it is chastised.

(3.) ALL the instructions and corrections of parents will avail nothing, but
rather make matters worse, if their examples are vicious and immoral.

ESSAY LIX. THE CONSTRAINTS OF CHRIST'S LOVE; A SERMON FROM 2 CORINTHIANS V.
13, 14.
For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to GOD: Or whether we be sober, it
is for your cause. For the love of CHRIST constrains us.
IT seems evident by the whole tenor of this epistle, that the holy and zealous
Apostle had not a few enemies in the church of Corinth, and those too such as
he might least of all have expected -- his fellow professors and
fellow-teachers of christianity. These vainglorious teachers, instead of
building upon the Apostle's foundation, and supporting and confirming his
authority over his beloved converts, endeavored by every trick of artifice and
calumny to overturn and subvert it. They represented him to the Corinthians as
mean and contemptible, as light and inconstant, as proud, overbearing and
imperious, as a subverter of the law, yea, as a downright madmen. They put a
bad construction on all his words and actions, preferred themselves before him,
and endeavored by every art to raise their own credit on the ruins of his
apostolical authority and reputation.

SUCH treatment as this could not but greatly affect the good Apostle. not only
as it tended to cool and weaken the affections of his beloved Corinthian
converts toward him; but more especially, as it was likely to prejudice their
minds against the important doctrines of the gospel which he had, with great
labor, zeal and sincerity, preached amongst them. And hence it is, that we
find so great a part of this epistle employed in St. Paul's vindication of his
own character and conduct, as an Apostle of CHRIST; -- in reclaiming the
Corinthian church from an undue attachment to these Judaizing teachers, -- and
in rekindling proper regards to those distinguishing and unadulterated
doctrines of the gospel, which he had, in the course of his ministry,
propagated amongst them.

As that peculiar fervency and ardour with which this eloquent Apostle of the
Gentiles prosecuted the gospel ministry, seems to be one of the great quarrels
which his enemies had against him, he makes a noble and spirited apology to the
Corinthians for his conduct in this respect, from the 10th verse to the end of
the chapter; alleging the grandeur and importance of the doctrines which the
gospel reveals, as a sufficient reason for the greatest possible zeal and
importunity of address.

AT the tenth verse he had laid down the certainty of a future judgment, in
which all men must appear before the tribunal of CHRIST, to receive, every one,
according to the deeds done in the body, whether good or bad. And this he
alleges as one powerful reason and motive of zeal and fervor in the gospel
ministry: Knowing therefore, says he, the terrors of the LORD, we persuade men;
that is, being firmly assured of a strict and impartial judgment, and its awful
consequences -- of that eternal and irreversible sentence of condemnation which
shall then pass upon all finally unbelieving sinners, and which shall fill
their souls with unspeakable terror and endless despair, we use every argument
and every art of address to persuade men; -- to urge, and, if possible, to
engage, them to escape the terrors of that day, by a timous application to
CHRIST, and a sincere repentance.

AND as some of these enemies, had probably unjustly charged him with a
vainglorious applauding, or commending of himself in his former epistle, he
wipes off this assertion by telling them, that what he had been obliged to say
of this kind, was only in his own necessary defense, and to furnish his friends
with a suitable answer to his censorious and hypocritical enemies: For, says
he, We commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion to glory on
our behalf, that you may have somewhat to answer them which glory in
appearance, and not in heart; i. e. who seem outwardly to glory and triumph
over us, although inwardly they are self-condemned, and are conscious, that
they have no reason to glory against us.

IN the words of our text the Apostle still continues to vindicate himself, and
suggests a farther and still more powerful motive of his zeal and earnestness
in the work of the ministry: For, says he, whether we be beside ourselves, it
is to GOD: Or whether we be sober, it is for your cause; for the love of CHRIST
constrains us. As though he had said; If, to cold and indifferent spectators,
who are not actuated by the same motives, and have not the same view and sense
of divine things as we the Apostles have, we should seem to speak and act with
a degree of zeal bordering upon frenzy or enthusiasm, and to be transported
beyond our natural selves -- beyond the cold measures of human prudence or
discretion -- it is a zeal for the glory of GOD which animates us and produces
these extraordinary effects: -- Or if, on the other hand, we be sober, and
prosecute all the arts of calm and dispassion are reasoning to convince
sinners, and lead them to GOD through CHRIST, it is for your sakes we take such
serious pains, in a matter which so nearly concerns your highest interests. So,
that love to GOD, and bene^olence to men, are the two grand principles by which
we are actuated, and well may we be zealous in so good a cause; for the love of
CHRIST constrains us -- That unparalelled love of his, manifested in the
redemption of a guilty world; -- that love which engaged him to die for a lost
and dead world; a world of creatures who were dead in trespasses and sins; void
of spiritual life, and under the condemnatory sentence of a broken law: This
wonderful love of CHRIST (as well as the certain prospect of a future,
impartial judgment) constrains us -- It bears us away as with a strong and
resistless torrent, so that we cannot resist or withstand that impetuosity,
with which it carries us on to the most active and zealous discharge of our
ministerial duty.

THE Greek word sunechei, which we render constrains, is vastly emphatical.
Sometimes it signifies to throng and press on every side, as with a crowd Luke
viii. 45.
sometimes, to hold fast or have in possession, as a prisoner Luke xxii. 63.
; sometimes, to surround, or invest a town by siege, to prevent the enemy's
escape Luke xix. 43.
; sometimes, to be in a strait between two contrary opinions, or to have the
mind in an anxious state of hesitancy or suspense between two opposite
resolutions or determinations Phil. i. (...).
; and sometimes it signifies to be strongly urged or pressed in spirit, under a
kind of irresistible impulse of mind, which forcibly urges one on to the
revelation of some mystery, or the declaration of some truth; as it is said,
Acts xviii. 5. That Paul (suneicheto to pneumati) being pressed in spirit,
testified to the Jews that Jesus was Christ. And it seems to have much this
last sense in our text: The love of Christ constrains us, -- it irresi^^ably
moves, impels, and bears us on to zeal and importunity in the sacred duties of
our Apostleship, so that we can by no means disengage ourselves from the
binding nature and urgency of those motives and obligations it lays us under.
For, as though he had said, how can we be cold and unaffected in promoting the
salvation of sinners; a cause in which our glorious Master not only labored
and suffered, but even laid down his life: Or, We thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them
and rose again. Therefore, this dying love of Christ constrains us to be
instant and importunate with sinners, not only to accept the precious benefits
it has purchased for them, but also to walk worthy of the glorious privileges
and hopes it has conferred upon them.

Now, that we may the better perceive the propriety and force of the Apostle's
reasoning, and feel the power and constraint of a Savior's love, I shall, in
the first place, by divine assistance, briefly show you the peculiar and
specific nature of the love of CHRIST, and by what characters it is
distinguished from, and exalted above the love of mortals. Secondly, Explain it
by its effects, or show in what instances it most eminently appears and is
expressed. And thirdly, Apply the doctrine to some practical uses, by showing
what influence it should have upon us, both as Ministers and people. And,

I. I AM to show you the peculiar and specific nature of this love of CHRIST,
and by what properties it is chiefly distinguished from, and exalted above the
love of mortals. And,

1. WE will find, on the smallest reflection, that love is a certain mode or
affection of the mind, drawing it forth with desire and complacency toward
some object; and, including in it (according to the scripture notion of it, and
as it is exercised from GOD to man) compassion, benevolence and bounty.

LOVE, as it exists in us, besides its imperfection, has generally a great
mixture of selfishness. We are sensible of a penury and want in our own beings.
We feel a dependence not only upon GOD, but also in some measure on our
fellow creatures, both for being and well-being. Our happiness in the present
state, is neither complete, nor independent, and therefore we seek some
augmentation of it, and some addition to it, by union with the objects we love.
If we closely and impartially examine the frame of our own nature, and the
motives of our actions, we will find, that perhaps the most pure and
disinterested acts of our love, benevolence and charity, are mixed with some
degree of selfishness. -- Let even a wicked person, who has any remains of
natural tenderness and humanity left in his breast, see a man who is an object
of great pity and compassion, his heart will melt toward him, -- he will feel
for his distress, and, if possible, give him some succor or relief; -- not
perhaps from any hope of reward in this life, nor merely out of ostentation,
that he may be seen and praised of men; -- not out of any love to GOD, or
obedience to his command, nor from any prospect of a future reward -- (the
supposition excludes all such motives); but purely to relieve the anxious and
sympathetic feelings of his own breast. He relieves the miserable, that he
himself may be less miserable. He endeavors to mitigate the pain of his
suffering and distressed fellow creature, that he himself may be less pained
and distressed. And although good and truly virtuous and gracious men may have
nobler and purer motives of their charity, yet it is much to be questioned,
whether something of self-interest may not mix itself with their most
disinterested actions.

I AM far, indeed, from condemning this natural sympathy and compassion, so
deeply implanted in the human heart, by the GOD of nature, for the succor and
relief of our fellow-men. I only mention this in proof of what I have advanced,
namely, That human love or charity, in the purest instances of it, is not
perhaps wholly disinterested: Either glory, or fame, or pleasure, or profit, or
commodity, or some interested selfish motive or obligation so mix themselves
with the most generous heroic acts of our love and charity, as to blast their
pretensions to purity and disinterestedness, and greatly to impair their merit.

BUT now the love of CHRIST is not this way excited. We had neither done any
thing to oblige him, nor had we any thing to engage him, farther than the
misery in which he saw us involved might move him. He loved us only because he
would love us. He had no by-end, no self-interest to serve in loving us and
having compassion upon us. Herein is love -- a peculiar and distinguishing love
-- not that we loved him, but that he loved us; which is equally true of the
Father and of the Son 1 John iv. 10.
.

2. THIS love of CHRIST, as it is a pure and disinterested, so it is a free,
generous and heroic love; like that of some great and public benefactor, who
touched with commiseration for the afflictions and distresses of mankind,
undertakes their relief. When we were without strength, ungodly sinners,
enemies, says the Apostle, CHRIST died for us Romans v. 6, 8, 10.
. Either of these three last characters might, in the estimate of human reason,
have frustrated the kind intentions of a Savior's love: But ^o! it triumhps
over them all. It is a singular, irresistible, unconquerable, triumphant love;
-- a love, as the wise man describes that passion, stronger than death; many
waters, numberless provocations and indignities, could not quench it Cant.
viii. 6.
. Many and great obstacles stood in its way, the wrath of GOD, the cruelty of
men, the rage of devils, the shame and pain of the cross, and, what was worse
than all, the ingratitude and obstinacy of those very sinners who where the
objects of this love, and their contempt of and aversion to its saving designs
-- and vet it surmounted them all! Are mankind ungodly, sinners, enemies? Yet
CHRIST will love them and die for them! O wonderful philanthropy! Surely no
instance of human love can equal this. We have heard of and applauded brave and
generous men, who have hazarded and exposed their lives for their friends,
their country, their religion; -- yea, we have heard, perhaps in the single
instance of Damon and Pythias, of one friend's offering to lay down his life
for another. And indeed, as our Savior observes, greater love has no man than
this, that he lay down his life for his friends; this being the very utmost
extent of human friendship John xv. 13.
: But greater love has CHRIST, who laid down his life for his enemies!

3. YEA, so great and unparalelled is this love of CHRIST to sinners, that it
surmounts all human thought and comprehension. The Apostle urges his beloved
Ephesians to comprehend with all saints, the breath, and length, and depth, and
height; and to know the love of CHRIST, which, adds he, passes knowledge
Ephesians. iii. 18, 19.
. The breadth, and length, and depth, and height of this love are beyond our
ken in the present state; and indeed, we shall, perhaps, never be able fully to
comprehend them. In order to know the just dimensions of a Savior's love, we
must first know the full dignity of his person, the greatness of his
condescension, and the depth of his sufferings; and these, perhaps, no created
understanding will ever be able fully to comprehend. What a strange command or
requisition, therefore, is this? -- to know and comprehend a love, which is
incomprehensible and passes knowledge! -- I answer, this is a lively
expression of the distinguishing greatness of CHRIST'S love, in the Apostle's
grand and masterly manner. The love of CHRIST is a subject which all the saints
search and pry into with the greatest attention and delight. They endeavor to
comprehend it more and more: something they know; more they desire to know;
they stoop down with the angels, and desire to look into these things 1 Pet. i.
12.
. They are daily making new discoveries and new researches into the wonders of
his love which passes knowledge, and which will prove the continual exercise
and the increasing joy and admiration of their perfected spirits, through the
ages of eternity, -- when they shall join in that new and perpetual song,
Worthy is the lamb, that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory and blessing: -- for thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to GOD, by thy blood, of out every kindred, and tongue, and
people and nation Rev. v. 9, -- 12.
. -- Now, the Apostle prays for these Ephesians, that the same mind might be in
them, and that with all saints, they might study more and more to comprehend
the boundless and amazing dimensions of the love of CHRIST, as being the most
powerful motive to reciprocal love, and cheerful universal obedience.

BY such characters then is this love of CHRIST distinguished from, and exalted
above, the love of mortals. It is pure and disinterested -- free, generous, and
heroic -- and exceeds all human comprehension. I proceed.

II. To explain this love of CHRIST by its effects; or to show in what
instances it most eminently appears and is expressed. And here the field is so
exceeding large, that I must of necessity, be very brief and general. Were an
angel, with all his heavenly knowledge and eloquence, to attempt a display of
the grand proofs and effects of his love, how infinitely must he come short of
doing justice to the subject? How much more we, whose views and apprehensions
are limited and confined? -- But that we may attempt it in our feeble and
imperfect manner,

1. THE greatness of our Savior's love manifests itself in the readiness and
cheerfulness with which he undertook our relief in the covenant of redemption.
-- Great was the misery into which mankind were fallen. All were dead, as the
verse below our text assures us. The human race, as one man, had revolted and
apostatized from GOD, and were become slaves to satan and their own lusts. The
whole world of mankind were become guilty before GOD, and were enemies to him
by wicked works. This is that spiritual death, -- that separation of the soul
from GOD, the fountain of spiritual and eternal, as well as of natural life, --
that death in trespasses and sins, mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. ii. 1. --
And the plain and just consequence of this, was a sentence of condemnation to
eternal death.

SUCH was the condition of lapsed man when CHRIST undertook for him;
proportionably great therefore must that price and work of redemption be, which
was necessary to restore the human race to GOD'S forfeited favor, and to their
own lost purity, perfection and happiness. GOD'S majesty was offended, and his
law transgressed. The former must therefore be appeased and the latter
honored. For this purpose the Redeemer must assume our nature; -- a body must
be prepared for him, in which he must not only obey and suffer, but even die!
All were dead, and he must die for all! Before he could see his seed; -- see
the travail of his soul and be satisfied; -- before the Father would give him
the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession, he must bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows; he must be wounded
for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, and make his soul an
offering for sin Isa. liii. 4, 5, 11. Psalm. ii. 8.
.

THIS was the hard law of redemption, -- these the arduous conditions to which
our Redeemer must submit! He must assume a body; -- he must suffer and obey,
bleed and die in the cause! And yet how cheerfully does he undertake it, when
there was no other to help or bring deliverance? -- Sacrifice and offering thou
did not desire, says he, -- then said I, lo, I come; in the volume of the
book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O my GOD: Yea, thy law is
written within my heart Psalm. xl. 6, -- 8.
. He well knew the will of his heavenly Father: He perfectly understood the
difficult law of redemption which he had put himself under: He knew how dearly
he must purchase the salvation of sinners. The black and dismal scene of his
sufferings was full in his view; and yet he so loved us as to submit with
delight -- rejoicing in the distant prospect of relieving and succouring
perishing rebels, on these difficult terms. Lo, I come, says the benevolent
Redeemer -- I delight to do thy will, O my GOD! -- He rejoiced in the habitable
parts of the earth, and his delights were with the sons of men of old, even
from everlasting Prove. viii. 31.
.

2. How surprising an instance have we of his love, in his incarnation, in
consequence of these engagements? In the fullness of time, GOD sent forth his
Son, made of a woman, made under the law, that he might redeem them that are
under the law Gal. iv. 4.
. The word, (says St. John) was made flesh, and dwelt among among us John i. 14.
. The Messiah became IMMANUEL, GOD with us, GOD manifest in the flesh, clothed
with mortality, and tabernacling among men! So great was his condescension and
abasement, that he laid aside a glory which he had with the Father before the
world was John xvii. 5.
. Although he was originally in the form of GOD, vested with divine perfections
and honors; yet he veiled these glories under the rags of humanity, and took
upon him the form of a servant Phil. ii. 6.
. For we know the grace of our Lord Jesus CHRIST, that though he was rich, yet
for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich 2 Cor.
viii. 9.
. Amazing condescension! Unparalelled grace! Had an angel, touched with
compassion for a few perishing mortals, and in order to do them some signal
service, condescended for a while to leave his seraphic joys; to take up his
dwelling in a human body, and be tied to its laws and its miseries; we should
highly extol such an act of generous condescension, and be ever speaking of our
good angel, with wonder and gratitude. But, behold! here is greater love, and a
lower stoop of condescension! CHRIST, the Lord of angels, before whom the
highest orders of these blessed spirits bow and adore in the most prostrate and
submissive forms, has done this! He so loved us, as to make himself of no
reputation, to take upon him the form of a servant, and, being found in fashion
as a man, he humbled himself yet farther, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross Phil. ii. 6. -- 8.
.

3. IF we confider the peculiar circumstances of his humanity, they will
greatly strengthen the argument of his love. He became an infant! An infant of
poor, despised parents! The son of Mary, and of Joseph the carpenter! --
Blessed Lord, what grace and condescension was this -- that thou should be
born for us -- and thus born -- born in such circumstances of obscurity and
contempt -- thy chamber of state, a stable -- thy cradle, a manger -- thy
mother, a poor despised virgin, and thy reputed father, a laboring mechanic!

IN like manner, if we trace the various circumstances of our Savior's life,
each of them will serve to illustrate the wonders of his love. While on the
stage of public action, he still appeared under the same disadvantages as to
any characters of worldly splendour or renown, and in circumstances of low
abasement; was still a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, despised and
rejected of men. The son of man had not where to lay his head Matthew. viii. 20.
; and having no worldly estate, consequently he was of little worth in he eyes
of the world, and had but few friends among the children of men. Nor could his
spotless reputation escape the keenest reproaches of sinners. The holy one and
the just; he who did no sin, and in whose mouth was found no guile, who was
holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners, and of whom this world was
not worthy, was calumniated and traduced as a blasphemer, a deceiver, a
madman, and a confederate with devils. Thus did he endure the contradiction of
finne^s against himself -- of sinners, (O amazing ingratitude!) toward whom he
had the kindest intentions, and for whom he was actually doing the kindest
things. Strange, mysterious love, that reconciled the SON of GOD to such
treatment from his own guilty creatures, and engaged him to bear it with a
meekness and resignation, which the rudest injuries could neither conquer nor
disturb! But,

4. THE last scene of his sufferings and death, is the most astonishing and
incomprehensible instance of his love. Here the scriptures lay the grand
emphasis. HE Idied! He died for ME! He died for ALL! He bore our sins in his
own body, on the tree! He gave himself for US, that he might redeem us to
himself, and make us a peculiar people, zealous of good works! To him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood; -- to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever, Amen! Here all is wonder. Eloquence itself is dumb
-- and the power of words and language utterly unable to express the
condescensions of this love. Agonizing, dying love! Love written in tears, and
groans and blood! The Son of GOD bleeding and expiring for the sons of men,
that he might raise them to the dignity and happiness of the sons of GOD! Could
he have purchased our redemption without the pain and shame of the cross, the
condescension had not been so exceedingly amazing: But this could not be; --
without shedding of blood there could be no remission; -- and therefore, he
died for us -- he humbled himself to the lowest degree of abasement, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross, the most cruel and
painful, as well as vilifying and abasing death; -- even the death of a Roman
slave! He took a body, on purpose to be striped, pierced, wounded, broken -- to
languish, bleed and die! -- He became a man, with design that he should be a
man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs; -- That GOD should lay upon him the
iniquities of us all, and make his soul an offering for sin; -- might bruise
him and put him to grief Isa. liii.
!

NOR was there one circumstance of horror wanting in this amazing tragedy, --
one bitter ingredient missing in this tremendous cup, a guilty conscience and
total despair excepted. Betrayed by his disciple, relinquished by his friends,
insulted by devils, surrounded by the cruel mocks and taunts of his enemies,
forsaken of his Father, destitute of the supports and consolations of a common
martyr, pierced with nails, transfixed with a spear -- he expired between two
thieves -- the sun hiding his face, the earth trembling, graves opening, rocks
rending, and all nature, as it were, sympathizing with her expiring LORD, and
feeling for the pains and indignities which he endured! -- He died; and, O,
what a death? -- Let this death, therefore, be unto our souls the voucher of
his love. -- By this let us measure it in its amazing dimensions! -- Nor,

5. DID his love terminate with his mortal life on earth: If it had, it had
been still incomplete, and we might still have perished in our sins. But as he
died for our sins, so he rose again for our justification, and ever lives at
the Father's right hand, making intercession for his people. Hence the
Apostle's triumph: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of GOD'S elect? It is
GOD that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is CHRIST that died, yea
rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of GOD, who also
makes intercession for us Romans viii. 33, 34.
. As the love of CHRIST engaged him to humble himself even unto death for
sinners, so it also engaged him to become not only an advocate and intercessor
with GOD the Father in their behalf, but also, a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance and remission of fins Acts v. 31.
. It engaged him, after he had led captivity captive, to ascend up on high, and
to give gists to men, even to the rebellious; -- to send down his Spirit as the
renewer and comforter of his people; -- to enter into the holiest as their
forerunner, to take possession of the promised inheritance in their name and
stead, and prepare mansions of glory in his Father's house for their reception,
-- and to give some Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of CHRIST; till we all come in the unity
of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of CHRIST Ephesians. iv. 8, -- 13.
.

AND how signal is his grace and love in applying the salvation he has
purchased, to the souls of men; -- in enlightening, converting, guiding,
restoring, quickening, and comforthing them? He brings them into his
banqueting house, and his banner over them is love; he satisfies their souls as
with marrow and with fatness, and causes them to eat hidden manna, and to drink
living waters of divine consolations. He knows and pities their infirmities,
sympathizes with them under their temptations, sufferings and conflicts, and
follows them with a constant, tender care. Whom he loves, he loves to the
end. His affection is not wavering, fickle and inconstant, but firm and steady
as the foundation of his throne. He never leaves nor forsakes his own, but
causes goodness and mercy to follow them all the days of their lives, and when
their flesh and their heart fails, he is the strength of their heart, and their
everlasting portion Psalm. lxxiii. 26.
. He gives unto his sheep, (his believing people) eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any be able to pluck them out of his hand; and as
he has the keys of death, and of the unseen world, he encourages them joyfully
to commit their departing souls into his gracious hands, and confidently to
pray with the martyr Stephen, in the very article of death, LORD JESUS, receive
my spirit John x. 28. Acts vii. 59.
.

6. HEAVEN is the glorious theater on which the super-abounding riches and
fullness of the love of CHRIST, both to the souls and bodies of his people,
shall be most earnestly and magnificently displayed, in its lost scene and
final issue. Heaven is the full accomplishment of this love. There, if ever,
the heights, and depths, and lengths, and breadths of this love of CHRIST, will
be fully comprehended -- at least, clearly perceived, to the everlasting
astonishment of the enraptured soul -- ever advancing -- ever improving in
perfection and happiness -- ever drinking in full draughts of those rivers of
pleasures which flow from the fountainhead of life, joy, perfection and
immortality. -- CHRIST loved the church, and gave himself for it, that he might
present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing Epes. v. 25.
. This was his ultimate end in coming from heaven, that he might advance his
servants and followers thither: I go, says he, to prepare a place for you. And
if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto
myself, that where I am, there ye may be also. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory
which thou have given me John xiv. 3. -- xvii. 24.
.

AND now, having thus showed you the peculiar and transcendent nature, and
briefly pointed out to you, some of the most eminent expressions and effects of
a Redeemer's love, what needs more to illustrate the force of the Apostle's
reasoning, or to show you the constraints of this love? -- Show you, did I
say,? Nay, do we not already begin to feel the constraints of this love upon
our souls, bearing us away with a sweet, but powerful influence to higher
degrees of faith, love, gratitude and obedience? have not our souls already
begun to catch the holy sire, and to enter into the force and spirit of the
Apostle's reasoning -- the love of CHRIST constrains us, because we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all,
that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
which died for them, and rose again? Do we not already begin to anticipate the
songs of the redeemed nations; Unto HIM that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, and has made us kings and priests unto GOD, even HIS
FATHER; to HIM be glory and dominion for ever and ever; AMEN Rev. i. 5, 6.
! Surely our hearts must be harder than adamant, more impenetrable than the
nether m^^^-stone, if such a view of the love of CHRIST, how meanly soever
displayed, can have no softening influence over them, no constraining force
upon them! But this naturally leads me in the

III. PLACE to improve the doctrine to some practical uses, by showing what
influence and constraint this love of CHRIST should have upon us, both as
Ministers and people.

1. As Christians, as the disciples and followers of the blessed JESUS, surely
this love of his should constrain us to reciprocal acts of love, imitation, and
obedience.

(1.) To reciprocal acts of love. The natural effects of love, are gratitude
and reciprocal love. Love begets love, as naturally as a parent begets his own
likeness. It Is as natural for us to love our friends, and be grateful to our
benefactors, as to dread and sly from our enemies. -- Now, as the blessed JESUS
is not only most amiable and lovely in himself, possessed of every natural and
moral excellency which can attract the esteem of an intelligent being, but as
he is also our best friend and most generous benefactor, hence our obligations
to gratitude and reciprocal love are quite indisputable. He has purchased our
love and gratitude at the dearest price, and has engaged us to love him by the
most astonishing acts of love and beneficence to us; in so much, that nothing
can be more just and equitable than that dreadful denounciation of the Apostle,
against all who are insensible to the attractions of a Savior's love: If any
man, says he, love not the LORD JESUS CHRIST, let him be anathema, maranatha,
i. e. let him be accursed, and the LORD will come speedily and execute that
curse upon him 1 Cor. xvi. 22.
. The question therefore, is not, whether the love of CHRIST to us, should be a
motive of ours to him; for this is self-evident? But rather, in what manner we
may best express our love to our great benefactor? And it is plain, that this
is best done by imitation and obedience. It follows therefore,

(2.) THAT the love of CHRIST should constrain us to the imitation of him, our
beloved Lord and Master. To imitate the beloved object, is a natural and
genuine effect of love. We naturally endeavor to imitate those whom we love,
especially in those things for which we love them, and by which we hope to
commend ourselves to their favor and esteem. Now, as the moral perfections of
CHRIST, and those divine graces and virtues which shone so conspicuous in him,
through the whole of his incarnate state, are one of the principal foundations
of our esteem for him; and as the imitation of those virtues and graces serve
principally to recommend us to his friendship and regard: So in these we will
earnestly endeavor to imitate him, if we truly love him. We will endeavor,
that the same mind and temper be in us, which was also in CHRIST JESUS Philip.
ii. 5.
. If we are indeed his sheep we will hear his voice and follow him; -- will
deny ourselves and take up our cross, learning of him to be meek and lowly,
pure and patient, humble and resigned, that, in all things, we may be conformed
unto him, and, in so doing, find peace, and rest, and happiness to our souls
Math. xvi. 24. -- xi. 29. John x. 27.
.

THE ancient philosophers manifested their love to the leaders of their
respective sects, by a most scrupulous imitation of them, in the whole tenor of
their behavior: And shall we, the disciples of JESUS, be less observant of the
most holy and perfect example of our divine Master, than they were of those of
Zeno and Pythagoras, of Plato, and Aristotle? Especially, when the Apostle
tells us, that even hereunto are we called; because CHRIST also suffered for
us, LEAVING US AN EXAMPLE, THAT WE SHOULD FOLLOW HIS STEPS 1 Pet. ii. 21.
. And when another Apostle assures us, that he who said he abides in him, or
is his disciple, ought himself also SO TO WALK, even as HE WALKED 1 John ii. 6.
.

(3.) THE love of CHRIST should constrain us, his followers and disciples, to a
cheerful and universal obedience to all his commandments. And what is this but
to imitate his example? For, what duty has he commanded us to perform, of
which he has not given us an example in his own conduct, so far as difference
of nature and circumstances would permit? To obey him, therefore, in his most
difficult and self-denying precepts, what is it but to imitate his own example,
and to do that out of love and duty for him, which he, in obedience to his
Father, has done for our sakes, and to promote our salvation and happiness? To
obey him, therefore, is to imitate him, and to imitate him is to be like him
both in holiness and happiness.

THIS is the love of GOD, says the Apostle, that is, the most certain and
substantial evidence of our love to him, that we keep his commandments 1 John
v. 3.
. And as this is the surest testimony of our love to the Father, so it is also
of the Son. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves
me. If a man love me, he will keep my words; but he that loves me not, keeps
not my sayings John xiv. 21, etc.
. We cheerfully and readily obey they person whom we love. Duty and inclination
here unite their kindred influences; laying a powerful and irresistible
constraint on all the faculties of the soul, and engage them in a course of
ready, active, cheerful and universal obedience. Besides, this is the very use
which the Apostle makes of the doctrine, in the verse below our text. CHRIST
died for all, and the principal end of his doing so, was, that those who
spiritually live, in consequence of his death, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, i. e. according to the lusts of their own wills, or the dictates of
their corrupt hearts; but according to the law, will and pleasure of HIM who
died for them and rose again. Hence you see, that the obedience of Christians,
is one of the primary ends of CHRIST'S death, as well as the highest and surest
evidence of their love to him. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify us unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of
good works: And he will be the Author of eternal salvation only to them that
obey him Tit. ii. 12. H^b. v. 9.
.

HERE then, Christians, let us bring our love of CHRIST to this touchstone,
and try its sincerity and its strength. Do we love the Lord Jesus CHRIST in
sincerity? If so, then we study above all things to please him, and dread above
all things to offend him; -- then we have an exquisite relish for, and delight
in his service, and none of his commandments seem grievous to us, but the
practice of the most self-denying duties is rendered easy and delightful, by
that love which is the principle of our obedience; -- if so, then his Sabbaths,
his house, his ordinances, his glory, honor and interest in the world, his
laws and his people, are all of them dear to us, and beloved by us, for the
love which we bear unto Jesus; But, and if the contrary of all this is the
matter of fact, then the dreadful, tremendous conclusion is, That the love of
the Father abides not in us, and that we love not the Lord Jesus CHRIST in
sincerity!

2. UPON us, who are the Ministers of his everlasting gospel, the love of
CHRIST ought to have a mighty constraint. As Christians, we lie under the same
obligations of love, gratitude, imitation and obedience with others. We lie
involved in the same common ruin with the rest of our guilty race; -- have
ourselves to save, as well as them who hear us, and, therefore, have the same
obligations to CHRIST for his great salvation, and have the same motives and
necessity with others to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling,
and to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure.

BESIDES, the whole tenor and all the duties of our sacred office, tend
directly to beget and cherish (so far as instrumental means can) the habits of
holiness and universal obedience in our souls; and therefore, perhaps, lays us
under higher obligations to an examplary piety than others who enjoy not the
same advantages. As Christian Ministers, our obligations rise and multiply. We
are surrounded, as it were, and pressed on every side, with a vast variety of
the most cogent arguments and powerful motives to zeal, ardour and diligence in
the discharge of our ministry. We are debtors both to the Greeks and to the
Barbarians, to the wise and the unwise. A dispensation of the gospel is
committed unto us, a necessity is laid upon us, and woe unto us, if we preach
not the gospel; if we be not instant in season and out of season; reproving,
rebuking, exhorting with all long-suffering and doctrine Romans i. 14. 1 Cor. ix.
16. 2 Timothy iv. 2.
.

THE love of CHRIST constrains us -- charity and universal benevolence to the
souls of m^^ constrain us -- our ordination vows constrain us -- the blood of
souls will be upon us, if we are unfaithful or remiss: But if, on the other
hand, we are wise to win, souls to CHRIST; -- if we are faithful and successful
in our office, important will be our services among men, and great and glorious
our reward in heaven. If we turn many unto righteousness, we shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever; we shall
deliver immortal souls from perdition, and increase the number of the blessed,
and the hallelujahs of the redeemed. By the conversion of sinners, we shall
give joy in heaven, enlarge the Redeemer's kingdom, and promote his interest
among men; -- we shall weaken the kingdom of satan; defeat his malice;
counteract his destructive designs, and lessen the number of his unhappy
subjects. And, finally, every soul whom we are happily instrumental in saving,
will be a new gem in our diadem of glory, a fresh accession to our everlasting
joy and happiness, on that memorable and important day, when the LORD shall
make up his jewels, and give unto every man according to his works, and to the
deeds done in the body.

ANIMATED therefore by these glorious hopes; fired by these important
prospects; urged and pressed, as it were, on every side, with these almighty
motives and considerations, well might the love of CHRIST, the love of souls,
and a sense of duty and obligation, constrain the Apostles; -- well may they
constrain us their unworthy successors, to the most ardent zeal and unwearied
diligence in promoting the glory of GOD, the interest of CHRIST, and the
salvation of sinners; -- well may they cause us to look down with sovereign
contempt on that fear and favor of men, which b^ing a snare, in the discharge
of our duty, and engage us to be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in
the work of the LORD, knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in him; --
well may they steel and fortify our hearts against all the opposition of men
and devils, and cause us to cry out, with our steadfast, magnanimous Apostle, in
the face of bonds, imprisonments and death itself, -- None of these things move
us, neither count we our lives dear unto ourselves, so that we might finish our
course with joy, and the ministry which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the gospel of the grace of GOD Acts xx. 24.
.

WHEN the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls was about to ascend into heaven,
he thrice interrogated Peter in the same terms; Simon, son of Jonas, love
thou me more than these? To which, when the great Apostle had thrice answered
in the affirmative; Yea, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee. His Lord charged him to testify his love to him, by feeding his
lambs and his sheep John xxi. 15, etc.
." Do we therefore love the Lord Jesus CHRIST? Let us give proof of our love,
by feeding his lambs and his sheep, and nourishing up in the words of faith and
sound doctrine, those souls whom he has redeemed with his precious blood. And
O that they who hear us might learn to be wise to salvation; that, laying aside
all malice, and guile, and hypocrisies, and evil-speakings, as newborn babes,
they might desire the sincere milk of the word, and grow thereby. Amen and Amen.

ESSAY LX. CHRISTIANS, LIGHTS IN THE WORLD; OR, THE BEAUTY and EXCELLENCY of
the CHRISTIAN LIFE: A SERMON FROM PHILIPPIANS II. 15, 16.
That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of GOD without rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the
world, holding forth the word of life.
THE Christian character, my brethren, is a most lovely and amiable character;
although alas! it is a most rare and uncommon one in the world, even in the
Christian world, where, as all are Christians by name and profession, so all
ought to be such in deed and in truth. He is not a Jew, (says the Apostle) who
is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh:
But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart,
in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of man but of God
Romans 11. 28, 29.
. -- So may we say with regard to christianity: He is not a Christian who is
one merely in name and outward profession; but he only who has the heart, the
spirit the temper, the principles, and the conduct of a Christian, whose praise
is not of man only, but of GOD also. To be Christians indeed and in reality, my
brethren, is to be lights in the world, to be harmless and blameless;
unrebukeable and unreproveable, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. And not only so; not merely to be thus negatively good; but also
positively so; shining as lights to direct others in the way of life and
happiness -- Holding forth the word of life -- Holding forth our good examples,
as luminous torches or flambeaus, to conduct the feet of erring, wandering,
benighted travelers, into the path of peace and felicity.

As natural light is the most pleasing and comfortable object to the eye and to
the mind; -- as it reveals all natural objects to us; -- directs our steps in
this world; -- points out the dangers of our way, and enables us to distinguish
between that which is pleasant and eligible, and that which is hurtful and
pernicious. For truly, (as Solomon observes) the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun Eccle^. xi. 17.
. So truth and virtue, which answer much the same purposes in the moral and
intellectual worlds, as material light does in the natural, are beautifully
termed the light of the mind, in a figurative and metaphorical sense. Hence
also, GOD, the great source and examplar of all truth and virtue, is called
light. GOD is light, and in him there is no darkness at all. And CHRIST, who is
the brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person, is
called, by way of eminence, The light of the world; -- and that light which
lights every man, which comes into the world. The scriptures also, which are
the purest channels of truth and virtue to a benighted world, are called,
Lights in a dark place; -- a light to our feet, and a lamp or lanthorn thorn to
our paths.

AGREEABLE to all this; -- when sinners are converted, or turned from error and
vice, to truth and virtue, they are said to have their eyes opened; their
understandings enlightened, and to be brought from darkness to light, and from
the power of satan to GOD: And GOD is said to bring them out of darkness into
his mavelous light. Ye were sometime darkness, (says the Apostle) but now are
ye light in the Lord.

AND hence, true Christians are called children of the light, -- and commanded
to walk in the light; to shine as lights in the world, -- and to let their
light so shine before men, that others, seeing their good works, may glorify
our Father which is in heaven.

To be a true Christian, therefore, my brethren, is to sustain the most
honorable and beautiful of all characters: -- It is to imitate and resemble
GOD, who is the great source and fountain of light, and in whom there is no
darkness at all; -- to imitate and resemble CHRIST, who is the light of the
world, and the life of men; -- to imitate and resemble the saints, those brave
and generous souls, who, in all ages, have copied after GOD, and shone as
lights in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, holding
forth the word of life. -- To be true Christians, is to be as like to the
glorious GOD, both in virtue and happiness, -- and to do as much good to our
fellow creatures in our day and generation, as possibly we can: -- in a word,
to be as lovely, as venerable, as virtuous, as holy, as happy and as useful, as
the capacities of our limited, depraved nature will permit.

ST. PAUL had founded a church in Philippi, which worshipped the true GOD, and
received the LORD JESUS CHRIST, while many of their brethren and
fellow-citizens, still continued in their idolatry and infidelity. It was,
therefore, the desire and ambition of the good Apostle, that the converted
Philippians should labor for the conversion of their heathen brethren. He
desired, that the unbelieving and idolatrous Philippians, (who were attentive
and malicious observers of their Christian brethren, because of the new
religion they had embraced, and the new kind of life they had devoted
themselves to) should see nothing in them, but what was wise, reputable, and of
good report; and such as becomes the gospel of CHRIST.

THIS, however, it seems had not been the case, so much as the good Apostle
wished. These young converts although they had broke off from the idolatry and
infidelity of their neighbors, yet were still of very imperfect characters, in
point of morality: -- Although they had embraced the profession of
Christianity; yet they had not fully imbibed its spirit and temper. However
sound they might be in faith, yet they lacked that charity, which is the bond
of perfectness, and without which true Christianity, cannot either live or move
or have its being. No sooner had they broke off from their unbelieving and
idolatrous brethren, than they began to quarrel among themselves. This seems to
have been the true ground and motive, of the Apostle's noble and excellent
exhortation, in our text; which will ever be equally useful, and equally
applicable, while Christianity has a being in a corrupt, imperfect, world and
state.

Do all things, (says the Apostle) without murmurings and disputings: That ye
may be blameless and harmless, the sons of GOD, without, etc.

IN the words, we have three things observable, and which-shall (through the
divine assistance) be the subject of the present discourse.

I. THE post or station of a Christian in this world. He lives in the midst of
a crooked and perverse generation; who are, at heart, enemies to that holiness
which he professes; who will be close and malicious observers of all his
conduct; and who are capable of being either greatly benefited, or greatly hurt
by his example and conversation.

II. WE have the Christian's destination in this world; what divine providence
designs he should be; or what purpose he is designed to serve, in the midst of
a crooked and perverse generation. He is to shine as a light in the world:
Holding forth the word of life, -- that he may serve the double purpose of both
saving himself and others.

III. WE have the duty of a Christian in this world, in order to his answering
this destination of providence: He is to be harmless and blameless; a child of
GOD, without rebuke; that the gospel may not be blamed; that sinners may be
converted, and that his Christian brethren may be edified: In a word, He is to
let this light of his so shine before men, that others, seeing his good works,
may glorify our Father which is in heaven.

ARE there any amongst us, my brethren, who have the noble ambition, not only
of obtaining this heavenly felicity ourselves, but also of leading others in
the same road? Are there any amongst us, who have the noble ambition of
concurring with JESUS CHRIST in the work of human redemption? Let such learn,
to day, from St. Paul, to prosecute so noble a design by shining as lights in
the world; by being harmless and blamless as the children of GOD, without
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. May the holy Spirit
himself inspire us with this divine ambition -- and may the blessing of GOD,
attending this discourse, give us power and spirit to pursue so noble a design,
until our endeavors are crowned with heavenly glory. -- Amen.

I. THEN we are briefly to consider the post and station of a true Christian in
this world: -- He lives in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

THIS sentiment and expression of the Apostle might be easily justified and
illustrated, by considering the religion and morals of the Jews and Heathens,
amongst which the primitive Christians lived, to whom he here writes. The
character which our Savior and his Apostles have left us on record, both of
the Jews and Gentiles of that age, (and which is abundantly confirmed by
contemporary writers) makes it appear, that they were, indeed, "a crooked and
perverse generation."

THE Jews had scarcely the very shadow of religion left amongst them in that
abandoned age. The measure of their iniquity seems then to have been filled,
and they were ripe for destruction. To the Pharisees, the 'most numerous and
respectable sect amongst them, our Savior thus addresses himself -- Ye
serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
And, as to the Sadducees, they were men of atheistical principles, and
detestable morals.

FOR the morals and manners of the Heathens of that time, and into what a state
of luxury, bebauchery, and universal corruption they had degenerated, I might
refer you to their own historians, moralists and satyrists: But that portrait
which this Apostle himself has given us of the Romans, one of the most learned,
philosophical, and civilized Heathen nations, shall suffice in lieu of every
other authority. -- Being filled (says the Apostle) with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, backbiters, haters of GOD, despiteful,
proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents, without
understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable,
unmerciful; vile in their affections; changing the truth of GOD into a lie; and
worshipping and serving the creature more than the CREATOR, who is GOD over
all, blessed for ever Romans i. 21, -- 34.
. What a black catalogue of vices is this? And was not that a "crooked and
perverse generation," indeed, of which this was the general and prevailing
character?

BUT, my brethren, we need not go back to antiquity, to justify and illustrate
this observation of the Apostle. In every age of the world, GOD'S true church
and people, live in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

THE Apostle is still addressing every Christian amongst us, in the words of
our text, with equal propriety as he did his converts at Philippi -- Be ye
harmless and blameless, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, amongst whom ye shine as lights in the world. The world, as
distinguished from the church, ever has been, and ever will be, "a crooked and
perverse generation." This world has been ever distinguished into two grand
classes of men, diametrically opposite in their principles, ends, motives,
dispositions and manners, and generally distinguished in scripture by the
appellation of the world, and the church; -- the seed of the woman, and seed of
the serpent; -- the sheep and the goats; -- the tares and the wheat; -- the
righteous and the wicked; -- the children of this world, and the children of
light. If we attentively read the scriptures, we will find that the word world,
is generally used to represent the worst of these two classes. -- The world
(says St. John) lies in wickedness. -- The world (says he) knows us not. --
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him: For all that is in the world,
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not
of the Father, but of the world. St. James tells us, that the friendship of the
world is enmity with GOD; and therefore beseeches Christians, to keep
themselves unspotted from the world. St. Paul tells us, that the LORD JESUS
CHRIST gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present
evil world, according to the will of GOD; -- and therefore earnestly beseeches
Christians not to be conformed to this world, in its manners, customs, spirit
or maxims, but to be transformed by the renewing of their minds. If the world
hate you (says CHRIST to his disciples) ye know that it hated me before it
hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because
ye are not of the world, but I have chose you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you.

IT were easy, my brethren, to multiply quotations to this purpose; but surely
evidence enough has been produced to prove, that the world, in which Christians
live; or, that that company of men with which the church is contrasted, and
from which it is distinguished every where in scripture, is a crooked and
perverse generation.

THE same truth will evidently appear from the general maxims and prevailing
manners of the world, by which the crookedness and perverseness of their
sentiments and conduct will be clearly manifested. Will either the dictates of
enlightened reason, the best interests of society, or the gospel of CHRIST,
justify such maxims as the following: -- Youth is the proper season for
pleasure and gallantry: -- It is ridiculous to make much ado about religion: --
We should not aspire to be saints: All that religion requires of us, is to be
just and honest in our dealings: -- Calumny and ridicule are the salt or zest
of conversation: -- It is unworthy of a man of honor to put up with an
affront. Revenge is sweet: -- Ambition is the vice of noble souls: -- Impurity
is intolerable in women, but pardonable in men. We should be conformed to the
world, and act agreeable to its maxims. -- Which of these my friends, (and a
great many more might be added to the number) does not flatly contradict some
precept of CHRIST, and the very spirit and genius of Christianity? -- And yet
which of these maxims is not received in society as a first principle, against
the truth of which, it would be deemed affectation to dispute?

AND are not the prevailing manners of the world, exactly conformable to these
maxims? -- How few regard even the solemnity of an oath, where interest is
concerned? -- What faith is, now a days, to be put in the promises or
professions of men? The very form of religion is in such sovereign contempt,
that it is deemed highly impolite to introduce even the mention of it into
company. How few in Christian countries, comparatively speaking, attend the
ordinances of CHRIST, or pay any regard to the public worship of GOD? -- What
are the lives of the generality, but a course of mere extravagance, sensuality,
and dissipation -- of enquiry how they may provide for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof -- what they shall eat, or drink, and wherewithal they shall be
clothed, without a single serious thought about the state of their souls, or
eternity? If we enquire into the source of mirth and pleasantry in most
companies, shall we not find the laugh almost perpetually raised, either at the
expense of religion, or at the natural or moral failings and infirmities of our
fellow creatures? Subjects which drew tears from the eyes of David, and which
no right mind can contemplate, without pain and anxiety! Indeed, what is modern
wit and gaiety, but calumny, slander and profanity, rendered laughable, by the
ludicrous garb in which they are dressed? -- To all this, may I not add, that
some of the most scandalous and filthy vices are become so common and
fashionable in Christian countries, that to resist or decline them, would be
deemed an almost unpardonable singularity.

SURELY nothing more need be added to prove, That the world in which Christians
live, is a crooked and perverse generation; -- that to follow the multitude, is
to renounce the guidance of reason and religion; and that to be conformed to
this evil world, in its general customs, maxims and manners, is to imitate the
very worst examples, and to forfeit all that glory and happiness which the
gospel has set before us. I am now to lay before you, under the

II. HEAD of discourse, The Christian's destination in this evil world; or,
what purposes he is designed and appointed to serve in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation. -- He is to shine as a light in the world, holding
forth the word of life. Upon such a view of things, Christians may possibly
say, Since such is the world in which we live; -- since human society is so
empoisoned and corrupted, let us shun the contagion: -- Let us break off all
commerce with the living: -- Let us abandon the society of men, and, like
hermits, secure our innocence in obscurity and retirement, in the solitude of
deserts and caves of the earth. By no means, says St. Paul. Man is a social
creature, and is designed for society: Flee not, therefore, from the
destination of Providence: Continue in that world where the example of your
virtue is so necessary: Labor to disabuse and undeceive your fellow-mortals,
and to prevent them, if possible, from falling into misery: Let your life, your
conversation, and your whole deportment, be a reproach to their vices, and a
light to direct their feet into the paths of peace, holiness and happiness:
Shine as lights in the world; holding forth, in your example and behavior, the
word of life, for the direction and instruction of others.

THE Greek word, which we translate light, has a peculiar energy in the text.
It is compounded of two words, which signify an elevated light, or a light held
up, for the guidance and direction of others. The Apostle probably alludes to
the ancient Pharos, a tower or lighthouse, built by Ptolemy Philadelphus, on an
island of the same name, in the mouth of the river Nile in Egypt, on the top of
which a fire was kept continually kindled in the night, to direct vessels into
the harbor. The allusion, my brethren, is very plain and very beautiful. The
Christian serves as a guide and director to a crooked and perverse generation.
Elevated above the false maxims and corrupt manners of the world, he holds
forth before him the word of life; i. e. he shows and manifests, by his
example, that which the word of GOD demands of us, in order to our entering
into life eternal.

THE word of GOD is termed Psalm. cxix. 105.
, A light to our feet and a lamp to our paths, because it gives us direction in
the whole of our conduct. When our temporal and eternal interests clash and
interfere with each other, it puts that important and significant question,
What shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
In the time of affliction, it calls us to consider, and to humble ourselves
under the mighty hand of GOD, that he may exalt us in due season. -- Under the
influence of riches and prosperity, it directs us, not to trust in uncertain
riches -- to be rich in the good works of charity and liberality -- to be good
stewards of the manifold grace of God; willing to distribute; ready to
communicate: -- To make unto ourselves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when we fail here, they may receive us into everlasting
habitations. -- On a deathbed, and in the near prospect of eternity, it is a
light to our feet, and a lamp to our paths -- by representing death as a
conquered, disarmed tyrant; -- by opening an eternal world of glory to the
faith of the Christian; -- by assuring him, that when his heart and his flesh
fail, GOD will be the strength of his heart and his portion for ever; -- that
blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord, for they do rest from their labor
and their works do follow them.

Now, that which David says of the word of GOD, St. Paul here says of the
destination of the Christian. As GOD has given his word to be a light to men's
feet and a lamp to their paths, -- to guide their feet into the way of peace
and happiness, -- so he has also destined and appointed Christians, to shine
as lights in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, --
practically holding forth, and examplifying the word of life, for their
guidance and direction.

THE Christian's life and conversation should be the word of GOD reduced to
practice; a living comment on the word of life; so that the ignorant and wicked
world, who either cannot or will not read the word of GOD, may see it clearly
held forth, and plainly examplified in the life of the Christian. And indeed,
my brethren, what have the lives of the saints been, in all ages, but just a
holding forth of this word of life? They have preached more powerfully and more
effectually, by their lives and examples, than their doctrines, to those
crooked and perverse generations, among whom they shone as lights in the world.
GOD has set them up, in every age and generation, as beacons and Pharoses, to
stem the torrent of human depravity and corruption; -- to show the
practicability of virtue in human nature; -- to be a reproof and reproach to
prevailing vice and immorality, causing iniquity, as ashamed, to hide its face,
-- and to allure mankind into the paths of virtue and happiness.

WOULD we see, for instance, the preference which the interests of eternity
should have to those of time; let us behold it examplified in the conduct of
Moses, Who refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; esteeming the reproach of CHRIST greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt, because he had respect to the recompense of reward. -- In
the lives of Abraham and Joshua, we have the noblest examples of pious masters
of families: As for me, (says Joshua) and my house, we will serve the Lord. For
I know Abraham, (says GOD) that he will command his children, and his household
after him, to keep the way of the Lord, and to do justice and judgment Genesis
xvii. 19. Josh. xxiv. 15.
. -- In King David, the most fervent piety and animated devotion shine forth
conspicuously. -- Job taught the world, in his day, that dutiful submission and
entire resignation which we owe to the will of GOD in times of the deepest
calamity and affliction; What! shall we receive good at the hand of GOD, and
shall we not receive evil also; the LORD gives, and the LORD takes away, and
blessed be the name of the LORD Job i. 21. -- ii. 10.
. In Zaccheus we have a bright example of the proper use of riches, and the
great duty of restitution; -- Behold, LORD, the half of my goods I give to the
poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, I
restore him fourfold Luke xix. 8.
: And in the life of St. Paul himself, we have examplified a whole
constellation of Christian virtues and duties; -- the most examplary humility,
patience and self-denial; -- unparalelled zeal and diligence in promoting the
glory of GOD, and the salvation of men, -- and the most earnest desire of being
absent from the body and present with the LORD. -- All these answered the
designation of divine providence, and fulfilled this positive and active part
of their Christian calling: -- All these were burning and shining lights in the
world; holding forth the word of life to those crooked and perverse
generations, among whom divine providence had stationed and placed them.

NOR, my brethren, was this duty peculiar to these great lights of the ancient
world; it is equally the duty, the honor and the interest of every individual
Christian to the end of time, to be a burning and a shining light in his day
and generation, and thus to hold forth the word of life, to the crooked and
perverse generation, among whom he is stationed by divine providence.

MANY Christians, indeed, are not able to build churches, to found hospitals,
to preach or defend the gospel, or to propagate it to distant parts of the
world; -- but every Christian is surely able to live a good, virtuous and
examplary life. -- Every Christian is able to adron the doctrine of GOD his
Savior, to exhibit the virtues and graces of genuine Christianity; -- to
encourage virtue and piety, and discountenance vice and immorality as far as
his influence and example can reach. And this is every Christian's duty: Let
your light, (says CHRIST, the great Lord and Lawgiver of Christians) so shine
before men, that others seeing your good works, may glorify your Father in
heaven. -- Be ye harmless and blameless, (says the Apostle) the children of GOD
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. -- Have your
conversation honest among the Gentiles; (says St. Peter) having a good
conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in CHRIST -- and may, by
your good works which they shall behold, glorify GOD in the day of visitation.

THESE scriptures, my brethren, while they point out the duty of Christians,
also show the propriety and expediency of it. It is proper, it is fit and
expedient, that Christians should maintain and preserve an immaculate and
examplary character -- that the gospel may not be blamed; -- that their
profession may not be disgraced; -- that sinners may be reclaimed, and that the
church may be edified. They owe this duty to GOD, to themselves, to the Church,
and to that crooked and perverse generation, among whom GOD has placed them as
lights, to hold forth the word of life.

THIS is the positive part of the Christian's duty. He is to be actively holy
and examplary, in all manner of life and conversation; and that, not merely
from the selfish and contracted view of securing his own salvation; -- but
also, from the more catholic and charitable motive of promoting the salvation
of his fellow men; -- that he may prosecute the noble and GOD- like design of
saving both himself and those who behold his good conversation in CHRIST. --
Proceed we now,

III. To the negative duty of a Christian, in order to his answering this
destination of providence: He is to live harmless and blameless, as the child
of GOD, without rebuke.

THESE words must be understood here (as indeed every where else in scripture
when applied to men) not in their most rigid and strictly literal meaning, as
implying a sinless perfection: For, alas! in this sense, there is not a just
man upon earth, who does good and sineth not. In many things we all offend:
And if we say we have no sin, we are liars and the truth is not in us. They
must therefore be understood in a qualified sense, as only implying gospel
sincerity and evangelical righteousness. Be ye harmless, blameless and
irreproachable as the children of GOD; that is, pay a constant regard to the
laws of that great Master whom you serve, so far as human weakness and
infirmity will permit; and let it appear evidently even by the very nature of
those failings and short-comings which the weakness and imperfection of your
nature sometimes betrays you into, that your sins are not deliberate and
allowed, proceeding from a spirit of rebellion; but arising wholly from the
weakness and infirmity of your nature, in the present imperfect state. It is
said emphatically of the wicked (...) xxxii. 5.
, They have corrupted themselves; their spot is not the spot of GOD'S children;
they are a perverse and crooked generation. GOD'S children, it seems, have
their spots; but they are not the spots of the wicked. They sin not cordially,
presumptuously, allowedly, nor perseveringly. They love holiness and pursue it,
as far as the weakness and infirmity of their nature will permit. It is their
honest and hearty endeavor, to be harmless and blameless, the children of GOD,
without rebuke; and with the charitable and right-thinking part of mankind,
they generally obtain a good report, an irreproachable character. A real
Christian can join Job, with some sincerity, in saying: I will not remove my
integrity from me; my righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go? My
heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. And what was predicated of Job,
may, with some propriety, be said of him; That he is a perfect man, and an
upright; one who fears GOD and escheweth evil Job i. 1. -- xxvii. 6.
. It will be his great ambition and earnest endeavor, as a child of GOD, not
only to imbibe the temper and disposition of a child, crying Abba Father; but
also to imitate his heavenly Father in all those virtues and graces which
constitute his moral character, being holy as GOD is holy, pure as he is pure,
and merciful as he is merciful, in all manner of life and conversation.

IN VAIN, my fellow Christians, do we assume the character of being the
children of GOD. -- In vain are we the expectants of a glorious immortality, in
consequence of this assumed character: -- and, in vain do we impose on a
credulous world, by this hollow and hypocritical profession, while we are
unlike our heavenly Father in the temper of our minds, and the conduct of our
lives; while, instead of being harmless, blameless, unrebukeable and examplary,
we continue to be a perverse and crooked generation, and have lives and
conversations all blurred over with the spots of the wicked. Indignant heaven
must justly spurn such affrontive insolence; and that omniscient GOD, who
requires truth in the heart, and sincerity in the inward part, will appoint us
our portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing
of teeth. But I have already trespassed too long on your patience, and shall
beg leave to conclude, by addressing my most tender exhortations to two sorts
of persons: And, 1st, To such of you, my brethren, who, by your Christian
profession, and by a correspondent examplary life, have the honor of shining
as lights, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, holding forth the
word of life.

I CALL you, my brethren, to consider the grand and sublime of your Christian
character and calling. When St. Paul would animate his son Timothy to a zealous
discharge of the duties of his ministry, he tells him, Take heed unto thy self,
and unto thy doctrine: For, in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and
them that hear thee 1 Timothy iv. 16.
. He makes him a kind of subordinate savior; a fellow laborer and
fellow-worker with CHRIST, in the glorious work of human redemption.

BUT what Timothy did by his ministry, every Christian is called, in our text,
to do by his example. If, indeed, my brethren, you are harmless and blameless,
the children of GOD, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, among whom you shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word
of life, you shall not only save yourselves, but also be highly instrumental in
saving others. And oh! what an honor, what a blessedness is this? -- In
pursuing this design, you enter into the plan of redemption, and partake of the
honors of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Redeemer; -- you do a work the most
pleasing to GOD; the most profitable to yourselves, and the most beneficial to
your fellow creatures: -- A work which employed the counsels of GOD from all
eternity; -- and a work, on which he lavished (if I may so speak with
reverence) the life and blood of his dear Son; I mean, the salvation of poor
mortals.

BY this divine and God-like labor of love, you are also brightening your
immortal crowns and doubling your eternal rewards. For what is our hopes, (says
St. Paul to the Thessalonians,) or our joy, or our crown of rejoicing? Are not
even ye in the presence of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, at his coming? For ye are our
glory and our joy. -- In like manner, my brethren, those souls, to whose
salvation you have contributed, by your virtuous and pious examples, will be
your crown, your joy, and your glory, through eternal ages. In those regions of
perfect love, you will be happy, not only in seeing the happiness of those whom
you loved here, but also in having promoted their eternal happiness; -- in
having preserved them from the contagion of the age; -- in having recovered
them from a crooked and perverse generation, and in having snatched them as
brands from the burning. -- And O! my friends, can there be any difficulty
unconquerable -- any virtue too severe -- any self-denial too painful with such
motives as these before your eyes? Is it possible, that any frivolous pleasure,
or trifling emolument of sin, should have power or influence enough to rob you
of this glory, this joy, and this crown of rejoicing? I would,

2. BEG leave to address myself in a few words, to such as are unhappy enough
still to make a part of that crooked and perverse generation, amidst whom the
few righteous shine as lights in the world.

MY unhappy fellow-sinners! Let me beseech you in the spirit of love and
meekness, to enter into the views of providence, who has set those eminent
examples of virtue and piety before your eyes! For what reason has GOD, the
Father of mercies, kindled up so many burning and shining lights in this world
of his -- Men of our own nature and make, adorned with so many conspicuous
virtues -- who have been ornaments to human nature, and benefactors to the
world? -- Is it only that we should behold them with an eye of envy and
contempt? Is it only that we should blacken their characters, and pursue them
with calumny and slander; thus aggravating our own guilt and condemnation? --
Is it not that we should emulate their virtues, imitate their examples, and be
corrected, reformed and instructed by their manners?

LET us blush to think that men of the same common nature with ourselves;
composed of the same flesh and blood; animated with the same passions, and born
heirs of the same corruptions and infirmities, should have yet so far
outstripped us, in every thing noble, GOD- like, rational and divine? -- Are
not the same succors, the same promises of aid and assistance, the same
sources of grace, virtue and holiness, open to us, as were to Abraham, to
Moses, to Job, to Elijah, to Paul; and as are to all the good, the virtuous,
the pious, and examplary, of this as well as every foregoing age? Wherefore
then do we not avail ourselves of these advantages? -- Is there any assignable
reason why any of our fellow creatures should outdo us in any thing amiable,
lovely, virtuous, praiseworthy and of good report? Why any of our fellow-men
should excel us in the care of their own souls, or of the souls of their
fellow creatures? The saints, are the excellent ones of the earth, in whom
should be all our delight: Let us respect their virtues: Let us cherish their
acquaintance: Let us love their society, and follow their examples. Too, too
long have we scandalized the church, it is now time we should edify it. Too,
too long have we labored for the destruction of our fellow-men, it is now time
we should labor for their conversion and salvation. Too, too long have we been
joined to this crooked and perverse generation; this world which lies in
wickedness. -- It is now time we should shine as lights in the world; holding
forth the word of life, for the guidance and direction of those whom our bypast
evil examples have perverted and confirmed in their wickedness!

To conclude in one word: Let me address that exhortation to all of you, my
dear hearers, which St. Peter addressed to the Jews -- Save yourselves from
this untoward generation. -- Deliver yourselves from their principles, maxims,
customs and manners; from their sins and from their judgments. -- Make haste,
flee for your lives, lest ye perish. May GOD, the merciful Father of our
spirits, give weight to this exhortation, and set it home powerfully upon each
of our consciences; and to his great name shall be the eternal praise, through
JESUS CHRIST our only Lord and Redeemer. Amen and Amen.

ESSAY LXI. THE AGGRAVATED GUILT OF MURDER: A SERMON FROM EXODUS XX. 13.
Thou shall not kill.
IT may perhaps be deemed a little unseasonable and impolite to handle a
subject of this kind, before a civilized and christianized assembly. Methinks,
I hear some of my hearers object, and say, You pay us but a rude and unwelcome
compliment, by even supposing us capable of committing such an atrocious and
unnatural crime as this. Murder! The shedding of innocent blood! Our blood runs
chill, and freezes at the very thought of it. No; GOD forbid! Our hearts are
too tender and humane ever to harbor such a design, or listen to such a
temptation!

THERE was a time, my hearers, when most murderers could doubtless have said
all this, with as much confidence and sincerity as any of us now can, and when
their very souls would have shuddered at the thoughts of committing so great a
wickedness. But there was also a time when the increased strength of their
corruptions hurried them on to commit it with greediness, and under the most
aggravated circumstances of guilt.

ALAS! we little know the deceitfulness and desperate wickedness of our own
hearts, or the depth and inveteracy of our corruptions, when we imagine
ourselves above the danger or possibility of committing the greatest and most
atrocious crimes. The heart (says the prophet) is deceitful above all things
and desperately wicked; who can know it? It starts aside like a broken bow Jer.
xvii. 9.
.

WE look upon murder, (and justly) as the most atrocious crime which can be
committed by man -- we have no compassion for the persons of murderers, but
regard them as monsters of iniquity, who have even no claim to human pity: --
But I am persuaded, my friends, that nothing but the restraining grace of GOD,
prevents multitudes, who are thus merciless in their judgment of others, from
committing the very same crime. Cruel man! -- Thou have no mercy on thy
fellow-sinner! -- Thou think him unworthy the pity either of GOD or man! --
Thou deemest it impossible for thee to fall into the same wickedness! -- Yet
thou art proud, imperious, intolerant and unforgiving! Yet thy soul often
boils, ferments, and rankles with the passion of anger, fury, revenge, envy,
and malice prepense against thy neighbor! Yet thou prayest for his damnation,
and devisest evil against him, and wishest him dead, because he stands in the
way of some gratification, or has wounded thy imaginary honor, or hurt thy
pride! Be it known unto thee, O blind and merciless man, that thou art the very
murderer whom thou condemnest without pity; and that nothing but some
prudential motive, or rather, the restraining grace of GOD, bridling thine
outrageous passions, for the safety and security of human society, prevents
thee from perpetrating the very fact thyself, which thou think unpardonable
in another.

Thou shall not kill, says GOD.

IT would be paying a bad compliment to the understandings of my hearers, to
take up much of your time in showing you -- That there are many circumstances,
wherein the taking away of human life, is not to be deemed sinful or criminal;
-- such as chance-medly, when one man takes away the life of another, by mere
accident, without any knowledge or design in the action; -- (...)
manslaughter, on one's own defense, when a man from a principle of
self-preservation, is, as it were, compelled to take away the life of another
who assaults him unprovoked, in order to save his own. The same also happens in
a lawful, defensive war, when men are forced to destroy an invading enemy, in
defense of their own lives, liberties and properties; -- or, lastly, when men
have forfeited their lives, by such crimes as essentially affect the public
good and safety, and which are adjudged worthy of death, by laws human and
divine. In all these cases, and perhaps in some others, the taking away of
human life, is so far from being criminal, that it may be a duty which we owe
to GOD, our neighbor and ourselves!

THE crime therefore here forbidden by GOD, and which is emphatically expressed
in the English language by the word murder, is the shedding of innocent blood;
-- or wilfully and feloniously killing of another, upon prepensed malice;
whether secretly or openly; whether ourselves, or by others. And this prepensed
malice, is either, (1.) Express, when it may be evidently proved, that there
was ill will; -- or, (2.) Implied; when one kills another suddenly, having
nothing to defend himself: For, in such a case, the law justly presumes, that
there must have been malice. -- To this may also be added, the atrocious crime
of suicide, or a man's laying violent hands upon himself; -- as also, duelling,
which contains in it the essence and guilt of both the above crimes.

IN farther improving this subject, I shall, I. A little expose the heinous and
and aggravated guilt of murder. -- II. Show you that it is a crime justly
punishable by death. -- III. Endeavor to expose those passions, tempers and
practices which lead to it. I am,

I. A LITTLE to open and expose the heinous and aggravated guilt of murder. And
this may be shown 1st, From the very nature and consequences of the crime
itself; and, 2dly, From the light in which both the word of GOD, and the
consciences of men represent it. And,

1. FROM the very nature and consequences of the crime itself. (1.) Man is
fearfully and wonderfully made; made, we are told, in the image and likeness of
GOD. Man is GOD'S offspring and representative on this earth. His body is,
perhaps, the noblest piece of divine workmanship; and GOD, when he had made it,
breathed into it the breath of life, and made it a living and intelligent image
of himself! Now to break to pieces this living temple; -- to deface, undo, and,
as much as in us is, wantonly to destroy this workmanship of GOD; -- to
separate this soul and body whom GOD has joined together; -- to disunite and
take down this tabernacle, which GOD has built and set up, by a miracle of his
power, wisdom and goodness; -- what a daring crime? What an audacious
wickedness? All our power, wisdom and contrivance cannot give form, existence
or life to a worm; and shall we dare to destroy a fellow-man? Shall we perfume
to take away, in the wantonness of our pride and passion, that which all the
powers on earth, and all the angels in haven cannot give?

(2.) THAT GOD makes nothing in vain, is a maxim not to be disputed. Who knows
the destiny of a human creature, or for what purposes Providence may have
designed him? Presumptuous, short-sighted mortals that we are, we are apt to
pronounce a being worthless and useless, on whom his Maker may set much value,
and by whom he may do great things! When we see Saul persecuting the church,
and assisting in the stoning of Stephen, we may adjudge him worthy of death,
and think the world would be well rid of such a monster; yet this very Saul was
a chosen vessel, who was to proselyte half the Roman empire to JESUS! How many
wicked and worthless men, have become benefactors to the world and ornaments to
humanity!

How many pests to human society have become fathers of children, who have done
honor to human nature, and become the saviors of their country? -- This
should reach us not to despise the meanest of the creatures of GOD, or the
wickedest of men, who are still in a place of repentance. But the murderer does
what in him lies to defeat the designs of GOD'S providence, and cut off the
purposes of his will. True, he can never effect this: GOD'S counsel shall
stand, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations: For there is neither
wisdom or device, or counsel against the Lord! -- Yet no thanks to the murderer
for this -- who, in the rage or wantonness of his passions, cuts off a human
creature, who, for all he knew or considered, might have been appointed by GOD
to answer the noblest purposes, and to bring about the noblest designs in the
world!

CRUEL and inhuman mother! -- Know thou how useful, how worthy, how
ornamental a member of society, that child might have proved, whom thou art now
about to strangle or abandon to certain death; -- to what honors, to what
happiness, to what usefulness, to what degrees of future glory it might have
been advanced! -- Vile and savage barbarian, who, for the slightest
provocation, or to gratify the most diabolical revenge, art just about to
plunge the murderous steel into thy neighbor's bowels, or to level him to the
earth by a leaden death! -- Stop thy hand, till thou have considered, That thou
art now about to rob helpless children, of a father -- a helpless wife, of her
provider -- the poor and needy, of a helper -- his friends, of a friend, and
the world, perhaps, of a more useful member of society than thy worthless self!

(3.) THE chief end and design of this world and state is, that men should
prepare and provide for a better, and an eternal world. Human life was given
chiefly for this purpose, and would be worth nothing on any other supposition.
I may even affirm it, with confidence, that it would be unworthy of the wisdom
and goodness of GOD to create such a being as man, and to expose him to the
many calamities and afflictions of this life, merely for the small portion of
pleasure and happiness which he enjoys in it.

LIFE, human life, is a time and space of trial and probation for eternity. In
this view of it, human life is an invaluable treasure, and every moment of it
is of the utmost importance! For this purpose the Psalmist importunately prays;
LORD, cut me not off in the midst of my days; thy years are throughout all
generations Psalm. cii. 24.
. For this purpose we pray against sudden deaths; lest we should be hurried
into eternity, and before the judgment seat, with our sins upon us, and in an
unprepared state.

BUT, now, the murderer robs us of all our precious time, -- sends us suddenly
and unexpectedly before the tribunal of GOD, without the possibility of a GOD
have mercy; and, perhaps, plunges us, impenitent, into an everlasting hell of
misery and despair! -- O! what restitution can be made in this case! What
reparation for this injury! If any guilt can look too big for divine mercy, it
must be such guilt as this!

WHAT can our sorrow, what can our tears, what can even our blood do toward
atoning such aggravated guilt as this? Can we redeem this soul from hell? Can
we again give it a new state of trial and probation; or one hour wherein to
work out its own salvation?

(4.) THIS is a crime against humanity; a crime against all the soft, tender
and sympathetic feelings of the heart! It speaks an infatuated understanding, a
hard heart, a seared conscience! -- A man must first kill himself as it were;
do violence to all his feelings, as a man; have totally divested himself of his
humanity before he could imbrue his hands in the blood of his fellow creature,
his neighbor, his friend, his brother of the human race.

(5.) IT is a crime truly diabolical. The devil was a murderer from the
beginning; and hence he is called Abaddon and Apollyon, the destroyer. Envy,
malice and revenge, from which murder springs, as from its proper source, are
passions truly diabolical; and a man must indeed be a devil incarnate, before
he can coolly premeditate murder, and take pleasure, or enjoy gratification, in
spilling innocent blood. And this is the infamous glory of those, who scruple
not to declare, that revenge is sweet! If there be, indeed, a pleasure in this
kind of revenge, it is truly the pleasure of a devil, and perhaps the only
species of pleasure of which a devil is capable!

(6.) GREAT and horrible as the crime of murder is in itself, yet there are
many circumstances which may exceedingly aggravate and increase its guilt; from
the time when, and place where it is committed; from the persons upon whom, and
deliberate manner in which it is perpetrated. Perhaps it was a poor innocent, a
helpless infant! Perhaps it was an aged, indulgent father, or the child of our
bowels! Perhaps it was a brother, or a friend who sticks closer than a
brother, and whom we ought to have protected at the hazard of life! Perhaps it
was done deliberately, in cold blood, after long premeditation, and for some
slight provocation, or upon some mere punctilio of honor! Perhaps it was the
father of a family, whose helpless children depended wholly upon his life for
their support! These, and a number of other circumstances, render this crime
exceedingly heinous.

2. THE aggravated guilt of murder farther appears from the light in which both
the word of GOD, and the consciences of men, represent it. When Cain slew his
brother Abel -- The LORD said, what have thou done? The voice of thy brother's
blood cries unto me from the ground. And now thou art cursed from the earth,
which has opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand Genesis
iv.
. -- Your blood of your lives will I require, at the hand of every beast will I
require it; and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man's brother will I
require the life of man Genesis ix.
.

IT is a crime of a deep die, and of a crimson color; -- a land-polluting,
land-defiling sin. Ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are, for blood it
defiles the land, and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed
therein, but by the blood of him that shed it Exodus xxi. 12, -- 15.
. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood: Therefore shall the land mourn, and
every one that dwells therein shall languish Hos. iv. 2, 3.
. Ye know, (says the Apostle) that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him
1 John iii. 15.
. And how earnestly does the Psalmist pray, Deliver me, O LORD, from
blood-guiltiness Psalm. li.
. -- Surely, at the command of the LORD came this upon Judah, to remove them
out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, and for the innocent blood which he
shed: For, he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, which the LORD would not
pardon 2 Kings xxiv. 3,4.
!

THE heinousness of this crime is also manifest from those terrors of
conscience which generally follow the commission of it. How dreadful was the
case of Cain? My punishment, (says he) is greater than I am able to bear; --
from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond on the
earth, and it shall come to pass that every one that finds me shall slay me
Genesis iv. 14.
. -- How piercing is the lamentation of unhappy Lamech? Hear my voice, ye wives
of Lamech, hearken to my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a
young man to my hurt! If Cain shall be avenged seven fold, surely Lamech,
seventy and sevenfold! (See how his terrors are multiplied, from a sense of
his guilt Genesis iv. 24.
!) -- The same truth might be illustrated from the history of Joseph's brethren
-- of David -- of King Herod -- of Pontius Pilate -- of Judas the traitor, and
of many other murderers, in profane history. Indeed, it is very remarkable,
that man-slayers are haunted with the most frightful terrors, which leave them
little ease or peace of mind; and that many of those who have perpetrated the
most horrid murders, in the most secret manner, have been driven by these
terrors, to betray their guilt, to confess their crimes, and to die for them,
rather than enjoy a life, wholly insupportable!

NOR, my friends, are these terrors vain things: -- They have their ground in
the very constitution of our nature, and in that moral law which GOD has
written on the human heart. They are peculiar to men, to moral agents,
accountable creatures: And that GOD, who has implanted them in the human
breast, must be a liar and a deceiver, (with all reverence be it spoken) if
these terrors have not an object in nature, and if they are not the forerunners
of future punishment! I should now, in the

II. PLACE, show you that this is a crime justly punishable by death. But
indeed, this is a truth almost too obvious to need either proof or
illustration. Surely, if there is any capital crime committed among men, murder
is that crime. The divine law is express in the matter, and seems to insist on
the death of the murderer, at the risk of the community, without leaving any
room or plea for mercy. At the hand of every man's brother will I require the
life of man: Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed Genesis
ix. 6.
. He that smites a man that he die, he shall surely be put to death. -- He
shall have no refuge. -- Thou shall even take him from mine altar, that he may
die Exodus xxi. Lev. xxiv.
. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer; but he shall be
surely put to death. Ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are; it cannot be
cleansed of the blood shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it Deuteronomy.
xix. Exodus xxi.
. -- The most barbarous nations, even from the light of nature and reason, have
always deemed murder worthy of death -- as appears from the history of Jonah
and the mariners -- and the Barbarians of the island Melita, who, when they saw
a viper fasten on the hand of Paul, said, No doubt this man is a murderer,
whom, though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live Acts
xxviii. 4.
.

THE same passions and barbarity of temper which have led a man to commit one
murder, may lead him to commit many; -- and such are the dreadful consequences
of this crime, that it would be dangerous to spare the life of such a criminal,
unless we could be assured of his true conversion, which is a matter not easily
ascertained: And therefore no security could be given to society, for his
future good behavior.

It is very remarkable, that above all crimes, murder seldom goes unpunished
even in this life; Providence often strangely so ordering it that those who
have committed this crime in the most secret manner, have frequently been
discovered by the most surprising means, and brought to condign punishment,
often many years after the commission of the fact.

SINCE, therefore, my brethren, murder is such an atrocious crime, and
condemned by the laws of GOD and man to so shameful and ignominious a
punishment; how careful ought we to be, both as men and Christians, to mortify
such passions and tempers, and shun such practices as tempt and lead to it? --
To expose these, therefore, in a practical manner, and to caution my hearers
against them, is the

III. AND last head of discourse proposed.

1. THEN let us set a strict watch over our hearts, in their very inmost
thoughts, desires and movements. Out of the heart, says the wise man, are the
issues of life. This is the cockatrice's nest, where all the viperous brood of
malignant passions are hatched and brought forth. How often has an unfriendly
thought, harbored there, boiled up into malice and broke out into murder? --
We are apt to think little of anger, and freely to indulge it: With Jonah, we
think we do well to be angry: We let the sun go down on our wrath -- and keep
it from day to day, from week to week, and from month to month, fermenting in
our bosoms: We call to mind every circumstance that may aggravate our wrath,
and brood upon it in our minds night and day, 'till it rankles and festers into
malice -- never considering, that anger and malice are the very seeds of murder
-- nay, that they are murder itself in GOD'S account, and by the determination
of the gospel of CHRIST! -- What says Christ? Ye have heard, that it has been
said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill: But I say unto you, whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: And
whosoever shall say unto his brother, Raca shall be in danger of the council:
But whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire Matthew. v.
21, 22.
. We are commanded to be angry and not sin; and cautioned not to let the sun go
down upon our wrath! -- But alas! How difficult a duty is this? And yet how
important: How quickly does anger degenerate into ma^^ce and envy? And how
often do these malignant passions break out into rage, and end in bloodshed and
murder itself! Of what importance is it, therefore, that we should keep the
heart with all diligence, and crush and stifle those seeds of murder there,
before they become ungovernable and bring forth fruit unto death? -- How
dangerous is an irrascible temper? And therefore the wise man counsels, Make no
friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go; lest
thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul Prove. xxii. 24.
. From within, (says our Savior) out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murderers, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnesses; -- these are the
things which defile a man Matthew. xv. 18,19,20.
. This is the source of all corruption; the fountain and origin of all the
outward evils of the life, which sends forth iniquity, as a fountain sends
forth its waters. Of what importance is it, therefore, to watch over the heart,
and to have this fountain of the life cleansed and purified by grace! Were men
at any pains with their hearts -- would they look into these chambers of
imagery, and put a stop to the workings of iniquity there; -- would they give
no quarter, no indulgence, to the sensual and malignant passions, but instantly
crush and exterminate them as they rise in the imagination, and check the
thought of wickedness, which is sin; and, while they attempt this, would they
pray for GOD'S help, and that he would create in them a clean heart, and renew
a right frame of spirit within them, they would have few out-breakings of sin
in their lives. -- But just the reverse of this is the case of sinners; they
not only totally neglect the government of the heart, but freely invite evil
thoughts into it, and fondly cherish them there; so that their hearts are like
the sluggard's garden, a nursery of every poisonous and noxious weed, and
overrun with all the sensual and malignant passions. Whosoever hates his
brother, (says St. John) is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him 1 John iii. 11.
.

2. AVARICE, or covetousness, is often the cause of murder. The love of money,
has, in this respect, been the root of much evil -- which, while many have
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows Tim. vi. 7, -- 10.
. Many of the wholesale murders committed under the pretext of war -- and most
of the private murders committed in robberies, have sprung from this source.

AHAB committed this kind of murder on Naboth, for his vineyard. A king covets
a neighboring state, and sends his soldiers to murder the inhabitants, the
rightful proprietors, that he may possess it: And yet this shall be sanctified
by the name of a lawful war, -- and the murderers who fall in the attempt,
shall be said to die in the bed of honor; and the chief murderer, who set them
on, shall be called a mighty hero! And his name shall shine in the annals of
history! But that GOD who siteth on the throne of the universe, and is the
avenger of innocent blood, sees his guilt and shall repay it. -- If the poor
wretch, who, under a sense of provocation, takes away the life of his
neighbor, shall be deemed a murderer -- What shall we think of Caesar and
Alexander, and many other doughty heroes since their time, who have shed the
blood of many millions of innocent men, merely through avarice, or in the
wantonness of their pride and ambition, to acquire the fame of mighty
conquerors? -- What shall we think also of those, who, under a pretense of
religion, have shed tuns of Christian blood, by inquisitions, racks, faggots,
and every cruel invention of persecution, both heathen and antichristian? -- Is
it easy to find a name for these wholesale murderers? But the souls of them who
were slain, are crying from under the altar, How long, O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth Rev.
vi. 9.
? And verily GOD will hear their cry; for vengeance belongs unto him, and he
will repay it! Let us therefore beware of covetousness, ambition and
superstition, which so often lead to blood-guiltiness!

3. DRUNKENNESS often leads to, and ends in the sin of murder. What says the
Wise Man? Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has
babblings? Who has wounds without cause? They that tarry long at the wine; for
at last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder Prove. xxiii. 29, --
32.
. While they are drunken as drunkards, (says Naham) they shall be devoured as
stubble sully dry. -- Wine is a mocker, (says Solomon) strong drink is a
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise. How many unnatural
quarrels; wounds without cause, and even murders, have been the consequences of
intoxication? And, indeed, what else can we expect, when the understandings of
men are extinguished, their passions enflamed, and their reason dethroned? in
such a situation as this, to what lengths of excess may not men go? Or what is
to restrain them from committing the most atrocious crimes? -- The light of
reason is put out; the judgment is all darkness and confusion; and the
passions, like a boisterous sea, are all in a rage and ferment! They have no
guide; no guard; no director! Their words and actions are all at random; and
are more likely to have a bad than a good direction.

INDEED, the generality of private murders, are owing more or less to this
cause. Ought not this, therefore, to be better than a thousand arguments for
sobriety, and against drunkenness? Can we possibly be over cautious against an
excess, which unmans us, which deprives us of the guidance of reason, proves a
stimulus to all the passions, and renders us the dupe of every temptation, and
liable to commit the greatest and most destructive crimes? -- How many
thousands are there this day in the world, who have suddenly committed such
crimes in their liquor, in a drunken, unguarded moment, as have ruined
themselves and their families, and as they never would probably have thought of
in sobriety?

WE have reason to tank GOD, indeed, that this vice is not very common amongst
us. But surely we cannot guard too much against it. The

4. AND last source of murder which I shall mention, is the false notions of
honor and shame, which prevail in the world; and it is the devil's interest to
maintain them and keep them up in the minds of men, as they contribute so
largely to the peopling of his kingdom.

THE fear of shame has drove many unhappy mothers, to commit the most unnatural
and barbarous of all murders, upon the fruit of their own bodies -- their
smiling, helpless infants? -- A dread of the imputation of cowardice, from the
meanest and vilest part of the human species, has driven many a man to commit
murder upon his neighbor, or to expose himself to the same fate, against every
dictate of reason, humanity, charity, and even self-preservation.

How many men deem themselves as much in honor and duty bound, to take away a
man's life, who, in passion, would give them the lie, (when, perhaps, it was
only giving them their due!) -- as to perform any duty of justice, charity or
mercy! And what is very remarkable, these men of honor, these heroes of the
point, are often persons of the most infamous principles, and of the most
insolent and provoking behavior; so that those who converse with them, are
under the sad dilemma, either of treating them with a respect which they by no
means deserve; or, of being run through the body, for telling them a naked, and
oftentimes a seasonable truth!

AND yet the person who, from Christian principles, or from the principle of
self-preservation, would decline this way of determining a point of honor,
must lose the esteem of the world, and be posted and stigmatized as a coward!

How many murders have had their rise from a word misunderstood, from an
affront never designed, or from other punctilios so trifling, as not to deserve
the smallest degree of resentment?

To conclude. Would we be removed at the greatest possible distance from the
commission of this heinous and atrocious crime,

(1.) LET us labor to obtain a sound conversion! Let us pray that GOD would
give us a new heart and a right frame of spirit; that he would root out of our
heart every bitter root of malice, envy and revenge, and that he would implant,
in their stead, the principles of humanity, mercy, meekness, patience and
Christian charity; that we may do justly, love mercy and walk humbly with our
GOD!

(2.) LET us keep a strict watch and guard over our passions and appetites;
those lusts which war against the soul, and hurry it no to every species of
excess.

AND while we watch, let us pray that we enter not into temptation; that GOD
would, by his grace, keep us from falling; and powerfully assist and uphold us
in every time of need. And,

LASTLY; let us shun evil company, which is often the occasion of these sins.
Evil communications corrupt good manners.

THE mischiefs which have arisen from evil company, and the snares which men
have been brought into by it, are innumerable. Blessed is the man, that walks
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor
sits in the seat of the scornful, (says David Psalm. i.
). He that walks with the wise, shall be wise; but a companion of fools shall
be destroyed. My son, (says Solomon) if sinners entice thee, consent thou not:
walk not thou in the way with them: Refrain thy foot from their path: For their
feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood. Enter not into the path of the
wicked, and go not in the way of evil men: Avoid it, pass not by it; turn from
it and pass away: For they sleep not unless they have done mischief.

MAY GOD sanctify these instructions of his word to us, and make them operative
on our hearts, and fruitful in our lives, through the power and Spirit of
CHRIST. Amen.

THE END.
A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.
N. B. Those whose places of residence are not particularly specified, are all,
either inhabitants of St. Croix, or persons who are connected with that Island,
and who have subscribed there.
A
CHARLES Aitkin, Esquire 2 books. George Aitkin, Esquire Alexander Armstrong, Esquire 3
books. Thomas Armstrong, Esquire Peter Adjett, Esquire Mr. Francis Adjett. Mr. William
Armstrong. Mr. Robert Allen. Mr. Andrew Anderson, 2 books. Mr. Nathanael Allt.
Mrs. Elizabeth Abbot. Mrs. Jermina Allen, Edenton, N. Carolina.
B
Lucas Von Beverhoudt, Esquire Commissary-General of War, 3 books. Lucas
Uytendaele, Baron Von Bretton, 2 books. John Balthazar Uytendaele, Baron Von
Bretton. John Uytendaele, Baron Von Bretton, 2 books. Fredrick Uytendaele,
Baron Von Bretton, 2 books. Lieutenant Creuzer Von Beverhoudt. Lieutenant
Severin Bag, 2 books. Dominicus Bragg, Esquire King's Weigh Master, 2 books.
Peter Severin Balling, Esquire 2 books. Johannes Broen, Esquire Mr. Fredrick Brandt,
King's Clerk. Mr. Jorgen Biering. Jacob Boffron jun. Esquire 2 books. Doctor John
Barnes, John Barnes, sen. Esquire Mr. Isaac Barnes. Mr. Thomas Bogle. Mr. James
Bladwell. James Barret, Esquire Richard Brown, sen. Esquire Mr. John Bryan. Mr. Richard
Brown. Mr. Joshua Buntin. Mr. James Bran. Mr. Alexander Berry, 3 books. Mr.
Francis Berry, 2 books. Mr. William Berry. Mr. Richard Brampton. Mr. John Bean,
Tortola. Mr. Simeon Banyea, St. Eustatius. Mr. Abel Blyden, sen. Ditto. Mr.
Abel Blyden jun. Ditto, 2 books. Col. Thomas Bouner, Edenton, N. Carolina, 6
books. Mr. James Boush, Hertford Town, N. Carolina. Mrs. Jean Blair, Edenton,
North Carolina, 3 books. Mr. William Bennet, Edenton, N. Carolina, 6 books. Mr.
William Boush, Hertford Town, N. Carolina.
C
His Excellency PETER CLAUSEN, Esquire his Royal Majesty's Knight of the order of
Danebrog, Major General, and Commander in Chief, over his Danish Majesty's
Charibee Islands in America, 2 books. Hans Christian Cretz, Esquire King's
Treasurer, 2 books. Ferdinand Augustus Chari^ius, Esquire Receiver of his Majesty's
old debts. The Honorable Major Cronenberg, Esquire St. Thomas. Thomas Collins, Esquire
Thomas Craven, Esquire 6 books. Nicolas Cruger, Esquire Mr. Josiah Crane, St. Thomas.
Mr. John Coyler, Ditto. Mr. Robert Crawford, 2 books. Mr. Arthur Cooper. Mr.
John Coakley, jun. Mr. Lewis Culture. Mr. James Christy. Mr. John Conner, 2
books. Capt. George Godivise, 2 books. William Cox, Esquire Tortola. Mr. Joseph
Cox, St. Eustatius. Mrs. Elizabeth Ester Cox, Ditto. Doctor Anthony Clark, St.
Kitts. Capt. John M'Crohan, Edenton, N. Carolina, 6 books,
D
The Honorable Jan Dewindt Esquire General and Commander in Chief, of the Islands
St. Eustatius, Saba, and St. Martin, 12 books. Guert Spt. Dewindt, Esquire
Commissary at War, 2 books. John Jacob Dewindt, Esquire 12 books. G. S. Dewindt,
Esquire St. Thomas, 2 books. Jacobus De Veer, Esquire 4 books. The Reverend Terrence
M^Donnel, St. Thomas, 2 books. The Reverend James Des Vories, The Thomas
Dunbavin, Esquire Mr. Thomas Durant, 2 books. Mr. Cornelius Durant, 2 books.
William Samuel Dracott, Esquire 3 books. Charles Daly, Esquire 4 books. Doctor Peter
Duncan, 2 books. Miss Elizabeth Delaney Colhoun, 2 books. Mr. Judah De Leon.
Mr. Samuel Dewindt. Capt. Jacob Dischingthun, King's Pilot. Jacobus Dam, Esquire 2
books. Mr. Frederick Dellgast. Capt. Booy Dircks, from Copenhagen. Mr. James De
Luy. Mr. Francis De Luy. The Honorable James Dawson, Esquire M. D. Tortola, 6
books. John Downing, sen. Esquire Ditto. John Downing, jun. Esquire Ditto. Doctor Doty,
Ditto. Doctor Robert Dougan, Ditto. Mr. Daniel Davis, St. Eustatius. Mr. Thomas
Davis, Ditto. Mr. John Deweaver, Ditto. Mrs. Ann Deweaver, Ditto. Mrs. Rebecca
Deweaver, Ditto. Doctor Samuel Dickinson, Edenton, North Carolina, 6 books. Mr.
William Dermosdy, Schoolmaster, Edenton, N. Carolina, 12 books.
E
The Reverend Mr. Seven Egeroed. Isaac Evens, Esquire Mr. Richard Edney. Mr. James
Every, St. Eustatius. Rev. Daniel Earl, Rector of St. Paul's parish, Chowan
county, North Carolina, 6 books. Mr. Benjamin Elliot, Hertford Town, N.
Carolina.
F
Henrick Fibeger, Esquire Collector of the King's Customs at Fredrickstaed. Roger
Ferral, Esquire Mr. Daniel Fraser, 3 books. Mr. Thomas Fletcher, 2 books. Daniel
Fox, Esquire Mr. Robert Fulton. Mr. George Faulkener. Mr. William French. Mr.
William Freeman. Florence Fret, Esquire Tortola, Martin Fret, Esquire Ditto. Mr. Robert
French, Merchant, Ditto, 6 books.
G
Hans Gionge, Esquire Naval Lieutenant. Tycho Christian Grutsmann, Esquire King's
Store-keeper, 2 books. The Reverend Mr. Cecil Wray Goodchild, Christianstaed, 4
books. John Guldager, Esquire Comptroller, 2 books. George Goslein, Esquire 2 books.
George Gordon, jun. Esquire 2 books. John Gordon, Esquire 2 books. Mr. Alexander
Gordon. Mr. Alexander Grant, 5 books. Mr. Collin Grant. Capt. Thomas Guion. Mr.
Paul Gallaudet, St. Thomas. Mr. James Gardner, Ditto. Mr. John Gibbs, Tortola.
Mr. John Green, Edenton, North Carolina, 3 books.
H
Johan. Friderich Heinrich, Esquire Intendant. Engebret Hesselberg, Esquire Commissary
General of War, 2 books. Christian Siegfried Heldwad, Esquire Judge in
Christianstaed, and dependencies. Christoph. Kinck Hansteen, Esquire King's
Book-keeper, 2 books. Rapzart Heyliger, Esquire 2 books. Mr. Hans Hoij. Mr. Adam
Gotlob Horrebow, King's Clerk. Honorable Major Hendericksen, 4 books. Madam
Ruth Home, 4 books. Madam Mary Aletta Heyliger, 3 books. Capt. Martin Heyliger,
Esquire 2 books. Capt. John Heyliger, Esquire 4 books. Pieter Heyliger, Esquire A. Z. 3
books. Mrs. Mary Hartman, 2 books. Mrs. Martha Hansen. Miss Mary Hassel. Isaac
Hartman, Esquire sen. 6 books. William Hartman, Esquire 2 books. Mr. Joseph Hartman.
Mr. Thomas Hill. Mr. Horatio Herbert, 4 books. F. C. Heitmann Esquire Capt. Samuel
Howard. Secretary Host, Esquire St. Thomas. G. Han^ler, Esquire Ditto. Capt. Benjamin
Hammatt, 2 books. Abraham Howel, Esquire Mr. John Hatchett. Mr. Abraham Hatchett.
Mr. Robert Hallet. Mr. Joseph Hallet. Mr. Adam Henderson. Mr. Patrick Hughes.
Mr. Samuel Haynes. Mr. Richard Tothill Hunt. Richard Hetherington, Esquire Tortola.
Rev. Benjamin William Hutchinson, St. Kitts. Mr. Joseph Hovey, St. Eustatius.
Mr. Hercules Hassel, Ditto. Mr. John How, Ditto. Mr. William Hill, Ditto, 2
books. Mr. Anthony Hill, Ditto. Mr. Josiah Hill, Ditto, Mr. William Holman,
Ditto. Mr. Lawrence Haddocks, Ditto, 2 books. Mr. John Herbert, Ditto. Mrs.
Rebecca Heiffernam, Ditto. Col. John Harvey, Speaker of the Assembly of North
Carolina, Perqueman's county, 6 books.
I
The Honorable Reinkard Iselin, Esquire in Copenhagen, Counselor of Conferences,
2 books. Elias Jacobi, Esquire Counselor of Chancery. Charles Frederick Iselin,
Esquire Copenhagen. Mr. Henning Junghans, King's Clerk. John Irwin Esquire 4 books.
Doctor James Irwin, 2 books. Doctor John Johnson. John James, Esquire John Jukes
Esquire 2 books. Mr. John Jamison. Honorable Robert Johnston, Tortola, 2 books,
John Johnson, Esquire St. Kitts. Mr. John Johnson, St. Eustatius. James Iredell,
Esquire Collector of the Customs of Port Renoke, Edenton, North Carolina, 4 books.
Thomas Jones, Esquire Attorney at Law, Edenton, North Carolina, 6 books.
K
The Honorable Colonel Krause, 5 books. Capt. Cornelius Kortright, Esquire 4
books. Mr. Alexander Kennedy, 4 books. Mr. William Kuembel. Mr. Samuel Knox.
Joh. Nicol. Kragh, Esquire St. Thomas. Mr. Phil. Peter Krogh, Ditto, 2 books. Mr.
John Christoph. Kempff. Lieutenant Carl Adolph Von Kohl. Christian Frederick
Kipmasse, Esquire Mr. Johannes Knudsen. Mr. Uz. Kender, St. Eustatius. Mr. William
Keeve, Ditto. Mrs. Clarinda Kaels, Ditto. Mrs. Eleanor Kelly, Ditto. Andrew
Knox, Esquire Merchant, Hertford Town, North Carolina, 12 books.
L
Wilhelm Anthony Lindemann, Esquire Counselor in the government, 2 books.
Christian Frederick Laurberg, Esquire Regiment Quartermaster, 2 books. Jacob
Linberg, Esquire 6 books. Mr. James Love, 2 books. Mr. Abraham Lynsen. Mr. Steven
Large. Mr. Richard Lindsey. Mr. Victorious Looby. Capt. William Lightbourn, 3
books. Mr. James Leitch, Tortola. Mr. John Lynch, St. Eustatius. Mr. James Le
Cand, Ditto. Mr. Charles Sim. Leverock, Ditto. Mr. William Littlejohn,
Merchant, Edenton, North Carolina, 6 books. Mrs. Sarah Lindsay, Hertford Town,
N. Carolina. Miss Sarah Lippencott, Hertford Town, N. Carolina. Mr. Samuel
Loudon, Bookseller, New York, 12 books.
M
Frederic Christian Moth, Esquire his Danish Majesty's Grand Bailiff, and
Counselor of State, for self, and The Right Honorable Bolle William Luxdorph,
Knight of the Order of Dannebrog, Counselor of Conferences, and first Deputy
of the Royal Chancery, 5 books. Frederic Moth, Esquire Capt. of Infantry. Otto
Christian Muller, Esquire Secretary, and Notary Public of St. Croix, 3 books. Mrs.
Elizabeth Maas, relict of the Rev. J. T. Wilhelmus Maas, deceased. Jorgen Hans
Muller, Esquire 2 books. Martin Meyer, Esquire 4 books. Mrs. Elizabeth M'Grath.
Christopher Mardenbrough, Esquire 6 books. Mr. David M'Farlane, 3 books. Mr. Walter
M'Farlane, 3 books. Mr. John M'Farlane. Capt. William M'Dougall, Esquire 2 books.
Mr. John Murray. Mr. John Mitchell. Mr. Donald M'Gillivray. Mr. Paul Martin.
Doctor John Martin. Mr. Thomas M'Nobney. Mr. Andrew Murdoch. Mr. Allen
M'Laghlan, 3 books. Mr. Lachlan M'Laghlan. Capt. John Morris. Mr. Hugh Morris,
M. D. Mr. Peter Markoc. Mr. Charles Molineux, 2 books. Mr. Arthur Miller, 2
books. Hon. -- Malleville, Commandant, St. Thomas. Christ. Morch, Esquire
Cammerreer, Ditto. Mr. John Magens, Ditto. Mr. Thomas Magens, Ditto. Mr. James
Moreton. James M'Leverty, Esquire Lieutenant in the British Navy, 2 books. Mr.
Christ. Mardenbrough, St. Kitts. The Honorable Henry Martin, Tortola, 12
books. Mr. Peter Markoe, St. Eustatius. Mr. George Markoe, Ditto. Mrs. Elianor
Markoe, Ditto. Mrs. Elizabeth Markoe, Ditto. Mr. Daniel Markoe, Ditto. Mrs.
Judith Markoe, Ditto. Mr. Isaac Moore, Hertford Town, N. Carolina. Doctor
Nathaniel Martyn, Hertford Town, N. Carolina. Reverend John Mason, Minister of
the Scotch Church, New York.
N
Pieter Heyliger De Nully, Esquire 2 books. Johan. August. Noser, Esquire Surgeon of
the King's troops in St. Croix. Honorable George Norman, Tortola, 2 books. Mr.
Francis Newby, Hertford Town, N. Carolina. Mr. William Newbold, Hertford Town,
N. Carolina.
O
Capt. James Ogilvie, 2 books. Mr. Matthews Osborn. Mr. Hans P. Obel. Mr.
Daniel Outwait. Mr. Richard O'Cain, Printer, St. Croix.
P
Paul Prihn, Esquire Commissary for the Reconciliation Court in Christianstaed, and
Agent for the Royal Guinea Company, 2 books. Honourabe Judge Prihn,
Frederickstaed, 4 books. Peter Nicholas Porth, Esquire Copenhagen. David Porth, Esquire
Mr. Lucas Passavant, London. Mr. Leonhard Passavant, in Tranquebar. Mr. Hans
Ulrich Passavant, St. Croix, 2 books. Mr. James Paterson. Doctor John Porter.
Pieter Pieterson, St. Thomas. James Potter, Merchant, Tortola, 6 books. Mrs.
Catherine Pantophlet, St. Eustatius. Daniel Peterson, Ditto. Mr. M^^hal Pain,
Merchant, Edenton, North Carolina, 6 books. Mr. Benjamin Philps, Hertford Town,
N. Carolina. Mr. William Reed, Perqueman's county, N. Carolina. 2 books.
Q
Mr. Isaac Quereau.
R
Julius Von Rohr, Esquire Director of his Majesty's buildings, and Surveyor.
Lieutenant Joseph De Rogiers, 2 books. Johannes and Pieter De Rogiers, Esqrs 2
books. Pieter Heyliger Robinson, Esquire 3 books. John Peter Richardson, Esquire 2
books. William Ravenshaw, Esquire 2 books. John Rengger, Esquire 2 books. Rasmus
Gottfried Robel, Esquire James Robertson, Esquire 3 books. Mr. James Rodger. Mr.
William Rayn. John Rogers, Esquire 2 books. Mr. John Russell, 2 books. Mannin
Rogers, Esquire 4 books. John Rattune, Esquire Mr. John Ruan. Christian Robel, Esquire St.
Thomas. Mr. Levien Jorgen Rohde, Ditto. Johannis Revene, Esquire St. Eustatius.
S
The Right Honorable Hinrich de Stamp, Esquire in Copenhagen, Knight of the Order
of Danebrog, etc. The Honorable Ludwig Hindrich Schimm^lmann, Esquire Lieutenant
Colonel of the King's infantry, and Commandant of St. Croix, 3 books. Jens
Reimert Schumacher, Esquire Counselor in the government, 2 books. Johannes
Sobotker, Esquire in Copenhagen, Counselor of Exchequer, 2 books. Abraham
Schneider, Esquire his Majesty's Agent in Copenhagen. Adam Sabother Esquire The
Honorable Niels Bernt Suhr, Esquire Upper-Judge in St. Croix, 3 books. Lieutenant
Johann Ernst Stu^p. Peter Sorensen, Esquire Attorney at Law. Doctor John Smith, 3
books. Madam Elizabeth Sevel. Christ. Anth. Seybeck, Esquire Attorney at Law.
Doctor John Smith, 3 books. Mr. Nathanael Strode. Mr. Hans Schafte. Mr. James
Skinner, 2 books. Cornelius Stalla^rdt, Esquire Mr. Thomas Stridiron. Thomas Smith,
jun. Esquire 2 books. Thomas Smith, sen. Esquire St. Thomas. Mr. Fran. Schattenbrand,
Ditto. Mr. Anth. Surian, St. Thomas. Mr. Daniel Sharry, St. Ki^ts. Mr. Peter
Sandiford, St. Eustatius. Mr. John S. Simmons, St. Eustatius, 2 books. Mrs.
Mary Stevenson, Perqueman's county, N. Carolina. Mr. Humphrey Simons, Hertford
Town, N. Carolina. Mr. John Stafford, Hertford Town, N. Carolina.
T
Fridrick Trott, Esquire Comptroller of his Majesty's Customs, 2 books. Johann
Christopher Testman, Esquire 2 books. Pieter Taarling, Esquire 2 books. Mr. Arnoldus
Ten Hoorn. Samuel Thompson, Esquire 2 books. James Towers, Esquire Dealing-Master, 3
books. John George Thomas, Esquire 6 books. Mr. Alexander Towers, M. D. 2 books.
Mr. Daniel Thomas. Mr. Daniel Thibou, Printer. Doctor Thomas Trow, 2 books.
Thomas Tucker, Esquire Mr. Mary Turnbull. Mr. Francis Tailor. George Tucker, M. D.
St. Thomas. Mr. Thomas Transfield, Ditto. Thomas Tomlinson, Esquire Tortola. Mr.
James Todd, St. Croix.
V
Capt. Paul Vaughan, Esquire Mr. William Venton. Mr. John Vanderpool, jun. Mr.
Albert Ursin. William Vanderpool, Esquire Tortola. Mr. Thomas William Vaughan, St.
Eustatius. Mr. William Vanderpool, Ditto.
W
Got^lieb Wolff, Esquire Laers Wiel, Esquire 3 books. George Werligh, Esquire Mr. James
Warden, 5 books. Thomas Wylly, Esquire ^ books. Mr. William Van Wyck. Mr. James
Waterson, 2 books. Capt. George Wells, 2 books. Mr. Gilbert Woodward. Mr.
Joshua Whitchead. Mr. Christopher Williams. Miss Mary Willis. Mr. John Wallace,
Mr. R. Willumsen, Esquire Mr. Thomas Willard. Mr. John Wharton. Mr. Robert White,
St. Eustatius. Nathaniel Williams, Esquire Merchant, Hertford Town, North Carolina,
6 books. Mr. Benjamin Wright, Hertford Town, N. Carolina. George Whedbec, Esquire
Perqueman's county, 2 books. Mr. Joseph Wyall, Tyrell county, N. Carolina, 2
books. Mr. Judith Wilkins, Chowan county, N. Carolina.
Y
Mr. Benjamin Yard. Mr. Matthew Yorath. Mr. William Young.
The Author begs leave to return thanks to all his Subscribers, for the genteel
encouragement they have given him; but more especially, to the inhabitants of
St. Croix, of all denominations, who have subscribed for not less than 450
books; which is, indeed, but one among many instances of respect and civility
he has received from them since his residence among them. He heartily wishes
the work was more worthy of their acceptance, and hopes, that his distance from
the press will apologize for any little errors or inaccuracies which may appear
in the work.


