STRICTURES ON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED "A Friendly Address TO ALL reasonable
AMERICANS, ON THE Subject of our Political Confusion." Addressed to the People
of AMERICA.

"Let Us canvas Him in his broad Cardinal's Hat." SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA,
Printed: NEWPORT: Reprinted and Sold by S. SOUTHWICK, in Queen Street, 1775.

STRICTURES, etc. TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA.
A PAMPLET, entitled A friendly address to all reasonable Americans, advertised
and sold by Mr. James Rivington, of New York, is of so extraordinary a nature
that it is difficult for any Man, who is interested in the welfare of the
Community (whatever contempt he may have for the performance) to remain silent.
-- I know not whether the author is a Layman or Ecclesiastic, but he bears
strongly the character of the latter. -- He has the want of candor and truth,
the apparent spirit of persecution, the unforgiveness, the deadly hatred to
Dissenters, and the zeal for arbitrary power, which has distinguished Churchmen
in all ages, and more particularly the high part of the Church of England; I
cannot help therefore considering him as one of this order.

THE design of his pamphlet is manifestly to dissolve the spirit of union, and
check the noble ardor prevailing through the continent; but his zeal so far
outruns his abilities, that there is the greatest reason to think that his
Reverence has labored to little effect. -- His discretion seems to be still
less than his genius. -- A man of common judgment would not so wantonly have
attacked the general reigning principles and opinions of a people, whom he
intends to seduce or intimidate out of their rights and privileges: For
instance, I believe there are ninety-nine Americans in a hundred, who think
that Charles the First was an execrable tyrant, that he met with no harder fate
than he deserved, and that his two sons ought in justice to have made the same
exit. To descant therefore on the criminality of the resistance made to that
tyrant; to affect on every occasion giving the title of rebellion to the civil
war which brought him to justice, is a degree of weakness which no man who is
not blinded by the Demon of jacobitism could possibly be guilty of. -- But to
preach up, in this enlightened age (as he does in almost express terms) passive
obedience, is a mark of lunacy, or at least it proves that the moment a head
begins to itch for a mitre, it looses the faculty of reasoning, for if the
principle of passive obedience is admitted, the gracious Prince, for whom his
Reverence professes so great a devotion, is a downright usurper, and the
Parliament of which he speaks so respectfully, Lords and Commons, are rebels
and traitors.

The doctrines he aims to inculcate, are as follow -- That the Parliament has a
right to tax you without your consent; that the duty upon tea is no tax; that
this duty is your only grievance; that the cause of Boston is their own
concern; that it is not your cause; that the punishment of Boston is a just
punishment; that it is lenient; that it is not equal to the crimes; that the
Bostonians are rebels traitors, and pampered fanatics; that the Congress are
little better; that no misconduct of administration can justify or excuse open
disrespect; that submission is to be paid to the higher powers, whatever
character they be; that an Apostle enjoined submission to the tyrant Nero; that
of all people under heaven the King's American subjects have the least cause
for complaint; that the present confusion of the Colonies has been occasioned
by false alarms; that none of your legal rights have been invaded: no injury
has been done you, and consequently that you can never be justified in
resenting that of which you have no reason to complain; that you are no judges
of the rights of Parliament; that the Parliament ought to act according to
their own judgment, not according to yours, even in things which concern you
principally or solely; that they assert they have the right in question; that
you have never proved they have not; that you have always believed or allowed
they had it until the present occasion; that the Quebec Bill is a just and
constitutional Bill; that the Canadians are likely to prove the best and most
loyal subjects in his Majesty's American dominions; that there is too much
reason to believe that the minds of the Americans are unprincipled, and their
hearts disposed for rebellion; that since the reduction of Canada, they have
been bloated with a vain opinion of their own power and importance; that the
Island of Great Britain is able to govern (that is to dragoon) ten Americas;
that the moment it is known that America is no longer under the protection of
Great Britain, all the maritime powers of Europe would join to ravage your sea
ports, plunder and seize your ships merely for the pleasure of ravaging; This
is perhaps the most preposterous idea that ever was hatched in a distempered
brain. America (more particularly since the distractions in Poland have taken
place) has been the great granary or cell^ penaria of Europe. -- Is it possible
to conceive that the different maritime powers should unite to deprive
themselves of the chief means of subsist^nce, merely for the ^un's sake? Is it
not more natural to suppose that they would out bid each other for your
friendship and commerce on which so much depends? When the Low Countries
withdrew themselves from the dominion of Spain, did England, France, and the
other Powers immediately set about ravaging their sea ports and seizing their
ships? Did they not, on the contrary, exert themselves directly and indirectly
to assist them? The ease is similar, the event would be similar; and that
Great Britain would not be powerful enough at sea, when separated from her
Colonies; to prevent this assistance, I shall refer my readers to Massie's
Estimates, the authority of which has never been disputed, and which
demonstrate, that more than half the naval power of Great Britain stands on her
American foundation.
that all the maritime powers of the world would not dispossess Great Britain
of the empire of the sea, even when America is separated from her. Now I
challenge the world to produce so many wicked sentiments, stupid principles,
audaciously false assertions, and monstrous absurdities, crowded together in so
small a compass. All his positions are indeed so self-evidently absurd and
false, that it would be an insult to American understandings, seriously to
attempt refuting them. I shall only beg leave to take notice of the curious
argument he uses to prove the duty on tea to be no tax; it is that, unless we
consent to the tax, we are not to pay the the duty. We may refuse purchasing it
if we please. The same logic would demonstrate that a duty on beer, candles, or
soap, would be no tax, as we are not absolutely obliged to drink beer; we may
drink water, we may go to bed before it is dark, and we are not forced to wash
our shirts. His assertion that Great Britain, when divorced from her Colonies,
will still hold the empire of the seas, in spite of all the powers of the
world, is still more ingenious. It amounts to this, that without the possible
means of procuring timber, iron, plank, masts, pitch, tar, or hemp, to furnish
out a single frigate, they may build more ships then all the world put
together; that when her nursery for seamen is destroyed, and all the commerce
on which the existence of seamen depends, is annihilated, they will then be
able to man more fleets than the whole universe put together. But I am ashamed
of trespassing on the public patience, in making strictures on such ridiculous
articles, I shall therefore pass on to some questions which have not been so
much agitated, and on which, if I mistake not, his reverence lays the greatest
stress; for as he modestly declares, that he has no opinion of your courage, it
was natural for him to consider intimidation and terror as the most powerful
figures of rhetoric. Regular armies from Great Britain, Hessians, Hanoverians,
royal standards erected, skilful G enerals, legions of Canadians, and
unnumbered tribes of Savages; swords flaming in the front and rear, pestilence,
desolation and famine, are all marshalled in a most dreadful order by this
church-militant author. -- But let us somewhat minutely examine the picture,
and see whether, stripped of its false colors, it has any thing really
terrifying. His reverence begins with assuring us, that there is no room to
doubt but that such an army as was employed in the reduction of Canada (that is
an army of seven thousand men) would be more than sufficient for the conquest
of all the disaffected American Colonies (which are in fact all the Colonies.)
Should such a resolution become necessary, in order to reduce them to
obedience, for my own part, I think there is very great reason to doubt, that
seven thousand, even of the best troops, are able to conquer two hundred
thousand of the most disorderly peasantry upon earth, if they were animated in
defense of every thing they hold most dear and sacred; and there is still
greater reason to doubt that 7000 very indifferent troops, composed of the
refuse of an exhausted nation, few of whom have (...) action of any kind,
should be able to conquer two hundred thousand active, vigorous yeomanry, fired
with the noble ardor, we see prevalent through the continent, all armed, all
expert in the use of arms almost from their cradle. The success of Quebec it is
true, does infinite honor to the English arms, the army was, I believe, only
for a thousand, the enemy were perhaps more than double, but sixteen thousand
men are not two hundred thousand. The fate of Canada, depended upon one
decisive action, but it is impossible to calculate how many victories must be
gained before these Colonies could be subdued, whereas a single victory gained
by the Colonies must decide the contest in their favor. In the affair of
Quebec there is another circumstance to be considered, it was Wolf, who
commanded; a man of the most wonderful talents, formed to level all
difficulties; to render the most despicable soldiery almost instantaneously an
army of heroes. In short, the genius of the man was so extraordinary, the event
was so extraordinary that no inferences can be drawn from it; but this without
presumption may be asserted, that no General now existing in the British
service, would with double or treble his number have succeeded in the same
circumstances. One thing more I must add in honor of that illustrious
personage, that the same greatness of soul which qualified him to conquer the
natural hereditary enemies of his country, would have made him reject with
horror the Hangman's office, which others, who are not endowed with conquering
attributes, will with readiness accept.

IT is notorious that Mr. Wolf was not only the first of soldiers, but that he
was a most liberal, virtuous citizen, that he was passionately attached to the
liberties of his country, and of mankind; and that he was particularly an enemy
to large standing armies in time of peace. It is on the other hand remarkable,
that all the advocates for standing armies; all those who are the fondest of
the faddling and parade of war, are the most active in avoiding real service.

THIS tremendous soothsayer, on the supposition that so great a miracle should
happen in our favor, as that the trifling body of five hundred thousand men,
though firmly united (for every man in America, firmly united, would not amount
to less) should be able to withstand his seven thousand; goes on to rattle in
our ears, armies of Hessians and Hanoverians. I wish to Heaven he had for once
deviated into probability and truth. I wish 10,000 of them could possibly be
transported tomorrow. The purpose they would answer, is a purpose devoutly to
be wished for; they would be an addition to this continent of just so many
useful and excellent citizens, for I will venture to affirm, (affirming is
infectious) that in less than four months not two of these ten thousand would
remain with their Colors. But does not this reverend Gentleman know, that in
the year 1764 a convention was formed by most of the Princes of the empire, at
the head of which convention were the Emperor himself and the King of Prussia,
to prevent the alarming emigrations which threatened depopulation to Germany?
Does he not know that no troops can march out of the empire without the consent
of the empire? Does he not know that the Elector of Hanover and the Emperor are
upon exceedingly ill terms? Does he not know that the Elector of Hanover and
the King of Prussia are still upon worse? Is he sure that the Landgrave of Hess
would sell his troops (for as not one man would return back to their country,
he must consider them as forever sold!) Is he sure that as the finances of
Great Britain stand, the vast sum necessary for this purchase would be
conveniently found? Is he sure that the State of Hanover would consent to such
a draining of their country? I know not how it is; but his most excellent
Majesty GEORGE the Third, who in England is justly esteemed the most gracious
of Sovereigns, the wisest, greatest, and best of Kings, is not very popular in
the Electorate of Hanover. These people seem to think it hard that Two Hundred
and Twenty Thousand Pounds should annually be drawn from them, for the purposes
(as they conceive it) of corrupting the Members of St. Stephen's Chapel, in
order to support the power and authority of a set of men, who from the
beginning have been enemies to the succession of the Hanover line, and who
showed a particular animosity to their last and favorite Prince, George the
Second; but these difficulties (great and unsurmountable as to a common mortal
they appear) our divine Exorcist has in an instant conjured down, and, by a
single motion of his enchanted wand, has transported whole armies, in spite of
their respective Princes, and without the consent of their respective States,
from the interior parts of Germany, across the Atlantic into the plains of
New England and Pennsylvania. But he does not confine himself to the
introduction of his Germans. He proceeds next to erect the Royal Standard, to
which he tells us that all who have the courage to declare themselve now
friends to government, will undoubtedly resort, and these, he says, in a good
cause, will be of themselves formidable to their opposers: Dreadfully
formidable they must be indeed! There would resort to it, let me see (for the
respectable town of Rye have declared themselves a kind of neutrals, rather
than friends to government) there would resort to it, Mr. Justice Sewell, the
honorable Mr. Paxton, Brigadier Ruggles, and about eight or ten more mandamus
Councilmen, with perhaps twice their number of Expectants, and not less than
twenty of the unrecanted Hutchinsonian Addressers. -- These the four Provinces
of New England alone would send forth -- New York would furnish six, seven or
probably eight, volunteers from a certain knot, who are in possession or
expectation of contracts, and the fourth part of a dozen of high flying Church
of England Romanised Priests -- I represent to myself the formidable
countenance they will make, when arranged under the Royal or ministerial
Standard; but what will add to the terror of the appearance, will be their
Reverend Pontifix himself, whom I conceive marching in the front, an
inquisitorial frown upon his brow, his bands and canonicals floating to the
air, bearing a cross in his hands, with the tremendous motto, In hoc signo
vinces, flaming upon it in capital letters of blood, leading them on, and
exciting them to victory. It is impossible, that men, who are not under an
infatuation by the judgment of heaven, should flatter themselves, that forty
thousand American Yeomanry (for we are assured, by the same great authority,
that more than forty thousand cannot be brought to action) should stand the
shock of this dreadful Phalanx.

BUT I should beg pardon for attempting to be ludicrous upon a subject which
demands our utmost indignation. -- I shall now therefore on the presumption
that the People of England should be so lost to sense, virtue and spirit, as to
suffer their profligate Misrulers to persevere in their present measures,
endeavor to state to you what is their force, and what is yours. -- I shall
endeavor to remove the false terrors which this writer would hold out, in
order to intimidate you from the defense of your liberties and those of your
posterity, that he and his similars may wallow in sinecures and benefices
heaped up from the fruits of your labor and industry.

GREAT BRITAIN has, I believe, of infantry at home (comprehending Ireland, and
exclusive of the guards) fifteen thousand men. -- They find the greatest
difficulty in keeping the regiments up to any thing near their establishment --
what they are able to procure are of the worst sort. They are composed of the
most debauched Weavers' prentices, the scum of the Irish Roman Catholics, who
desert upon every occasion, and a few, very few, Scotch, who are not strong
enough to carry packs. -- This is no exageration; those who have been lately at
Boston, represent the soldiers there (one or two regiments excepted) as very
defective in size, and apparently in strength: But we shall be told they are
still regulars, and regulars have an irresistible advantage. -- There is,
perhaps, more imposition in the term regular troops, than in any of the jargon
which issues from the mouth of a Quack Doctor. I do not mean to insinuate, that
a disorderly mob are equal to a trained disciplined body of men; but I mean,
that all the essentials necessary to form infantry for real service may be
acquired in a few months. There cannot be a stronger illustration of the truth
here advanced, than the Prussian army. -- They are composed of about one third
of the King's own subjects, two-thirds foreigners. -- The third, consisting of
his own subject, are, when the exercising season is over, (which lasts six or
seven weeks) suffered to return to their families, and attend to the business
of husbandry -- half of the other two-thirds, consisting of foreigners, are not
only permitted, but encouraged to work at their trades in the garrison towns,
and never touch a musket for the rest of the year, so that, in fact, only one
third are, in the modern language, to be called regular Soldiers; -- these
generally make their escape the first opportunity: It may be said, therefore,
that the King of Prussia has gained all his victories with a sort of Militia.
I mean that it is very possible for men to be clothed in red, to be expert in
all the tricks of the parade, to call themselves regular troops, and yet, by
attaching themselves principally or solely to the tinsel and show of war, be
totally unfit for real service. -- This, I am told, is a good deal the case of
the present British Infantry: If they can acquit themselves tolerably in the
puerile reviews exhibited for the amusement of royal Masters and Misses in Hyde
Park or Wimbledon Common, it is sufficient.

IN the beginning of the late war, some of the most esteemed regular regiments
were sent over to this country; they were well dressed; they were well
powdered; they were perfect masters of their manual exercise; they fired
together in platoons; but fatal experience taught us, that they knew not how to
fight. -- While your Militia were frequently crowned with success, these
regulars were defeated or baffled for three years successively in every part of
the continent -- at length, indeed (after repeated losses and disgraces) they
became excellent troops, but not until they had absolutely forgotten every
thing which, we are assured, must render regulars quite irresistible. The corpse
sent from this country under General Monkton was, I believe, for its number,
one of the best armies that ever was led to conquest, and yet, if I have been
rightly informed, there was not a single regiment of them that could go through
the manual exercise, or at best, they performed it most wretchedly. -- It is
likewise said, that when, after their glorious and rapid conquest of Martinico,
they were joined by the spruce regiments from Europe; such was their uncouth
appearance, that they were scarce honored with the title of Soldiers by those
Gentlemen. Upon the whole, it is most certain, that men may be smartly dressed,
keep their arms bright, be called regulars, be expert in all the anticks of a
review, and yet be very unfit for real action. -- It is equally certain, that a
Militia, by confining themselves to essentials, by a simplification of the
necessary maneuvers, may become, in a very few months, a most formidable
infantry. -- The Yeomanry of America have, besides, infinite advantages over
the peasantry of other countries; they are accustomed from their infancy to
fire arms; they are expert in the use of them: -- Whereas the lower and middle
people of England are, by the tyranny of certain laws almost as ignorant in the
use of a musket, as they are of the ancient Catepulta. The Americans are
likewise, to a man, skilful in the management of the instruments necessary for
all military works; such as spades, pickaxes, hatchets, etc. -- Taking,
therefore, all circumstances into consideration, there will be no rashness in
affirming, that this continent may have formed for action, in three or four
months, an hundred thousand infantry: For as to the assertion of one friendly
adviser, that no more than forty thousand could act to advantage, I confess I
do not understand it, nor does he, I believe, understand himself. -- If he
means that sixty thousand men cannot be ranged in a field capable of containing
only forty thousand, we shall all agree with him; but how in the operations of
a war upon a vast continent double this number should be a disadvantage, I can
have no conception.

LET one simple general plan be adopted for the formation and subdivision of
your battalions; let them be instructed only in so much of the manual exercise
as to prevent confusion, and accidents in loading and firing; let them be
taught to form, to retreat, to advance, to change their front, to rally by
their colors; let them be taught to reduce themselves from a line of fire to a
line of impression, that is, from two deep to four, six, or eight. -- This is
all so easy and simple, that it may be acquired in three months. Let some plan
of this sort be adopted, I say, and there is no doubt but that, in the time I
have prescribed, you may have an army on foot of seventy, eighty, or an hundred
thousand men, equal to all the services of war.

SHOULD this be admitted, it will be still objected, that you have no able
officers to conduct you. I do not know that you have; but it is certain that
those sent to dragoon you have better? I have taken some pains to inform myself
what methods these gentlemen, said to be bred to arms, take to qualify
themselves in a superior degree for the profession. -- What is their rotine of
instruction? Do they read much? I am assured that they do not: From books alone
the theory of war can be acquired: and the English service, in times of peace,
affords them no practical lessons; for mounting guard once or twice a week, or
the preparation for the review of a single regiment can never be esteemed as
such. It is much to be lamented, that the Gentlemen of the Army do not apply
more of the many leisure yours they have upon their hands (...) reading. -- The
majority of them are of a generous disposition, which, (...) they cultivate, by
conversing with the great historians and orators (...) antiquity, and the more
liberal political writers of our own country, a standing army would be
something less an object of jealousy to ^ll virtuous citizens -- We might
perhaps see them instead of being advocates and partisans of the present
Ministry, a check upon their wickedness. -- I am inclined to think that few or
none of the officers have condescend to inform themselves of the merit of the
present contest. -- Let me conjure them for once to read coolly and heartily
the whole process, afterward to lay their hands upon their hearts, and answer,
whether the People of America in general, and of Boston in particular, ^^re
"more sinned against or sinning?"

Now I am upon the subject of the Officers of the Army, I take the opportunity
of mentioning, with the respect due to him, one Gentleman of high rank amongst
them -- the tenure of his conduct while in command, was so liberal, and his
letters, quoted in the House of Commons, were so fair, candid and friendly to
this Continent, that he is entitled to the thanks of America. -- He is indeed
of a country that owes not only its prosperity but its existance to the same
principles which actuate America.




ANOTHER circumstance, Americans, may be added for your comfort. It has been
allowed by some of the most candid of the regulars themselves, that during the
last war upon this continent, your countrymen, the provincial field-officers,
were in general more understanding and capable than their own of the same rank.
But the history of the civil war, in the year 1641, furnishes us with the
strongest instances that excellent officers may be soon formed from Country
Gentlemen, Citizens, Lawyers, and Farmers -- The Parliament's army (or as our
priestly writer would all them, the rebellious Republicans) were chiefly
composed of this class of men. In the beginning of this war, they were treated
with the same affected contempt, and almost in the same opprobrious terms as
you, the people of America, are by your friendly and decent adviser.

WHOEVER would infer from the tenure of these papers, that the writer is
desirous of precipitating, or could look with indifference upon the calamities
of a civil war, does him great injustice. He considers them with all the horror
natural to a feeling man and honest citizen. He execrates the memory of those
men to whom they may justly be attributed, but he is persuaded that they never
originated (at least in states of any considerable extent) in the turbulent
disposition of the people, nor in the arts of demagogues, but in the oppression
of their rulers, in the wantonness, folly, pride, or avarice of Kings,
Ministers, or Governors. The Gri^^ers of Switzerland, the Granvels of Holland,
the Lauds and Straffords of England, were the undoubted authors of the
tragedies acted in their respec-countries: And if this continent should be
stained with the blood of a single citizen, it can never be charged to the
unreasonable pretensions of the people, but to the Bernards, Hutchinsons, and
some other traitors of a similar stamp.

HE is convinced, that being prepared for a civil war is the surest means of
preventing it; that to keep the swords of your enemies in their scabbards, you
must whet your own. -- He is convinced that remonstrances, petitions, prayers,
and supplications will make no impression on our callous Court, and abandoned
Parliament; England, Ireland, America, even Guernsey, Jersey, and Minorca, are
witnesses of their inefficacy. -- He is convinced, that sear alone can operate;
there are symptoms that it already begins to operate; -- the monster, Tyranny,
already begins to pant, press her now with ardor, and she is down; already the
Ministry have expressed in their letters an inclination to make some
concessions; to meet you halfway: Which I suppose may be construed thus, that
as they find they have it not in their power to establish, by force, the
despotism which they aimed at, they shall be very well satisfied (...) you will
just cede so much of your rights and privileges as will enable them, by
extending their pecuniary influence, and sapping your virtue, to take away the
rest at their leisure.

THERE now remains, people of America, one consideration, which (however it may
be taken) I think it my duty to offer. History tells us that the free states of
Greece, Thebes, Sparta, Athens, and Syracuse, were all in their turns
subjugated by the force or art of tyrants. They almost all, in their turns,
recovered their liberty and destroyed their tyrants. The first act upon the
recovery of their liberty was to demolish those badges of slavery, citadels,
strong holds and military tenements; the Switzers did the same; the people of
England (lost in corruption and lethargy as they are) could never be prevailed
upon to suffer barracks amongst them; even the courtly Blackstone is startled
at the idea. No separate camps, no barracks, no inland fortresses, says he,
should be allowed; in fact, wherever barracks are, freedom cannot be said to
exist, or she exists so lamely as scarcely to deserve the name.

IT is worth your consideration, Americans, whether these badges should remain
or on. I shall now conclude, brave citizens, with invoking the Almighty God,
from whom all virtues flow, to continue you in that spirit of unanimity and
vigor which must insure your success, and immortalize you through all ages, as
the champions and patrons of the human race.


