A NARRATIVE, OF THE EXCURSION and RAVAGES OF THE KING'S TROOPS Under the
Command of General GAGE, On the nineteenth of APRIL, 1775.

TOGETHER WITH THE DEPOSITIONS Taken by ORDER of CONGRESS, To Support the Truth
of it.

Published by AUTHORITY.

MASSACHUSETTS BAY: WORCESTER, Printed by ISAIAH THOMAS, by order of the
PROVINCIAL CONGRESS.

In PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, Watertown, May 22d, 1775.
RESOLVED, That the following Narrative of the excursion and ravages of the
King's troops under the command of General Gage, on the 19th of April last,
together with the Depositions taken by order of the Congress to support the
truth of it, be sent to the press for publication.

Attest. SAMUEL FREEMAN, Sec'y.

A NARRATIVE OF THE EXCURSION and RAVAGES, OF THE KING'S TROOPS, andC.
ON the nineteenth day of April one thousand, seven hundred and seventy five, a
day to be remembered by all Americans of the present generation, and which
ought and doubtless will be handed down to ages yet unborn, in which the troops
of Britain, unprovoked, shed the blood of sundry of the loyal American subjects
of the British King in the field of Lexington. Early in the morning of said
day, a detachment of the forces under the command of General Gage, stationed at
Boston, attacked a small party of the inhabitants of Lexington and some other
towns adjacent, the detachment consisting of about nine hundred men commanded
by Lieutenant Colonel Smith: The inhabitants of Lexington and the other towns
were about one hundred, some with and some without fire arms, who had collected
upon information, that the detachment had secretly marched from Boston the
preceding night, and landed on Phips's Farm in Cambridge, and were proceeding
on their way with brisk pace toward Concord (as the inhabitants supposed) to
take or destroy a quantity of stores deposited there for the use of the colony;
sundry peaceable inhabitants having the same night been taken, held by force,
and otherwise abused on the road, by some officers of General Gage's army,
which caused a just alarm to the people, and a suspicion that some fatal design
was immediately to be put in execution against them: This small party of the
inhabitants so far from being disposed to commit hostilities against the troops
of their sovereign, that unless attacked were determined to be peaceable
spectators of this extraordinary movement; immediately on the approach of
Colonel Smith with the detachment under his command they dispersed; But the
detachment, seeming to thirst for BLOOD, wantonly rushed on, and first began
the hostile scene by firing on this small party, in which they killed eight men
on the spot and wounded several others before any guns were fired upon the
troops by our men. Not contented with this effusion of blood, as if malice had
occupied their whole soul, they continued the fire, until all this small party
who escaped the dismal carnage, were out of the reach of their fire: Colonel
Smith with the detachment then proceeded to Concord, where a part of this
detachment again made the first fire upon some of the inhabitants of Concord
and the adjacent towns, who were collected at a bridge upon this just alarm,
and killed two of them and wounded several others, before any of the
Provincials there had done one hostile act: Then the Provincials (roused with
zeal for the liberties of their country, finding life and every thing dear and
valuable at stake) assumed their native valor and returned the fire, and the
engagement on both sides began: Soon after which the British troops retreated
toward Charlestown (having first committed violence and waste on public and
private property) and on their retreat were joined by another detachment of
General Gage's troops, consisting of about a thousand men, under the command of
Earl Percy, who continued the retreat, the engagement lasted through the day,
many were killed and wounded on each side, though the loss on the part of the
British troops far exceeded that of the provincials: The devastation committed
by the British troops on their retreat, the whole of the way from Concord to
Charlestown, is almost beyond description, such as plundering and burning of
dwelling houses and other buildings, driving into the street women in
childbed, killing old men in their houses unarmed: Such scenes of desolation
would be a reproach to the perpetrators, even if committed by the most
barbarous nations, how much more when done by Britons famed for humanity and
tenderness: And all this because these colonies will not submit to the iron
yoke of arbitrary power.

The following depositions were taken and authenticated as soon as possible
after the action to prove and elucidate the truth of facts relative thereto.
WE SOLOMON BROWN, JONATHAN LORING, and ELIJAH SANDERSON, all of lawful age and
of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex and colony of the Massachusetts Bay,
in New England, do testify and declare, That on the evening of the eighteenth
of April instant, being on the road between Lexington and Concord, and all of
us mounted on horses, we were about ten of the Clock, suddenly surprised by
nine persons whom we took to be regular officers, who rode up to us, mounted
and armed, each holding a pistol in his hand, and after putting pistols, to our
breasts, and seizing the bridles of our horses, they swore that if we stirred
another step we should be all dead men, upon which we surrendered ourselves,
they detained us until two o'clock the next morning, in which time they
searched and greatly abused us, having first enquired about the magazine at
Concord, whether any guards were posted there and whether the bridges were up,
and said four or five regiments of regulars would be in possession of the
stores soon, they then brought us back to Lexington, cut the horses bridles and
girts, turned them loose, and then left us.

SOLOMON BROWN, JONATHAN LORING, ELIJAH SANDERSON,
Lexington, April 25th, 1775,
MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
JONATHAN LORING, Solomon Brown, and Elijah Sanderson, being duly cautioned to
testify the whole truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition
by them subscribed.

Quorum, William Read Josiah Johnson William Stickney, Justices of the Peace.

I ELIJAH SANDERSON abovenamed, do further testify and declare that I was in
Lexington Common the morning of the nineteenth of April aforesaid, having been
dismissed by the officers abovementioned and saw a large body of regular troops
advancing toward Lexington Company, many of whom were then dispersing, I heard
one of the regulars, whom I took to be an officer, say, damn them we will have
them, and immediately the regulars shouted aloud, run and fired on the
Lexington Company, which did not fire a gun before the regulars discharged on
them, eight of the Lexington company were killed, while they were dispersing
and at considerable distance, from each other, and many wounded, and although a
spectator I narrowly escaped with my life.

ELIJAH SANDERSON MIDDLESEX,
Lexington, April 25th, 1775.
MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
ELIJAH SANDERSON above named, being duly cautioned to testify the whole truth,
made solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition by him subscribed.

Querum, William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney, Justices of the Peace.

I THOMAS RICE WILLARD, of lawful age, do testify and declare, that being in
the house of Daniel Harrington, of Lexington, on the nineteenth instant, in the
morning, about half an hour before sunrise, looked out at the window of said
house and saw (as I suppose) about four hundred of regulars in one body coming
up the road and marched toward the north part of the Common back of the meeting
house, of said Lexington, and as soon as said regulars were against the East
End of the meeting house, the commanding officer said something, what I know
not, but upon that the regulars ran till they came within about eight or nine
rods of about an hundred of the militia of Lexington who were collected on said
common, at which time the militia of Lexington dispersed, then the officers
made an huzza, and the private soldiers succeeded them, directly after this, an
officer rode before the regulars, to the other side of the body, and hollowed
after the Militia of said Lexington, and said "Lay down your arms, damn you,
why don't you lay down your arms," and that there was not a gun fired till the
militia of Lexington were dispersed, and further says not.

THOMAS RICE WILLARD.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23d. 1775.
THE within named Thomas Rice Willard, personally appeared, and after due
caution to testify the whole truth and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath
to the truth of the within deposition by him subscribed, before us,

William Read Jonathan Hastings, Duncan Ingraham. Justices, of the Peace.

Lexington, 25th of April, 1775.
SIMON WINSHIP of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex, and province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, being of lawful age testifies and says,
that on the nineteenth of April instant, about four o'clock in the morning, as
he was passing the public road in said Lexington, peaceably and unarmed, about
two miles and an half distant from the meeting house in said Lexington, he was
met by a body of the King's regular troops, and being stopped by some officers
of said troops was commanded to dismount, upon asking why he must dismount, he
was obliged by force to quit his horse, and ordered to march in the midst of
the body, and being examined whether he had been warning the minute-men he
answered no, but had been out and was then returning to his father's. Said
Winship further testifies, that he marched with said troops until he came
within about half a quarter of a mile of said meeting house, where an Officer
commanded the troops to halt, and then to prime and load, this being done, the
said troops marched on till they came within a few rods of Capt. Parker, and
company, who were partly collected on the place of parade, when said Winship
observed an officer at the head of said troops, flourishing his sword and with
a loud voice giving the word fire, which was instantly followed by a discharge
of arms from said regular troops, and said Winship is positive, and in the most
solemn manner declares, that there was no discharge of arms on either side,
till the word fire was given by said Officer as above,

SIMON WINSHIP.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775,
SIMON WINSHIP above named appeared and after due caution to testify the whole
truth and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the above
deposition by him subscribed, before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson. Justices of the Peace.

Lexington, April 25 th, 1775.
I JOHN PARKER, of lawful age, and commander of the militia in Lexington, do
testify and declare, that on the 19th instant, in the morning about one of the
Clock, being informed that there were a number of the regular officers riding
up and down the road, stopping and insulting people as they passed the road,
and also was informed that a number of the regular troops were on their march
from Boston, in order to take the province stores at Concord, ordered our
militia to meet on the common in said Lexington, to consult what to do, and
concluded not to be discovered nor meddle or make with said regular troops (if
they should approach) unless they should insult or molest us, and upon their
sudden approach, I immediately ordered our militia to disperse and not to fire.
Immediately said troops made their appearance and rushing furiously, fired upon
and killed eight of our party, without receiving any provocation therefore from
us.

JOHN PARKER.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
THE above names John Parker, personally appeared and after being duly
cautioned to declare the whole truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the
above deposition by him subscribed, before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney, Justices of the Peace.

Lexington, April 24th, 1775.
I JOHN ROBBINS, being of lawful age to testify and say, that on the 19th
instant, the company under the command of Captain John Parker, being drawn up
sometime before sunrise, on the green or common, and I being in the front rank,
there suddenly appeared a number of the King's troops, about a thousand, as I
thought, at the distance of about sixty or seventy yards from us, huzzaing, and
on a quick pace toward us, with three officers in their front on horse back,
and on full gallop toward us, the foremost of which cried, throw down your
arms, ye villains, ye rebels, upon which said company dispersing, the foremost
of the three officers ordered their men saying fire, by God, fire, at which
moment we received a very heavy and close fire from them, at which instant,
being wounded, I fell, and several of our men were shot dead by me. Capt.
Parker's men I believe, had not then fired a gun, and further the deponent
says not.

JOHN ROBBINS.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 24th, 1775.
JOHN ROBBINS, within named, appeared, and being duly cautioned to testify the
truth and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the within
deposition, subscibed by his special order, he being so maimed and wounded;
that he thought he could neither write his name, nor make his mark. Before us,

William Read Josiah Johnson. Justices of the Peace.

WE BENJAMIN TIDD, of Lexington, and JOSEPH ABBOT, of Lincoln, in the county of
Middlesex, and colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, of lawful age
do testify and declare, that on the morning of the nineteenth of April instant,
about five o'clock being on Lexington common and mounted on horses, we saw a
body of Regular Troops marching up to the Lexington company which was then
dispersing, soon after the regulars fired, first a few guns, which we took to
be pistols, from some of the regulars who were mounted on horses, and then the
said regulars fired a volley or two before any guns were fired, by the
Lexington company. Our horses immediately started and we rode off and further
say not.

BENJAMIN TIDD, JOSEPH ABBOTT.
Lexington, April 25th, 1775.
MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
BENJAMIN TIDD and Joseph Abbott, abovenamed being duly cautioned, to testify
the whole truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition by them
subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney. Justices of the Peace.

WE NATHANIEL MULLIKEN, PHILLIP RUSSELL, MOSES HARRINGTON, jun. THOMAS and
DANIEL HARRINGTON, WILLIAM GRIMER, WILLIAM TIDD, ISAAC HASTINGS, JONAS STONE,
jun. JAMES WYMAN, THADDEUS HARRINGTON, JOHN CHANDLER, JOSHUA REED, jun. JOSEPH
SIMONDS, PHINEAS SMITH, JOHN CHANDLER, jun. RUEBEN LOCK, JOEL VILES, NATHAN
REED, SAMUEL TIDD, BENJAMIN LOCK, THOMAS WINSHIP, SIMEON SNOW, JOHN SMITH,
MOSES HARRINGTON, 3d. JOSHUA READ, EBENEZER PARKER, JOHN HARRINGTON, ENOCH
WILLINGTON, JOHN HOSMER, ISAAC GREEN, PHINEAS STEARNS, ISAAC DURANT, and THOMAS
HEADLY, jun. all of lawful age, and inhabitants of Lexington, in the county of
Middlesex, and Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, do testify and
declare, that on the nineteenth of April instant, about one or two o'clock in
the morning, being informed that several officers of the regulars, had the
evening before been riding up and down the road, and had detained and insulted
the inhabitants passing (...) same, and also understanding that a body of
regulars were marching from Boston, toward Concord, with intent (as it was
supposed) to take the stores belonging to the colony in that town, we were
alarmed and having met at the place of our Company's parade, were dismissed by
our Captain, John Parker, for the present, with orders to be ready to attend at
the beat of the drum, we further testify and declare, that about five o'clock
in the morning, hearing our drum beat, we proceeded toward the parade, and
soon found that a large body of troops were marching toward us, some of our
company were coming up to the parade and others had reached it, at which time
the company began to disperse, whilst our backs were turned on the troops, we
were fired on by them, and a number of our men were instantly killed and
wounded, not a gun was fired by any person in our company on the regulars to
our knowledge before they fired on us, and they continued firing until we had
all made our escape

Lexington, April 25th, 1775. NATHANIEL MULLIKEN, PHILIP RUSSELL, MOSES
HARRINGTON, jun. THOMAS HARRINGTON, DANIEL HARRINGTON, WILLIAM GRIMER, WILLIAM
TIDD, ISAAC HASTINGS, JONAS STONE, jun. JAMES WYMAN, THADDEUS HARRINGTON, JOHN
CHANDLER, JOSHUA READ, jun. JOSEPH SIMONDS, PHINEAS SMITH, JOHN CHANDLER, jun.
RUEBENLOCK, JOEL VILES, NATHAN READ, SAMUEL TIDD, BENJAMIN LOCK, THOMAS
WINSHIP, SIMEON SNOW, JOHN SMITH, MOSES HARRINGTON, 3d. JOSHUA READ, EBENEZER
PARKER, JOHN HARRINGTON, ENOCH WILLINGTON, JOHN HOSMER, ISAAC GREEN, PHINEAS
STEARNS, ISAAC DURANT, THOMAS HEADLEY, jun.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
NATHANIEL MULLIKEN, Phillip Russell, Moses Harrington, jun. Thomas Harrington,
Daniel Harrington, William Grimer, William Tidd, Isaac Hastings, Jonas Stone,
jun. James Wyman, Thaddeus Harrington, John Chandler, Joshua Read, jun. Joseph
Simons, Phineas Smith, John Chandler, jun. Rueben Lock, Joel Viles, Nathan
Read, Samuel Tidd, Benjamin Lock, Thomas Winship, Simeon Snow, John Smith,
Moses Harrington, 3 d. Joshua Read, Ebenezer Parker, John Harrington, Enoch
Willington, John Hosmer, Isaac Green, Phineas Stearns, Isaac Durant and Thomas
Hadley, jun. above named being duly cautioned to testify the whole truth, made
solemn oath to the above deposition, as containing nothing but the truth, as
subscribed by them. Before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney, Justices of the Peace.

WE NATHANIEL PARKHURST, JONAS PARKER, JOHN MUNROE, jun. JOHN WINDSHIP, SOLOMON
PIERCE, JOHN MUZZY, ABNER MEADS, JOHN BRIDGE, jun. EBENEZER BOWMAN, WILLIAM
MUNROE, 3d. MICAH HAGAR, SAMUEL SANDERSON, SAMUEL HASTINGS, and JAMES BROWN, of
Lexington in the county of Middlesex and colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in
New England, and all of lawful age, do testify and say, that on the morning of
the nineteenth of April, instant, about one or two o'clock, being informed that
a number of regular officers had been riding up and down the road the evening
and night preceding, and that some of the inhabitants as they were passing had
been insulted by the officers and stoped by them, and being also informed that
the regular troops, were on their march from Boston, in order (as it was said)
to take the colony stores then depoConcord, we met on the parade of our Company
in this town, after the company had collected we were ordered by Capt. John
Parker (who commanded us) to disperse for the present, and to be ready to
attend the beat of the drum, and accordingly the company went into houses near
the place of parade. We further testify and say, that above five o'clock in the
morning we attended the beat of our drum, and where formed on the parade, we
were faced toward the regulars then marching up to us, and some of our company
were coming to the parade, with their backs toward the troops, and others on
the parade began to disperse, when the regulars fired on the company before a
gun was fired by any of our company on them, they killed eight of our company
and wounded several, and continued their fire until we had all made our escape.

Lexington, 25th April, 1775. NATHANIEL PARKHURST, JONAS PARKER, JOHN MUNROE,
jun. JOHN WINDSHIP, SOLOMON PIERCE, JOHN MUZZY, ABNER MEADS, JOHN BRIDGE, jun.
EBENEZER BOWMAN, WILLIAM MUNROE, 3d. MICHA HAGAR, SAMUEL SANDERSON, SAMUEL
HASTINGS, JAMES BROWN.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
NATHANIEL PARKHURST, Jonas Parker, John Munroe, jun. John Windship, Solomon
Pierce, John Muzzy, Abner Mead, John Bridge, jun. Ebenezer Bowman, William
Munroe, 3 d. Micha Hagar, Samuel Sanderson, Samuel Hastings, and James Brown
abovenamed, being duly cautioned to testify the whole truth, made solemn oath
to the truth, of the above deposition by them subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney, Justices of the Peace.

I TIMOTHY SMITH of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex and colony of
Massachusetts Bay, in New England, being of lawful age, do testify and declare,
that on the morning of the nineteenth of April instant, being at Lexington
common, as a spectator, I saw a large body of regular troops, marching up
toward the Lexington Company then dispersing, and likewise saw the regular
troops fire on the Lexington company before the latter fired a gun, I
immediately run and a volley was discharged at me, which put me in imminent
danger of losing my life: I soon returned to the Common, and saw eight of the
Lexington men, who were killed and lay bleeding at a considerable distance from
each other, and several were wounded, and further says not.

TIMOTHY SMITH.
Lexington, April 25th, 1775.
MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
TIMOTHY SMITH, abovenamed, being duly cautioned to testify the truth, made
solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition by him subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney. Justices of the Peace.

WE LEVI MEAD and LEVI HARRINGTON, both of Lexington, in the county of
Middlesex, and colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, and of lawful
age, do testify and declare, that on the morning of the nineteenth of April,
being on Lexington Common, as spectators, we saw a large body of regular troops
marching up toward the Lexington company, and some of the regulars on horses,
whom we took to be Officers, fired a pistol or two on the Lexington company,
which was then dispersing, these were the first guns that were fired, and they
were immediately followed by several vollies from the regulars, by which eight
men belonging to said company were killed, and several wounded.

LEVI MEAD, LEVI HARRINGTON.
Lexington, April 25th, 1775.
MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
LEVI MEAD and Levi Harrington above named, being duly cautioned to testify the
whole truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition by them
subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney. Justices of the Peace.

Lexington, April 25th, 1775.
I WILLIAM DRAPER, of lawful age, and an inhabitant of Colrain, in the county
of Hampshire, and Colony of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, do testify
and declare, that being on the parade of said Lexington, April 19th, instant,
about half an hour before sunrise the King's regular troops appeared at the
meeting house of Lexington, Captain Parker's company who were drawn up back of
said meeting house on the parade, turned from said troops, making their escape
by dispersing, in the mean time the regular troops made an huzza, and ran
toward Captain Parker's company who were dispersing, and immediately after the
huzza was made, the commanding officer of said troops (as I took him) gave the
command to the troops fire, fire, damn you fire, and immediately they fired,
before any of Captain Parker's company fired, I then being within three or four
rods of said regular troops, and further says not.

WILLIAM DRAPER.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 25th, 1775.
WILLIAM DRAPER, abovenamed, being duly cautioned to testify the whole truth,
made solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition by him subscribed. Before
us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, William Stickney, Justices of the Peace.

Lexington, April 23d, 1775.
I THOMAS FESSENDEN, of lawful age, testify and declare, that being in a
pasture near the meeting house, at said Lexington, on Wednesday last, at about
half an hour before sunrise, I saw a number of regular troops pass speedily by
said Meeting House, on their way toward a company of militia of said
Lexington, who were assembled to the number of about an hundred in a company,
at the distance of eighteen or twenty rods from said meeting house, and after
they had passed by said meetinghouse, I saw three officers on horse back
advance to the front of said regulars, when one of them being within six rod of
said militia, cried out, disperse you rebels immediately, on which he
brandished his sword over his head three times, mean while the second officer,
who was about two rods behind him fired a pistol pointed at said militia, and
the regulars kept huzzaing till he had finished brandishing his sword, and when
he had thus finished brandishing his sword, he pointed it down toward said
militia, and immediately on which, the said regulars fired a volley at said
militia, and then I ran off as fast as I could, while they continued firing
till I got out of their reach. I further testify, that as soon as ever the
officer cried disperse you rebels, the said company of millitia dispersed every
way as fast as they could, and while they were dispersing the regulars kept
firing at them incessantly, and further says not,

THOMAS FESSENDEN.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23 d. 1775.
THE within named Thomas Fessenden appeared, and after due caution to testify
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath to the truth of
the within deposition by him subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Josiah Johnson, Justices of the Peace.

Lincoln, April 23 d, 1775.
I JOHN BATEMAN, belonging to the fifty-second regiment, commanded by Colonel
Jones on Wednesday morning, on the nineteenth day of April instant, was in the
party marching to Concord, being at Lexington in the county of Middlesex, being
nigh the meeting house in said Lexington, there was a small party of men
gathered together in that place, when our said troops marched by, and I testify
and declare, that I heard the word of command given to the troops to fire, and
some of said troops did fire, and I saw one of said small party lay dead on the
ground nigh said meeting house, and I testify, that I never heard any of the
inhabitants so much as fire one gun on said troops.

JOHN BATEMAN.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23d, 1775.
THE abovenamed John Bateman, voluntarily (being previously cautioned to
relate nothing but the truth) made solemn oath to the above deposition by him
subscribed. Before us,

John Cumming, Duncan Ingraham, Justices of the Peace.

Lexington April 23 d, 1775.
WE JOHN HOAR, JOHN WHITEHEAD, ABRAHAM GARFIELD, BENJAMIN MUNROE, ISAAC PARKS,
WILLIAM HOSMER, JOHN ADAMS, and GREGORY STONE, all of Lincoln, in the county of
Middlesex, Massachusetts Bay, all of lawful age, do testify and say, that on
Wednesday last we were assembled at Concord, in the morning of said day, in
consequence of information received, that a brigade of regular troops were on
their march to the said town of Concord, who had killed six men at the town of
Lexington. About an hour afterward we saw them approaching to the number as we
apprehended of about twelve hundred, on which we retreated to a hill about
eighty rods back, and the said troops then took possession of the hill where we
were first posted; presently after this we saw the troops moving toward the
Northbridge about one mile from the said Concord meeting house, we then
immediately went before them and passed the bridge, just before a party of
them, to the number of about two hundred arrived: They there left about one
half of their two hundred at the bridge, and proceeded with the rest toward
Colonel Barret's about two miles from the said Bridge; we then seeing several
fires in the town, thought the houses in Concord were in danger, and marched
toward the said bridge, and the troops who were stationed there, observing our
approach, marched back over the bridge, and then took up some of the plank, we
then hastened our march toward the bridge, and when we had got near the bridge
they fired on our men first three guns one after the other, and then a
considerable number more, and then and not before (having orders from our
commanding officers not to fire till we were fired upon) we fired upon the
regulars, and they retreated, on their retreat through this town and Lexington,
to Charlestown, they ravaged and destroyed private property and burned three
houses, one barn, and one shop.

JOHN HOAR, JOHN WHITEHEAD, ABRAHAM GARFIELD, BENJAMIN MUNROE, ISAAC PARKS,
WILLIAM HOSMER, JOHN ADAMS, GREGORY STONE.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23 d, 1775.
THE within named John Hoar, John Whitehead, Abraham Garfield, Benjamin Munroe,
Isaac Parks, William Hosmer, John Adams and Gregory Stone appeared, and made
oath solemnly to the truth of the above deposition. Before us,

Jilliam Read, John Cummings, Jonathan Hastings, Duncan Ingraham. Justices of
the Peace.

Lexington, April 23 d, 1775.
WE NATHAN BARRET, Captain; Jonathan Farrer, Joseph Butler and Francis Wheeler,
Lieutenants; John Barret, Ensign; John Brown, Silas Walker, Ephraim Melvin,
Nathan Butterick, Stephen Hosmer, jun. Samuel Barrett, Thomas Jones, Joseph
Chandler, Peter Wheeler, Nathan Pierce, and Edward Richardson, all of Concord,
in the county of Middlesex, in the province of the Massachusetts Bay, of lawful
age, testify and declare, that on Wednesday the nineteenth instant, about an
hour after sunrise, we assembled on a hill near the meeting house in Concord
aforesaid, in consequence of an information that a number of regular troops had
killed six of our countrymen at Lexington, and were on their march to said
Concord, and about an hour after we saw them approaching, to the number, as we
imagine, of about twelve hundred, on which we retreated to a hill about eighty
rods back, and the aforesaid troops then took possession of the hill where we
were first posted. Presently after this we saw them moving toward the
north-bridge, about one mile from said meeting house, we then immediately went
before them, and passed the bridge just before a party of them to the number of
about two hundred arrived, they there left about one half of those two hundred
at the bridge, and proceeded with the rest toward Colonel Barrett's, about two
mile from the said bridge, we then seeing several fires in the town, thought our
houses were in danger and immediately marched back toward said bridge and the
troops who were stationed there observing our approach, marched back over the
bridge, and then took up some of the planks, we then hastened our steps toward
the bridge and when we had got near the bridge, they fired on our men first
three guns one after the other, and then a considerable number more, upon
which, and not before, (having orders from our commanding officers not to fire
till we were fired upon) we fired upon the regulars and they retreated. At
Concord, and on their retreat through Lexington, they plundered many houses,
burnt three at Lexington, together with a shop and a barn, and committed
damage, more or less, to almost every house from Concord to Charlestown.

NATHAN BARRET, JONATHAN FARRAR, JOSEPH BUTLER, FRANCIS WHEELER, JOHN BARRETT,
JOHN BROWN, SILAS WALKER, EPHRAIM MELVIN, NATHAN BUTTERICK, STEPHEN HOSMER,
SAMUEL BARRETT, THOMAS JONES, JOSEPH CHANDLER, PETER WHEELER, NATHAN PIERCE,
EDWARD RICHARDSON.

Lexington, April 23 d, 1775.
WE JOSEPH BUTLER and EPHRAIM MELVIN, do testify and declare, that when the
regular troops fired upon our people at the North-Bridge, in Concord, as
related in the foregoing depositions, they shot one and we believe two of our
people before we fired a single gun at them.

JOSEPH BUTLER, EPHRAIM MELVIN.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23d, 1775.
THE within named Nathan Barret, Jonathan Farrar, Joseph Butler, Francis
Wheeler, John Barret, John Brown, Silas Walker, Ephraim Melvin, Nathan
Butterick, Stephen Hosmer, Samuel Barrett, Thomas Jones, Joseph Chandler, Peter
Wheeler, Nathan Pierce, and Edward Richardson, appeared, and made solemn oath
to the truth of the above depositions by them subscribed. Before us,

Jonathan Hasting, John Cummings, Duncan Ingraham, Justices of the Peace.

Concord, April 23 d, 1775.
I TIMOTHY MINOT, jun. of Concord, on the nineteenth day of this instant April,
after that I had heard of the regular troops firing upon the Lexington men, and
fearing that hostilities might be committed at Concord, thought it my incumbent
duty to secure my family: After I had secured my family, sometime after that,
returning toward my own dwelling, and finding that the Bridge on the northern
part of said Concord was guarded by regular troops, being a spectator of what
had happened at said Bridge, declare that the regular troops stationed on the
bridge after they saw the men that were collected on the westerly side of said
bridge, marched toward said bridge, then the troops returned toward the
easterly side of said Bridge, and formed themselves as I thought for a regular
fight, after that they fired one gun, then two or three more, before the men
that were stationed on the westerly part of said bridge fired upon them.

TIMOTHY MINOT, jun.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23 d. 1775.
DOCTOR Timothy Minot, jun. personally appeared and after due caution to
testify the truth, and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath to the truth of
the above deposition by him subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Jonathan Hastings, John Cumming, Duncan Ingraham. Justices of
the Peace.

Lexington, April 23d. 1775.
I JAMES BARRETT of Concord, Colonel of a regiment of militia in the county of
Middlesex, do testify and say, that on Wednesday morning last, about day break,
I was informed of the approach of a number of the regular troops to the town of
Concord, where was some magazines belonging to this province, when there was
assembled some of the Militia of this and the neighboring towns, when I
ordered them to march to the north-bridge, so called, which they had passed and
were taking up, I ordered said militia to march to said bridge and pass the
same, but not to fire on the King's troops unless they were first fired upon,
we advanced near said bridge, when the said troops fired upon our militia, and
killed two men dead on the spot, and wounded several others, which was the
first firing of guns in the town of Concord, my detachment then returned the
fire, which killed and wounded several of the King's troops.

JAMES BARRETT.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23 d. 1775.
THE abovenamed James Barrett, personally appeared, and after due caution to
testify the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath to the
truth of the above deposition by him subscribed. Before us,

William Read, Jonathan Hastings, Duncan Ingraham. Justices of the Peace.

Lexington, April 23d. 1775.
WE BRADBURY ROBINSON, SAMUEL SPRING, THADDEUS BANCROFT, all of Concord and
JAMES ADAMS, of Lincoln, all in the County of Middlesex, all of lawful age, do
testify and say, that on Wednesday morning last, near ten of the clock, we saw
near one hundred of regular troops being in the town of Concord, at the
North-Bridge in said town (so called) and having passed the same they were
taking up said bridge, when about three hundred of our militia were advancing
toward said bridge, in order to pass said bridge, when, without saying any
thing to us, they discharged a number of guns on us, which killed two men dead
on the spot and wounded several others, when we returned the fire on them,
which killed two of them, and wounded several, which was the beginning of
hostilities in the town of Concord.

BRADBURY ROBERTSON, SAMUEL SPRING, THADDEUS BANCROFT.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23d, 1775.
THE within named Bradbury, Robinson, Samuel Spring, Thaddeus Bancroft and
James Adams, made solemn oath to the truth of the within deposition by them
subscribed. Before us,

William Read, William Stickney, Jonathan Hastings.} Justices of the Peace.

Concord, April 23 d. 1775.
I JAMES MAR of lawful age testify and say, that in the evening of the
eighteenth instant I received orders from George Hutchinson, Adjutant of the
fourth regiment of the regular troops stationed in Boston, to prepare and march
to which order I attended and marched to Concord where I was ordered by an
officer, with about one hundred men to guard a certain bridge, there, while
attending that service, a number of people came along, in order as I supposed,
to cross said bridge, at which time a number of regular troops first fired upon
them.

JAMES MAR.

MIDDLESEX, ss. April 23 d. 1775.
THE abovenamed James Mar, appeared, and after due caution to testify the
truth and nothing but the truth, made solemn oath to the truth of the above
deposition by him voluntarily subscribed. Before us,

Duncan Ingraham, Jonas Dix. Justices of the Peace.

I EDWARD THORNTON GOULD, of his Majesty's own regiment of foot, being of
lawful age, do testify and declare, that on the evening of the 18th, instant,
under the order of General Gage, I embarked with the light infantry and
grenadiers of the line, commanded by Colonel Smith, and landed on the marshes
of Cambridge, from whence we proceeded to Lexington, on our arrival at that
place we saw a body of provincial troops armed, to the number of about sixty or
seventy men, on our approach they disbursed and soon after firing began, but
which party fired first I cannot exactly say, as our troops rushed on,
shouting, huzzaing, previous to the firing, which was continued by our troops
so long as any of the provincials were to be seen. From thence we marched to
Concord, on a hill near the entrance of the town, we saw another body of
provincials assembled, the Light-Infantry companies were ordered up the hill to
disperse them, on our approach they retreated toward Concord, the grenadiers
continued the road under the hill toward the town, six companies of
light-infantry were ordered down to take possession of the bridge which the
provincials retreated over; the company I commanded was one of the three
companies of the above detachment went forward about two miles, in the mean
time the provincial troops returned to the number of about three or four
hundred, we drew up on the Concord side the bridge, the provincials came down
upon us, upon which we engaged and gave the first fire: This was the first
engagement after the one at Lexington, a continued firing from both parties
lasted through the whole day: I myself was wounded at the attack of the bridge,
and am now treated with the greatest humanity and taken all possible care of,
by the provincials at Medford,

EDWARD THORNTON GOULD.
Medford, April 20th, 1775.
Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY, MIDDLESEX COUNTY, April 25 th, 1775.
LIEUTENANT EDWARD THORNTON GOULD, aforenamed, personally made oath to the
truth of the foregoing declaration by him subscribed. Before us,

Thaddeus Mason, Josiah Johnson, Simon Tufts. Justices of the Peace.

Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY. CHARLESTOWN, ss.
I NATHANIEL GORHAM, Notary and Tabellion Public, by lawful authority, duly
admitted and sworn, hereby certify to all whom it does or may concern, that
Thaddeus Mason, Josiah Johnson, and Simon Tufts, Esq'rs. are three of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace (Quorum Unus) for the county of Middlesex, and
that full faith and credit is and ought to be given to their transactions as
such, both in court and out. In witness whereof I have hereunto affixed my name
and seal, this twenty sixth day of April, Anno. Domini one thousand, seven
hundred, and seventy-five.

NATHANIEL GORHAM.
N. B. A certificate was made out under the signature of the Notary Public,
that all the other Justices who administered the oaths to the several
deponents, were his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, in the counties where such
certificates were made, and were legally appointed to that office, and that
full faith and credit is and ought to be given to their transactions.



A paper having been printed in Boston, representing that one of the British
troops killed at the bridge at Concord, was scalped, and the ears cut off from
the head, supposed to be done in order to dishonor the Massachusetts people,
and to make them appear to be savage and barbarous, the following deposition
was taken that the truth may be known.

WE the subscribers, of lawful age, testify and say, that we buried the dead
bodies of the King's troops that were killed at the North-Bridge in Concord, on
the nineteenth day of April, 1775, where the action first began, and that
neither of those persons were scalped, nor their ears cut off, as has been
represented.

ZECHARIAH BROWN, THOMAS DAVIS, jun.

Concord, May 11 th, 1775.
ZECHARIAH BROWN, Thomas Davis, jun. personally appeared before me, and made
oath to the above declaration.

Duncan Ingraham, Justice of the Peace.

HANNAH ADAMS, wise of Deacon Joseph Adams, of the second precinct in
Cambridge, testifies and says, that on the nineteenth day of April last past,
upon the return of the King's troops from Concord, diverse of them entered our
house, by bursting open the doors, and three of the soldiers broke into the
room in which I then was, laid on my bed, being scarcely able to walk from my
bed to the fire, not having been to my chamber door from my being delivered in
childbirth to time. One of said soldiers immediately opened my curtains with
his bayonet fixed, pointing the same to my breast. I immediately cried out for
the Lord's sake do not kill me, he replied, damn you, one that stood near said,
we will not hurt the woman, if she will go out of the house, but we will surely
burn it. I immediately arose, threw a blanket over me, went out, and crauled
into a corn-house near the door, with my infant in my arms, where I remained
until they were gone, they immediately set the house on fire, in which I had
left five children and no other person, but the fire was happily extinguished,
when the house was in the utmost danger of being utterly consumed.

HANNAH ADAMS.

MIDDLESEX, ss. Cambridge, Second Precinct 17 th May, 1775.
HANNAH ADAMS, the subscriber of the above deposition, personally appeared, and
made oath to the truth of the same. Before me, Jonathan Hastings, Justice of
the Peace.

Cambridge, May 19 th, 1775.
WE BENJAMIN COOPER and RACHEL COOPER, both of Cambridge aforesaid, of lawful
age, testify and say, that in the afternoon of the 19th day of April last, the
King's regular troops, under the command of General Gage, upon their return
from blood and slaughter which they had made at Lexington and Concord, fired
more than an hundred bullets into the house where we dwell, through doors,
windows, etc. then a number of them entered the house, where we and two aged
gentlemen were, all unarmed, we escaped for our lives into the cellar, the two
aged gentlemen were immediately most barbarously and inhumanly murdered by
them, being stabbed through in many places, their heads mauled, skulls broke,
and their brains out on the floor and walls of the house, and further says not.

BENJAMIN COOPER, RACHEL COOPER.

MIDDLESEX, ss. May 19 th, 1775.
THE abovenamed Benjamin Cooper and Rachel Cooper, appeared and after due
caution, made solemn oath to the truth of the above deposition by them
subscribed. Before me,

Jonas Dix, Justice of peace.

The following is a list of those provincials who were killed, wounded and
missing in the action of the 19th of April, 1775, and the towns to which they
respectively belonged. Including all that was lost that day.
CAMBRIDGE.
KILLED. William Mercy, Moses Richardson, John Hicks, Jason Russel, Jabish
Wyman, Jason Winship. WOUNDED. Captain Samuel Whittemore. MISSING. Samuel Frost
and Seth Russell.
CHARLESTOWN,
KILLED. James Miller and a son of Captain William Barber.
WATERTOWN,
KILLED. Joseph Cooledge.
SUDBURY.
KILLED. Deacon Josiah Haynes, Asahel Reed. WOUNDED. Joshua Haynes, jun.
ACTON.
KILLED. Capt. Isaac Davis, Abner Hosmer, James Hayward.
BEDFORD.
KILLED. Capt. Jonathan Wilson. WOUNDED. Job Lane.
WOBURN.
KILLED. Asa Parker, Daniel Thomson. WOUNDED. George Read, Jacob Bacon.
MEDFORD.
KILLED. Henry Putnam, William Polly.
NEWTON.
WOUNDED. Noah Wiswell.
LEXINGTON.
KILLED. Jonas Parker, Robert Munroe, Jedediah Munroe, John Raymond, Samuel
Hadley, Jonathan Harrington, jun. Isaac Muzzy, Caleb Harrington, Nathaniel
Wyman, John Brown. WOUNDED. Francis Brown, John Robbins, Solomon Pierce, John
Tidd, Joseph Comce, Ebenezer Munroe, jun. Thomas Winship, Nathaniel Fearnux,
Prince a Negro.
BILLERICA.
WOUNDED. John Nicholas, Timothy Blanchard.
CHELMSFORD.
WOUNDED. Deacon Aaron Chamberlain, Captain Oliver Barron
CONCORD.
WOUNDED. Abel Prescott, jun. Captain Charles Miles, Captain Nathan Barrett.
FRAMINGHAM.
WOUNDED. Daniel Hemingway.
STOW.
WOUNDED. Daniel Conant.
DEDHAM.
KILLED. Elias Haven. WOUNDED. Israel Averit.
NEEDHAM.
KILLED. Lieutenant John Bacon, Sergeant Elisha Mills, Amos Mills, Nathaniel
Chamberlain, Jonathan Parker. WOUNDED. Captain Eleezar Kingsbury, and a son of
Doctor Toleman.
ROXBURY.
MISSING. Elijah Seever.
BROOKLINE.
KILLED. Isaac Gardner, Esquire
SALEM.
KILLED. Benjamin Pierce.
DANVERS.
KILLED. Henry Jacobs, Samuel Cook, Ebenezer Goldthwait, George Southwick,
Benjamin Daland, jun. Jotham Webb, Perly Putnam. WOUNDED. Nathan Putnam, Dennis
Wallis. MISSING. Joseph Bell.
BEVERLY.
KILLED. Mr. Kinnym. WOUNDED. Nathaniel Cleaves, Samuel Woodbury, William
Dodge.
LYNN.
KILLED. Abednego Ramsdell, Daniel Townsend, William Flynt, Thomas Hadley.
WOUNDED. Joshua Felt, Timothy Munro. MISSING. Josiah Breed.
FINIS.

