THE PATRIOTS OF NORTH AMERICA: A SKETCH. WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES.

Urbem, quam dicunt Romam, Melibae, putavi,
Stultus ego, huic nostrae simil^m:
Sic canibus catulos similes, sic matribus haedas
Noram; sic parvis componere magna solebam.
New York: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M,DCC,LXXV.

Advertisement.
THERE is not a single Pamphlet, written in North America, that does not, by
some Accident, or other, find its Way, to England. At a Time, when the English
Newspapers, may probably, be filled with Equipments of Fleets, Embarkations of
Armies, etc. the dullest Composition, relating to the Affairs of this Country,
will be read there, with Avidity. The Author has therefore thought it proper,
to subjoin here, and there, a Note, for the Information, of his English
Readers. He has occasionally quoted, a few Scraps of Latin, not because, like
Panurge, he chooses to speak any Language, rather than his Mother Tongue; for
he abhors Pedantry and Affectation of every Kind: But partly from his dreadful
Apprehension of the Tarrers, and Featherers, of the Country, in which he
resides; none of whom, he is well assured, were ever bred, at a Latin School:
And partly, from Respect, to the female Part of his Readers, for whose
Innocence. and Modesty, he has a sacred Regard. At the same Time, left, while
the latter acquit his Manners, they should think hardly, of his Morals, -- he
begs Leave to assure them, that Ribaldry, is unknown to that Language. The
Philosophers, Poets, and Historians, with whose Names, the Men, are too prone
to insult their Understandings, abounding with Expressions, which literally
translated, would be too foul, for the Mouths, of the most brutal of a modern
Rabble.

THE PATRIOTS OF NORTH AMERICA, A SKETCH.
MEN placed, by Chance, or sovereign Fate,
In Life's low, unambitious State;
Whilst undeprav'd, all amply share,
Wise, bounteous Nature's, equal Care.
To them, impartial Heaven, assigned,
Contentment calm, sweet Peace of Mind,
Denied them, Fame, and Power, and Wealth,
But gave them, Temperance, Mirth, and Health;
Preserved them, from the fatal Snares,
Which Lux'ry spreads, for Fortune's Heirs.
From all the dire insidious Train,
Of Wants unreal, Wishes vain,
Refinements false, and fierce Desires,
Voluptuous Arts, and lawless Fires;
Soft Blandishments, of Wealth, and Ease,
Which ruin, while they smile, and please
From childish, restless Whim, that reigns
In satiate Taste, and pampered Veins;
From the dire Weight, of vacant Time,
(That fatal Source of many a Crime;)
Envy of Pension, Power, and Place,
Vain Competition, sad Disgrace;
Honor, and Virtue, meanly sold
For Titles, Rank, or sordid Gold:
Corroding Cares, that constant wait
To check the Triumphs of the Great.
Doomed them to earn, their wholesome Fare,
By gentler Toils, than anxious Care:
Free from the Woes, Ambition brings,
And made them, happier far, than Kings.
To them, our equal Laws dispense,
Fair Liberty, and sure Defense;
From Pride, from Force, and brutal Scorn
Of Knaves, to Power, and Fortune born:
Of Foplings, dainty, weak, and nice,
Who hold, plain Poverty as Vice.
The same great sacred Rights afford,
They give, to every splendid Lord;
Subject alike, to just control,
Dear social Parts of one great Whole;
Whilst undeprav'd, and just, and free,
Content with modest Liberty,
Industrious, Temperate chaste they live,
They merit all that Praise can give:
With Morals pure, Affections kind,
They claim the Love, of all Mankind.
The Men depraved, who quit their Sphere,
Without Remorse, or Shame, or Fear,
And boldly rush, they know not where;
Seduced, alas! by fond Applause,
Of gaping Mobs, and loud Huzzas.
Unconscious all, of nobler Aim,
Than sordid Pelf, or vulgar Fame;
Men undefin'd, by any Rules,
Ambiguous Things, half Knaves, half Fools,
Whom God denied, the Talents great,
Required, to make a Knave, complete;
Whom Nature formed, vile Party-Tools,
Absurder much, than dowright Fools,
Who from their own dear Puppet-Show,
The World's great Stage, pretend to know.
In Politics, mere Punchinellos,
Yet pass for rare, for clever Fellows;
Like Punch, who struts, and swears, and roars,
And calls his Betters, Rogues and Whores;
Like Punch, who speak their Prompter's Sense,
Like his, their powerful Eloquence,
Like his, their wondering Audience.
Poor, busy, factious, empty Things,
Who nothing know, of Courts or Kings;
Who Lords or Commons, never have seen,
But think, they are like Committee Men;
By Rote, like clamorous Parrots prate
Of Trade, Revenue, Church, and State.
Born to be lodged, and clothed, and fed,
By other Toils, than Toil of Head;
Formed for the Oar, the Sledge, the Saw,
Yet rave, of Government, and Law,
As fond, at Committees to prattle,
As Babe, and Suckling, of its Rattle.
In costive Brains, whole Weeks revolve,
To frame, some lawless, mad Resolve;
Some Hand-Bill vile, with Threatenings dire,
Of Murder, Feathers, Tar, or Fire,
Of rich, and poor, decide the Fate
With Scorn, of every Magistrate.
Is there among them, who can read,
It serves to turn, the Idiots Head;
Is there among them, who can write,
It serves to wreak the Miscreant's Spite;
With Vipers leagued, in borrowed Name,
They hiss and blast their Neighbor's Fame
Vipers like,
or Dolt.
Fair Truth, exclude, from many a Press,
On Pain, of every dread Distress:
As Priests, their Flocks to circumvent,
Forbid, to read Christ's Testament,
With senseless Jargon, stupid Lies,
Like Morpheus, close the People's Eyes,
Vile, false, pernicious Doctrines preach,
Rebellion rank, and Treason teach,
Malignant over the Land they crawl,
And wither, blast, and poison all.
So when the Devilish with horrid Joy,
Hatched, the dire Project to destroy
Mankind, created frail, and weak,
He took the Form of grovelling Snake,
And stung, with Envy, Rage, Despair,
To see a World, so gay, so fair
A World as erst, alas, was this
The Seat of Pleasure, Ease and Bliss:
A World, where Spirits, foul from Hell,
Were too impure, too black, to dwell
With Mortals, harmless as the Dove,
'Midst Innocence, and Peace, and Love,
Till, they had made, the simple Elves,
As soul, and guilty, as themselves;
Triumphant, used the same Device,
And made a Hell of Paradise.
In Brothels, Corners, Fields, who lurk,
Fond of Cabals, detesting Work,
Neglect, their useful Occupations,
And starve themselves, to starve whole Nations
Whose foul, remorseless, guilty Souls,
Nor Laws of God, or Man, controuls;
Who scowl on Wealth, with envious Eye,
For Wealth, and Fame, and Influence sigh,
And strive intent, on Pelf, and Spoils,
To plunge the Land, in civil Broils.
Furious, and sleepless, till they see
One general, glorious Anarchy.
(Sad Scenes! where idle Russians gain
Riches unearn'd, by Toil or Pain,)
And ruthless, clear their bloody Way,
To wild, despotic, brutal Sway.
Like Thieves, and Plund'rers, Traitors fell,
The same vile Progeny, of Hell.
When some fair City, roused from Sleep,
In calm, Oblivious, Midnight Deep,
Alarmed, by dreadful Din, of Bells,
Loud Cries of Fire, and dismal Yells;
When Interest, Duty, Love demand
The Aid, of every friendly Hand,
Whilst the wide-spreading Flames resound,
With joyful Ears, all catch the Sound;
Rush on their Prey, a grisly Mob,
And seize the dreadful Hour, to rob.
Shall we applaud, this vagrant Crew,
Whose wretched Jargon, crude and new,
Whose Impudence, and Lies delude
The harmless, ign'rant Multitude:
To Varlets, weak, impure, unjust,
The Reins, of Government, entrust.
Will Raggamuffins bold like these,
Protect our Freedom, Peace, or Ease?
Ah! surely no, it cannot be,
These are false Sons of Liberty.
The Men, who form, their Hopes and Fears,
From Hand-Bills, Pamphlets, Gazetteers;
Swallow like Gudgeons, every Lie
Which Malice, Rage, and Guilt supply;
Whose Views reach, not an Inch, from Home,
Who think their little Mantua, Rome.
The dullest Ignorance betray,
In all they do, and write, and say.
Boldly affirm, each wild Position,
As if inspired, by Intuition;
Untaught, in Wisdom's modest School,
That Confidence, proclaims a Fool:
Their scanty Stock of useless Knowledge,
Taught them by Floggings sheer of College,
Or which, alas! in ten Times worse,
Derived from some polluted Source.
From Clodius, Judge of Men, and Things,
Of Statesmen, Ministers and Kings;
Of Power supreme, of just Protection,
Of Order, Peace, and due Subjection;
Too fond, and credulous to see
Treason, in Mask of Liberty.
What false Conclusions, Knaves can draw
From Gospel Truths, from Statute Law;
How much like Fools, these Knaves can write,
From Hunger, or from Party Spite,
Of regal Power, of legal Right.
From Curio's frothy Declamation,
Decide on Trade, on Legislation,
On Charter Rights, and dread Taxation;
(That nauseous Cant, of old, and young,
That Theme, of every Booby's Tongue;)
Like Pettifoggers, pert, and raw,
Who grope, in Indexes for Law,
Prating of Books, they never read,
Toiling over Parchment, for their Bread;
Formed at the most, to scrawl a Lease,
Yet dare to judge, of War, and Peace;
Whom, God for Scriv'ners only, meant,
Yet dare, to ape, high Parli'ment;
Scorning over moldy Books to pore,
And learn, what passed, in Days of yore,
With wise, important Lessons, fraught,
How Patriots acted, Sages thought.
How Greece, that Seat of every Art,
That charms the Eye, and mends the Heart;
By Phoebus, by the Muses chaste,
Inspired with Genius, Wit and Taste:
Of Heroes erst, the blessed Abode
Of many a Sage, and Demi-God;
Source of a long illustrious Line
Of Sculptors, Painters, Bards divine,
Favored of Heaven, immortal Land,
Formed to enchant, to teach, command;
Whose various, wise, instructive Page,
(Fond Theme of every Land and Age)
With Sense sublime, with Truth replete,
With Precepts wise, Examples great:
Midst Ignorance dark, and deep as Night,
Diffused its kind, refulgent Light;
From Goths, and Vandals, fierce, and blind,
From Slavery, rescued half Mankind.
How, even wise Greece, illustrious Greece,
Wanton with Plenty, Wealth, and Peace,
To lawless Mobs, resigned its Power,
Changed Men, and Measures, every Hour.
For every Whim, Town-Meetings called,
In greasy, tattered Troops, cabal'd,
Convened, intrigu'd, harangu'd, resolved,
The Laws of God, and Man, dissolved,
Till Liberty, was prostrate laid,
By hireling Demagogues betrayed:
Her Offspring now, a hapless Race,
Exposed to Want, and dire Disgrace,
Extinguished, all those sacred Fires,
Which warmed the Bosoms, of their Sires;
Each Trace, of ancient Worth effaced,
Their Souls, by Servitude debased,
See all around, with brutish Eye,
Stupendous Arts, in Ruin lie:
The vast, magnificent, sublime,
The Prey of Rage, and mouldering Time;
Yet when, or why, erected there,
The wretched Slaves, nor know, nor care,
Unconscious that a noble Race,
Renowned, for Valor, Genius, Grace;
Chosen of Heaven, the World's great Pride,
Their Ancestors, did there reside;
There, where their hapless Offspring lurk,
The abject Slaves of haughty Turk.
How dreadful! awful, was the Doom,
Of wise, imperial, haughty Rome,
Freedom's, and Honor's, glorious School,
Ordained by Heaven for sovereign Rule;
Whose glorious Deeds, through many an Age,
Adorn the Historians wondrous Page;
Whose Sons, were taught, from earliest Youth,
To fear the Gods, to reverence Truth,
The Siren Pleasures to oppose,
Wisdom's, and Valor's mortal Foes,
To look on Danger, with Disdain,
And smile at Want, at Grief and Pain;
To shrink from naught, but mean Disgrace,
Heroes of more than mortal Race:
In Battle, fierce as thundering Jove,
In Peace, as mild, as timid Dove;
As gentle, modest, and as plain
As artless Child, or simple Swain;
In all th'endearing Scenes of Life,
To Friend, to Parent, Child, or Wife,
To love, to pity, taught to yield,
And only dreadful in the Field;
Yet fired, with noble patriot Zeal,
Prefer to all, the Public Weal,
Their own, their Wives, their Children's Blood.
The sacred Pledge, to general Good.
How Manners, simple, Morals pure,
Fair Liberty, and Peace ensure.
How Arts Voluptuous, soon efface
The Virtues, of the happiest Race.
By Wealth, from foreign Lands acquired,
How Knaves, to Fame, and Power aspired,
For Plunder, won from conquered Greece,
Their Honor sold, their Ease and Peace,
Wanton, and vain, and turbulent,
Fit for no Form of Government;
Assumed the Patriots sacred Guise,
By bold Harangues, and specious Lies,
Allurements false, and fordid Bribes,
Seduced the poor Plebian Tribes;
Taught them their favorite, darling Theme,
To spurn the Rights, of Power supreme,
The sacred Bonds of Peace dissolve,
To meet, to plot, cabal, resolve,
At Cinna's Beck, at Sylla's Nod,
Trample on every Law of God,
At Will of each alternate Lord,
To plunge, (as Russians gave the Word,)
In kindred Breasts, the murdering Sword:
How by ambitious Tribunes led,
Deluded Millions fought, and bled,
And see to mad Sedition prone,
The Mistress of the World undone.
Sad mournful Truths! Examples great!
Mirrors to every happy State!
Faithful, unerring Guides to show!
How Plans ideal, Doctrines new,
Blind Zealots, void of Worth, and Sense,
To patriot Love, how false Pretense.
Ambition, Lies, and Impudence,
How vain Desires, and fond Conceit,
Treach'ry, Revenge, and mean Deceit;
Fair Fortunes squandered, Debts unpaid,
Profusion, Lust, unprosp'rous Trade.
Wild Mobs, to mad Sedition prone,
And Liberty licentious grown,
Must make, the fatal Hour draw near,
Of civil Discord's wild Career,
Must cause, one general Anarchy,
Must end in Loss of Liberty;
And this free Country soon become,
Like Carthage, Florence, Greece and Rome,
Unless some God, should interpose,
And save it, from domestic Foes.
Men to Atlantic Empire born,
Look down on Greece, and Rome with Scorn;
Disdain their Maxims, Laws, or Rules,
To take from any States, or Schools,
Prefer their Mohawks, and their Creeks,
To Romans, Britons, Swiss, or Greeks,
Their nobler Souls, no Systems please,
But Savage Life, of Shawanese;
Or Monsters fierce, of Woods and Seas.
Such Notions crude, the Fools retail,
As paramount to Coke and Hale;
Hold -- Stuff as found, and true,
As Blackstone, Grotius, Montesquieu:
Scorning to tread the beaten Road,
To take a Hint, from any Code;
And while they act, like Imps from Hell,
Ween they are as wife as Machiavel.
So often the giddy Eton Boys,
Disturb, Oh, Thames, thy peaceful Joys,
With sullen Murm'rings, loud Complaints,
Of Studies hard, of sad Restraints;
Calling their Comrades, Knaves and Fools,
Who tamely crouch, to College Rules,
Wanton, and bold, in Pride of Youth,
Deaf to Remonstrance, blind to Truth,
Fond premature, to play the Man,
They meet, and form their little Plan;
Talk not of Talk, they scorn to learn it,
They know what is what, as well as Barnet.
Scarcely, five fleeting Years revolve,
But they cabal, harrangue, resolve,
Rebel, associate, run away;
Exult in Anarchy's short Day.
At Dormer's Arms, in Congress meet,
A medley Herd, of small and great,
Their little Sufferings, to redress,
They pen, some petulant Address,
The general Tenor of it runs,
That Fathers shall not control their Sons,
That none, but downright sneaking Fools,
Will tamely sit, and drudge in Schools,
There over their Cups, on Usher, Master,
Denounce, some terrible Disaster,
"D -- n all his Threatenings, never fear,
"We'll starve the Dog in half a Year,
"By this bold vigorous Stroke we have made
"The Churl, will soon loose all his Trade:
"Square-Toes, no Doubt, will call it Treason,
"No Matter, he will be brought to Reason."
Swear they are as wise, more stout, and bold,
Than Men infirm, and weak, and old.
Then curse, and rail, and roar, and bluster,
With flowing Bowls, their Senses fluster;
Forget the impending pain, and sorrow,
The floggings dire, of sad Tomorrow;
And while they are jovial, round the Table,
"Think they are august, and venerable;
"And to preserve the Association,
"All swear religious Observation."
Enjoy the dear, delusive Instant,
While Masters, Fathers, all are distant;
Thoughtless, how void of all Resource,
How weak their plans, how scant their Purse:
Gay as at Cricket, Play, or Ball,
Defenseless, weak, a Prey to all.
In three short Days, not worth three Groats,
They fall to cut each other's Throats,
Upbraid, recriminate retort,
"You brought us here, you will answer for it;
"Ye little Scoundrels, York and Penn,
"Take care Boys, how you talk to Men.
"None of your sneaking, shirking Farces,
"Or hark'ee, Lads! we'll whip your A -- s;
"You snotty Urchins, dare to sham,
"Car, Vir, Mar, Con, Rhode, Mass, and Ham!
"With half an Eye, one may discern it,
"You Would Sugar Plumbs, from Doctor Barnet."
With all this Bullying, Rant, and Noise,
They Are giddy, thoughtless, helpless Boys;
Ah! cruel fate, alas! how soon,
Their idle, truant Race, is run.
Lo! Father comes, with wild Affright,
Their glorious Noon, is changed to Night:
Questioned poor Things, they cry and pray,
"'It Was H-n -- k, A -- s, led the way.
"They called the Masters, Rogues and Fools,
"Swore 'twas a Shame, to be such Tools;
"That Ushers all, were hellish Imps,
"The Servants, Scoundrels, Rogues and Pimps!
"Combined, the Scholars to defraud,
"To pamper, cozen, wh -- e, or baud;
"That Boys were all by Nature free,
"And College Laws, rank Slavery.
"For naughty Language, he had held,
"Foresaw he must, be soon expelled;
"Laughed at (...), boyish fears,
"Set us with Ushers by the Ears,
"Let Fly in Master's Face, a F -- t,
"And cried G-d d -- n him, let us desert."
Cowards when sober, bold when drunk,
At thoughts of Birch, their Spirits sank,
Their Shillings, prodigally spent,
Conscious of Weakness, they relent;
Acknowledge, they have played the Fool,
Repent, return, are flogg'd in School;
And by their sufferings, wiser grown,
Their just Subordination own.
Some of the Lads, perchance have Sense,
Talents, and Wit, and Eloquence:
But want Experience, Practice, Knowledge,
And think the Cockpit, Eton College.
Like them, the Men, whom Worlds unborn,
Shall name with horror, grief, and scorn;
Their Mem'ries, and their Deeds detest,
Who robbed a Land supremely blessed,
Of sacred Rights, their Sires Possessed.
As savage fierce, as savage raw,
Averse from Order, Power and Law;
Less fit for Senates, than for Toys,
In politics, at best but Boys.
Are these the Men, to bring Salvation,
To a distressed, unhappy Nation;
Ah! surely no, it cannot be,
It Is License, this, not Liberty.
The Men who make Revenge their Rule,
By which to judge, of Knave, and Fool;
Who though no Kingdom can exist,
Without at least, some civil List,
Swear, that all mortal Men in Place,
Are void of Honor, Sense, and Grace.
Forget what once they learnt at School,
That Bu^rhus, was nor Knave nor Fool;
That Barnevelt, Colbert, Sully too,
All claimed their Pensions, as their Due;
That Summers, C -- t -- m, M -- s -- d, More,
Heroes, and Statesmen, many a Score;
Received rich Salaries, or what is worse,
Titles, and Pensions, (Rogues of Course.)
That Hampden, Pym, and fierce St. John,
Were all with Place, and Pension won;
But like true Patriots, did resign,
And scorned to act, like Cataline.
Forget, that high Rewards, are due,
To Men, who are able, just, and true;
That they themselves, each passing Year,
Their -- take, with Conscience clear;
Grev'd only, 'cause it is much below,
The hidden Talents, they could show:
Who swear no Honor, Virtue, Grace,
Is proof against, a Bribe, or Place;
Leave us, full fairly, to conclude,
(What else, would be unjust, and rude;)
That being but poor frail Men, at best;
Their Virtue, never had stood the Test:
That Title, Pension, Power, of Place,
Or Rank, had altered quite the Case
Made Opposition, Fiends accursed
Made B -- e a Saint, made M -- s -- d just:
Made N -- h the Gift; of bounteous Heaven,
And Virtue dwell, with pure St. Stephen,
Made them, all foam, and "swear by G-d,
"A better King, on Earth never trod;
"A better King, ye Rebel Crew,
"Than d -- n your B -- s ye ever knew."
Can men disguised, in Virtue's Mein,
To wreak, their mad, vindictive Spleen;
Who spurn Religion, Law, Obedience,
And damn as Slavery, just Allegiance,
Who fume, and fret, and dart their Stings,
Like Wasps, against Ministers, and Kings;
Who roar, it is glorious to oppose,
The Patron, by whose Love, they rose.
Virtuous, and grateful, just, and fair,
To starve the Sire, to please the Heir;
Unfit for Court, or Camp, or City,
Without Remorse, or Love, or Pity.
Squand'ring a wretched, frantic Life,
In sowing jealousies, and Strife;
Can Men, who all Subjection hate,
Prove Subjects true, to any state,
Submit their furious, boisterous Souls,
To legal Power, or just Controuls:
Ah! surely no, it cannot be,
They wear the Mask of Liberty.
The Men, who like a Trooper swear,
And neither God, nor Devil fear;
Who shake their Sides at holy Writ,
Spout Smut, and Blasphemy for wit:
And while they damn their Souls, to Hell,
Swear Hell's a lie, the Parsons tell.
Can they with Covenanters dine,
Get drunk, with Rum, instead of Wine;
Preserve unmoved a jovial Face,
Whilst snuffling Fanatics say Grace.
To puritanic Modes, conform,
Whom God, nor Man, could ever reform;
Long Hours, in Conventicle sit,
For Taverns, Brothels, only fit;
Hear ghostly Pastors, cant, and chide,
With Texts, and Comments, they deride
Midst bawdy Catches, nurtured long,
In Chorus join, of Heavenly Song!
Curb their impetuous, lawless Fires,
When artless Maidens, raise Desires.
Will they, those Charter Rights, maintain,
They treated erst, with high Disdain;
To legal Power, who drink d -- n,
Truckle to H-n -- k's Proclamation;
And march, encamp, retire, or stand,
As General P -- n-m, shall command,
Ah! surely no, it cannot be,
They Would d -- n to H-ll, such Liberty.
The Men, whose envious Souls, repine,
Unless, they are raised aloft, to shine;
Who think no Place, their proper Sphere,
Save where they rule, and domineer;
Men vain, aspiring, insolent,
On lawless Power, and Interest bent.
Prone by Defect, of Head, and Heart,
To act each bold, flagitious Part;
To whom sweet, humble Peace serene,
Appears, a dull, insipid Scene:
And deaf, to Pity's sacred Voice
On Tumults, Riots, Broils rejoice,
Intent, as Hunger dire, on Food,
On Rapes, Adult'ry, Spoils, and Blood;
With wild Ambition, raving mad,
Tyrants in Garb, of Freedom clad,
The Laws of God, and Man defy,
With furious Mein, and Blood shot Eye;
Haggar'd, from Discords fatal Lap,
Display, the sacred Staff, and Cap.
And Freedom's Ensigns fair, pervert,
To pierce fair Freedom, to the Heart;
Who bid us all, to Arms resort,
That they may reap, delicious Sport;
Who'd rather see us all, in Hell,
Than wisely scruple to rebel,
Who boast no Daughter, Wife, or Son,
Nor care, if this dear Land's undone.
Thirsting for War, for fighting Sake,
Alike to them, what Part they take;
Whether unjust, or just the Cause,
To shield, or to subvert the Laws.
As G -- e, or H -- k gives the Word,
They draw the impatient, murdering Sword:
Be Men, or Measures, bad, or good,
Fond to imbrue, their Hands in Blood;
Would you trust Men, in any Cause,
Who love, not God, nor Man, nor Laws.
Ah! surely no, it cannot be,
Or farewell, sacred Liberty;
Great Shade of Lock, immortal Sage!
Bright Glory of thy Land, and Age.
Apostle blessed! of Toleration!
Benign to every Sect, and Nation:
Friend to Mankind, in Mercy given,
The choicest Boon, of bounteous Heaven;
To curb, the lawless Tyrants Rule,
And rescue Slaves from Filmer's School;
Refute what Hob'bes, what Oxford dreamt,
And show the Ends, of Government;
To ridicule, the biggot Rules,
Which Knaves devised to govern Fools;
To prove in spite of pedant claims,
God made not Men, for Charles, or James.
But bid them Tyrant Power control,
Nor let a Part, enslave the Whole;
To show that Nature, common Sense,
Gave them, the Rights, of Self-defence.
To prove when Kings, the Laws invade,
By Nature, God, or Compacts made,
And claim like Hell, the Right divine,
To treat Mankind, like Herds of Swine;
To rob, or murder, as they list,
It Is just, and virtuous, to resist.
That James full justly, lost his Crown,
And Laws of old, of high Renown;
By Valor, Wisdom, all restored,
Made great Nassau, our lawful Lord.
Patriot! and Legislator wise!
Look down, with Pity, from the Skies!
Behold a vain, deluded Race,
Thy venerable Name, disgrace;
As Casuists false, as Savage rude,
With Glosses weak, with Comments crude.
Pervert thy fair, instructive Page,
To Sanctify, licentious Rage;
To form, some wild, ideal Plan,
And break the Laws, of God, and Man.
Oh! let thy bright Example show,
What Subjects, to their Sovereigns owe;
Thou liv'dst, when Britain's glorious Land,
Was torn by Faction's daring Hand.
When Foreign Gold, when Gallic Bribes,
Seduced, the sordid, venal Tribes;
When William's self, that Land to save,
Was sorc'd to bribe, each factious Knave:
When every Sect, by turns complained,
And cursed the Hour, that William reigned.
Called Freedom's guardian, Virtues Pride,
Usurper, Tyrant, Parricide;
Stunned gaping Crowds, with Tales of Woe,
Of Darien's Host, and sad Glencoe.
Midst these mad Conflicts, vain Alarms,
Say, did thou call, the Land to Arms!
Declare the solemn Compact, broke,
And Subjects free, from William's Yoke.
Thou know, that Subjects, Statesmen, Kings,
Are frail, impure, imperfect Things;
The polished Town, the Savage Wood,
Comparatively, bad, or good.
That More's, St. Piere's, and Plato's Themes,
Are all but flattering, Golden Dreams;
Know that a perfect, legal Plan,
No more exists, than perfect Man.
That Wisdom, warns us, not to grieve,
For Ills, that Wisdom, cannot relieve;
Thou know, to mark the gradual Lines,
From Nero, to the Antonines.
That Freedom, even in Gallia reigns,
Compared, with Asia's hapless Plains;
Compared with Gallia's, boastful Page,
Great William's, was a Golden Age:
Compared with That, still, happier This,
The Age of Freedom, Age of Bliss.
Blind Superstitious Zeal, no more,
Bids Hood-wink't timid Fools adore,
And crouch to Usurpation, dire,
On pain of God's eternal Ire.
No more, deluded Mortals fight,
For vain, hereditary Right;
No more, the murdering Sword, is drawn,
For Pastor's Cloak, or Prelate's Lawn.
Now Whig, and Tory, Country, Court,
No longer, make the Rabble sport;
Now Subjects, Monarchs all combine,
To laugh, at cant of Right Divine.
Appeal to common Sense, for all,
And think like Thee, of good St. Paul;
Thy general Truth's, by all confessed,
And noisy Faction, lulled to Rest.
Some Ray, of thy pervading Mind,
Oh, shed on Mortals, weak, and blind;
Their wandering Steps, to Truth recall,
Oh, save Them, save Them, ever they fall.
Teach them, to view the historick Page,
To trace the Scenes, of every Age;
To look over Asia's, Africk's Coast,
And see Mankind, in Slavery lost.
Born, to fair Nature's equal Law,
Doomed to hew Wood, and Water draw;
The Weak, the Strong, the Young, the Old,
Like Cattle bought, like Cattle sold;
Their Wives, their Daughters, bed, and board,
At will, of some imperious Lord.
Fawning like Spaniels, trained, and linked,
And every free born Thought extinct;
The Book of Knowledge, fair concealed,
And Heaven's most sacred Laws, repealed.
See even in Europe's happier Climes,
Popes, Emperors, Kings, immersed in Crimes;
Deaf to kind Love, to Mercy's Call,
The Industrious, Good, and Wise enthrall;
Formed from the same Promethean Clay,
To Nobles, Hirelings, Priests a Prey.
Bid them, some sew, short Leagues advance,
From Albion's Shores, to polished Franee;
Alas! how soon, how great the Change!
There bid, their Contemplation range.
There view, the blind, sequacious Herds,
Governed by Cowls, and monkish Beards;
See the poor Gaul, whose merry Soul,
Nor Priests, nor Tyrants, can control;
Give him, his Onion, Soupe, and Bread,
No idle Cares, perplex his Head.
Intendants, Farmers, Soldiers, Spies
Unnumbered, pass before his Eyes,
He sees them all, and never sighs.
Judges corrupt, and Racks, and Wheels,
Hang over his Head, he nothing feels;
Contented, in his humble Sphere,
To mind his Work, the Laws revere.
As Sprightly, as the Wine, he Quaffs,
Midst dire Oppression, sings, and Laughs.
Woes of next Cent'ry, never revolves,
Nor breaks his Rest, with Town Resolves;
Of Slavery, nor of Want, complains,
But sings, and Dances, in his Chains.
Such Bliss, a Freeborn Briton, scorns,
His Breast, with generous Ardor, burns;
He scorns to be the Tool, or Slave,
Of King, or Priest, of Fool, or Knave.
All that Grimace, and Mirth, and Glee,
Is mere Insensibility:
That Animal, in human Shape,
Is but at best, a merry Ape;
Plundered, of every natural Right,
And plunged in Ignorance, dark as Night.
His Intellects, as gross, and dull,
As Bear, or Ass, or Horse, or Bull;
Doomed to the same, insipid State,
Born but to feed, and Propagate.
Is this the boasted, happy Gaul!
How blessed, then, every Animal!
Yet even an Ape, a Bear, or Goose,
Is happier much, than Men let loose;
From all restraints, of God, and Man,
In search of wild, ideal Plan.
Satiate with Pleasure, Wealth, and Ease,
And left to do, whatever they please;
Yet even in France, in shackl'd France,
Midst Want, and Slavery, Song, and Dance:
Even there, the Friends to Truth, and You,
Helvetius, Diderot, Montescue;
D'Alembert, Rousseau, Marmontel,
In spite of Slavery, loved to dwell.
Yet there, the Wise, the gay Voltaire,
Freedom's and Candors lineal Heir;
There formed, his sweet instructive Page,
To curb the Priest's, the Tyrant's Rage,
To scourge, divert, and mend the Age.
Nor changed, for Brunswick's mild Command,
The Pleasures of his native Land:
Midst Power despotic, Monkish Cells,
Thy Beccaria peaceful dwells.
These chosen few, the Wise, and Great,
Lament, their hapless Country's Fate;
View all, with Philosophic Eyes,
See through the Gaudy, thin Disguise.
Vile Tartuffes, Sorbonne, all combined,
To check, the Freeborn, generous Mind;
Like Harpies, grieve to lose their Prey,
Like Goblins, fly at dawn of Day;
And damn Philosophy, to Hell,
That dares to break, the Magic Spell.
They know why Men, from Woods, and Caves,
Consented to be, partial Slaves;
United Intrests, Hopes, and Fears,
Rather than live, like Wolves, and Bears,
Resigned their Wills, to just Control,
And gave a Part, to guard the Whole.
They see the social Compact broke,
They feel, the heavy, galling Yoke;
See Virtue, Honor, prostrate laid,
Fair, equal Liberty betrayed.
See Vice triumphant, Worth disgraced,
Truth, Mercy, Justice, all effaced;
Men born to Freedom, abject Slaves,
The Property, of Fools, and Knaves.
See King's, whom God, and Men, designed,
The Friends, and Fathers, of Mankind;
The Laws of God, and Man oppose,
And treat their Subjects, as their Foes.
Yet even in wretched Lands, like these,
True Wisdom, finds Content, and Ease;
Knows that these Ills, are gentler far,
Than horrid Discords, civil War.
Fatal Resource! sad last Relief!
From just, substantial, real Grief;
From Woes, that urge, to wild Despair,
From Ills, that Patriots, scorn to bear.
On Wisdom's Arm, great sacred Shield,
Not made, for vulgar Hands, to wield;
Not made for Sport, like idle Toys,
For peevish, froward, thoughtless Boys.
For Lies, which factious Knaves obtrude,
On the poor, ign'rant Multitude;
For wild Chimera's, idle Dreams,
Causeless Complaints, and airy Schemes.
To combat Wind-Mills, wage with Sheep.
Reserved our sacred Rights to keep,
When Giant Power, makes Millions weep.
When Tyrants fierce, give just Alarms,
The gallant Patriot, calls to Arms;
Reluctant calls, from patriot Love,
Left Arms alas! successless prove.
Wisdom recalls the League, the Fronde,
The Thousands slain, on Gallic Ground;
Recalls that black, infernal Night,
R ecalls, and shudders, at the Sight;
When Cath'rine, Charles, and fierce Tavanne,
To Deeds of Horror led the Van,
When Seine's fair Stream, his Banks o'erflow'd,
All swollen, with native, kindred Blood:
Recalls, mad Clement, fierce Chatel,
Ravaillac, armed with Powers, from Hell,
When virtuous, godlike, Bourbon fell.
Alas! the Liberties, they sought,
For which Coligny, Conde fought,
Subdued, and prostrate, still remain,
And wretched Millions, fell in vain.
Recalls Phillippi's fatal Field,
Where Virtue's self, was forced to yield;
Where Heroes, found untimely Graves,
And left free Romans, abject Slaves.
Oh! did thou live, in George's Reign,
And heard'st the Knaves, and Fools, complain,
The Fools, deluded by the Knaves;
Complain they are worse, than Galley Slaves.
The mad, the ign'rant Knaves, complain,
Midst Ease, and Wealth; of Want, and Pain,
With Doctrines, borrowed from the Clouds,
Delude the stolid gaping Crowds:
Doctrines absurd, and crude, and new,
And swear, they learnt them, all from you.
How would thy Breast, indignant feel
Alternate Scorn, and patriot Zeal!
Alas! vain Men, how blind! how weak!
Give them the Liberty, they seek;
Grant all their vain, their fond Desires,
Grant all, that every Fool requires.
Let them convene, in vagrant Bands,
To play at Questions, and Commands,
In tattered Garb, with squallid Mein,
Like Children, play at King, and Queen.
Let them, round Freedom's sacred Pole,
Quaff Toddy, from the flowing Bowl.
The Tyler's, Cade's, and Straw's debate,
The dread Arcana's, of the State.
Issue their Mandates, near and far,
On Pain of Feathers, and of Tar,
Pierce through dark Night, with gummy Eyes,
And see an Empire, vast arise.
(Since it is a Truth, by all confessed,
That Arts, and Empires, travel West,)
An Empire vast, by Heaven declared,
With which, each other State, compared,
From Delly, to renowned Calcut,
Is not much bigger than a Nut,
From Ispahan, to Neufchatel,
Is but the veriest Bagatelle.
That Isle, so blessed, by George's Sway,
Is but the Needle, in the Hay.
Claim Power supreme, by Right Divine,
From Acady, to Caroline.
The Power, and Glory of a State,
By Quantities, of Acres rate.
Let them, great Legislators sit,
Instruct, advise, forbid, permit,
Sole Judges, of their private Weal,
As they demand, enact, repeal.
Fleets, Armies, Hirelings, Viceroys, all
The pension'd Slaves, of Courts recall.
Let Cobblers, Tinkers, Butchers, prate
At Will, of deep Affairs of State;
Relate, their Sufferings, over and over,
Of Tea, of Tax, and Compacts roar,
Till Power Supreme, to Babes devolves,
And every Suckling, lisps Resolves.
Poor giddy Wights, without pretense,
To Age, Experience, Parts, or Sense:
Yet dare to judge of Men, and Things,
And think themselves, as great as Kings;
Leave them, their idle Course to run,
In two short Years, they would be undone.
Thus often, a cocker'd, pampered Child,
By fond maternal Love, is spoiled.
Froward, and petulant, and rash,
Neglects his Books, and feeds on Trash;
Flies in his aged Parent's Face,
For Whims, that Age, and Sense disgrace.
A weak, ungrateful, booby Son,
Sullen, controlled; if pleased, undone:
Let him pursue, his idle Way,
'Twou'd be, one glorious Holiday;
Let the poor Thing, his Fancy please,
He Would perish soon by dire Disease.
Unconscious, of the Woes to come,
Unmindful of his future Doom,
How rough the World, compared with Home.
When left alone, on Life's sad Stag,
When anxious Cares, his Thoughts engage,
Of Parent's fost'ring Aid berest,
To the wide World, an Orphan left.
Too late, the fatal Truth, perceives,
Too late reflects, and vainly grieves,
His Parent, fondly was beguiled,
Had spared the Rod, and spoiled the Child.
Teach them, wise Patriot, to obey,
The mild Commands, of Brunswick's Sway;
Bid them, the Tyrants Power defy,
In Freedom live, for Freedom die:
But Oh! instruct them, first to know,
Tyrants, from Sov'reigns, Friend, from Foe,
Freedom, from wild licentious Schemes,
Just, legal Rights, from idle Dreams,
The golden Mean, from mad Extremes.
Like Prophets, erst in Mercy sent,
To bid offending Worlds, repent.
Recall, their wandering Steps, to Truth,
Look down, with Pity, on their Youth.
Wanton, and proud, in Nature's Bloom,
Unconscious, of impending Doom.
Whilst George's fond, paternal Hand,
Lingering suspends, the stern Command;
Ere hostile, conquering Fleets appear,
Benignant check, their mad Career.
Ere yet, avenging Hosts prepare
To shake the Land, with horrid War.
Save them, from that sad Scene, of Woes,
Where thankless Sons, their Sires oppose;
Where Sires, and Sons, are mortal Foes;
Where Moonstruck Zealots, fierce despise
Nature's endearing, sacred Ties;
Where Russians, gain unblest Applause,
By violated, Faith, and Laws.
Where fair earned Wealth, Possessions fair,
Are torn from many a rightful Heir;
Where Lust of Power, and guilty Joys,
Sweet Peace, and Innocence, destroys;
Impostors vile, to Power aspire,
Honor and Worth abashed, retire.
Retire, and see their native Lands,
Plundered by bold rapacious Hands.
Unpitying Bands, fair Seats destroy,
Of dear domestic, social Joy;
See many a Field, and fertile Plain,
Covered with kindred Natives slain.
See Friends, Companions, once beloved,
By dire contageous Madness moved;
Frantic, and ruthless, pierce the Breast,
Once with dear, mutual Love possessed.
Triumphant Crimes, pollute the Land,
Consigned to every Butcher's Hand;
Spread Desolation, like a Flood,
And Brothers, shed, their Brother's Blood.
Rouse these dear Lands, from torpid Sleep,
Ah! rouse them, lest they 'wake to weep;
With Anguish weep, alas! in vain,
For thousands ruined, thousands slain.
Let not their fatal Rage, despise
The Orphans Tears, the Widows Sighs.
Kind aged Parents, left forlorn,
Their hapless, murdered Sons, to mourn;
Dear, pious, Sons, whose frantic Eye,
Beholds their Sires, untimely die;
And Russians, rushing to destroy,
Soft Charms, reserved for virtuous Joy.
Snatch this short fleeting Interval,
Their wandering Senses to recall.
Warn them, of their impending Fate,
Lest sad Repentance comes too late.
Bid them survey the Realms above,
The blissful Seats, of Peace, and Love,
Yet there, even there, a rebel Crew,
That Peace, that Love, could joyless view;
See God, immortal Joys prepare,
Yet Joys, immortal, scorn to share.
Placed by the Side, of Power divine,
Yet 'midst that Glory, could repine.
View Power supreme, with envious Eye,
And God's Omnipotence defy:
To Envy, Rage, and Malice prone,
Invade the indulgent Father's Throne,
Till by unjust Wrath, the Traitors fell,
Headlong from Heaven, to endless Hell.
THE END.
NOTES ON THE PRECEDING WORK.
[ The Men depraved. Page 3, Line5.]

SEE the Names, in the Lifts of Committees, in the several Districts of
North America; and enquire, what are their Callings?

Calls his Betters. P. 3, L. 23.] It is the Practice of these Orators, over all
America, to summon the Mob, by some anonymous portentous Hand-Bill, addressed
to the PUBLIC; to mount into a Gallery or elevated Station, in or near a Place
of public Resort; and from thence, with a grave important Face, harangue on the
deplorable State of public Affairs, and the total Loss of Liberty, in a
Country, which, were it not for them, would be the happiest and the freest
Country in the Universe. To retail from Scraps of Party Papers, the Merits of
the Leaders of Opposition; ascribe Opinions to them, which they would hear with
the highest Indignation; and engage for their Countenance and Support,
Opinions, Designs, etc. as if they were as familiarly known to them, as their
own Characters are to their Wives, Children, and Servants, if they happen to
have any.

On the first Personages of Great Britain, all the great Officers of State, and
the Majority of both Houses, they liberally bestow the delicious Epithets of
Jacobites, Papists, Tyrants, Hirelings and Scoundrels, amidst the repeated
Shouts of their greasy Followers.

The Oar, the Sledge. P. 4, L. 5.] The Author could have added the Awl, the
Trowel, and many other Tools; but he thinks his Rhyme rough enough in all
Conscience, as it is. -- Such Tools, are as little adapted to Poetry, as to
Politics.

Hand Bills. P. 4, L. 11.] The Oracles of North America, like the Sibyls Leaves
scattered over the whole Country They have been lately collected with great
Labor and Expense, digested by the Sanhedrim at Philadelphia, and compiled
into a regular Code.

A memorable Era in the Annals of North America. A Code, by which the
Principles of common Sense, every System of Ethics, ancient and modern, the
Authority of the most celebrated Jurists, the Common and Statute Laws of
Great Britain, the Laws of the several Provincial Legislatures, the Authority
of Provincial Magistrates, and the revealed Laws of God, are all abrogated and
done away. A Code, which the gaping Vulgar of America thumb with the same
Delight, as they con Jack the Giant Killer; which the great and little Vulgar
of England will laugh over, as at the Farce of High Life below Stairs; and
which every Man in Europe, of Sense and Benevolence, will read with Grief and
Indignation.

Invida fatorum series, summisque negatum stare diu.
(...) repetons, iterum Chaos.
Vipers leagued P. 4, L. 19.] Alluding to the Figure of a Snake, with which
certain Printers of American Newspapers, adorn their Publications, designed to
allure a certain Set of Customers, and to enlist a certain Crew of Writers, who
have contributed in a most criminal Degree, to subvert the Laws of this
Country, have already enflamed it, into the most dangerous Convulsions, and
threaten to complete its final Destruction. These Standards were erected
perhaps in Imitation of certain well known Signs in Blood-Bowl-Alley of London,
and in la Rue D'Enfer of Paris. The Resorts of Bullies, Spies, Informers,
Incendiaries, Highwaymen, and Murderers.

This Custom is not common to all the Publishers of NewsPapers; some of the
Fraternity, equally malignant in their Designs, and more successful in their
Operations, hang out no Sign at all. They are of old established Credit. Their
Wine needs no Bush.

Many a Press. P. 4, L. 23.] Not every Press; Mr. Rivington, of New York,
continues to discharge the duties of his Profession faithfully, in Spite of
frequent Letters from unknown Villains, threatening him with Fire,
Assassination, etc. in Defiance of many unwarrantable Associations in different
Parts of America, exhorting some, and compelling others, to withdraw their
Subscriptions to his useful and impartial Gazetteer, in the Face of numerous
Committees, who have taken the same sage Precautions to prevent the
Introduction of his Publications into their respective Realms, as if they had
been consigned from Smyrna, or Aleppo, in a Time of a general Pestilence.

He grows bolder, by Persecution, to the Confusion of a pernicious Set of
Scriblers, and of an envious Gang of Rivals, who constantly mark him in their
Newspapers to the deluded Rabble for Destruction. The Public, is in the
Author's Opinion, much obliged to him, and to the good Sense, and Liberality of
the Gentlemen of all Parties in that Province, by whom he is countenanced and
employed indifferently, as his Gazetteer, and his Catalogue of Pamphlets
testify.

The Author believes there is likewise a free Press or two at Boston, defended
by an Army and a Fleet, by which alone they preserve their Freedom.

Who scowl on Wealth. P. 5, l. 27.] No Man of common Observation, who has
crossed the Atlantic, can have failed to remark, the great Difference between
the Manners, of the lower and middling Sort of People in England, and of People
of the same Classes here. Although those Orders of Englishmen, are not much
celebrated for their Civility. The Author, who had often beheld in certain
Countries of Europe, the miserable and abject State of that great and sacred
Portion of the human Species; and had seen the insolent, and brutal Abuse of
Rank, Titles, and Power, on his first Arrival in North America, exulted in an
Appearance, so honorable to Humanity; he recollected the Observation of a
Philosopher, in discovering a Circle exactly described on an unknown Shore,
where he happened to be shipwrecked; and thought this as sure a Proof of
general Felicity, as that of Civility and Science. Jealous though he is naturally
of his Superiors (and his Superiors are innumerable) he begins to find he was
mistaken, and to perceive that there are Pleasures, like the Pleasures of
Excess, exquisite but short-lived, and ending in Disease and untimely Death.

These Men begin to look upon their Superiors as if the Order of the Universe
had been inverted in their Favor; as if they were possessed of what naturally
belonged to themselves, and were determined to seize the first Opportunity to
recover it Vi et Armis.

Ye take too much upon yourselves, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every
one of them: Wherefore then lift you up yourselves above the Congregation of
the Lord?

Their little Mantua, Rome. P. 7, L. 6.] There is a very remarkable Difference,
between the Opinions, Principles, and Conduct in general, of the Natives of
this Country, who have resided in Europe, or have conversed much with
Europeans, and of those who never passed the Limits of their own, or of some
neighboring province. Arts, Sciences, Knowledge, Accomplishments, Wealth,
Power, Dignity, are all comparative. Comparisons are frequently mortifying in
the extremest Degree to that Vanity, which is inseparable from our Nature: But
without it no Man can form a true Estimate of himself, or establish a just Rule
of his Conduct. However nauseous the Medicine may be, it is a salutary one. An
overweening Conceit of the Importance of this Country, and a very inadequate
Knowledge, or a total Ignorance of the Parent Country, are among the fatal
Sources of the dreadful Calamities, at this Moment impending over a Part of
this Country; may they never extend over the Whole.

Dullest Ignorance betray. P. 7, L. 7.] Ignorance of the true Nature,
Conditions, and Ends of Government, and of the Application of general
Doctrines, to particular Circumstances, in which they resemble certain bold
Empiricks, who by administering excellent and efficacious Medicines
unseasonably, and in too large Doses, throw their Patients into Convulsions,
and destroy them. There are three or four Pamphlets, said to be written in
America, within these twelve Months, by Gentlemen called Whigs. These Gentlemen
appear by their Writings to be Men of Sense and Candor. They are Proofs, in
the Author's Opinion, how frequently Men are led by Youth, Inexperience,
Confinement to narrow Scenes, Want of Leisure, and general enlarged Knowledge,
to form false and fatal Conclusions, from the noblest Principles. The Epidemic,
may it not prove the mortal Disease, of this Country. Eslo perpetua.

There is a Pamphlet likewise lately written by a Gentleman, who calls himself
a Whig, under the Title of Strictures, very different from the former in its
Design, if not in its Effect.

"Abominable, inutterable, and worse
"Than Fables yet have feigned, or Fear conceived;
"GORGONS, and HYDRAS, and CHIMERAS dire."
Scriveners only meant. P. 8, L. 9.] The Author has been assured, that no less
than 28 of the Members of the Sanhedrim were Lawyers; he expressed Astonishment
on hearing this, but on enquiring, he found they were, what they call in
England, Attorney at Law, his Astonishment ceased. When he recollected the
Observation of the celebrated Judge Blackstone, on Gentlemen placed at the Desk
of some skilful Attorney, ita lex scripta est, is the utmost his Knowledge will
arrive at, he must never aspire to form, and seldom expect to comprehend, any
Arguments, drawn a priori from the Spirit of the Laws, and the Natural
Foundations of Justice. In the same Page, he admits one or two shining
Exceptions in all Great Britain; how many he might admit here, the Author is no
Judge. By the abuse of certain Words of an ill Sound, much debated about in
this Country, he is afraid there are many among them, who are not well
acquainted even with Lex scripta, nor much versed in English Dictionaries.

Shawanese. P. 12, L. 22.] A Tribe of North-American Indians. The Americans
wish to live in populous Towns, or cultivated Countries, to have Manufactures
to cloth them, or Money to buy clothes, their regular Meals, good Beds to lie
on; to be protected from foreign and domestic Violence, to their own Persons
and Property, and to the Persons of their Wives and Children, without paying
for it. To have their Injuries redressed without the Risk of shedding their own
blood, and to enjoy, at the same Time, the native unrestrained Freedom of a
Savage. They are not contented with being Men. "Men would be Angels, Angels
would be Gods!"

As wise as Machiavel. P. 12, L. 31.] The Gentlemen of the Sanhedrim have acted
in direct contradiction to the first Maxim of that extraordinary Man, "never to
do any Thing by Halves." They have employed his flagitious, and atrocious
Means, wantonly, and without remorse, with as much Ferocity as Caesar Borgia,
his Hero, but without regard to his Ends.

As well as Barnet. P. 13. L. 12.] Doctor Barnet, Master of Eton College, very
generally respected, both on Account of his examplary Virtues as a Man, and of
his uncommon Attention and Kindness to his Scholars as a Master. His Scholars
were much more numerous than they had even been known to be under the Direction
of any of his Predecessors.

Dormer's Arms, P. 13. L. 17.] A noted Inn, on the River Thames, some Miles
distant from Eton; their usual Rendezvous, when the Boys rebel and run from the
College.

York. P. 14. L. 23.] A very genteel, good natured, sensible, generous, young
Gentleman; once a great favorite, and on his Part, very fond of Doctor Barnet;
but had lately taken a Pique to him, was continually pouting, and had grown
very refractory. The Doctor, it seems, had given Orders, that for the future,
no Scholar, should deal with Mother Bat, the Apple-Woman. She had been detected
in bringing the Boys by Stealth, Brandy, and Rum, to make Punch, the
Commodities of the green Cannister, Serpents, Crackers, etc. etc. all which
were absolutely forbidden by the Rules of the College.

As Goody Brit who was recommended by the Doctor in her Room, was a very decent
Woman, who scorned to get her Livelihood in any Way, but an honest one. She
could not afford to sell quite so cheap as Mother Bat. Poor York was very much
nettled at these Orders, for he was a very kind hearted Boy, and used to lay
out a great Deal of Money upon Oranges and Cheesecakes, etc. to treat his
Comrades, Moreover Mother Bat happened to be a near Relation of his Gradmamma:
However, he never would have joined the Scholars if he had not been afraid of
the great Boys: He was forgiven upon Condition, that for the future, when he
thought himself ill-treated by the Praepostors or Servants, he would come and
tell his Complaints to the Doctor, and not run up and down as he used to do,
telling Stories against him to all the Bargemen, Cobblers, Tinkers, Blacksmiths,
Newspaper Carriers, Pedlars, etc. of the Parish.

Penn. P. 14. L. 23.] A Descendant of an illegitimate Son of Admiral Penn, who
with Venables conquered the Island of Jamaica. His paternal Relations,
according to the benevolent Spirit of their virtuous Ancestor, the celebrated
Legislator of Pennsylvania, treated him with as much Kindness, as if he had
been legally descended; he was (not long ago) the very best Boy of the College,
a plain, modest, amiable, sweet tempered Youth; so very innoffensive in his
Behavior, that he was never known to Quarrel with any Body, for he had often
heard his Relations, who were excellent examplary Men, remark, that it was
preposterous and horrible for Creatures who pretended to be Rational, to be one
Moment bowing, scraping, cringing, and flattering, and the next, damning one
another Bloods for Scoundrels, knocking each others Eyes out, and running one
another through the Body, for every Trifle. It is said, however, that he is of
late very much altered, by keeping Company with Vir. Car. Mar. and Mass. and by
the Conversation, during the Holidays, of some Foreign Merchants, ho frequent
his Uncles House upon Business, and is grown a Fop, Swears, Drinks, Bullies,
and talks of Duels, etc. to the extreme Grief of his venerable Relations.
However, as early Impressions are not easily wholly effaced, it is hoped a
little gentle Correction, and his Uncle's Remonstrances, may have reclaimed
him. His Pique to the Doctor, was for much the same Reason as York's,
excepting, that he was not related to Mother Bat; he was uncommonly tall for
his Age, of which he was not a little Vain, and would mutter now and then, that
the Doctor durst not touch a Hair of his Head, he was a Match for the old
Fellow.

Car. Vir. Mar. P. 14. L. 24] All of them much alike, very acoomplished,
sprightly, sensible Lads, but the sauciest Boys of the whole College, as proud
as Lucifer. They were nicknamed by the Rest of the Scholars, your Honor, your
Grace, your Majesty. They had been accustomed from their Infancy to wear tawdry
Clothes, to ride in Coaches and fix, to eat and drink what they liked, to be
waited upon by a great Number of Servants, whom they saw every Day goaded like
Oxen, and beat like Dogs. At College they were pert and idle, and of course
much disliked by the Doctor. They were hated by the Dames where they lodged,
for they used to D -- n her for an old B -- h, because she did not cure her
Bacon with Salt Petre, and put Cinnamon and Mace into her minced Pyes. Their
Holydays were spent at Sadler's Wells, Mary-Bone Gardens, Taverns, and B -- w
-- y House, where they hectored and swore like the Bellies of the House. At
College they distinguished themselves by robbing the Ban-Yards, Quarrelling
with the Barge-Men, Forming a Maccaroni Club, Gaming, Drinking, Whoring and
talking of New Market Meetings. Several Reasons were given for their running
from the College. They were in Debt to all the Public Houses, B -- w -- y
Houses, Shopkeepers, Tailors, Pastry Cooks, and Fruit Shops at Windsor: Car.
took a Pique to the Usher, and stole behind him one Day as he was going into
the School, and with a Piece of blue Crayon slily marked on his Back, R. T. in
Capital Letters, to the great Diversion of all the Boys, especially of Mass.
Con. Ham. and Rhode; another Time he (...) into the Doctor's Kitchen, and while
the Cook was winding up the Jack, threw a Paper of Jallop into a Rice Puding, a
Servant who happened to pass by the Kitchen Window, observing what he was
about, informed the Doctor, who invited him to Dine with him that Day, gravely
recommended to him a Slice of the Pudding, and sent him to his Dames, with a
horrible Fit of the Gripes. Vir. was obliged to run off: His Master it seems,
had threatened to Flog him for some Fault or another, if he did not mend his
Manners; upon which he had the Impudence to throw a Chaw of Tobacco in his
Face, take to his Heels, and call to the Boys to follow him. These young
Gentlemen would have been all expelled, if some of their very near Relations,
well known to the Doctor, and highly respected by him, as they well deserved to
be, had not interecded for him; telling the Doctor, it was pity to ruin the
poor Lads utterly for a few boyish Tricks, which Age and Reflection might make
them ashamed of after very severe Correction, and begging hard for Forgiveness,
they were permitted to remain at College.

Mass. Con. Ham. Rhode. P. 14, L. 28.] The Character of either of these Boys
will serve for a Description of the rest. They are among the oldest Boys of the
School. Their Fathers being often at Sea, or constantly employed in their
Farms, had left them in the earlier, Parts of their Life, to the Care and
Tuition of their Grandmothers, and maiden Aunts, who made them read, every
Morning and Evening, some select Chapters of the Old Testament; entertained
them in the Winter Evenings, with Stories of the Bloody Queen Mary, the Gun
Powder Plot, the Irish Massacre, the Act of Uniformity, etc. Told them what a
wicked profane Monster Charles the first was, to let People fetch a Walk, Play
at Cricket, and go a Skaiting on the Sabbath. Made him read Prynne's Histrio
Mastic, Killing no Murder, etc. Repeated to him the crying Sin of Fornication,
Swearing, and taking the Lord's Name in Vain, made him get by Heart, how Mr.
Pride, the Drayman, Mr. Hewson, the Cobbler, came to be Colonels, Mr. Praise God
Bare bones, the Felmonger, a Member of Parliament, and Farmer Cromwell, of the
Isle of Ely, Lord High Protector of Great Britain and Ireland. They led him to
Church every Sabbath, where he spent five Hours twice a Day, hearing the
Minister preach about David's Rebellion against Saul. About Agag, and the
Amalakites. Binding Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron. The
glorious Achievements of Joshua, at the Seige and Surrender of Jericho, the
Priests of Baal, etc. Their Fathers were a sagacious Sort of Men, and hearing
that Boys sometimes made Acquaintances at Eton, that proved very Advantageous
to them when they engaged in Business and the World; sent them there contrary
to the Customs of their Ancestors, and of their Relations. These Boys did not
appear to be so bad as Car. Vir. and Mar. but some how or other, they were much
less beloved by the whole College. They rarely mixed with the rest of the Boys,
if they did, it was only to set them against the Doctor, calling him a cruel,
abominable Tyrant; that he designed to give them harder Tasks, flog them more
than ever, and keep them at Eton, all the Holidays. If a Boy happened to take
the Lord's Name in Vain, they would give him a Knock in the Face, and tell him
the D -- l would carry him to Hell in his Sleep. They never played at Cricket,
Fives, Leap Frog, or any other Game with the rest. When they bought Apples,
they stole into a Corner, and eat them by themselves; if they saw any of the
Youngsters with an Orange, or a Cheese-cake, they would snatch it out of his
Hand, vow it was theirs, that they had stolen it out of their Pockets; if they
dared to complain, they gave him a Kick on the Breech, bid him go and complain
to the Doctor, they did not care a F -- t, for the Doctor, the Doctor might
Kiss their A -- es.

These Boys would have been infallibly expelled, but they had a great Number of
very near Relations, very unlike themselves; to whom the Doctor had the highest
Obligations, who condemned their undutiful Behavior, as much at least, as
himself. They had been confined several Months to their Chambers, to hard
Study, when the Author last heard of them; and were not to be released, till
they had publicly acknowledged their Faults on their bare Knees, asked the
Doctor's forgiveness; solemnly promised to be good Boys for the future, and
received a very severe and exemplary Flogging.

There was at the College, a young Gentleman of the Name of Can. the only
Scholar of any Consequence, who was not invited to the Dormer's Arms, because
they knew it would have been to no purpose. Can. was a very polite, good
natured, sprightly young Cavalier, danced the best Minuet of any Boy in the
School, had rode the great Horse, very brave, and an excellent Fencer; he had
lately been removed from another public School, where he had been very hardly
used, seldom had his Belly full, was flogg'd unmercifully by the Master,
Ushers, and Praeposters, for the slightest Fault of Mistake, and kicked and
cuff'd about by all the Servants of the College; of whom he never durst
complain, for fear of worse Treatment. Finding this to very different from the
School he had left, he conceived a great Affection and reverence for Doctor
Barnet, and behaved so modestly, and dutifully, that there never was a single
Complaint against him. Can was much liked by the Boys who were acquainted with
him, always cheerful and obliging, laughing, singing and dancing, never
complaining. If at any Time Marid'eve, Malagorge, Navire-gage, Dickfils,
Oyseau-blue, Temps, cuilier, or any other of the discontented Boys, began to
insinuate any Things in a round-about-way, against the Doctor, his Ushers, or
Praeposters, or the Rules of the College. It was a Sort of Gibberish he had
never been used to, he would stare, shake his Head, shrug up his Shoulders,
Mutter. Nontong Pau, Comprong, rieng, de tob Sla^, Along, (...). If Mass spoke
out and called the Doctor Tyrant, and the Ushers Scoundrels in plain Terms, he
fell in a furious Passion, (...) Friatre, Osetu B -- g -- e, Sacre Bleu, Ventre
Bleu, and kicked 'em and cuff'd 'em like a Madman. At last they let him alone,
flattered him always to his Face, and abused him behind his Back; for he had
given many of them a black Eye, and they were more afraid of him, than of the
Doctor, Ushers, Proepostors and Servants, all joined in a Body.

August and Venerable, P. 14, L. 10.] Epithets selected with great Diligence,
and used with singular Propriety and Precision by the Members of a late Cabal
(much resembling that at the Dormer's Arms) in speaking of themselves, in (...)
of the masculine Simplicity of the Ancients; fiducia potius morum, quam
arrogantia e. g. Sum pius AEneas.

H-n -- k, A-d-s. P. 15, L. 8.] The Characters of these young Gentlemen are too
well known to need any Description, as their Fellow Creature the Author,
sincerely pities them, as a real Friend to the Doctor and his Scholars: He
wishes them Repentance, Euthanasia, and the Forgiveness of the Father of
Mercies.

For naughty Language. P. 15. L. 19.] Oh! Absalom, my Son! my Son! Not long
ago, an Acquaintance of the Author, who affectionately laments his undutiful
Behavior: A young Gentleman to whom God has given rare Talents, but the Devil
the Application of them.

O quid agis? Fortitur occupa
P^rtum.
Hampden, Pym, and s^rce St. John. P. 17, L. 5.] See Whitelock, the most candid
Historian, or Journalist, etc. of the Times of which he writ.

Pure. St. Stephen. P. 17, L. 26.] The Chamber where the Commons of
Great Britain sit.

Like a Trooper swear. P. 18, L. 21.] Some of the Features described in the
following Lines, are common to many of the Author's intimate Friends and
Acquaintance, for whom he feels the sincerest Affection and Respect: Men
possessed of all the heathenish Virtues in the highest Degree; if they do not
possess every Virtue, it is the Fate of Humanity. He supposes their liberal
Taste and Habits, to be incompatible with the Manners of the Covenanters of
New England. -- Oh! my Soul, come not thou into their Assemblies: To their
Councils, mine Honor, be not thou united.

When William's self, that Land to save. P. 22, L. 15.] See Burnet, whose
Authority the Author presumes is rarely called in Question by the Whigs of this
Country,

Of good St. Paul's P. 23. L. 28.] General as these Reflectious are on the
Doctrine of Passive-Obedience and Non Resistance, it has occurred to the Author
since he writ them, that they may be wrested to gratify the Malignity of Party
Zeal, into a personal Reflection.

Even the Name of the Gentleman who writ the Friendly Address, is unknown to
him; he never read a Pamphlet truer to its Title, or that appeared to be
written with a more benevolent Intention. It would be well for this country, if
they could distinguish their true Friends. It is vulnerable in one small Part
only: in the rest invincible. No Man who has read the Citizen of Hobbes, the
Decrees of Oxford, the wretched Shifts that Bishop Burnet had recourse to, in
order to accommodate the Doctrines of his Church, to the Revolution, or the
Bungling of the learned Grotius in endeavoring to reconcile capital
Punishments, War, and Resistance, with the Meekness of the Gospel. No Man of
Candor and good Will, can wonder at, or be angry with, the Author of the
Friendly Address. It is one of the sad Effects of such Times as these, to force
Men of certain Tempers to fly for Refuge into the gloomy Regions of Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistance. This was the Case of Hobbes, and of the
University of Oxford, of many other Men, and of Bodies of Men, possessed of too
much Benevolence, Virtue, Learning, and Abilities, to be treated with petulant
or arrogant Contempt. Such Men fly from Anarchy into these dismal but peaceful
Retreats; they do not wish to remain there. Under a James the Second, Oxford,
and others retracted.

Naturam expell's ferca: tumen usque recurret.
With the good Leave of St. Peter and St. Paul, had the Author lived in the
Days of Nero, with his present Opinions and Feelings, he would have united with
Mr. A -- s, Mr. H -- k, yea, even with the Generation of Vipers, and under the
Auspices of -- (could he have been assured, that he would not have deserted
them, and gone over to the Enemy) have done his utmost to tumble Nero from his
Misaud. Thank God,

Nou tali auxil^c, nec defensoribus ^stis
Tempus ^get.
Staff and Cap. P. 20. L. 8.] Ensigns of Liberty, not as they are engraved on
the Front of a certain American News-Paper. It would be an Affront to the
Understandings of such consummate Politicians as the Printer, Designer, and
Engraver, employed in that Paper, to insinuate, that they were ignorant even of
the very (...) of legal Liberty; possibly therefore, they were designed (...)
Hieroglyphics to signify that particular Species of Liberty for which they and
their Friends the Chartres, Renaults, and Lotharios of this Country so nobly
contend. The Hint may, peradventure, have been taken from the pathetic
Complaint of the indignant Belvidera to her Husband, in the Tragedy of Venice
Preserved, or a Plot Discovered.

"No sooner was I laid on my sad Bed, etc."

(...), impudi^^s, adulter, gan^o, manu, ^^ntre pine, bona, Patria, (...)
qu^que (...) as grande cons^averat, etc.

Combat wind mills, wage with Sheep. P. 28. L.13.] Alluding to the well-known
Life of a very amiable worthy Country Gentleman, whole Imagination, by an
intense Application, to a certain favorite Study, became so disordered, that
his Ideas of Right and Wrong, and of the most common Inconveniences, Accidents
and Occurrences of Life, were wholly unlike those of other Men. He had been
many years a Member of a very respectable Club, and was as much esteemed by his
Brother Members, and treated with as much Kindness, as any Man. From the Moment
that he was seized with this strange, fatal Delirium, he became another Sort of
Man, always discontented, for ever complaining, that he was should down to the
lower End of the Table, had not his Share of Fat, could not get a Bit of the
Green, etc. that they were always plotting against him, at the Upper-end of the
Table: That they constantly took Advantage of his occasional Absence, and never
waited for his Consent, when they made any new Rules for the Club. When the
Reckoning was called for, he would throw down a Halfpenny, and swear till he
was black in the Face, that it was as good a Guinea, as ever came from the
Mint. He would take a common Farmer for a Field-Marshal, a Plowman for a
Lieutenant General, a Set of Puppets for Ministers Statesmen, and Kings; a
Windmill for some blood-thirsty gigantic Tyrant, and a Flock of harmless
Animals, for an Army of the Enemy. He constantly mistook his Friends for his
Foes, and his Foes for his Friends; herded with the lowest and vilest of the
Rabble, and shunned the Society of his old Companions, the Clergyman of the
parish, his Neighbor the Gentlemen Farmer, Squire Question, Squire Tensi^, and
others, with whom he had formerly lived very happily, and in great Intimacy;
who sincerely lamented his strange Delusion, and spared no Pains to divert him
from the Study of those absurd Romances, which had been the fatal Cause of it;
such as the Works of Don Malagorge, Don Poulecoq, Don Dicksfils, Don Obispo
Naviregage, and above all the fabulous and monstrous History of the Reign and
Achievments of Sincantrois frequently expostulating with him in the most
affectionate Terms, and warning him if he persisted in it, that he would
infailibly beggar himself, his Family, and Relations, not in a jail, come to be
hanged, or die under a Hedge, in return for their friendly Advice, he called
them a Pack of Scoundrels, Liars, Pickpockets, Sycophants and Traitors, and
swore they had been bribed to ruin him by Don Jorge, a noble Duke, of whom he
held his Estate, by the Tenure of Fealty and Homage. Every Body remembers how
he took up his Lodgings one Night at a Hedge Alehouse, and thought himself in a
Magnificent Castle, dreamt that he was attacked by a furious Giant, jumpt out
of Bed, ran to his Sword, attacked a Hogshead of Red Wine, broached the
Hogshead, and let out all the Wine about the Chamber, and on the Landlord's
insisting upon being paid for his Wine, laughed at him for a Blockhead, swore
it was the Blood of a Giant, whom he had Slain in Defense of him and his
Castle, damned him for an insolent ungrateful Scoundrel, and threatened to cut
his Ears off.

It is well known likewise, how he put to flight all the Magistrates of the
District, released a Gang of Thieves, Pickpockets, Highway-men and Murderers,
and let them loose upon the industrious, innocent, Inhabitants; how they fell
upon their Deliverer, and how he narrowly escaped with his Life.

That black infernal Night, P. 28, L. 22.] The Night of the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew.

Since it is a Truth. P. 30, L. 11.] A very cogent Argument frequently urged
with much Gravity, to pove the approaching Splendour of North America.

By Quantity of Acres of rate, P. 30, L. 24.] If the Author noes not mistake,
it was a Remark of Dean Berkley, that a Man might possess fifty Thousand Acres
of Land in North America, and not know where to get a Dinner. The Dean was in
the Right: It is the melancholy Case at this Day of innumerable American
Landholders. Experts creed Roberts.

This Preeminence so much boasted of, will in the Author's humble Opinion,
prove for many Centuries to come, fatal to the Establishment of Manufactories,
to permanent Independence, to mutual Defense, and to lasting Peace,

The League, the Fronde, P. 28, L. 20.] See Thuanus, Davila, Brantome,
Henriade, L'Esprit de la Ligue, De Retz, Rochefaucault, Jolly, Nemours, etc.

It is much to be wished, that the Details of Civil War, were more generally
known in America, than they appear to be; the Horror of a Civil War is become a
standing Joke among a very numerous Body of Americans: The Author has been
assured, that it is very common to the wild Geese of this Country, to fly
against a Light House in the Night, and dash themselves to Pieces. The same
Cause may perhaps be assigned for both.

Arts and Empires travel West, P. 30, L. 12.] A very cogent Argument,
frequently urged with much Gravity to prove the approaching Splendour of North
America.

The Needle in the Hay, P. 30, L. 20.] A very prevailing lode of Thinking, and
Talking of the insignificant little Island Britain.

Great Shade of Lock. P. 21, l. 1.] See Life of Mr. Lock, Biographia
Brittanica.

And think the Cock Pit. P. 16, l. 6.] The Chamber where the (...) Council of
Great Britain sits.

ERRATA.
Page 17, Line 13, for grev'd, read grieved.

19, last Line, for on Tumults, r. in Tumults.

33, Line 11, for see many a Field, r. in many a Field.

34, last Line but one, for unjust Wrath, r. just Wrath.


