A NEW Proclamation!
By THOMAS GAGE, whom British frenzy,
Styled honorable and Excellency,
Over Massachusett's sent to stand here
Vice Admiral and Chief Commander;
Whose power Gubernatorial still
Extends as far as Bunker's-Hill,
Whose Admiralty reaches clever,
Full half a mile up Mistic river,
Let every clime and every nation
Attend once more -- A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS the infatuated creatures,
Still led by folks whom we call traitors,
(Whom had we dared, we'd have you know,
We should have hanged a year ago)
Advancing in progression fatal
Have now proceeded to give battle,
And with deep wounds, that fate portend,
Galled many a Reg'lars latter end;
And all the good effects we hoped,
From fear and patience now are dropped,
The good effects we mean, of gaining,
Whatever you had was worth obtaining,
The good effects we saw in visions,
Of Lordships, Pensions, Posts, Commissions,
All which by following these same elves,
You Have kept most wisely for yourselves;
It but remains for us, who stand
Invested with supreme command,
To prove we do not bear, or show you
The sword in vain -- So woe be to you!
But first it is fit it should be seen,
What arrant knaves ye all have been
What dreadful crimes you have been committing,
Against parliament and crown of Britain,
Denied their sacred rights to these,
Of calmly robbing whom they please,
And trait'rously combined your forces
To save your consciences and purses;
That any man with half an eye
Your plots and mischiefs might espy,
And by the pains you took to hide 'em,
Discern your knav'ries ever you tried 'em,
Did ye not fright each public press,
And make even RIVINGTON confess,
Scare every Printer bold and wise,
Who dared to publish Tory lies?
Nay, when myself in Proclamation,
Spread wholesome falsehoods through the nation,
Although the lies I used to scatter,
Were of the noblest size, no matter;
Did ye not all refuse to credit,
As if some common liar had said it?
Did not my scribbler general strain hard,
My Massachusettensis, L -- d,
Write every moment he could spare
From cards, and barbers, and the fair,
To argue, wheedle, coax and frighten
Your hardy rogues from schemes of fighting,
Scrawl'd, till he muddled quite his head;
And did you mind one word he said?
Did not my grave Judge S -- l hit,
The summit of news-paper wit,
Fill every leaf, and every paper,
Of MILLS and HICKS, and Mother DRAPER,
Draw proclamations, works of toil,
In true sublime of scarecrow style.
Write farces too against right and freedom,
All for your good -- and none would read 'em,
My friends at York did ye not hamper,
And make each Tory scribbler scamper,
From COOPER, that right reverend Ribald;
By Phebus' self, inspired to quibble,
Down to the unmeaning, senseless prater,
From folly's rear guard, styled MERCATOR;
Raise such a tumult, bluster, jarring,
That midst the clash of tempests warring,
L -- w's weathercock, with veers forlorn,
Could hardly tell which way to turn?
And did ye not in the same shallow way,
Fright my poor Pennsylvanian G -- y?
What ropes and halters did ye send
To mind him of his latter end?
Till least he would hang in more than effigy,
Fled in a fog the trembling refugee?
What disappointments sad, and bilkings,
Awaited poor departing WILKINS?
What wild confusion, rout and hobble, you*
Made with the Farmer, Don A. W.
How did you before committees drag it,
And answer it with fire and faggot?
Still bent your own side to advance,
You never gave us equal chance,
That all the world might see and tell,
Which party beat at lying well.
From whence the point is very clear,
You did not dare the truth to hear;
But fearful lest the world should guess it,
Took all this trouble to suppress it.
Did ye not prate of law and right,
And stir your Yankies up to fight,
Apply the animating lays
Of freedom's sons in ancient days,
Although you could not fail to know
Those days were thousand years ago?
Did not your clergy, all as one,
Vile Protestants each mother's son,
Though miracles have left in lurch,
All men, but our true Cath'lic church,
Engage your knaves in treasons stout,
And tell them heaven would help you out,
That providence subscribed the league,
And angels carried, on the intrigue,
Till proud such aid was on your side,
You all our mortal power defied;
While every sermon beat alarms,
And every pulpit beat to arms?
And now to tell the things that past,
The nineteenth day of April last*
Of your armed men, some twenty dozens,
Whom our fears multiplied to thousands,
(For fear supplies in ways right able
The whole of old Pythog'ras' table;)
Attacked the peaceful troops I sent,
For plunder, not for slaughter meant;
Who little mischief then had done,
But killed eight men at Lexington;
This showed their love to peace and virtue,
And proved they would no intent to hurt you;
For did not every Reg'lar run,
As soon as ever you fired a gun?
And fearful if they staid for sport,
You might by accident be hurt,
Convey themselves with speed away,
Full twenty miles in half a day;
Run till their legs were grown so weary,
They scarce sufficed their weight to carry?
While you unmoved by all this kindness,
Pursued, like tigers, still behind us;
And since assuming airs so tall
Because we did not kill you all,
You Have dared with jibes and jeers confounded,
TO insult the brave, whose backs ye wounded;
(Though valor would with shame have burned.
To shoot at men whose backs were turned)
And bragging ^igh, as though you beat us,
No more mind Reg'lars than musquitoes,
Fire on us at your will, and shut
The town, as though ye'd starve us out,
And with parade prepost'rous hedged,
Affect to hold us here besieged;
Though we who still command the seas,
Can run away when ever we please,
Scare all the Tories into town,
And burn their hay and houses down,
And threaten high unless we flee,
To drive us headlong in the sea;
As once to faithless Jews a sign,
The De'el turned Hogreeve, did the swine*
At any rate, I Am now content to
Avoid the scrape I have got into,
And published here my resolution
Of blood to spare the least effusion:
For fast proceeding in this pickle,
Who knows whose blood the next may trickle,
It Is time in faith to cry enough;
Heaven prosper those who now leave off.
Those that in peace will henceforth live,
I, and his Majesty forgive.
No more the Yankies I contemn;
Let me alone, and I Will let them,
All but that arch rogue, and first grand cock,
Your Samuel Adams and John Hancock,
Whose crimes are grown to that degree,
I must hang them, or they will hang me.
But farther to explain to the end,
That none may ignorance pretend,
I, ex cathedra, each mal-feazance
That follows rank with blackest treasons,
Whoever shall henceforth, without more said,
Associate with those knaves aforesaid,
Take arms to fight, or to conceal
Such Traitors against the common weal,
Aid them with money, arms, provision,
Goods, carriages, or ammunition,
Assist their onset, or retreat,
And help them, or to fight, or eat,
Hold correspondence, us to weaken,
By letter, message, sign or beacon;
Know they, as traitors we shall watch 'em,
And hang they shall, if I can catch 'em.
And now (for bravely we come on,
One more Whereas, and then we have done)
WHEREAS as long as we shall dwell on
This strange, unnatural rebellion,
For all rebellion, to a notch
Is natural, only to the Scotch,
Though parliament have done their share,
To nat'ralize it every where)
Since justice cannot take its course,
And common law's kicked out of doors;
I by the power your charters grant,
(Find ye out how, for faith, I cannot)
Prescribe, to keep all rogues in awe,
The constant use of Martial Law,
So long and in such quantities,
As my great wisdom shall devise;
Then without noise, or grumbling take it,
And ropes shall trick the knaves who break it.
But putting off this rage and fury,
I Am twice as glad again, t'assure you,
That all who in this trying crisis,
Shall heed my peaceable advices,
Submit to me in every thing,
And lose their rights to please the King,
Shall from my arm, which is not short,
Obtain protection and support;
Such as I give the Boston Tories
Who starve for heeding thus my stories,
Or venture each his worthless head,
Condemned to list, and fight for bread.
And all the Tory refugees
May now go home whenever they please;
We Have no occasion for such stuff;
We Have British fools and knaves enough.
Whenever they dare without remissness,
Let them walk out about their business;
Yet not with Whigs and Rebels linked,
But still stand separate and distinct,
Till mercy aid your country undone,
And heaven dispatch me back to LONDON
FINIS.
PRICE THREE COPPER


