AN ELEGY ON THE TIMES: FIRST PRINTED AT BOSTON, September 20th, A. D. 1774.

NEW HAVEN: Reprinted by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN. 1775.

ADVERTISEMENT To the PUBLIC.
THE following Elegy was first published in one of the Boston Gazettes, about
the middle of last September. It was adapted to the circumstances of the times
at that period, and calculated to promote that Spirit of Liberty, Industry and
Economy, recommended by the Grand Congress, then sitting at Philadelphia.
Notwithstanding some alterations in the state of our public affairs, by which
the sentiments and advice in some parts of it are become superfluous, its
general tenor, which no change in our fortune can render improper, and its
poetical merit, made it worthy, in our opinion, of a second publication.

An ELEGY, etc.
OH BOSTON! late with every pleasure crowned,
Where Commerce triumphed on the favoring gales,
And each pleased eye, that roved in prospect round,
Hailed thy bright spires and blessed thy opening sails!
Thy plenteous marts with rich profusion smiled;
The gay throng crowded in thy spacious streets;
From either Ind thy cheerful stores were filled;
Thy ports were gladden'd with unnumber'd fleets.
For there more fair than in their native vales,
Tall groves of masts arose in beauteous pride;
The waves were whitened by the swelling sails,
And plenty wafted on the neighboring tide.
Alas, how changed! the swelling sails no more
Catch the fair winds and wanton in the sky;
But hostile beaks affright the guarded shore,
And pointed thunders all access deny.
Where the bold Cape its warning forehead rears,
Where tyrant Vengeance waved her magic wand,
Far from the sight each friendly vessel veers,
Calls the kind gales and flies the fatal strand.
The ruined Merchant turns his mournful eyes
From the drear shore and desolated way;
Thy silent marts unusual glooms surprise,
And through thy streets the sons of rapine stray.
Such the dread stillness of the desert night,
When brooding horror settles on the groves;
While powers of darkness claim their hateful right,
And fierce for prey the savage tiger roves.
Along thy fields, which late in beauty shone
With lowing herds and grassy vesture fair,
The insulting tents of barbarous troops are strown,
And bloody standards stain the peaceful air. --
Are these thy deeds, oh Britain? this the praise,
That points the growing luster of thy name?
These glorious works that in thy latter days,
Gild the bright period of thine early fame?
Shall thy strong fleets, with awful sails unfurled,
On Freedom's shrines the unhallowed vengeance bend?
And leave forlorn the desolated world,
Crushed -- every foe, and ruined -- every friend!
And damped alas! thy soul-inspiring ray,
Where Virtue prompted and where Genius soared,
Or quenched in darkness, and the gloomy sway
Of Senates venal and the liv'ried Lord!
There shame sits blazoned on the unmeaning brow,
And over the scene thy factious Nobles wait,
Prompt the mixed tumult of the noisy show,
Guide the blind vote and rule the mock debate.
To these how vain, in weary woes forlorn,
With fearful hands the fond complaint, to raise,
Lift fruitless offerings to the ear of Scorn --
Of servile vows and well-dissembled praise!
Will the grim savage of the nightly fold
Learn from their cries the blameless flock to spare?
Will the deaf gods, that frown in molten gold,
Bless the dup'd hand, that spreads the prostrate prayer?
With what pleased hope before the face of Pride,
We reared our suppliant eyes with filial awe;
While loud Disdain with ruffian voice replied,
And Inj'ry triumphed in the garb of Law!
While Peers enraptured hail the unmanly wrong,
See Ribaldry, vile prostitute of shame,
Stretch the bribed hand and prompt the venal tongue,
To blast the laurels of a FRANKLIN'S fame!
But will the Sage, whose philosophic soul,
Controlled the lightning in its fierce career,
Heard unappal'd the aerial thunders roll,
And taught the bolts of vengeance where to steer; --
Will he, while echoing to his just renown
The voice of kingdoms swells the loud applause;
Heed the weak malice of a Courtier's frown,
Or dread the coward insolence of laws?
See envying Britain rends the sacred bays;
Illuded Justice pens the mock decree;
While Infamy her darling scrowl displays,
And points well pleased, Oh Wedderburn, to thee!
For naught avail the virtues of the heart,
The vengeful bolt no Muse's laurels ward;
From Britain's rage, and death's relentless dart,
No worth can save us, and no fame can guard.
Over hallowed bounds see dire Oppression roll;
Fair Freedom buried in the whelming flood;
Nor charter'd rights the tyrant course control,
Though sealed by Kings and witnessed in our blood.
No more shall Justice with unbiased hand,
From lawless Rapine snatch her trembling prey,
While in her balance by supreme command
Hang the dead weights of ministerial sway.
(For taught by pain, our injured bosoms feel
The potent claims whence all our woes began,
And own supreme the power, that could repeal,
Those laws of heaven, that guard the rights of man.)
In vain we hope from Britain's haughty pride
An hand to save us, or an heart to bless;
It Is strength, our own, must stem the rushing tide,
And our own virtue yield the wished success.
But, oh, my friends, the arm of blood To this passage on its first publication
at Boston, the Author subjoined the following note, viz. "This is not meant as
a caution against defending our rights with our blood, if we should be driven
to that extremity; but only against the impolitiv zeal of those, who seem
desirous to let loose the rage of popular resentment, and bring matters
immediately to a crisis in this Province." As the state of the times is now
changed, the Author would undoubtedly, with every other Friend to his country,
rejoice in that animated Spirit of Heroism, which now rouzes every man to arm
in defense of our invaded Privileges.
restrain!
(No rage intemp'rate aids the public weal)
Nor basely blend (too daring, but in vain)
The assassin's madness with the patriot's zeal.
Shall the fields blush, with vital crimson stained,
When blind resentment marks the victim'd breast?
Will reeking life, by vengeful hands profaned,
Our wrongs relieve, or charm our woes to rest?
Ours be the manly firmness of the sage,
From shameless foes the ungrateful wounds to bear;
Alike removed from baseness and from rage,
The flames of faction, and the chills of fear.
Check the vast torrent of commercial gain,
That buys our ruin at a price so rare;
And while we scorn Britannia's servile chain,
Disdain the liv'ry of her marts to wear.
For shall the lust of fashions and of show,
The cursed idolatry of silks and lace,
Bid our proud robes insult our Country's woe,
And welcome Slavery in the glare of dress?
Will the blind dupe, in liv'ried tinsel gay,
Boast the shamed trappings, that adorn the slave?
Will the fond mourner change his sad array,
TO attend in gorgeous pomp a parent's grave?
No! the rich produce of our fertile soil,
Shall cloth the neatness of our cheerful train,
While heaven-born virtues bless the pious toil,
And gild the humble vestures of the plain.
No foreign labor in the Asian field
Shall weave her silks to deck the wanton age,
But, as in Rome, the furrowed vale shall yield
The unvanquish'd Chieftain and paternal Sage.
And ye, whose heaven in ermin'd pomp to shine,
To run with joy the vain, luxurious round,
Bless the full banquet with the charms of wine,
And roll the thundering chariot over the ground!
For this, while guis'd in sycophantic smile,
With hearts all mindless of your country's pain,
Your flattering falsehoods feed the ears of Guile,
And barter freedom for the dreams of gain!
Are these the joys, on vassal'd climes that wait --
In downs of ease luxuriant to repose,
Quaff streams nectareous in the domes of state,
And blaze in splendour of imperial shows?
No -- the hard hand, the tortured brow of Care,
The thatch-roof'd hamlet and defenseless shed,
The tattered garb, that meets the inclement air,
The famished table, and the matted bed --
These are their fate -- In vain the arm of toil
With gifts autumnal crowns the bearded plain;
In vain glad Summer prompts the genial soil,
And Spring dissolves in softening showers in vain;
There savage Power extends his dismal shade,
And chill Oppression, with her frosts severe,
Sheds her dire blastings over the springing blade,
And robs the expecting labors of the year.
So must we sink? -- and at the stern command
That bears the terrors of a tyrant's word,
Bend the crouch'd knee and raise the suppliant hand,
The scorned, dependant vassals of a Lord?
The wintry ravage of the storm to meet,
Brave the scorched vapors of the autumnal air,
Then pour the hard-earn'd harvest at his feet,
And beg some pittance from our pains to share?
But not for this, by heaven and virtue led,
From the mad rule of hierarchal pride,
From slavish chains our injured fathers fled,
And followed freedom on the adventurous tide;
Dared the wild horrors of these climes unknown,
The insidious savage, and the crimsoned plain,
To us bequeathed the prize, their woes had won,
Nor deemed they suffered, or they bled in vain.
And think thou, North, the sons of such a race,
Where beams of glory blessed their purpled morn,
Will shrink unnerv'd before a tyrant's face,
Nor meet thy louring insolence with scorn?
Look through the circuit of the extended shore,
That checks the surges of the Atlantic deep!
What weak eye trembles at the frowns of power?
What leaden soul invites the bands of sleep?
How Goodness warms each heaven-illumin'd heart!
What generous gifts the woes of want assuage,
And sympathetic tears of pity start,
To aid the destined victims of thy rage!
No clamorous faction with unhallowed zeal
To wayward madness wakes the impassioned throng;
No thoughtless furies sheath their breasts with steel,
Or call the sword to avenge the oppressive wrong.
Fraternal bands with vows accordant join;
One guardian Genius, one enrapt'ring Soul
Nerves the bold arm, inflames the just design,
Combines, inspirits and illumes the whole,
Now meet the Fathers of this western clime;
Nor names more noble graced the rolls of fame,
When Spartan firmness braved the wrecks of time,
Or Rome's bold virtues fanned the heroic flame.
Not deeper thought the immortal Sage inspired,
On Solon's lips when Grecian senates hung;
Nor manlier eloquence the bosom fired,
When genius thundered from the Athenian tongue.
And hopes thy pride to match the patriot strain
By the bribed slave in pension'd lists enrolled;
Or awe their councils by the voice profane,
That wakes to utt'rance at the calls of gold?
Can frowns of terror daunt the warrior's deeds,
Where guilt is stranger to the ingenuous heart?
Or Craft illude, where godlike Science sheds
The beams of knowledge and the gifts of art?
Go, raise thy hand, and with its magic power
Pencil with night the sun's ascending ray,
Bid the broad veil eclipse the noontide hour,
And damps of stygian darkness shroud thy day. --
(Such night as lours over Britain's fated land,
Where rayless shades the darkened throne surround;
Nor deeper glooms at Moses' waving wand,
Poured their thick horrors over the Memphian ground.)
Bid heavens dread thunders at thy voice expire,
Or chain the angry vengeance of the waves;
Then hope thy breath can chill the eternal fire,
And free souls pinion with the bonds of slaves.
Thou can not hope -- Attend the flight of days,
View the bold deeds, that wait the dawning age,
Where Time's strong arm, that rules the mighty maze,
Shifts the proud actors on this earthly stage!
Then tell us, North, -- for thou art sure to know;
For have not Kings and fortune made thee great?
Or lurks not genius in the ennobled brow,
And dwells not wisdom in the robes of state?
Tell how the powers of luxury and pride,
Taint thy pure zephyrs with their poisoned breath;
How dark Corruption spreads the envenomed tide,
And Britain trembles on the verge of death.
And tell how, rapt by Freedom's deathless flame,
And fost'ring influence of the favoring skies,
This Western World, the last recess of fame,
Sees in her wilds a new born Empire rise:
A newborn Empire, whose ascendant hour
Defies the foes, that would its life destroy,
And like Alcides, with its infant power
Shall crush those serpents, who its rest annoy.
Then look through time, and with extended eye,
Pierce the deep veil of fate's obscure domain!
The morning dawns, the effulgent star is nigh,
And crimsoned glories deck her rising reign!
Behold afar beneath the cloud of days,
Where rest the wonders of ascending fame;
What Heroes rise, immortal heirs of praise!
What fields of death with conquering standards flame!
See her thronged cities' warlike gates unfold!
What towering armies stretch their banners wide,
Where cold Ontario's icy waves are rolled,
Or far Altama's silver waters glide!
Lo from the groves, the aspiring cliffs that shade,
Ascending pines the surging ocean brave,
Rise in tall masts, the floating canvas spread,
And rule the dread dominions of the wave!
Where her clear rivers pour the mazy tide,
The laughing lawns in full luxuriance bloom,
The golden harvest spreads her wanton pride,
The flowery garden breathes a glad perfume.
Her potent voice shall hush the storms of fate,
Where the meads blossom or the billows roar;
And cities, gay with sumptuous domes of state,
Stretch their bright turrets on the sounding shore.
There mark that Coast, which seats of wealth surround,
That haven, rich with many a flowing sail,
Where mighty ships, from earth's remotest bound,
Float on the chearly pinions of the gale.
There BOSTON smiles, no more the sport of scorn,
And meanly imprisoned by thy fleets no more;
And far as ocean's billowy tides are borne,
Lifts her feared ensigns of imperial power.
So smile the shores, where lordly Hudson strays,
(Whose floods fair York and proud Albania lave)
Or Philadelphia's happier clime surveys
Her glist'ring spires in Schulkyll's lucid wave.
Or southward far extend thy wondering eyes,
Where fertile streams the garden'd vales divide;
And mid the peopled fields distinguished rise
Virginian towers, and Charlestown's spiry pride.
Genius of arts, of manners and of arms,
See decked with glory and the blooms of grace,
This Virgin-clime unfolds her brighter charms,
And gives her beauties to thy fond embrace!
Hark, from the glades, and every listening spray,
What heaven-born Muses wake the enraptured song!
The vocal shades attune the enchanting lay,
And echoing vales harmonious strains prolong.
Through the vast series of descending years,
That lose their currents in the eternal wave,
Till heaven's last trump shall rend the affrighted spheres,
And open each empire's everlasting grave;
Propitious skies the joyous field shall crown,
And robe her valleys in perpetual prime,
And ages blessed of undisturbed renown,
Beam their mild radiance over the imperial clime. --
And where is Britain? -- In the skirt of day,
Where stormy Neptune rolls his utmost tide,
Where suns oblique diffuse a feeble ray,
And lonely waves the fated coasts divide;
See thou yon Isle, whose desert landscape yields
The mournful traces of the fame she bore;
Where matted thorns oppress the cultured fields,
And piles of ruin choke the dreary shore? --
From those loved seats, the Virtues sad withdrew,
From fell Corruption's bold and venal hand;
Reluctant Freedom waved her last adieu,
And Devastation swept the vassal'd land.
On her white cliffs, the pillars once of fame,
Her melancholy Genius sits to wail;
Drops the fond tear, and over her latest shame,
Bids dark Oblivion draw her sable veil.

