M'FINGAL: A MODERN EPIC POEM. CANTO FIRST, OR THE TOWN-MEETING.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed and Sold by WILLIAM and THOMAS BRADFORD, at the London
Coffee-House, 1775.

M'FINGAL, AN EPIC POEM, etc.
WHEN Yankies skilled in martial rule,
First put the British troops to school;
Instructed them in warlike trade,
And new maneuvers of parade;
The true war dance of Yanky-reels,
And val'rous exercise of heels;
Made them give up, like saints complete,
The arm of flesh and trust the feet,
And work, like Christians undissembling,
Salvation out, by fear and trembling;
Taught Piercy fashionable races,
And modern modes of Chevy-chaces:
From Boston, in his best array,
Great Squire M'Fingal took his way,
And graced with Ensigns of renown,
Steered homewards to his native town.
His high descent our heralds trace
To See Fingal, an ancient Epic Poem, published as the work of Ossian, a
Caledonian Bard, of the third century, by James M'Pherson, a pensioned Scotch
ministerial scribbler.
Ossian's famed Fingalian race:
For though their name some part may lack,
Old Fingal spelt it with a Mac;
Which great M'Pherson, with submission
We hope will add, the next edition.
His fathers flourished in the Highlands
Of Scotia's fog-benighted islands;
Whence gained our 'Squire two gifts by right,
Rebellion and the second sight
Of these the first in ancient days
Had gained the noblest palms of praise,
Against Kings stood forth and many a crowned head
With terror of its might confounded;
Till rose a King with potent charm
His foes by goodness to disarm,
Whom evr'y Scot and Jacobite
Strait fell in love with, at first sight;
Whose gracious speech, with aid of pensions,
Hushed down all murmurs of dissensions,
And with the sound of potent metal,
Brought all their blustering swarms to settle;
Who rained his ministerial mannas,
Till loud sedition sung hosannahs;
The good Lords, Bishops and the Kirk
United in the public work;
Rebellion from the northern regions,
With Bute and Mansfield swore allegiance;
And all combined to raze as nuisance,
Of church and state, the constitutions;
Pull down the empire, on whose ruins
They meant to edify their new ones;
Enslave the Amer'can wildernesses,
And tear the provinces in pieces.
For these our 'Squire among the vailnt'st
Employed his time and tools and talents;
And in their cause with manly zeal
Used his first virtue, to rebel;
And found this new rebellion pleasing
As his old king-destroying treason.
Nor less availed his optic slight,
And Scottish gift of second-sight.
No ancient sybil famed in rhyme
Saw deeper in the womb of time;
No block in old Dod^na's grove,
Could ever more orac'ler prove.
Nor only saw he all that was,
But much that never came to pass;
Whereby all Prophets far outwent he,
Though former days produced a plenty:
For any man with half an eye,
What stands before him may espy,
But optics sharp it needs, I ween,
To see what is not to be seen.
As in the days of ancient fame
Prophets and poets were the same,
And all the praise that poets gain
Is but for what the invent and feign;
So gained our 'Squire his fame by seeing
Such things as never would have being.
Whence he for oracles was grown
The very The Tripod was a sacred three-legged stool, from which the ancient
priests uttered their oracles.
tripod of his town.
Gazettes no sooner rose a lie in,
But strait he fell to prophesying;
Made dreadful slaughter in his course,
O'erthrew provincials, foot and horse;
Brought armies over by sudden pressings
Of Hanoverians, Swiss and Hessians;
Feasted with blood his Scottish clan,
And hanged all rebels, to a man;
Divided their estates and pelf;
And took a goodly share himself.
All this with spirit energetic,
He did by second-sight prophetic.
Thus stored with intellectual riches,
Skilled was our 'Squire in making Speeches,
Where strength of brains united centers
With strength of lungs surpassing stentor's
But as some muskets so contrive it,
As often to miss the mark they drive at,
And though well aimed at duck or plover,
Bear wide and kick their owners over:
So fared our 'Squire, whose reasoning toil
Would often on himself recoil,
And so much injured more his side,
The stronger arg'ments he applied.
As old war-elephants dismayed,
Trod down the troops they came to aid,
And hurt their own side more in battle
Than less and ordinary cattle.
Yet at town-meetings every chief
Pinned faith on great M'Fingal's sleeve,
And as he motion'd all by rote
Raised sympathetic hands to vote.
The town, our hero's scene of action,
Had long been torn by feuds of faction,
And as each party's strength prevails,
It turned up different, heads or tails;
With constant rattl'ing in a trice
Showed various sides as often as dice;
As that famed weaver, Homer's Odissey
wife to Ulysses,
By night each day's-work picked in pieces,
And though she stoutly did bestir her,
Its finishing was never the nearer:
So did this town with sted fast zeal
Weave cob-webs for the public weal,
Which when completed, or before,
A second vote in pieces tore.
They met, made speeches full long winded,
Resolved, protested, and rescinded;
Addresses signed, then chose Committees,
To stop all drinking of Bohea-teas;
With winds of doctrine veer'd about,
And turned all Whig-Committees out.
Meanwhile our hero, as their head,
In pomp the tory-faction led,
Still following, as the 'Squire should please,
Successive on, like files of geese.
And now the town was summoned greeting,
To grand parading of town-meeting;
A show, that strangers might appall,
As Rome's grave senate did the gaul.
High over the rout, on pulpit-stairs,
Like den of thieves in house of prayers,
(That house, which loath a rule to break,
Served heaven but one day in the week,
Open the rest for all supplies
Of news and politics and lies)
Stood forth the constable, and bore
His staff, like Merc'ry's wand of yore,
Waved potent round, the peace to keep,
As that laid dead men's souls to sleep.
Above and near the hermetic staff,
The moderator's upper half,
In grandeur over the cushion bowed,
Like Sol half-seen behind a cloud.
Beneath stood voters of all colors,
Whigs, tories, orators and bawlers,
With every tongue in either faction,
Prepared, like minute-men, for action;
Where truth and falsehood, wrong and right,
Draw all their legions out to sight;
With equal uproar, scarcely rave
Opposing winds in OE'lus' cave;
Such dialogues with earnest face
Held never Balaam with his ass.
With daring zeal and courage blessed
Honorious first the crowd addressed;
When now our 'Squire returning late,
Arrived to aid the grand debate,
With strange four faces-fat him down,
While thus the orator went on.
" -- For ages blessed, thus Britain rose
The terror of encircling foes;
Her heroes ruled the bloody plain;
Her conquering standard awed the main:
The different palms her triumphs grace;
Of arms in war, of arts in peace:
Beneath her kind, maternal care,
Each rising province flourished fair;
Whose various wealth with liberal hand,
By far o'er-paid the parent-land,
But though so bright her sun might shine,
'T was quickly hasting to decline,
With feeble rays, too weak to assuage,
The damps, that chill the eve of age.
For states, like men, are doomed as well
The infirmities of age to feel;
And as their constitutions please 'em,
Find every deep distemper seize 'em.
Some states high fevers have made head in,
Which naught could cure but copious bleeding.
While others have grown dull and dozy,
Or fixed in helpless idiocy.
Thus now while hoary years prevail,
Good Mother Britain seemed to fail:
Her back bent, crippled with the weight
Of age and debts and cares of state:
For debts she owed, and those so large,
As twice her wealth could not discharge,
And now 'twas thought, so high they would grown,
She Would break and come upon the town;
Her arms, of nations once the dread,
She scarce could lift above her head;
Her deafen'd ears ('it was all their hope)
The final trump perhaps might open,
So long they would been in stupid mood,
Shut to the hearing of all good;
Grim death had put her in his scroll,
Down on the execution-roll;
And Gallic crows, as she grew weaker,
Already whet their beaks to pick her,
And now her powers decaying fast,
Her grand Climact'ric had she past,
And, just like all old women else,
Fell in the vapors much by spells:
Strange whimsies on her fancy struck,
And gave her brain a dismal shock;
Her memory fails, her judgment ends;
She quite forgot her nearest friends,
Lost all her former sense and knowledge,
And fitted fast for Beth'lem college;
Of all the powers she once retained,
Conceit and pride alone remained.
As Eve when falling was so modest
To fancy she should grow a goddess;
As madmen, straw who long have slept on,
Will style them, Jupiter or Neptune:
So Britain 'midst her airs so flighty,
Now took a whim to be Almighty;
Urged on to desperate heights of frenzy,
Affirmed her own Omnipotency;
Would rather ruin all her race,
Than 'bate Supremacy an ace;
Assumed all rights divine, as grown,
The churches head, like good Pope Joan;
Swore all the world should bow and skip
To her almighty Goodyship;
Anath'matiz'd each unbeliever,
And vowed to live and rule forever.
Her servants humored every whim,
And owned at once her power supreme,
Her follies pleased in all their stages,
For sake of legacies and wages;
In The Parliament House is called by that name.
Stephen's Chapel then in state too
Set up her golden calf to pray to,
Proclaimed its power and right divine,
And called for worship at its shrine,
And for poor Heretics to burn us,
Bade North prepare his fiery furnace:
Struck bargains with the Romish Churches
Infallibility to purchase;
Set wide for Popery the door,
Made friends with Babel's scarlet whore,
Joined both the matrons firm in clan;
No sisters made a better span.
No wonder then, ere this was over,
That she should make her children suffer.
She first, without pretense of reason,
Claimed right whatever we had to seize on;
And with determined resolution,
To put her claims in execution,
Sent fire and sword and called it, Lenity,
Starved us, and christened it, Humanity.
For she, her case grown desperater,
Mistook the plainest things in nature;
Had lost all use of eyes or wits;
Took slavery for the bill of rights;
Trembled at Whigs and deemed them foes,
And stopped at loyalty her nose;
Styled her own children, brats and caitiffs,
And knew us not from the Indian natives.
What though with supplicating prayer
We begged our lives and goods she would spare;
Not vainer vows, with fillier call,
Elijah's prophets raised to Baal;
A worshipped stock of god, or goddess,
Had better heard and understood us.
So once Egyptians at the Nile
Adored their guardian Crocodile,
Who heard them first with kindest ear,
And ate them to reward their prayer;
And could he talk, as kings can do,
Had made as gracious speeches too.
Thus spite of prayers her schemes pursuing,
She still went on to work our ruin;
Annulled our charters of releases,
And tore our title-deeds in pieces;
Then signed her warrants of ejection,
And gallows raised to stretch our necks on:
And on these errands sent in rage,
Her bailiff, and her hangman, Gage,
And at his heels, like dogs to bait us,
Dispatched her Posse Comitatus.
No state ever chose a fitter person,
To carry such a silly farce on.
As Heathen gods in ancient days
Received at second-hand their praise,
Stood imag'd forth in stones and stocks,
And deified in barbers blocks;
So Gage was chose to represent
The omnipotence of Parliament.
And as old heroes gained, by shifts,
From gods, as poets tell, their gifts;
Our General, as his actions show,
Gained like assistance from below,
By Satan graced with full supplies,
From all his magazine of lies.
Yet could his practice never impart
The wit to tell a lie with art.
Those lies alone are formidable,
Where artful truth is mixed with fable;
But Gage has bungled often so vilely
No soul would credit lies so silly,
Outwent all faith and stretched beyond
Credulity's extremest end.
Whence plain it seems though Satan once
O'erlook'd with scorn each brainless dunce,
And blund'ring brutes in Eden shunning,
Chose out the serpent for his cunning;
Of late he is not half so nice,
Nor picks assistants, 'cause they are wise.
For had he stood upon perfection,
His present friends had lost the election,
And fared as hard in this proceeding,
As owls and asses did in Eden.
Yet meanest reptiles are most venomous,
And simpletons most dangerous enemies;
Nor ever could Gage by craft and prowess
Have done a whit more mischief to us:
Since he began the unnatural war,
The work his masters sent him for.
And are there in this freeborn land
Among ourselves a venal band,
A dastard race who long have sold
Their souls and consciences for gold;
Who wish to stab their country's vitals,
If they might heir surviving titles;
With joy behold our mischiefs brewing,
Insult and triumph in our ruin?
Priests who, if Satan should sit down,
To make a bible of his own,
Would gladly, for the sake of mitres,
Turn his inspired and sacred writers;
Lawyers, who should he wish to prove
His title to his old feat above,
Would, if his cause he would give 'em fees in,
Bring writs of Entry sur disseisin,
Plead for him boldly at the session,
And hope to put him in possession;
Merchants who, for his kindly aid,
Would make him partners in their trade,
And Judges, who would lift his pages,
For proper liveries and wages;
And who as humbly cringe and bow
To all his mortal servants now?
There are; and shame with pointing gestures,
Marks out the Addressors and Protestors;
Whom, following down the stream of fate,
Contempts ineffable await,
And public infamy forlorn,
Dread hate and everlasting scorn."
As thus he spoke, our 'Squire M'Fingal
Gave to his partisans a signal.
Not quicker rolled the waves to land,
When Moses waved his potent wand,
Nor with more uproar, than the Tories
Set up a general rout in chorus;
Laughed, hissed, hemmed, murmured, groaned and jeered;
Honorius now could scarce be heard.
Our Muse amid the increasing roar,
Could not distinguish one word more:
Though she fate by in firm record
To take in shorthand every word;
As ancient Muses wont to whom
Old Bards for depositions come,
Who must have writ 'em; for how else
Could they each speech verbatim tell 's?
And though some readers of romances
Are apt to strain their tortured fancies,
And doubt when lovers all alone
Their sad soliloquies do groan,
Grieve many a page with no one near 'em,
And naught but rocks and groves to hear 'em,
What spright infernal could have tattled,
And told the authors all they prattled;
Whence some weak minds have made objection,
That what they scribbled must be fiction:
It Is false; for while the lovers spoke,
The Muse was by, with table book,
And, least some blunder might ensue,
Echo stood clerk and kept the cue.
And though the speech ben't worth a groat,
As usual, 'tisn't the author's fault,
But error merely of the prater,
Who should have talked to the purpose better:
Which full excuse, my critic-brothers,
May help me out, as well as others;
And it is designed, though here it lurk,
To serve as preface to this work.
So let it be -- for now our 'Squire
No longer could contain his ire;
And rising midst applauding Tories,
Thus vented wrath upon Honorius.
Quoth he, "'It Is wondrous what strange stuff
Your Whig's-heads are compounded of;
Which force of logic cannot pierce
Nor syllogistic carte and tierce,
Nor weight of scripture or of reason
Suffice to make the least impression.
Not heeding what ye raised contest on,
Ye prate and beg or steal the question;
And when your boasted arguings fail,
Strait leave all reasoning off, to rail.
Have not our High-Church Clergy made it
Appear from scriptures which ye credit,
That right divine from heaven was lent
To kings, that is the Parliament,
Their subjects to oppress and teaze,
And serve the Devil when they please?
Did they not write and pray and preach,
And torture all the parts of speech,
About Rebellion make a pother,
From one end of the land to the other?
And yet gained fewer prof'lyte Whigs
Than old The stories of St. Anthony and his pig, and St. Austin's preaching to
fishes, are told in the Popish Legends.
St. Anth'ny amongst the pigs;
And changed not half so many vicious
As Austin, when he preached to fishes;
Who thronged to hear, the legend tells,
Were edified and wagg'd their tails:
But scarce you would prove it, if you tried,
That ever one Whig was edified.
Have ye not heard from High-Church Clergymen, one at Boston, one at New York.
Parson Walter
Much dire presage of many a halter?
What warnings had ye of your duty
From our old Reverend High-Church Clergymen, one at Boston, one at New York.
Sam. (...),
From Priests of all degrees and metres,
TO our fagg-end man poor Peter's, a Tory-Clergyman in Connecticut, who after
making himself detestable by his inimical conduct, absconded from the contempt,
rather than the vengeance of his countrymen, and fled to England to make
complaints against that colony: Cooper, a writer, poet, and satyrist of the
same stamp, President of the college at New York; Seabury, a Clergyman of the
same province.
Parson Peter's?
Have not our Cooper and our Seabury
Sung hymns, like Barak and old Deborah,
Proved all intrigues to set you free
Rebellion against the powr's that be;
Brought over many a scripture text
That used to wink at rebel-sects,
Coax'd wayward ones to favor regents,
Or paraphrased them to obedience;
Proved every king, even those confessed
Horns of the Apocalyptic beast,
And sprouting from its noddles seven,
Ordained, as bishops are, by heaven;
(For reasons sim'lar, as we are told,
That Tophet was ordained of old)
By this lay-ordination valid
Becomes all sanctified and hallowed,
Takes patent out when heaven has signed it,
And starts up strait, the Lord's anointed?
As extreme unction that can cleanse
Each penitent from deadly sins,
Make them run glib, when oil'd by Priest,
The heavenly road, like wheels new-greas'd,
Serve them, like shoeball, for defenses
Against wear and tear of consciences:
So king's anointment cleans betimes,
Like fuller's earth, all spots of crimes,
For future knav'ries gives commissions,
Like Papists sinning under license.
For heaven ordained the origin,
Divines declare, of pain and sin;
Prove such great good they both have done us,
Kind mercy 'twas they came upon us.
For without pain and sin and folly
Man never were blessed, or wise, or holy;
And we should See the modern Metaphysical Divinity.
thank the Lord, it is so,
As authors grave wrote long ago.
Now heaven its issues never brings
Without the means, and these are kings;
And he, who blames when they announce ills,
Would counteract the eternal counsels.
As when the Jews, a murmuring race,
By constant grumblings fell from grace,
Heaven taught them first to know their distance
By famine, slavery and Philistines;
When these could no repentance bring,
In wrath it sent them last, a king.
So nineteen, it is believed, in twenty
Of modern kings for plagues are sent you;
Nor can your cavillers pretend,
But that they answer well their end.
It Is yours to yield to their command,
As rods in Providence's hand;
And if it means to send you pain,
You turn your noses up in vain;
Your only way's in peace to bear it,
And make necessity a merit.
Hence sure perdition must await
The man, who rises against the state,
Who meets at once the damning sentence
Without one loophole for repentance;
Even though he gain the royal see,
And rank among the powers that be;
For hell is theirs, the scripture shows,
Whoever the powers that be, oppose,
And all those powers (I Am clear that it is so)
Are damned for ever, ex officio.
Thus far our Clergy; but it is true,
We lacked not earthly reas'ners too.
Had I the Virgil's AEueid, 6th book, line 625.
Poet's brazen lungs
As sound-board to his hundred tongues,
I could not half the scribblers muster
That swarmed round Rivington in cluster;
Assemblies, Councilmen, forsooth;
Brush, Cooper, Wilkins, Chandler, Booth.
Yet all their arguments and sap'ence,
You did not value at three halfpence.
Did not our Scribbler-gen'ral strain hard,
Our Massachusettensis, One of the Mandamus Council in Massachusett's Bay,
author of a course of essays, under the signature of Massachusettensis; for
which and his other good services he had a place given him with a salary of L.
200 sterling.
Leonard?
Scrawl every moment he could spare,
From cards and barbers and the fair;
Show, clear as sun in noonday heavens,
You did not feel a single grievance;
Demonstrate all your opposition
Sprung from the Committees of Correspondence are the foulest and most venomous
serpent, that ever issued from the eggs of sedition, etc. Massachusettensis.
eggs of foul sedition;
Swear he had seen the nest she laid in,
And knew how long she had been sitting;
Could tell exact what strength of heat is
Required to hatch her out Committees;
What shapes they take and how much longer's
The space before they grow to a Congress?
New-whitewash'd Hutchinson and varnished,
Our Gage, who'd got a little tarnish'd,
Made 'em new marks, in time no doubt,
For Hutchinson's was quite worn out;
And while he muddled all his head,
You did not heed a word he said.
Did not our grave Attorney General of Massachusett's-Bay, a judge of
Admiralty, Gage's chief Adviser and Proclamation maker, author of a farce,
called the Americans Rouzed, and of a great variety of essays on the
Ministerial side, in the Boston newspapers.
judge Sewall hit
The summit of news-paper wit?
Filled every leaf of every paper
Of Mills and Hicks and mother Draper;
Drew proclamations, works of toil,
In true sublime of scarecrow style;
Wrote farces too, against Sons of Freedom,
All for your good, and none would read 'em;
Denounced damnation on their frenzy,
Who died in Whig-impenitency;
Affirmed that heaven would lend us aid,
As all our Tory-writers said,
And calculated so its kindness,
He told the moment when it joined us."
"'It Was then belike, Honorius cried,
When you the public fast defied,
Refused to heaven to raise a prayer,
Because you would no connections there:
And since with reverend hearts and faces
To Governors you would made addresses,
In them, who made you Tories, seeing
You lived and moved and had your being;
Your humble vows you would not breathe
To powers you would no acquaintance with."
"As for your fasts, replied our 'Squire,
What circumstance could fasts require?
We kept them not, but 'twas no crime;
We held them merely loss of time.
For what advantage firm and lasting,
Pray did ye ever get by fasting?
And what the gains that can arise
From vows and offerings to the skies?
Will heaven reward with posts and sees,
Or send us Tea, as Consignees,
Give pensions, sal'ries, places, bribes,
Or choose us judges, clerks, or scribes?
Has it commissions in its gift,
Or cash, to serve us at a lift?
Are acts of Parliament there made,
To carry on the placeman's trade?
Or has it passed a single bill
To let us plunder whom we will?
And look our list of placemen all over;
Did heaven appoint our chief-judge, Oliver,
Fill that high bench with ignoramus,
(...) has it councils by mandamus?
Who made that wit of The proper emblem of his genius.
water gruel,
A judge of Admiralty, Sewall?
And were they not mere earthly struggles,
That raised up Murray, say, and Ruggles?
Did heaven send down, our pains to medicine,
That old simplicity of Edson,
Or by election pick out from us,
That Marshfield blund'rer Not. Ray Thomas,
Or had it any hand in serving
A Loring, Pepp'rell, Brown, or Erving?
Yet we have some saints, the very thing,
We'll pit against the best you will bring.
For can the strongest fancy paint
Than Hutchinson a greater saint?
Was there a parson used to pray
At times more reg'lar twice a day;
As folks exact have dinners got,
Whether they have appetites or not?
Was there a zealot more alarming
Against public vice to hold forth sermon,
Or fixed at church, whose inward motion
Rolled up his eyes with more devotion?
What Puritan could ever pray
In godlier tone, than treas'rer One of the Mandamus Councils who wrote a
pamphlet, in which he charged the Congress with being drunk when they signed
the Continental Association.
Gray,
Or at town-meetings speechify'ng,
Could utter more melodious whine,
And shut his eyes and vent his moan,
Like owl afflicted in the sun?
Who once sent home his canting rival,
Lord Dartmouth's self might outbedrived."
"Have you forgot, Honorius cried,
How your prime saint the truth defied,
Affirmed he never wrote a line
Your charter'd rights to undermine;
When his own letters then were by,
That proved his message all a lie?
How many promises he sealed,
To get the oppressive acts repealed,
Yet once arrived on England's shore,
Set on the Premier to pass more?
But these are no defects, we grant,
In a right loyal Tory saint,
Whose godlike virtues must with ease
Atone such venial crimes as these;
Or ye perhaps in scripture spy
A new commandment, "Thou shall lie;"
And if 't be so (as who can tell?)
There Is no one sure ye keep so well."
"Quoth he, For lies and promisebreaking
Ye need not be in such a taking;
For lying is, we know and teach,
The highest privilege of speech;
The universal Magna Charta,
To which all human race is party,
Whence children first, as David says,
Lay claim to 't in their earliest days;
The only stratagem in war,
Our Generals have occasion for;
The only freedom of the press
Our politicians need in peace:
And it is a shame you wish to abridge us
Of these our darling privileges.
Thank heaven, your shot have missed their aim,
For lying is no sin, or shame.
As men last wills may change again,
Though drawn in name of God, amen;
Besure they must have much the more,
Over promises as great a power,
Which made in haste, with small inspection,
So much the more will need correction;
And when they have careless spoke, or penned 'em,
Have right to look 'em over and mend 'em;
Revise their vows, or change the text,
By way of codicil annexed;
Turn out a promise, that was base,
And put a better in its place.
So Gage of late agreed, you know,
To let the Boston people go:
Yet when he saw against troops that braved him,
They were the only guards that saved him,
Kept off that satan of a Putnam,
From breaking in to maul and mutt'n him;
He Would too much wit such leagues to observe,
And shut them in again to starve.
As Moses writes, when female Jews
Made oaths and vows unfit for use,
Their parents then might set them free
From that conscientious tyranny:
And shall men feel that spir'tual bondage
Forever, when they grow beyond age;
Nor have power their own oaths to change?
I think the tale were very strange,
Shall vows but bind the stout and strong,
And let go women weak and young,
As nets enclose the larger crew,
And let the smaller fry creep through?
Besides, the Whigs have all been set on,
The Tories to affright and threaten,
Till Gage amidst his trembling fits
Has hardly kept him in his wits;
And though he speak with art and finesse,
It Is said beneath duress per minas.
For we are in peril of our souls
From feathers, tar and lib'rty-poles:
And vows extorted are not binding
In law, and so not worth the minding.
For we have in this hurly burly
Sent off our consciences on furlow,
Thrown our religion over in form;
Our ship to lighten in the storm.
Nor need we blush your Whigs before;
If we have no virtue, you have no more.
Your boasted patriotism is scarce,
And country's love is but a farce;
And after all the proofs you bring,
We Tories know there is no such thing.
Our English writers of great fame
Prove public virtue but a name.
Has not Ministerial Pensioners.
Dalrymple showed in print,
And Ministerial Pensioners.
Johnson too, there is nothing in it?
Produced you demonstration ample
From other's and their own example,
That self is still, in either faction,
The only principle of action;
The loadstone, whose attracting tether
Keeps the politic world together.
And spite of all your double-dealing,
We Tories know it is so, by feeling.
Who heeds your babbling of transmitting
Freedom to brats of your begetting,
Or will proceed as though there were a tie,
Or obligation to posterity?
We get 'em, bear 'em, breed and nurse;
What has poster'ty done for us,
That we, left they their rights should lose,
Should trust our necks to gripe of noose?
And who believes you will not run?
You're cowards, every mother's son;
And should you offer to deny,
We Have witnesses to prove it by.
Attend the opinion first, as referee,
Of your old General, stout Sir Jeffery,
Who swore that with five thousand foot
He Would rout you all, and in pursuit,
Run through the land as easily,
As camel through a needle's eye.
Did not the valiant Col'nel Grant
Against your courage make his slant,
Affirm your universal failure
In every principle of valor,
And swear no scamp'rers ever could match you,
So swift, a bullet scarce could catch you.
And will ye not confess in this,
A judge most competent he is,
Well skilled on runnings to decide,
As what himself has often tried?
'Twould not methinks be labor lost,
If you would sit down and count the cost;
And ere you call your Yankees out,
First think what work you have set about.
Have ye not roused, his force to try on,
That grim old beast, the British lion?
And know you not that at a sup
He Is large enough to eat you up?
Have you surveyed his jaws beneath,
Drawn inventories of his teeth,
Or have you weighed in even balance
His strength, and magnitude of talons?
His roar would turn your boasts to fear,
As easily as sour small-beer,
And make your feet from dreadful fray,
By native instinct run away.
Britain, depend on it, will take on her
TO assert her dignity and honor,
And ere she would lose your share of pelf,
Destroy your country and herself.
For has not North declared they fight
To gain substantial rev'nue by it,
Denied he would ever deign to treat,
Till on your knees and at his feet?
And feel you not a trifling ague,
From Van's, Delenda est Carthago?
For this, now Britain has come to 't,
Think you she has not means to do it?
Has she not set to work all engines
To spirit up the native Indians,
Send on your backs a savage band,
With each a hatchet in his hand,
TO amuse themselves with scalping knives,
And butcher children and your wives;
That she may boast again with vanity,
Her English national humanity?
For now in its primaeval sense,
This term, human'ty, comprehends
All things of which, on this side hell,
The human mind is capable;
And thus it is well, by writers sage,
Applied to Britain and to Gage.)
And on this work to raise allies,
She sent her duplicate of Guy's,
To drive, at different parts at once, on,
Her stout Guy Carlton and Guy Johnson:
To each of whom, to send again ye
Old Guy of Warwick were a ninny;
Though the dun cow he felled in war,
These killcows are his betters far.
And has she not assayed her notes,
To rouse your slaves to cut your throats,
Sent over ambassadors with guineas,
To bribe your blacks in Carolinas?
And has not Gage, her missionary,
Turned many an Afric slave t'a Tory,
And made the Amer'can bishop's see grow,
By many a new-converted Negro?
As friends to gov'rnment did not he
Their slaves at Boston late set free;
Enlist them all in black parade,
Set off with regimental red?
And were they not accounted then
Among his very bravest men?
And when such means she stoops to take,
Think you she is not wide awake?
As Eliphaz' good man in Job
Owned numerous allies through the globe;
Had brought the The stones and all the elements with thee
Shall ratify a strict confed'racy;
Wild beasts their savage temper shall forget,
And for a firm alliance with thee treat: etc.
Blackmore's paraphrase of (...).

stones along the street
To ratify a covenant meet,
And every beast from mice to lions,
To join in leagues of strict alliance:
Has she not cring'd, in spite of pride,
For like assistance far and wide?
Was there a creature so despised,
Its aid she has not sought and prized?
Till all this formidable league rose
Of Indians, British troops and Negroes.
And can you break these triple bands
By all your workmanship of hands?"
"Sir, quoth Honorius, we presume
You guess from past feats, what is to come,
And from the mighty deeds of Gage,
Foretell how fierce the war he will wage,
You doubtless recollected here
The annals of his first great year:
While wearying out the Tories' patience,
He spent his breath in proclamations;
While all his mighty noise and vapor
Was used in wrangling upon paper;
And boasted military fits
Closed in the straining of his wits;
While troops in Boston commons placed
Laid naught but quires of paper waste;
While strokes alternate stunned the nation,
Protest, address and proclamation;
And speech met speech, fib clash'd with fib,
And Gage still answered, squib for squib.
Though this not all his time was lost on;
He fortified the town of Boston;
Built breastworks that might lend assistance
To keep the patriots at a distance;
(For howsoe'er the rogues might scoff,
He liked them best the farthest off)
Of mighty use and help to aid
His courage, when he felt afraid;
And whence right off in manful station,
He Would boldly pop his proclamation.
Our hearts must in our bosoms freeze
At such heroic deeds as these."
"Vain, quoth the 'Squire, you will find to sneer
At Gage's first triumphant year;
For Providence, disposed to teaze us,
Can use what instruments it pleases.
To pay a tax at Peter's wish,
His chief cashier was once a fish;
An Ass, in Balaam's sad disaster,
Turned Orator and saved his master;
A Goose placed centry on his station
Preserved old Rome from desolation;
An English Bishop's See Bishop Atterbury's trial.
cur of late
Disclosed rebellions against the state;
So Frogs croak'd Pharaoh to repentance,
And Lice reversed the threatening sentence:
And heaven can ruin you at pleasure,
By our scorned Gage, as well as Caesar.
Yet did our hero in these days
Pick up some laurel wreaths of praise.
And as the statuary of Seville
Made his cracked saint an exc'llent devil;
So though our war few triumphs brings,
We gained great fame in other things.
Did not our troops show much discerning,
And skill your various arts in learning?
Outwent they not each native Noodle
By far in playing Yanky-doodle;
Which, as 'twas your New England tune,
'T was mavelous they took so soon?
And ere the year was fully through,
Did not they learn to foot it too,
And such a dance as never was known,
For twenty miles on end lead down?
Was there a Yanky trick you knew,
They did not play as well as you?
Did they not lay their heads together,
And gain your art to tar and feather,
When Col'nel Nesbitt through the town,
In triumph bore the country-clown?
Oh, what a glorious work to sing
The vet'ran troops of Britain's king,
Advent'ring for the heroic laurel,
With bag of feathers and tar-barrel!
To paint the cart where culprits ride,
And Nesbitt marching at its side,
Great executioner and proud,
Like hangman high on Holbourn road;
And over the bright triumphal car
The waving ensigns of the war!
As when a triumph Rome decreed,
For great Calig'la's valiant deed,
Who had subdued the British seas,
By gathering cockles from their base;
In pompous car the conqu'ror bore
His captived scallops from the shore,
Ovations gained his crabs for fetching,
And mighty feats of oyster-catching:
Over Yankies thus the war begun,
They tarr'd and triumphed over one;
And fought and boasted through the season,
With might as great, and equal reason.
Yet thus, though skilled in vict'ry's toils,
They beast, not unexpert, in wiles.
For gained they not an equal fame in
The arts of secrecy and scheming?
In stratagems showed mighty force,
And moderniz'd the Trojan horse,
Played over again those tricks Ulyssean,
In their famed Salem-expedition?
For as that horse, the Poets tell ye,
Bore Grecian armies in his belly,
Till their full reckoning run, with joy
Their Sinon midwif'd them in Troy:
So in one ship was Leslie bold
Crammed with three hundred men in hold;
Equipped for enterprise and sail,
Like Jonas stowed in womb of whale.
To Marblehead in depth of night,
The cautious vessel winged her flight.
And now the sabbath's silent day
Called all your Yankies off to pray;
Removed each prying jealous neighbor,
The scheme and vessel fell in labor;
Forth from its hollow womb poured hast'ly
The Myrmidons of Col'nel Leslie.
Not thicker over the blackened strand
The Sea Homer's battle of the frogs and mice.
frogs' detachment rushed to land,
Equipped by onset or surprise
To storm the entrenchment of the mice.
Through Salem strait without delay,
The bold battalion took its way,
Marched over a bridge in open sight
Of several Yankies armed for fight,
Then without loss of time, or men,
Veer'd round for Boston back again;
And found so well their projects thrive,
That every soul got home alive.
Thus Gage's arms did fortune bless
With triumph, safety and success:
But mercy is without dispute
His first and darling attribute;
So great it far outwent and conquered
His military skill at Concord.
There when the war he chose to wage
Shone the benevolence of Gage;
Sent troops to that ill-omen'd place
On errands mere of special grace,
And all the work he chose them for
Was to See Gage's answer to Governor Trumbull.
prevent a civil war:
And for that purpose he projected
The only certain way to effect it,
To take your powder, stores and arms,
And all your means of doing harms.
As prudent folks take knives away,
Lest children cut themselves at play.
And yet though this was all his scheme,
This war you still will charge on him;
And though he often has swore and said it,
Stick close to facts and give no credit.
Think you, he wished you would brave and beard him?
Why, 'twas the very thing that scared him.
He Would rather you should all have run,
Than stayed to fire a single gun.
And for the civil war you lament,
Faith, you yourselves must take the blame in it;
And had you then, as he intended,
Given up your arms, it must have ended.
Since that is no war, each mortal knows,
Where one side only gives the blows,
And the other bears 'em; on reflection
The most you will call it is correction;
Nor could the contest have gone higher,
If you had never returned the fire;
But when you shot, and not before,
It then commenced a civil war.
Else Gage, to end this controversy,
Had but corrected you in mercy:
Whom mother Britain old and wise,
Sent over the Col'nies to chastise;
Command obedience on their peril
Of ministerial whip and ferule;
And since they never must come of age,
Governed and tutored them by Gage.
Still more, that this was all their errand,
The army's conduct makes apparent.
What though at Lexington you can say
They killed a few they did not fancy,
At Concord then, with manful popping,
Discharged a round the ball to open?
Yet when they saw your rebel-rout
Determined still to hold it out;
Did they not show their love to peace,
And wish that discord strait might cease,
Demonstrate, and by proofs uncommon,
Their orders were to injure no man?
For did not every Reg'lar run
As soon as ever you fired a gun;
Take the first shot you sent them greeting,
As meant their signal for retreating;
And fearful if they staid for sport,
You might by accident be hurt,
Convey themselves with speed away
Full twenty miles in half a day?
Race till their legs were grown so weary,
They Would scarce suffice their weight to carry!
Whence Gage extols, from general hearsay,
The great Too much praise cannot be given to Lord Piercy for his remarkable
activity through the whole day. Gage's account of the Lexington battle.
activ'ty of Lord Piercy;
Whose brave example led them on,
And spirited the troops to run;
And now may boast at royal levees
A Yanky-chace worth forty Chevys.
Yet you as vile as they were kind,
Pursued, like tigers, still behind,
Fired on them at your will, and shut
The town, as though you would starve them out,
And with And with a preposterous parade of military arrangement they affect to
hold the army besieged. Gage's last grand proclamation.
parade prepost'rous hedged,
Affect to hold them there besieged;
(Though Gage, whom proclamations call
Your Gov'rnor and Vice Admiral,
Whose power gubernatorial still
Extends as far as Bunker's hill;
Where admiralty reaches clever,
Near half a mile up Mystic river,
Whose naval force commands the seas,
Can run away whenever he please.)
Scared troops of Tories into town,
And burnt their hay and houses down,
And menaced Gage, unless he would flee,
To drive him headlong to the sea;
As once, to faithless Jews a sign,
The de'el, turned hog-reeve, did the swine.
But now your triumphs all are over;
For see from Britain's angry shore
With mighty hosts of valor join
Her How, her Clinton and Burgoyne.
As comets through the affrighted skies
Pour baleful ruins as they rise;
As AEtna with infernal roar
In conflagration sweeps the shore;
Or as He was representative of Marshfield, and employed to carry their famous
town-resolves to Boston. He armed himself in as ridiculous military array, as
another Hudibrass, pretending he was afraid he should be robbed of them.
Abijah White, when sent
Our Marshfield friends to represent,
Himself while dread array involves
Commissions, pistols, swords, resolves,
In awful pomp descending down,
Bore terror on the factious town:
Not with less glory and affright,
Parade these Generals forth to fight.
No more each Reg'lar This was a fact. Some Regular officers, soon after Gage's
arrival in Boston, walking on Beacon-Hill after sunset, were affrighted by
noises in the air (supposed to be the flying of bugs and beetles) which they
took to be the sound of bullets, and left the hill with great precipitation:
Concerning which they wrote terrible accounts to England of their being shot at
with air-guns; as appears by one or two letters, extracts from which were
published in the English papers.
Col'nel runs
From whizzing beetles, as air-guns,
Thinks hornbugs bullets, or through fears
Muskitoes takes for musketeers?
Nor escapes, as though you would gained allies
From Beelzebub's whole host of flies.
No bug their warlike hearts appalls;
They better know the sound of balls.
I hear the din of battle bray,
The trump of horror marks its way.
I see afar the sack of cities,
The gallows strung with Whig-committees;
Your Moderators triced, like vermin,
And gate-posts graced with heads of Chairmen.
What pill'ries glad the Tories' eyes
With patriot-ears for sacrifice!
What whipping-posts your chosen race
Admit successive in embrace,
While each bears off his crimes, alack!
Like Bunyan's pilgrim, on his back!
Where then, when Tories scarce get clear,
Shall Whigs and Congresses appear?
What rocks and mountains shall you call
To wrap you over with their fall,
And save your heads in these sad weathers,
From fire and sword, and tar and feathers!
For lo, with British troops tarbright,
Again our Nesbitt heaves in sight!
He comes, he comes, your lines to storm,
And rigg your troops in uniform!
To meet such heroes, will ye brag,
With fury armed, and feather bagg;
Who wield their missile pitch and tar,
With engines new in British war?
Lo, where our mighty navy brings
Destruction on her canvas-wings,
While through the deeps her potent thunder
Shall sound the alarm to rob and plunder!
As Phoebus first, so Homer speaks,
When he marched out to attack the Greeks,
Against mules sent forth his arrows fatal,
And slew the auxiliaries, their cattle;
So where our Whether our squire by his second fight really foresaw the late
piratical depredations of the British navy, or whether he only guessed, from
what he knew (...) disposition of its commanders, must be left to the judgment
of the reader.
ships shall stretch the keel,
What sheep and oxen shall they steal!
Disperse whole troops of horse, and pressing,
Make cows surrender at discretion;
Attack your hens, like Alexanders,
And reg'ments rout of geese and ganders,
Or where united arms combine
Lead captive many a herd of swine!
Then rush in dreadful fury down
To fire on every seaport town;
Display their glory and their wits,
Fright unarmed children into fits,
And stoutly from the unequal fray,
Make many a woman run away!
And can ye doubt whenever we please
Our chiefs shall boast such deeds as these?
Have we not chiefs transcending far,
The old famed thunderbolts of war;
Beyond the brave romantic fighters,
Styled swords of death by novel-writers?
Nor in romancing ages ever rose
So terrible a tier of heroes.
From Gage, what flashes fright the waves!
How loud a blunderbuss is Graves!
How Newport dreads the blustering sallies,
That thunder from our popgun, Wallace,
While noise in formidable strains
Spouts from his thimble-full of brains!
I see you sink with awed surprise!
I see our Tory-brethren rise!
And as the sect'ries Sandemanian,
Our friends, describe their wished Millennium,
Tell how the world in every region
At once shall own their true religion;
For heaven with plagues of awful dread
Shall knock all heretics of the head,
And then their church, the meek in spirit,
The earth, as promised, shall inherit,
From the dead wicked, as heirs male,
And next remainder-men in tail:
Such ruin shall the Whigs oppress!
Such spoils our Tory friends shall bless!
While confiscation at command
Shall stalk in horror through the land,
Shall give your Whig-estates away,
And call our brethren into play.
And can ye doubt or scruple more,
These things are near you at the door?
Behold! for though to reasoning blind,
Signs of the times ye sure might mind,
And view impending fate as plain
As ye'd foretell a shower of rain.
Has not heaven warned you what must ensue,
And Providence declared against you;
Hung forth its dire portents of war,
By Such stories of prodigies were at that time industriously propagated by the
Tory-party in various parts of New England to terrify and intimidate the
superstitious.
signs and beacons in the air;
Alarmed old women all around
By fearful noises under ground;
While earth for many a dozen leagues
Groaned with her dismal load of Whigs?
Was there a meteor far and wide
But mustered on the Tory-side?
A star malign that has not bent
Its aspects for the Parliament,
Foreboding your defeat and misery;
As once they fought against old Sisera?
Was there a cloud that spread the skies,
But bore our armies of allies?
While dreadful hosts of fire stood forth
'Mid baleful glimm'rings from the North;
Which plainly shows which part they joined,
For North's the minister, ye mind;
Whence often your quibblers in gazettes
On Northern blasts have strained their wits;
And think ye not the clouds know how
To make the pun as well as you?
Did there arise an apparition,
But grinn'd forth ruin to sedition?
A death-watch, but has joined our leagues,
And click'd destruction to the Whigs?
Heard ye not, when the wind was fair,
At night our or'tors in the air,
That, loud as admiralty-libel,
Read awful Such stories were then reported.
chapters from the bible,
And death and deviltry denounced,
And told you how you would soon be trounc'd?
(...) to join our conou'ring side
Heaven, earth and hell at once allied!
See from your overthrow and end
The Tories paradise ascend;
Like that new world that claims its station
Beyond the final conflagration!
I see the day that lots your share
In utter darkness and despair;
The day of joy, when North, our Lord,
His faithful favorites shall reward!
No Tory then shall set before him
Small wish of 'Squire, or Justice Quorum;
But before his unmistaken eyes
See lordships, posts and pensions rise.
Awake to gladness then, ye Tories,
The unbounded prospect lies before us?
The power displayed in Gage's banners
Shall cut Amer'can lands to manors,
And over our happy conquered ground
Dispense estates and titles round!
Behold, the world shall stare at new setts
Of home-made See Hutchinson's and Oliver's letters.
earls in Massachusetts;
Admire, arrayed in ducal tassels,
Your Ol'vers, Hutchinson's and Vassals;
See joined in ministerial work
His grace of Albany and York!
What lordships from each carved estate,
On our New York Assembly wait!
What titled Members of the Ministerial majority in the New York assembly;
Wilkins a noted writer.
Jauncys, Gales and Billops;
Lord Brush, lord Wilkins and lord Philips!
In wide-sleev'd pomp of godly guise,
What solemn rows of bishops rise!
Aloft a card'nal's hat is spread
Over punster President Cooper is a notorious punster: Vardell, author of some
poetical satires on the sons of liberty in New York, and royal professor in
King's college; Chandler and Auchmuty, High-church and Tory-writers of the
Clerical order.
Cooper's reverend head!
In Vardell, that poetic zealot,
I view a lawn-bedizen'd prelate!
While mitres fall, as it is their duty,
On heads of Chandler and Auchmuty!
Knights, viscounts, barons shall ye meet,
As thick as pavements in the street!
Even I perhaps, heaven speed my claim,
Shall fix a Sir before my name.
For titles all our foreheads ache;
For what blessed changes can they make!
Place reverence, grace and excellence
Where neither claimed the least pretense;
Transform by patent's magic words
Men, likest devils, into lords;
Whence commoners to peers translated
Are justly said to be created!
Now where commissioners ye saw
Shall boards of nobles deal you law!
Long-rob'd comptrollers judge your rights,
And tide-waiters start up in knights!
While Whigs subdued in slavish awe,
Our wood shall hew, our water draw,
And bless that mildness, when past hope,
Which saved their necks from noose of rope.
For as to gain assistance we
Design their Negroes to set free;
For Whigs, when we enough shall bang 'em,
Perhaps it is better not to hang 'em;
Except their chiefs; the vulgar knaves
Will do more good preserved for slaves."
"'It Is well, Honorius cried, your scheme
Has painted out a pretty dream.
We cannot confute your second-sight;
We shall be slaves and you a knight:
These things must come; but I divine
They Will come not in your day, or mine.
But oh, my friends, my brethren, hear,
And turn for once the attentive ear.
Ye see how prompt to aid our woes,
The tender mercies of our foes;
Ye see with what unvaried rancour
Still for our blood their minions hanker,
Nor aught can sat their mad ambition,
From us, but death, or worse, submission,
Shall these then riot in our spoil,
Reap the glad harvest of our toil,
Rise from their country's ruin proud,
And roll their chariot-wheels in blood?
And can ye sleep while high outspread
Hangs desolation over your head.
See Gage with inauspicious star
Has oped the gates of civil war;
When streams of gore, from freemen slain,
Encrimson'd Concord's fatal plain,
Whose warning voice with awful sound,
Still cries, like Abel's from the ground;
And heaven attentive to its call,
Shall doom the proud oppressor's fall.
Rise then, ere ruin swift suprize,
To victory, to vengeance rise!
Hark, how the distant din alarms!
The echoing trumpet breathes, to arms.
From provinces remote, afar,
The sons of glory rouse to war.
It Is freedom calls; the enraptured found
The Apalachian hills rebound:
The Georgian shores her voice shall hear,
And start from lethargies of fear.
From the parched zone, with glowing ray,
Where pours the sun intenser day,
To shores where icy waters roll,
And tremble to the dusky pole,
Inspired by freedom's heavenly charms,
United nations wake to arms.
The star of conquest lights their way,
And guides their vengeance on their prey --
Yes, though tyrannic force oppose,
Still shall they triumph over their foes,
Till heaven the happy land shall bless
With safety, liberty and peace.
And ye whose souls of dastard mould
Start at the brav'ry of the bold;
To love your country who pretend,
Yet want all spirit to defend;
Who feel your fancies so prolific,
Engend'ring vision'd whims terrific,
O'er-run with horrors of coercion,
Fire, blood and thunder in reversion,
King's standards, pill'ries, confiscations,
And Gage's scarecrow proclamations,
With all the trumpery of fear;
Hear bullets whizzing in your rear;
Who scarce could rouse, if caught in fray,
Presence of mind to run away;
See naught but halters rise to view
In all your dreams (and dreams are true)
And while these phantoms haunt your brains,
Bow down the willing neck to chains:
Heavens! are ye sons of sires so great,
Immortal in the fields of fate,
Who braved all deaths by land or sea,
Who bled, who conquered, to be free!
Hence, coward souls, the worst disgrace
Of our forefather's valiant race!
Hie homeward from the glorious field;
There turn the wheel, the distaff wield;
Act what ye are, nor dare to stain
The warrior's arms with touch profane:
There beg your more heroic wives
To guard your children and your lives;
Beneath their aprons find a screen,
Nor dare to mingle more with men."
As thus he said, the Tories' anger
Could now restrain itself no longer.
Who tried before by many a freak, or
Insulting noise, to stop the speaker;
Swung the unoil'd hinge of each pew-door;
Their feet kept shuffling on the floor;
Made their disapprobation known
By many a murmur, hum and groan;
That to his speech supplied the place
Of counterpart in thorough-base:
As bag-pipes, while the tune they breathe,
Still groan and grumble underneath;
Or as the famed Demosthenes
Harangued the rumbling of the seas,
Held forth with eloquence so grave
To audience loud of wind and wave;
And had a stiller congregation
Than Tories are to hear the oration.
But now the storm grew high and louder
As nearer thundrings of a cloud are,
And every soul with heart and voice
Supplied his quota of the noise:
Each listening ear was set on torture
Each Tory bell'wing out, to order;
And some, with tongue not low or weak,
Were clam'ring fast, for leave to speak;
The moderator, with great vi'lence,
The cushion thump'd with "Silence, silence;"
The constable to every prater
Bawled out, "Pray hear the moderator;"
Some called the vote, and some in turn
Were screaming high, "Adjourn, adjourn:"
Not chaos heard such jars and clashes
When all the el'ments fought for places.
Each bludgeon soon for blows was timed;
Each fist stood ready cocked and prim'd;
The storm each moment louder grew;
His sword the great M'Fingal drew;
Prepared in either chance to share,
To keep the peace, or aid the war.
Nor lacked they each poetic being,
Whom bards alone are skilled in seeing;
Plumed victory stood perched on high,
Upon the pulpit-canopy,
To join, as is her custom tried,
Like Indians, on the strongest side;
The destinies with shears and distaff,
Drew near their threads of life to twist off;
Old Jove had got his scales and weights
To balance their impending fates;
The furies 'gan to feast on blows,
And broken heads or bloody nose:
When on a sudden from without
Arose a loud terrific shout;
And strait the people all at once heard
Of tongues an universal concert;
Like AEsop's times, as fable runs,
When every creature talked at once,
Or like the variegated gabble
That crazed the carpenters of Babble.
Each party soon forgot the quarrel,
And let the other go on parole;
Eager to know what fearful matter
Had conjured up such general clatter;
And left the church in thin array,
As though it had been lecture-day.
Our 'Squire M'Fingal straitway beckoned
The constable to stand his second,
And fallied forth with aspect fierce
The crowd assembled to disperse.
The moderator out of view
Beneath a bench had lain perdue;
Peeped up his head to view the fray,
Beheld the wranglers run away,
And left alone with solemn face,
Adjourned them without time or place.
END OF CANTO FIRST

