AMERICANS ROUSED, IN A CURE FOR THE SPLEEN.

OR AMUSEMENT FOR A WINTER's EVENING; Being the Substance of a Conversation on
the Times, over A FRIENDLY TANKARD AND PIPE BETWEEN SHARP, A Country Parson.
BUMPER, A Country Justice. FILLPOT, An Innkeeper. GRAVEAIRS, A Deacon. TRIM, A
Barber. BRIM, A Quaker. PUFF, A late Representative.


Taken in Shorthand, by SIR ROGER DE COVERLY.

Omne tulit Punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
HOR. NEW ENGLAND, PRINTED; NEW YORK, Reprinted, by JAMES RIVINGTON.

THE AMERICANS ROUSED, IN A CURE FOR THE SPLEEN, etc.
Enter Sharp and Bumper. Sharp. YOUR servant, 'Squire Bumper, pray walk in; how
do you do?


Bump. In pretty good health, I thank you, Sir; how is it with yourself, and
Madam?


Sharp. We Are moving about, tolerably well, for old folks; pray sit down.


Bump. Thank you, Sir, [sits down] very fine weather for the season.


Sharp. Yes, we have had a very favorable winter hitherto; and have great
cause for thankfulness.


Bump. Aye, as you say, Sir, we ought to be thankful for a little, and that is
the way to get more, as the saying is, he! he! he! Excuse my joking a little,
you know it is my way, Sir -- hem.


Sharp. Oh, I love a joke; but we may enjoy many favors of a kind providence,
and we ought not to be ungrateful, 'Squire; we have a very plentiful year for
every thing except cider; that indeed has fallen short.


Bump. Why, aye, as you say, Sir, we have but precious little cider this year
-- this puts me in mind of your tankard, he! he! he! Excuse my boldness, but I
am somewhat th^rsty; and a drop of your old pomona to moisten the clay, as the
saying is; and then a pipe of M'Intire's best; and then we'll settle the
nation, ha! ha! ha!


Sharp. With all my heart -- Tony, a tankard of cider, and pipes and tobacco
here, quick; and take the 'Squire's hat and cane.


Enter to them Fillpot, Graveairs and Trim. Sharp. Your servant, Gentlemen,
pray sit down; how do you do, Deacon?


Grave. I thank you, Rev. Sir, this cough has not quite left me yet -- h --
hugh -- h -- hugh -- h -- hugh -- though through mercy, it is much better -- h --
hugh -- h -- hugh.


Sharp. I Am glad to hear it, how do you do, Landlord?


Fill. As well as I can, these hard times, Sir.


Sharp. Hard times! Why, surely you have no reason to complain, Landlord.


Fill. Why, no, Sir, I don't complain: that is, on my own account -- but then
our public affairs, you know, Sir, we must think a little about them.


Sharp. I believe, if we mind every one his own business, and leave the affairs
of the state to the conduct of wiser heads, we shall soon be convinced that we
are a happy people.


Trim. Excuse me there, Rev. Sir, saving your presence; why, Sir, if I was
denied the privilege of my shop to canvass politics, as a body may say, that is
Lord North, East India company, constitution, charter-rights and privileges,
duties, taxes, and the like of that* body of me, Sir, strip me of this darling
privilege, and you may even take my razor^, soap, combs and all, and set fire
to my shop. Why, Sir, I remember the time when every man minded his own
business, as you say, and then my customers were in such a confounded hurry,
that if they could not be shaved in a twinkling, without loss of time, they would
go to meeting with their beards hanging down to the waistbands of their
breeches, and I must lose their custom; but now, Sir, if forty come in
together, and all in the most feezing hurry, I have nothing to do but to souse
plump into a descant upon the times, and in the snap of a finger every man is
as patient and still as any blockhead in my shop. arrectis auribus, they sit
gaping, with solemn unmeaning phiz's, every one listens with silent attention
to me, and forgets his beard, until I am pleased to dissolve the charm by
closing my discourse; I tell them how I would trim Lord North, and have the
Lords and Commons, (excepting the dissentients) the East India company, Gov.
Bernard, Gov. Hutchinson, etc. over head and ears in the suds, if I could get
at them; and then I rattle away upon grievances, opposition, rebellion and so
on, only for the innocent purpose of supporting the credit of my shop. Pray,
Sir, if you have any compassion for poor Trim, for heaven's sake don't preach
up that old fashioned doctrine of every one's minding his own business; for if
you do, I must decamp, and seek a living in some town where I can find a more
orthodox minister. Would you please to be shaved, Sir?


Sharp. Why really neighbor Trim you prove the truth of your doctrine, by
making me an example of the force of your eloquence; amazed at your harrangue.
I had entirely forgot your business as to shave me: come, sit down.


Trim. Non tanto me dignor honor, domine; I know my place too well to sit down
before yourself, and his worship here.


Bump. Come, come, sit down, Mr. Trim; and pray, no more of your lingo, till
Mr. Sharp recollects the cider, because it will grow flat by standing, he! he!
he! Excuse me, Rev. Sir.


Sharp. I beg your pardon, 'Squire; my service to you.

[drinks.]
Bump. Deacon, my service to you: [drinks] choice cider upon my honor, but I
am afraid it will not come round again -- mum.


Sharp. Never fear 'Squire, we'll replenish the tankard when it is out; there is
plenty in the cellar; pray drink, Deacon.


Grave. Rev. Sir, here is toward your good health [drinks] mighty fine cider
truly.

Enter to them Brim and Puff.
Sharp. How do you do* Friend Brim?


Brim. I thank thee friend Sharp, in pretty good health; how is it with thee
and thy family?


Sharp. Pretty well, I thank you. Your servant, Mr. Puff: Pray be seated,
Gentlemen. Come, we are all smoakers, I think, except Mr. Trim, and it is what
the seamen call a leward evening; let us enjoy a social pipe; and I suppose
neighbor Trim, you will have patience to tarry an hour, if you can be indulged
with a dish of politics.


Trim. O, by all means, Sir, I Am in no hurry; but as for politics I can do well
enough without them here, provided always that you don't banish them from my
shop; for they are a part of my trade; at least, they are the ca sa sine ^ua
non of my custom; and a trade in theory without the practical part, will go but
little way toward keeping the pot boiling.


Brim. Verily, friend Trim, thou art arch today. Why I have often heard thee
holding forth to thy customers, with such energy and apparent zeal, against
British tyranny and oppression, that I was verily persuaded thou wast infected
with the epidemical frenzy of the times; but now I find thou wast only
cunningly working at thy trade forsooth -- truly thou art a very wag.


Trim. Aye, friend Brim, all trades have their mysteries, and one half the
world live by the follies of the other half.


Puff. But pray Mr. Trim, are you such a tory as to turn all our grievances
into scorn and derision, and only pretend to be a friend to your country, for
the sake of a living?


Trim. Why, between you and I and the post, Mr. Puff, I believe, you, when you
would be a representative, and Trim the barber, when he would get and keep good
custom, act upon much the same principles with ninety nine in a hundred of the
most flaming patriotic sons of liberty. Interest is the word! But I claim the
exclusive right of preaching myself, only in my own shop; every where else, I
had much rather be a hearer of my good minister, Mr. Sharp; therefore you must
excuse me from entering the lists here, unless it be now and then a word or so,
by way of marginal note; and upon the word of an honest shaver, or trimmer, or,
call me what you please, I Would shave and trim you all round for nothing, if I
could but hear you settle intelligibly, what is a whig, and what a tory; what
is constitution, and what are charter rights and privileges -- what is the
obedience due from an American Englishman, to the King and parliament of
Great Britain, and what are our grievances; for by the mother that bore me, and
by the father (if I ever had one) who begot me, I do solemnly affirm, friend
Brim, that notwithstanding all I have heard, and the still greater, all I have
preached upon this subject, I am ignorant of the essential difference (if there
is any) between a true whig and an honest tory. I know nothing in our
constitution by which we can claim any privileges which are denied us. I have
never heard of any obedience, demanded by the king and parliament, which I can
in conscience withhold; and I have no more idea of the grievances which for the
sake of my custom, I am obliged to join in complaining of, than I have of the
political disputes in the moon; though I believe they are pretty much alike,
because our's, I can safely swear, savor strong of lunacy.


Brim. Friend Trim, in good truth, thou speak like an oracle -- I would thou
and I could hear these matters discussed.


Fill. I say, Amen -- for I hear them talked about and about every day, and
many a good mug of flip do I fell upon the same account, and that is all I get
by it; for, burn my barroom if I understand a word of the pudding.


Bump. I do not know where Mr. Trim got his learning, but, in his Majesty's
name, I do solemnly declare, that in my judgment, no mere man, since the days
of Coke upon Littelton, could in so few words have expressed more upon the
subject than he has done; and I heartily second his motion -- provided always,
that we first light our p^pes, after having previously put about the tankard --
Once before you fill, and twice before you light, says the proverb -- You know
revd. sir -- he! he! he! hem! excuse me -- sir my service to you.


Puff. Hem! he! hem! I cannot for the life of me comprehend how it is possible
for a man of Mr. Trim's good natural sense, to be so egregiously mistaken in
his notions of our constitutional rights and privileges, as he seems to be;
why, Mr. Speaker! -- I beg pardon -- gentlemen, I mean -- but, no matter -- let
that slip -- I ask pardon gentlemen -- but as I was saying -- for him to say as
this here -- to wit -- that there is no difference between a whig and a tory --
why what a dickens are we contending about, if so be as how this here was the
case -- a fine case truly -- why has not Lord North and Lord Hilsboro' and that
George Grenville stripped us of all our constitutional charter rights and
privileges -- the birthright of Englishmen, which our pious fore fathers
purchased with their blood and treasure, when they came over into this waste
howling wilderness -- and has not Lord ^hatham and Mr. Pit, and Lord Cambden,
and -- and -- and -- Lord what do you call 'm^ it is immater al about their names
-- I say please your (...) -- gentlemen, I mean t'ask pardon; have not these
great and good men stood up for our rights and privileges, against the
tyrannical designs of the corrupt ministry and house of commons -- and now, for
to tell me that there is no difference between a whig and a tory -- and for a
man to say as how our constitution is not taken a way -- and that we have no
grievances, and the like of that -- I say, in my humble opinion, he is an enemy
to his country -- just as if every man did not know what constitution is -- and
whether we had any grievances, and so forth; why, Mr. Trim may talk his latin
stuff if he pleases, with his Causis sino quono, and such like -- I know some
latin as well as he; and I say he is an ignoramus, if so be he talks at this
rate -- I hope in mercy we shall have no bloodshed; but I swagger, (I ask
pardon for swearing) but I snore, before I Would give up our just rights and
privileges, I Would take my gun, and load and fire and pull trigger like the
nation, and fight up to the knees in blood -- but I will not put myself in a
passion -- I ask pardon gentlemen -- By your leave Sir, I Will make bold to take
a drink of your cider. Gentlemen all your healths.


Trim. I believe Mr. Puff it is with you pretty much as it is with your humble
servant, you can prea^h best in your own shop; but as your shop as well as mine
happens to be shut up, at this present writing, I fancy we both should save
credit, by leaving it to others to discuss these knotty points; for I have
frankly confessed my ignorance; and if you follow my example, it will
positively be your shortest way out of the labyrinth in which you seem to be
bewildered -- sat verbum sapienti.


Puff. None of your unmanly reflections Mr. Trim. I suppose you think I don't
understand greek.


Brim. Friend Trim, I like thee and thy discourse, well -- thy motion is good,
and thy humor pleases my mind; and I do verily believe a calm debate upon
these matters, interlarded with thy pithy marginal notes would tend greatly to
our edification.


Trim. I believe so too; and, by my aunt Tabitha's muff* I protest good Mr.
Puff, that I had no design to offend you in any thing I have said; and if I
have offended, I ask pardon, and that is the satisfaction of a gentleman; and
now I hope we shall verify the old proverb, Amantium ira amoris redintegratio
est.


Puff. Well, well, no more of your French jabbering -- I Am not a man to hold
anger, though I say it -- but howsomever, I say again, rather than tamely give up
my rights and privileges, I would fight to the last drop of --


Trim. Cider.


Bump. Ha! ha! ha! well put it, Trim -- here is your good health, Mr. Puff.


Grave. Upon my word gentlem^n, these are no laughing matters -- h -- hugh --
as Mr. -- h -- hugh -- Puff has very well observed, all our charter rights and
privileges are torn from us and we are made slaves, and the Lord send us
deliverance -- h -- hugh -- h -- hugh -- h -- hugh.


Sharp. Don't you carry matters rather too far deacon? You certainly view our
public affairs through a gloomy deceitful medium; you say all our charter
rights and privileges are torn from us -- and that we are slaves. Pray
consider, don't you sit quietly under your own vine, and under your own
fig tree? Don't you enjoy full liberty of conscience in religious matters?
Don't you reap without interruption, the fruit of your own labors? Does any
one meddle with your person or property? Are you overburthened with taxes?
Compare your situation with that of any other people under heaven: Turn your
eyes to your brother Englishmen in Great Britain -- see with what taxes and
duties they are burdened -- and you will find you enjoy liberty, freedom and
ease in a degree so far superior to them, that if you have the least spark of
gratitude in your bosom, you will be so far from murmuring and complaining,
like the grumbling, rebellious Jews of old, that you will exclaim, with the
most grateful effusion of soul, "The lines are fallen to us in pleasant places,
yea, we have a goodly heritage."


Trim. Or with the poet, O fortunatos, nimium, sua si bona norint,
Amercanos!
That is to say, Mr. Puff, How happy are Americans, if they did but know it!


Sharp. The truth is, and it is a melancholy truth, we have been lifted up to
heaven in privileges, and now like the chosen people of old, we spurn at the
hand that raised and has hitherto sustained us: Our king has planted us in a
land flowing with milk and honey, and has driven out the Canaanites from before
us, and left us no thorn in our side -- and now we vauntingly and ungratefully
say, who shall be Lord over us? The description given of the Jews by Mr.
Dryden, fits us, so very nearly, that I cannot help repeating it.

"The Jews, a headstrong, moody, murmuring race,
As ever tried the extent and stretch of grace;
God's pampered people, whom, debauched with ease,
No king could govern, and, no God could please;
(Gods they had tried of every shape and size,
That god-smiths could produce, or priests devise:
These Adam-wits, too fortunately free,
Began to dream they wanted liberty;
And when no rule, no precedent was found,
Of men, by laws, less circumscribed and bound;
They led their wild desires to woods and caves.
And thought that all but, Savages, were slaves.
Those very Jews, who at their very best,
Their humor, more than loyalty, expressed;
Now, wondered why, so long, they had obeyed,
An idol monarch which their hands had made;
Thought they might ruin him they could create,
Or melt him to that golden calf, a state.
But these were random bolts" --

Puff. But pray rev. sir, have the parliament any right to make laws for us?
And is not this a grievance?


Fill. Aye, there was a Boston minister, and another gentleman, lodged at our
house last night, and they talked a great deal about this very thing, and made
it out as clear as the sun at noonday, that the parliament have no such right;
though I did not understand them -- but I know they argued very powerfully, and
proved that we ought to resist. However, I don't like taking up arms neither,
that I must own.


Trim. No, no, let you alone for that; if we come to gunpowder and cold iron,
I Will be shot if you a'n't found entrenched in your bar, behind a tier of
case-bottles, loaded with good cherry slings.


Brim. Prithee friend Trim restrain thy wit a little -- I would gladly hear
friend Sharp discourse upon this authority of parliament; I plainly perceive
that the minds of friend Graveairs, and friend Puff, and friend Fillpot stand
in need of enlightening -- and friend Sharp seems to be moved to become a light
to their feet and a lamp to their paths.


Trim. Tace, is the Latin for a candle -- I am dumb. Perge Domine reverende.


Sharp. I have ne objection against delivering my opinion freely upon this
question, I can appeal to you all as my vouchers, that I have never cloak'd my
sentiments, or conformed outwardly to popular prejudices, as too many of my
reverend brethren have done; and I wish I could not add with truth, that too
many of them, instead of inculcating the peaceable principles of the gospel,
have by their prayers, sermons and example encouraged sedition, privy
conspiracy and rebellion; and stimulated their hearers to every evil work --
witness the late impious fast -- an unparalled piece of solemn mockery,
shocking to every serious mind -- for what can be conceived more horrible, than
to beseech the fountain of truth and justice to espouse and abet the cause of
robbery and injustice, by imploring of him a miraculous interposition for the
removal of grievances, brought upon the metropolis by a most high-handed
robbery, plunder and destruction of their neighbor's property, and continued
only by an obstinate refusal to make that restitution which the laws of
justice, equity and good conscience loudly demand? Sorry I am that such a
heaven daring farce should originate with ministers -- I am grieved that so
many of our sacred order should, by this and other parts of their conduct, have
discovered such a disposition to increase instead of curing our popular
distractions.


Trim. Nothing new sir, I remember to have read of priests in days of yore,
that they were,

-- "Well versed of old,
In godly faction, and in treason bold,
For who so fit for reign as Aaron's race,
If once dominion they could found in grace?
These lead the path, though not of surest scent,
Yet deepest mouthed against the government."
And Lilly's grammar ranks them with beasts and robbers, -- " Bos, fur, sus,
atque sacerdos" -- No offense to you sir.


Sharp. Hold, hold, neighbor Trim, you are not to take liberties with my
cloth, because I do myself. But to proceed -- In considering this question of
the right of parliament to make laws to bind us, I shall observe the
distinction made by Mr. Pit, Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Wilkes, Mr. Otis, and all
other advocates for the rights of the Colonies, between legislation and
taxation -- they say there must necessarily be a supreme power, lodged
somewhere, of governing and regulating the trade of the Colonies; and this is
in the King, Lords and Commons of Great Britain, but that this does not extend
to internal taxes, though it includes the right of laying duties on such articles
of trade, as they allow us to import, if we choose to import them -- -and upon
this distinction was founded our opposition to the unhappy stamp act -- we then
acknowledged the authority of parliament, in it is full extent, excepting only
in the matter of internal taxation; though it is very true, we have since been
daily growing wiser and wiser, 'till at length, we openly avow principles of
absolute independency* and deny that the parliament of Great Britain have any
more rightful authority over us, ^han the parliament of Paris, or the divan of
Constantinople. And the grand argument in suppor^ of this new doctrine is, that
our charter is a compact between the king and our ancestors, by which the sole
power of legislation is given for ever to our general assembly. And in answer
to this it is said, that it never was in the power of the king to put any
British subjects out of the jurisdiction of parliament, and therefore, if he
had given such a charter, it would be void; but it is said further, that it is
not true in fact; for that no such grant of a supreme, independent,
uncontrolable power of legislation is, or over was contained in the charter.
Now, if such a power be conveyed by the charter, it is either expressed or
implied -- that it is not expressed is too clear to be denied -- and therefore
it must be implied, or it is not conveyed by the charter, but is merely
imaginary. This is a question of the highest importance to every man who has
got a head, or any property to save or to lose; for the principle, if wrong,
leads directly to treason and rebellion; to which we are hastening with a
rapidity which I greatly fear, will soon plunge us headlong in irretrievable
ruin, unless we are stopped in our career. In order to a right understanding of
this important matter, it is necessary to go back and consider how the case
stood before, at, and ever since the time of our receiving the charter: -- And
from this view we shall als^ perceive whether the present claim of parliament
is new, as many ignorantly suppose, or whether it was made, openly and
expressly, before the grant of the charter, and has ever since been uniformly
exercised by them, and acknowledged by us. To satisfy myself in this marter, I
have made a journey to Boston, on purpose to see the statutes at large; and I
find the case to be thus. In ^650, an act of parliament was made for blocking
up the ports of Barbados, Virginia, Bermudas and An^igua, in which the supreme
authority of parliament over all the Colonies is most clearly and expressly
cla^med, and it is declared "that they are, and ought to be, subordinate to,
and dependant upon England; and have, ever since the planting thereof, been,
and ought to be subject to such laws, orders and regulations, as are, or shall
be made by the parliament of England. -- Any letters patent, or other autho^^ty
formerly granted or given, to the contrary notwith^^^nding." This was during
the protectorship of Oliver Cromwell.


Trim. That same Oliver Cromwell was a huge son of liberty, as I take it.


^rim. Yea verily, so huge that he never left, 'till he had got the whole
liberty of the na^ion into his own hands; and bequeathed it all to Charles the
second, as a recompense for taking off the head of his father, only for
desiring his share of it: But Charles the son being a very different man from
Oliver, returned the nation their liberty.


Sharp. In 1603, under the reign of King Charles the second, was passed An act
for the encouragement of trade -- in which is this very remarkable clause --
"And in regard his Majesty's plantations beyond the seas are inhabited and
peopled by his subjects of this kingdom of England; for the maintaining a
greater correspondence and kindness between them, and keeping them in a firmer
dependence upon it, and rendering them yet more beneficial and advantageous
unto it, in the further employment and increase of English shipping and seamen,
vent of English woollen and other manufactures and commodities, rendering the
navigation to and from the same, more safe and cheap, and making this kingdom a
staple, not only of the commodities of those plantations, but also of the
commodities of other countries and places, for the supplying of them; and it
being the usage of other nations to keep their plantation-trade to themselves:"
etc. Our charter was granted by King William and Queen Mary, in 1692, which
impowers the general-court to make laws, "so as the same be not repugnant or
contrary to the laws of the realm of England." And in 1696, during the same
glorious reign, an act of parliament was made extending all the acts of trade
to the Colonies, and requiring all governors and commanders in chief, "to take
a solemn oath to do their utmost, that all the clauses, matters and things
contained in that and former acts of parliament, relating to the colonies and
plantations be punctually and bona fide observed." And it is therein expressly
e^acted, "That all laws, bye-laws, usages and customs, at this time, or which
hereafter shall be in practice, or endeavored or pretended to be in force or
practice, in any of the said planta^ions, which are in any wise repugnant to
the beforem^ntioned laws or any of them, so far as they do relate to the said
plantations, or any of them, or which are any ways repugnan^ ^o th^^ present
act, or any other law hereafter to be made in thi^ kingdom, so far as such law
shall relate to and mention the sa^d plantation^, are ^^^egal, null and void to
(...) and (...)" Thus it (...) that two and forty (...) before the (...) of our
charter, the jurisdiction of parliament over us, was openly and explicitly
claimed; and again, twenty-nine years before; and then in the charter itself,
this supreme jurisdiction is expressly reserved; and four years after it is
again confirmed in the most positive terms, and all governors bound by an oath
to see it submitted to. Now, when we consider this claim, openly and repeatedly
made, before, at, and immediately after, the granting and accepting of the
charter, if the charter can be viewed in the light of a compact, is not this
evidently one essential article of the agreement, on our part, namely, that we
will acknowledge and submit to the jurisdiction of parliament? It is plain we
accepted the charter under this condition. How then can this, with the least
color of truth, be called a new claim? Especially, when this right of
parliament, has not only been thus amply claimed, but has been all along
exercised, in various instances, and without any opposition, denial or question
on our part -- and this I find to be the case in fact -- for, from the time of
our charter, in every reign, acts of parliament have been continually making,
imposing duties, and for regulating the trade, manufactures and internal
government and police of this and the other colonies; -- thus, duties have been
imposed and paid upon sugar, rum, molasses, coffee, wines, etc. and on the
other hand, bounties and premiums have been granted on various articles; the
trade of hatters, and the manufacture of iron, by slitting mills, has been
regulated and restrained -- wool prohibited from being water-born -- the
post office erected -- the rates of coin established -- the cutting of pine
trees prohibited -- lands made liable to the payment of debts -- the statute of
wills extended to the colonies -- the paper current restrained -- indented
servants empowered to inlist -- troops raised here made subject to the articles
of war -- acts of assembly made void -- and in diverse other instances has this
supreme right of parliament been exercised and acquiesced in, continually,
without interruption, from the usurpation of Oliver Cromwell to the reign of
George the third.


Trim. God bless his Majesty.


Sharp. Amen. -- And yet such is the infatuation, that people seem to be
rushing into open rebellion, upon a supposition, that the parliament of England
are setting up a new and unheard of claim, in order to enslave a whole people,
for whom they have ever discovered a parental fondness, and whose liberties and
happiness are most intimately connected and interwoven with their own.


Trim. O tempora! O mores!


Sharp. From the foregoing view of the matter, if attended to, every prejudiced
man must be convinced, that an exclusive, supreme power of legislation, is so
far from being conveyed to our assembly by implication, that on the contrary,
their subordination to the supreme legislative authority of the British
Parliament, is most strongly and clearly implied in the charter, and has been
repeatedly and expressly claimed and exercised by parliament, and tacitly
acknowledged and quietly submitted to by us, for at least an hundred and twenty
four years last past, and consequently whatever argument may be against the
claim, this of its being new, must fall to the ground.


Fill. Well I do protest, Sir, I Would given as good a mug of brandy flip as I
could make, that you had been at our house last night, to argue with that
Boston minister, and the other man, for I don't believe they know one word of all
this; because they declared, as how the Parliament never thought of making laws
for us before that George Grenville put it into their heads; and how it was
right against our charter, and such like -- why if they would known these acts of
parliament, you have been telling of, they couldn't have talked so.


Trim. Split me, neighbor Fillpot, if I believe you will ever be hanged for
witchcraft, or had any hand in the plot; why, man, they know 'em all, as well
as I know that my political preachments, to my shallow-pated customers, are all
stuffed with catch-penn^ lies, but I suppose it is a part of their trade as
well as of mine -- heaven forgive us all.


Grave. I must confess, Rev. Sir, I never understood so much of this matter
before, and truly if there are such acts of parliament as you have been
mentioning, it alters the case very much h -- hugh -- h -- hugh, in my opinion.


Bump. If there are! Oh, you may take my word for that, Deacon, it is a long
time since I read them, but I remember them perfectly, now Mr. Sharp puts me in
mind of 'em. -- Gentlemen, your healths.


Trim. I hope, please your worship, the parliament will not lay a tax upon cider.


Bump. Ha! ha! ha! you're a merry wag, you trim close, but you shall not spoil my
draught. Come, here is to ye, old cock -- I can take a joke.


Trim. Aye, and swallow it too, by jingo.


Puff. As for that matter, Rev. Sir, if so be, the acts of parliament be as you
tell of, and our charter is such a kind of a compact as you seem to suppose,
why I Am free to own, that I don't see so much reason to complain; but then how
can that be? For I Am sure Mr. Samuel Adams told the house, last sessions, as
how the tea act was an entering wedge, contrived by Lord North, to enslave all
the colonies, and Col. Hancock said as much. What is your opinion of the tea
act, sir?


Sharp. My opinion is this. Before the late tea act was made, no tea could be
shipped to America* unless the merchant first paid a duty of one shilling
sterling a pound; and this duty was paid in England, and the merchant took the
risque of it is ever reaching America. This made tea so dear, that the Dutch
could greatly undersell the English East India company; and the American
merchants, at lea^^ some of them, found their account in purchasing tea of the
Dutch, and running i^ here; wherefore to enable the English to sell as cheap as
the Dutch, the parliament took off nine pe^ce of the du^y, and left only three
pence; and this is not paid before the ^ea arrives safe here, but must be paid
by the merchant before it is landed. And with the same view, they by another
act, enabled the East India company to sell the^r tea by wholesale, at public
auction, in Boston; by this means, if we did not foolishly oppose it, instead
of paying from a dollar to eight shillings a pound for tea, we might have it at
two pistareens, or half a dollar, at most.


Trim. This is a mighty grievance truly; who would not fight rather than be
deprived of the liberty of paying treble price for what they buy?


Sharp. But the grievance complained of lies here. This act laying the three
penny duty on tea, expressly mentions, among other purposes, the raising a
revenue: This, say we, is taking money out of our pockets without our consent;
and it is argued, that if they may do it in this trifling instance, they may do
it in all others; and will go on till they leave us nothing. Upon which I would
observe, in the first place, that it is not true, that this is taking money out
of our pockets without our consent; because we are not compell^d to buy; and if
we will buy, the small pittance which we pay for the duty, we pay with our own
consent, as much as we do any money which we pay for any commodity we buy. The
same might as well be said, when we buy a quart of rum, or a dram, for when we
pay for it, we pay our proportion of the duty laid by act of parliament on
molasses: This we have done a long time, and never found out that it was a
grievance, or that we were thereby made slaves -- but the consequence is false
and absurd; for it can never follow, that because we submit to a reasonable
law, therefore we must be called to submit to the most tyrannical, unjust and
unreasonable laws. And what is the danger from this law, any more than from
other revenue laws to which we have so long submitted? Those laws have all
along, in fact, raised a revenue; and because this is mentioned in the act, can
this possibly alter the case? Yes, say our patriots, this is claiming a right
to tax us; but I deny it; for as I have clearly shown, this is no other claim
than has been made, exercised and submitted to, for more than a century: It is
essentially different from taxing us; for a tax is raised by compulsion,
whether we will or no; but this is a regulation of trade, by which, though it
may raise a revenue, and is designed for this purpose, yet no man can be
compelled to pay any part of it; and if he does, it is his own voluntary act,
as much as when he chooses to drink wine or rum, rather than cider, or to wear
English cloth, rather than homespun; and they are doing no service to their
country, who thus absurdly place tax acts and revenue laws upon the same
footing and infer a right of taxation, from a right of legislation in other
respects. But further, the tea act, as it is called, was made in the seventh
year of the present reign; and the preamble, which I took a copy of, runs thus:
"Whereas it is expedient, that a revenue should be raised in your Majesty's
dominions in America, for making a more certain and adequate provision for
defraying the charge of the administration of justice, and the support of civil
government in such provinces where it shall be found necessary, and toward
further defraying the expenses of defending, protecting and securing the said
dominions." -- Now it is generally supposed, that this express purpose of
raising a revenue, in the colonies, is entirely new and unprecedented; but to
show that this is a mistake, I will read you a copy of the preamble to an act,
passed in the fourth year of this reign, which is thus, "Whereas it is
expedient, that new provisions and regulations should be established for
improving the revenue of this kingdom, and for extending and securing the
navigation and commerce between Great Britain and your Majesty's dominions in
America, which by the peace have been so happily enlarged: And whereas it is
just and necessary that a revenue be raised in your Majesty's said dominions in
America, for defraying the expenses of defending, protesting and securing the
same," etc. and then the act goes on to lay duties on sugars, wines, East India
goods, etc. imported from Great Britain, etc. This act has been, and still is,
submitted to, without the least complaint. Now I should be glad to know, what
difference there is between these two preambles, so far as respects the matter
of raising a revenue.


Trim. Six of one, and half a dozen of the other, that is all.


Sharp. Nay, so long ago as the year 1670, in an act made for regulating the
plantation trade, one reason expressly assigned, is that otherwise "the trade of
them would, in a great measure be diverted from England, and carried elsewhere,
and his Majesty's customs and revenues much lessened." In short, every revenue
act is, in the nature of it, an act for raising a revenue, whether it be so
expressed or not; and it is trifling, at this time of day, to start an
objection, which does not carry the force even of a quibble. If it be said,
that the money raised by this act is misapplied, because our civil officers are
paid out of it; I answer, this is a distinct matter: The moneys raised by this,
and all other revenue acts, are, and, for more than a century, have been, paid
into his Majesty's Exchequer; and if, when there, instead of being applied
toward easing British subjects in their taxes, as formerly, they are now
applied for our ease, by paying the salaries of our Governor, Judges, etc.
which, otherwise, we must pay by an internal tax on our polls and estates, it
seems as if we could have no reason to complain of this as a grievance:
However, even though the money when raised was never so grossly misapplied, it
would by no means affect the legality and constitutional right of raising it;
these are matters quite distinct and independent of each other.


Puff. But pray, Sir, for if I am wrong, I am willing to be set right, I would
make bold to ask yourself, whether you don't believe the Parliament have made
an act to tax our lands five shillings sterling an acre, or that they will very
soon make it?


Fill. Indeed, Sir, I do assure you, the Boston minister declared it had
actually passed the House of Commons, though the King had not signed it; and more
than all that, he told how it was a deep plot to get away all our lands; for he
said they knew as how we would never submit to it, and then it would be called
high treason, and then General Gage was to take all our lands, and cut them
into lordships, and divide them among the new Counselors.


Trim. Slice me like a lemon, landlord Fillpot, if I would not undertake, for
one nippikin, to make you believe, nolen^ volens, that larks may be catched by
the sky's falling, or, by putting salt on their tails; or, that the Pope of
Rome, or man of sin, is a real painted whore, of the feminine gender; or, that
the moon is made of green cheese, -- why,

"You make me think you are that tool,
"Which knaves do work with, called a fool."
Pray, Mr, Sagacity, don't you believe there is an act of Parliament, laying a
duty of fifty pounds sterling upon every marriage; and another fifty pounds
upon every child born in lawful wedlock; and another, giving fifty pounds
bounty upon every murder of a bastard child, provided always, any thing in the
said act to the contrary notwithstanding, that such child be not above the age
of two years; tell me honestly, my host, don't you, in your conscience firmly
believe these quaint improbabilities.


Fill. Why you may laugh if you please, because as how you have got a glib
tongue: but I am ready to take my corporal oath, that the Boston minister, just
after he would been to prayer with my family, solemnly declared, there was such an
act, actually past, and that he had seen it, and read it too, more than that;
but I never saw it.


Puff. Well, if you havn't, I have; but howsomever, that last part, about
murder, staggers me, for all.


Brim. And well it may, friend Puff; and, verily, thy understanding must be
firm and solid, or thou must needs have stumbled at the threshold; for I
affirm, should an act be passed, containing only the first clause of this
bastard act, I should be weak enough to renounce all my peaceable principles,
and putting my trust in an arm of flesh, should join in trying the strength and
temper of carnal weapons; but friend Sharp will lighten thy darkness, and, if
possible, fine down the dregs of friend Fillpot's understanding.


Trim. If he can, I Will be sworn he is an adept at refining; and I would advise
neighbor Fillpot, after that, to let some of his liquors undergo the same
operation; for, as I Am a sinner, it is like host, like wines; both cloudy, not
to say muddy.


Bump. That Is the barber, positivo; -- ^ere's to ye, honest Trim.


Fill. Why your tongue's no slander, Trim, and so I shall not resent it; but every
body knows my wine must be good, for I have my Madeira of'Squire ****, and my
Fyal of Deacon *** *****'s son-in-law there, I forget his name, and so it cannot
be thick; and so there you're out for once.


Trim. That Is what the learned call a non sequitur; for by the same kind of
argument you may prove your skull is not thick; for there nobody will dispute
the character of the Maker; and yet, I Will be cut up into fiddle-cases, if the
world don't agree that it is too thick, -- but Mr. Sharp's pipe is lighted. --
Attendamus.


Sharp. When I first read that pretended act of Parliament for discouraging
marriages, and making it lawful to murder poor innocent bastard children, I
supposed it was designed only as a witty piece of banter, without any
mischievous intention; and little did I think, notwithstanding the general
infatuation, that a single man could be found weak enough to believe it was a
real act of Parliament; but to my astonishment, I find there are some, though I
hope, for the honor of the country, there are but few, who, like gudgeons,
have swallowed the bait, without perceiving the hook, though it lies so bare;
and it seems in vain to attempt undeceiving such, for they can have no
understanding of their own to apply to, or at best, they have not the free use
and exercise of it; so that it is like talking upon colors to a blind man, or
upon sounds, or any other subject, to a deaf man; there can be no absurdity too
gross for such simple credulous persons to be taken in with, provided it is
conveyed through the right channel.


Fill. Why, Sir, the Boston minister told how it was exactly fitted to answer
the wicked, corrupt design of the ministry, which was to prevent poculation.


Brim. Thou would say population, I conclude, friend Fillpot.


Trim. Or copulation, for that will answer; and then the amendment is easy, he
having nothing to do but to countermarch the P. and the C.


Grave. Pho! pshaw^ Mr. Trim, I wonder at you, h -- hugh hem, you make me
smile, but indeed you are naughty -- fie! fie! h -- m.


Bump. As I am one of his Majesty's justices of the peace, Trim, you are a good
jolly companion; and the old grave coachman here, loves the smack of the whip;
come, Deacon, here is to ye, ha! ha! ha! h -- a! here it goes.


Sharp. The man who forged the act we are speaking of, has been guilty of such
an unprecedented insult upon the wisdom and integrity of the King and
Parliament, and upon the understandings of Americans; and it now appears to be
done with so wicked a design of stirring up the people to open rebellion, that,
if he could be detected, I can hardly think of a punishment that could be
called unjust or severe; for what effusion of human blood -- what extensive and
shocking miseries is that man chargeable with, who, by wicked arts, involves a
country in rebellion! The report, so industriously spread, of a land tax, is
another malicious falsehood of the same kind* calculated and tending to produce
the same horrid, mischievous effects: There is not the slightest reason to
suppose the King, or any member of the house of lords or house of commons, have
had the least thought of laying any sort of tax on our lands; or of laying upon
us or our estates any internal tax of any kind whatever; but it is trumped up
here, to deceive and mislead the ignorant country people, and betray them into
such acts, as must end in the loss of life and estate.


Puff. Why do you really believe all this, Sir.


Sharp, As firmly as I believe that I must hereafter give an account of all my
words and actions, to that all-seeing Judge who knows my heart, and cannot be
deceived, and will not be mocked.


Grav. I am dreadfully afraid we have been deceived; but who could have thought
mankind could be so wicked.


Brim. Why verily, friend Graveairs, had thou but made use of thine own
understanding, instead of blindly following those filthy sons of Belial, whose
very existence depends upon the confusion of their country, thou would not
now marvel at what friend Sharp has been conveying to thy mind.


Puff. But pray revd. Sir, we have some grievances, certainly, why there is the
governor's and judges salaries -- and then there is the alteration of our
council and juries -- pray Sir a'nt this taking away our charter?


Sharp. That the new method of appointing the council, is an alteration of that
part of our charter is true, and that the new regulation respecting jurors is
different from that prescribed by our province law is also true, but that these
are grievances, may well be questioned. -- The English constitution has ever
been thought by the wisest men of all nations the best form of government in
the whole world -- and if so, these two alterations in our constitution are so
far from being grievous, that they are benefits, because they bring us nearer
to perfection -- for our jurors are now to be chosen in the same manner they
are in England; and our council being now made independent of the governor and
people, and removeable only by the King, as the governor is, brings them to a
much nearer resemblance to the house of Lords; and besides, both council and
juries are now upon exactly the same footing as they are in New Hampshire, New
York and all the southern governments, and in all the West India Islands, so
that if this makes us slaves, all those other governments, as well as England,
are, and ever have been, slaves -- and the same may be observed of the King's
paying his governor and judges, for the case is just the same in all King's
governments; and in England likewise, so far as respects the judges -- and if
we look back to former times, and consider how our council was situated.


Trim. Like a turnip between two trenchers.


Sharp. Liable, annually to be displaced, either by the governor or the house,
if they offend either, and how miserably our judges have been paid, and how
dependent they also were upon both the governor and the house, we must see the
wisdom of both these alterations; and when we are cool, I doubt not, we shall
highly approve of, and rejoice in them: And as to juries, the same privilege of
being tried by our countrymen, is left to us -- and the method of choosing them
is such as long experience has proved to be the best; and not attended with any
dangerous consequences.


Puff. Well, don't you think Sir, these things were brought about by enemies to
the country, among ourselves?


Sharp. No, it is our own imprudent conduct, has shown the King and parliament
the ne^^ssity of these alterations, and they have done it for our good.


Puff. Why there is the Quebec-bill; don't you think they intend to bring in
Popery? For the Boston minister said as how they did; and that every man that
would n't turn Papist, was to lose his land.


Sharp. That Boston minister, as well as some others, I Am sorry to say it, has
much to answer for -- he knows better -- the Quebec-bill can no more effect our
civil or religious liberties, than the laws of Holland can -- what parliament
has done is no more than they were bound to do, by every rule of equity and
common justice; The Canadians surrendered their country to his Britannic
Majesty upon express condition, among others that they should enjoy the free
exercise of their religion; and to this end, that they should have a
Roman-catholic bishop, to be approved of by the King of England -- this was one
article of the capitulation, expressly (...) to by the general to whom they
surrendered -- this engagement is now confirmed by Parliament, and this is all
-- now it is plain, they are entitled to the enjoyment of their religion,
according to the full extent and meaning of this agreement, or their country
ought to be restored to them -- and if the English government intended to
comply with their terms of capitulation, ought they not to give them the
fullest assurance of it, by confirming them by an act? Surely, if Parliament is
to be blamed for any thing, it should seem to be rather, that they have not
quieted the minds of the Canadians, by giving them this assurance before -- for
we must remember, that their religion is as dear to them, as ours is to us, and
they have the same right to worship God, in the way they think right, that we
claim for ourselves -- they have prejudices of education to biass them, as we
have; and they have their own natural understandings, and their priests to
guide them as we have; and they have an equal right with us to the benefit of
the gospel rule, "Do to others as ye would they should do unto you." And we
should do well to remember that, "with what measure we mete, it shall be
measured unto us again." -- In short, the only principles upon which Parliament
can be arraigned in this instance, are entirely destructive of all liberty of
conscience; and in point of common justice, and the faith of nations, they can
be found fault with, only upon the malevolent, unjust, diabolical position,
which, God forbid Protestants should ever adopt, that no faith is ever to be
kept with heretics. -- As to the danger arising to our religion, from this
act, it is a mere bugbear, raised to disturb weak minds: for nothing can be
more egregiously absurd than to infer, that because the King and Parliament
from the plain dictates of justice and humanity have complied with their most
solemn treaty made by their General, and upon the faith of which, an extensive
country has been surrendered to them, that therefore the King intends to
violate his coronation oath, and break through the condition upon which he holds
his crown; and that the Lords and Commons, collected from all parts of England,
are joining in this impolitic, iniquitous, foolish design. -- Let us turn the
tables, and make the present case of the Canadians, our own. Suppose the King
of France had conquered New England, at the time the King of England conquered
Canada, and we had capitulated upon condition, that we should enjoy our own
religion, and choose our own ministers, as we had done from the first
settlement of the country to this time; and the French General had agreed to
this, as General Amh^^st did to their terms; and we had remained ever since
under the French government; and when the King of France and his Parliament had
confirmed this treaty by a law, and the province of Canada should make a
clamor, and say the King of France, being governed by his mistresses, intended
to in^roduce the Protestant religion among them: I ask every unprejudiced man,
whether he would not think, and say, the Canadians were the most jealous,
unreasonable and unjust people under Heaven? -- I will venture to answer, yes,
for every Englishman upon the continent, -- and are our clamou^^ less
unreasonable than theirs would be under similar circumstance^^ Certainly with
what jugdment we should judge them, we ought to be judged -- but further,
whence arises the mighty danger? The act of Parliament grants no new liberty;
it only confirms what they have enjoyed for eleven or twelve years, since the
conquest, and for a century before; and has Popery spread or prevailed in any
degree in the other colonies, during that time -- or has our religion suffered
from the prevalency of that of the Roman Catholics in Maryland for many years
past, -- surely people must feel but little of the power and influence of their
religion, who fear any danger arising to it, from the bare toleration of any
other religion in any other part of the globe. In short, it is plain, beyond a
possibility of doubt, that this innocent and just act of Parliament is greedily
caught at, by your deceivers, as a lucky prop to a cause which has no
foundation, but in delusion; and consequently, is in danger of falling every
moment, -- they have persuaded you, that the two grand objects for which men in
society, will fight, if they ever fight, are now at stake, viz. religion and
property.


Trim. Aye, pro aris et focis -- that is now the watchword, not that I believe
they will fight for them, without better p^^of of their being in danger. -- Our
people talk too much to fight, your true fighting fellows are always pretty
silent -- they talk little, and pay it off in thinking.


Bump. I Will forfeit my commission if there is any fighting* 'till there is better
cause for it -- fighting, forsooth! Why what should they fight for? Do they
feel any grievance yet? Are any taxes demanded of them? Does any body meddle
with their lands? Are the pulpi^^ shut up? Are their bibles taken from them?
Are they restrained of their liberty to go and come, and do as they please? Are
their wives ravished, or their daughters?


Trim. Ha! ha! ha! -- Whiz.


Bump. What do they feel? What do they see? What do they hear, but idle tales?
Don't they say, and do as they please? And is not this a proof of the mildness
of the government? Talk of liberty -- why, in the name of wonder, what is
liberty if this is not? They say and do as they will, and get what they can, and
keep what they get, and go to church, or stay at home, as they list; they swear
and drink, and lie, and whore, and cheat, and ^ob, and pull down houses, and
^ar and feather, and play the devil in every shape, just as the devil and their
own inclinations lead them; and yet they cry out for liberty; what the deu^e
would they have, or what would they be at? Why too much liberty has made them
so raving mad, that they cannot distinguish liberty from slavery; fighting! I
say fighting -- a fiddle-stick's end -- these are not your fellows for
fighting; they will run upon the first fire, if they wait for that.


Sharp. Indeed, they don't well consider what they talk of, when they talk of
fighting the King's troops; they don't sit down first and count the costs; they
don't consider that they are entering the lists with a power, which is more
than a match for all the other powers of Europe; they don't consider the
horrors of a civil war; the terrible attendants even on a successful rebellion;
much less, the fatal consequences of an unsuccessful, forceable opposition to
their lawful Sovereign and his lawful authority. England is a powerful state by
sea, superior to all the rest of the world combined; she can block up all our
harbors, and prevent all foreign imports, and cut off all communications
between the colonies by sea; by this means we may at once be cut off from all
supplies of clothing, grain, rum, sugar, molasses, salt, ammunition, fish, and
every article of foreign trade, either for our own necessary consumption, or
for re-exportation; the shipping of the province may all be made lawful prize,
and every sea port town be laid in ruins. -- By land, with a very few
regiments, she may cut off all intercourse between town and town, and go on to
lay waste and utterly destroy our houses, barns, fields, cattle, grain and
stock of all kinds, until a body can assemble who shall dare to face them in
the field. And here arises to our view innumerable difficulties not yet
attended to: Our wives and children must be secured; our estates deserted;
provisions, arms, ammunition, camp-equipage, and other necessaries of war must
be provided; leaders skilled in the art of war must be found; and if we think
we have any such among us, what a vast proportion of them will, before the
crisis comes on, declare for the loyal side; and what numbers, must we be sure,
will follow them when we reflect, that this is a country of property, and
consider what will be the certain consequences of a defeat: For the punishment
of open traitors and rebels is not, and cannot be, governed by any certain
rules of law, but is inflicted summarily, according to the exigence of the
times; and what these consequences must be, it is shocking to humanity to
consider: Suppose a battle, and numbers slain, and the rest put to flight; what
multitudes must be sacrificed in the subsequent pursuit; what numbers taken
prisoners, impaled and gibbete^ from unavoidable necessity; and what then
becomes of their wives and helpless innocent children; and of the aged and
infirm; for then it will be impossible to make those distinctions which
humanity would wish for, but one general calamity must involve the innocent, if
such there are, with the guilty -- but suppose by a lucky accident, a body of
the King's forces, should be worsted, how long would it be before they would
appear again with an irresistible force, and with a resentment that would mark
the whole country with desolation and misery; imagine to yourselves an
individual head of a family, mortally wounded in battle, but lingering in the
pangs of death -- what would be his bitter reflections, and how would he
condemn his own rashness and folly in that awful interval; in some such
plaintive moans as these, may we well suppose, he would breathe out his life.
-- "What have I done, foolish man that I was -- why did I blindly rush upon
certain ruin -- now that my passions are cooled, and reason, alas! too late,
has resumed her seat, all those imaginary grievances disappear. -- I now die a
traitor, and rebel by the laws of my country -- my estate is forfeited -- my
affectionate wife, and our innocent babes, the sweet pledge^ of our loves --
how have I, who ought to have been their guide and protector -- how have I left
them friendless, forlorn, destitute of the means of procuring daily bread -- to
what hardships, dangers and distresses have I abandoned them -- O my God, how
shall I look up in this hour of torture -- take them, O take them under thy
protection -- for they are innocent of the heavy crime that now weighs down the
soul of their unhappy husband and father."


Trim. I wonder what makes my eyes water so -- I believe it grows late.


Brim. Verily, friend Trim, thy humanity is more pleasing than even thy
sprightly humor -- thou needst not be ashamed of thy weakness in this, case --
that silent tear, dropped over the picture of thy distressed country, does thee
an honor which kings might envy, but could not confer.


Sharp. Such are the miseries to which this poor, unhappily deluded people are
hastening apace; and all to save those liberties which their own foolish
credulity, and the wicked arts of their designing leaders, have misrepresented
to their heated imaginations as being in danger; and which, heaven knows, how
soon they may lose in good earnest, if they go on in their mad career; well is
it said, that rebellion is like the sin of witchcraft, for in both cases, the
minds of men are entirely actuated by such a spirit, as renders them proper
Demoniacs; otherwise it would be morally impossible, that they should throw up
lives and fortunes, merely because they fear they are in danger of losing a few
of those rights, which no people under Heaven either do or wish to enjoy -- and
without which, I may add, we should have been much happier, had we never
fancied ourselves entitled to them.


Puff. But, with submission, Rev. Sir, has not the grand Continental Congress,
in their wisdom, adopted the Suffolk resolves, and called upon us to extend our
views to the most unhappy events, and be in all respects prepared for every
contingency? And what is this but preparing for civil war?


Sharp. They have advised to this and many other extraordinary steps; but that
they have done it in their wisdom, is, I confess, more than I can see.


Trim. We read of a kind of wisdom which is foolishness; and if the measures of
our august Congress can be said to be wise, I believe it must be in some such
figurative sense.


Sharp. I never was so painfully deceived in my expectations, in any instance,
as I have been in this of the conduct of the Congress; I comforted myself with
the most sanguine hopes, that they would adopt such prudent measures, as might
tend to bring about an accommodation of all our unhappy disputes: but instead
of this, they have blown up a spark, which was but kindling, into a raging
conflagration. Their resolves are nothing short of high treason; their
association is an open declaration of hostilities, partaking so equally of
wickedness and folly, that it is hard to say which is its prevailing
characteristic; it recommends robbery to the whole continent; it is calculated
to reduce thousands of families to poverty and ruin; it tends directly to
quarrelling, fightings and murders; it is a scheme, in the fixed nature of
things, impossible to be executed; it must render us contemptible in the eyes
of Britons, a reproach, a laughing stock and a bye-word, among all civilized
nations. Their addresses are a jargon of contradictions and absurdities;
Britons and Canadians must smile with ineffable contempt, at so gross an
imposition upon their understandings. In short, every step they have taken has
been just the reverse of what it ought to have been, and in my opinion, they
have removed us infinitely farther from pea^e and happiness, than we should
have been, had a Congress never been thought on.


Brim. To my understanding, it appears in a clear light, that all our public
measures in congres^es, town-meetings, body-meetings, and delegate-meetings,
have tended, instead of mending matters, to make bad, worse; they have all
partook of one and the same evil spirit; government, without which mankind
cannot live in society, has been overturned and trampled on -- magistrates
insulted, abused and driven from their habitations -- the courts of justice
violently shut up -- individuals persecuted and buffeted, and their property
destroyed, merely for exercising the right of private judgment -- high treason
and rebellion stalk through the land at noon day -- and civil war is openly
talked of, with a blind, enthusiastic zeal, equal to that which in former days,
crowded friend Whitefield's lectures. But if such measures procure a redress of
grievances, as the cant phrase is, it must be because the nature of things is
changed, and the same causes produce effects contrary to those they have ever
before produced.


Bump. Fiddle faddle, it is all stuff and nonsense; redress of grievances, is
but the decoy set up to catch the ignorant and unwary. The leaders aim at an
independency on Great Britain, in order to become themselves the tyrants of the
colonies: And, if God in judgment for our ingratitude and folly, should give us
up to our own heart's desire, we should soon see High and Mighty States, like
those of Holland, or swa^m^ of Petty Prince^, like those of Germany, whose
little singe^s would be ^hicker than the loins of King, Lords and Common^; who
would trample on the liberties, and tr^ad on ^he n^^ks of this infatuated
people; woulst chastise them with scorpions, and their portion would be, the
cu^se of Him, to become the servant of servants: a long ^c^ne of war and
bloodshed would despoil and depopulate this fertile, happy country, 't^ll (...)
more fortunate villain would rise super^^^ to his comrades, and become alone
the lordly tyrant over this now f^^e people. It is enough to make a wi^e man
mad to see how tam^ly the common people suffer themselves to be f^ol^d, first
o^t of their senses, and then out of their libe^^y, p^ope^ty and lives. ^et a
mounte^ank, who has fled from ju^^ice for blasphemy, treason and rebellion in
another province, set himself up (...) a pat^iot, forsooth, and they will stand
gaping like id^o^s, and let him take all their teeth out of their heads. Tell
them through the channel of a seditious news-paper, the most improbable tale
about grievances, and they believe it more firmly than they will those many
parts of holy writ which enjoin submission to rulers, as a christian duty. Let
one of their demagogues but hint, that some hundreds of persons of the greatest
property in the province -- who were born here -- whose families are here --
whose estates are here, whose characters in public and private life, they have
long known, proved and adored, are all at once become enemies to their country,
to their friends, to their neighbors, to their families, to themselves, and to
God, and they instantly fall upon them with a savage barbarity, which the
uncivilized, unchristianized Indians never exercised toward the invaders of
their peaceful retreats. Tell them the Parliament of Great Britain may be made
to tremble at the threats of an American Congress, and they believe it; tell
them the veter^n troops of that potent kingdom, will fly before an
und^sciplined multitude of New England squirrel-hunters, and they will swallow
it without a hiccough; and each hero in his chimney corner, kills his dozen,
and crows victorious; tell them all communication is cut off between Boston and
the country, and down it goes, though they go there every day to market, and
return without molestation; tell them, though our trade and our seaport towns
should be all destroyed, it would do us no hurt; that if they beat their plough
shares into swords, and their crowbars into gun-barrels, and go all to
training, nevertheless, their lands, without tilling, will produce sufficient
for themselves and all the inhabitants of the seaport towns, and they believe
it most seriously; tell them a duty of a threepence upon tea, is more a
grievance than a duty of a shilling, and they believe it; tell them what would
be high treason in England, is no crime at all in America, and on they go,
blindfold, to the ^pen commission of it, with the same devotion that they go to
meeting, to hear the same comfortable doctrine preached: -- In short, there is
no absurdity too great for their swallows, or too hard for their stomachs, if
it does but come from the right books, and through the proper channel. And as
they believe, so they practice: How silly has been their behavior all over the
province; two thousand assembled at Great-Barrington, as many more at
Springfield; three thousand at Worcester* and four thousand at Cambridge;
besides other formidable bodies Eastward and Southward; all with halters about
their necks; and for what? Why truly, to prevent four unarmed judges from
holding a provincial, constitutional* charter court of justice; and to compel
one, two, or at most three counselors, appointed by the King, to resign their
seats at the board, which seats they either had never accepted, or if they had,
their resignations were void and of no effect. -- Other bodies of wise-acres
have assembled, in warlike array, for the heroic purpose of compelling an aged,
infirm justice, who had signed an address, to recant; that is, to set his name
to an infamo^s lie, fabricated in general, if they have been truly retailed in
the newspapers, by heroes in their cups, incapable of spelling or reasoning.
And in those instances wh^re the devoted victims, have either secreted
themselves, or had resolution enough to appear and refuse, l^ke Shadrach,
M^shech and Abednego, to fall down and worship the brazen image, some have been
denied the common rights of humanity; such as having corn ground for the daily
bread of themselves and families; others the common privileges and conveniences
of society, such as employing laborers for hire, to reap, mow, thresh, etc.
nay the very dumb beasts of some, have been denied the common rights of nature;
an instance of this kind happened in the county of Middlesex, where an
unfortunate addresser having a cow, sent her over to his neighbor, a deacon,
who was the owner of a bull, and to whom he had, for some years, sent all his
cows in the like exigencies; but the pious deacon, animated with a holy zeal
against Lord North, and Governor Hutchinson, warmed with the steams of modern
patriotism, and free from the infirmity of universal benevolence, ^wore his
bull should not bull a tory cow.


Trim. I fancy the deacon was well stricken in years.


Bump. In all parts of the province, we have seen instances of this egregious
folly of the mob, in compelling addressers to Gov. Hutchinson, and to his
present Excellency Genesis Gage, to ^ecant; just as if such forced recantations
could persuade the world that such addressers did not address! The actors in
these tragi-comi farcical scenes have no meaning at all; in them it is all the
effect of rum and ^^ip: Their abettors mean to make administration believe that
we are all of one mind; but their folly is glaring; a band of highway robbers
might as well make the world believe that they and the persons robbed are all
of a mind, by obliging them, when in their power, to sign a confession that
they consented to the robbery. People have been gulled, imposed on, and misled
long enough; it is high time for them to look about them; the night is (...),
the day is at hand -- the day of reckoning -- the day, wh^^ the friends and
foes, the liege subjects, and the rebels and traitors, to George the Third,
must be distinguished: And however speciously the leaders may flatter their
blind followers with hopes of success in their opposition, by publishing
extracts of letters from England, they may assure themselves there is not the
least reason to suppose that parliament will not support their authority, even
to the ruin of the present generation, in this and all the other colonies, if
it cannot be established at a less expense: And it is as certain that submission
is required only to save the honor of government; they never intend to tax us;
they don't wish to enslave us; they abhor the thought; they want us to be happy
and free; but no, we forsooth, must quarrel for a shadow, under a moral
certainty of losing the substance in the contest. The people are told by their
oracles, that, if they give way now, their chains are rivited, and such kind of
trumpery; but, if they would but open their eyes, they might see that this is
mere delusion; let them try the experiment of submitting; and if all their
grievances are not redressed, they may as well take up the cudgels, one or two,
or ten years hence, as now. They will have hands and guns then as well as now;
and the deuce is in it, if they don't think their wives, their children, their
estates and their necks, worth trying to save. Some tell them they have been
guilty of treason already, they have put their hands to the plough, and it is
too late to look back. This is the language of vile seducers; but it is never
too late in this world, to repent^ and the sooner the better; they have a
gracious King to deal with, and a parliament of Britons, who know the value of
civil and religious liberty, and can make all due allowances for the sudden
extravagancies of Englishmen, when first impressed with the fear of losing it;
but it must be remembered, that the obstinate perseverance of incorrigible
offenders, will put a period to the long sufferings even of the Deity. I think
I can perceive, that the eyes of many begin to open; I heartily wish they may
attain a full view of their danger, before the door of mercy is shut. But I ask
pardon, Rev'd Sir, for breaking in upon your discourse, and interrupting it so
long; the distresses coming upon my country, through the wicked machinations of
mock patriots lie uppermost in my mind; and when I enter upon the subject, I
know not where to stop. But I have done. --


Sharp. Indeed 'squire, there needs no apology; you have delivered my
sentiments, in much better terms than I can pretend to. The subject, as you
observe, is of the greatest moment; and happy will it be, if you, by your
conversation, and I by my preaching, can awaken our neighbors and friends to
serious consideration, before it be too late.


Trim. Well, I Am determined to drop my shop preachments, or else, for the
fut^^e, to take the right side of the question, and discharge (...) conscience,
whatever becomes of my custom.


Grave. I verily fear we are all wrong, and the sooner we turn about, the
better for the country.


Puff. I profess, I Am of the same mind; I begin to see things in a different
light from what I did: Indeed I never liked the high proceedings of the
provincial congress; this affair of seizing the King's moneys, and taking the
militia out of the hands of the Governor, I could never see through; it is
against the King's prerogative, and founds too much like treason; and I Am
resolved not to go to the next, if I am chosen.


Fill. I desire to be thankful I Have had nothing to do with these matters, and
don't intend to* I Will mind my own bu^iness, and that is enough for me.


Trim. Bravo, neighbor Fillpot -- stick to that, and you will do well enough --
I Will be sworn your business will never fail, 'till all the ports upon the
continent are blocked up. And as to you, neighbor Puff, you have made the
wisest speech, and the be^^ (...) you ever made in your life; stand by it, and
yo^ ^ay save your bacon yet. I hope my past offenses will be forgiven, in
consideration of the strength of the temptation; and I Will give them leave to
tuck me up, without ceremony, if ever I p^each up^treason and rebellion again,
so long as my name's Trim.


Brim. Ah! Friend Trim, if all that have preached treason and rebellion, were
to be tucked up, as thou phrasest it, the harvest truly would be plenteous, and
the laborers ^ew.


Trim. Hemp would bear a good price, I believe.


B^im. Treason is an odious crime in the sight of God and men; may we none of
us listen to the suggestions of Satan, but may the candle of the Lord within,
lighten our paths; and may the spirit lead us in the w^y of truth, and preserve
us from all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion. But it grows late, and
the spirit moves me to be getting home. Friend Sharp, fare thee well. Come
friends.


Sharp. Gentlemen I wish you all a very good night. --

Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.

