ORATION DELIVERED MARCH SIXTH, 1775.

AN ORATION; DELIVERED MARCH SIXTH, 1775. AT THE REQUEST of the INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN of BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE the BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH of MARCH,
1770.

By Dr. JOSEPH WARREN.

TANTAE MOLIS ERAT, ROMANAM CONDERE GENT^M.
VIRGIL's AEN. QHI, METUENS, VIVIT, LIBER MIHI NON ERIT UNQUAM.
HOR. EPIS. BOSTON: Printed by Messieurs EDES and GILL in Queen Street, and by
JOSEPH GREENLEAF in Union-street, near the Market. M,DCC,LXXV.

AT a meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the town of BOSTON,
duly assembled at Faneuil-Hall, and from thence adjourned to the Old-south
Meeting House, on Monday the 6th day of MARCH, Annoque Domini, 1775.
UPON a motion made, Voted unanimously, That the thanks of the Town be, and
hereby are, given to Dr. JOSEPH WARREN, for the elegant and spirited ORATION
delivered by him at their request, in commemoration of the horrid MASSACRE,
perpetrated on the envening of the 5th of March, 1770, by a party of Soldiers
of the XXIX Regiment, under the command of Capt. Thomas Preston; and that, Mr.
Samuel Adams, Hon. John Hancock, Esquire Benjamin Church, Esquire Mr. John Pitts, John
Scollay, Esquire Colonel Thomas Marshall and Mr. Samuel Austin, Be a committee to
wait upon Dr. JOSEPH WARREN, and, in the name of the town, desire a copy of the
ORATION for the press.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

Upon application made, the copy of the ORATION was sent with the following
message,
GENTLEMEN,
THE same motives which influenced me yesterday to appear before my fellow
citizens, induce me to deliver this copy to you,

I am with the sincerest Respect, Your most obedient Servant, JOSEPH WARREN.
MARCH 7th, 1775.
AN ORATION.
MY EVER HONORED FELLOW-CITIZENS,
IT is not without the most humiliating conviction of my want of ability that I
now appear before you: But the sense I have of the obligation I am under to
obey the calls of my country at all times, together with an animating
recollection of your indulgence exhibited upon so many occasions, has induced
me once more, undeserving as I am, to throw myself upon that candor which looks
with kindness on the feeblest efforts of an honest mind.

YOU will not now expect the elegance, he learning, the fire, the enrapturing
strains of eloquence which charmed you when a LOVELL, a CHURCH, or a HANCOCK
spoke; but you will permit me to say that with a sincerity, equal to their's, I
mourn over my bleeding country: With them I weep at her distress, and with them
deeply resent the many injuries she has received from the hands of cruel and
unreasonable men.

THAT personal freedom is the natural right of every man; and that property or
an exclusive right to dispose of what he has honestly acquired by his own
labor, necessarily arises therefrom, are truths which common sense has placed
beyond the reach of contradiction. And no man or body of men can; without being
guilty of flagrant injustice, claim a right to dispose of the persons or
acquisitions of any other man, or body of men, unless it can be proved that
such a right has arisen from some compact between the parties in which it has
been explicitly and freely granted.

IF I may be indulged in taking a retrospective view of the first settlement of
our country, it will be easy to determine with what degree of justice the late
parliament of Great Britain have assumed the power of giving away that property
which the Americans have earned by their labor.

OUR fathers, having nobly resolved never to wear the yoke of despotism, and
seeing the European world, at that time, through indolence and cowardice, falling
a prey to tyranny; bravely threw themselves upon the bosom of the ocean;
determined to find a place in which they might enjoy their freedom, or perish
in the glorious attempt. Approving Heaven beheld the favorite ark dancing upon
the waves, and graciously preserved it until the chosen families were brought
in safety to these western regions. They found the land swarming with savages,
who threatened death with every kind of torture. But savages, and death with
torture, were far less terrible than slavery: -- Nothing was so much the object
of their abhorence as a tyrant's power: -- They knew that it was more safe to
dwell with man in his most unpolished state than in a country where arbitrary
power prevails. Even anarchy itself, that bugbear held up by the tools of power
(though truly to be deprecated) is infinitely less dangerous to mankind than
arbitrary government. Anarchy can be but of short duration; for when men are at
liberty to pursue that course which is most conducive to their own happiness,
they will soon come into it, and from the rudest state of nature, order and
good government must soon arise. But tyranny, when once established, entails
its curse on a nation to the latest period of time; unless some daring genius,
inspired by Heaven, shall unappalled by danger, bravely form and execute the
arduous design of restoring liberty and life to his enslaved, murdered country.

THE tools of power in every age have racked their inventions to justify the
FEW in sporting with the happiness of the MANY; and, having found their
sophistry too weak to hold mankind in bondage, have impiously dared to force
religion, the daughter of the king of Heaven, to become a prostitute in the
service of Hell. They taught that princes, honored with the name of christian,
might bid defiance to the founder of their faith, might pillage pagan countries
and deluge them with blood, only because they boasted themselves to be the
disciples of that teacher who strictly charged his followers to do to others as
they would that others should do unto them.

THIS country, having been discovered by an English subject in the year 1620,
was (according to the system which the blind superstition of those times
supported) deemed the property of the crown of England. Our ancestors, when
they resolved to quit their native soil, obtained from King James a grant of
certain lands in North America. This they probably did to silence the cavils of
their enemies, for it cannot be doubted, but they despised the pretended right
which he claimed thereto. Certain it is that he might, with equal propriety and
justice, have made them a grant of the planet Jupiter. And their subsequent
conduct plainly shows that they were too well acquainted with humanity and the
principles of natural equity to suppose that the grant gave them any right to
take possession; they therefore entered into a treaty with the natives and
bought from them the lands: Nor have I yet obtained any information that our
ancestors ever pleaded, or that the natives ever regarded the grant from the
English crown: The business was transacted by the parties in the same
independent manner that it would have been, had neither of them ever known or
heard of the island of Great Britain.

HAVING become the honest proprietors of the soil, they immediately applied
themselves to the cultivation of it; and they soon beheld the virgin earth
teeming with richest fruits, a grateful recompense for their unwearied toil.
The fields began to wave with ripening harvests, and the late barren wilderness
was seen to blossom like the rose. The savage natives saw with wonder the
delightful change, and quickly formed a scheme to obtain that by fraud or
force, which nature meant as the reward of industry alone. But the illustrious
emigrants soon convinced the rude invaders that they were not less ready to
take the field for battle than for labor; and the insidious foe was driven from
their borders as often as he ventured to disturb them. The crown of England
looked with indifference on the contest; our ancestors were left alone to
combat with the natives. -- Nor is there any reason to believe, that it ever
was intended by the one party, or expected by the other, that the grantor
should defend and maintain the grantees in the peaceable possession of the
lands named in the patents. And it appears plainly from the history of those
times that neither the Prince nor the people of England thought themselves much
interested in the matter. They had not then any idea of a thousandth part of
those advantages which they since have and we are most heartily willing they
should still continue to reap from us.

BUT when at an infinite expense of toil and blood, this widely extended
continent had been cultivated and defended: When the hardy adventurers justly
expected that they and their descendants should peaceably have enjoyed the
harvest of those fields which they had sown, and the fruit of those vineyards
which they had planted; this country was then thought worthy the attention of
the British ministry; and the only justifiable and only successful means of
rendering the colonies serviceable to Britain were adopted. By an intercourse
of friendly offices, the two countries became so united in affection, that they
thought not of any distinct or separate interests, they found both countries
flourishing and happy. Britain saw her commerce extended and her wealth
increased; her lands raised to an immense value, her fleets riding triumphant
on the ocean, the terror of her arms spreading to every quarter of the globe.
The colonist found himself free, and thought himself secure: He dwelt under his
own vine and under his own figtree and had none to make him afraid: He knew
indeed that by purchasing the manufactures of Great Britain he contributed to
its greatness: He knew that all the wealth that his labor produced centered in
Great Britain: But that far from exciting his envy filled him with the highest
pleasure; that thought supported him in all his toils. When the business of the
day was past, he solaced himself with the contemplation or perhaps entertained
his listening family with the recital of some great, some glorious transaction
which shines conspicuous in the history of Britain: Or perhaps his elevated
fancy led him to foretell, with a kind of enthusiastic confidence, the glory,
power and duration of an empire which should extend from one end of the earth
to the other: He saw, or thought he saw, the British nation risen to a pitch of
grandeur which cast a veil over the Roman glory, and, ravished with the
praeview, boasted a race of British Kings, whose names should echo through
those realms where Cyrus, Alexander, and the Caesar's were unknown; Princes for
whom millions of grateful subjects redeemed from slavery and pagan ignorance,
should with thankful tongues offer up their prayers and praises to that
transcendantly great and beneficent being by whom Kings reign and Princes
decree justice.

THESE pleasing connections might have continued; these delightsome prospects
might have been every day extended; and even the reveries of the most warm
imagination might have been realized; but unhappily for us, unhappily for
Britain, the madness of an avaricious minister of state has drawn a sable
curtain over the charming scene, and in its stead has brought upon the stage,
discord, envy, hatred and revenge, with civil war close in their rear.

SOME demon in an evil hour suggested to a short sighted financier the hateful
project of transfering the whole property of the King's subjects in America to
his subjects in Britain. The claim of the British parliament to tax the
colonies can never be supported but by such a TRANSFER; for the right of the
house of commons of Great Britain to originate any tax or to grant money is
altogether derived from their being elected by the people of Great Britain to
act for them, and the people of Great Britain cannot confer on their
representatives a right to give or grant any thing which they themselves have
not a right to give or grant personally. Therefore it follows that if the
members chosen by the people of Great Britain to represent them in parliament
have by virtue of their being so chosen, any right to give or grant American
property, or to lay any tax upon the lands or persons of the colonists, it is
because the lands and people in the colonies are bona fide, owned by, and
justly belong to the people of Great Britain. But (as has been before observed)
every man has a natural right to personal freedom, consequently a right to
enjoy what is acquired by his own labor. And as it is evident that the property
in this country has been acquired by our own labor, it is the duty of the
people of Great Britain to produce some compact in which we have explicitly
given up to them a right to dispose of our persons or property. Until this is
done every attempt of their's, or of those whom they have deputed to act for
them to give or grant any part of our property is directly repugnant to every
principle of reason and natural justice. But I may boldly say that such a
compact never existed, no, not even in imagination. Nevertheless the
representatives of a nation, long famed for justice and the exercise of every
noble virtue, have been prevailed on to adopt the fatal scheme; and although
the dreadful consequences of this wicked policy have already shaken the empire
to its center; yet still it is persisted in. Regardless of the voice of reason
-- deaf to the prayers and supplications -- and unaffected with the flowing
tears of suffering millions, the British ministry still hug the darling idol;
and every rolling year affords fresh instances of the absurd devotion with
which they worship it. Alas! how has the folly, the distraction of the British
counsels blasted our swelling hopes and spread a gloom over this western
hemisphere. The hearts of Britons and Americans, which lately felt the generous
glow of mutual confidence and love, now burn with jealousy and rage. Though but
of yesterday I recollect (deeply affected at the ill boding change) the happy
hours that past whilst Britain and America rejoiced in the prosperity and
greatness of each other, (Heaven grant those halcyon days may soon return.) But
now the Briton too often looks on the American with an evious eye, taught to
consider his just plea for the enjoyment of his earnings as the effect of pride
and stubborn opposition to the parent country. Whilst the American beholds the
Briton as the ruffian, ready first to take away his property, and next, what is
dearer to every virtuous man, the liberty of his country.

WHEN the measures of administration had disgusted the colonies to the highest
degree, and the people of Great Britain had by artifice and falsehood been
irritated against America, an army was sent over to enforce submission to
certain acts of the British parliament, which reason scorned to countenance,
and which placemen and pensioners were found unable to support.

MARTIAL law and the government of a well regulated city are so entirely
different, that it has always been considered as improper to quarter troops in
populous cities, as frequent disputes must necessarily arise between the
citizen and the soldier, even if no previous animosities subsist. And it is
further certain from a consideration of the nature of mankind, as well as from
constant experience, that standing armies always endanger the liberty of the
subject. But when the people on the one part, considered the army as sent to
enslave them, and the army on the other were taught to look on the people as in
a state of rebellion, it was but just to fear the most disagreeable
consequences. Our fears, we have seen, were but too well grounded.

THE many injuries offered to the town I pass over in silence. I cannot now
mark out the path which led to that unequaled scene of horror, the sad
remembrance of which takes the full possession of my soul. The sanguinary
theater again opens; itself to view. The baleful images of terror crowd around
me -- and discontented ghosts with hollow groans appear to solemnize the
anniversary of the FIFTH of MARCH.

APPROACH we then the melancholy walk of death. Hither let me call the gay
companion, here let him drop a farewell tear upon that body which so late he saw
vigorous and warm with social mirth -- Hither let me lead the tender mother to
weep over her beloved son -- Come widowed mourner, here satiate thy grief;
behold thy murdered husband gasping on the ground, and to complete the pompous
show of wretchedness bring in each hand thy infant children to bewail their
father's fate -- Take heed, ye orphan babes, lest whilst your streaming eyes
are fixed upon the ghastly corpse, your feet slide on the stones bespattered
with your father's brains. After Mr. GRAY had been shot through the body and
had fallen dead on the ground -- a bayonet was pushed through his skull, part
of the bone being broken his brains fell out upon the pavement.
Enough! This tragedy need not be heightened by an infant weltering in the
blood of him that gave it birth. Nature reluctant shrinks already from the
view, and the chilled blood rolls slowly backward to its fountain. We wildly
stare about, and with amazement, ask, who spread this ruin round us? What
wretch has dared deface the image of his God? Has haughty France or cruel Spain
sent forth her myrmidons? Has the grim savage rushed again from the far distant
wilderness? Or does some fiend, fierce from the depth of Hell, with all the
rancourous malice which the apostate damned can feel, twang her destructive bow
and hurl her deadly arrows at our breast? No. None of these -- but, how
astonishing! It is the hand of Britain that inflicts the wound. The arms of
George our rightful King have been employed to shed that blood which freely
would have flown at his command when justice or the honor of his crown had
called his subjects to the field.

BUT pity, grief, astonishment, with all the softer movements of the soul must
now give way to stronger passions. Say, fellow-citizens, what dreadful thought
now swells your heaving bosoms -- You fly to arms -- Sharp indignation flashes
from each eye -- Revenge gnashes her iron teeth -- Death grins an hideous smile
secure to drench his greedy jaws in human gore -- Whilst hovering furies darken
all the air.

BUT stop, my bold adventurous countrymen, stain not your weapons with the
blood of Britons. Attend to reason's voice -- Humanity puts in her claim -- and
sues to be again admitted to her wonted seat, the bosom of the brave. Revenge
is far beneath the noble mind. Many perhaps, compelled to rank among the vile
assassins, do from their inmost souls, detest the barbarous action. The winged
death, shot from your arms, may chance to pierce some breast that bleeds,
already for your injured country.

THE storm subsides -- a solemn pause ensues -- You spare upon condition they
depart. They go -- they quit your city -- they no more shall give offense. --
Thus closes the important drama.

And could it have been conceived that we again should have seen a British army
in our land, sent to enforce obedience to acts of parliament destructive of our
liberty. But the royal ear far distant from this western world, has been
assaulted by the tongue of slander; and villains, traitorous alike to king and
country, have prevailed upon a gracious prince to cloth his countenance with
wrath, and to erect the hostile banner against a people ever affectionate and
loyal to him and his illustrious predecessors of the house of Hanover. Our
streets are again filled with armed men: Our harbor is crowded with ships of
war; but these cannot intimidate us; our liberty must be preserved; it is far
dearer than life, we hold it even dear as our allegiance; we must defend it
against the attacks of friends as well as enemies; we cannot suffer even
BRITONS to ravish it from us.

No longer could we reflect with generous pride on the heroic actions of our
American forefathers, -- no longer boast our origin from that far famed
island, whose warlike sons have so often drawn their well-tried swords to save
her from the ravages of tyranny; could we but for a moment entertain the
thought of giving up our liberty. The man who meanly will submit to wear a
shackle, contemns the noblest gift of Heaven, and impiously affronts the God
that made him free.

IT was a maxim of the Roman people, which eminently conduced to the greatness
of that state never to despair of the commonwealth. The maxim may prove as
salutary to us now, as it did to them. Short sighted mortals see not the
numerous links of small and great events which form the chain on which the fate
of kings and nations is suspended. Ease and prosperity, (though pleasing for a
day,) have often sunk a people into effeminacy and sloth. Hardships and
dangers, (though we forever strive to shun them,) have frequently called forth
such virtues, as have commanded the applause and reverence of an admiring
world. Our country loudly calls you to be circumspect, vigilant, active and
brave. Perhaps, (all gracious Heaven avert it) perhaps, the power of Britain, a
nation great in war, by some malignant influence, may be employed to enslave
you. But let not even this discourage you. Her arms, it is true, have filled the
world with terror: her troops have reaped the laurels of the field: her fleets
have rode triumphant on the sea -- And when or where did you, my Countrymen,
depart inglorious from the field of fight? The Patience with which this People
have borne the repeated Injuries which have been heaped upon them, and their
unwillingness to take any sanguinary Measures, has very injudiciously been
ascribed to Cowardice, by Persons both here and in Great Britain. I most
heartily wish that an Opinion so erroneous in itself, and so fatal in its
consequences, might be utterly removed before it be too late: And I think
nothing further necessary to convince every intelligent Man, that the Conduct
of this People is owing to the tender Regard which they have for their Fellow
Men, and an utter Abhorrence to the shedding of human Blood, than a little
Attention to their general Temper and Disposition, discovered when they cannot
be supposed to be under any Apprehension of Danger to themselves. -- I will
only mention the universal Detestation which they show to every Act of Cruelty,
by whom and upon whomsoever committed; the mild Spirit of their Laws; the very
few Crimes to which capital Penalties are annexed; and the very great
Backwardness which both Courts and Juries discover, in condemning Persons
charged with capital Crimes. -- But if any should think this Observation not to
the Purpose, I readily appeal to those Gentlemen of the Army who have been in
the Camp, or in the Field, with the Americans.
You too can show the trophies of your forefather's victories and your own; can
name the fortresses and battles you have won; and many of you count the
honorable scars of wounds received, whilst sighting for your king and country.

WHERE justice is the standard, Heaven is the warrior's shield* But conscious
guilt unnerves the arm that lifts the sword against the innocent. Britain
united with these colonies, by commerce and affection -- by interest and blood,
may mock the threats of France and Spain: May be the seat of universal empire.
But should America either by force, or those more dangerous engines, luxury and
corruption, ever be brought into a state of vassalage, Britain must lose her
freedom also. No longer shall she sit the empress of the sea: -- Her ships no
more shall waft her thunders over the wide ocean: -- The wreath shall wither on
her temples: -- Her weakened arm shall be unable to defend her coasts: and she
at last must bow her veneable head to some proud foreigner's despotic rule.

BUT if from past events we may venture to form a judgment of the future, we
justly may expect that the devices of our enemies will but increase the
triumphs of our country. I must indulge a hope that Britain's liberty as well
as ours, will eventually be preserved by the virtue of America.

THE attempt of the British parliament to raise a revenue from America, and our
denial of their right to do it, have excited an almost universal enquiry into
the rights of mankind in general, and of British subjects in particular; the
necessary result of which must be such a liberality of sentiment, and such a
jealousy of those in power as will, better than an adamantine wall, secure us
against the future approaches of despotism.

THE malice of the Boston Port-Bill has been defeated in a very considerable
degree, by giving you an opportunity of deserving, and our brethren in this and
our sister-colonies an opportunity of bestowing those benefactions which have
delighted your friends and astonished your enemies, not only in America, but in
Europe also. And what is more valuable still, the sympathetic feelings for a
brother in distress, and the grateful emotions excited in the breast of him who
finds relief, must forever endear each to the other, and form those
indissoluble bonds of friendship and affection, on which the preservation of
our rights so evidently depend.

THE mutilation of our charter has made every other colony jealous for its own;
for this, if once submitted to by us, would set on float the property and
government of every British settlement upon the continent. If Charters are not
deemed sacred, how miserably precarious is every thing founded upon them.

EVEN the sending troops to put these acts in execution is not without
advantages to us. The exactness and beauty of their Discipline inspire our
youth with ardor in the pursuit of military knowledge. Charles the Invicible,
taught Peter the Great, the art of war. The battle of Pultowa convinced Charles
of the proficiency Peter had made.

OUR Country is in danger, but not to be despaired of. Our enemies are numerous
and powerful -- but we have many friends, determine to BE FREE, and Heaven and
Earth will aid the RESOLUTION. On you depend the fortunes of America. You are
to decide the important question, on which rest the happiness and liberty of
millions yet unborn. Act worthy of yourselves. The faltering tongue of hoary
age calls on you to support your country. The lisping infant raises its
suppliant hands, imploring defense against the monster slavery. Your fathers
look from their caelestial seats with smiling approbation on their sons, who
boldly stand forth in the cause of virtue; but sternly frown upon the inhuman
miscreant, who, to secure the loaves and fishes to himself, would breed a
serpent to destroy his children.

BUT, pardon me, my fellow-citizens, I know you want not zeal Or fortitude. You
will maintain your rights or perish in the generous struggle. However difficult
the combat, you never will decline it when freedom is the prize. An
independence on Great Britain is not our aim. No, our wish is, that Britain and
the Colonies may like the oak and ivy, grow and increase in strength together.
But whilst the infatuated plan of making one part of the empire slaves to the
other, is persisted in; the interest and safety of Britain, as well as the
Colonies, require that the wise measures recommended by the honorable, the
continental Congress, be steadily pursued; whereby the unnatural contest
between a parent honored, and a child beloved, may probably be brought to such
an issue, as that the peace and happiness of both, may be established upon a
lasting basis. But if these pacific measures are ineffectual, and it appears
that the only way to safety is, through fields of blood, I know you will not turn
your faces from your foes; but will undauntedly press forward, until tyranny is
trodden under foot, and you have fixed your adored goddess LIBERTY, fast by a
BRUNSWICK's side, on the American Throne.

YOU then, who nobly have espoused your Country's cause, who generously have
sacrificed wealth and case -- who have despised the pomp and show of tinsel'd
greatness -- refused the summons to the festive board, been deaf to the
alluring calls of luxury and mirth, who have forsaken the downy pillow, to keep
your vigils by the midnight lamp, for the salvation of your invaded country,
that you might break the fowler's snare, and disappoint the vulture of his
prey, you then will reap that harvest of renown which you so justly have
deserved. Your country shall pay her grateful tribute of applause. Even the
children of your most inveterate enemies, ashamed to tell from whom they
sprang, while they in secret curse their stupid, cruel parents, shall join the
general voice of gratitude to those who broke the setters which their father's
forged.

HAVING redeemed your Country, and secured the blessing to future generations,
who fired by your example, shall emulate your virtues, and learn from you the
heavenly art of making millions happy; -- with heartfelt joy, with transports
all your own, YOU CRY, the GLORIOUS WORK IS DONE. Then drop the mantle to some
young ELISHA, and take your seats with kindred spirits in your native skies.

FINIS.

