As the great business of the polite world is the eager pursuit of amusement,
and as the Public diversions of the season have been interrupted by the hostile
parade in the capital; the exhibition of a new farce may not be unentertaining.

THE GROUP, As lately acted, and to be re-acted to the wonder of all superior
intelligences, nigh headquarters at Amboyne.

The author has thought proper to borrow the following spirited lines from a
late celebrated poet, and offer to the public by way of PROLOGUE, which cannot
fail of pleasing at this crisis

What! armed for virtue, and not point the pen,
Brand the bold front of shameless guilty men,
Dash the proud Gamester from his gilded car.
Bare the mean heart which lurks beneath a star,
Shall I not strip the gilding off a knave,
Unplac'd, unpension'd, no man's heir or slave?
I will or perish in the generous cause;
Hear this and tremble, ye who 'scape the laws.
Yes, while I live, no rich or noble knave,
Shall walk the world in credit to his grave;
To virtue only, and her friends, a friend,
The world beside may murmur, or commend.
BOSTON Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL in Queen=Street. 1775.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Lord Chief Justice HALZEROD, Judge MEAGAE, Brigadier HATEALL, HUM HUMBUG, Esquire
Sir SPARROW SPENDALL, HECTOR MUSHROOM, -- Col. BEAU TRUMPS, DICK, the Publican,
SIMPLE SAPLING, Esquire Monsieur de FRANCOIS, CRUSTY CROWBAR, Esquire DUPE, --
Secretary of State, SCRIBLERIUS FRIBBLE, COMMODORE BATTEAU, COLLATERALIS, -- a
new made Judge.
Attended by a swarm of court sycophants, hungry harpies, and unprincipled
danglers, collected from the neighboring villages, hovering over the stage in
the shape of locusts, led by Massachusettensis in the form of a basilisk; the
rear brought up by proteus, bearing a torch in one hand, and a powder-flask in
the other: The whole supported by a mighty army and navy, from blunderland, for
the laudible purpose of enslaving its best friends.

THE GROUP.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Scene, a little dark parlour, guards standing at the door. HAZLEROD, CRUSTY
CROWBAR, SIMPLE-SAPLING, HATEALL, and HECTOR MUSHROOM. SIMPLE. I KNOW not what
to think of these sad times,
The people armed -- and all resolved to die
E're they will submit. --

CRUSTY CROWBAR. I too am almost sick of the parade
Of honors purchased at the price of peace.

SIMPLE. Fond as I am of greatness and her charms
Elate with prospects of my rising name,
Pushed into place, -- a place I never expected,
My bounding heart leapt in my feeble breast
And ecstasies entranced my slender brain. --
But yet, e're this I hoped more solid gains,
As my low purse demands a quick supply. --
Poor Sylvia weeps, -- and urges my return
To rural peace and humble happiness,
As my ambition beggars all her babes.

CRUSTY. When first I listed in the desperate cause,
And blindly swor obedience to his will,
So wise, so just, so good I thought Rapati^,
That if salvation rested on his word
I Would pin my faith and risk my hopes thereon.

HAZLEROD. And why not now? -- What staggers thy belief?

CRUSTY. Himself -- his perfidy appears --
It is too plain he has betrayed his country.
And we are the wretched tools by him marked out
To seal its ruins -- tear up the ancient forms,
And every vestige treacherously destroy,
Nor leave a trait of freedom in the land.
Nor did I think hard fate would call me up
From drudging over my acres, --
Treading the glade, and sweating at the plough,
To dangle at the tables of the great;
At bowls and cards, to spend my frozen years;
To sell my friends, my country, and my conscience;
Profane the sacred sabbaths of my God;
Scorned by the very men who want my aid
To spread distress over this devoted people.

HAZLEROD. Pho -- what misgivings -- why these idle qualms
This shrinking backwards at the bugbear conscience?
In early life I heard the phantom named,
And the grave sages prate of moral sense
Presiding in the bosom of the just;
Or panting thongs about the guilty heart.
Bound by these shackles, long my laboring mind
Obscurely trod the lower walks of life,
In hopes by honesty my bread to gain;
But neither commerce, or my conjuring rods,
Nor yet mechanics, or new fangled drills,
Or all the Iron-mongers curious arts,
Gave me a competence of shining ore,
Or gratified my itching palm for more;
Till I dismissed the bold intruding guest,
And banished conscience from my wounded breast.

CRUSTY. Happy expedient! -- Could I gain the art,
Then balmy sleep might sooth my waking lids,
And rest once more refresh my weary soul. --

HAZLEROD. Resolved more rapidly to gain my point,
I mounted high in justice's sacred seat,
With flowing robes, and head equipped without,
A heart unfeeling and a stubborn soul,
As qualified as ever a Jefferies was;
Save in the knotty rudiments of law,
The smallest requisite for modern times,
When wisdom, law, and justice, are supplied
By swords, dragoons, and ministerial nods,
Sanctions most sacred in the pander's creed,
I sold my country for a splendid bribe.
Now let her sink -- and all the dire alarms
Of war, confusion, pestilence and blood,
And tenfold misery be her future doom --
Let civil discord lift her sword on high,
Nay sheathe its hilt even in my brother's blood;
It never shall move the purpose of my soul;
Though once I trembled at a thought so bold;
By Philalethes's arguments, convinced
We may live Demons, as we die like brutes,
I give my tears, and conscience to the winds,

HATEALL. Curse on their coward fears, and dastard souls,
Their soft compunctions and relenting qualms,
Compassion never shall seize my steadfast breast
Though blood and carnage spread through all the land;
Till streaming purple tinge the verdant turf,
Till every street shall float with human gore,
I Nero like, the capital in flames,
Could laugh to see her glossed sons expire,
Though much too rough my soul to touch the lyre.

SIMPLE. I fear the brave, the injured multitude;
Repeated wrongs, arouse them to resent,
And every patriot like old Brutus stands,
The shining steal half drawn -- its glittering point
Scarce hid beneath the scabbard's friendly cell
Resolved to die, or see their country free.

HATEALL. Then let them die -- The dogs we will keep down --
While N -- 's my friend, and G -- approves the deed,
Though hell and all its hell bounds should unite,
I Will not recede to save from swift perdition
My wise, my country, family or friends.
G -- 's mandamus I more highly prize
Than all the mandates of the etherial king.

HECTOR MUSHROOM. Will our abettors in the distant towns
Support us long against the common cause,
When they shall see from Hampshire's northern bounds
Through the wide western plains to southern shores
The whole united continent in arms? --

HATEALL. The shall -- as sure as oaths or bonds can bind;
I Have boldly sent my newborn brat abroad,
The association of my morbid brain,
To which each minion must affix his name.
As all our hope depends on brutal force
On quick destruction, misery and death;
Soon may we see dark ruin stalk around,
With murder, rapine, and inflicted pains,
Estates confiscate, slavery and despair,
Wrecks, halters, axes, gibbeting and chains,
All the dread ills that wait on civil war; --
How I could glut my vengeful eyes to see
The weeping maid thrown helpless on the world,
Her fire cut off. -- Her orphan brothers stand
While the big tear rools down the manly cheek.
(...) of maternal care by grief's keen shaft,
The sorrowing mother mourns her starving babes.
Her murdered lord torn guiltless from her side,
And flees for shelter to the pitying grave
To skreen at once from slavery and pain.

HAZLEROD. But more complete I view this scene of woe,
By the incursions of a savage foe,
Of which I warned them, if they dare refuse
The budge of slaves, and bold resistance use.
Now let them suffer -- I Will no pity feel.

HATEALL. Nor I -- But had I power, as I have the Will
I Would send them murmuring to the shades of hell.

ACT. II.
The scene changes to a large dining room. The table furnished with bowls,
bottles, glasses, and cards -- The group appear sitting round in a restless
attitude. In one corner of the room is discovered a small cabinet of books, for
the use of the studious and contemplative; containing Hobbs's Leviathan,
Sipthrop's Sermons, Hutchinson's History, Fable of the Bees, Philalethes on
Philanthrop, with an appendix by Massachusettensis, Hoyle on Whist, Lives of
the Stewarts, Statutes of Henry the eighth, and William the Conqueror,
Wedderburn's speeches, and Acts of Parliament, for 1774. SCENE. I.
Hateall, Hazlerod, Monsieur, Beau Trumps, Simple, Humbug, Sir Sparrow. and c.
and c. SCRIBLERIUS. THY toast Monsieur, Pray, why that solemn phiz? --
Art thou too balancing 'twixt right and wrong?
Have thou a thought so mean as to give up
Thy present good, for promise in reversion
It Is true hereafter has some feeble terrors,
But ever our grizley heads are wrapped in clay
We may compound, and make our peace with Heaven.

MONSIEUR. Could I give up the dread of retribution,
The awful reckoning of some future day,
Like surly Hateall I might curse mankind,
And dare the threat'ned vengeance of the skies.
Or like yon apostate. -- [Pointing to Hazlerod, retired to a corner to read
Massachusettensis.] Feel but slight remorse
To sell my country for a grasp of Gold,
But the impressions of my early youth,
Infix'd by precepts of my pious fire,
Are stings and scorpions in my goaded breast;
Often have I hung upon my parents knee
And heard him tell of his escape from France;
He left the land of slaves, and wooden shoes;
From place to place he sought a safe retreat,
Till fair Bostonia stretched her friendly arm
And gave the refugee both bread and peace,
(shall I ungrateful raze the sacred bonds,
And help to clank the tyrant's iron chains
Over these blessed shores -- once the sure assylum
From all the ills of arbitrary sway)
With his expiring breath he bade his sons
If ever oppression reached the western world
Resist its force, and break the servile yoke.

SCRIBLERIUS. Well quit thy post; -- Go make thy flattering court
To Freedom's Son's and tell thy baby fears;
Show the soft traces in thy puny heart,
Made by the trembling tongue and quivering lip
Of an old grandsire's superstitious whims.

MONSIEUR. No, -- I never can --
So great the itch I feel for titl'd place
Some honorary post, some small distinction,
To save my name from dark oblivions jaws,
I Will Hazard all, but never give up my place,
For that I Will see Rome's ancient rites restored,
And flame and faggot blaze in every street.

BEAU-TRUMPS. -- That Is right Monsieur,
There Is naught on earth that has such tempting charms
As rank and show, and pomp, and glittering dress,
Save the dear counters at beloved quadrill,
Viner unsoil'd, and Littleton may sleep,
And Coke lie mouldering on the dusty shelf,
If I by shuffling draw some lucky card
That wins the livers, or lucrative place.

HUM-HUMBUG. When sly Rapatio showed his friends the scrall,
I wondered much to see thy patriot name
Among the list of rebels to the state,
I thought thee one of Rusticus's sworn friends.

BEAU-TRUMPS. When first I entered on the public stage
My country groaned beneath base Brundo's hand,
Virtue looked fair and beckoned to her lure,
Through truth's bright mirror I beheld her charms
And wished to tread the patriotic path.
And wear the Laurels that adorn his fame;
I walked a while and tasted solid peace
With Cassius, Rusticus and good Hortensius,
And many more, whose names will be revered
When you and I, and all the venal herd
Weighed in Nemosis just impartial scale,
Are marked with infamy till time blot out
And in oblivion sink our hated names.
But 'twas a poor unprofitable path
Naught to be gained, save solid peace of mind,
No pensions, place or title there I found;
I saw Rapatio's arts had struck so deep
And given his country such a fatal wound
None but its foes promotion could expect;
I trimmed, and pimp'd, and veer'd, and wavering stood
But half resolved to show myself a knave,
Till the Arch Traitor prowling round for aid
Saw my suspense and bid me doubt no more; --
He gently bowed, and smiling took my hand,
And whispering softly in my listening ear,
Showed me my name among his chosen band,
And laughed at virtue dignified by fools,
Cleared all my doubts, and bid me persevere
In spite of the restraints, or hourly checks
Of wounded friendship, and a goaded mind,
Or all the sacred ties of truth and honor.

COLLATERALIS. Come amongst ourselves we'll even speak out the truth.
Can you suppose there yet is such a dupe
As still believes that wretch an honest man?
The latter strokes of his serpentine brain
Outvie the arts of Machiavel himself;
His Borgian model here is realiz'd,
And the stale tricks of politicians played
Beneath a vizard fair --
-- Drawn from the Heavenly form
Of blessed religion weeping over the land
For virtue fallen, and for (...) lost.

BEAU-TRUMPS. I think with you. --
-- unparallelled his effront'ry,
When by chican'ry and specious art,
Midst the distress in which he would brought the city,
He found a few, (by artifice and cunning,
By much industry of his wily friend
The false Philanthrop -- sly undermining tool,
Who with the Syren's voice --
Deals daily round the poison of his tongue,)
To speak him fair -- and overlook his guilt.
They by reiterated promise made
To stand their friend at Britain's mighty court,
And vindicate his native injured land,
Lent him their names to sanctify his deeds.
But mark the traitor -- his high crime gloss'd over
Conceals the tender feelings of the man,
The social ties that bind the human heart;
He strikes a bargain with his country's foes,
And joins to wrap America in flames.
Yet with seign'd pity, and Satanic grin,
As if more deep to fix the keen insult,
Or make his life a farce still more complete,
He sends a groan across the broad Atlantic,
And with a phiz of Crocodilian stamp,
Can weep, and wreathe, still hoping to deceive,
He cries the gathering clouds hang thick about her,
But laughs within -- then sobs --
-- Alas! my country!

HUM-HUMBUG. Why so severe, or why exclaim at all,
Against the man who made thee what thou art?

BEAU-TRUMPS. I know his guilt, -- I ever knew the man,
Thy father knew him e're we trod the stage;
I only speak to such as know him well;
Abroad I tell the World he is a saint.
But as for interest, I betrayed my own
With the same views, I ranked among his friends;
But my ambition sighs for something more.
What merits has fir Sparrow of his own,
And yet a feather graces the Fool's cap:
Which did he wear for what himself achieved,
'T would stamp some honor on his latest heir --
But I Will suspen'd my murmuring rays awhile;
Come the other glass -- and try our luck at loo,
And if before the dawn your gold I win,
Or ever bright Phoebus does his course begin,
The eastern breeze from Britain's hostile shore
Should waft her lofty floating towers over,
Whose waving pendants sweep the watery main,
Dip their proud beaks and dance toward the plain,
The destined plains of slaughter and distress,
Laden with troops from Hanover and Hess,
I would invigorate my sinking soul,
For then the continent we might control;
Not all the millions that she vainly boasts
Can cope with Veteran Barbarian hosts; --
But the brave sons of Albion's warlike race,
Their arms, and honors, never can disgrace,
Or draw their swords in such a hated cause
In blood to seal a N -- 's oppressive (...),
They Will spurn the service; -- Briton's must (...),
And show themselves the natives of an isle
Who fought for freedom, in the worst of times
Produced her Hampden's, Fairfaxe's and Pym's.
But if by carnage we should win the game,
Perhaps by my abilities and same,
I might attain a splendid glittering car,
And mount aloft, and sail in liquid air,
Like Phaeton, I Would then outstrip the wind,
And leave my low competitors behind.

ACT II. SCENE II.
COLLATERALIS -- DICK the PUBLICAN.
PUBLICAN. THIS dull inaction will no longer do;
Month after Month the idle troops have lain,
Nor struck one stroke that leads us to our wish.
The trifling beckerings at the city gates,
Or bold outrages of their midnight routs,
Bring us no nearer to the point in view.
Though much the daily sufferings of the people,
Commerce destroyed, and government unhinged,
No talk of tame submission yet I hear.

COLLATERALIS. No -- not the least --
-- they are more resolved than ever.
They Are firm, united, bold, undaunted, brave,
And every villa boasts their marshalled ranks.
The warlike Clarion sounds through every street;
Both vigorous youth, and the gray headed fire
Bear the Fusee, in regimental garbs,
Repairing to defend invaded right,
And if pushed hard, by manly force repel;
And though Britannia sends her legions over,
To plant her daggers in her children's breast,
It will rebound -- New whetted, the keen point,
Will find a sheath in every tyrant's heart.

PUBLICAN. -- What then is to be done?
My finances too low to stand it long.
You well remember --
When station'd there to gripe the honest trader,
How much I plundered from your native town.
Under the sanctions of the laws of trade,
(...) hard earnings of industry
Filch'd from their hands, and built my nest on high.
And on the spoils I rioted a while,
But soon the unrighteous pelf slipped through my hand.
Nor longer idly could I waste my time,
A numerous flock was rising round my Board,
Who urged to something that might give them bread.
My only game was hither to repair,
And court the proud oppressors of my Country,
By the parade of pompous luxury,
To win their favor, and obtain a place;
That (with my limbeck) might have kept me on,
But for the cursed, persevering spirit
Of Freedom's sons -- who triumph over distress,
Nor will comply with requisitions, made
By haughty mandates from corrupted courts,
To pay the workmen for the chains, they would Forged.

COLLATERALIS. No -- though proud Britain wafts her wooden walls
Over the broad waves -- and plants them round these Coasts,
Shuts up their Ports, and robs them of their bread,
They Are not dismayed -- nor servilely comply
To pay the hunters of the Nabob shores
Their high demand for India's poisonous weed,
Long since a sacrifice to Thetis made,
A rich regale -- Now all the watery dames
May snuff Souchong, and sip in flowing bowls,
The higher flavour'd choice Hysonian stream,
And leave their Nectar to old Homer's Gods.

PUBLICAN. The Group this morn were summoned to the camp;
The council early meets at Sylla's tent,
But for what purpose yet I cannot learn.

COLLATERALIS. Then let us haste, it is novel to be called,
By Sylla's order, summoned to attend,
So close he keeps his counsels in his breast,
Nor trustsus with the manoeuvers of state,
I fear he half despises us himself.
And if he does, we cannot wonder much,
We Are made the jest of every idle boy:
Most of us hunted from our rural seats,
Drove from our homes, a prey to guilty fears,
When -- When dare we return!
And now shut up in this devoted City,
Amidst the pestilence on either hand,
Pursued by every dreadful Execration
That the bold Tongue of innocence oppressed,
Pours forth in anguish for a ruined state.

SCENE III.
The fragments of the broken Council appear with trembling servile Gestures,
showing several applications to the General from the Under-Tools in the distant
Counties, begging each a guard of myrmidons to protect them from the armed
multitudes (which the guilty horrors of their wounded consciences hourly
presented to their frighted imaginations) approaching to take speedy vengeance
on the Court Parasites, who had fled for refuge to the Camp, by immediate
destruction to their Pimps, Panders and Sycophants left behind. -- SYLLA
walking in great Perplexity. SYLLA. PRAY, how will it comport with my pretense
For building walls, and shutting up the Town,
Erecting fortresses, and strong redoubts,
To keep my troops from any bold inroads?
A brave insulted people might attempt,
If I send out my little scattered parties,
And the long suffering, generous patriot's Care
Prevents a Skirmish.
Though they are the sport of wanton cruel power,
And Hydra headed ills start up around,
Till the last hope of a redress cut off
Their humane feeling, Urge them to forbear,
And wait some milder means to bring relief.

HATEALL. It Is now the time to try their daring tempers.
Send out a few -- and if they are cut off,
What are a thousand souls, sent swiftly down
To Pluto's gloomy shades, -- to tell in anguish
Half their compeers shall sit pandimonic,
E're we will suffer Liberty to reign,
Or see her sons triumphant win the day.
I feign would push them to the last extreme,
To draw their swords against their legal King,
Then short's the process to complete destruction.

SECRETARY DUPE. Be not so sanguine -- the day is not our own,
And much I fear it never will be won.
Their discipline is equal to our own,
Their valor has been tried, -- and in a field
They Are not less brave than are a Fred'ricks troops,
Those members formidable pour along,
While virtue's banners shroud each warrior's head
Stern Justice binds the helmet on his brow,
And liberty sits perched on every shield.
But who is applied, and asked the General's aid,
Or wished his peaceful Villa such a curse,
As posting Troops beside the peasant's cot?

JUDGE MEAGRE. None but the very dregs of all mankind,
The Stains of nature, -- The blots of human race,
Yet that is no matter, still they are our friends,
'Twill help our projects if we give them aid.

SIMPLE SAPPLING. Though my paternal Acres are eat up,
My patrimony spent, I Have yet an house
My lenient creditors let me improve,
Send up the Troops, 'twill serve them well for Barracks.
I some how think 'twould bear a noble sound,
To have my mansion guarded by the King.

SYLLA. Have thou no sons or blooming daughters there,
To call up all the feelings of a Father,
Least their young minds contaminate by vice,
Caught from such inmates, dangerous and vile,
Devoid of virtue, rectitude, or honor
Save what accords with military fame?
Have thou no wise who asks thy tender care,
To guard her from Belona's hardy sons?
Who when not toiling in the hostile field,
Are faithful vot'ries to the Cyprian Queen,
Or is her soul of such materials made,
Indelicate, and thoughtless of her fame:
So void of either sentiment or sense,
As makes her a companion fit for thee!

SIMPLE SAPPLING. Silvia's good natured, and no doubt will yield,
And take the brawny vet'rans to her board,
When she is assured 'twill help her husband's fame,
If she complains or murmurs at the plan,
Let her solicit charity abroad;
Let her go out and seek some pitying friend
To give her shelter from the wint'ry blast,
Disperse her children round the neighboring cots,
And then --

PUBLICAN. -- Then weep thy folly, and her own hard fate!
I pity Silvia, I knew the beauteous maid
Ever she descended to become thy wife:
She silent mourns the weakness of her lord,
For she is too virtuous to approve thy deeds.

HATEALL. Pho -- what is a woman's tears,
Or all the whinings of that trifling sex?
I never felt one tender thought toward them.
When young, indeed, I wedded nut brown Kate,
(Blyth bosom Dowager, the jockey's prey)
But all I wished was to secure her dower.
I broke her spirits when I Would won her purse;
For which I Will give a recipe most sure
To every hen peck'd husband round the board;
If crabbed words or surly looks will not tame
The haughty strew, nor bend the stubborn mind,
Then the green Hick'ry, or the willow twig,
Will prove a curse for each rebellious dame
Who dare oppose her lord's superior will.

SYLLA. Enough of this, ten thousand harrowing cares
Tear up my peace, and swell my anxious breast.
I see some mighty victim must appease
An injured nation, tottering on the verge
Of wide destruction, made the wanton sport
Of hungry Harpies, gaping for their prey;
Which if by misadventures they should miss,
The disappointed vultures angry Fang,
Will sieze the lesser gudgeons of the state,
And sacrifice to mad Alecto's rage;
Lest the tide turning, with a rapid course
The booming torrent rushes over their heads,
And sweeps the "cawing cormorants from earth".

HATEALL. Then strike some sudden blow, and if hereafter
Dangers should rise -- then set up for thyself,
And make thy name as famous in Columbia,
As ever Caesar's was in ancient Gaul.
Who would such distant Provinces subdue,
And then resign them to a foreign lord!
With such an armament at thy command
Why all this cautious prudence?

SYLLA. I only wish to serve my Sovereign well,
And bring new glory to my master's crown,
Which cannot be done by spreading ruin round
This loyal country --
-- Wro't up to madness by oppression's hand.
How much deceived my royal master is
By those he trusts! -- but more of this anon.
Were it consistent with my former plan,
I Would gladly send my sickly troops abroad
Out from the stench of this infected town,
To breath some air more free from putrefaction;
To brace their nerves against approaching spring,
If my ill stars should destine a campaign,
And call me forth to fight in such a cause.
To quench the generous spark, the innate love
Of glorious freedom, planted in the breast
Of every man who boasts a Briton's name,
Until some base born lust of foreign growth
Contaminate his soul, till false ambition,
Or the fordid hope of swelling coffers,
Poison the mind, and brutalize the man.

COLLATERALIS. I almost wish I never had engaged
To rob my country of her native rights,
Nor strove to mount on justice solemn bench,
By mean submission cringing for a place.
How great the pain, and yet how small the purchase!
Had I been dumb, or my right hand cut off,
Ever I so servilely had held it up,
Or given my voice abjectly to rescind
The wisest step that mortal man could take
To curb the tallons of tyrannic power,
Out stretched rapacious ready to devour
The fair possessions, by our Maker given
Confirmed by compacts -- ratified by Heaven.

SYLLA. Look over the annals of our virtuous fires,
And search the story of Britannia's deeds,
From Caesar's ravages to Hambden's fall;
From the good Hambden down to glorious Wolf,
Whose soul took wing on Abraham's fatal plain,
Where the young Hero fought Britannia's foes,
And vanquished Bourbons dark ferocious hosts,
Till the slaves trembled at a George's name.
'Twas love of freedom drew a Marlborough's sword;
This glorious passion moved a Sydney's pen;
And crowned with Bays a Harrington and Lock;
It Is freedom wreathes the Garlands over their tombs.
For her how often have bleeding Heroes fallen!
With the warm fluid, gushing from their wounds,
Conveyed the purchase to their distant heirs!
And shall I rashly draw my guilty sword,
And dip its hungry hilt in the rich blood
Of the best subjects that a Brunswick boasts,
And for no cause, but that they nobly scorn
To wear the fetters of his venal slaves!
But swift time rolls, and on his rapid wheel
Bears the winged hours, and the circling years.
The cloud cap'd morn, the dark short wintry day,
And the keen blasts of roughned Borea's breath,
Will soon evanish, and approaching spring
Opes with the fate of empires on her wing.
Exit Sylla, Hazlerod rises in great agitation. This ballancing of passions
never will do,
And by the scale which virtue holds to reason,
Weighing the business ever he executes,
Doubting, deliberating, half resolved
To be the savior of a virtuous state,
Instead of guarding refugees and knaves,
The buzzing reptiles that crawl round his court,
And lick his hand for some delicious crumb,
Or painted plume to grace the guilty brow,
Stained with ten thousand falsities, trumped up
To injure every good and virtuous name
Who will not strike hands and be his country's foe:
I Will hasten after, and stir up his soul,
To dire revenge and bloody resolutions,
Or the whole fabric falls, on which we hang,
And down the pit of infamy we plunge,
Without the spoils we long have hoped to reap.

He crosses the stage hastily and goes out after Sylla. Meagre and Secretary
Dupe at the further part of the stage. MEAGRE. As Sylla passed I marked his
anxious brow;
I fear his soul is with compassion moved
For suffering virtue, wounded and betrayed;
For freedom hunted down in this fair field,
The only soil, in these degenerate days,
In which the heavenly goddess can exist.

SECRETARY. Humanity recoils -- his heart relucts
To execute the black the accursed design.
Such I must call it, though thy guilty friends,
Thy subtle brother, laid the artful plan,
"And like the toad squat at the ear of Eve"
Infusing poisons by his snaky tongue,
Pushed Brundo on to tread the thorny path,
And plunge his country in ten thousand woes;
Then flyly justling him behind the scenes,
Stepped in his place for which he long had sighed.

MEAGRE. Yes all allow he played a master game,
And dealt his cards with such peculiar skill,
That every dangler about the court,
As you and I and all might well suppose,
Thought the chains fixed which Brundo only clank'd,
But yet unless some speedy method's found
To break the union, and dissolve the bonds
That bind this mighty continent so firm,
Their Congresses, their Covenants, and leagues,
With their Committees, working in each town
With unremitting vigilance and care,
To baffle every evil machination
Of all state rooks, who peck about the land,
If not broke up, will ruin all at last.
Amidst the many scriblers of the age,
Can none be found to set their schemes afloat,
To sow dissension -- and distrust abroad,
Sap that cement that bears down all before it,
And makes America a match for all
The hostile powers that proud Europa boasts?

SECRETARY. Not all the swarms of prostituted pens,
Nor hireling smatterers scribbling for gain,
From the first pension'd on the nothern lift
To bigot Priests -- who write from southern shores,
With all their phantoms, bugbears, threats or smiles,
Will ever persuade them to renounce their claim
To freedom, purchased with their fathers blood.
How various are the arts already tried,
What pains unwearied to write men to sleep,
Or rock them in the cradle of despair,
To doze supinely, 'till they should believe
They Would neither eyes, nor tongues, or strength to move
But at the nod of some despotic lord!
What shifts, evasions, what delusive tales,
What poor prevarication for rash oaths,
What nightly watchings, and what daily cares
To dress up falsehood in some fair disguise,
Or wrap the bantling of their midnight dreams
In the soft vest of friendship, to betray,
Then send it forth in every fairy form,
To stalk at noon tide, giddy with fond hope
That some new gambols might deceive again
Men broad awake, who see through all the cheat.

MEAGRE. There still is hope -- why need we yet despair?
The doughty champion of our sinking cause,
The deep "arcana" of whose winding brain
Is fraught with dark expedients to betray,
By the long labors of his vet'ran quill,
By scattering scraps from every musty code
Of canon, civil, or draconian laws,
Quoting old statutes or defining new,
Treasons, misprissions, riots, routs, cabals,
And insurrections of these stubborn times,
He Will sure prevail and terrify at last,
By bringing precedents from those blessed days
When royal Stewarts, Britain's scepter swayed,
And taught her sons the right divine of Kings.
When pains and forfeitures an hundred sold
Were dealt to traitors, puny when compared
To the bold rebels of this continent,
From Merrimack to Messisipi's -- Banks
Who dare resist a ministerial frown.
In spite of all the truths Nov. anglus tells,
And his cool reasoning argumentive style,
Or master strokes of his unrivaled pen,
They will divide, and wavering will submit
And take the word of Massachusettensis
That men were born all ready bitted, curbed,
And on their backs the saddles prominent,
For every upstart sycophant to mount.

SECRETARY. Not Massachusettensis oily tongue,
Or retail'd nonsense of a Philarene
Not Senex rant, nor yet dull Grotius' pen,
Or the whole Group of selfish venal men,
If gathered from cold Zembla's frozen shore,
To the warm zone where rapid rivers roar,
Can either coax them, or the least control
The val'rous purpose of their roman souls.

MEAGRE. Let not thy soft temidity of heart
Urge thee to terms, till the last stake is thrown.
It Is not my temper ever to forgive,
When once resentment's kindled in my breast.
I hated Brutus for his noble stand
Against the oppressors of his injured country.
I hate the leaders of these restless factions,
For all their generous efforts to be free.
I curse the senate which defeats our bribes,
Who Hazlerod impeached for the same crime.
I hate the people, who, no longer gulled,
See through the schemes of our aspiring clan.
And from the rancour of my venomed mind,
I look askance on all the human race,
And if they are not to be appalled by fear,
I wish the earth might drink that vital stream
That warms the heart, and feeds the manly glow,
The love inherent, planted in the breast,
To equal liberty, conferred on man,
By him who formed the peasant and the King!
Could we erase these notions from their minds,
Then (paramount to these ideal whims,
Utopian dreams, of patriotic virtue,
Which long has danced in their distempered brains)
We'd smoothly glide on midst a race of slaves,
Nor heave one sigh though all the human race
Were plunged in darkness, slavery and vice.
If we could keep our foot-hold in the stirrup,
And, like the noble Claudia of old,
Ride over the people, if they don't give way;
Or wish their fates were all involved in one;
For iv'e a Brother, as the roman dame,
Who would strike off the rebel neck at once.

SECRETARY. No all is over unless the sword decides,
Which cuts down Kings, and kingdoms often divides.
By that appeal I think we cannot prevail,
Their valor's great, and justice holds the scale.
They fight for freedom, while we stab the breast
Of every man, who is her friend professed.
They fight in virtue's ever sacred cause,
While we tread on divine and human laws.
Glory and victory, and lasting fame,
Will crown their arms and bless each Hero's name!

MEAGRE. Away with all thy foolish, trifling cares,
And to the winds give all thy empty fears;
Let us repair and urge brave Sylla on,
I long to see the sweet revenge begun.
As fortune is a fickle, sportive dame,
She may for us the victory proclaim,
And with success our busy ploddings crown,
Though injured justice stern and solemn frown.
Then they shall smart for every bold offense,
Estates confiscated will pay the expense;
On their lost fortunes we a while will plume
And strive to think there is no after doom.
Ex. Om -- s As they pass off the stage the curtain draws up, and discovers to
the audience a Lady nearly connected with one of the principal actors in the
group, reclined in an adjoining alcove, who in mournful accents accosts them --
thus -- What painful scenes are hovering over the morn,
When spring again invigorates the lawn!
Instead of the gay landscape's beauteous dies,
Must the stained field salute our weeping eyes,
Must the green turf, and all the mournful glades,
Drenched in the stream, absorb their dewy heads,
Whilst the tall oak, and quivering willow bends
To make a covert for their country's friends,
Denied a grave! -- amid the hurrying scene
Of routed armies scouring over the plain.
Till British troops shall to Columbia yield,
And freedom's sons are Masters of the field;
Then over the purpl'd plain the victors tread
Among the slain to seek each patriot dead,
(While Freedom weeps that merit could not save But conquering Hero's must
enrich the Grave) An adamantine monument they rear
With this inscription -- Virtue's sons lie here!

FINIS.
Errata. P. 15. I. 26. for bosom r. buxsom. I. 32. for strew r. shrew


