THE BATTLE OF BROOKLYN, A FARCE OF TWO ACTS: AS IT WAS PERFORMED ON
LONG ISLAND, On TUESDAY the 27th Day of AUGUST, 1776.

By the REPRESENTATIVES of the TYRANTS of AMERICA, ASSEMBLED AT PHILADELPHIA.

For as a Flea, that goes to bed,
Lies with his tail above his head:
So in this mongrel State of ours,
The rabble are the supreme powers;
Who Have horsed us on their backs, to show us
A jadish trick, at last, and throw us.
HUDIBRAS. NEW YORK: PRINTED for J. RIVINGTON, in the Year of the REBELLION.
1776.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Rebel Chiefs.
WASHINGTON, PUTNAM, SULLIVAN, STIRLING,
Colonels.
LASHER, a Shoemaker of New York, CLARK, a Retailer of Rum in Connecticut,
REMSEN, a Farmer of Newtown, Long Island,
IBENEZER SNUFFLE, a New England Parson, Chaplain to General Putnam. JOE KING,
Servant to Stirling. NOAH, Servant to Sullivan. SKINNER, a Thief, employed by
Putnam.
WOMEN.
LADY GATES. BETTY, her Servant.
Officers and Soldiers.
SCENE, partly within the Rebel Lines at Brooklyn; and partly at Gwana^.

THE BATTLE of BROOKLYN.
ACT I. SCENE I. An Apartment at Brooklyn.
Enter STIRLING as from his bed-room, rubbing his head. STIRLING. JOE! honest
Joe! -- Damn the Fellow, where can this King be; (looking at his watch) odso,
almost twelve o'clock.


Enter KING. KING. Why here, my Lord -- Devil damme Sir pray who do you damn so?


STIR. My dear Joe, the cares that distract, and split this poor head of mine
--


KING. Split! -- Yes, by heaven! you drank stinkabus enough last night, to
split the head of an Indian!


STIR. Insolence! -- in future know me for your master -- your lord! who has
the disposal of your life.


KING. I must hold a candle to this Devil. Aside. My Lord, I ask your pardon; I
meant no harm, but only as an old acquaintance. -- You know, my Lord, I am
given to joking, and you formerly encouraged me in it, when we were concerned
together in the paper manufactory.


STIR. Forgive me, honest Joe -- the public cares so hang upon me, that they
quite destroy my constitutional good humor. The Regulars are near to us, and
every moment we expect them over the hills.


KING. Your Lordship has so long, and so uniformly wished to meet them, that I
thought, the nearer the prospect, the better you would have been pleased. You
have no doubt, my Lord, of spitting, and roasting, and pickling these red coat
fellows.


STIR. We are to meet at the Church this day, to determine in council, what to
do with them. I am for surrounding -- surround! is the word with me: if they
were twenty times the number, I say surround them all! -- But these gripes,
Joe, and my canteens are empty: you must procure me something for them.


KING. O heavens, the gripes! -- Zounds! a puncheon of Jamaica to have the
gripes, ( aside.) I have some peach brandy, my Lord.


STIR. The best of all possible things: it so admirably fits a man for the
cabinet and the field. ( A knocking at the door.) What can that mean; run Joe,
and see who knocks.


KING. I go, Sir. ( As he goes observes Stirling's countenance.) Pale and
trembling, by that august body the Congress.


Aside and exit. STIR. These bloody fellows, I fear, are in motion. I hope to
God that damned rascal King will be shot; he has been my evil genius, ever
since I was concerned with him in counterfeiting paper currency. Enter KING.
Dear Joe, what is the matter?


KING. Nothing, but to desire you to meet the other Generals in council, two
hours hence, at the church.


STIR. O, is that all; I shall attend; in the mean time* go to the Commissary
of (...), and get my canteens filled; and by all means, my good Joe, be at home
when I return.


( Exit Stirling.) KING. Canteens filled -- and then thy whole soul will be in
thy canteens. That is, if he has credit enough with the Commissary, to get his
canteens filled with rum, he will belch it out of his stomach in the damn'dest
(...), that ever disqualified a man for the character or a gentleman: and yet,
parson M'Worther, bestows from his pulpit, that this most ignobleman, is a
chosen vessel, to execute the Lord's work. -- Ill-fated country! when will this
delusion end?


Exit. The Scene changes to a small House, in a Field: Cattle and Horses
grazing. Enter LASHER and CLARK. CLARK. Behold, Colonel, these flocks and
herds; with the sword of Gideon have I made them mine; and honestly collected
them, in the district allotted to me by our agreement.


LASHER. I rejoice with you in the acquisition. My harvest from the Wallaboch^
is like the miraculous draught: -- two hundred and seven head of horned beasts,
and thirty-seven horses, g^aze where my guards direct.


CLARK. Favor has not been so amply manifested unto me* for, from the farthest
verge of Gwanas, even from C^^^ar's house, till you come to Brewer's mills, one
hundred and nine horned, and twenty-eight beasts of burden, were all I could
collect: nor was there compassion in my soul, to spare one of the kine for
milk, to the offspring of a people, who believe that men cannot be saved by
faith alone, without works.


LASH. Impious and blasphemous tenet; destructive of Republicanism and
Intoleration. I doubt whether such people should be spared from the sword. --
But, brother Clark, to secure what we have thus obtained by a strong hand, and
mighty arm, was assigned to your care and prudence.


CLARK. That I am not unworthy of the trust, you are to know, that nine of our
sloops will, this day, be discharged from the continental service: tomorrow,
they will be ready at the ferry to receive the spoil. Every fifth beast, by
lot, is to be the wages of their safe delivery, at New Haven, in Connecticut,
the residence of the faithful. But, we being fellow laborers, if you approve
-- Tabitha, the wife of my bosom, shall be charged with the care of your cattle.


LASH. Be it as thou have said; at her hands I will require them; and as I had
allotted to myself a large brass Kettle, in a former division of the spoil,
with the Cattle let it be conveyed, as a testimony of the love I bear unto her.


CLARK. Whatever is in thy heart to do, that do and prosper. I hear that twelve
thousand are to keep the hills to day; spies proclaim some motion in the camp
of the Philistians.


LASH. What the end of these things will be, I know not; but as my soul lives,
I mean not to budge a jot beyond the summit of the hill; keeping in full view,
and practicable acquisition, the fort called GREEN.


CLARK. Know you not, the wise determination of the Congress on that head;
stimulated thereto, by the prudence of our Generals; who, I do believe,
received it by inspiration?


LASH. Ignorant have I been kept; but unfold the mighty tidings, for I already
perceive they are big with joy.


CLARK. Have you not observed, with what address. the southern militias are
drawn hither?


LASH. That they are here I know, but am yet to learn the secret cause, if any
secret cause there be.


CLARK. Know, then, that the Marylanders, Pennsylvanians, and the rifle
regiments, are mostly composed of Europeans; a great majority of which are
Irish and Germans.


LASH. These things I am no stranger to, but still lack information.


CLARK. Which way soever the battle tends, the burden and heat of it will be
theirs; for thus it is resolved, to spare the natives, and make no account of
the expenditure of the Europeans: feel you not the power of inspiration now?


LASH. Wonderful! truly wonderful workings of wisdom indeed!


CLARK. But for some twenty head of cattle, the gleanings of Gwanas, in the
orchard of one Bergen, I would not go so far: these once obtained, we will be
near each other.


Enter Remsen, without a hat; his hair on end; his coat torn, and every mark
of fear about him. LASH. Mercy! mercy! O Lord, where are they?


CLARK. O heaven! he is wounded, and out of his senses! Dear Colonel, can you
speak?


REM. Oh! Here Godt! what merciful escape I get this time. -- Shentlemen, have
you seen my regment?


CLARK. No, where did you leave it? -- Lord help us! how near is the enemy?


REM. O Godt! O Godt! O Godt! -- Comt the bloedt out of me in any place?


LASH. Blood, no; nor can I see any body coming after you: your hurt, I fancy,
is fear! Colonel; and your wound must be sought for in your breeches! but,
compose yourself, and tell us what has happened.


REM. Well, I will tell you, then. I was, yust now, van the head of my regment,
close up behind Shon van Dinen's field. I keep my eye op Arian Mortes's lane. I
see, yust by the groundt, something creep: I say my regment, take care of
yourself boys. I peep again mit both mine eyes, and see nothing: I say, boys,
it is close up with us now -- they begin for to run; my horse he see the danger
too, and carry me off: Godt knows I get here; I believe the rest is all killed,
or taken prisoners. Enter an Officer. Godt bless you ay^dant, where is the
regment?


OFF. Where! damn them, scattered in every cover between this and the place
where you started.


REM. Here Godt! all killed?


OFF. Killed! no, nor any of them hurt, except four or five that you rode over:
why, there was not a regular within a mile, when you took fright.


LASH. O you ungodly coward! out from the presence of the brave!


Kicks him off, and exit after him. OFF. That fellow kicks as awkward, as if he
soon expected the same discipline: but I will go and try, if possible, to
collect our heroes.


Exit Officer. CLARK. What credulous stuff, these New-Yorkers are made of. The
bill of lading for the cattle and horses will be in my name only: Poor Lasher!
not a hide of them shall thou have, to put a stitch in: -- and then there is
the Kettle, too! a! ha! ha!


Exit laughing. SCENE, a ROOM at Brooklyn Ferry.
Enter Lady GATES and BETTY. BETTY. After Council, Mem, General Washington will
wait of you; till then he begs your patience, as the time is near that he is to
meet the rest of the Generals.


LADY G. Council! a pretty collection of Councillors, indeed: but since it must
be so, you shall comply with your promise to me, girl, by giving me the
narrative of Harrison and your General: it will beguile the time.


BET. La, mem, you so discomfit me, by claiming this promise, that I am a blush
all over.


LADY G. Why, Betty, you must have assumed the blushing trade lately; it was
not always so with you.


BETTY. Indeed, your Ladyship does not make proper allowances for necessity and
inexperience. -- Fifty dollars, and hard ones too, with a promise of fifty
times as much, was irresistible: but Oh! the nasty beast! I almost puke at the
recollection.


LADY G. Oh! that must be affectation, for, bless me, what could raise such
ideas?


BETTY. Why, he is such a slobbering, odious, unfavoury smelling creature, that
I wonders any woman in the world could sleep a night by his side.


LADY G. And yet, you see, that fifty hard dollars, made you put up, for a
night, with all the inconveniency of bad smells.


BET. A night! your Ladyship wrongs me very much: why, he snored within an
hour! and the first snore was a signal for my retreat. I am sure, I should have
been a corpse, if I had been obliged to stay the night.


LADY G. Fifty dollars, is a good deal of money, Betty; but did he make no
claim upon you afterward?


BET. Indeed, mem, he stayed from Congress on purpose to teaze me: why he
cried, and said he was in liquor that night, and did every thing, I think, that
could make me despise him; but all would not do.


LADY G. And there your affairs ended with Harrison, did they not, Betty?


BET. Not quite, my Lady* for when he found I could not abide him, he proposed
to introduce General Washington to me. The General was a very pretty Gentleman,
and I consented to it, on purpose to get rid of Harrison.


LADY G. This I should have imagined a favorable change myself, Betty, was it
not?


BET. The General is the sweetest, meekest, melancholy, sighing Gentleman; and
then he is such a warrior -- O mem, I shall always love the General.


LADY G. And among his other qualifications, the most liberal.


BET. Why, my Lady, I will tell you honestly: his Excellency gave me a thirty
dollar bill; he assured me it would have been more, but that he was obliged to
repay Harrison the fifty hard dollars, that he had given me: now, mem, is not
Harrison a dirty fellow, in every shape that you can view him?


LADY G. No great things, girl, to be sure, from your account of him; neither
is your meek, melancholy hero, from my own observation.


BET. Lord! -- lord! -- mem, did he not make codfish of them all at Boston! and
has he not seen tory men rid upon rails at New York, by the tailors and cobblers
of the town! And more, my lady, did he not order the King's statue to be pulled
down, and the head cut off! for God's sake, mem, what would you have of a hero?


LADY G. Codfish at Boston! it is really an odd term, Betty, but he did no more
than that old fool Putnam would have done: his not forbidding that insult to
humanity, at New York, was countenancing an act of barbarism; and none, but a
little-minded barbarian, would have suffered the Arts to be trampled under
foot, as he did, in the case of the King's statue.


BET. You know of these things best, mem, to be sure: but I have heard the
New England officers say, that he should be their General no longer than he
pleased them, and, may be, they would have it so.


LADY G. Be you assured, girl, that if he had native dignity of heart, he would
have soon convinced the rabble, that they must be governed by him,
notwithstanding that he may have obtained his power by an usurpation from
themselves -- but hark! what clamourous noise is that in the street? run and
learn. Exit Betty. There appears to be some commotion, and it grows late; I
begin to despair of seeing the General.


Enter Betty. BET. O, my lady, do not let us wait to see the General. The
New England Colonels are in a mutiny; and say they will not sight, if the boats
are not all ready to carry their men off to New York, when they run away: let
us go, dear mem, for I do not think we shall be safe, on this side of the
Allegany mountains.


LADY G. I will take your advice, girl. O Horatio! that you should sully your
laurels in the abominable cause of republican Tyrants, and Smugglers in power:
-- to be a runnagate for such miscreants, almost distracts me.


Exeunt. The SCENE changes to Brooklyn Church. WASHINGTON, PUTNAM, SULLIVAN and
STIRLING in Council. WASH. Gentlemen, spies from Flat-Bush inform, that the
regulars are making a disposition to cross the hills, near that place. --
General Putnam's wisdom in ordering that road to be flanked with breast-works,
is now apparent. Lord Stirling, with his usual intrepidity and precision, has
reconnoitered their numbers, which he finds to be about seven thousand. General
Sullivan has appointed the hill with exquisite judgment; where the Brigades
under him and Lord Stirling, are to take post, and act as occasion may require:
twelve thousand men are allotted for the service of sending them back to their
ships. I, with eight thousand, will stay within these lines, to be called out
to the slaughter and pursuit; unless our present deliberations, alter this plan
of operation. My Lord, the Council expects your opinion.


STIR. I rise to give it, to the most respectable, and most puissant council of
general officers, that this or any other age ever produced. I would not
presume, Gentlemen, to speak in this place, without being conscious that I
possese the energy and oratory of a Burke! or even write on the subject, but
that I feel the powers, and the pen of a Junius! That I reconnoitered them is
most true; and if my weak opinion has any weight in council, I am for
surrounding them, and when we have got them hemmed in, I am then for sending to
our noble Commander in chief, in these lines, -- to know what to do with them.


SUL. Pompous, flimsey, drunken fool. ( Aside.) The noble Lord has said nothing
against the disposition that the General had pointed out, and of which I
approve. -- His Lordship's ideas are exceedingly surrounding; I wish the
practice may be as easy as the theory, and that their numbers may not exceed
seven thousand: -- but if the council holds the opinion of General Washington
and myself, our deliberations are at an end; and we cannot be too (...) at our
different posts.


PUT. I this morning gave the chaps another pill, and I will tell you how: you
know the road to Bedford, a little on this side the house that the bandy-legged
Jew lives in; well, do you (...), there is on each side the road, a stone wall,
near three feet high; beyond that, on each side, are clear fields -- what do
you think I have done there?


STIR. Why something like a great officer, no body doubts.


PUT. Swamp me, if I have not have up a breastwork, right across the road, from
wall to wall: -- but, before we break up, determine, Gentlemen, what I am to do
with my prisoners.


STIR. Right, General; I should have gone to my post, and been at a loss on
this head.


WASH. Send them to me: a great part of Fort Green is allotted for their
reception; but be sure that they are disarmed, and well guarded.


STIR. O, to-be-sure; undoubtedly, Sir, we will take care of that. I am for my
post: Gentlemen, farewell.


PUT. A little business dispatched, and I will call upon you there. Exit
Stirling. If your Excellency should have any commands for me an hour hence, I
may be found upon the Flat-bush roads your servant, Gentlemen.


Exit Putnam. WASH. Good betide them both. -- After this fustian, a little
sober reasoning, General Sullivan, may fit the mind for the doubtful events of
war. My apprehensions from the King's troops, believe me, are trifling,
compared with the risque we run, from the people of America at large. The
tyranny, that our accursed usurpation has made necessary, which they now feel,
and feeling, I fear, will soon make them see through the disguise. Their rage, no
doubt, will be heightened, by the slaughter that will probably ensue; and we,
as members of the Congress, fall the first victims of it. -- O Sullivan! my
heart never consented to this ruin of my native country!


SUL. My dear General, the moments for reflection are elapsed, and
irrecoverable, Our safety is first in conquest; if that is denied to our
endeavors, I am sure, we can obtain better terms, from our much injured
Sovereign, than from our more injured country: -- but wear a less rueful
countenance; it is a proverb among the troops, that their General is much
melted down, since the fleet arrived.


WASH. Our soldiers are a standing miracle to me: they define sensibly upon
matters that are unimportant to them, and resign their powers of thinking to
us, in a case where their all is at stake; and do not yet discover, that we
make them the engines of our power, at the expense of all that is dear and
sacred to them as men! -- but avaunt reflection! Our hope, my dear Sullivan, is
in you; every command of ground is ours, with a perfect knowledge of all the
woods and defiles: these advantages, at the least, double the strength of our
men; and if we cannot defend these, I know of no place we can.


SUL. All things that depend upon me, will, I hope, meet with your approbation;
and I shall aim to infuse such sentiments into the troops, that our next
meeting may be ushered in, with greetings of congratulation: till then, my dear
General, farewell.


Exit Sullivan. WASH. Greetings of congratulation! -- oh! could I congratulate
myself, on finding my lost peace of mind! -- on the restoration of my honor!
O! cursed ambition! what have I sacrificed to thee? An ambition, too, of
foreign growth; obtruded upon me by the most artful, insinuating villains, that
ever enslaved a, once, free and happy country. To behold myself, against my
principle and better judgment, made the tool of their diabolical
determinations, to entail a war upon my fellow subjects of America. -- Heigh!
ho! (looking at his watch.) Bless me, so late, and my engagements to a lady not
complied with.


Exit. SCENE, a ROOM, in a House at Brooklyn.
Enter PUTNAM and SNUFFLE. SNUFF. My dear General, the great, the important day
advances; big with the fate of empire, in the united States of America.


PUT. True, good Sir: and I laugh to think, that when we have established our
power, and driven these Red-coats into the sea, what ripping reformation you
Gentlemen will make in church affairs. Down goes Episcopacy and Quakerism, at
least: I hope you will not leave one broad-brim on the continent.


SNUFF. Why really, General, we shall be very apt to make free with those
Gentlemen. We have long beheld, with a jealous eye, the growing power of the
Episcopal Clergy; and considered them as the only obstacle to our becoming the
heads of the Church, in America; a dignity, that so properly belongs to the
Elect, and for which, they have had the assurance to contend with the Lord's
own people. As for the Quakers, who in general have joined the tories against
us, we shall not fail to produce "an ancient testimony" in their behalf: I mean
the testimony of our forefathers; till with fines, whipping, imprisonment, and
the gallows, we have extirpated them from the face of the earth.


PUT. In the mean time, we shall not be behind-hand with the Tories: for, as
the best estates in America belong to them, it is but cooking up some
newfangled oath, which their squeamish consciences will not let them swallow;
then, whip go their estates, like a juggler's ninepence, and themselves to
prison, to be hanged as traitors to the commonwealth.


Enter SKINNER. SNUFF. Very true, my dear General: but here comes one of your
officers. I will retire, to offer up my prayers for the success of our arms;
while you pursue, the more important business of your department.


Exit. PUT. Adieu, Sir. Well, Skinner, what news with you?


SKIN. The horses are delivered, as your Excellency directed. They are, by this
time, well on their way to Connecticut; and so elegant a string of nine horses,
are not to be picked up again, on all Long Island.


PUT. My letter tells me they are clever horses: -- but that horse of Polhemus
-- O, my heart was set upon that horse: you let him slip through your fingers
carelessly, Skinner; or did the owner of him, tempt you with a bribe, to leave
him -- I wish to know where he is?


SKIN. I know where he is, to the length of my whip. -- I careless! I take a
bribe! -- why the General should know me better; the horse is at Haerlem.


PUT. At Haerlem! -- why what notion of deviltry could send him there! Is there
any body but us upon the lay, on this island?


SKIN. What Is his name brought him there -- damn his name, I cannot remember it:
he is son, however, to the Governor of Rhode Island.


PUT. O ho! then I quite excuse you; you are too young in the business, to be a
match for young filch: he inherits his father's talents. I had expectation,
though, that we should have done better, with your knowledge of the country,
and other advantages. --. I had reckoned upon twenty horses.


SKIN. I myself, Sir, thought that number sure, but he lay in my rear, and
brought off six that I had reconnoitered.


PUT. Well, Skinner, as the business is over for the present, and we expect
bloody noses in a few hours, there is a hundred dollars for your encouragement.
[Gives him a handful of Congress notes.] Go over, now, and join your regiment.


SKIN. I hope your Excellency will reconsider the matter, and make it more:
there is not one of the horses, but what is worth more than a hundred and fifty
soft dollars; -- consider, Sir!


PUT. Consider! -- why you are an unreasonable whelp! do you consider, that I
took you from serving drams to Negroes, for your mother Foster at Rockaway, and
robbing the neighboring henroosts for a livlihood! From petty larceny, you
cur, I put you at the head of the profession; procured you a lieutenant's
commission, and a separate command to hunt tories on this island, in order to
push you forward, -- and dare you grumble?


SIN. I do not grumble, Sir; but fifty dollars more, would enable to take the
field with credit: it would make my regimentals my own.


PUT. I seldom mistake my men: I knew that you had talents, Skinner, or I
should not have employed you: I will therefore point out a fund for you, to
raise the fifty dollars more. Remember, Sir, the fuzee you filched at Merrick;
item, the two watches, rings, etc. etc. at several other places; you gave me no
account of these, though I had an equitable demand upon you for half. There is
a fifty dollar fund for you, -- don't you think, young man, to catch old birds
with chaff. It is near night: I must to my post, and get you over the ferry to
your duty.


Exit Putnam. SKIN. What a damned old scoundrel he is: how the devil did he
know of the gun, and the other things? -- In future I will do business for
myself. Exit.


ACT II.
SCENE, a HILL at Gwanas, about two miles from Brooklyn lines, with an
encampment on it. Time, about three o'clock in the morning.
Enter a SOLDIER. SOL. Where Is General Stirling? -- hollo, General Stirling! --
Zounos! how dark it is.


Enter Stirling half dressed. STIR. For God's sake! what is the matter, sentry?


SOL. Here, Sir! it is I that call, to inform your Lordship, there has been a
great deal of shooting toward the Red Lion, within this little while.


STIR. Dear sentry, which way did it come from?


SOL. I can hardly tell, Sir; but it seemed tight work for a little while: --
there! there it begins again.


STIR. It does indeed: do you think it comes any thing nearer, sentry?


SOL. Rather nearer, if any thing; though much in the same place.


STIR. Run, sentry, to the rear; make my respects to General Sullivan, and beg
of him to come hither.


SOL. I will, my Lord. There it goes again: ripping work, my Lord!


Exit Soldier. STIR. Now will I endeavor to get buttoned up, and my garters
tied. Enter CLARK. O Colonel Clark! from whence -- from whence are you come?


CLARK. From where our out-sentries are attacked. -- I see you are getting
ready, my Lord.


STIR. But where are they attacked? Where is the enemy? Are there many of them
-- are they coming forward -- is any body killed -- say dear Will?


CLARK. I cannot tell you half of what you have already asked me; but I will
tell you all I know. They sent a Captain to relieve me; I would not be relieved
by a Captain, so I went to sleep at one Bergen's, from whence the out-sentries
were relieved. This Bergen awaked me awhile ago, and said there was shooting in
his field.


STIR. God bless me! shooting in his field! was it near the house?


CLARK. Very near -- so I stole out, for I knew the road, dark as it was. Every
thing was as still, as if nothing had happened; except some groans of dying
men, that appeared to be at a little distance. But I have seen nothing, nor
heard any thing by the way.


STIR. Then their numbers are still a secret?


CLARK. I will be bound there are not fifty of them, or there would have been
some noise.


STIR. O damn it! it is nothing but a scouting party. -- Come, Colonel, we will
take a whistle from my canteens.


CLARK. With all my heart, my Lord. -- Poison take the canteens; I have lost
the cattle, that were in Bergen's orchard. [Aside.] Enter five Soldiers. What
are these! who are you?


1st SOL. We are the remains of the out-post guard, your honors.


STIR. And where are the rest of the guard, my good lads?


1st SOL. In Sarah's bosom, I hope.


2d SOL. In Abraham's bosom, he means, noble General.


1st SOL. Blood-an-oons, is not she his wife? which makes it all one.


STIR. Leave off this trifling, and tell me what you know.


1st SOL. Your honor must know, that we was standing by the end of a side of
an Indian corn field, up yonder a-piece. We heard something rustle among the
water-mellon leaves, and saw something move; we bid them stand, and blazed away
like brave boys.


STIR. Well, my lad, and what followed?


1st SOL. Followed! by my soul, a sharp iron thing, that they call a bayonet.


STIR. And what then?


1st SOL. What then! your honor! why to be sure, the few that could run, run
away; and then all was peace and quietness.


STIR. Do you not know, how many there were?


1st SOL. How many! your honor must know, that they were speechless: they
carried their tongues in them damned bayonets, and most of our guard, I
believe, are eating breakfast with their great-grandfathers!


STIR. What corpse do you belong to?


1st SOL. Pennsylvanians, an please your honor.


STIR. Go, and join your regiment. Exit Soldiers. Colonel Clark, as it begins
to be light, go and get intelligence. I, every moment, expect General Sullivan:
one or other of us, you will find here, to make a report to.


CLARK. I shall not stay long, my Lord.


Exit Clark. STIR. I begin to feel easy: it has been but a scouting party; and
they have gone back again. It is a devilish raw morning, and I must* have
something to keep the cold out.


Exit SCENE, a HILL, with troops drawn up, under arms. Time, broad daylight.
Enter SULLIVAN and STIRLING. STIR. Well, do you not think, from the
examination of these fellows, that it was a mere scouting party, that surprised
the guard?


SUL. Their silence, my Lord, with me, marks order and good conduct: besides,
they do not make war by scouting parties -- but here comes Colonel Clark.


Enter CLARK. CLARK. Gentlemen, the regulars are in motion: they are numerous,
and will be here within an hour. From yonder hill, I looked down upon them.


STIR. Good Colonel, have they any artillery with them?


CLARK. I know not, my Lord; but I must away and join my men. O what a scrape,
those cattle have brought me into. I am afraid, I shall be obliged to fight at
last. Aside, and exit.


SUL. Well, my Lord, will you make a disposition for your favorite scheme of
surrounding?


STIR. For God's sake, dear General, don't mention it. I did not expect them
this way: our whole dependence is upon you, my dear General; but do not let
them cut off our retreat.


SUL. Let four brigades immediately take post in the bottom, and extend from
the small house below, as far as the stone house upon the left; and farther, if
the hill gives them cover: let them approach as near the road as possible,
without being discovered. The Pennsylvanians are to draw up, at the foot of
this hill, in full view of the enemy. From their uniform, they may be taken for
Hessians; and the fire from the brigades, be more completely surprising and
effectual.


STIR. It shall be done -- Oh! it shall be done.


Exit Stirling. SUL. If they should force these brigades to the hill, we can
easily maintain this post, against the united force of Britain, without loss:
and make the retreat to our lines, when we please, unmolested.


Re-enter Stirling. STIR. The Brigades are disposed, as your Excellency
directed; and the regulars are nearly up to them: you will see their advanced
guard pass the stone house, directly.


SUL. There they are, and have discovered the Pennsylvanians; for they have
quitted the road, and push toward them.


STIR. I hope to God, they will push back again, as soon as our fire begins. O!
there they go -- well fired my boys! they cannot stand this! you will see, they
will push directly, General.


SUL. I see they do push, but it is with their bayonets; and our men are
scampering toward us. Enter a Pennsylvanian, hastily. Stop soldier, you are
far enough.


PEN. I will be judge of that, my dear; for, by my soul, honey, you have
brought old Ireland about your ears, at last; and we can find the way to eat
now, without asking such vermin as you for victuals.


Exit. STIR. Dear General, what shall we do now?


SUL. Ply the artillery, as fast as possible.


Enter an Officer. OFF. Toward the south, an incessant firing has prevailed
for half an hour, nor has it ought approached: my post is that way advanced,
but I thought my duty bid me quit it, to give you this information.


SUL. You have my thanks. To your post again, and let me speedily be informed,
if the firing approaches. Exit Officer. While they are kept at bay, my Lord, we
are safe upon this hill.


STIR. But yet we should prepare for a retreat -- for see, where they fearless
climb up yonder hill.


SUL. There is nothing to obstruct us in our rear, my Lord: we will retreat in
good time.


Enter CLARK. CLARK. Lost! O Lord, undone! ruined! destroyed!


SUL. Amazement! what ails the man?


CLARK. In the rear -- there, in our rear -- no retreat! no retreat!


SUL. Too true -- there is part of the royal army, indeed, between us and our
lines.


STIR. O General Sullivan! General Sullivan! -- what do you think of it now?


SUL. This I now know, my Lord, that we heaven-born Generals, are exceedingly
apt to lead our troops to the devil.


STIR. But my dear General Sullivan, what shall we do?


SUL. Just what you please: every man is now his own general, so, Gentlemen,
farewell.


Exit. STIR. Do not leave me also, Colonel Clark. O Lord, incline their hearts
to mercy.


CLARK. Amen, and amen. I hope, however, that we are not of consequence enough
to be hanged. This way, my Lord, this way.


Exeunt. SCENE, FORT GREEN, in Brooklyn Lines: A Sentinel on one of the
Merlins, looking out.
Enter WASHINGTON. WASH. What do you look so earnestly at, Sentry?


CEN. At our people, Sir, that are setting fire to the houses and barns, in
their retreat.


WASH. What, are they retreating then?


CEN. Look this way, Sir; there they run, like so many deer, and will get in:
but the poor souls yonder, that come across the meadow, and attempt to cross
the mill creek; O! what a number of them stick in the mud, and the stronger
ones make a bridge of them.


WASH. All other retreat must be cut off: but I shall soon know the event, for
here comes Putnam galloping. Enter PUTNAM. What is the disaster? what news do
you bring me General Putnam.


PUT. This is no Boston work, Sir; they are in earnest! Orders must be
immediately issued for the Boats to be in readiness, to carry our people over
to New York.


WASH. There is time enough for that General Putnam, after we have defended
these works: the account of the Battle is what I wish to hear.


PUT. Defend Sir! we cannot defend these works; our people will not defend them:
if they do not see the boats; they will swim over, they will not be hemmed in to
be made mine'd of. If you don't give your orders I will give the orders myself.


WASH. If it must be so, the orders shall originate with me; and as soon as you
have satisfied me on the fate of the day, proper measures shall be taken.


PUT. Acursed fate, indeed, and most impious, for they took us fasting; and
then they deceived us -- a devilish deception too; for they did not come any
one way, that we had marked out for them.


WASH. Well, but you had the woods, and the hills, and every other advantage.
The rifle-men did great execution from behind the trees, surely!


PUT. Zounds! Sir, the regulars did all the execution! They know that rifle-men
are deer-killers! -- Rifle guns and rifle freeks, will be as cheap in their
camp tomorrow, as cods-heads in Newfoundland. -- But the orders, Sir; no time
is to be lost: they are at our heels.


WASH. Have patience, General. What is our loss? Where are the other Generals?


PUT. How can I tell, where they are, or what our loss really is; but I am sure
it is thousands. Good God, Sir, let us make haste, to save what is not lost.


WASH. This, General Putnam, is against my will; but I wait on you, to execute
yours.


Exeunt. SCENE, a ROOM, at Brooklyn Ferry.
Enter NOAH, solus; his clothes covered with creek mud. NOAH. Notwithstanding
your dirty condition, Mr. Noah, I congratulate you, on your safe arrival into
your old quarters; neither hol'd by musket balls, nor swelled up with
salt water and creek mud. Thanks to my activity, that I am not crab's meat with
the rest. Enter KING. Welcome, Joe; dripping from the creek, I see: but I am
glad to see you alive!


KING. Confirm it, that I really am alive, for I feel some doubts about it.


NO. Don't you know me then?


KING. As well as I know myself, Noah: but are we not both in the other world!


NO. Why, man, look about you; and you will find this to be the very room, that
we have inhabited, for some time past.


KING. My senses, good Noah, claim conviction: something, first, to cherish me,
and then I may be convinced, that I can, with propriety, talk upon sublunary
subjects.


NO. Behold, Joe, this pocket bottle; one half of it is contents, I prescribe to
your conviction and restoration.


KING. (Drinks.) Now I return your congratulations* and am heartily glad to
find you on this side of the grave -- but, Noah, what has become of our
Generals?


NO. Killed or taken prisoners; but I suppose the latter. -- My poor General, I
quite lament him.


KING. Mine is under the same predicament, but I have not a pity for him: --
nor should I love you very much, if I thought you serious in your lamentation.


NO. Consider; he and I were brought up together: we went together to sea,
before the mast; and since he commenced lawyer, he maintained a suit for me
against my mother, and got the cause.


KING. Confound the dog! But was he really a lawyer, and did he influence you,
to commence an action against your mother?


NO. He! -- why, that fellow, drank flip every night with the common people of
our town of Berwick, and had art enough, to influence them to all his ends.


KING. And some hundreds of the common people, has he influenced to their end,
this day. (...) but, for God's sake, Noah, how came a man of your
understanding, in the capacity of this fellow's servant?


NO. Without doubt, I might have started with a regiment, and probably, have
been, myself, a general by this time. But I saw through their topsy turvy
schemes; -- though I was obliged to float with the tide, I knew, the post of
honor, would be the most private station. But Sullivan will be a loss to his
family.


KING. So will not Stirling. He will be a loss to no body, but those that find
him. Had Sullivan any property?


NO. Most excellent property, for he made a property of weakness and ignorance,
and consequently had an extensive fund. -- But yours was a titled general, and
I suppose very full of property; as he has often declared, he was of principle.


KING. His principle, Noah, has for years past, been to withhold other people's
property from them; and when all the resources of art failed, his estate was
exposed to sale by virtue of an execution: But he resisted the Sheriff, and
declared himself a partizan of confusion, because law and order, would compel
him to acts of justice. -- But, do you recollect, that this is the fast day?


NO. Is it, really! then it is one of the baits, which the Continental Congress
threw out, for the people of America to bite at; and the event gives the lie to
the inflaming and prophetic oratory, this day resounded from the pulpits of
New England. A day, on which, heaven has discarded them, and disavowed their
cause, in a remarkable manner. O King, our preachers prevented this unhappy
dispute, from coming to a bloodless issue.


KING. It is a maxim with the Congress at Philadelphia, that by the mavelous,
the vulgar are to be robbed of their reason; but heaven has rejected the
sacrifice, that the people may open their eyes, and be no longer the dupes of
their tyranny, deception and bloodshed.


NO. From the first meeting of that Hydra at Philadelphia, it is sixty four
mouths, have all been open to devour two strangers!


KING. Devouring mouths, I know they are; but what strangers do you point at?


NO. Power! and Riches!


KING. True, very true -- strangers, indeed, to most of them: the first they
have amply usurped from the people, and have had art enough, to make use of
them as instruments, to confirm the usurpation.


NO. They are, indeed, such monopolizers of liberty, that they do not suffer
other people to follow their inclinations: but as we know, and consequently
detest, their machinations; let us avail ourselves of the character of
servants, and the confusion of retreat, to lie concealed, until they are clear
of the island.


KING. Agreed; and in order that we may claim the mercy, that our good old
master has extended to his erring servants, and return to that authority which
never oppressed a subject; let us renew our allegiance to the most amiable and
virtuous Prince, that ever swayed a scepter; and join our weak endeavors, in
supporting a constitution, that has been, at once, the envy and admiration of
the whole world.


NO. I honor your sentiments, because I, experimentally, know them to be just.
And O! almighty disposer of human events, open the eyes of my deluded
fellow subjects, in this, once, happy country: encourage them to a free
exercise of that reason, which is the portion of every individual, that each
may judge for himself: then peace and order, will smile triumphant, over the
rugged face of war and horror: the same hand that sows, shall reap the field;
and our vines and vinyards be our own.


Exeunt omnes. THE END.

