THE GROUP, A FARCE: As lately Acted, and to be Re-acted, to the Wonder of all
superior Intelligences; NIGH HEAD QUARTERS, AT AMBOYNE. IN TWO ACTS.

JAMAICA, PRINTED; PHILADELPHIA, REPRINTED; BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, junior, in
Front-street

M. DCC. LXXV.

The AUTHOR has thought proper to borrow the following spirited lines from a
late celebrated Poet, and offer to the public, by way of PROLOGUE, which cannot
fail of pleasing at this crisis.

PROLOGUE.
WHAT! armed for virtue, and not point the pen,
Brand the bold front of shameless guilty men,
Dash the proud gamester from his gilded car,
Bare the mean heart which lurks beneath a star,
Shall I not strip the gilding off a knave,
Unplac'd, unpension'd, no man's heir, or slave?
I will, or perish in the generous cause;
Hear this and tremble, ya who' escape the laws;
Yes, while I live, no rich or noble knave,
Shall walk the world in credit to his grave;
To virtue only, and her friends. a friend,
The world beside may murmur, or commend.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Lord Chief Justice HAZLERORD, Judge MEAGRE, Brigadier HATEALL, HUM HUMBUG
Esquire, Sir SPARROW SPENDALL, HECTOR MUSHROOM -- Col. BEAU TRUMPS, DICK, the
Publican, SIMPLE SAPLING, Esquire, Monsieur de FRANCOIS, CRUSTY CROWBAR,
Esquire, DUPE, -- Secretary of State, SCRIBLERIUS FRIBBLE. COMMODORE BATEAU,
COLLATERALIS, -- a new made Judge.
Attended by a swarm of court sycophants, hungry harpies, and unprincipled
danglers, collected from the neighboring villages, hovering over the stage in
the shape of locusts, led by Massachusettensis in the form of a basilisk; the
rear brought up by Proteus, bearing a torch in one hand, and a powder-flask in
the other; The whole supported by a mighty army and navy, from Blunderland, for
the laudable purpose of enslaving its best friends.

THE GROUP, A FARCE:
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, a little dark Parlour in BOSTON: GUARDS standing at the DOOR, HAZLEROD,
CRUSTY CROWBAR, SIMPLE-SAPLING, HATEALL, and HECTOR MUSHROOM. SIMPLE. I KNOW
not what to think of these sad times,
The people armed, -- and all resolved to die
E're they will submit. --

CRUSTY CROWBAR. I too am almost sick of the parade.
Of honors purchased at the price of peace.

SIMPLE. Fond as I am of greatness and her charms,
Elate with prospects of my rising name,
Pushed into place, -- a place I never expected,
My bounding heart leapt in my feeble breast.
And ecstasies entranced my slender brain. --
But yet, e're this I hoped more solid gains,
As my low purse demands a quick supply. --
Poor Sylvia weeps, -- and urges my return
To rural peace and humble happiness,
As my ambition beggars all her babes.

CRUSTY. When first I listed in the desperate cause,
And blindly swore obedience to his will,
So wise, so just, so good I thought RAPATIO,
That if salvation rested on his word
I Would pin my faith, and risk my hopes thereon.

HAZLEROD. And why not now? -- What staggers thy belief?

CRUSTY. Himself -- his perfidy appears --
It is too plain he has betrayed his country;
And we are the wretched tools by him marked out
To seal its ruins -- tear up the ancient forms,
And every vestige treacherously destroy,
Nor leave a trait of freedom in the land.
Nor did I think hard fate would call me up
From drudging over my acres,
Treading the glade, and sweating at the plough,
To dangle at the tables of the great;
At bowls and cards to spend my frozen years;
To sell my friends, my country, and my conscience;
Profane the sacred sabbaths of my God;
Scorned by the very men who want my aid
To spread distress over this devoted people.

HAZLEROD. Pho -- what misgivings -- why these idle qualms,
This skrinking backwards at the bugbear conscience;
In early life I heard the phantom named,
And the grave sages prate of moral sense
Presiding in the bosom of the just;
Or planting thongs about the guilty heart.
Bound by these shackles, long my laboring mind,
Obscurely trod the lower walks of life,
In hopes by honesty my bread to gain;
But neither commerce, or my conjuring rods,
Nor yet mechanics, or new fangled drills,
Or all the iron-monger's curious arts,
Gave me a competence of shining ore,
Or gratified my itching palm for more;
Till I dismissed the bold intruding guest,
And banished conscience from my wounded breast.

CRUSTY. Happy expedient! -- Could I gain the art,
Then balmy sleep might sooth my waking lids,
And rest once more refresh my weary soul.

HAZLEROD. Resolved more rapidly to gain my point,
I mounted high in justice's sacred seat,
With flowing robes, and head equipped without,
A heart unfeeling and a stubborn soul,
As qualified as ever a JEFFERIES was;
Save in the knotty rudiments of law,
The smallest requisite for modern times,
When wisdom, law and justice, are supplied
By swords, dragoons, and ministerial nods,
Sanctions most sacred in the Pander's creed,
I sold my country for a splended bribe.
Now let her sink -- and all the dire alarms
Of war, confusion, pestilence and blood,
And tenfold misery be her future doom --
Let civil discord lift her sword on high,
Nay sheath its hilt even in my brother's blood;
It never shall move the purpose of my soul;
Though once I trembled at a thought so bold;
By Philalethes's arguments, convinced,
We may live Demons, as we die like brutes,
I give my tears, and conscience to the winds.

HATEALL. Curse on their coward fears, and daftard souls,
Their soft compunctions and relented qualms,
Compassion never shall seize my steadfast breast
Though blood and carnage spread through all the land;
Till streaming purple tinge the verdant turf,
Till every street shall float with human gore,
I Nero like, the capital in flames,
Could laugh to see her glotted sons expire,
Though much too rough my soul to touch the lyre.

SIMPLE. I fear the brave, the injured multitude,
Repeated wrongs, arouse them to resent,
And every patriot like old Brutus stands,
The shining steel half drawn -- its glittering point
Scarce hid beneath the scabbard's friendly cell,
Resolved to die, or see their country free.

HATEALL. Then let them die -- The dogs we will keep down --
While N -- 's my friend, and G -- approves the deed,
Though hell and all its hell hounds should unite,
I Will not recede to save from swift perdition
My wife, my country, family, or friends.
G -- 's mandamus I more highly prize
Than all the mandates of the etherial king.

HECTOR MUSHROOM. Will our abettors in the distant towns
Support us long against the common cause,
When they shall see from Hampshire's northern bounds
Through the wide western plains to southern shores
The whole united continent in arms? --

HATEALL. They shall -- as sure as oaths or bond can bind;
I Have boldly sent my newborn brat abroad,
The association of my morbid brain,
To which each minion must affix his name,
As all our hope depends on brutal force,
On quick destruction, misery and death;
Soon may we see dark ruin stalk around,
With murder, rapine, and inflicted pains;
Estates confiscate, slavery and despair,
Wrecks, halters, axes, gibbeting and chains,
All the dread ills that wait on civil war; --
How I could glut my vengeful eyes to see
The weeping maid thrown helpless on the world,
Her sire cut off. -- Her orphan brothers stand,
While the big tear roll's down the manly cheek.
Robbed of maternal care by grief's keen shaft,
The sorrowing mother mourns her starving babes,
Her murdered lord torn guiltless from her side,
And flees for shelter to the pitying grave
To skreen at once from slavery and pain.

HAZLEROD. But more complete I view this scene of woe,
By the incursions of a savage foe.
Of which I warned them, if they dare refuse
The badge of slaves, and bold resistance use.
Now let them suffer -- Ill no pity feel.

HATEALL. Nor Il -- But had I power, as I have the will,
I Would send them murmuring to the shades of hell.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
The scene changes to a large dining room. The table furnished with bowls,
bottles, glasses and cards -- The Group appear sitting round in a restless
attitude. In one corner of the room is discovered a small cabinet of books, for
the use of the studious and contemplative: containing, Hobbs's Leviathan,
Sipthorp's Sermons, Hutchinson's History, Fable of the Bees, Philalethes on
Philanthropy, with an appendix by Massachusettentis, Hoyl on Whist, Lives of
the Stuarts, Statutes of Henry the eighth, and William the Conqueror,
Wedderburne's speeches, and acts of Parliament, for 1774. SCENE I. HATEALL,
HAZLEROD, MONSIEUR, BEAU TRUMPS, SIMPLE, HUMBUG, Sir SPARROW, etc. etc.
SCRIBLERIUS. -- THY toast Monsieur,
Pray, why that solemn phiz: --
Art thou, too, balancing 'twixt right and wrong?
Have thou a thought so mean as to give up
Thy present good, for promise in reversion?
It Is true hereafter has some feeble terrors,
But 'ere our grizley heads are wrapped in clay
We may compound, and make our peace with Heaven.

MONSIEUR. Could I give up the dread of retribution,
The awful reckoning of some future day,
Like surly Hateall I might curse mankind,
And dare the threat'ned vengeance of the skies.
Or like yon apostate -- [ Pointing to Hazlerod, retired to a corner to read
Massachusettensis.]
Feel but slight remorse
To sell my country for a grasp of gold.
But the impressions of my early youth,
Infix'd by precepts of my pious sire,
Are stings and scorpions in my goaded breast;
Often have I hung upon my parent's knee
And heard him tell of his escape from France;
He left the land of slaves, and wooden shoes;
From place to place he sought a safe retroat,
Till fair Bostonia stretched her friendly arm
And gave the refugee both bread and peace;
(Shall I ungrateful 'rase the sacred bonds,
And help to clank the tyrant's iron chains
Over these bleft shores -- once the sure affylum
From all the ills of arbitrary sway)
With his expiring breath he bade his sons,
If ever oppression reached the western world,
Resist its force, and break the servile yoke.

SCRIBLERIUS. Well quit thy posts; -- Go make thy flattering court
To Freedom's Sons and tell thy baby fears;
Show the foot traces in thy puny heart,
Made by the trembling tongue and quivering lip
Of an old gransire's superstitious whims.

MONSIEUR. No, -- I never can --
So great the itch I feel for titl'd place
Some honorary post, some small distinction,
To save my name from dark oblivion's jaws,
I Will hazard all, but never give up my place;
For that I Will see Rome's ancient rites restored,
And flame and faggot blaze in every street.

BEAU TRUMPS. -- That Is right Monsieur,
There Is naught on earth that has such tempting charms
As rank and show, and pomp, and glittering dress,
Save the dear counters at beloved Quadril,
Viner unsoil'd, and Littleton, may sleep,
And Coke lie mouldering on the dusty shelf,
If I by shuffling draw some lucky card
That wins the livres, or lurative place.

HUM HUMBUG. When sly Rapatio showed his friends the scroll,
I wondered much to see thy patriot name
Among the list of rebels to the state,
I thought thee one of Rusticus's sworn friends.

BEAU TRUMPS. When first I entered on the public stage
My country groaned beneath base Brundo's hand,
Virtue looked fair and beckoned to her lure,
Through truth's bright mirror I beheld her charms
And wished to tread the patriotic path
And wear the laurels that adorn his fame;
I walked a while and tasted solid peace
With Cassius, Rusticus, and good Hortensius,
And many more, whose names will be revered
When you, and I, and all the venal herd,
Weighed in Nemesis, just impartial scale,
Are marked with infamy, till time blot out
And in oblivion sink our hated names.
But 'twas a poor unprositable path,
Naught to be gained, save solid peace of mind,
No pensions, place or title there I found;
I saw Rapatio's arts had struck so deep
And given his country such a fatal wound,
None but his foes promotion could expect;
I trimmed, and pimp'd, and veer'd, and wavering stood,
But half resolved to show myself a knave,
Till the Arch Traitor prowling round for aid
Saw my suspense and bade me doubt no more; --
He gently bowed, and smiling took my hand,
And whispering softly in my listening ear,
Showed me my name among his chosen band,
And laughed at virtue dignified by fools,
Cleared all my doubts, and bade me persevere
In spite of the restraints, or hourly checks
Of wounded friendship, and a goaded mind,
Or all the sacred ties of truth and honor.

COLLATERALIS. Come amongst ourselves we'll even speak out the truth.
Can you suppose there yet is such a dupe
As still believes that wretch an honest man?
The later strokes of his serpentine brain
Outvie the arts of Machiavel himself,
His Borgian model here is realiz'd
And the stale tricks of politicians played
Beneath a vizard fair --
-- Drawn from the Heavn'ly form
Of blessed religion weeping over the land
For virtue fallen, and for freedom lost.

BEAU TRUMPS. I think with you --
-- unparallelled his effront'ry,
When by chican'ry and specious art,
Midst the distress in which he would brought the city,
He found a few, (by artifice and cunning,
By much industry of his wily friend
The false Philanthrop -- sly undermining tool,
Who with the Syren's voice --
Deals daily round the poison of his tongue,)
To speak him fair -- and overlook his guilt.
They by reiterated promise made
To stand his friend at Britains's mighty court,
And vindicate his native injured land,
Lent him their names to sanctify his deeds.
But mark the traitor -- his high crimes gloss'd over
Conceals the tender feelings of the man,
The social ties that bind the human heart;
He strikes a bargain with his country's foes,
And joins to wrap America in flames.
Yet with feigned pity, and Satanic grin,
As if more deep to fix the keen insult,
Or make his life a farce still more complete,
He sends a groan across the broad Atlantic,
And with a phiz of Crocodilian stamp,
Can weep, and wreathe, still hoping to deceive,
He cries the gathering clouds hang thick about her,
But laughs within -- then sobs --
-- Alas! my country?

HUM HUMBUG. Why so severe, or why exclaim at all,
Against the man who made thee what thou art?

BEAU TRUMPS. I know his guilt, -- I ever knew the man,
Thy father knew him ever we trod the stage;
I only speak to such as know him well;
Abroad I tell the world he is a saint,
But as for interest I betrayed my own
With the same views, I ranked among his friends;
But my ambition sighs for something more.
What merits has sir Sparrow of his own,
And yet a feather graces the fools cap:
Which did he wear for what himself achieved,
'Twould stamp some honor on his latest heir --
But I Will suspend my murmuring care awhile;
Come, the other glass -- and try our luck at Loo,
And if before the dawn your gold I win,
Or ever bright Phoebus does his course begin,
The eastern breeze from Britain's hostile shore
Should waft her lofty floating towers over,
Whose waving pendants sweep the watery main,
Dip their proud beaks and dance toward the plain,
The destined plains of slaughter and distress,
Laden with troops from Hanover and Hess,
It would invigorate my sinking soul,
For then the continent we might control;
Not all the millions that she vainly boasts
Can cope with Veteran Barbarian hosts; --
But the brave sons of Albion's warlike race,
Their arms, and honors, never can disgrace,
Or draw their swords in such a hated cause,
In blood to seal a N -- 's oppressive laws,
They Will spurn the service; -- Britions must recoil,
And show themselves the natives of an isle
Who fought for freedom, in the worst of times
Produced her Hampdens, Fairfaxes and Pyms.
But if by carnage we should win the game,
Perhaps by my abilities and fame;
I might attain a splendid glittering car,
And mount aloft, and sail in liquid air.
Like Phaeton, I Would then outstrip the wind,
And leave my low competitors behind.

FINIS

