THE DEATH OF WARREN


THE BATTLE OF BUNKERS-HILL. A DRAMATIC PIECE, OF FIVE ACTS, IN HEROIC MEASURE.

BY A GENTLEMAN OF MARYLAND.

-- Pulcrumque mori succurrit in armis.

VIRGIL. -- It Is glorious to die in Battle. --

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

TO RICHARD STOCKTON, ESQUIRE; MEMBER OF THE HONORABLE, THE CONTINENTAL
CONGRESS, FOR THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY.
SIR,
I TAKE the Freedom to Inscribe with YOUR Name, the following short Performance
in Honor of some brave MEN, who have fallen in the Cause of LIBERTY.

IT was at first drawn up for an Exercise in Oratory, to a number of young
Gentlemen in a southern Academy, but being now Published, may serve the same
Purpose, in other AMERICAN Seminaries.

THE many Civilities, received from YOUR Family, at an earlier Period of my
Life, while a Student at NEW JERSEY College, demand the warmest Gratitude; and
I do continually, with the most sincere Pleasure, recollect and acknowledge
them.

IT is my fervent wish, that the Ruler of the Universe may Crown with Success,
the Cause of FREEDOM, and speedily relieve our bleeding Country in whose
Service YOU have distinguishedly exerted YOUR eminent Abilities, by assisting
HER Deliberations in the grand Council of the Empire.

SIR, I am, With great Respect, Your much obliged, and most humble Servant, THE
AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE TO THE BATTLE OF BUNKERS-HILL.
By a Lieutenant Colonel in the CONTINENTAL ARMY.
THIS mighty Era big with dread alarms,
Aloud calls each AMERICAN to arms.
Let every Breast with martial ardor glow,
Nor dread to meet the proud usurping foe.
What though our bodies feel an earthly chain,
Still the free soul, unblemished and serene
Enjoys a mental LIBERTY, -- a charm,
Beyond the power of fate itself to harm.
Should victory crown us in the doubtful strife. --
Eternal honors mark the hero's life.
Should Wounds and slaughter be our hapless doom --
Unfading laurels deck the Martyr's Tomb:
A sure reward awaits his soul on high,
On earth his memory shall never die,
For when we read the fatal story over,
One tear shall drop for him who is -- no more.
Who nobly struggled to support our laws,
And bravely fell in freedom's sacred cause
Let virtue fire us to the martial deed;
We fight to conquer and we dare to bleed:
Witness ye fathers! whose protracted time,
Fruitful of story, chronicles the clime.
These howling deserts, hospitably tame,
Erst snatched you martyrs, from the hungry flame;
'Twas Heaven's own cause, beneath whose sheltering power,
Ye grew the wonder of this present hour --
The task -- be ours with unremitted toil,
To guard the rights of this dear-purchas'd soil,
From Royal plund'rers, greedy of our spoil,
Who come resolved to murder and enslave,
To shackle FREEMEN and to rob the brave.
The loud mouthed cannon threaten from afar,
Be this our comfort in the storm of war --
Who fights, to take our liberty away,
Dead-hearted fights, and falls an easy prey.
Then, on my brethren to the embattl'd plain,
Who shrinks with fear, anticipates a chain.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
AMERICAN OFFICERS. WARREN. PUTNAM.
BRITISH OFFICERS. GARDENER. GAGE. HOW. BURGOYNE. CLINTON. LORD PIGOT.
SHERWIN. Aid de Camp to General HOW, Soldiers, and c.
THE BATTLE OF BUNKERS-HILL.
ACT I. SCENE I.
CAMP at CAMBRIDGE.
Enter WARREN, PUTNAM, and GARDENER. WARREN. WHY thus brave PUTNAM, shall we
still encamp
Inactive here; and with this gentle flood,
By CAMBRIDGE murmuring, mix briny tears?
Salt tears of grief by many a parent shed,
For sons detained, and tender innocents
In yon fair City, famishing for bread;
For not fond mothers or their weeping babes
Can move the hard heart of relentless GAGE.
Perfidious man! Who pledged his oath so late,
And word of honor to those patriots
Yet in his power, that yielding him their arms,
They should receive permission to depart,
And join once more their valiant countrymen;
But now detains as hostages these men,
In low damp dungeons, and in gaols chained down,
While grief and famine on their vitals prey.
Say noble PUTNAM, shall we hear of this,
And let our idle swords rust in the sheath,
While slaves of Royal Power impeach our worth
As vain, and call our patience cowardice?

PUTNAM. Not less bold WARREN have I felt the pangs
Of woe severe in this calamity:
And could I with my life redeem the times,
The richest blood that circles round my heart,
Should hastily be shed. But what avails
The genuine flame and vigor of the soul,
When nature's self, and all the strength of art,
Opposes every effort in our power?
These Tons of slavery dare not advance,
And meet in equal fight our hostile arms.
For yet they well remember LEXINGTON,
And what they suffered on that rueful day,
When wantoning in savage rage, they marched
Onward to CONCORD, in a firm array,
Mock music playing, and the ample flag
Of tyranny displayed; but with dire loss
And infamy drove back, they gained the town,
And under cover of their ships of war,
Retired, confounded and dismayed. No more
In mirthful mood to combat us, or mix
Their jocund music with the sounds of war.
To tempt no more unequal fight with men,
Who to oppose dire arbitrary sway,
Have grasped the sword; and resolute to brave
Death in a thousand dreary shapes, can know,
In the warm breast, no sentiment of fear.

GARDENER. The free born spirit of immortal fire
Is stranger to ignoble deeds, and shuns
The name of cowardice. But well thy mind,
Sage, and matur'd by long experience, weighs
The perilous attempt, to storm the town,
And rescue thence, the suffering citizens.
For but one pass to that peninsula,
On which the city stands, on all sides barred.
And here what numbers can supply the rage,
Of the all devouring, deep mouthed cannon, placed,
On many a strong redoubt; While on each side,
The ships of war, moored, in the winding bay,
Can sweep ten thousand from the level beach,
"And render all access impregnable."

WARREN. True valiant GARDENER, the attempt is vain,
To force that entrance to the sea-girt town;
Which while we hoped for peace, and in that view,
Kept back our swords, we saw them fortify.
But what if happily, with a chosen few,
Led through the midnight shades, yon heights were gained,
And that contiguous hill, whose grassy foot,
By Mystick's gentle tide is washed. Here raised,
Strong batt'ries jutting over the level sea,
With everlasting thunder, shall annoy
Their navy far beneath; and in some lucky hour,
When dubious darkness on the land is spread,
A chosen band may pierce their separate fleet,
And in swift boats, across the narrow tide,
Pour like a flame, on their unguarded ranks,
And wither them: As when an Angel smote,
The Assyrian camp. The proud Sennacherib,
With impious rage, against the hill of God,
Blasphemed. Low humbl'd, when the dawning light,
Saw all his host dead men: So yet I trust,
The God of battles, will avouch our cause,
And those proud champions of despotic power,
Who turn our fasting to their mirth, and mock
Our prayers, naming us the SAINTS, shall yet,
Repay with blood, the tears and agonies,
Of tender mothers, and their infant babes,
Shut up in BOSTON.

PUTNAM. Heaven, smile on us then,
And favor this attempt. Now from our troops,
Seven hundred gallant men, and skilled in arms,
With speed select, choice spirits of the war.
By you, led on brave GARDENER, to the heights,
E're yet the morn, with dawning light breaks forth,
Entrench on BUNKERS HILL; and when the day,
First, over the hill top rises, we shall join
United arms, against the assailing foe,
Should they attempt to cross the narrow tide,
In deep battalion to regain the hill.

GARDENER. The thought is perilous, and many men,
In this bold enterprise, must strew the ground.
But since we combat in the cause of God,
I draw my sword, nor shall the sheath again,
Receive the shining blade, till on the heights,
Of CHARLESTOWN, and BUNKER'S pleasant HILL,
It drinks the blood of many a warrior slain.

ACT II. SCENE I.
BOSTON.
Enter GAGE, HOW, and BURGOYNE. BURGOYNE. How long brave generals, shall the
rebel foe,
In vain arrangements, and mock siege, display,
Their haughty insolence? -- Shall in this town,
So many thousands, of BRITANNIA'S troops,
With watch incessant, and fore toil oppressed,
Remain besieged? A vetr'an army pent,
In the enclosure, of so small a space,
By a disordered herd, untaught, unofficer'd.
Let not sweet Heaven, the envious mouth of same,
With breath malignant, over the Atlantic wave,
Bear this to Europe's shores, or tell to France,
Or haughty Spain of LEXINGTON'S retreat.
Who could have thought it, in the womb of time,
That BRITISH soldiers, in this latter age,
Beat back by peasants, and in slight disgraced,
Could tamely brook the base discomfiture;
Nor sallying out, with spirit reassumed,
Exact due tribute of their victory?
Drive back the foe, to Alleghany hills,
In woody valleys, or on mountain tops,
To mix with wolves and kindred savages.

GAGE. This mighty paradox, will soon dissolve.
Hear first, BURGOYNE, the valor of these men,
Fired with the zeal, of fiercest liberty,
No fear of death, so terrible to all,
Can stop their rage. Grey-headed clergymen,
With holy bible, and continual prayer,
Bear up their fortitude -- and talk of heaven,
And tell them, that sweet soul, who dies in battle,
Shall walk, with spirits of the just. These words,
Add wings to native rage, and hurry them
Impetuous to war. Nor yet in arms
Unpractised. The day of LEXINGTON,
A sad conviction gave our soldiery,
That these AMERICANS, were not that herd,
And rout ungoverned, which we painted them.

HOW. Not strange to your maturer thought, BURGOYNE,
This matter will appear. A people brave,
Who never yet, of luxury, or soft
Delights, effeminate, and false, have tasted.
But, through hate of chains, and slavery, supposed,
Forsake their mountain tops, and rush to arms.
Often have I heard their valor, published:
Their perseverance, and untameable
Fierce mind, when late they fought with us, and drove,
The French encroaching on their settlements,
Back to their frozen lakes. Or when with us
On Cape B^ton, they stormed Louisburg.
With us in Canada, they took Quebec;
And at the Havannah, these NEW ENGLAND MEN,
Led on by PUTNAM, acted gallantly.
I had a brother once, who in that war,
With fame commanded them, and when he fell,
Not unlamented; for these warriors,
So brave themselves, and sensible of merit,
Erected him a costly monument;
And much it grieves me that I draw my sword,
For this late insurrection, and revolt,
To chastise them. Would to Almighty God,
The task unnatural, had been assigned,
Else where. But since by Heaven, determined,
Let Us on, and wipe the day of LEXINGTON,
Thus soiled, quite from our soldiers memories.
This reinforcement, which with us have sailed,
In many a transport, from BRITANNIA'S shores,
Will give new vigor to the Royal Arms,
And crush rebellion, in its infancy.
Let Us on, and from this siege, calamitous,
Assert our liberty; nay rather die,
Transfixed in battle, by their bayonets,
Than thus remain, the scoff, and ridicule
Of gibing wits, and paultry gazetteers,
On this, their madding continent, who cry,
Where is the BRITISH valor: that renown
Which spoke in thunder, to the Gallic shores?
That spirit is evaporate, that fire;
Which erst distinguished them, that flame;
And generous energy of soul, which filled,
Their Henry's, Edwards, thunder bolts of war;
Their Hampdens, Marlboroughs, and the immortal Wolf,
On the Abraham heights, victorious.
BRITANNIA'S genius, is unfortunate,
And flags say they, when Royal tyranny
Directs her arms, This let us then disprove,
In combat speedily, and take from them,
The wantonness of this fell pride, and boasting.

GAGE. Though much I dread the issue of the attempt,
So full of hazard, and adventurous spirit;
Yet since your judgment, and high skill in arms,
From full experience, boldly prompts you on,
I give my voice, and when one day has passed,
In whose swift hours, may be wrought, highly up,
The resolution, of the soldiery,
With soothing words, and ample promises,
Of rich rewards, in lands and settlements,
From the confiscate property throughout,
These rebel colonies, at length subdued;
Then march we forth, beat up their drowsy camp,
And with the sun, to this safe capital,
Return, rich, with the triumphs of the war.
And be our plan, that which brave Haldiman,
E're yet recalled, advised to us. Let first,
Brave HOW, and CLINTON, on that western point,
Land with the transports, and mean time BURGOYNE,
With the artillery, pour sharp cannonade,
Along the neck, and sweep, that beachy plain,
Which lies to ROXBOROUGH, where ^on western stream,
Flowing from CAMBRIDGE, mixes with the Bay.
Thus, these AMERICANS, shall learn to dread,
The force of discipline, and skill in arms.

ACT III. SCENE I.
BUNKERS-HILL.
Enter GARDENER, with Seven Hundred Men. GARDENER. This is the hill, brave
countrymen, whose brow
We mean to fortify. A strong redoubt,
With saliant angles, and embrasures deep,
Be speedily thrown up. Let each himself,
Not underserving, of our choice approve,
For out of thousands, I have challenged you,
To this bold enterprise, as men of might,
And valor eminent, and such this day,
I trust, will honor you. Let each his spade,
And pick-axe, vig'rously, in this hard soil,
Where I have laid, the curved line, exe^t.
For now the morning star, bright Lucifer,
Peers on the firmament, and soon the day,
Flushed with the golden sun, shall visit us.
Then gallant countrymen, should faithless GAGE,
Pour forth his lean, and half starved myrmidons;
We'll make them taste our cartridges, and know,
What rugged steel, our bayonets are made of;
Or if over charged, with numbers, bravely fall,
Like those three hundred at THERMOPYLAE,
And give our Country, credit in our deaths.

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
BOSTON.
GAGE Solus. Oh sweet tranquillity, and peace of soul,
That in the bosom of the cottager,
Take up thy residence -- cannot the beams,
Of royal sunshine, call thee to my breast.
Fair honor, waits on thee, renown abroad,
And high dominion, over this Continent,
Soon as the spirit, of rebellious war,
Is scourged into obedience. Why then ye Gods,
This inward gnawing, and remorse of thought,
For perfidy, and breach of promises!
Why should the spouse, or weeping infant babe,
Or meek eyed virgin, with her fallow cheek,
The rose by famine, withered out of it;
Or why the father, or his youthful son,
By me detained, from all their relatives,
And, in low dungeons, and, in Gaols chained down,
Affect my spirit, when the mighty cause,
Of GEORGE and BRITAIN, is endangered.
For nobly struggling, in the cause of kings,
We claim the high, the just prerogative,
To rule mankind, and with an iron rod,
Exact submission, due, though absolute.
What though they style me, villain, murderer,
And imprecate from heaven, dire thunderbolts,
To crush my purposes -- Was that a gun,
Which thunders over the wave? -- Or is it guilt,
That plays the coward, with my trembling heart,
And cools the blood, with frightful images.
Oh guilt, thy blackness, hovers on the mind,
Nor can the morning dissipate thy shades.
Yon ruddy morn, which over BUNKERS-HILL,
Advancing slowly, blushes to the bay,
And tips with gold the spires of CHARLESTOWN.
Enter BURGOYNE. The rebel foe, grown yet, more insolent,
By that small loss, or rout, at LEXINGTON,
Prevent our purpose and the night bypast,
Have pushed intrenchments, and some flimsy
works,
With rude achievement, on the rocky brow,
Of that tall hill. A ship-boy, with the day,
From the tall mast-head, of the Admiral,
Descried their aim, and gave the swift alarm.
Our glasses mark, but one small regiment there,
Yet, every hour we languish in delay,
Inspires fresh hope, and fills their pig'my souls,
With thoughts of holding it. You hear the sound
Of spades and pick-axes, upon the hill,
Incessant, pounding, like old Vulcan's forge,
Urged by the Cyclops.
Enter HOW. To your alarm posts, officers; come gallant
souls,
Let Us out, and drive them from that eminence,
On which the foe, does earth himself.
I relish not, such haughty neighborhood.
Give orders, swiftly, to the Admiral,
That some stout ship heave up the narrow bay,
And pour indignant, from the full-tide wave,
Fierce cannonade, across the isthmus point,
That no assistance may be brought to them.
If but seven hundred, we can treat with them.
Yes, strew the hill, with death, and carcases,
And offer up, this band, a hecatomb,
To Britain's glory, and the cause of kings.
Exeunt BURGOYNE and HOW.
GAGE. Solus. May Heaven, protect us, from their rage, I say,
When but a boy, I dreamed, of death in bed,
And ever since that time, I hated things
Which put him, like a pair of spectacles,
Before my eyes. The thought lies deep in fate,
Nor can a mortal, see the bottom of it.
It Is here -- It Is there -- I could philosophize --
Eternity, is like a winding sheet --
The seven commandments like -- I think there is
seven, --
I scratch my head -- but yet in vain I scratch --
Oh BUTE, and DARTMOUTH knew ye what
I feel,
You sure would pity, an old drinking man,
That has more heart-ake, than philosophy.
Exeunt.
SCENE II.
HOW with the British Army.
HOW. The day at length, propitious shows itself,
And with full beams of majesty, the sun,
Has blessed, its fair nativity; when Heaven,
Brave soldiers, and the cause of kings,
Calls on the spirit of your loyalty,
To chastise this rebellion, and tread down,
Such foul ingratitude -- such monstrous shape,
Of horrid liberty, which spurns that love --
That fond maternal tenderness of soul,
Which on this dreary coast, first planted them:
Restrained the rage, of murdering savages,
Which, with fierce inroad, on their settlements,
Made frequent war -- struck down the arm of
France,
Just raised, to crush them, in their infancy:
And since that time, have bade their cities grow,
To marts of trade: called fair-ey'd commerce forth,
To share dominion, on the distant wave,
And visit every clime, and foreign shore.
Yet this, brave soldiers, is the proud return,
For the best blood of ENGLAND, shed for them.
Behold yon hill, where fell rebellion rears,
Her snake-stream'd ensign, and would seem to brave
With scarce seven hundred, this sea-bounded Camp,
Where may be counted, full ten thousand men,
That in the war with France so late, acquired
Loud fame, and shook the other continent.
Come on brave soldiers, seize your gleaming arms,
And let this day, in after times be held,
As Minden famous, and each hostile field,
Where British valor, shone victorious.
The time moves slow, which enviously detains,
Our just resentment from these traitors heads.
Their richest farms, and cultured settlements,
By winding river, or extensive bay,
Shall be your first reward. Our noble king
As things confiscate, holds their property,
And in rich measure, will bestow on you,
Who face the frowns, and labor of this day.
He that outlives this battle, shall ascend,
In titled honor, to the height of state,
Dukedoms, and baronies, midst these our foes,
In tributary vassalage, kept down,
Shall be your fair inheritance. Come on,
Beat up the heroic sound of war. The word,
Is GEORGE our sovereign, and BRITANNIA's arms.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
BUNKERS-HILL.
WARREN with the American Army.
WARREN. To arms, brave countrymen, for see the foe,
Comes forth to battle, and would seem to try,
Once more, their fortune in decisive war.
Three thousand, against seven hundred, ranged this day,
Shall give the world, an ample specimen,
What strength, and noble confidence, the sound,
Of Liberty inspires. That Liberty,
Which, not the thunder of Bellona's voice,
With fleets, and armies, from the BRITISH Shore,
Shall wrest from us. Our noble ancestors,
Out-brav'd the tempests, of the hoary deep,
And on these hills, uncultivate, and wild,
Sought an asylum, from despotic sway;
A short asylum, for that envious power,
With persecution dire, still follows us.
At first, they deemed our charters forfeited.
Next, our just rights, in government, abridg'd.
Then, thrust in viceroys, and bashaws, to rule,
With lawless sovereignty. Now added force,
Of standing armies, to secure their sway.
Much, have we suffered from the licensed rage,
Of brutal soldiery, in each fair town.
Remember march, brave countrymen, that day
When BOSTON'S streets ran blood. Think on that day,
And let the memory, to revenge, stir up,
The temper of your souls. There might we still,
On terms precarious, and disdainful lived,
With daughters ravished, and butchered sons,
But heaven, forbade the thought. These are the men,
Who in firm phalanx, threaten us with war,
And aim this day, to fix forever down,
The galling chains, which tyranny has forged for us.
These count our lands and settlements their own,
And in their intercepted letters, speak,
Of farms, and tenements, secured for friends,
Which, if they gain, brave soldiers, let with blood,
The purchase, be sealed down. Let every arm,
This day be active, in fair freedom's cause,
And shower down, from the hill, like Heaven in wrath,
Full store of lightning, and fierce iron hail,
To blast the adversary. Let this ground,
Like burning AEtna or Vesuvius top,
Be wrapped in flame -- The word is LIBERTY,
And Heaven smile on us, in so just a cause.

SCENE II.
BUNKERS-HILL.
GARDENER, Leading up his Men to the Engagement. Fear not, brave soldiers, though
their infantry,
In deep array, so far out-number us.
The justness of our cause, will brace each arm,
And steel the soul, with fortitude; while they,
Whose guilt, hangs trembling, on their consciences,
Must fail in battle, and receive that death,
Which, in high vengeance, we prepare for them.
Let then each spirit, to the height, wound up,
Show noble vigor, and full force this day.
For on the merit, of our swords, is placed,
The virgin honor, and true character,
Of this whole Continent: and one short hour,
May give complexion, to the whole event,
Fixing the judgment whether as base slaves,
We serve these masters, or more nobly live,
Free as the breeze, that on the hill-top, plays,
With these sweet fields, and tenements, our own.
Oh fellow soldiers, let this battle speak,
Dire disappointment, to the insulting foe,
Who claim, our fair possessions, and set down,
These cultur'd-farms, and bowry-hills, and plains,
As the rich prize, of certain victory.
Shall we, the sons of MASSACHUSETTS BAY,
NEW HAMPSHIRE, and CONNECTICUT; shall we
Fall back, dishonored, from our native plains,
Mix with the savages, and roam for food,
On western mountains, or the desert shores,
Of Canada's cold lakes? or state more vile,
Sit down, in humble vassalage, content
To till the ground for these proud conquerors?
No, fellow soldiers, let us rise this day,
Emancipate, from such ignoble choice.
And should the battle, ravish our sweet lives,
Late time, shall give, an ample monument,
And bid her worthies, emulate our fame.

SCENE III.
BOSTON.
The British Army being Repulsed, SHERWIN is dispatched to General GAGE, for
Assistance.
SHERWIN, GAGE, BURGOYNE, and CLINTON. SHERWIN. Our men advancing, have
received dire loss,
In this encounter, and the case demands,
In the swift crisis, of extremity,
A thousand men to reinforce the war.

GAGE. Do as you please BURGOYNE in this affair,
I Will hide myself in some deep vault beneath.
Exit.
BURGOYNE. It Is yours, brave CLINTON, to command, these men.
Embark them speedily. I see our troops,
Stand on the margin, of the ebbing flood,
(The flood affrighted, at the scene it views)
And fear, once more, to climb the desperate hill,
Whence the bold rebel, showr's destruction down.
Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
WARREN.
Mortally wounded, falling on his right knee, covering his breast with his
right hand, and supporting himself with his firelock in his left. A deadly
ball, has limited my life,
And now to god, I offer up my soul.
But oh my Countrymen, let not the cause,
The sacred cause of liberty, with me
Faint or expire. By the last parting breath,
And blood of this your fellow soldier slain,
Be now adjur'd, never to yield the right,
The grand deposite of all-giving heaven,
To man's free nature, that he rule himself.
With these rude Britons, wage life-scorning war,
'Till they admit it, and like hell fall off,
With ebbing billows, from this troubled coast,
Where but for them firm Concord, and true love,
Should individual, hold their court and reign.
The infernal engin'ry of state, resist
To death, that unborn times may be secure,
And while men flourish in the peace you win,
Write each fair name with worthies of the earth.
Weep not your General, who is snatched this day,
From the embraces of a family,
Five virgin daughters young, and unendow'd,
Now with the foe left lone and fatherless.
Weep not for him who first espoused the cause
And risking life have met the enemy,
In fatal opposition -- But rejoice --
For now I go to mingle with the dead,
Great Brutus, Hampden, Sidney, and the rest,
Of old or modern memory, who lived,
A mound to tyrants, and strong hedge to kings,
Bounding the inundation of their rage,
Against the happiness and peace of man.
I see these heroes where they walk serene,
By crystal currents, on the vale of Heaven,
High in full converse of immortal acts,
Achieved for truth and innocence on earth.
Mean time the harmony and thrilling found
Of mellow lutes, sweet viols, and guittars,
Dwell on the soul and ravish every nerve.
Anon the murmur of the tight-brac'd drum,
With finely varied fifes to martial airs,
Wind up the spirit to the mighty proof
Of siege and battle, and attempt in arms.
Illustrious group! They beckon me along,
To ray my vissage with immortal light,
And bind the amarinth around my brow.
I come, I come, ye firstborn of true fame.
Fight on my countrymen, be FREE, be FREE.

SCENE V.
CHARLESTOWN.
The Reinforcement landed, and Orders given to burn CHARLESTOWN, that they may
march up more securely under the smoke, General HOW, Rallies his Repulsed and
Broken Troops. HOW. Curse on the fortune, of BRITANNIA'S arms,
That plays the jilt with us. Shall these few men,
Beat back the flower, and best half of our troops,
While on our side, so many ships of war,
And floating batt'ries, from the mystic tide,
Shake all the hill, and sweep its ridgy top.
Oh Gods! no time, can blot its memory out.
We Have men enough, upon the field to day,
To bury, this small handful, with the dust
Our march excites -- back to the charge -- close ranks,
And drive these wizzards from the enchanted ground.
The reinforcement, which bold CLINTON heads,
Gives such superiority of strength,
That let each man of us, but cast a stone,
We cover this small hill, with these few soes,
And over head, erect a pyramid.
The smoke, you see, enwraps us in its shade,
On, then, my countrymen, and try once more,
To change the fortune, of the inglorious day.

SCENE VI.
BUNKERS-HILL.
GARDENER, to the AMERICAN Army. You see, brave soldiers, how an evil cause,
A cause of slavery, and civil death,
Unmans the spirit, and strikes down the soul:
The gallant Englishman, whose fame in arms,
Through every clime, shakes terribly the globe,
Is found this day, shorn off his wonted strength,
Repulsed, and driven from the flaming hill.
Warren is fallen, on fair honor's bed,
Pierced in the breast, with every wound before.
It Is ours, now tenfold, to avenge his death,
And offer up, a reg'ment of the foe,
Achilles-like, upon the Hero's tomb.
See, reinforced they face us yet again,
And onward move in Phalanx to the war.
Oh noble spirits, let this bold attack,
Be bloody to their host. GOD is our Aid
Give then full scope, to just revenge this day.

SCENE VII.
The BAY-SHORE.
The British Army once more repulsed, HOW again rallies his flying Troops.
HOW. But that so many mouths, can witness it,
I would deny myself an Englishman,
And swear this day, that with such cowardice,
No kindred, or alliance, has my birth.
Oh base degenerate souls, whose ancestors,
At Cressy, Poictiers, and at Agincourt,
With tenfold numbers, combated, and plucked
The budding laurels, from the brows of France.
Back to the charge, once more, and rather die,
Burned up, and withered on this bloody hill,
Than live the blemish, of your Country's fame,
With everlasting infamy, oppressed.
Their ammunition, as you hear, is spent,
So that unless, their looks, and visages,
Like fierce-ey'd Basilisks, can strike you dead;
Return, and rescue yet, sweet Countrymen,
Some share of honor, on this hapless day.
Let some brave officers, stand on the rear,
And with the small sword, and sharp bayonet,
Drive on each coward that attempts to lag,
That thus, sure death may find the villain out,
With more dread certainty, than him who moves,
Full in the van, to meet the wrathful foe.

SCENE VIII.
BUNKERS-HILL.
GARDENER desperately wounded and borne from the field by two Soldiers.
GARDENER. A musket-ball death-wing'd, has pierced my groin,
And widely opened the swift curr'nt of my veins.
Bear me then Soldiers, to that hollow space,
A little hence, just in the hill's decline.
A surgeon there, may stop the gushing wound,
And gain a short respite to life, that yet,
I may return, and fight one half hour more.
Then, shall I die in peace, and to my GOD,
Surrender up, the spirit, which he gave.

SCENE IX.
PUTNAM, to the American Army. Swift-rising fame, on early wing, mounts up,
To the convexity of bending Heaven,
And writes each name, who fought with us this day,
In fairest character, amidst the stars.
The world shall read it, and still talk of us,
Who, far out-number'd, twice drove back the foe,
With carnage horrid, murmuring to their ships.
The Ghost of WARREN says, enough -- I see
One thousand veterans, mingled with the dust.
Now, for our sacred honor, and the wound,
Which Gardener feels, once more we charge -- once more
Dear friends, And fence the obscured hill,
With hecatombs of slain. Let every piece,
Flash, like the fierce-consuming fire of Heaven,
And make the smoke, in which they wrap themselves,
"A darkness visible." -- Now, once again,
Receive the battle, as a shore of rock
The ocean wave. And if at last we yield,
Leave many a death, amidst their hollow ranks,
To damp the measure, of their dear-bought joy.

SCENE X. and Last.
BUNKERS-HILL.
The American Army overpowered by numbers, are obliged to retreat. Enter HOW,
PIGOT, and CLINTON with the British Army. RICHARDSON, a young Officer, on the
Parapet. The day is ours, huzza, the day is ours,
This last attack has forced them to retreat.

CLINTON. It Is true, full victory declares for us,
But we have dearly, dearly, purchased it.
Full fifteen hundred, of our men lie dead,
Who, with their officers, do swell the list
Of this day's carnage -- On the well-fought hill,
Whole ranks cut down, lie struggling with their wounds,
Or close their bright eyes, in the shades of night.
No wonder! such incessant musketry,
And fire of Cannon, from the hill-top poured,
Seemed not the agency, of mortal men,
But heaven itself, with snares, and vengeance armed,
TO oppose our gaining it. Even when was spent
Their ammunition, and fierce WARREN slain,
Huge stones were hurled from the rocky brow,
And war renewed, by these inveterate;
'Till GARDENER wounded, the left wing gave way,
And with their shattered infantry, the whole,
Drawn off by PUTNAM, to the causeway fled,
When from the ships, and batt'ries on the wave,
They met deep loss, and strewn the narrow bridge,
With lifeless carcases. O such a day,
Since Sodom and Gomorrah sunk in flames,
Has not been heard of by the ear of man,
Nor has an eye beheld its parallel.

LORD PIGOT. The day is ours, but with heart-piercing loss,
Of soldiers slain, and gallant officers.
Old Abercrombie, on the field lies dead.
Pitcairn and Sherwin, in sore battle slain.
The gallant reg'ment of Welsh fusileers,
To seventeen privates, is this day reduced.
The grenadiers, stand thinly on the hill,
Like the tall fir-trees on the blasted heath,
Scorched by the autumnal burnings, which have rushed,
With wasting fire fierce through its leafy groves.
Should every hill by the rebellious foe,
So well defended, cost thus dear to us,
Not the united forces of the world,
Could master them, and the proud rage subdue
Of these AMERICANS. --

HOW. Even in an enemy I honor worth,
And valor eminent. The vanquished foe,
In feats of prowess show their ancestry,
And speak their birth legitimate;
The sons of Britons, with the genuine flame,
Of British heat, and valor in their veins.
What pity it is, such excellence of mind,
Should spend itself, in the fantastic cause,
Of wildfire liberty. -- Warren is dead,
And lies unburied, on the smoky hill;
But with rich honors he shall be inhum'd,
To teach our soldiery, how much we love,
Even in a foe, true worth and noble fortitude.
Come then brave soldiers, and take up the dead,
Majors, and Col'nels, which are this day slain,
And noble Captains of sweet live bereft.
Fair flowers shall grow upon their grassy tombs,
And fame in tears, shall tell their tragedy,
To many a widow and soft weeping maid,
Or parent woe-ful for an only son,
Through mourning BRITAIN, and HIBIRNIA'S Isle.
Enter BURGOYNE from BOSTON. Often have I read, in the historic page,
And witnessed myself, high scenes in war:
But this rude day, unparalled in time,
Has no competitor -- The gazing eye,
Of many a soldier, from the chimney-tops,
And spires of Boston, witnessed when How,
With his full thousands, moving up the hill,
Received the onset of the impetuous foe.
The hill itself, like Ida's burning mount,
When Jove came down, in terrors, to dismay
The Grecian host, enshrowded in thick flames;
And round its margin, to the ebbing wave,
A town on fire, and rushing from its base,
With ruin hideous, and combustion down.
Mean time, deep thunder, from the hollow sides
Of the artill'ry, on the hill top heard,
With roar of thunder, and loud mortars played,
From the tall ships, and batt'ries on the wave,
Bade yon blue ocean, and wide heaven resound.
A scene like which, perhaps, no time shall know,
'Till heaven with final ruin fires the ball,
Burns up the cities, and the works of men,
And wraps the mountains in one general blaze.
Exeunt
THE END.
EPILOGUE.
Written by a GENTLEMAN of the ARMY.
Supposed to be spoken, immediately after the Battle; By Lieutenant Colonel
WEBB, Aid de camp to General PUTNAM. THE Field is their's, but dearly was it
bought,
Thus long defended and severely fought.
Now pale-faced death sits brooding over the strand,
And views the carnage of his ruthless hand.
But why my heart this deep unbidden sigh,
Why steals the tear, soft trickling from the eye?
Is FREEDOM mastered by our late defeat
Or HONOR wounded by a brave retreat?
It Is nature dictates; and in pride's despite,
I mourn my brethren slaughtered in the fight.
'Th' insulting foe, now revels over the ground,
Yet flushed with victory, they feel the wound.
Embru'd in gore, they bleed from every part,
And deep wounds rankle at BRITANNIA'S heart.
O fatal conquest! Speak thou crimsoned plain,
Now pressed beneath the weight of hundreds slain?
There heaps of BRITISH youth promiscuous lie,
Here, murdered FREEMEN catch the wandering eye.
Observe yon stripling bathed in purple gore,
He bleeds for FREEDOM on his native shore.
His livid eyes in drear convulsions roll,
While from his wounds escapes the fluttering soul,
Breathless and naked on the ensanguin'd plain,
Midst friends and brothers, sons and fathers slain.
No pitying hand his languid eyes to close,
He breathes his last amidst insulting foes;
His body plundered, massacred, abused;
By Christians -- Christian funeral rites refused --
Thrown as a carrion in the public way,
To Dogs, to Britons, and to Birds a prey.
Enwrapt in sulfurous flame and clouds of smoke,
Brave GARDENER sinks beneath the deadly stroke,
And WARREN bleeds to grace the bloody strife
And for his injured country gives his life.
Yet while his mighty soul ascends the skies,
On earth his blood for ten-fold vengeance cries.
Great spirit rest -- by Heaven it is decreed,
Thy murdering tyrante by the sword shall bleed.
Even racks and gibbets would but consecrate,
And death repeated be too kind a fate.
The sword is drawn, in peace no more to rest,
Till justice bathes it in some tyrants breast.
Honor my weapon with the glorious task,
And let me stab, it is all the boon I ask.
Kind powers, beneath your all-protecting shield,
I now unsheath my sword, and take the field,
Sure of success, with this sweet comfort given,
Who fights for FREEDOM, -- fights the cause of HEAVEN.
AN ODE on the Battle of BUNKERS-HILL, Sung and Acted by a Soldier in a
Military Habit, with his Firelock, etc.
In the same Measure with a Sea Piece, Entitled the TEMPEST.
-- Cease rude BOREAS, blustering railer --

I.
YOU bold warriors, who resemble,
Flames, upon the distant hill,
At whose view, the heroes tremble,
Fighting with unequal skill.
Loud-sounding drums now with hoarse murmurs,
Rouse the spirit up to war,
Fear not, fear not, though their numbers,
Much to ours, superior are.
Hear brave WARREN bold commanding;
" Gallant souls and vet'rans brave,
" See the enemy just landing,
" From the navy-cover'd wave.
" Close the wings -- advance the center --
" Engineers point well your guns --
" Clap the matches, let the rent air,
" Bellow to Britannia's sons.
II.
Now think you see, three thousand moving,
Up the brow of BUNKERS-HILL,
Many a gallant vet'ran, shoving,
Cowards on against their will.
The curling volumes all behind them,
Dusky clouds of smoke arise,
Our cannon-balls, brave boys shall find them,
At each shot a hero dies.
Once more WARREN midst this terror,
" Charge brave soldiers charge again,
" Many an expert vet'ran warrior
" Of the enemy is slain.
" Level well your charged pieces,
" In direction to the town;
" They shake, they shake, their lightning ceases,
" That shot brought six standards down."
III.
Maids in virgin beauty blooming,
On Britannia's sea-girt isle,
Say no more your swains are coming,
Or with songs the day beguile.
For sleeping sound in death's embraces,
On their clay-cold beds they lie,
Death, grim death, alas defaces,
Youth and pleasure which must die.
" March the right wing GARDENER yonder,
" Take the assailing foe in flank,
" The hero's spirit lives in thunder,
Close there sergeants, close that rank.
" The conflict now does loudly call on
" Highest proof of martial skill,
" Heroes shall sing of them, who fall on,
" The slippery brow of BUNKERS-HILL."
IV.
Unkindest fortune, still thou changest,
As the wind upon the wave,
The good and bad alike thou rangest,
Undistinguished in the grave.
Shall kingly tyrants see thee smiling,
Whilst the brave and just must die,
Them of sweet hope and life beguiling
In the arms of victory.
" Behave this day my lads with spirit,
" Wrap the hill top as in flame;
" Oh if we fall, let each one merit,
" Immortality in fame.
" From this high ground like Vesuv'us
" Pour the floods of fire along;
" Let not, let not, numbers move us,
" We are yet five hundred strong.
V.
Many a widow sore bewailing
Tender husbands, shall remain,
With tears and sorrows, unavailing,
From this hour to mourn them slain.
The rude scene striking all bystanders,
Bids the little band retire,
Who can live like salamanders,
In such floods of liquid fire?
" Ah! Our troops are sorely pressed,
" HOW ascends the smoky hill,
" Wheel inward, let these ranks be faced,
" We have yet some blood to spill.
" Our right wing pushed, our left surrounded,
" Weight of numbers five to one,
" WARREN dead, and GARDENER wounded,
" Ammunition is quite gone".
VI.
See the steely points, bright gleaming,
In the sun's fierce dazzling ray,
Groans arising, lifeblood streaming,
Purple over the face of day.
The field is covered with the dying,
Freemen mixed with tyrants lie,
The living with each other vying,
Raise the shout of battle high.
Now brave PUTNAM, aged soldier,
" Come my vet'rans, we must yield;
" More equal matched, we'll yet charge bolder,
" For the present quit the field.
" The God of battles shall revisit,
" On their heads each soul that dies,
" Take courage boys, we yet shall not miss it,
" From a thousand victories."
BY GENERAL WASHINGTON, On his entering the Town of BOSTON, at the Head of the
AMERICAN ARMY, after the BRITISH TROOPS were by his skilful Approaches obliged
to abandon it.
AUSPICIOUS day, of happiness unmixed!
When this fair City, without bloodshed won,
Receives to her sweet bosom, once again,
Her freeborn sons, of perseverance tried,
And noble fortitude, in deeds of arms.
Now let the father, meet his infant son,
His virgin daughter, and long faithful spouse,
And kiss away all tears, but those of joy.
Now, let the ardent lover clasp his fair,
New flush the red rose in her damask cheek,
Light up the glad beam in her rolling eye,
And bid all pain and sorrowing be gone.
Oh happy day -- Shine on thou blissful fun,
And not one vapor, blemish thy career,
Till from thy midday champaign, wheeling down,
Thou in the western ocean go to rest.
O happy town -- Now let thy buildings smile,
Thy streets, run down, with silver floods of joy,
And from thy temples, loudly, hymn and song,
Sweep, the high arches, of resounding Heaven.
Yes fellow soldiers, let us bend to him
Who gave us strength, and confidence of soul,
To meet the Battle and fierce iron war,
Urged on severe by the tyrannic foe,
With deadly thunder, and mischievous arms.
To him who with his tempest, bulg'd the deep,
And their full hundred war-ships, on the bay,
Chained, with his strong wind, to the North-east shore.
The hand of Heaven, is visible in this,
And we Oh God, pour forth our souls in praise.
O fellow soldiers let our offerings rise,
Not in rich hecatombs, of bulls and goats,
But in true piety, and light of love,
And warm devotion, in the inward part.
Let your festivity, be mixed with thought,
And sober judgment, on this grand event.
March on, and take true pleasure to your arms,
You all are bridegrooms, to fair joy to day.
A MILLITARY SONG, BY THE ARMY:
On General WASHINGTON'S victorious entry into the Town of BOSTON.
I.
SONS of valor, taste the glories,
Of Celestial LIBERTY,
Sing a Triumph over the Tories,
Let the pulse of joy beat high.
II.
Heaven this day has foiled the many,
Fallacies of GEORGE their King,
Let the echo reach Britan'y,
Bid her mountain summits ring.
III.
See yon Navy swell the bosom,
Of the late enraged sea,
Where e're they go we shall oppose them,
Sons of valor must be free.
IV.
Should they touch at fair RHODE ISLAND,
There to combat with the brave,
Driven, from each hill, and high land,
They shall plough the purple wave.
V.
Should they thence, to fair VIRGIN'Y
Bend a squadron to DUNMORE,
Still with fear and ignominy,
They shall quit, the hostile shore.
VI.
To CAROLINA or to GEORG'Y,
Should they next advance their fame,
This land of heroes shall disgorge the,
Sons of tyranny and shame.
VII.
Let them rove to climes far distant,
Situate under Artic skies,
Call on Hessian troops assistant,
And the Savages to rise.
VIII.
Boast of wild brigades from Russia,
To fix down the galling chain,
Canada and Nova Scotia,
Shall discharge these Hords again.
IX.
In NEW YORK State, rejoined by CLINTON,
Should their standards mock the air,
Many a surgeon, shall put lint on,
Wounds of death, received there.
X.
War fierce war shall break their forces,
Nerves of tory men shall fail,
Seeing HOW with altered courses,
Bending to the western gale.
XI.
Thus, from every bay of ocean,
Flying back, with sails unfurled,
Tossed with ever-troubl'd motion,
They shall quit, this smiling world.
XII.
Like Satan banished, from HEAVEN,
Never see, the smiling shore,
From this land so happy, driven,
Never Stain, its bosom more.
THE END.
Philadelphia, November 10th. 1776.
In three weeks from this date will be published, by ROBERT BELL, in
Third-street, PHILADELPHIA: for the use of schools, and for the use of all, who
wish to elevate their speech, and expand their understandings.

Ornamented, with one hundred and fifty Designs, engraved on Copper Plates. In
one octavo volume, with neat binding, (Price two dollars.)

SELECT FABLES OF AESOP AND OTHER FABULISTS. IN THREE BOOKS. CONTAINING, I.
FABLES FROM THE ANCIENTS. II. FABLES FROM THE MODERNS. III. ORIGINAL FABLES
NEWLY INVENTED.


BY ROBERT DODSLEY.

-- Is not the earth
With various living creatures, and the air
Replenished, and all those at thy command
To come and play before thee? Know thou not
Their language and their ways? They also know,
And reason not contemptibly: with these
Find pastime.
PARADISE LOST, b. 8. l. 370. N. B. At said BELL's, may now be had, all the new
publications on the MILITARY ART, Also a considerable variety of Books in
NAVIGATION, and other BRANCHES of the MATHEMATICS.


