THE FALL OF BRITISH TYRANNY: OR, AMERICAN LIBERTY TRIUMPHANT. THE FIRST
CAMPAIGN.

A TRAGI-COMEDY OF FIVE ACTS, AS LATELY PLANNED AT THE ROYAL THEATRUM
PANDEMONIUM, AT ST. JAMES'.

THE PRINCIPAL PLACE OF ACTION IN AMERICA.

PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF PARLIAMENT.

Quis furor o cives! quae tanta licentia ferri? LUCAN. lib. 1. ver. 8. What
blind, detested madness could afford
Such horrid license to the murdering sword?
ROW. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY STYNER AND CIST, IN SECOND-STREET, NEAR
ARCH-STREET. M DCC LXXVI.

THE DEDICATION.
To Lord BOSTON, Lord KIDNAPPER, and the innumerable and never-ending Clan of
Macs and Donalds upon Donalds, and the Remnant of the Gentlemen Officers,
Actors, Merry Andrews, strolling Players, Pirates and Buccaneers in America.
MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,
UNDERSTANDING you are vastly fond of plays and farces, and frequently exhibit
them for your own amusement, and the laudable purpose of ridiculing your
masters (the Yankees, as you call 'em) it was expected you would have been
polite enough to have favored the world, or America at least, (at whose
expense you act them) with some of your play-bills, or with a sample of your
composition.

I shall however not copy your churlishness, but dedicate the following
Tragi-Comedy to your patronage, and for your future entertainment; and as the
most of you have already acted your particular parts of it, both comic and
tragic, in reality at Lexington, Bunker's-hill, the Great-Bridge, etc. etc.
etc. to the very great applause of yourselves, though not of the whole house, no
doubt you will preserve the marks, or memory of it, as long as you live, as it
is wrote in capital American characters and letters of blood on your
posteriors: And however some Whigs may censure you for your affected mirth (as
they term it, in the deplorable situation you are now in, like bogs in a pen,
and in want of elbow room) yet I can by no means agree with them, but think it
a proof of true heroism and philosophy, to endeavor to make the best of a bad
bargain, and laugh at yourselves, to prevent others from laughing at you; and
though you are deprived of the use of your teeth, it is no reason you should be
bereaved of the use of your tongues, your eyes, your ears, and your risible
faculties and powers. That would be cruel indeed! after the glorious and
fatiguing campaign you have made, and the many signal victories obtained over
whole herbs of cattle and swine, routing flocks of sheep, lambs and geese,
storming hen-roosts, and taking them prisoners, and thereby raising the glory
of Old England to a pitch she never knew before. And ye Macs, and ye Donalds
upon Donalds, go on, and may our gallows-bills and liberty poles be honored
and adorned with some of your heads: Why should Tyburn and Temple Bar make a
monopoly of so valuable a commodity?

Wishing you abundance of entertainment in the re-acting this Tragi-Comedy, and
of which I should be proud to take a part with you, though I have reason to think
you would not of choice let me come within three hundred yards of your stage,
lest I should rob you of your laurels, receive the clap of the whole house, and
pass for a second Garrick among you, as you, know I always act with applause,
speak bold -- point blank -- off hand -- and without prompter.

I am, My Lords and Gentlemen Buffoons, Your always ready humble servant, DICK
RIFLE.

THE PREFACE.
SOLOMON said, "Oppression makes a wise man mad:" but what would he have said,
had he lived in these days, and seen the oppression of the people of Boston,
and the distressed situation of the inhabitants of Charlestown, Falmouth,
Stonnington, Bristol, Norfolk, etc. Would he not have said, The tongue of the
sucking child cleaves to the roof of his mouth for thirst; the young children
ask for bread, but no man breaks it unto them? They that did feed delicately,
perish in the streets; they that were brought up in scarlet, embrace the dung.
What would he have said of rejected petitions, disregarded supplications, and
contemned remonstrances? Would he not have said, "From hardness of heart, good
Lord, deliver us?" What would he have said of a freeborn people butchered --
their towns desolated, and become an heap of ashes -- their inhabitants become
beggars, wanderers and vagabonds -- by the cruel orders of an unrelenting
tyrant, wallowing in luxury, and wantonly wasting the people's wealth, to
oppress them the more? Would he not have said, it was oppression and
ingratitude in the highest degree, exceeding the oppression of the children of
Israel? and, like Moses, have cried out, let the people go? Would he not have
wondered at our patience and long-suffering, and have said, It Is time to change
our master! -- It Is time to part! -- And had he been an American born, would he
not have showed his wisdom by adopting the language of independency? Happy then
for America in these fluctuating times, she is not without her Solomon's, who
see the n^cessity of heark'ning to reason, and listening to the voice of COMMON
SENSE.

THE GODDESS OF LIBERTY.
HAIL! The Congress*
Patriots, hail! by me inspired be!
Speak boldly, think and act for Liberty,
United sons, America's choice band,
Ye Patriots firm, ye fav'ours of the land.
Hail! Patriots, hail! rise with the rising sun,
Nor quit your labor, till the work is done.
Ye early risers in your country's cause,
Shine forth at noon, for Liberty and Laws.
Build a strong tower, whose fabric may endure
Firm as a rock, from tyranny secure.
Yet would you build my fabric to endure,
Be your hearts warm -- but let your hands be pure.
Never to shine, yourselves, your country sell;
But think you nobly, while in place act well.
Let no self-server general trust betray,
No picque, no party, bar the public way.
Front an armed world, with union on your side:
No foe shall shake you -- if no friends divide.
At night repose, and sweetly take your rest;
None sleeps so sound as those by conscience blessed:
May martyred patriots whisper in your ear,
To tread the paths of virtue without fear;
May pleasing visions charm your patriot eyes;
While Freedom's sons shall hail you blessed and wise.
Hail! my last hope, she cries, inspired by me,
Wish, talk, write, fight, and die -- for LIBERTY.
THE PROLOGUE,
spoken by Mr. PETER BUCKSTAIL.
SINCE it is the fashion, preface, prologue next,
Else what is a play? -- like sermon without text!
Since it is the fashion then, I Will not oppose;
For what is a man if he is without a nose?
The curtain's up -- the musick's now begun,
What is it? -- Why murder, fire, and sword, and gun.
What scene? -- Why blood! -- What act? -- Fight and be free!
Or be ye slaves -- and give up liberty!
Blessed Continent, while groaning nations round
Bend to the servile yoke, ignobly bound,
May ye be free -- nor ever be oppressed
By murdering tyrants, but a land of rest!
What say ye to 't? what says the audience?
Methinks I hear some whisper COMMON SENSE.
Hark! what say them Tories? -- Silence -- let 'em speak,
Poor sools! dumb -- they hav'n't spoke a word this week,
Dumb let 'em be, at full end of their tethers,
'Twill save the expense of tar and of feathers:
Since old Pluto's lurch'd 'em, and swears he does not know
If more these Tory puppy curs will bark or no.
Now ring the bell -- Come forth, ye actors, come,
The Tragedy's begun, beat, beat the drum,
Let Us all advance, equipt like volunteers,
Oppose the foe, and banish all our fears.
We will be free -- or bravely we will die,
And leave to Tories tyrants legacy,
And all our share of its dependency.
Dramatis Personae
Lord Paramount, Mr. BUTE, Lord Mocklaw, Mr. MANSFIELD, Lord Hypocrite, Mr.
DARTMOUTH, Lord Poltron, Mr. SANDWICH, Lord Catspaw, Mr. NORTH, Lord Wisdom,
Mr. CHATHAM, Lord Religion, Bishop of St, ASAPH, Lord Justice, Mr. CAMDEN, Lord
Patriot, Mr. WILKES, Bold Irishman, Mr. BURKE, Judas, Mr. HUTCHINSON, Charley,
Mr. JENKINSON, Brazen, Mr. WEDDERBURNE, Colonel, Mr. BAR, Lord Boston, Mr.
GAGE, Admiral Tombstone, Mr. GRAVES, Elbow Rcom, It seems to be generally
thought, that the expression of Elbow Room is to be attributed to General How,
and not to General Burgoyne.
Mr. HOW, Mr. Caper, Mr. BURGOYNE, Lord Kidnapper, Mr. DUNMORE, General
Washington, General Lee, General Putnam, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Citizens,
Negroes, etc. etc. etc.
THE FALL OF BRITISH TYRANNY, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
At ST. JAMES'S.
Lord Paramount solus, strutting about. MANY long years have rolled
delightfully on, whilst I have been basking in the sunshine of grandeur and
power, whilst I have imperceptibly (though not unsuspected) guided the chariot of
state, and greased with the nation's gold the imperial wheels.

It Is I that move the mighty engine of royalty, and with the tincture of my
somniferous opiate (or, in the language of a courtier) by the virtue of my
secret in^^^ence, I have lulled the axletree to sleep, and brought on a
pleasing insensibility.

Let their champion, Lord Wisdom, groan, he is now become feeble and impotent,
a mere cripple in politics; their Lord Patriot's squint has lost its basilisk
effect: and the bold Irishman may bellow the Keenew till he is hoarse, he is no
more when compared to me than an Irish salmon to a Scotch herring: I care not a
bawbee for them all. I Will reign in Britain, I Will be king of their counsels, and
chief among the princes.

Oh! ambition, thou darling of my soul! stop not 'till I rise superior to all
superlative, 'till I mount triumphantly the pinnacle of glory, or at least open
the way for one of my own family and name to enter without opposition.

The work is now cut out, and must be finished, I have (...) too far to recede,
my honor's at stake, my imp^rt^nce, ^a^ my life dep^nds upon it!

L^^t night's three hours clos^ting has effectually done the (...); then I
spoke my mind in such terms as to make a (...) impression, never to be
eradicated -- all -- all was given up to me, and now since I hold the reins of
government, since I am possessed of supreme power, every thing shall b^
sub^^rvi^nt to my royal will and pleasure.

SCENE II.
Enter Mocklaw. I am your Lordship's most obedient humble servant.


Paramou^t. Be seated. -- I sent for you to have a small co^^erence with you --
and to let you know, your advice re^pecting certain points of law, I have
found, ^ucceeded to admiration, even beyond my most ^anguine expect^tions.


M^^^law. I am heartily glad of it, although the advice I gave your Lordship, I
cannot say, was law; yet, your Lordship can easily pass it as such by a royal
proclamation: and should it ev^r be disputed, I have quirks and quibbles enough
at your service, with Mr. Brazen and Mr. Atto^^ey General's assi^tance, to
render it so doubtful, obscure and ambiguous, as to puzzle Lord Justice,
perpl^x D^nning, and con^ound Gly^n.


Param^^^t. Can you show me an instance of a ^oyal proc^amation passing for a
law? or advise me how to make it such, if you can, I shall make it well worth
your study.


Mockl^w. My Lord as you have now got a parliament exact^y to your mind, every
thing you propose will be granted: but in order that you may see precedents are
not want^ng -- there is a statute in the r^ign of Henry the 8th that expressly
shows the then parliament passed a law that the kin^^^ proclamation should be
the law of the land --


Paramount. Are you sure of that?


M^cklaw. My Lord, here it is -- this is real law: (...). When we find any
thing of this kind* ready made to our hands, it is a treasure we should never
part with. [Paramount reads.


Paramount. I see it plain! this, this alone is worth a ton of gold -- Now, by
St. Andrew! I Will strike a stroke that shall surprise all Europe, and make the
boldest of the adverse party turn pale and tremble -- Scotch politics, Scotch
intrigues, Scotch Influence, and Scotch impudence (as they have termed it) they
shall see ere long shine with unheard of spl^ndour, and the name of Lord
Paramount the mighty, shall blaze in the annals of the world with far greater
lu^tre (as a consummate politician) than the name of Alexander the Great, as an
hero!


Mocklaw. That day I much wish for, -- but, with your Lordship's permission, I
would just mention, that secrecy and dissimulation are the soul of enterprise;
your Lordship has many enemies, who watch every movement of state with a
jealous and wary eye.


Paramount. I know it, but the futile attempts of my timid adversaries have
hitherto proved abortive -- so far I have borne down all opposition, and those
(even some of the greatest of them) who not long since were my most open, as
well as secret enemies, I now behold with the most princely pleasure, the
earliest to attend, to congratulate me on my birth day, though uninvited, bow
down, and make the most obsequious congees. Have you not seen this, Mocklaw?
and how I keep them in expectation of something, by now and then bestowing part
of a gracious smile amongst a do^en of 'em?


Mocklaw. I have, my Lord, and no doubt they interpret that as a favorable
^men; -- however, policy, my Lord, would dictate that to you, if there were no
other consideration.


Param^^nt. True, and yet they are cursedly mistaken -- and now, Mocklaw, as I
have ever found you to be well disposed toward me, and the cause I espouse,
and as I trust you continue satisfied with my former bounty, and my promise now
of granting you a pension for life, with liberty to retire, I shall make you my
confident, and disclose to you a secret no man except myself yet knows, which I
expect you have so much honor to let it remain a secret to all the world (I
mean as to the main point I have in view).


Mocklaw. Depend upon it, my Lord, I am sincerely devoted to your Lordship,
command me, I care not what it is, I Will screw, twist and strain the law as
tight as a drum-head to serve you.


Paramount. I shall at this time but just give you a hint of the plan I Have
drawn up in my own mind. You must have perceived in me a secret hankering for
majesty for some time past, notwithstanding my age; -- but as I have considered
the great dislike the nation in general have, as to my person. I Will wave my own
pretensions, and bend my power and affiduity to it in favor of one, the
nearest a kin to me, you know who I mean, and a particular friend of yours,
provided I continue to be dictator, as at present; and further, I intend
America shall submit. -- What think you of it so far?


Mocklaw. A day I Have long wished to see! but you stagger me, my Lord, not as to
my honor, secrecy, or resolution to serve you, but as to the accomplishment of
such grand designs.


Paramount. It Is true, I have undertaken a mighty task, a task that would have
perplexed the Council of Nice, and staggered even Julius Ce^ar -- but --


Mocklaw. You have need, my Lord, of all your wisdom, fortitude and power, when
you consider with whom you have to contend. -- Let me see -- Lord Wisdom --
Lord Religion -- Lord Justice -- Lord Patri^t -- the bold Irishman, etc. etc.
etc. and the wisdom of the United Colonies of America, in Congress to cope
with; as individuals they are trifling, but in league combined may become
potent enemies.


Paramount. Granted -- But are you so little of a lawyer as not to know the
virtue of a certain specific I Am possessed of, that will accomplish any thing,
even to performing miracles? Don't you know there is such sweet music in the
shaking of the treasury keys, that they will instantly lock the most babbling
patriot's tongue! transform a Tory into a Whig, and a Whig into a Tory? make a
superannuated old miser dance, and an old Cy^^^ philosopher smile? How many
thousand times has your tongue danced at Westminster Hall to the sound of such
music?


Mocklaw. Enchanting sounds, powerful magic, there is notwithstanding the charms
of such music, their potency and influence are irresistible -- that is a point
of law I can by no means give up, of more force than all the acts of parliament
since the days of king Alfred.


Paramount. I Am glad you acknowledge that -- Now then for a line of politics --
I propose to begin first by taxing America, as a blind -- that will create an
eternal animo^ity between us, and by sending over continually ships and troops,
this will of course produce a civil war -- weaken Britain by leaving her coasts
defenseless, and impover^^h America; so that we need not fear any thing from
that quarter. Then the united fleets of France and Spain with troops to appear
in the channel, and make a descent, while my kinsman with thirty thousand men
lands in Scotland, marches to London, and joins the others: What then can
prevent the scheme from having the wished for effect? This is the main point,
which keep to yourself.


Mocklaw. If it has failed heretofore, it is impossible it should fail now;
nothing within the reach of human wisdom was ever planned so judiciously; had
Solomon been alive, and a politician, I would have sworn your Lordship had
consulted him. -- But I would beg leave to hint to your Lordship the opposition
to be apprehended from the militia of England; and the German forces that may
be sent for according to treaty.


Paramount. As to the militia, they are half of them my friends, witness
Lancaster, Manchester, Liverpool, etc, etc. etc. the other half scarce ever
fired a gun in their lives, especially those of London, and I shall take care
by shaking the keys a little to have such officers appointed over them, who are
well known to be in my interest. As to the German forces, I have nothing to
apprehend from them; the parliament can soon pass an act against the
introduction of foreign troops, exept the French or Spaniards, who cannot be
called foreign, they are our friends and nearest neighbors. Have you any thing
further to object against the probability of this plan?


Mocklaw. Nothing my Lord, but the people of Ireland, who must be cajoled or
humbugg'd.


Paramount. As to that, let me alone, I shall grant the Roman Catholics, who
are by far the most numerous, the free exercise of their religion, with the
liberty of bearing arms, so long unjustly deprived of, and disarm in due time
all the Protestants in their turn.


Mocklaw. That will be a noble stroke; the more I consider it, the more I Am
surprised at your Lordship's profound wisdom and foresight: I think success is
certain.


Paramount. Then this is the favorable crisis to attempt it; it is not the
thought of a day, a month, or a year. Have you any more objections?


Mocklaw. I have one more, my Lord --


Paramount. Well, pray let us hear it; these lawyers will be heard.


Mocklaw. The Bishops and Clergy are a powerful, numerous body; it would be
necessary, my Lord, to gain them over, or keep them silent -- A religious war
is the worst of wars.


Paramount. You are very right, I have 'em fast enough -- Mammon will work
powerfully on them -- The keys -- the keys -- His Grace my Lord of Suffolk, and
Dean Tucker, are managing this business for me, and feeding them with the hopes
of being all created Archbishops here, and each to have a diocese, and Bishops
of their own appointment in America; not a city or town there but must be
provided with a Bishop: There let religion erect her holy altars, by which
means their revenues will be augmented beyond that of a Cardinal. All this we
must make 'em believe.


Mocklaw. True, my Lord, what is a Bishop without faith? This is the grandest
stroke of religious circumvention that ever was struck. -- I Have done, my Lord.


Paramount. Very well; you will not fail to meet the privy council here this
evening; in the mean time you will go and search the statutes for other
precedents to strengthen the cause; and remember I have enjoined you to secrecy.


Mocklaw. Depend upon it, my Lord, I cannot prove ungrateful to your Lordship,
nor such an enemy to myself. [ Exit Mocklaw.


SCENE III.
LordParamount solus. This Mocklaw is a cursed knowing dog, and I believe the
father of Brazen; how readily he found an old act of parliament to my purpose,
as soon as I told him I would make it worth his study; and the thoughts of a
pension will make him search his old worm-eaten statute books from the reign of
king Arthur down to this present time; how he raises objections too to make me
think his mind is ever bent on study to serve me. The shaking of the treasury
keys is a fine bait. [Rings the bell.] Charters, magna Cha^tas, bill of rights,
acts of assembly, resolves of congresses, trials by juries (and acts of
parliament too) when they make against us, must all be annihilated; a
suspending power I approve of, and of royal proclamations. --


Enter Charley. Charley I wait your Lordship's orders.


Paramount. Write a number of cards, and see that the Lords of the privy
council, and Mr. Judas, be summoned to give their attendance this evening at
six o'clock, at my Pandemonium.


Charley. I Am gone, my Lord.


[ Exit Charley. Paramount solus. Paramount How do we show our authority? how
do we maintain the royal prerogative? keep in awe the knowing ones of the
opposite party, and blind the eyes of the ignorant multitude in Britain? Why,
by spirited measures, by an accumulation of power, of deception, and the
shaking of the keys, we may hope to succeed; should that fail, I Will enforce
them with the pointed bayonet; the Americans from one end to the other shall
submit, in spite of all opposition; I Will listen to no overtures of
reconciliation from any petty self-constituted congress, they shall submit
implicitly to such terms as I of my royal indulgence please to grant. I Will show
them the impudence and weakness of their resolves, and the strength of mine; I
will never soften; my inflexibility shall stand firm, and convince them the
second Pharaoh is at least equal to the first. I am unalterably determined at
every hazard and at the risk of every cons^quence sequence to compel the
colonies to absolute submission. I Will draw in treasure from every quarter, and,
Solomon-like, wallow in riches; and Scotland, my dear Scotland* shall be the
paradise of the world. Rejoice in the name of Paramount, and the sound of a
bawbee shall be no more heard in the land of my nativity. --


SCENE. IV.
Enter Charley in hast^. My Lord, the notices are all served.


Paramount. It Is very well, Charley.


Charley. My Lord, be pleased to turn your eyes, and look out of the window,
and see the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common council and Liverymen going to St.
James's with the address.


Paramount. Where? Sure enough -- Curse their impudence; how that ^quinting
scou^drel swells with importance -- Mind, Charley, how fond he is of bowing to
the gaping multitude, and every upstart he fees at a window -- I hope he will not
turn his blare eyes toward me -- I want none of his bows, not I -- Stand
before me, Charley --


Charley. I will, my Lord, and if he looks this way, I Will give him such a
devili^h grin as best suits such fellows as him, and make him remember it as
long as he lives.


Paramount. Do so, Charley; I hate the dog mortally, I religiously hate him,
and hope ere long to have satisfaction for his in^olence, and the freedoms he
has taken with me and my connexions; I shall never forget the many scandalous
verses, lampoons and pasquinades he made upon us.


Charley. Indeed he has used your Lordship too ill ever to be forgotten or
forgiven.


Paramount. Damn him, I never intend to do either -- See again how he bows --
there again -- how the mob throw up their hats, ^plit their throats; how they
huzza too; they make a mere god of the fellow; how they idolize him -- Ignorant
brutes!


Charley. A scoundrel; he has climbed up the stilts of preferment strangely, my
Lord.


Paramount. Strangely, indeed; but it is our own faults.


Charley. He has had better luck than honester folks; I Am surprised to think
he has ever rose to the honor of presenting a remonstrance, or rather, that he
could ever have the impudence to think of remonstrating.


Paramount. Aye, Charley, you see how unaccountably things turn out; his
audacity is unparalelled -- a Newgate dog.


Charley My Lord, I believe the fellow was never known to blush; and indeed
it is an observation I made some time since, and I believe a just one, without
an exception, that those who squint never blush.


Paramount. You must be mistaken, Charley.


Charley. No, my Lord, it is a fact, I had an uncle squinted exactly like him,
who was guilty of many scandalous things, and yet all the parish, with the
parson at their head, could not make him blush, so that at last he became a
bye-word -- Here comes old shame-the-devil; this dog is the very spawn of him.


Paramount. Hoot, mon! ye give your uncle a shoking character.


Charley. I only mention it, my Lord, for the similarity's sake.


Paramount. For the spawn of him, and the similarity's sake, I Am apt to think
you have been abusing your own cousin all this while.


Charley. God forbid, my Lord, I should be any how allied to him.


Paramount. I fancy, Charley, if the truth was known, your uncle did not
mention you in his will, and forgot to leave you the mansion house and farm at
Gallows-hill. Am I right, Charley?


Charley. You're right, my Lord, upon my honor -- but --


Paramount. I thought so -- Well, never mind -- Ha, ha, ha, who are those two
fat fellows there that go in such state?


Charley. I suppose them to be a couple of Livery Tallow-chandlers, my Lord, by
their big bellies.


Paramount. Ha, ha, -- what work the guards would make amongst them -- but they
must not be called yet. -- And who are those other two behind 'em?


Charley. This is Mr. Hone, and the other Mr. Strap, a couple of the
Corporation Barbers, for^ooth.


Paramount. Ha, ha, ha, I thought they had been a couple of Dukes; -- and that
one -- who is he with the Beehive whig?


Charley. That is Mr. Alderman Pipe^^ank, in Newgate-street.


Paramount. A parcel of Newgate dogs altogether -- Well, it is a good deal of
satisfaction to me to think how this fellow will be received at St. James's;
he will not return back so pleased as he seems to be now, I warrant you -- I have
taken care he shall meet with a d -- d cold recep^ion there; he will have to
make his appearance before Lord Frostyface, Lord Scarecrow, Lord Sneerwell,
Lord Firebrand, Lord Mawmouth, Lord Waggonjaws, Lord Gripe, Lord Brass, Lord
Surly and Lord Tribulation, as hard-fac'd fellows as himself; and the beauty of
it is, not one of them loves him a whit more than I do.


Charley. That will be rare diversion for them that are present; he will look
then, my Lord, like Sampson making sport for the Philistines.


Paramount. Aye, but I wish he was as blind too, as Sampson was. -- Well,
Charley, we have been disposed to be a little merry with this ridiculous
parade, this high life below stairs. I wish you had begun your description a
little sooner, before they were all gone; the looks of these wiseacres affords
us some mirth, though we despise them and their politics, and it is not unlikely
it may end in blood -- Be it so, I Am prepared for the worst.


Charley. Rather so, my Lord, than submit to such rascals.


Paramount. I Will give up my life first for a sacrifice.


[ Exit Charley. SCENE V.
Enter Mocklaw, Poltron, Hypocrite, Cat^paw, Brazen, Judas. ( All seated.)
Paramount. My Lords and Gentlemen, it seems opposition to our measures are
making hasty-strides; the discontented faction, the supporters and encouragers
of rebellion, and whose hearts are tainted therewith, seem bent, if possible,
on the destruction of Britain, and their own aggrandisement. Are not the daily
papers filled with treasonable resolves of American congresses and committees,
extracts of letters, and other infamous pieces and scurrilous pamphlets,
circulating with unusual industry throughout the kingdom, by the enemies of
Britain, thereby poisoning the minds of our liege subjects with their
detestable tenets? -- And did you not this day see the procession, and that
vile miscreant Lord Patriot at their head, going to St. James's with their
remonstrance, in such state and parade as manifestly tended to provoke,
challenge and defy majesty itself, and the powers of government? and yet
nothing done to stop their pernicious effects. -- Surely, my Lords and
Gentlemen, you must agree with me, that it is now become highly expedient that
an immediate stop should be put to such unwarrantable and dangerous
proceedings, by the most vigorous and coercive measures.


Mocklaw. I entirely agree with your Lordship, and was ever firmly of opinion,
that licentiousness of every kind, (particularly that of the Press) is
dangerous to the state; the rabble should be kept in awe by examples of
severity, and a proper respect should be enforced to superiors. I have
sufficiently shown my dislike to the freedom of the press, by the examples I
have frequently made (though too favorable) of several printers, and others, who
had greatly trespassed, and if they still persist, other measures should be
taken with them, which the laws will point out; and as to Lord Patriot, he is a
fellow that has been outlawed, scandal proof, little to be got by meddling with
him; I would advise to let him alone for the present, and humble America first.


Mr. Brazen. I am very clear in it, please your Lordship; there are numbers of
men in this country who are ever studying how to perplex and entangle the
state, constantly thwarting government, in every laudable undertaking; this
clamorous faction must be curbed, must be subdued and crushed -- our thunder
must go forth, America must be conquered. I am for blood and fire to crush the
rising glories of America -- They boast of her strength; she must be conquered,
it half Germany is called to our assistance.


Mr. Poltron. I entirely agree with you, Mr. Brazen; my advice is, that Lord
Boston and Admiral Tombstone be immediately despatch'd to Boston, with two or
three regiments (though one would be more than sufficient) and a few ships to
shut up their ports, disannul their charter, stop their trade, and the
pusillanimous beggars, those scoundrel rascals, whose predominant passions are
impudence and fear, would immediately give up, on the first landing of the
regulars, and fly before 'em like a hare before the hounds; that this would be
the case, I pawn my honor to your Lordships, nay I Will sacrifice my life: My
Lords, I have moreover the testimony of General Amherst and Colonel Grant to
back my assertion; besides here is Mr. Judas, let him speak.


Lord Hypocrite. If this is the same Colonel Grant that was at Fort Duque^ne,
the same that ran away from the French and Indians, the same that ran away from
the French and Indians, the same that was rescued by Colonel Washington, I have
no idea of his honor or testimony.


Lord Poltron. He Is a Gentleman, my Lord Hypocrite, of undoubted veracity.


Lord Hypocrite. You might as well have said courage too; I have exceptions
against both; and as to General Amher^t's assertion that he could drive all
America with five thousand men, he must have been joking, as he is quite of a
different opinion now.


Lord Catspaw. What is your opinion of your countrymen, Mr. Judas, with respect
to their courage?


Judas. The same that I ever told you, my Lord; as to true courage they have
none, I know 'em well -- they have a plenty of a kind of enthusiastic real,
which they substitute in the room of it; I am very certain they would never
face the regulars, though with the advantage of ten to one.


Lord Hypocrite. All this, and a great deal more, would never convince me of
the general cowardice of the Americans -- but of the cowardice of Grant I Have
been long con^inced, by numbers of letters formerly from America -- I Am for
doing the business effectually; don't let us be too sanguine, trust to stories
told by every sycophant, and hurry (...) over head to be laughed at; the
Americans are bold, stubborn and sour; it will require foreign assistance to
subdue 'em.


Lord Catspaw. These sour Americans, ignorant brutes, unbroke and wild, must be
tamed; they will soon be humble if punished; but if disregarded, grow fierce. --
Barbarous nations must be held by fear, rein'd and spurred hard, chained to the
oar, and bowed to due control, 'till they look grim with blood; let us first
humble America, and bring them under our feet; the olive branch has been held
out, and they have rejected it; it now becomes us to use the iron rod to break
their disobedience; and should we lack it, foreign assistance is at hand.


Lord Hypocrite. All this I grant, but I Am for sending a force sufficient to
crush 'em at once, and not with too much precipitation; I am first for giving
it a color of impartiality, forbearance and religion. -- Lay it before
parliament; we have then law on our side, and endeavor to gain over some or
all of the Methodist Teachers, and in particular my very good friend Mr.
Wesley, their Bishop, and the worthy Mr. Clapum, which task I would undertake;
it will then have the sanction of religion, make it less suspected, and give it
a better grace.


Lord Catspaw. I should choose it to be done by consent of parliament; we stand
then on firmer ground; there is no doubt they will grant every thing your Lordship
proposes upon my motion: but to tell the truth, I Would rather be in purgatory so
long, than to run the gantlet of the Bold Irishman's tongue.


Mo^k^aw. Aye, aye, don't part with the law while it is in our favor, or we can
have it by asking for -- and as to the Bold Irishman, don't be brow-beaten, you
must summon all your brass, and put on a rugged highwayman's face like his; I
expect some work of that kind too, but the devil himself shall not brow-beat me.


Paramount. I am glad to find, my Lords and Gentlemen, you all see the
necessity of sending over troops and ships; I intend my Lord Cat^paw shall lay
it before parliament, and am very certain they will pass any acts I can desire. I
thank you, Lord Hypocrite, for your kind offer, and accept of it; his Grace my
Lord of Suffolk and Dean Tucker are n^gociating the same business with the rest
of my Lords the Bishops, and will succeed; so that it will carry the appearance
of law and of religion, and will be sufficiently graced; I Will warrant you no
one shall have cause to complain of its wanting grace. And now, my Lords and
Gentlemen, as it is so late, and we have gone through all the business at this
time proposed, you are at your liberty to withdraw.


[Exeunt. Paramount solus. " -- The great, the important day,
" Big with the fate of Britain and of America,
is now fixed, irr^vocably fixed; the ^torm is ready to burst; the lowering
clouds portend their fate my glory, their fall my triumph -- But I must h^^te
to be gone, the ceremonies await my pr^sence; deeds of darkness must be done by
night, and, like the sil^nt mol^, work under ground:

Now rushing forth in sober twilight gray,
Like prowling wolf, who ranges for his prey,
With eager grash I Will seize the imperial crown.
But if I fail, thou world, turn upside down;
Nor mortal leave a^ive, my fall to mourn.

[Exit. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Lord Wisdom, Lord Religion, Lord Justice. Lord Wisdom. I Much lament, my
Lords, the present unhappy situation of my country; wherever I turn my eyes, to
Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, the prospect appears the same. -- Look up to
the throne, and behold your king, if I may now call him by that soft title --
Where is the wisdom, the justice, the religion, that once adorned that throne,
and shed the benign influence of their bright rays through the four quarters of
the globe? Alas! they are flown!

Mark his forlorn looks -- his countenance dejected, a sullen greatness fixed
on his brow, as if it veiled in blood some awful purpose, his eyes flaming and
sanguinary; how I bewail him for his predecessor's sake! -- Long -- long have I
been an old, and I trust a faithful servant in the family -- Can I then
restrain one tear? No, it is impossible!-View that arch-dragon, that old fiend,
Paramount, that rebel in grain, whispering in his ear. View his wretched
ministers hovering round him, to accomplish their accursed purpose, and
accelerate his destruction -- View the whole herd of administration (I know 'em
well) and tell me if the world can furnish a viler set of miscreants? View both
houses of parliament, and count the number of Tyrants, Jacobites, Tories,
Placemen, Pensioners, Sycophants and Panders. View the constitution, is she not
disrobed and dismantled? is she not become like a virgin deflower'd? View our
fleets and armies commanded by bloody murdering butchers! View Britain herself
as a sheep without a shepherd! And lastly view America, for her virtue bleeding
and for her liberty weltering in her blood!


Lord Religion. Such has, and ever will be the fate of kings, who only listen
to the voice of pleasure, thrown in their way by the sirens of administration,
which never fail to swallow them up like a quicksand -- like a serpent, who
charms and fascinates, bewitches and enchants with his eye the unwary bird;
witness the fatal catastrophe of Rehob^am, who rejected the counsel of the wise
and experienced, and gave up all to the advice and guidance of young, unskilful
and wic^^d counselors. Had he listened to you, my Lord, had he followed your
advice, all, all would have gone well -- Under your auspicious administration
Britain flourished, but ever since has been on the decline, and patriotism,
like religion, scarcely now more than a sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.


Lord Wisdom. My counsel has been rejected -- my conciliatory plan thrown under
the table, and treated with contempt; the experience of gray hairs called the
superannuated notions of old age -- my bodily infirmities -- my tottering frame
-- my crazy carca^e, worn out in the service of my country, and even my very
crutches, have been made the subject of their ridicule.


Lord Justice. Gratitude, like religion and patriotism, are about taking their
flight, and the law of the land stands on tiptoe; the constitution, that
admirable fabric, that work of ages, the envy of the world, is deflower'd
indeed, and made to commit a rape upon her own body, by the avaricious frowns
of her own father, who is bound to protect her, not to destroy -- Her pillars
are thrown down, her capitals broke, her pedestals demolished and her
foundation nearly destroyed. -- Lord Paramount and his wretched adviser Mocklaw
baffles all our efforts. -- The statutes of the land superseded by royal
proclamations and dispensing powers, etc. etc. the bloody knife to be held to
the throats of the Americans, and force them to submit to slavery. --
Administration have commenced bloody tyrants, and those that should protect the
subject, are become their executioners; yet will I dispute with them inch by
inch, while there is a statute book left in the land. Come forth, thou grand
deceiver! I challenge thee to come forth!


Lord Wisdom. Our friends must bestir themselves once more, perhaps we may yet
turn the scale. -- If the voice of religion, wisdom and justice should fail,
let us sound the trumpet of liberty and patriotism, that will conquer them in
America, I know; let us try to storm them here with the united whole, and if by
a base majority they still carry their point, we can nevertheless wash our
hands and be clean.


Lord Religion. From the pulpit, in the house of God, have I spoken aloud, I
have lifted up my voice like a trumpet, Oh! Britain, how art thou fallen! Hear
now, O house of Britain, is it a small thing for you to weary man, but will you
weary your God also? In the house of Lords have I borne my testimony: Hear now,
O ye Princes, and I will yet declare in Britain, and show forth in America, I
will not cease 'till I bring about (if possible) unity, peace and concord.


Lord Wisdom. Much to be wished for; but alas! I fear it is now too late; I
foresee the tendency and consequence of those diabolical measures that have
been pursued with unrelenting fury. Britain will ruin her trade, waste her
wealth, her strength, her credit and her importance in the scale of Europe.
When a British king proves ungrateful and haughty, and strives to be
independent of his people, (who are his sole support) the people will in their
turn likewise strive to be independent of him and his myrmidons, and will be
free; they will erect the anfractuous standard of independency, and thousands
and tens of thousands will flock to it, and solace themselves under its shade.
-- They have often been told of this, but affected to despise it; they know not
America's strength, they are ignorant of it; fed by the flattery of every
sycophant tale, imagine themselves almighty, and able to subdue the whole
world. America will be lost to Britain for ever, and will prove her downfall.
America is wise, and will shake off the galling yoke before it be rivetted on
them; they will be drove to it, and who can blame them? Who can blame a gally
slave for making his escape? -- Britain will miscarry in her vile projects, her
knight errant, her Don Quixotte schemes in America: America will resist; they
are not easily to be subdued; (nay it is impossible) Britain will find it a
harder task than to conquer France and Spain united, and will cost 'em more
blood and treasure than a twice seven years war with those European powers;
they will stand out 'till Britons are tired. Britain will invite her with kind
promises and open arms; America will reject them; America will triumph, rejoice
and flourish, and become the glory of the earth; Britain will languidly hold
down her head, and become first a prey to a vile Pret^nder, and then be subject
to the ravagers of Europe. I love the Americans, because they love liberty.
Liberty flourishes in the wilds of America. I honor the plant, I revere the
tree, and would cherish its branches. Let us, my friends, join hands with them,
follow their example, and endeavor to support expiring liberty in Britain;
whilst I have a tongue to speak, I will support her wherever found; whilst I
have crutches to crawl with, I will try to find her out, and with the voice of
an archangel will demand for a sacrifice to the nation those miscreants who
have wickedly and wantonly been the ruin of their country. Oh, Liberty! Oh, my
country!


Lord Religion. Oh, Religion! Oh, Virtue! whither art thou fleeing? Oh, thou
Defender of the Faith! Oh, ye mighty Lords and Commons! Oh, ye deluded Bishops!
ye learned props of our unerring church, who preach up vengeance, force and
fire, instead of peace! be wise in time, left the Americans be driven to work
out their own salvation without fear or trembling.


[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Lord Patriot, Bold Irishman, Colonel. Bold Irishman. That Brazen Lawyer See
Wedderburne's speech.
, that Lord Chancellor, that would be, held forth surprisingly last night, he
beat the drum in your ears, brother soldier.


Colonel. I think he did; he beat a Tatoo for us all.


Lord Patriot. No politicians but lawyer politicians, it seems, will go down;
if we believe him, we must all turn lawyers now, and prate away the liberties
of the nation.


Colonel. Aye, first we must learn to rall at the clamorous faction,
disappointed politicians -- ever restless -- ever plotting -- constantly
thwarting government, in laudable and blameable purposes. -- Inconsiderable
party -- inconsistent in their own politics -- hostile to all government,
soured by disappointment, and urged by want -- proceeding to unjusti^iable
lengths -- and then sound the magnanimity of a British senate, animated by the
sacred fire caught from a high-spirited people --


Bold Irishman. And the devil knows what beside -- Magnanimity and sacred fire,
indeed! -- Very magnanimous sounds, but pompous nothings! Why did he not tell
us where was the magnanimity of the British senate at the time of the dispute
about Falkland's Island? What sort of fire animated them then? -- Where was the
high spirit of the people? -- Strange sort of fire, and strange sort of spirit,
to give up to our inveterate enemies, the Spaniards, our property unasked for,
and cut our best friends and brethren the Americans throats, for defending
theirs against lawless tyranny; their sacred fire became then all fumo, and the
strength of their boasted spirits evaporated into invisible effluvium; the
giant then sunk sure enough spontaneously into a dwarf; and now, it seems the
dwarf having been feeding upon smoaky fire and evaporated spirits, is
endeavoring to swell himself into a giant again, like the frog in the fable,
'till he bursts himself in silent thunder -- But let the mighty Philistine, the
Goliath Paramount, and his oracle Mocklaw, with their thunder bellowed from the
brazen mortar-piece of a turn-coat lawyer, have a care of the little American
David!


Lord Patri^t. Aye, indeed! America will prove a second Sampson to 'em; they
may put out his eyes for a while, but he will pull their house down about their
ears for all that. Mr. Brazen seemed surprised at the thought of relinqui^hing
America, and bawled out with the vociferation of an old miser that had been
robbed -- Relinquish America! relinquish America! forbid it heavens! But let
him and his masters take great care, or America will save 'em the trouble, and
relinquish Britain.


C^lonel. Or I Am much mistaken, Brazen says, establish first your superiority,
and then talk of negotiating.


Lord Patriot. That doctrine suits 'em best; just lik^ a cowardly pickpocket,
or a bloody highwayman, knock a man down first, and then tell him stand and
deliver.


Colonel. A just comparison, and excellent simile, by my soul! But I Am
surprised he did not include the Clergy among the number of professions unfit
(as he said) to be politicians.


Bold Irishman. Did you ever know a lawyer to meddle with religion, unless he
got a fee by it? he will take care and ^teer clear of that; if it don't come in
his way, he will never break his neck over a church bible, I warrant you --
Mammon is his god -- Judge Jeffereys is his priest -- Star Chamber doctrine is
his creed -- fire, flames and faggot, blood, murder, halters and thundering
cannon are the ceremonies of his church -- and lies, misrepresentations,
deceit, hypocrisy and di^^imulation are the articles of his religion.


Lord Patriot. You make him a monster, indeed.


Bold Irishman, Not half so bad as he is, my Lord; he is following close to the
heels ^f that profound sage, that oracle, Mocklaw, his tutor: I can compare the
whole herd of them to nothing else but to the swine we read of running headlong
down the hill, Paramount their devil, Mocklaw the evil spirit, and Brazen their
driver, as unfit to guide the chariot of state as Phaeton was to guide the
chariot of the ^un.


Colonel. And thus they will drive liberty from out the land, yet I hope they will
meet the ambitious Phaeton's fate; but when a brave people, like the Americans,
from their infancy used to liberty (not as a gift, but who inherit it as a
birthright, but not as a mess of pottage, to be bought by, or sold to, every
hungry glutton of a minister) find attempts made to reduce them to slavery,
they generally take some desperate successful measure for their deliverance. I
should not be at all surprised to hear of independency proclaimed throughout
their land, of Britain's armies beat, their fleets burnt, sunk, or otherwise
destroyed. The same principle which Mr. Brazen speaks of, that inspires British
soldiers to fight, namely the ferment of youthful blood, the high spirit of the
people, a love of glory, and a sense of national honor, will inspire the
Americans to withstand ^^^m; to which I may add, liberty and property. -- But
what is national honor? Why, national pride. -- What is national glory? Why
national nonsense, when put in competition with liberty and property.


Lord Patriot. Of Britain I fear liberty has taken its farewell, the aspiring
wings of tyranny has long hovered over, and the over-shadowing influence of
bribery has eclipsed its rays and dark'ned its luster; the huge Paramount,
that temporal deity, that golden calf, finds servile wretches enough so base as
to bow down, worship and adore his gilded horns; -- let 'em even if they will:
-- But as for me, though I should stand alone, I would spurn the brute, where he
forty-five Alluding to the North-Briton, Number forty-five.
times greater than he is; I Will administer, ere long, such an emetic to him, as
shall make the monster disgorge the millions yet unaccounted for, and never
shall it be said, that Patriot ever feared or truckled to him, or kept a silent
tongue when it should speak.


Bold Irishman. There I Will shake hands with you, and my tongue shall echo in
their ears, make their arched ceiling shake, the treasury bench crack, and the
great chair of their great speaker tremble, and never will I cease lashing
them, while lashing is good, or hope remains; and when the voice of poor
liberty can no longer be heard in Britain or Hibernia, let us give Caledonia a
kick with our heels, and away with the goddess to the American shore, crown
her, and defy the grim king of tyranny, at his peril, to set his foot there. --
Here let him stay, and wallow in sackcloth and ashes, like a beast as he is,
and, Nebucadnezzar-like, eat grass and thistles.


[Exeunt. See Paramount, upon his awful throne,
Striving to make each freeman's purse his own!
While Lords and Commons most as one agree,
To grace his head with crown of tyranny.
They spurn the laws, -- force constitution locks,
To seize each subject's coffer, chest and box;
Send justice packing, as though too poor unmixed,
And bug the tyrant, as by law he is fixed.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
In BOSTON.
Selectman, Citizen. Selectman. AT length, it seems, the bloody flag is hung
out, the ministry and parliament, ever studious in mischief, and bent on our
destruction, have ordered troops and ships of war to shut our ports, and starve
us into submission.


Citizen. And compel us to be slaves; I have heard so. It is a fashionable way
to requite us for our loyalty, for the present we made them of Louisburg, for
our protection at Duquesne, for the assistance we gave them at Quebec,
Martinico, Guadaloupe, the Havannah, etc. etc. Blast their councils, spurn
their ingratitude! Soul of Pepperel! whither art thou fled?


Selectman. They seem to be guided by some secret demon; this stopping our
ports and depriving us of all trade is cruel, calculated to starve and beggar
thousands of families, more spiteful than politic, more to their own
disadvantage than ours: But we can resolve to do without trade; it will be the
means of banishing luxury, which has tinged the simplicity and spotless
innocence of our once happy asylum.


Citizen. We thank heaven, we have the necessaries of life in abundance, even
to an exuberant plenty; and how often has our hospitable tables fed numbers of
those ungrateful monsters, who would now, if they could, famish us?


Selectman. No doubt, as we abound in those temporal blessings, it has tempted
them to pick our pockets by violence, in hopes of treasures more to their minds.


Citizen. In that these thir^ters after gold and human blood will be
disappointed. -- No Perus or Mexicos here they will find -- but the demon you
speak of, though he acts in secret is notoriously known. Lord Paramount is that
demon, that bird of prey, that ministerial cormorant, that waits to devour, and
who first thought to disturb the repose of America; a wretch no friend to
mankind, who acts through envy and avarice, like ^atan, who escaped from hell to
disturb the regions of paradise; after ransacking Britain and Hibernia for
gold, the growth of hell, to feed his luxury, now waits to ri^^e the bowels of
America.


Selectman. May he prove more unsuccessful than ^atan; blind politics, rank
infatuation, madness detestable, the concomitants of arbitrary power! They can
never think to succeed; but should they conquer, they will find that he who
overcomes by force and blood, has overcome but half his foe -- Capt.
Pre^ton's massacre is too recent in our memories; and if a few troops dared to
commit such hellish unprovoked barbarities, what may we not expect from
^^egions armed with vengeance, whose leaders harbor principles repugnant to
freedom, and possessed with more than diabolical notions? Surely our friends
will oppose them with all the power heaven has given them.


Citizen. Nothing more certain; each citizen and each individual inhabitant of
America are bound by the ties of nature; the laws of God and man justify such a
procedure; passive obedience for passive slaves, and non-resistance for servile
wretches who know not, neither deserve, the sweets of liberty. As for me and my
house, thank God, such detestable doctrine never did, nor shall ever, enter
over my (...).


Selectman. Would all America were so zealous as you. -- The appointment of a
general Continental Congress was a judicious measure, and will prove the
salvation of this new world, where counsel mature, wisdom and strength united,
will prove a barrier, a bulwark, against the encroachments of arbitary power.


Citizen. I much approve of the choice of a congress; America is young, she
will be to it like a tender nursing mother, she will give it the paps of virtue
to suck, cherish it with the milk of liberty, and fatten it on the cream of
patriotism; she will train it up in its youth, and teach it to shun the poison
of British voluptuousness, and instruct it to keep better company. Let us, my
friend, support her all in our power, and set on foot an immediate association;
they will form an intrenchment, too strong for ministerial tyranny to o'erleap.


Selectman. I am determined so to do, it may prevent the farther effusion of
blood -- and --


SCENE II.
Enter a minister. My friends, I yet will hail you good morrow, though I know not
how long we may be indulged that liberty to each other; doleful tidings I have
to tell.


Selectman. With sorrow we have heard it -- good morrow, Sir.


Minister. Would to God it may prove false, and that it may vanish like the dew
of the morning.


Citizen. Beyond a doubt, Sir, it is too true.


Minister. Perhaps, my friends, you have not heard all.


Selectman. We have heard too much, of the troops and ships coming over, we
suppose you mean; we have not heard more, if more there be.


Minister. Then worse I have to tell, tidings which will raise the blood of the
patriot, and put your virtue to the proof, will kindle such an ardent love of
liberty in your breasts, as time will not be able to exterminate --


Citizen. Pray let us hear it, I Am all on fire^


Selectman. I Am impatient to know it, welcome or unwelcome.


Minister. Such as it is, take it; your charter is annihilated; you are all,
all declared rebels; your estates are to be confiscated; your patrimony to be
given to those who ever labored for it; popery to be established in the room
of the true catholic faith; the Old South, and other houses of our God,
converted perhaps into nunneries, inquisitions, barracks and common jails,
where you will peri^^ with want and famine, or suffer an ignominious death
(...) your wives, children, dearest relatives and friends, forever separated
from you in this world, without the prospect of receiving any comfort or
consolation from them, or the least hope of affording any to them.


Selectman. Perish the thought!


Citizen. I Have heard enough; -- To arms! my dear friends, to arms! and death or
freedom be our motto!


Minister. A noble resolution; Posterity will crown the urn of the patriot who
consecrates his talents to virtue and freedom; his name shall not be forgot;
his reputation shall bloom with unfading verdure, while the name of the tyrant,
like his vile body, shall moulder into dust. Put your trust in the Lord of
hosts, he is your strong tower, he is your helper and defense, he will guide
and strengthen the arm of flesh, and scatter your enemies like chaff.


Selectman. Let us not hesitate.


Citizen. Not a single moment; -- it is like to prove a mortal strife, a
never-ending contest, tyranny or death.


Minister. Delays may be dangerous. -- Go and awake your brethren that
sleeps; -- rou^e them up from their lethargy and supineness, and join with
confidence tempo^^^ with spiritual weapons. -- Perhaps they be now landing and
this moment, this very moment, may be the last (...) your liberty. -- Prepare
yourselves -- be ready -- stand fa^t -- ye know not the day nor the hour. --
May the Ruler of (...) send us liberty and life. -- Adieu! my friends.


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
In a street in BOSTON.
Frequent town-meetings and consultations amongst the inhabitants; -- Lord
Boston arrives with the forces and ships; -- lands and fortifies Boston, etc.

Whig, Tory. Whig. I have said and done all that man could say or do. -- It Is
wrong, I insist upon it, and time will show it, to suffer them to take
possession of Castle William and fortify Boston Neck.


Tory. I cannot see, good Sir, of what advantage it will be to them; -- they have
only a mind, I suppose, to keep their soldiers from being inactive, which may
prejudice their health.


Whig. I wish it may prove so, I would very gladly confess your superior
knowledge in military maneuvers; but till then, suffer me to tell you, it is a
stroke the most fatal to us, -- no less, Sir, but to cut off the communication
between the town and country, making prisoners of us all by degrees, and give
'em an opportunity of making excursions, and in a short time subdue us without
resistance.


Tory. I think your fears are groundless.


Whig. Sir, my reason is not to be trifled with. Do you not see or hear every
day of insults and provocations to the peaceable inhabitants? This is only a
prelude. Can men of spirit bear forever with such usage? I know not what
business they have here at all.


Tory. I suppose they are come to protect us.


Whig. Damn such protectors, such cutthroat villains; protect us? from what?
from whom? --


Tory. Nay, Sir, I know not their business; -- let us yet bear with them 'till
we know the success of the petition from the Congress; -- if unfavourable, then
it will be our time.


Whig. Then, I fear, it will be too late; all that time we lose, and they gain
ground; I have no notion of trusting to the success of petitions, waiting
twelve months for no answer at all. Our assemblies have petitioned often, and
as often in vain; 'twould be a miracle in these days to hear of an American
petition being granted; their omnipotencies, their demi-godships (as they think
themselves) no doubt think it too great a favor done us to throw our petitions
under their table, much less vouchsafe to read them.


Tory. You go too far; -- the power of King, Lords and Commons is
uncontrollable.


Whig. With respect to tyrannising they would make it so, if they could, I
know, but there is a good deal to be said and done first; we have more than half
the bargain to make.


Tory. Sure you would not go to dispute by arms with Great Britain.


Whig. Sure I would not suffer you to pick my pocket, Sir.


Tory. If I did, the law is open for you --


Whig. I have but a poor opinion of law, when the devil sits judge.


Tory. What would you do then, Sir, if I was to pick your pocket?


Whig. Break your head, Sir --


Tory. Sure you don't mean as you say, Sir --


Whig. I surely do -- try me, Sir --


Tory. Excuse me, Sir, I am not of your mind, I would avoid every thing that
has the appearance of rashness. -- Great-Britain's power, Sir --


Whig. Great-Britain's power, Sir, is too much magnified, 'twill soon grow
weak, by endeavoring to make slaves of American freemen; we are not Africans
yet, neither bondslaves. -- You would avoid and discourage every thing that
has the appearance of patriotism, you mean. --


Tory. Who? me, Sir?


Whig. Yes, you, Sir; -- you go slily pimping, spying and sneaking about,
cajoling the ignorant, and insinuating bugbear notions of Great-Britain's
mighty power into weak people's ears, that we may tamely give all up, and you
be rewarded, perhaps, with the office of judge of the admiralty, or continental
hangman, for ought I know.


Tory. Who? me, Sir?


Whig. Aye, you, Sir; -- and let me tell you, Sir, you have been long suspected
--


Tory. Of what, Sir?


Whig. For a rank Tory, Sir.


Tory. What mean you, Sir?


Whig. I repeat it again -- suspected to be an enemy to your country.


Tory. By whom, Sir? Can you show me an instance?


Whig. From your present discourse I suspect you -- and from your connexions
and artful behavior all suspect you.


Tory. Can you give me a proof?


Whig. Not a point blank proof, as to my own knowledge; you're so much of a
Jesuit, you have put it out of my power; -- but strong circumstances by
information, such as amount to a proof in the present case, Sir, I can furnish
you with.


Tory. Sir, you may be mistaken.


Whig. It Is not possible, my informant knows you too well.


Tory. Who is your informant, Sir?


Whig. A gentleman, Sir; and if you will give yourself the trouble to walk with
me, I Will soon produce him.


Tory. Another time; I cannot stay now; -- it is dinnertime.


Whig. That Is the time to find him.


Tory. I cannot stay now.


Whig. We'll call at your house then.


Tory. I dine abroad, Sir.


Whig. Be gone, you scoundrel! I Will watch your waters; it is time to clear the
land of such infernal vermin.


[Exeunt both different ways. SCENE IV.
In BOSTON, while the Regulars were flying from LEXINGTON.
Lord Boston, surrounded by his guards and a few officers. Lord Boston. If
Colonel Smith succeeds in his embassy, and I think there is no doubt of it, I
shall have the pleasure this evening, I expect, of having my friends Hancock
and Adam's good company; I Will make each of them a present of a pair of handsome
iron ruffles, and Major Provost shall provide a suitable entertainment for them
in his apartment.


Officer. Sure they will not be so unpolite as to refuse your Excellency's kind
invitation.


Lord Boston. Should they, Colonel Smith and Major Pitcairn have my orders to
make use of all their rhetoric and the persuasive eloquence of British thunder.


Enters a messenger in haste. I bring your Excellency unwelcome tidings --


Lord Boston. For heaven's sake! from what quarter?


Messenger. From Lexington plains.


Lord Boston. It Is impossible!


Messenger. Too true, Sir.


Lord Boston. Say -- what is it? Speak what you know.


Messenger. Colonel Smith is defeated, and fast retreating.


Lord Boston. Good God! -- What does he say? Mercy on me!


Messenger. They Are flying before the enemy.


Lord Boston. Britons turn their backs before the Rebels! -- The Rebels put
Britons to flight? -- Said you not so?


Messenger. They are routed, Sir; -- they are flying this instant; -- the
Provincials are numerous, and hourly gaining strength; -- they have nearly
surrounded our troops. A reinforcement, Sir -- a timely succor may save the
shattered remnant. Speedily! speedily, Sir! or they are irretrievably lost!


Lord Boston. Good God! What does he say? Can it be possible?


Messenger. Lose no time, Sir.


Lord Boston. What can I do? -- O dear!


Officer. Draw off a detachment -- form a brigade; prepare part of the train;
send for Lord Percy; let the drums beat to arms.


Lord Boston. Aye do, Captain; you know how, better than I. ( Exit Officer) Did
the Rebels dare to fire on the king's troops? Had they the courage? Guards,
keep round me.


Messenger. They Are like lions; they have killed many of our bravest officers
and men; and if not checked instantly, will totally surround them, and make the
whole prisoners. This is no time to parley, Sir.


Lord Boston. No, indeed; what will become of me?


Enter Earl Percy. Earl Percy. Your orders, Sir.


Lord Boston. Haste, my good Percy, immediately take command of the brigade of
reinforcement, and fly to the assistance of poor Smith! -- Lose no time, lest
they be all cut off, and the Rebels improve their advantage, and be upon us;
and God knows what quarter they will give. -- Haste, my noble Earl! -- Speedily!
-- Speedily! -- Where Is my guard?


Earl Percy. I Am gone, Sir.


[ Exeunt Percy and officers -- drums beating to arms. Lord Boston. What means
this fluttering round my heart? this unusual chilness? Is it fear? No, it
cannot be, it must proceed from my great anxiety, my perturbation of mind for
the fate of my countrymen. A drowsiness hangs over my eyelids; -- fain would I
repose myself a short time; -- but I must not; -- I must wait; -- I Will to the
top of yon eminence, -- there I shall be safer. Here I cannot stay; -- there I
may behold something favorable to calm this tumult in my breast. -- But, alas!
I fear -- Guards, attend me.


[ Exeunt Lord Boston and guards. SCENE V.
Lord Boston and guards on a hill in BOSTON, that overlooks CHARLESTOWN.
Lord Boston. Clouds of dust and smoke intercept my sight; I cannot see; I hear
the noise of cannon -- Percy's cannon -- Grant him success!


Officer of guard. Methinks, Sir, I see British colors waving.


Lord Boston. Some ray of hope. -- Have they got so near? -- Captain, keep a
good look out; tell me every thing you see. My eyes are wondrous dim.


Officer. The two brigades have joined -- Now Admiral Tombstone bellows his
lower tier on the Provincials. How does your Excellency?


Lord Boston. Right; -- more hope still. -- I Am bravely to what I was. Which
way do our forces tend?


Officer. I can distinguish nothing for a certainty now; such smoke and dust!


Lord Boston. God grant Percy courage!


Officer. His ancestors were brave, Sir.


Lord Boston. Aye, that is no rule -- no rule, Captain; so were mine. -- A heavy
firing now. -- The Rebels must be very numerous --


Officer. They Are like caterpillars; as numerous as the loc^^ts of Egypt.


Lord Boston. Look out, Captain, God help you, look out.


Officer. I do, Sir.


Lord Boston. What do you see now? Hark! what dreadful noise!


One of the guard. (aside) How damned afraid he is.


Another of the guard. (aside) He Is one of your chimney corner Generals -- an
old granny.


Officer. If I mistake not, our troops are fast retreating; their fire
slackens; the noise increases.


Lord Boston. Oh, Captain, don't say so!


Officer. It Is true, Sir, they are running -- the enemy shout victory.


Lord Boston. Upon your honor? -- say --


Officer. Upon my honor, Sir, they are flying toward Charlestown. Percy's
beat; -- I Am afraid he is lost his artillery.


Lord Boston. Then it is all over -- the day is lost -- what more can we do?


Officer. We may, with the few troops left in Boston, yet afford them some
succor, and cover their retreat across the water; it is impossible to do more.


Lord Boston. Go instantly; I Will wait your return. Try your utmost to prevent
the Rebels from crossing. Success attend you, my dear Captain, God prosper you!
[Exit Officer] Alas! alas! my glory's gone; my honor's stained. My dear
guards, don't leave me, and you shall have plenty of porter and sour-crout.


SCENE VI.
Roger and Dick, two shepherds near LEXINGTON, after the defeat and flight of
the Regulars.
Roger. Whilst early looking, Dick, ere the sun was seen to tinge the brow of
the mountain, for my flock of sheep, nor dreaming of approaching evil, suddenly
mine eyes beheld from you hill a cloud of dust arise at a small distance; the
intermediate space were thick set with laurels, willows, evergreens, and bushes
of various kinds, the growth of wild nature, and which hid the danger from my
eyes, thinking perchance my flock had thither strayed; I descended, and
straight onward went; but, Dick, judge you my thoughts at such a
disappointment: Instead of my innocent flock of sheep, I found myself almost
encircled by a herd of ravenous British wolves.


Dick. Dangerous must have been your situation, Roger, whatever were your
thoughts.


Roger. I soon discovered my mistake; finding a hostile appearance, I instantly
turned myself about, and fled to alarm the shepherds.


Dick. Did they pursue you?


Roger. They did; but having the start, and being acquainted with the bye-ways,
I presently got clear of their voracious jaws.


Dick. A lucky escape, indeed, Roger; and what rout did they take after that?


Roger. Onwards, toward Lexington, devouring geese, cattle and swine, with
fury and rage, which, no doubt, was increased by their disappointment; and what
may appear strange to you, Dick, (though no more strange than true) is, they
seemed to be possessed of a kind of brutish music, growling something like our
favorite tune Yankee Doodle, (perhaps in ridicule) 'till it were almost thread
bare, seeming vastly pleased (monkey-like) with their mimickry, as though it
provoked us much.


Dick. Nature, Roger, has furnished some brute animals with voices, or, more
properly speaking, with organs of sound that nearly resemble the human. I have
heard of crocodiles weeping like a child, to decoy the unwary traveller, who is
no sooner within their reach, but they seize and devour instantly.


Roger. Very true, Dick, I have read of the same; and these wolves, being of
the canine breed, and having the properties of bloodhounds, no doubt are
possessed of a more acute sense of smelling, more reason, instinct, sagacity,
or what shall I call it? than all other brutes. It might have been a piece of
cunning of theirs, peculiar to them, to make themselves pass for shepherds, and
decoy our flocks; for, as you know, Dick, all our shepherds both play and sing
Yankee Doodle, our sheep and lambs are as well acquainted with that tune as
ourselves, and always make up to us whenever they hear the sound.


Dick. Yes, Roger; and now you put me in mind of it I Will tell you of something
surprising in my turn: I have an old ram and an old ewe, that, whenever they
sing Yankee Doodle together, a skilful musician can scarcely distinguish it
from the bass and tenor of an organ.


Roger. Surprising indeed, Dick, nor do I in the least doubt it; and why not,
as well as Balaam's ass, speak? and I might add, many other asses, nowadays;
and yet, how might that music be improved by a judicious disposition of its
various parts, by the addition of a proper number of sheep and young lambs;
'twould then likewise resemble the counter, counter tenor, treble, and finest
pipes of an organ, and might be truly called nature's organ; methinks, Dick, I
could forever sit and hear such music,

Where all the parts in complication roll,
And with its charming music feast the soul!

Dick. Delightful, indeed; I Will attempt it with what little skill I have in
music; we may then defy these wolves to imitate it, and thereby save our
flocks: I am well convinced, Roger, these wolves intended it rather as a decoy
than by way of ridicule, because they live by cunning and deception; besides,
they could never mean to ridicule a piece of music, a tune, of which such
brutes cannot be supposed to be judges, and, which is allowed by the best
masters of music to be a composition of the most sublime kind, and would have
done honor to a Handel or a Correllius. Well, go on, Roger, I long to hear the
whole.


Roger. When they came to Lexington, where a flock of our innocent sheep and
young lambs, as usual, were feeding and sporting on the plain, these dogs of
violence and rapine with haughty stride advanced, and berated them in a new and
unheard of language to us.


Dick. I suppose learned at their own famed universities --


Roger. No doubt; they had teachers among them -- Two old wolves their leaders,
not unlike in features to Smith and Pitcairn, as striving to outvie each other
in the very dregs of brutal eloquence, and more than Billingsgate jargon,
howled in their ears such a peal of newfangled execra^^ons, and hell-invented
oratory, 'till that day unheard in New England, as struck the whole flock with
horror, and made them for a while stand aghast, as though all the wolves in the
forest had broke loose upon them.


Dick. Oh shocking! -- Roger, go on.


Roger. Not content with this, their murdering leaders, with premeditated
malice, keen appetite, and without provocation, gave the howl for the onset,
when instantly the whole herd, as if the devil had entered into them, ran
violently down the hill, and fixed their talons and jaws upon them, and as
quick as lightening eight innocent young lambs fell a sacrifice to their fury,
and victims to their rapacity; the very houses of our God were no longer a
sanctuary; many they tore to pieces, and some at the very foot of the altar;
others were dragged out as in a wanton gamesome mood.


Dick. Barbarity inexpressible! more than savage cruelty! I hope you will make
their master pay for 'em; there is a law of this province, Roger, which obliges
the owner of such dogs to pay for the mischief they do.


Roger. I know it, Dick; he shall pay, never fear, and that handsomely too; he
has paid part of it already.


Dick. Who is their master, Roger?


Roger. One Lord Paramount; they call him a freebooter; a fellow who pretends
to be proprietor of all America, and says he has a deed for it, and chief
ranger of all the flocks, and pretends to have a patent for it; has been a long
time in the practice of killing and stealing sheep in England and Ireland, and
had like to have been hanged for it there, but was reprieved by the means of
his friend GEORGE -- I forgot his other name -- not Grenville -- not George the
Second -- but another George --


Dick. It Is no matter, he will be hanged yet; he has sent his dogs to a wrong
place, and lugg'd the wrong sow by the ear; he should have sent them to
Newfoundland, or Kamptschatka, there is no sheep there -- But never mind, go on,
Roger.


Roger. Nor was their voracious appetites satiated there; they rushed into the
town of Concord, and proceeded to devour every thing that lay in their way; and
those brute devils, like Sampson's foxes, (and as though they were men) thrice
attempted with firebrands to destroy our corn, our townhouse and habitations.


Dick. Heavens! Could not all this provoke you?


Roger. It did; rage prompted us at length, and found us arms against such
hellish mischief to oppose.


Dick. Oh, would I had been there!


Roger. Our numbers increasing, and armed with revenge, we in our turn played
the man; they, unused to wounds, with hideous yelling soon betook themselves to
a precipitate and confused flight, nor did we give over the chase, 'till
Phoebus grew drowsy, bad us desist, and wished us a good night.


Dick. Of some part of their hasty retreat I was a joyful spectator, I saw
their tongues lolling out of their mouths, and heard them pant like hunted
wolves indeed.


Roger. Did you not hear how their mirth was turned into mourning? their fury
into astonishment? how soon they quitted their howling Yankee Doodle, and
changed their notes to bellowing? how nimbly (yet against their will) they
betook themselves to dancing? And he was then the bravest dog that beat time
the swiftest, and footed Yankee Doodle the nimblest.


Dick. Well pleased, Roger, was I with the chase, and glorious sport it was: I
often perceived them tumbling over each other heels over head; nor did one dare
stay to help his brother -- but, with bloody breech, made the best of his way
-- nor ever stopped 'till they were got safe within their lurking-holes --


Roger. From whence they have not the courage to peep out, unless four to one,
except (like a skunk) forced by famine.


Dick. May this be the fate of all those prowling sheepstealers; it behooves
the shepherds to double the watch, to take uncommon precaution and care of
their tender flocks, more especially as this is like to be an uncommon severe
winter, by the appearance of wolves so early in the season -- but, hark! --
Roger, methinks I hear the sound of melody warbling through the grove -- Let Us
sit a while, and partake of it unseen.


Roger. With all my heart. -- Most delightful harmony! This is the First of
May; our shepherds and nymphs are celebrating our glorious St. Tammany's day;
we'll hear the song out, and then join in the frolic, and chorus it over and
over again -- This day shall be devoted to joy and festivity.


SONG.
[ Tune. The hounds are all out, etc.]
1.
OF St. George, or St. Bute, let the poet Laureat sing,
Of Pharaoh or Pluto of old,
While he rhimes forth their praise, in false, flattering lays,
I Will sing of St. Tamm'ny the bold, my brave boys.
2.
Let Hibernia's sons boast, make Patrick their toast;
And Scots Andrew's fame spread abroad.
Potatoes and oats, and Welsh leeks for Welsh goats,
Was never St. Tammany's food, my brave boys.
3.
In freedom's bright cause, Tamm'ny pled with applause,
And reasoned most justly from nature;
For this, this was his song, all, all the day long:
Liberty's the right of each creature, brave boys.
4.
Whilst under an oak his great parliament sat,
His throne was the crotch of the tree;
With Solomon's look, without statutes or book,
He wisely sent forth his decree, my brave boys.
5.
His subjects stood round, not the least noise or sound,
Whilst freedom blazed full in each face:
So plain were the laws, and each pleaded his cause;
That might BUTE, NORTH and MANSFIELD disgrace [my brave boys
6.
No duties, nor stamps, their blessed liberty cramps,
A king, though no tyrant, was he;
He did often times declare, nay sometimes would swear,
The least of his subjects were free, my brave boys.
7.
He, as king of the woods, of the rivers and floods,
Had a right all beasts to control;
Yet, content with a few, to give nature her due:
So generous was Tammany's soul! my brave boys.
8.
In the morn he arose, and a-hunting he goes,
Bold Nimrod his second was he.
For his breakfast he would take a large venison stake,
And despised your slip-slops and tea, my brave boys.
9.
While all in a row, with squaw, dog and bow,
Vermilion adorning his face,
With feathery head he ranged the woods wide:
St. George sure had never such grace, my brave boys?
10.
His jetty black hair, such as Buckskin saints wear,
Persumed with bear's grease well smeared,
Which illum'd the saints face, and ran down apace,
Like the oil from Aaron's old beard, my brave boys.
11.
The strong nervous deer, with amazing career,
In swiftness he would fairly run down;
And, like Sampson, would tear wolf, lion or bear.
Never was such a saint as our own, my brave boys.
12.
When he would run down a stag, be behind him would l^g;
For, so noble a soul had he!
He Would stop, though he lost it, tradition reports it,
To give him fresh chance to get free, my brave boys.
13.
With a mighty strong arm, and a masculine how,
His arrow he drew to the head,
And as sure as he shot, it was ever his lot,
His prey it fell instantly dead, my brave boys.
14.
His table he spread where the venison bled,
Be thankful, he used to say;
He Would laugh and he would sing, though a saint and a king,
And sumptuously dine on his prey, my brave boys.
15.
Then over the hills, over the mountains and rills
He Would caper, such was his delight;
And never in his days, Indian history says,
Did lack a good supper at night, my brave boys.
16.
On an old stump he sat, without cap or hat.
When supper was ready to eat,
Snap, his dog, he stood by, and cast a sheep's eye
For ven'son, the king of all meat, my brave boys.
17.
Like Isaac of old, and both cast in one mould,
Though a wigwam was Tamm'ny's cottage,
He loved sav'ry meat, such that patriarch eat,
Of ven'son and squirrel made pottage, brave boys.
18.
When fourscore years old, as I Have oft'times been told,
To doubt it, sure, would not be right,
With a pipe in his jaw, he would buss his old squaw,
And get a young saint every night, my brave boys.
19.
As old age came on, he grew blind, deaf and dumb,
Though his sport, 'twere hard to keep from it,
Quite tired of life, bid adieu to his wife,
And blazed like the tail of a comet, brave boys.
20.
What country on earth, then, did ever give birth
To such a magnanimous saint?
His acts far excel all that history tell,
And language too feeble to paint, my brave boys.
21.
Now, to finish my song, a full flowing bowl
I Will quaff, and sing all the long day,
And with punch and wine paint my cheeks for my saint,
And hail every First of sweet May, my brave boys.
Dick. What a seraphic voice! how it enlivens my soul! Come away, away, Roger,
the moments are precious.


[Exeunt Dick and Roger. SCENE VII.
In a chamber, near BOSTON, the morning after the battle of BUNKER'S HILL.
Clarissa. How lovely is this newborn day! -- The sun rises with uncommon
radiance after the most gloomy night my wearied eyes ever knew. -- The voice of
slumber was not heard -- the angel of sleep was fled -- and the awful whispers
of solemnity and silence prevented my eyelids from closing. -- No wonder --
the terrors and ideas of yesterday -- such a scene of war -- of tumult -- hurry
and hubbub -- of horror and destruction -- the direful noise of conflict -- the
dismal hissing of iron shot in vollies flying -- such bellowing of mortars --
such thundering of cannon -- such roaring of musquetry -- and such clashing of
swords and bayonets -- such cries of the wounded -- and such streams of blood
-- such a noise and crush of houses, steeples, and whole streets of desolate
Charlestown falling -- pillars of fire, and the convulsed vortex of fiery
flakes, rolling in flaming wreaths in the air, in dreadful combustion, seemed
as though the elements and whole earth were envelop'd in one general, eternal
conflagration and total ruin, and intermingled with black smoke, ascending, on
the wings of mourning, up to heaven, seemed piteously to implore the almighty
interposition to put a stop to such devastation, lest the whole earth should be
unpeopled in the unnatural conflict -- Too, too much for female heroism to
dwell upon -- But what are all those to the terrors that filled my affrighted
imagination the last night? -- Dreams -- fancies -- evil bodings -- shadows,
phantoms and ghastly visions continually hovering around my pillow, goading and
harrowing my soul with the most terrific appearances, not imaginary, but real
-- Am I awake -- Where are the British murderers? -- where is my husband? -- my
son? -- my brother? -- Something more than human tells me all is not well: If
they are among the slain, it is impossible. -- I -- Oh! (She cries.)


Enter a neighbor, a spectator of the battle. Madam, grieve not so much.

Clarissa. Am I wont to grieve without a cause? Would to God I did; -- mock me
not -- What voice is that? methinks I know it -- some angel sent to comfort me?
-- welcome then. (She turns about) O, my neighbor, is it you? My friend, I
have need of comfort. Have thou any for me? -- say -- will you not speak?
Where Is my husband? -- my son? -- my brother? Have thou seen them since the
battle? Oh! bring me not unwelcome tidings. (Cries.)


Neighbor. (Aside. What shall I say?) Madam, I beheld them yesterday from an
eminence.


Clarissa. Upon that very eminence was I. What then? --


Neighbor. I saw the brave man Warren, your son and brother.


Clarissa. What? O ye gods! -- Speak on friend -- stop -- what saw ye?


Neighbor. In the midst of the tempest of war --


Clarissa. Where are they now? -- That I saw too -- What is all this?


Neighbor. Madam, hear me --


Clarissa. Then say on -- yet -- O, his looks! -- I fear!


Neighbor. When General Putnam bid the vanguard open their front to the --


Clarissa. Oh, trifle not with me -- dear Neighbor! -- where shall I find
them? -- say --


Neighbor. (Aside. Heavens! must I tell her!) Madam, be patient -- right and
left, that all may see who hate us, we are prepared for them --


Clarissa. What then? -- Can you find 'em? --


Neighbor. I saw Warren and the other two heroes firm as Roxbury stand the
shock of the enemy's fiercest attacks, and twice put to flight their boasted
phalanx. --


Clarissa. All that I saw, and more; say -- would they not come to me, were
they well? --


Neighbor. Madam, hear me --


Clarissa. O! he will not speak.


Neighbor. The enemy returned to the charge, and stumbling over the dead and
wounded bodies of their friends, Warren received them with indissoluble
firmness, and notwithstanding their battalious aspect, in the midst of the
battle, though surrounded with foes on every side --


Clarissa. O, my neighbor! --


Neighbor. Madam -- his nervous arm, like a giant refreshed with wine, hurled
destruction wherever he came, breathing heroic ardour to adventurous deeds, and
long time in even scale the battle hung, 'till at last death turned pale and
affrighted at the carnage -- they ran --


Clarissa. Who ran?


Neighbor. The enemy, Madam, gave way --


Clarissa. Warren never ran -- yet -- oh! I would he had -- I fear -- (Cries)


Neighbor. I say not so, Madam.


Clarissa. What say ye then? he was no coward, neighbor --


Neighbor. Brave to the last. (Aside. I forgot myself.)


Clarissa. What said you? O heavens! brave to the last! those words -- why do
you keep me thus? -- cruel --


Neighbor. (Aside. She will know it.) I say, Madam, by some mistaken orders on
our side, the enemy rallied and returned to the charge with fresh numbers, and
your husband, son and brother -- Madam --


Clarissa. Stop! -- O ye powers! -- What? -- say no more mdash;yet let me hear
-- keep me not thus -- tell me, I charge thee --


Neighbor. (Aside. I can hold no longer, she must know it) Forgive me, Madam
-- I saw them fall -- and Michael, the archangel, who vanquished satan, is not
more immortal than they. -- (Aside. Who can relate such woes without a tear?)


Clarissa. Oh! I Have heard enough -- too -- too much (Cries) yet -- if thou have
worse to tell -- say on -- naught worse can be -- O ye gods! -- cruel -- cruel
-- thrice cruel -- could ye not leave me one -- (She faints, and is caught by
her friend, and placed in a chair, he rings the bell, the family come in, and
endeavor to bring her too)


Neighbor. With surprising fortitude she heard the melancholy relation, until
I came to the last close -- she then gave me a mournful look, lifted up her
eyes, and immediately sunk motionless into my arms.


Woman. Poor soul! -- no wonder -- how I sympathize with her in her distress --
my tender bosom can scarcely bear the sight! A dreadful loss! a most shocking
scene it was, that brothers should with brothers war, and in intestine fierce
opposition meet, to seek the blood of each other, like dogs for a bare bone,
who so often in generous friendship and commerce joined, in festivals of love and
joy unanimous as the sons of one kind and indulgent father, and separately
would freely in a good cause spend their blood and sacrifice their lives for
him.


Neighbor. A terrible black day it was, and ever will be remembered by
New England, when that vile Briton, (unworthy the name of a Briton) Lord
Boston, (curse the name!) whose horrid murders stain American soil with blood;
perish his name! a fratricide! 'twas he who fired Charlestown, and spread
desolation, fire, flames and smoke in every corner -- he was the wretch, that
waster of the world, that licensed robber, that blood-stained insulter of a
free people, who bears the name of Lord Boston, but from henceforth shall be
called Cain, that pillaged the ruins, and dragged and murdered the infant, the
aged and infirm -- (But look, she recovers.)


Clarissa. O ye angels! ye cherubims and seraphims! waft their souls to bliss,
bathe their wounds with angelic balsam, and crown them with immortality. A
faithful, loving and beloved husband, a promising and filial son, a tender and
affectionate brother: Alas! what a loss! -- Whom have I now to comfort me? --
What have I left, but the voice of lamentation: (She weeps) III-fated bullets
-- these tears shall sustain me -- yes, ye dear friends! how gladly would I
follow you -- but alas! I must still endure tribulation and inquietudes, from
which you are now exempt; I cannot cease to weep, ye brave men, I will mourn
your fall -- weep on -- flow, mine eyes, and wash away their blood, 'till the
fountain of sorrow is dried up -- but, oh! it never -- never will -- my
sympathetic soul shall dwell on your bosoms, and floods of tears shall water
your graves; and since all other comfort is denied me, deprive me not of the
only consolation left me of meditating on your virtues and dear memories, who
fell in defense of liberty and your country -- ye brave men -- ye more than
friends -- ye martyrs to liberty! -- This, this is all I ask, 'till sorrow
overwhelms me -- I breathe my last; and ye yourselves, your own bright spirits,
come and waft me to your peaceful abode, where the voice of lamentation is not
heard, neither shall we know any more what it is to separate.

Eager the patriot meets his desperate foe
With full intent to give the fatal blow;
The cause he fights for animates him high,
His wife, his children and his liberty:
For these he conquers, or more bravely dies,
And yields himself a willing sacrifice.

[Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Near Norfolk, in Virginia, on board a man of war, Lord Kidnapper in the
state-room, a boat appears rowing toward the ship.
Sailor, Boatswain. Sailor. BOATSWAIN!


Boatswain. Holla.


Sailor. Damn my eyes, Mr. Boatswain, but here is a black flag of truce coming
on board.


Boatswain. Sure enough -- where are they from?


Sailor. From hell, I suppose -- for they are as black as so many devils.


Boatswain. Very well -- no matter -- they are recruits for the Kidnapper.


Sailor. We shall be all of a color by and by -- damn me --


Boatswain. I Will go and inform his Lordship and his pair of doxies of it, I
suppose by this time they have trimmed their sails, and he is done heaving the
log.


[Exit Boatswain. SCENE II.
Near the state-room.
Boatswain. Where Is his Lordship?


Servant. He Is in the state-room.


Boatswain. It Is time for him to turn out, tell him I want to speak to him.


Servant. I dare not do it, Boatswain; it is more than my life is worth.


Boatswain. Damn your squeamish stomach, go directly, or I Will go myself.


Servant. For God's sake! Boatswain --


Boatswain. Damn your eyes, you pimping son of a bitch, go this instant, or
I Will stick my knife in your gammons.


Servant. O Lord! Boatswain. (Servant goes.)


Boatswain (^olus). What the devil -- keep a pimp guard here, better station
the son of a bitch at the mast head, to keep a look out there, lest Admiral
Hopkins be upon us.


Enter Kidnapper. What Is your will, Boatswain.

Boatswain. I beg your Lordship's pardon, ( Aside. But you can soon fetch up
Leeway, and spread the water sail again) please your honor, here is a boat full
of fine recruits along side for you.


Kidnapper. Recruits, Boatswain? you mean soldiers from Augustine, I imagine;
what reg'mentals have they on?


Boatswain. Mourning, please your honor, and as black as our tarpawling.


Kidnapper. Ha, ha, well, well, take 'em on board, Boatswain, I Will be on deck
presently.


Boatswain. With submission to your honor, do you see (scratching his head) I
think we have gallows-looking dogs enough on board already -- the scr^^ings of
Newgate, and the refuse of Tyburn, and when the (...) blows aft, damn 'em, they
stink like polecats -- but do you see, as your honor pleases, with submission,
if it is Lord Paramount's orders, why it must be so, I suppose -- but I Have done
my duty, do you see --


Kidnapper. Ha, ha, the work must be done, Boatswain, no matter by whom.


Boatswain. Why, aye, that is true, please your honor, any port in a storm --
if a man is to be hanged, or have his throat cut, do you see -- who are so fit to
do it as his own slaves? especially as they are to have their freedoms for it;
nobody can blame 'em, nor your honor neither, for you get them for half price,
or nothing at all, do you see me, and that will help to lessen poor Owld
England's taxes, and when you have done with 'em here, and they get their
brains knocked out, do you see, your honor can sell them in the West Indies, and
that will be something in your honor's pocket, do you see -- well, every man to
his trade -- but, damn my impudence for all, I see your honor knows all about
it -- do you see.


[Exit Boatswain. SCENE III.
Lord Kidnapper returns to his state-room, the Boatswain comes on deck and
pipes. All hands ahoi -- hand a rope, some of you Tories, forward there, for
his worship's reg'ment of black guards to come aboard.


Enter Negroes. Boatswain. Your humble servant, Gentlemen, I suppose you want
to see Lord Kidnapper? -- Clear the gangway there of them Tyburn tulips. Please
to walk aft, brother soldiers, that is the fittest birth for you, the
Kidnapper's in the state room, he will hoist his sheet-anchor presently, he will be
up in a jiffin -- as soon as he has made fast the end of his small rope athwart
Jenny Bluegarter and Kate Common's stern posts.


First Sailor. Damn my eyes, but I suppose, messmate, we must bundle out of our
hammocks this cold weather, to make room for these black regulars to stow in,
tumble upon deck, and choose a soft birth among the snow?


Second Sailor. Blast 'em, if they come within a cable's length of my hammock,
I Will kick 'em to hell through one of the gun ports.


Boatswain. Come, come, brothers, don't be angry, I suppose we shall soon be in
a warmer latitude -- the Kidnapper seems as fond of these black regulars (as
you call 'em Jack) as he is of the brace of whores below; but as they come in
so damned slow, I Will put him in the humor of sending part of the fleet this
winter to the coast of Guinea, and beat up for volunteers, there he will get
recruits enough for a hogshead or two of New England rum, and a few old
pipe-shanks, and save poor Owld-England the trouble and expense of clothing
them in the bargain.


First Sailor. Aye, Boatswain, any voyage, so it is a warm one -- if it is to
hell itself -- for I Am sure the devil must be better off than we, if we are to
stay here this winter.


Second Sailor. Any voyage, so it is to the southward, rather than stay here at
lazy anchor -- no fire, nothing to eat or drink, but suck our frosty fists like
bears, unless we turn sheep-stealers again, and get our brains knocked out.
Eigh, master cook, you're a gentleman now -- nothing to do -- grown so proud,
you wont speak to poor folks, I suppose?


Cook. The devil may cook for 'em for me -- if I had any thing to cook -- a
parcel of frozen half starved dogs. I should never be able to keep 'em out of
the cook-room, or their noses out of the slush tub.


Boatswain. Damn your old smoaky jaws, you're better off than any man aboard,
your trouble will be nothing, -- for I suppose they will be disbur^ted in
different messes among the Tori^s, and it is only putting on the big pot,
cockey. Ha, ha, ha.


Cook. What signifies, Mr. Boatswain, the big pot or the little pot, if there is
nothing to cook? no fire, coal or wood to cook with? Blast my eyes, Mr.
Boatswain, if I disgrease myself so much, I have had the honor, damn me (though
I say it that shou'dn't say it) to be chief cook of a seventy-four gun ship, on
board of which was Lord Abel-Marl and Admiral Poke-Cock.


Boatswain. Damn the liars -- old singe-the-devil -- you chief cook of a
seventy-four gun ship, eigh? you the devil, you're as proud as hell, for all
you look as old as Matheg'lum, hand a pair of silk stockings for our cook here,
do you see -- lash a handspike athwart his arse, get a ladle full of slush and a
handful of brimstone for his hair, and step one of you Tories there for the
devil's barbe^^ to come and shave and dress him. Ha, ha, ha.


Cook. No, Mr. Boatswain, it is not pride -- but look 'e (as I said before) I Will
not disgrease my station, I Will throw up my commission, before I Will stand cook
for a parcel of escape gallows, convict Tory dogs and runaway Negroes.


Boatswain. What Is that you say? Take care, old frosty face -- What? do you
accuse his worship of turning kidnapper, and harboring run away Negroes? --
Softly, or you will be taken up for a Whig, and get a handsome coat of slush and
hogs feathers for a christmass-box, cockey: Throw up your commission, eigh?
throw up the pot-halliards, you mean, old piss-to-windward? Ha, ha, ha.


Cook. I tell you, Mr. Boatswain -- I --


Boatswain. Come, come, give us a chaw of tobacco, Cook -- blast your eyes,
don't take any pride in what I say -- I Am only joking, do you see --


Cook. Well, but Mr. Boatswain --


Boatswain. Come, avast, belay the lanyards of your jaws, and let us have no
more of it, do you see. (Boatswain pipes.) Make fast that boat along side there.


[Exeunt every man to his station. SCENE IV.
Lord Kidnapper comes up on the quarter deck.
Well, my brave blacks, are you come to lift?


Cudjo. Eas, massa Lord, you preazee.


Kidnapper. How many are there of you?


Cudjo. Twenty-two, massa.


Kidnapper. Very well, did you all run away from your masters?


Cudjo. Eas, massa Lord, eb'ry one, me too.


Kidnapper. That Is clever; they have no right to make you slaves, I wish all
the Negroes would do the same, I Will make 'em free -- what part did you come
from?


Cudjo. Disse brack man, disse one, disse one, disse one, disse one, come from
Hamton, disse one, disse one, disse one, come from Nawfok, me come from Nawfok
too.


Kidnapper. Very well, what was your master's name?


Cudjo. Me massa name Cunney Tomsee.


Kidnapper. Colonel ^hompson -- eigh?


Cudjo. Eas, massa, Cunney Tomsee.


Kidnapper. Well then I Will make you a major -- and what is your name?


Cudjo. Me massa cawra me Cudjo.


Kidnapper. Cudjo? -- very good -- was you ever christened, Cudjo?


Cudjo. No, massa, me no crissen.


Kidnapper. Well then I Will christen you -- you shall be called major Cudjo
Thompson, and if you behave well, I Will soon make you a greater man than your
master, and if I find the rest of you behave well, I Will make you all officers,
and after you have served Lord Paramount a while, you shall have money in your
pockets, good clothes on your backs, and be as free as them white men there.
(Pointing forward to a parcel of Tories.)


Cudjo. Tankee, massa, gaw bresse, massa Kidnap.


Sailor. (Aside.) What a damned big mouth that Cudjo has -- as large as our
main hatch-way --


Cook. (Aside.) Aye, he is come to a wrong place to make a good use of it -- it
might stand some little chance at a Lord Mayor's feast. --


Kidnapper. Now go forward, give 'em something to eat and drink there. (Aside.
Poor devils, they look half starved and naked like ourselves.)


Cook. (Aside.) I don't know where the devil they will get it; the sight of that
fellow's mouth is enough to breed a famine on board, if there was not one
already.


Sailor. Aye, he would tumble plenty down his damned guts and swallow it, like
Jones swallowed the whale.


Kidnapper. Tomorrow you shall have guns like them white men. Can you shoot
some of them rebels ashore, Major Cudjo?


Cudjo. Eas, massa, me try.


Kidnapper. Would you shoot your old master, the Colonel, if you could see him?


Cudjo. Eas, massa, you terra me, me shoot him down dead.


Kidnapper. That Is a brave fellow -- damn 'em -- down with them all -- shoot
all the damned rebels.


Sergeant. (Aside) Brave fellows indeed!


Kidnapper. Sergeant!


Sergeant. I wait your Lordship's commands.


Kidnapper. Sergeant, tomorrow begin to teach those black recruits the
exercise, and when they have learned sufficiently well to load and fire, then
incorporate them among the regulars and the other Whites on board; we shall in
a few days have some work for 'em, I expect -- be as expeditious as possible.
(Aside to him) Set a guard over them every night, and take their arms from
them, for who knows but they may cut our throats.


Sergeant. Very true, My Lord, I shall take particular care.


[Exit Kidnapper, Sergeant and Negroes walk forward. SCENE V.
Sergeant. Damn 'em, I Would rather see half their weight in beef.


Boatswain. Aye, curse their stomachs, or mutton either; then our Cook would not
be so damned lazy as he is, strutting about the deck like a nobleman, receiving
Paramount's pay for nothing.


Sergeant. Walk faster, damn your black heads. I suppose, Boatswain, when this
hell-cat reg'ment's complete, they will be reviewed in Hyde park? --


Boatswain. Aye, blast my eyes, and our Chaplain with his dirty black gown, or
our Cook, shall be their general, and review 'em, for he talks of throwing up
his pot-halliards commission, in hopes of it.


Sergeant. Ha, ha, ha. --


Cook. I Would see the devil have 'em first. --


[Exeunt Sergeant, etc. SCENE VI.
In the cabin.

Lord Kidnapper, Captain Squires, Chaplain.

Kidnapper. These blacks are no small acquisition, them and the Tories we have
on board, will strengthen us vastly; the thoughts of emancipation will make 'em
brave, and the encouragement given them by my proclamation, will greatly
intimidate the rebels -- internal enemies are worse than open foes. --


Chaplain. Very true, My Lord; David prayed that he might be preserved from
secret enemies.


Kidnapper. Aye, so I Have heard, but I look upon this to be a grand maneuver in
politics; this is making dog eat dog -- thief catch thief -- the servant
against his master -- rebel against rebel -- what think you of that, parson?


Chaplain. A house divided thus against itself cannot stand, according to
scripture -- My Lord, your observation is truly scriptural.


Kidnapper. Scripture? poh, poh -- I Have nothing to do with scripture -- I mean
politically, parson.


Chaplain. I know it very well; sure, My Lord, I understand you perfectly.


Kidnapper. Faith that is all I care for; if we can stand our ground this
winter, and burn all their towns that are accessible to our ships, and Colonel
Connolly succeeds in his plan, there is not the least doubt but we shall have
supplies from England very early in the spring, which I have wrote for; then,
in conjunction with Connolly, we shall be able to make a descent where we
please, and drive the rebels like hogs into a pen.


Chaplain. And then gather them (as the scriptures say) as a hen gathers her
chickens.


Kidnapper. True, Mr. Scripture.


Captain Squires. Very good, but you must take care of the hawks.


Kidnapper. What do you mean by the hawks, Captain?


Captain Squires. I mean the shirt-men, the rifle-men, My Lord.


Kidnapper. Aye, damn 'em, hawks indeed; they are cursed dogs; a man is never
safe where they are, but I Will take care to be out of their reach, let others
take their chance, for I see they have no respect to persons -- I suppose they
would shoot at me, if I were within their reach.


Chaplain. Undoubtedly, they would be more fond of you than of a wild turkey; a
parcel of ignorant unmannerly rascals, they pay no more respect to a Lord than
they would to a devil.


Kidnapper. The scoundrels are grown so damned impudent too, that one can
scarcely get a roasting pig nowadays, but I Will be even with some of 'em by
and by.


Chaplain. I hope we shall get something good for our Christmas dinner -- so
much abstinence and involuntary mortification, cannot be good for the soul -- a
war in the body corporal is of more dangerous consequence than a civil war to
the state, or heresy and schism to the church.


Kidnapper. Very true, parson -- very true -- now I like your doctrine -- a
full belly is better than an empty sermon; preach that doctrine; -- stick to
that text, and you will not fail of making converts.


Chaplain. The wisest of men said, there is nothing better, than that a man
should enjoy that which he has, namely, eat, drink, and be merry, if he can.


Kidnapper. You're very right -- Solomon was no fool, they say -- (he sings)

Give me a charming lass, Twangdillo cries,
I know no pleasure, but love's sweet joys.

Chaplain.(Sings.) Give me the bottle, says the red face sot,
For a whore I Would not give sixpence, not a groat.

Yet two is better than one, my Lord, for the scriptures further say, if one be
alone, how can there be heat? you seem to be converted to that belief, for you
have a brace of them, as the Boatswain says.

Kidnapper. Ha, ha. It Is a pity but you were a bishop, you have the scriptures
so pat -- now I Will go and take a short nap, meanwhile; Captain, if any thing
new happens, pray order my servant to wake me.


Captain Squires. I will, My Lord.


[Exit Kidnapper. Chaplain. And you and I Will crack a bottle, Captain; (bring a
bottle, boy!) it is bad enough to perish by famine, but ten thousand times worse
to be choked for want of moisture. His Lordship and two more makes three; and
you and I and the bottle make three more, and a threefold cord is not easily
broken; so we are even with him.


Captain Squires. With all my heart. -- Boy, bear a hand!


Tom. Coming, Sir.


Chaplain. Tom, Tom! -- make haste, you scoundrel! -- fetch two bottles. I
think we can manage it.


Enter Tom with the bottles. Chaplain. That Is right, Tom. -- Now bring the
glasses, and shut the door after you.


[Exit Tom. SCENE VII.
In BOSTON. A council of war after the battle of BUNKER'S HILL.
Lord Boston, Admiral Tombstone, Elbow Room, Mr. Caper, General Clinton, Earl
Percy. Lord Boston. I fully expected, with the help of the last reinforcement
you brought me over, and the advice and assistance of three accomplished and
experienced Generals, I should have been able to have subdued the rebels, and
gained immortal laurels to myself -- have returned to Old England like a Roman
Consul, with a score or two of the rebel Generals, Colonels and Majors, to have
graced my triumph.


Elbow Room. You have been vastly disappointed, Sir -- you must not look for
laurels (unless wild ones) nor expect triumphs (unless sham ones) from your own
victories or conquests in America.


Lord Boston. And yet not more disappointed than you, Sir -- witness your
thrasonical speeches on your first landing, provided you had but elbow room --
and Mr. Caper too to bring over Monsieur Rigadoon, the dancing master, and
Signior Rosin, the fiddler for^ooth; he thought, no doubt, to have country
danced the rebels out of their liberty with some of his new cuts -- with his
soft music to have fascinated their wives and daughters, and with some of 'em,
no doubt, to have taken the tour of America, with his reg'ment of fine sleek
prancing horses, that have been feeding this six months on codfish tails; he
thought to have grown fat with feasting, dancing, and drinking tea with the
Ladies, instead of being the skeleton he now appears to be -- not to mention
any thing of his letter, wherein he laments Tom's absence; for See Burgoyne's
letter.
"had Tom been with him (he says) he would have been out of danger, and quite
secure from the enemy's shot."


Percy. I think, Gentlemen, we are even with you now; you have had your mirth
and frolic with us, for dancing Yankee Doodle, as you called it, from
Lexington. -- I find you have had a severer dance, a brave sweat at Bunker's
Hill, and have been obliged to pay the fiddler in the bargain.


Clinton. However, Gentlemen, I approve (at proper sea^ons) of a little joking,
yet I can by no means think (as we have had such bad success with our crackers)
that this is a proper time to throw your squibs.


Lord Boston. I grant you, Sir, this is a very improper time for joking; for my
part, I was only speaking as to my own thoughts, when Mr. Elbow Room made
remarks, which he might as well have spared.


Elbow Room. I took you, Sir, as meaning a reflection upon us for our late
great loss, and particularly to myself, for expressing some surprise on our
first landing, that you should suffer a parcel of ignorant peasants to drive
you before 'em like sheep from Lexington; and I must own I was a little
chagrin'd at your seeming so unconc^rn'd at such an affair as this, (which had
nearly proved our ruin) by your innuendoes and ironical talk of accomplished
Generals, Roman Consuls and triumphs.


Lord Boston. My mentioning accomplished Generals, surely, Sir, was rather a
compliment to you.


Elbow Room. When irony pass current for compliments, and we take it so, I
shall have no objection to it.


Mr. Caper. The affair of Lexington, My Lord Boston, at which you were so much
affrighted (if I am rightly informed) was because you then stood on your own
bottom, this of Bunker's Hill you seem secretly to rejoice at, only because you
have three accomplished and experienced Generals to share the disgrace with
you, besides the brave Admiral Tombstone -- you talk of dancing and fiddling,
and yet you do neither, as I see.


Lord Boston. And pray, Sir, what did you do with the commission, the post, the
Duke of Grafton gave you, in lieu of your losses at Preston election, and the
expenses of your trial at the king's bench for a riot, which had emptied your
pockets? -- Why you sold it -- you sold it, Sir -- to raise cash to gamble
with. --


Admiral Tombstone. Damn it, don't let us kick up a dust among ourselves, to be
laughed at fore and aft -- this is a h^ll of a council of war -- though I
believe it will turn out one before we have done -- a scolding and quarrelling
like a parcel of damned butter whores -- I never heard two whores yet scold and
quarrel, but they got to fighting at last.


Clinton. Pray, Gentlemen, drop this discourse, consider the honor of England
is at stake, and our own safety depends upon this day's consultation.


Lord Boston. It Is not for argument sake -- but the dignity of my station
requires others should give up first.


Elbow Room. Sir, I have done, lest you should also accuse me of obstructing
the proceedings of the council of war.


Mr. Caper. For the same reason I drop it now.


Lord Boston. Well, Gentlemen, what are we met here for?


Admiral Tombstone. Who the devil should know, if you don't? -- damn it, didn't
you send for us?


Lord Boston. Our late great loss of men has tore up the foundation of our
plan, and rendered all further attempts impracticable -- 'twill be a long time
ere we can expect any more reinforcements -- and if they should arrive, I Am
doubtful of their success.


Clinton. The provincials are vastly strong, and seem no novices in the art of
war; it is true we gained the hill at last, but of what advantage is it to us?
-- none -- the loss of 1400 as brave men as Britain can boast of, is a
melancholy consideration, and must make our most sanguinary friends in England
abate of their vigor.


Elbow Room. I never saw or read of any battle equal to it -- never was more
martial courage displayed, and the provincials, to do the dogs justice, sought
like heroes, fought indeed more like devils than men; such carnage and
destruction not exceeded by Blenheim, Minden, Fontenoy, Ramillies, Dettingen,
the battle of the Boyne, and the late affair of the Spaniards and Algerines --
a mere cock-fight to it -- no laurels there.


Mr. Caper. No, nor triumphs neither -- I regret in particular the number of
brave Officers that fell that day, many of whom were of the first families in
England.


Admiral Tombstone. Aye, a damned affair indeed -- many powdered b^aus -- petit
maitres -- ^ops -- fribbles -- skip jacks -- macaronies -- jack puddings --
noblemen's bastards and whores sons fell that day -- and my poor marines stood
no more chance with 'em than a cat in hell without claws.


Lord Boston. It cannot be helped, Admiral; what is to be done next?


Admiral Tombstone. Done? -- why, what the devil have you done? -- nothing yet,
but eat Paramount's beef, and steal a few Yankee sheep -- and that, it seems,
is now become a damned lousy, beggarly trade too, for you hav'n't left
yourselves a mouthful to eat.

(Aside) " Bold at the council board,
" But cautious in the field, he shunned the sword.

Lord Boston. But what can we do, Admiral?


Admiral Tombstone. Do? -- why suck your paws -- that is all you're like to get.
(Aside.) But avast, I must bowse taught there, or we shall get to logger heads
soon, we are such damned fighting fellows.


Lord Boston. We must act on the defensive this winter, 'till reinforcements
arrive.


Admiral Tombstone. Defensive? aye, aye -- if we can defend our bellies from
hunger, and prevent a mutiny and civil war among the small guts there this
winter, we shall make a glorious campaign of it indeed -- it will read well in
the American Chronicles.


Lord Boston. I expect to be recalled this winter, when I shall lay the case
before Lord Paramount, and let him know your deplorable situation.


Admiral Tombstone. Aye, do -- and lay it behind him too; you have got the
weather-gage of us this tack, me^smate; but I wish you a good voyage for all --
and don't forget to tell him, the poor worms are starving too, having nothing
to eat, but half starved dead soldiers and the ships bottoms. (Aside.) A
cunning old fox, he is gnawed his way handsomely out of the Boston cage -- but
he will never be a WOLF, for all that.


Mr. Caper. I shall desire to be recalled too -- I Have not been used to such
fare -- and not the least diversion or entertainment of any sort going forward
here -- I neither can nor will put up with it.


Admiral Tombstone. I think we are all a parcel of damned boobies for coming
three thousand miles upon a wild goose chase -- to perish with cold -- starve
with hunger -- get our brains knocked out, or be hanged for sheep-stealing and
robbing hen-roo^ts.


Lord Boston. I think, Admiral, you're always grumbling -- never satisfied.


Admiral Tombstone. Satisfied? I see no appearance of it -- we have been here
these twelve hours, scolding upon empty stomachs -- you may call it a council
of war, (and so it is indeed, a war with the guts) or what you will -- but I
call it a council of famine.


Lord Boston. As it is so late, Gentlemen, we'll adjourn the council of war
'till tomorrow at nine o'clock -- I hope you will all attend, and come to a
conclusion.


Admiral Tombstone. And I hope you will then conclude to favor us with one of
them fine turkeys you're keeping for your sea store, (aside. or that fine, fat,
black pig you or some of your guard stole out of the poor Negroe's pen) as it is
near Christmas, and you're going to make your exit -- you know the old custom
among the sailors -- pave your way first -- let us have one good dinner before
we part, and leave us half a dozen pipes of Mr. Hancock's wine to drink your
health, and a good voyage, and don't let us part with dry lips.

Such foolish councils, with no wisdom fraught,
Must end in wordy words, and come to naught;
Just like St. James's, where they bluster, scold,
They nothing know -- yet they despise being told.

[Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I.
At MONTREAL.
General Pre^cot, Officer. General Prescot. SO it seems indeed, one misfortune
seldom comes alone -- The rebels, after the taking of Ticonderoga and Chamblee,
as I just now learn by a Savage, marched immediately to be^iege St. John's, and
are now before that place, closely investing it, and no doubt intend paying us
a visit soon.


Officer. Say you so? then it is time to look about us.


Genesis Prescot. They Will find us prepared, I Will warrant 'em, to give 'em such a
reception as they little dream of -- a parcel of Yankee dogs.


Officer. Their success, no doubt, has elated them, and given 'em hopes of
conquering all Canada soon, if that is their intent.


Genesis Prescot. No doubt it is -- but I Will cheek their career a little. --


Enter Scouting Officer, with Colonel Allen, and other prisoners. Scouting
Officer. Sir, I make bold to present you with a few prisoners -- they are a
scouting detachment from the army besieging St. John's.


Genesis Prescot. Prisoners? Rebels, I suppose, and scarcely worth hanging.


Colonel Allen. Sir, you suppose wrong -- you mean scarcely worth your while to
attempt.


Genesis Prescot. Pray who are you, Sir?


Col. Allen. A man, Sir, and who had the honor, 'till now, to command those
brave men, whom you call rebels.


Genesis Prescot. What is your name? if I may be so bold?


Col. Allen. Allen.


Genesis Prescot. Allen?


Col. Allen. Yes, Allen.


Genesis Prescot. Are you that Allen, that Colonel Allen (as they call him) that
dared to take Ticonderoga?


Col. Allen. The same -- the very man.


Genesis Prescot. Then rebels you are, and as such I shall treat you, for daring
to oppose Lord Paramount's troops, and the laws of the land.


Col. Allen. Prisoners we are, it is true -- but we despise the name of a rebel
-- With more propriety that name is applicable to your master -- it is he who
attempts to destroy the laws of the land, not us -- we mean to support them,
and defend our property against Paramount's and parliamentary tyranny.


Genesis Prescot. To answer you, were a poorness of spirit I despise; when Rebels
dare accuse, power that replies, forgets to punish; I am not to argue that
point with you: And let me tell you, Sir, whoever you are, it now ill becomes
you thus to talk -- You're my prisoner -- your life is in my hands, and you
shall suffer immediately -- Guards! take them away.


Col. Allen. Cruel insult! -- pardon these brave men! -- what they have done
has been by my orders -- I am the only guilty person (if guilt there be) let me
alone suffer for them all [opening his breast] Here! take your revenge -- Why
do you hesitate? -- Will you not strike a breast that never will flinch from
your pointed bayonet?


Genesis Prescot. Provoke me not -- Remember you're my prisoners.


Col. Allen. Our souls are free! -- Strike, cowards, strike! -- I scorn to beg
my life.


Genesis Prescot. Guards! away with them -- I Will reserve you for a more
ignominious death -- your fate is fixed -- away with them.


Col. Allen. (Going off) Be glutted, ye thirsters after human blood -- Come,
see me suffer -- mark my eye, and scorn me, if my expiring soul confesses fear
-- Come, see and be taught virtue, and to die as a patriot for the wrongs of my
country.


[Exeunt prisoners and guards. SCENE II.
A dungeon.
Col. Allen. What! ye infernal monsters! murder us in the dark? -- What place
is this? -- Who reigns king of these gloomy mansions? -- You might favor us at
least with one spark of light -- Ye cannot see to do your business here.


Officer. It Is our orders.


Col. Allen. Ye dear, ye brave, wretched friends! -- now would I die for ye all
-- ye share a death I would gladly excuse you from -- It Is not death I fear --
this is only bodily death -- but to die noteless in the silent dark, is to die
scorned, and shame our suffering country -- we fall undignify'd by villains
hands -- a sacrifice to Britain's outcast bloodhounds -- This, this shakes the
soul! -- Come then, ye murderers, since it must be so -- do your business
speedily -- Farewell, my friends! to die with you is now my noblest claim,
since to die for you was a choice denied -- What are ye about? -- Stand off, ye
wretches!


Officer. I am ordered to lay you in irons (they seize him) you must submit.


Col. Allen. What, do you mean to torture us to death with chains, racks and
gibbets? rather despatch us immediately -- Ye executioners, ye inquisitors,
does this cruelty proceed from the lenity I showed to the prisoners I took? --
Did it offend you that I treated them with friendship, genero^ity, honor and
humanity? -- If it did, our sufferings will redound more to our honor, and our
fall be the more glorious -- But remember, this fall will prove your own one
day -- Wretches! I fear you not, do your worst; and while I here lay suffering
and chained on my back to the damp floor, I Will yet pray for your conversion.


Officer. Excuse us, we have only obeyed our orders.


Col. Allen. Then I forgive you; but pray execute them.

Oh! my lost friends! it is liberty, not breath,
Gives the brave life. Shun slavery more than death.
He who spurns fear, and dares disdain to be,
Mocks chains and wrongs -- and is forever free;
'While the base coward, never safe, though low,
Creeps but to sufferings, and lives on for woe!

[Exeunt guards. SCENE III.
In the camp at CAMBRIDGE.
General Washington, General Lee, General Putnam. General Washington. Our
accounts from the Northward, so far, are very favorable; Ticonderoga,
Chamblee, St. John's and Montreal our troops are already in possession of --
and Colonel Arnold, having penetrated Canada, after suffering much through cold,
fatigue, and want of provisions, is now before Quebec, and General Montgomery,
I understand, is in full march to join him; see these letters [they read]


Genesis Lee. The brave, the intrepid Arnold, with his handful of fearless troops,
have dared beyond the strength of mortals -- Their courage ^mil'd at doubts,
and resolutely marched on, clamb'ring (to all but themselves) in^urmountable
precipices, whose tops, covered with ice and snow, lay hid in the clouds, and
dragging baggage, provisions, ammunition and artillery along with them, by main
strength, in the dead of winter, over such stupendous and amazing heights,
seems almost incredible, unparallelled in history! -- It Is true, Hannibal's
march over the Alps comes the nearest to it -- it was a surprising undertaking,
but when compared to this, appears but as a party of pleasure, an agreeable
walk, a sabbath day's journey.


Genesis Putnam. Posterity will stand amazed, and be astonished at the heroes of
this new world, that the spirit of patriotism should blaze to such a height,
and eclipse all others, should outbrave fatigue, danger, pain, peril, famine,
and even death itself, to serve their country; that they should march, at this
inclement season, through long and dreary deserts, through the remotest wilds,
covered with swamps and standing lakes, beset with trees, bushes and briars,
impervious to the chearing rays of the sun, where are no traces or vestiges of
human footsteps, wild, untrodden paths, that strike terror into the fiercest of
the brute creation.

No bird of song to cheer the gloomy desert!
No animals of gentle love's enliven!

Genesis Lee. Let Britons do the like -- no -- they dare not attempt it -- let 'em
call forth the Hanoverian, the Hessian, the hardy Russian, or, if they will,
the wild Cossacks and Kalmucks of Tartary, and they would tremble at the
thought! And who but Americans dare undertake it? The wondering moon and stars
stood aloof, and turned pale at the fight!


Genesis Washington. I rejoice to hear the Canadians received them kindly, after
their fatigue furnished them with the necessaries of life, and otherways
treated them very humanely -- And the savages, whose hair stood an end, and
looked and listened with horror and astonishment at the relation of the
fatigues and perils they underwent, commiserated them, and afforded all the
succor in their power.


Genesis Lee. The friendship of the Canadians and savages, or even their
neutrality alone, are favorable circumstances that cannot fail to hearten our
men; and the junction of General Montgomery will inspire 'em with fresh ardour.


Genesis Putnam. Heavens prosper 'em!


Enter Officer and Express. Officer. Sir, here is an express.


Express. I have letters to your Excellency.


Genesis Washington. From whence?


Express. From Canada, Sir.


Genesis Washington. From the army?


Express. From the headquarters, Sir.


Genesis Washington. I hope matters go well there. -- Had General Montgomery
joined Colonel Arnold when you left it?


Express. He had, Sir -- these letters are from both those gentlemen. [gives
him the letters]


Genesis Washington. Very well. You may now withdraw and refresh yourself, unless
you have further to say -- I Will dispatch you shortly.


Express. Nothing further, Sir.


[Exeunt Officer and Express. SCENE III.
Genesis Washington. [Opens and reads the letters to General Lee and Putnam] I am
well pleased with their contents -- all but the behavior of the haughty
Carleton -- to fire upon a flag of truce, hitherto unprecedented, even amongst
Savages or Algerines -- his cruelty to the prisoners is cowardly, and personal
ill treatment of General Montgomery is unbecoming a General -- a soldier -- and
beneath a Gentleman -- and leaves an indelible mark of brutality -- I hope
General Montgomery, however, will not follow his example.


General Lee. I hope so too, Sir -- if it can be avoided; it is a disgrace to
the soldier, and a scandal to the Gentleman -- so long as I Have been a soldier,
my experience has not furnished me with a like instance.


Genesis Putnam. I see no reason why he shou'dn't be paid in his own coin. -- If a
man bruises my heel, I Will break his head -- I cannot see the reason or
propriety of bearing with their insults -- does he not know it is in our power
to retaliate fourfold?


Genesis Lee. Let Us be good natured, General -- let us (...) little more of it
first --


Genesis Putnam. I think we have seen enough of it already for this twelve-months
past. Methinks the behavior of Lord Boston, the ill treatment of poor Allen,
to be thrown into a loathsome dungeon like a murder^r, be loaded with and
transported like a convict, would sufficiently rouse us to a just retaliation
-- that imperious red coat, Carleton, should be taught good manners -- I hope
to see him ere long in our College at Cambridge --


Genesis Lee. I doubt; he will be too cunning, and play truant -- he has no notion
of learning American manners; every dog must have his day (as the saying is);
it may be our time by and by -- the event of war is uncertain --


Genesis Putnam. Very true, Sir; but don't let us be laughed at forever.


[Enters an Officer in haste. Sir, A Messenger this moment from Quebec, waits
to be admitted.

Genesis Washington. Let him enter.


[Exit Officer. Enters Messenger. Genesis Washington. What news bring you?


Messenger. I am sorry, Sir, to be the bearer of an unpleasing tale --


Genesis Washington. Bad news have you? -- have you letters?


Messenger. None, Sir -- I came off at a moment's warning -- my message is
verbal.


Genesis Washington. Then relate what you know.


Messenger. After the arrival and junction of General Montgomery's troops with
Colonel Arnold's, Carleton was summoned to surrender; he disdaining any answer,
fired on the flag of truce --


Genesis Washington. That we have heard -- go on.


Messenger. The General finding no breach could be effected in any reasonable
time, their walls being vastly strong, and his cannon rather light, determined
to attempt it by storm -- The enemy were apprized of it -- however he passed
the first barrier, and was attempting the second, where he was unfortunately
killed, with several other brave Officers --


Genesis Washington. Is General Montgomery ki^^ed?


Messenger. He is certainly, Sir.


Genesis Washington. I am sorry for it -- a brave man -- I could wish him a better
fate! --


Genesis Lee. I lament the loss of him -- a resolute soldier --


Genesis Putnam. Pity such bravery should prove unsuccessful, such merit
unrewarded; -- but the irreversible decree of Providence! -- who can gainsay?
-- we may lament the loss of a friend, but it is irreligious to murmur at
pre-ordination. What happened afterward?


Messenger. The Officer next in command, finding their attacks at that time
unsuccessful, retired in good order.


Genesis Washington. What became of Colonel Arnold?


Messenger. Colonel Arnold, at the head of about three hundred and fifty brave
troops, and Captain Lamb's company of artillery, having in the mean time passed
through St. Rocques, attacked a battery, and carried it, though well defended,
with the loss of some men --


Genesis Putnam. I hope they proved more successful.


Genesis Lee. Aye, let us hear.


Messenger. The Colonel about this time received a wound in his leg, and was
obliged to crawl as well as he could to the hospital, through the fire of the
enemy, and within fifty yards of the walls, but, through Providence, escaped any
further damage. --


Genesis Putnam. Aye, providential indeed!


Genesis Washington. Is he dangerously wounded?


Messenger. I am told not, Sir.


Genesis Washington. I am glad of it. -- What followed?


Messenger. His brave troops pushed on to the second barrier, and took
possession of it.


Genesis Washington. Very good -- proceed.


Messenger. A party of the enemy then ^allying out from the palace-gate,
attacked them in the rear, whom they fought with incredible bravery for three
hours, and deeds of eternal fame were done; but being surrounded on all sides,
and overpowered by numbers, were at last obliged to submit themselves as
prisoners of war.


Genesis Putnam. Heavens! could any thing prove more unlucky? such brave fellows
deserve better treatment than they will get (I Am afraid) from the inhuman
Carleton.


Genesis Lee. Such is the fortune of war, and the vicissitudes attending a
military life; today conquerors, tomorrow prisoners.


Genesis Washington. He dares not treat them ill -- only as prisoners. Did you
learn how those brave fellows were treated?


Messenger. It was currently reported in the camp they were treated very
humanely.


Genesis Washington. A change for the better.


Genesis Putnam. Produced by fear, no doubt from General Montgomery's letter --
but no matter from what cause.


Genesis Lee. How far did the remainder of the army retire?


Messenger. About two miles from the city, where they are posted very
advantageously, continuing the blockade, and waiting for reinforcements.


Genesis Lee. Did the enemy show any peculiar marks of distinction to the corpse
of General Montgomery?


Messenger. He was interred in Quebec, with every possible mark of distinction.


Genesis Washington. What day did the affair happen on?


Messenger. On the last day of the year.


Genesis Washington. A remarkable day! When was the General interred?


Messenger. The second of January.


Genesis Lee. What number of men in the whole attack was killed? did you learn?


Messenger. About sixty killed and wounded.


Genesis Washington. Have you any thing further to communica^e?


Messenger. Nothing, Sir, but to inform you they are all in good spirits, and
desire reinforcements and heavy artillery ^ay be sent them as soon as possible.


Genesis Washington. That be our business -- with all despatc^. You may for the
present withdraw. Sergeant!


Enters Sergeant. Sergeant. I wait your orders, Sir.


Genesis Washington. See that the Messenger and his horse want for nothing.


Sergeant. I shall, Sir.


[Exeunt Sergeant and Messenger. SCENE IV.
Genesis Washington. I Will despatch an express to the Congress. This repulse, if I
mistake not, (or victory, as Ca^leton may call it) will stand 'em but in little
stead -- 't will be only a temporary reprieve -- we'll reinforce our friends,
let the consequence be what it may -- Qu^be^ must fall, and the lofty strong
walls and brazen gates (the shield of cowards) must tumble by an artificial
earthquake; should they continue in their obstinacy, we'll arm our friends with
missive thunders in their hands, and stream death on them swifter than the
winds.


Genesis Lee. I lament the loss of the valiant Montgomery and his brave officers
and soldiers (at this time more especi^^^y) it is the fortune of war, it is
unavoidable; yet, I doubt not, out of their ashes will arise new heroes.


Genesis Putnam. Who can die a more glorious, a more honorable death than in
their country's cause? -- let it redouble our ardour, and kindle a noble
emulation in our breasts -- let each American be determined to conquer or die
in a righteous cause.


Genesis Washington. I have drawn my sword, and never will I sheathe it, 'till
America is free, or I Am no more.


Genesis Lee. Peace is despaired of, and who can think of submission? The last
petition from the Congress, like the former, has been disregarded; they prayed
but for liberty, peace and safety, and their omnipotent authoritative
supreme-ships will grant them neither: War, then, war open and understood, must
be resolved on; this, this will humble their pride, will bring their tyrant
noses to the ground, each 'em humility, and force them to hearken to reason
when it is too late. My noble General, I join you [drawing his sword] I Will away
with the scabbard, and sheathe my sword in the bosom of tyranny.


Genesis Putnam. Have you not read the speed, where frowning revenge and sounds of
awful dread for disgrace at Lexington and loss at Bunker's-hill echo forth? Not
smiling peace, or pity, tame his sullen soul; but, P^aroah-like, on the wings
of tyranny he rides and forfeits happiness to feast revenge, 'till the waters
of the red sea of blood deluge the tyrant, with his mixed host of vile
cutthroats, murderers, and bloody butchers.


Genesis Washington. Yet, finding they cannot conquer us, gladly would they make
it up by a voluntary free will offering of a million of money in bribes, rather
than be obliged to relish the thoughts of sacrificing their cursed (...) and
false honor, they sending over to amuse us (to put us off our guard) a score
or two of commissioners with (...) n^gotiations in great state, to endeavor to
effect, by (...), dec^ption and chicanery, what they cannot accomplish by
force. Perish such wretches! -- detested be their schemes! -- Perish such
mon^ters! -- a reproach to human understanding -- their vaunted boasts and
threats will ^^nish like smoke, and be no more than like snow falling on the
moist ground, melt in silence, and waste away -- Bla^ted* fo^ever blasted be
the hand of the villainous traitor that re^^ives their gold upon such terms --
may he become leprous, (...), the Syrian, yea, rather like Gehazi, the (...) of
Eli^h^, that it may stick to him for ever.


Genesis P^t^^m. I join you both, and swear by all the (...) of New England, that
this arm, though fourscore and (...) [(...) his sword] ^till nervous and strong,
shall (...) this sword to the last in the support of liberty and my (...),
(...) the insult offered to the immortal Mont^^m^ry, and brutal treatment of
the brave Allen.

Oh, liberty! thou sunshine of the heart!
(...) of nature, and thou soul of art!
(...) thy aid no human hope could grow,
^^d all we could enjoy were turned to woe.

[Exeunt. THE EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. FREEMAN.
SINCE tyrants reign, and lust and lux'ry rule;
Since kings turn Nero's -- statesmen play the fool;
Since parli'ment in cursed league combine,
To sport with rights that is sacred and divine;
^estroying towns with direful confiagration,
And murder subjects without provocation!
(...) are but part of evils we could name,
(...) to their glory, but eternal shame.
Petitions -- waste paper -- great Pharaoh cries,
Nor care a rush for your remonstrances.
Each Jacobite, and every pimping Tory,
Waits for your wealth, to raise his future glory:
Or pensions sure, must every rascal have,
Who strove his might, to make FREEMAN a slave.
Since this the case, to whom for succor cry?
To God, our swords, and sons of liberty!
Cast off the idol god! -- kings are but vain!
Let justice rule, and independence reign.
Are ye not men? Pray who made men, but God?
Yet men make kings -- to tremble at their nod!
What nonsense this -- let us wrong with right oppose,
Since no^ght will do, but sound, impartial blows.
Let Us act in earnest, not with vain pretense,
Adopt the language of sound COMMON SENSE,
And with one voice proclaim INDEPENDENCE.
Convince your foes you will defend your right,
That blows and knocks is all they will get by it.
Let tyrants see that you are well prepared,
By proclamations, sword, nor speeches scared;
That liberty freeborn breathe in each soul!
One god-like union animate the whole!
END of the FIRST CAMPAIGN.

