AN ORATION DELIVERED APRIL EIGHTH, 1776.

AN ORATION; DELIVERED AT THE King's-CHAPEL IN BOSTON, APRIL 8, 1776, On the
Re-Interment of the Remains of the late MOST WORSHIPFUL GRAND-MASTER JOSEPH
WARREN, ESQUIRE; PRESIDENT of the late CONGRESS of this Colony, AND
MAJOR GENERAL of the MASSACHUSETTS FORCES; Who was Slain in the Battle of
BUNKER's-HILL, JUNE 17, 1775.

BY PEREZ MORTON, M. M.

BOSTON: PRINTED, AND TO BE SOLD BY J. GILL, IN QUEEN STREET. 1776.

Boston, April 5, 1776. Brother PEREZ MORTON, SIR,
I AM requested by the Brethren of the Grand Lodge, to beg the favor of you to
pronounce an ORATION on Monday next, at the re-interment of our late Grand
Master JOSEPH WARREN, Esquire which I doubt not you will perform with credit to
yourself and satisfaction to your audience.

I am, your affectionate brother, and humble servant, JOSEPH WEBB, D. G. M.

To PEREZ MORTON, Esquire Watertown.
Watertown, April 6, 1776.
BROTHER MORTON presents his respects to Brother WEBB, and the other Officers
of the Grand Lodge, and thanks them for the honor done him in their requesting
him to pronounce an ORATION on the re-interment of the late Grand Master; and
gives for answer, that he will endeavor to prepare himself, and has no other
apology to urge for any deficiencies, that may appear, than his want of
abilities for so important an undertaking, and the shortness of time given him
to prepare in.

PEREZ MORTON.

To the Right Worshipful JOSEPH WEBB. D. G. Master, BOSTON.
Council Chamger, Boston, April 8, 1776.
AT a Meeting of the Grand Lodge, and a numerous body of Free and Accepted
Masons, after the re-interment of our Most Worshipful Grand Master, JOSEPH
WARREN, Esquire who was slain in the battle of Bunker's-Hill, June 17, 1775.

In the Chair, the Right Worshipful JOSEPH WEBB, D. G. M.

VOTED, That our Brothers Paul Revere, Edward Proctor, and Stephen Bruce, be a
committee to wait on our brother Perez Morton, Esquire and present our most cordial
thanks, for his ORATION delivered this afternoon, and request a copy thereof
for the press.

Attest, WILLIAM HOSKINS, G. Secr'y.

BRETHREN,
FROM that duty, which I owe to the Lodge, I am constrained to comply with your
request; and shall urge no other apology for the defects of the performance,
than the very short time that was given me to prepare it in, added to my most
sincere wishes of having been better able to have done justice to the exalted
character of the subject of it.

I am, with due respect, your most affectionate brother, PEREZ MORTON.

AN ORATION.
ILLUSTRIOUS RELICS!
WHAT Tidings from the Grave! Why have thou left the peaceful Mansions of the
Tomb, to visit again this troubled Earth! Art thou the welcome Messenger of
Peace! Art thou risen again to exhibit thy glorious Wounds, and through them
proclaim Salvation to thy Country! Or art thou come to demand that last Debt of
Humanity, to which your Rank and Merit have so justly entitled you -- but which
has been so long ungenerously withheld! And art thou angry at the barbarous
usage? Be appeased, sweet Ghost! For though thy Body has long laid
undistinguished among the vulgar Dead, scarce priveleged with Earth enough to
hide it from the Birds of Prey; though not a kindred Tear was dropped, though not a
friendly Sigh was uttered, over thy Grave; and though the Execrations of an
impious Foe, were all thy Funeral Knells; yet matchless Patriot! thy Memory has
been embalmed in the Affections of thy grateful Countrymen; who in their Breast
have raised eternal Monuments to thy Bravery!

BUT let us leave the beloved Remains, and contemplate for a Moment, those
Virtues of the Man, the Exercise of which have so deservedly endeared him to
the honest among the Great, and the Good among the humble.

IN the private Walks of Life, he was a Pattern for Mankind. -- The Tears of
her, to whom the World's indebted for so much Virtue, are silent Heralds of his
filial Piety: While his tender Offspring, in lisping out their Father's Care,
proclaim his parential Affection: And an ADAMS can witness with how much Zeal
he loved, where he had formed the sacred Connection of a Friend; -- their
kindred Souls were so closely twined, that both felt one Joy, both one
Affliction. In Conversation he had the happy Talent of addressing his Subject
both to the Understanding and the Passions; from the one he forced Conviction,
from the other he stole Assent.

HE was blessed with a Complacency of Disposition, and Equanimity of Temper,
which peculiarly endeared him to his Friends; and which, added to the
Deportment of the Gentleman, commanded Reverence and Esteem even from his
Enemies.

SUCH was the tender Sensibility of his Soul, that he need but see Distress to
feel it, and contribute to its Relief. -- He was deaf to the Calls of Interest
even in the Course of his Profession; and wherever he beheld an indigent
Object, which claimed his healing Skill, he administered it, without even the
Hope of any other Reward, than that which resulted from the Reflection of
having so far promoted the Happiness of his Fellow Men.

IN the social Departments of Life, practicing upon the Strength of that
Doctrine, he used so earnestly to inculcate himself, that nothing so much
conduced to enlighten Mankind, and advance the great End of Society at large,
as the frequent Interchange of Sentiments, in friendly Meetings; we find him
constantly engaged in this eligible Labor; but on none did he place so high a
Value, as on that most honorable of all detached Societies, THE FREE AND
ACCEPTED MASONS: Into this Fraternity he was early initiated; and after having
given repeated Proofs of a rapid Proficiency in the Arts, and after evidencing
by his Life, the Professions of his Lips -- finally, as the Reward of his
Merit, he was commissioned the most worshipful GRAND MASTER of all the ancient
Masons, through North America. -- And you, Brethren, are living Testimonies, with
how much Honor to himself, and Benefit to the Craft universal, he discharged
the Duties of his elevated Trust; with what sweetened Accents he courted your
Attention, while with Wisdom, Strength and Beauty, he instructed his Lodges in
the secret Arts of Free-masonry; what perfect Order and Decorum he preserved in
the Government of them; and in all his Conduct, what a bright Example he set
us, to live within Compass, and act upon the Square.

WITH what Pleasure did he silence the Wants of poor and pennyless Brethren;
yea the Necessitous every where, though ignorant of the Mysteries of the Craft,
from his Benefactions, felt the happy Effects of that Institution which is
founded on Faith, Hope and Charity. And the World may cease to wonder, that he
so readily offered up his Life, on the Altar of his Country, when they are
told, that the main Pillar of Masonry, is the LOVE OF MANKIND.

THE Fates, as though they would reveal, in the Person of our GRAND MASTER, those
Mysteries, which have so long lain hid from the World, have suffered him, like
the great Master Builder in the Temple of old, to fall by the Hands of
Ruffians, and be again raised in Honor and Authority: We searched in the Field
for the murdered Son of a Widow, and we found him, by the Turf and the Twig,
buried on the Brow of a Hill, though not in a decent Grave. -- And though we must
again commit his Body to the Tomb, yet our Breasts shall be the Burying Spot of
his Masonic Virtues, and there --

"An adamantine Monument we'll rear,"
"With this Inscription," Masonry "lies here." --
IN public Life, the sole Object of his Ambition was to acquire the Conscience
of virtuous Enterprises; Amor Patriae was the Spring of his Actions, and Men's
Conscia Recti was his Guide. -- And on this Security he was, on every Occasion,
ready to sacrifice his Health, his Interest and his Ease, to the sacred Calls
of his Country. When the Liberties of America were attacked, he appeared an
early Champion in the Contest; and though his Knowledge and Abilities would have
insured Riches and Preferment (could he have stooped to Prostitution) yet he
nobly withstood the fascinating Charm, tossed Fortune back her Plume, and
persued the inflexible Purpose of his Soul, in guiltless Competence.

HE sought not the airy Honors of a Name, else, many of those Publications,
which in the early Period of our Controversy served to open the Minds of the
People, had not appeared anonymous. In every time of eminent Danger, his
Fellow-Citizens flew to him for Advice; like the Orator of Athens, he gave it,
and dispelled their Fears: -- Twice did they call him to the Rostrum, to
commemorate the Massacre of their Brethren; and from that Instance, in
persuasive Language he taught them, not only the dangerous Tendency, but the
actual Mischief, of stationing a Military Force, in a free City, in a Time of
Peace. -- They learnt the profitable Lesson, and penned it among their
Grievances.

BUT his Abilities were too great, his Deliberations too much wanted, to be
confined to the Limits of a single City, and at a Time when our Liberties were
most critically in Danger from the secret Machinations and open Assaults of our
Enemies, this Town, to their lasting Honor, elected him to take a Part in the
Councils of the State. -- And with what Faithfulness he discharged the
important Delegation, the Neglect of his private Concerns, and his unwearied
Attendance on that Betrustment, will sufficiently testify: and the Records of
that virtuous Assembly will remain the Testimonials of his Accomplishments as a
Statesman, and his Integrity and Services as a Patriot, through all Posterity.

The Congress of our Colony could not observe so much Virtue and Greatness
without honoring it with the highest Mark of their Favor; and by the free
Suffrages of that uncorrupted Body of Freemen, he was soon called to preside in
the Senate. -- Where by his daily Councils and Exertions, he was constantly
promoting the great Cause of General Liberty.

BUT when he found the Tools of Oppression were obstinately bent on Violence;
when he found the Vengeance of the British Court must he glutted with Blood; he
determined, that what he could not effect by his Eloquence or his Pen, he would
bring to Purpose by his Sword. And on the memorable 19th of April, he appeared
in the Field, under the united Characters of the General, the Soldier and the
Physician. -- Here he was seen animating his Countrymen to Battle, and fighting
by their Side, and there he was found administering healing Comforts to the
wounded. And when he had repelled the unprovoked Assaults of the Enemy, and had
driven them back into their Strongholds, like the virtuous Chief of Rome, he
returned to the Senate, and presided again at the Councils of the Fathers.

WHEN the vanquished Foe had rallied their disordered Army, and by the
Acquisition of fresh Strength, again presumed to fight against Freemen; our
Patriot, ever anxious to be, where he could do the most good, again put off the
Senator, and in Contempt of Danger flew to the Field of Battle, where, after a
stern, and almost victorious Resistance, ah! too soon for his Country! he
sealed his Principles with his Blood -- then --

"Freedom wept, that MERIT could not save,"
But WARREN's Manes "must enrich the Grave."
Enriched indeed! And the Heights of Charlestown shall be more memorable for
thy Fall, than the Plains of Abraham are for that of the Hero of Britain. For
while he died contending for a single Country, You fell in the Cause of Virtue
and Mankind.

THE Greatness of his Soul shone even in the Moment of Death; for if Fame
speaks true, in his last Agonies he met the Insults of his barbarous Foe, with
his wonted Magnanimity, and with the true Spirit of a Soldier, frowned at their
Impotence.

IN Fine, to complete the great Character -- like HARRINGTON he wrote, like
CICERO he spoke, like HAMPDEN he lived, and like WOLF he died.

AND can we, my Countrymen, with Indifference behold so much Worth and Valor
laid prostrate by the Hand of British Tyranny! And can we ever grasp that Hand
in Affection again? -- Are we not yet convinced "that he who hunts the Woods
for Prey, the naked and untutored Indian, is less a Savage than the King of
Britain"! Have we not Proofs, wrote in Blood, that the corrupted Nation, from
whence we sprang (though there may be some Traces of their ancient Virtue left)
are stubbornly fixed on our Destruction! And shall we still court a Dependence
on such a State? Still contend for a Connection with those, who have forfeited
not only every kindred Claim, but even their Title to Humanity! Forbid it the
Spirit of the brave MONTGOMORY! Forbid it the Spirit of immortal WARREN! Forbid
it the Spirits of all our valiant Countrymen! Who fought, bled and died for far
different Purposes; and who would have thought the Purchase dear indeed! to
have paid their Lives for the paltry Boon, of displacing one Set of Villains in
Power, to make Way for another. No. They contended for the Establishment of
Peace, Liberty and Safety to their Country, and we are unworthy to be called
their Countrymen, if we stop at any Acpuisition short of this.

Now is the happy Season, to seize again those Rights, which as Men we are by
Nature entitled to, and which by Contract we never have and never could have
surrendered: -- But which have been repeatedly and violently attacked by the
King, Lords and Commons of Britain. Ought we not then to disclaim forever the
forfeited Affinity; and by a timely Amputation of that rotten Limb of the
Empire, prevent the Mortification of the whole? Ought we not to listen to the
Voice of our slaughtered Brethren, who are now proclaiming aloud to their
Country --

Go tell the King, and tell him from our Spirits,
That you and Britons can be Friends no more;
Tell him to you all Tyrants are the same:
Or if in Bonds, the never conquered Soul
Can feel a Pang, more keen than Slavery's self,
It Is where the Chains that crush you into Dust,
Are forged by Hands, from which you hoped for Freedom.
Yes, we ought and will -- We will assert the Blood of our murdered Hero
against thy hostile Oppressions, O shameless Britain! and when "thy Cloud-cap'd
Towers, thy gorgeous Palaces" shall by the Teeth of Pride and Folly be levelled
with the Dust -- and when thy Glory shall have faded like the Western Sunbeam
-- the Name and the Virtues of WARREN shall remain immortal.


