THE CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, AS ESTABLISHED BY THE
GENERAL CONVENTION ELECTED FOR THAT PURPOSE, AND HELD AT PHILADELPHIA, JULY
15th, 1776, AND CONTINUED BY ADJOURNMENTS TO SEPTEMBER 28, 1776.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED by JOHN DUNLAP, in MARKET-STREET. M,DCC,LXXVI.

The CONSTITUTION of PENNSYLVANIA.
WHEREAS all government ought to be instituted and supported for the security
and protection of the community as such, and to enable the individuals who
compose it to enjoy their natural rights and the other blessings which the
author of existence has bestowed upon man; and whenever these great ends of
government are not obtained, the people have a right, by common consent, to
change it, and take such measures as to them may appear necessary to promote
their safety and happiness. AND WHEREAS the inhabitants of this Commonwealth
have, in consideration of protection only, heretofore acknowledged allegiance
to the King of Great Britain, and the said King has not only withdrawn that
protection, but commenced and still continues to carry on, with unabated
vengeance, a most cruel and unjust war against them, employing therein not only
the troops of Great Britain, but foreign mercenaries, savages and slaves, for
the avowed purpose of reducing them to a total and abject submission to the
despotic domination of the British Parliament, with many other acts of tyranny,
(more fully set forth in the Declaration of Congress) whereby all allegiance
and fealty to the said King and his successors are dissolved and at an end, and
all power and authority derived from him ceased in these Colonies. AND WHEREAS
it is absolutely necessary for the welfare and safety of the inhabitants of
said Colonies, that they be henceforth free and independent States, and that
just, permanent and proper forms of government exist in every part of them,
derived from, and founded on the authority of, the people only, agreeable to
the directions of the Honorable American Congress. WE, the Representatives of
the Freemen of Pennsylvania in General Convention met, for the express purpose
of framing such a government, confessing the goodness of the great Governor of
the Universe (who alone knows to what degree of earthly happiness mankind may
attain by perfecting the arts of government) in permitting the people of this
State, by common consent, and without violence, deliberately to form for
themselves such just rules as they shall think best, for governing their future
society; and being fully convinced that it is our indispensable duty to
establish such original principles of government as will best promote the
general happiness of the people of this State and their posterity, and provide
for future improvements, without partiality for or prejudice against any
particular class, sect or denomination of men whatever, DO, by virtue of the
authority vested in us by our constituents, ordain, declare and establish the
following Declaration of Rights and Frame of Government to be THE CONSTITUTION
of this Commonwealth, and to remain in force therein forever, unaltered,
except in such articles as shall hereafter on experience be found to require
improvement, and which shall by the same authority of the people, fairly
delegated as this Frame of Government directs, be amended or improved for the
more effectual obtaining and securing THE GREAT END AND DESIGN OF ALL
GOVERNMENT, herein before mentioned.

CHAPTER I. A DECLARATION of the RIGHTS of the INHABITANTS of the State of
PENNSYLVANIA.
I. THAT all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain
natural, inherent and unalienable Rights, amongst which are the enjoying and
defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and
pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.

II. THAT all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences and understanding: And that
no man ought or of right can be compelled to attend any religious worship, or
erect or support any place of worship, or maintain any Ministry, contrary to,
or against, his own free will and consent: Nor can any man, who acknowledges
the being of a God, be justly deprived or abridged of any civil right as a
citizen, on account of his religious sentiments or peculiar mode of religious
worship: And that no authority can or ought to be vested in, or assumed by, any
power whatever, that shall in any case interfere with, or in any manner
control, the right of conscience in the free exercise of religious worship.

III. THAT the people of this State have the sole exclusive and inherent right
of governing and regulating the internal police of the same.

IV. THAT all power being originally inherent in, and consequently derived
from, the people; therefore all officers of government, whether legislative or
executive, are their trustees and servants, and at all times accountable to
them.

V. THAT government is, or ought to be, instituted for the common benefit,
protection and security of the people, nation or community; and not for the
particular emolument or advantage of any single man, family or set of men who
are a part only of that community: And that the community has an indubitable,
unalienable and indefeasible right to reform, alter or abolish government in
such manner as shall be by that community judged most conducive to the public
weal.

VI. That those who are employed in the legislative and executive business of
the State may be restrained from oppression, the people have a right, at such
periods as they may think proper, to reduce their public officers to a private
station, and supply the vacancies by certain and regular elections.

VII. THAT all elections ought to be free; and that all free men having a
sufficient evident common interest with, and attachment to the community, have
a right to elect officers, or be elected into office.

VIII. THAT every member of society has a right to be protected in the
enjoyment of life, liberty and property, and therefore is bound to contribute
his proportion toward the expense of that protection, and yield his personal
service, when necessary, or an equivalent thereto: But no part of a man's
property can be justly taken from him, or applied to public uses, without his
own consent, or that of his legal representatives: Nor can any man who is
conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms, be justly compelled thereto, if he
will pay such equivalent: Nor are the people bound by any laws, but such as
they have in like manner assented to, for their common good.

IX. That in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, a man has a right to be
heard by himself and his Council, to demand the cause and nature of his
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses, to call for evidence in his
favor, and a speedy public trial, by an impartial Jury of the country, without
the unanimous consent of which Jury he cannot be found guilty: Nor can he be
compelled to give evidence against himself: Nor can any man be justly deprived
of his liberty, except by the laws of the land or the judgment of his peers.

X. THAT the people have a right to hold themselves, their houses, papers and
possessions free from search or seizure; and therefore warrants without oaths
or affirmations first made, affording a sufficient foundation for them, and
whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded or required to search
suspected places, or to seize any person or persons, his or their property, not
particularly described, are contrary to that right, and ought not to be granted.

XI. THAT in controversies respecting property, and in suits between man and
man, the parties have a right to trial by Jury, which ought to be held sacred.

XII. THAT the people have a right to freedom of speech, and of writing, and
publishing their sentiments; therefore the freedom of the press ought not to be
restrained.

XIII. THAT the people have a right to bear arms for the defense of themselves
and the State; and as standing armies, in the time of peace, are dangerous to
liberty, they ought not to be kept up: And that the military should be kept
under strict subordination to, and governed by, the civil power.

XVI. THAT a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles, and a firm
adherence to justice, moderation, temperance, industry and frugality, are
absolutely necessary to preserve the blessings of liberty, and keep a
government free: The people ought therefore to pay particular attention to
these points in the choice of Officers and Representatives, and have a right to
exact a due and constant regard to them, from their Legislators and Magistrates
in the making and executing such laws as are necessary for the good government
of the State.

XV. THAT all men have a natural inherent right to emigrate from one State to
another that will receive them, or to form a new State in vacant countries, or
in such countries as they can purchase, whenever they think that thereby they
may promote their own happiness.

XVI. THAT the people have a right to assemble together, to consult for their
common good, to instruct their Representatives, and to apply to the Legislature
for redress of grievances, by address, petition or remonstrance.

CHAPTER II. PLAN or FRAME of GOVERNMENT.
SECTION the First.
THE Commonwealth or State of Pennsylvania shall be governed hereafter by an
Assembly of the Representatives of the Freemen of the same, and a President and
Council, in manner and form following --

SECTION the Second.
THE supreme legislative power shall be vested in a House of Representatives of
the Freemen of the Commonwealth or State of Pennsylvania.

SECTION the Third.
THE supreme executive power shall be vested in a President and Council.

SECTION the Fourth.
COURTS of Justice shall be established in the city of Philadelphia and in
every county of this State.

SECTION the Fifth.
THE Freemen of this Commonwealth and their sons shall be trained and armed
for its defense, under such regulations, restrictions and exceptions as the
General Assembly shall by law direct, preserving always to the people the right
of choosing their Colonel and all commissioned officers under that rank, in such
manner and as often as by the said laws shall be directed.

SECTION the Sixth.
EVERY freeman of the full age of twenty-one years, having resided in this
State for the space of one whole year next before the day of election for
Representatives, and paid public taxes during that time, shall enjoy the right
of an elector: Provided always, That sons of Freeholders of the age of
twenty-one years shall be entitled to vote although they have not paid taxes.

SECTION the Seventh.
THE House of Representatives of the Freemen of this Commonwealth shall
consist of persons most noted for wisdom and virtue, to be chosen by the
Freemen of every city and county of this Commonwealth respectively. And no
person shall be elected unless he has resided in the city or county for which
he shall be chosen two years immediately before the said election; nor shall
any member, while he continues such, hold any other office except in the
Militia.

SECTION the Eighth.
NO person shall be capable of being elected a member to serve in the House of
Representatives of the Freemen of this Commonwealth more than four years in
seven.

SECTION the Ninth.
THE Members of the House of Representatives shall be chosen annually by ballot
by the freemen of the Commonwealth, on the second Tuesday in October forever,
(except this present year) and shall meet on the fourth Monday of the same
month, and shall be styled THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
FREEMEN OF PENNSYLVANIA, and shall have power to choose their Speaker, the
Treasurer of the State, and their other Officers; sit on their own
adjournments; prepare Bills and enact them into Laws; judge of the elections
and qualifications of their own members; they may expel a member, but not a
second time for the same cause; they may administer oaths or affirmations on
examination of witnesses; redress grievances; impeach state criminals; grant
charters of incorporation; constitute towns, boroughs, cities and counties: And
shall have all other powers necessary for the Legislature of a free State or
Commonwealth: But they shall have no power to add to, alter, abolish, or
infringe any part of this Constitution.

SECTION the Tenth.
A QUORUM of the House of Representatives shall consist of two thirds of the
whole number of members elected; and having met and chosen their Speaker, shall
each of them before they proceed to business take and subscribe, as well the
oath or affirmation of fidelity and allegiance herein after directed, as the
following oath or affirmation, viz.

I -- do swear (or affirm) that as a Member of this Assembly, I will not
propose or assent to any bill, vote, or resolution, which shall appear to me
injurious to the people; nor do or consent to any act or thing whatever that
shall have a tendency to lessen or abridge their rights and privileges, as
declared in the Constitution of this state; but will in all things conduct
myself as a faithful honest Representative and Guardian of the People,
according to the best of my judgment and abilities.

AND each member, before he takes his seat, shall make and subscribe the
following declaration, viz.

I DO believe in one God, the Creator and Governor of the Universe, the
rewarder of the good and punisher of the wicked. And I do acknowledge the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration.

AND no further or other religious test shall ever hereafter be required of any
Civil Officer or Magistrate in this State.

SECTION the Eleventh.
DELEGATES to represent this State in Congress shall be chosen by ballot by the
future General Assembly at their first meeting, and annually forever
afterward, as long as such Representation shall be necessary. Any Delegate may
be superseded at any time, by the General Assembly apponting another in his
stead. No man shall sit in Congress longer than two years successively, nor be
capable of re-election for three years afterward: And no person who holds any
office in the gift of the Congress shall hereafter be elected to represent this
Commonwealth in Congress.

SECTION the Twelfth.
IF any city or cities, county or counties shall neglect or refuse to elect and
send Representatives to the General Assembly, two thirds of the members from
the cities or counties that do elect and send Representatives, provided they be
a majority of the cities and counties of the whole State when met, shall have
all the powers of the General Assembly as fully and amply as if the whole were
present.

SECTION the Thirteenth.
THE doors of the house in which the Representatives of the Freemen of this
State shall sit in General Assembly, shall be and remain open for the admission
of all persons who behave decently, except only when the welfare of this State
may require the doors to be shut.

SECTION the Fourteenth.
THE Votes and Proceedings of the General Assembly shall be printed weekly
during their sitting with the yeas and nays on any question, vote or
resolution, where any two members require it, except when the vote is taken by
ballot; and when the yeas and nays are so taken, every member shall have a
right to insert the reasons of his vote upon the Minutes, if he desire it.

SECTION the Fifteenth.
TO the end that Laws before they are enacted may be more maturely considered,
and the inconvenience of hasty determinations as much as possible prevented,
all bills of public nature shall be printed for the consideration of the
people, before they are read in General Assembly the last time for debate and
amendment; and except on occasions of sudden necessity, shall not be passed
into Laws until the next session of Assembly; and for the more perfect
satisfaction of the public, the reasons and motives for making such Laws shall
be fully and clearly expressed in the preambles.

SECTION the Sixteenth.
THE style of the Laws of this Commonwealth shall be, Be it enacted, and it is
hereby enacted by the Representatives of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and by the authority of the same. And
the General Assembly shall affix their seal to every bill, as soon as it is
enacted into a Law, which seal shall be kept by the Assembly and shall be
called, THE SEAL OF THE LAWS OF PENNSYLVANIA, and shall not be used for any
other purpose.

SECTION the Seventeenth.
THE city of Philadelphia and each county in this Commonwealth respectively,
shall on the first Tuesday of November in this present year, and on the second
Tuesday in October, annually for the two next succeeding years, to wit, the
year one thousand seven hundred and seventy seven, and the year one thousand
seven hundred and seventy eight, choose six persons to represent them in General
Assembly. But as Representation in proportion to the number of taxable
inhabitants is the only principle which can at all times secure liberty and
make the voice of a majority of the people the law of the land; therefore the
General Assembly shall cause complete lists of the taxable inhabitants in the
city and each county in the Commonwealth respectively, to be taken and
returned to them, on or before the last meeting of the Assembly, elected in the
year one thousand seven hundred and seventy eight, who shall appoint a
representation to each in proportion to the number of taxables in such returns,
which representation shall continue for the next seven years afterward, at the
end of which, a new return of the taxable inhabitants shall be made, and a
representation agreeable thereto appointed by the said Assembly, and so on
septennially for ever. The wages of the Representatives in General Assembly,
and all other State charges shall be paid out of the State Treasury.

SECTION the Eighteenth.
IN order that the Freemen of this Commonwealth may enjoy the benefit of
election as equally as may be until the representation shall commence, as
directed in the foregoing Section, each county at its own choice may be divided
into districts, hold elections therein, and elect their Representatives in the
county and their other elective officers, as shall be hereafter regulated by
the General Assembly of this State. And no inhabitant of this State shall have
more than one annual vote at the general election for Representatives in
Assembly.

SECTION the Nineteenth.
FOR the present the supreme executive Council of this State shall consist of
twelve persons, chosen in the following manner: The freemen of the city of
Philadelphia and of the counties of Philadelphia, Chester and Bucks
respectively shall choose by ballot one person for the city and one for each
county aforesaid, to serve for three years and no longer, at the time and place
for electing Representatives in General Assembly. The freemen of the counties
of Lancaster, York, Cumberland and Berks shall in like manner elect one person
for each county respectively, to serve as Counselors for two years and no
longer. And the counties of Northampton, Bedford, Northumberland and
Westmoreland respectively shall in like manner elect one person for each
county, to serve as Counselors for one year and no longer. And at the
expiration of the time for which each Counselor was chosen to serve, the
freemen of the city of Philadelphia and of the several counties in this State
respectively shall elect one person to serve as Counselor for three years and
no longer; and so on every third year forever. By this mode of election and
continual rotation, more men will be trained to public business, there will in
every subsequent year be found in the Council a number of persons acquainted
with the proceedings of the foregoing years, whereby the business will be more
consistently conducted, and moreover the danger of establishing an inconvenient
aristocrary will be effectually prevented. All vacancies in the Council that
may happen by death, resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled at the next
general election for Representatives in General Assembly, unless a particular
election for that purpose shall be sooner appointed by the President and
Council. No member of the General Assembly or Delegate in Congress, shall be
chosen a member of the Council. The President and Vice President shall be
chosen annually by the joint ballot of the General Assembly and Council, of the
members of the Council. Any person having served as a Counselor for three
successive years, shall be incapable of holding that office for four years
afterward. Every member of the Council shall be a Justice of the Peace for the
whole Commonwealth, by virtue of his office.

IN case new additional counties shall hereafter be erected in this State, such
county or counties shall elect a Counselor, and such county or counties shall
be annexed to the next neighboring counties, and shall take rotation with such
counties.

THE Council shall meet annually, at the same time and place with the General
Assembly.

THE Treasurer of the State, Trustees of the Loan-Office, Naval Officers,
Collectors of Customs or Excise, Judge of the Admiralty, Attornies-General,
Sheriffs, and Prothonotaries, shall not be capable of a seat in the General
Assembly, Executive Council, or Continental Congress.

SECTION the Twentieth.
THE President, and in his absence the Vice President, with the Council, five
of whom shall be a quorum, shall have power to appoint and commissionate
Judges, Naval Officers, Judge of the Admiralty, Attorney General and all other
officers, civil and military, except such as are chosen by the General
Assembly, or the people, agreeable to this frame of government and the laws
that may be made hereafter; and shall supply every vacancy, in any office,
occasioned by death, resignation, removal or disqualification, until the office
can be filled in the time and manner directed by law or this Constitution. They
are to correspond with other States, and transact business with the officers of
government, civil and military; and to prepare such business as may appear to
them necessary, to lay before the General Assembly. They shall sit as Judges,
to hear and determine on impeachments, taking to their assistance, for advice
only, the Justices of the Supreme Court. And shall have power to grant pardons,
and remit fines, in all cases whatsoever, except in cases of impeachment; and
in cases of treason and murder, shall have power to grant reprieves, but not to
pardon, until the end of the next sessions of Assembly; but there shall be no
remission or mitigation of punishment on impeachments, except by act of the
legislature; they are also to take care that the laws be faithfully executed;
they are to expedite the execution of such measures as may be resolved upon by
the General Assembly; and they may draw upon the Treasury for such sums as
shall be appropriated by the House: They may also lay embargoes, or prohibit
the exportation of any commodity, for any time, not exceeding thirty days, in
the recess of the House only: They may grant such licenses as shall be directed
by law, and shall have power to call together the General Assembly when
necessary, before the day to which they shall stand adjourned. The President
shall be commander in chief of the forces of the State, but shall not command
in person, except advised thereto by the Council, and then only so long as they
shall approve thereof. The President and Council shall have a Secretary, and
keep fair books of their proceedings, wherein any Counselor may enter his
dissent, with his reasons in support of it.

SECTION the Twenty-first.
ALL commissions shall be in the name, and by the authority of the Freemen of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, sealed with the State Seal, signed by the
President or Vice President, and attested by the Secretary; which Seal shall be
kept by the Council.

SECTION the Twenty-second.
EVERY officer of State, whether judicial or executive, shall be liable to be
impeached by the General Assembly, either when in office, or after his
resignation, or removal for mal-administration: All impeachments shall be
before the President or Vice President and Council, who shall hear and
determine the same.

SECTION the Twenty-third.
THE Judges of the Supreme Court of Judicature shall have fixed salaries, be
commissioned for seven years only, though capable of re-appointment at the end of
that term, but removeable for misbehaviour at any time by the General Assembly;
-- they shall not be allowed to sit as members in the Continental Congress,
Executive Council, or General Assembly, nor to hold any other office civil or
military, nor to take or receive fees or perquisites of any kind.

SECTION the Twenty-fourth.
THE Supreme Court and the several Courts of Common Pleas of this Commonwealth
shall, besides the powers usually exercised by such Courts, have the powers of
a Court of Chancery, so far as relates to the perpetuating testimony, obtaining
evidence from places not within this State, and the care of the persons and
estates of those who are non compotes mentis, and such other powers as may be
found necessary by future General Assemblies, not inconsistent with this
Constitution.

SECTION the Twenty-fifth.
TRIALS shall be by Jury as heretofore: And it is recommended to the
Legislature of this State to provide by law against every corruption or
partiality in the choice, return, or appointment of Juries.

SECTION the Twenty-sixth.
COURTS of Sessions, Common Pleas, and Orphans Courts shall be held quarterly
in each city and county; and the Legislature shall have power to establish all
such other Courts as they may judge for the good of the inhabitants of the
State. All Courts shall be open, and justice shall be impartially administered
without corruption or unnecessary delay: All their officers shall be paid an
adequate but moderate compensation for their services: And if any officer shall
take greater or other fees than the laws allow him, either directly or
indirectly, it shall ever after disqualify him from holding any office in this
State.

SECTION the Twenty-seventh.
All prosecutions shall commence in the name and by the authority of the
Freemen of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and all indictments shall
conclude with these words, "Against the peace and dignity of the same." The
style of all process hereafter in this State shall be, The Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

SECTION the Twenty-eighth.
THE person of a debtor, where there is not a strong presumption of fraud,
shall not be continued in prison, after delivering up, bona fide, all his
estate real and personal, for the use of his creditors, in such manner as shall
be hereafter regulated by law. All prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient
sureties, unless for capital offenses, when the proof is evident or presumption
great.

SECTION the Twenty-ninth.
EXCESSIVE bail shall not be exacted for bailable offenses: And all sines shall
be moderate.

SECTION the Thirtieth.
JUSTICES of the Peace shall be elected by the Freeholders of each city and
county respectively, that is to say, two or more persons may be chosen for each
ward, township or district, as the Law shall hereafter direct: And their names
shall be returned to the President in Council, who shall commissionate one or
more of them for each ward, township or district so returning, for seven years,
removable for misconduct by the General Assembly: -- But if any city or county,
ward, township or district in this Commonwealth, shall hereafter incline to
change the manner of appointing their Justices of the Peace as settled in this
article, the General Assembly may make Laws to regulate the same, agreeable to
the desire of a majority of the freeholders of the city or county, ward,
township or district so applying. No Justice of the Peace shall sit in the
General Assembly unless he first resign his commission, nor shall he be allowed
to take any fees; nor any salary or allowance except such as the future
Legislature may grant.

SECTION the Thirty first
SHERIFFS and Coroners shall be elected annually in each city and county, by
the Freemen; that is to say, two persons for each office, one of whom for each,
is to be commissioned by the President in Council. No person shall continue in
the office of Sheriff more than three successive years, or be capable of being
again elected during four years afterward. The election shall be held at the
same time and place appointed for the election of Representatives: And the
Commissioners and Assessors, and other officers chosen by the people, shall
also be then and there elected, as has been usual heretofore, until altered or
otherwise regulated by the future Legislature of this State.

SECTION the Thirty-second.
ALL elections, whether by the People or in General Assembly, shall be by
ballot, free and voluntary: And any Elector, who shall receive any gift or
reward for his vote, in meat, drink, moneys or otherwise, shall forfeit his
right to elect for that time, and suffer such other penalty as future Laws
shall direct. And any person who shall directly or indirectly give promise or
bestow any such rewards to be elected, shall be thereby rendered incapable to
serve for the ensuing year.

SECTION the Thirty third.
ALL fees, license money, fines and forfeitures heretofore granted, or paid to
the Governor, or his deputies for the support of government, shall hereafter be
paid into the public treasury, unless altered or abolished by the future
legislature.

SECTION the Thirty-fourth.
A Register's Office for the Probate of Wills and granting letters of
administration, and an office for the recording of Deeds, shall be kept in each
city and county: The officers to be appointed by the General Assembly,
removeable at their pleasure, and to be commissioned by the President in
Council.

SECTION the Thirty fifth.
THE Printing Presses shall be Free to every person who undertakes to examine
the proceedings of the legislature, or any part of government.

SECTION the Thirty-sixth.
AS every Freeman, to preserve his Independence, (if without a sufficient
estate) ought to have some profession, calling, trade or farm, whereby he may
honestly subsist, there can be no necessity for, nor use in establishing
offices of profit, the usual effects of which are dependence and servility,
unbecoming Freemen, in the possessors and expectants; faction, contention,
corruption and disorder among the people. But if any man is called into public
service, to the prejudice of his private affairs, he has a right to a
reasonable compensation: And whenever an office, through increase of fees, or
otherwise becomes so profitable as to occasion many to apply for it, the
profits ought to be lessened by the legislature.

SECTION the Thirty-seventh.
THE future legislature of this State, shall regulate intails in such a manner
as to prevent perpetuities.

SECTION the Thirty-eighth.
THE penal laws as heretofore used, shall be reformed by the future legislature
of this State, as soon as may be, and punishments made in some cases less
sanguinary, and in general more proportionate to the crimes.

SECTION the Thirty-ninth.
TO deter more effectually from the commission of crimes, by continued visible
punishment of long duration, and to make sanguinary punishments less necessary;
houses ought to be provided for punishing by hard labor, those who shall be
convicted of crimes not capital; wherein the criminals shall be employed for
the benefit of the public, or for reparation of injuries done to private
persons: And all persons at proper times shall be admitted to see the prisoners
at their labor.

SECTION the Fortieth.
EVERY officer, whether judicial, executive or military, in authority under
this Commonwealth, shall take the following oath or affirmation of allegiance,
and general oath of office before he enter on the execution of his office: The
oath or affirmation of allegiance. "I -- do swear (or affirm) That I will be
true and faithful to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: And that I will not
directly or indirectly do any act or thing prejudicial or injurious to the
Constitution or Government thereof as established by the Convention." The oath
or affirmation of office. "I -- do swear (or affirm) That I will faithfully
execute the office of -- for the -- of -- and will do equal right and justice
to all men to the best of my judgment and abilities, according to Law." --

SECTION the Forty-first.
NO public tax, custom or contribution shall be imposed upon, or paid by the
People of this State, except by a Law for that purpose: And before any Law be
made for raising it, the purpose for which any tax is to be raised ought to
appear clearly to the Legislature to be of more service to the community than
the money would be, if not collected, which being well observed, taxes can
never be burdens.

SECTION the Forty-second.
EVERY foreigner of good character, who comes to settle in this State, having
first taken an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the same, may purchase, or
by other just means acquire, hold and transfer land or other real estate; and
after one year's residence, shall be deemed a free denizen thereof, and
entitled to all the rights of a natural born subject of this State, except that
he shall not be capable of being elected a Representative until after two years
residence.

SECTION the Forty-third.
THE inhabitants of this State shall have liberty to fowl and hunt in
seasonable times on the lands they hold, and on all other lands therein not
enclosed; and in like manner to fish in all boatable waters and others not
private property.

SECTION the Forty-fourth.
A SCHOOL or schools shall be established in each county by the Legislature,
for the convenient instruction of youth, with such salaries to the masters paid
by the Public as may enable them to instruct youth at low prices: And all
useful learning shall be duly encouraged and promoted in one or more
Universities.

SECTION the Forty-fifth.
LAWS for the encouragement of virtue, and prevention of vice and immorality,
shall be made and constantly kept in force, and provision shall be made for
their due execution: And all religious societies or bodies of men heretofore
united or incorporated for the advancement of religion and learning, or for
other pious and charitable purposes, shall be encouraged and protected in the
enjoyment of the privileges, immunities and estates which they were accustomed
to enjoy, or could of right have enjoyed under the Laws and former Constitution
of this State.

SECTION the Forty-sixth.
THE declaration of rights is hereby declared to be a part of the constitution
of this Commonwealth, and ought never to be violated on any pretense whatever.

SECTION the Forty-seventh.
IN order that the freedom of this Commonwealth may be preserved inviolate for
ever, there shall be chosen by ballot by the Freemen in each city and county
respectively, on the second Tuesday in October, in the year one thousand seven
hundred and eighty three, and on the second Tuesday in October in every seventh
year thereafter, two persons in each city and county of this State, to be
called the Council of Censors; who shall meet together on the second Monday of
November, next ensuing their election; the majority of whom shall be a quorum
in every case, except as to calling a Convention, in which two thirds of the
whole number elected shall agree; and whose duty it shall be to enquire whether
the constitution has been preserved inviolate in every part? And whether the
legislative and executive branches of government have performed their duty as
guardians of the people, or assumed to themselves, or exercised other or
greater powers than they are entitled to by the constitution: They are also to
enquire whether the public taxes have been justly laid and collected in all
parts of this Commonwealth, in what manner the public moneys have been
disposed of, and whether the laws have been duly executed: For these purposes
they shall have power to send for persons papers and records; they shall have
authority to pass public censures, to order impeachments, and to recommend to
the legislature the repealing such laws as appear to them to have been enacted
contrary to the principles of the constitution: These powers they shall
continue to have, for and during the space of one year from the day of their
election, and no longer: The said Council of Censors shall also have power to
call a Convention, to meet within two years after their sitting, if there
appear to them an absolute necessity of amending any article of the
constitution which may be defective, explaining such as may be thought not
clearly expressed, and of adding such as are necessary for the preservation of
the rights and happiness of the people: But the articles to be amended, and the
amendments proposed and such articles as are proposed to be added or abolished,
shall be promulgated at least six months before the day appointed for the
election of such Convention, for the previous consideration of the people, that
they may have an opportunity of instructing their Delegates on the subject.

THE END.

