AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH FIFTH, 1776.

AN ORATION DELIVERED AT WATERTOWN, MARCH 5, 1776. TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY
MASSACRE AT BOSTON: PERPETRATED MARCH 5, 1770.

BY PETER THACHER, A. M.

Asellum in prato timidus pascebat senex
Is hostium clamore subito territus,
Suadebat asino fugere, ne possent capi.
At ille lentus: quaeso, number binas mihi,
Clitellas impositurum victorem putas?
Senex negavit. Ergo quid refert mea,
Cui serviam? Clitellas dam portem meas.
PHAEDRUS. WATERTOWN: Printed and Sold by BENJAMIN EDES, on the Bridge,
M,DCC,LXXVI.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
legally assembled at Watertown, MARCH 5th. 1776.
VOTED, That the Thanks of the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston, be given to
the Rev. Mr. PETER THACHER, for his elegant and spirited ORATION, now delivered
at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid MASSACRE perpetrated on the
Evening of the 5th of March, 1770, by a Party of Soldiers of the XXIXth
Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston.

Voted, That a Committee be appointed to wait upon the Rev. Mr. Thacher, with
the above Vote, and desire a Copy of the ORATION for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
A Sincere Desire to show my Respect to the truly worthy Inhabitants of the
Town of BOSTON, alone induced me to deliver the following ORATION; the same
Motive influences me in consenting to its Publication.

I am, Gentlemen, With the utmost Respect, Your most obedient humble Servant,
PETER THACHER.

AN ORATION.
MY FRIENDS,
WHEN the ambition of Princes induces them to break over the sacred barriers of
social compact, and to violate those rights, which it is their duty to defend,
they will leave no methods unessayed to bring the people to acquiesce in their
unjustifiable encroachments.

IN this cause, the pens of venal authors have, in every age, been drawn* With
Machiavelian subtilty, they have labored to persuade mankind, that their
public happiness consisted in being subject to uncontrouled power; that they
were incapable of judging concerning the mysteries of government; and that it
was their interest to deliver their estates, their liberties, and their lives,
into the hands of an absolute Monarch.

MITER^ hypocrites, and cringing, base-souled Priests, have impiously dared to
inlist the oracles of GOD into the service of despotism; to assert, that, by
the command of the supreme lawgiver, we are bound to surrender our rights into
the hands of the first bold Tyrant, who dares to seize them; and that when so
seized, it is rebellion against God, and treason against the Prince, for us to
attempt to resume them.

DEPRAVED as is the human understanding, it has yet strength enough to discern
the ridiculous falacy of these assertions: The votaries of ignorance and
superstition may indeed be imposed upon by them: When we place unlimited
confidence in our civil or spiritual fathers, we can swallow, with ease* the
most improbable dogmas; but there are feelings in the human heart, which compel
men to recognize their own rights, to venerate the majesty of the people, and
to despise the insult which is offered to their understandings, by these
doting absurdities. Had princes no other methods to accomplish their purposes,
could they not establish their usarpation, without convincing men's judgments of
their utility, they would be more harmless to mankind than they have ever yet
been? They might be surrounded with the fascinating gew-gaws of regal pomp; a
few parasites might bow the knee before these idols of their own creating; the
weak and the wicked might obey their mandates; but the baneful influence which
they now have upon the interests of individuals, and of society, would come to
a period: they would not revel in the spoils of nations, nor trample upon the
ruins of public Liberty.

CONSCIOUS of this, they have used arguments, and pursued methods, entirely
different from these, to effect their designs; instead of convincing the
understandings, they have addressed themselves to the passions of men: The acts
of bribery and corruption have been tried with a fatal success: Men, We know,
have sold their children, their country, and their GOD, for a small quantity of
painted dirt, which will perish with the using*

EXTENSIVE as are the revenues of princes, they are still inadequate to the
purpose of bribing large communities to submit to their pleasure; corrupting
therefore a few, they have overawed the rest; from small beginnings, and under
spacious pretenses, they will use a standing military force, the most
successful engine ever yet weilded by the hand of lawless domination.

WITH such a force, it is easy for an ambitious prince, possessed by nature of
very slender abilities, to subvert every principle of liberty in the
constitution of his government, and to render his people the most abject of
slaves; if any individual feels the injury done to his country, and wishes to
restore it to a state of happiness, with a bayonet at his breast, a dragoon
will compel him to silence: If the people, awakened to see their interest and
their duty, assemble for the same purpose, a military force is at hand to
subdue them, and by leaden arguments, to convince them of their error.

AN easy task would it be to enlarge upon the fatal consequences of keeping up
such a standing army in time of peace, and of quartering a lawless body of men,
who despise the just restraints of civil authority, in free and populous
cities: That no vestige of freedom can remain in a state where such a force
exists; that the morals of the people will be gradually corrupted; that they
will contract such an habit of tame submission, as to become an easy prey to
the brutal tyrant who rules them; has been heretofore largely and plainly
demonstrated, by persons so much more capable of doing it, than he who is
speaking, that it would be presumption in him to attempt it now.

THERE is no need of recurring to the ancient histories of Greece and Rome, for
instances of these truths. The British nation, once famous for its attachment
to freedom, and enthusiastically jealous of its rights, is now become a great
tame beast, which fetches and carries for any minister who pleases to employ it.

ENGLISHMEN have been wont to boast of the excellence of their constitution; to
boast that it contained whatever was excellent, in every form of government,
hitherto, by the wit of man devised; in their King, whose power was limited,
they have asserted that they enjoyed the advantages of Monarchy, without fear
of its evils: While their house of Commons, chosen by the suffrages of the
people, and dependant upon them, represented a republic; their house of peers,
forming a balance of power between the king and the people, gave them the
benefit of an aristocracy. In theory, the British constitution is, on many
accounts, excellent; but when we observe it reduced to practice, when we
observe the British government, as it has been, for a long course of years,
administered, we must be convinced that its boasted advantages are not real:
The management of the public revenue, the appointment of civil and military
officers, are vested in the king: Improving the advantages which those powers
give him, he has sound means to corrupt the other branches of the legislature:
Britons please themselves with the thought of being free; their tyrant suffers
them to enjoy the shadow, whilst he himself grasps the substance of power.
Impossible would it have been for the kings of England to have acquired such an
exorbitant power, had they not had a standing army under their command: With
the officers of this army they have bribed men to sacrifice the rights of their
country: Having artfully got their arms out of the hands of the people, with
their mercenary forces, they have awed them into submission. When they have
appeared, at any time, disposed to assert their freedom, these troops have been
ready to obey the mandates of their sovereign, to imbrue their hands in the
blood of their brethren.

HAVING found the efficacy of this method to quell a spirit of liberty in the
people of Great Britain, the righteous administration of the righteous king,
George the third, determined to try the experiment upon the people of America.
To fright us into submission to their unjustifiable claims, they sent a
military force to the town of Boston. This day leads us to reflect upon the
fatal effects of the measure! By their intercourse with troops, made up in
general of the most abandoned of men, the morals of our youth were corrupted:
The temples and the day of our God were scandalously profaned: We experienced
the most provoking insults; and at length saw the streets of Boston strewed
with the corpses of five of its inhabitants, murdered in cool blood, by the
British mercenaries.

THE indignant rage which swelled your bosoms upon this occasion, the fortitude
and humanity which you discovered, the anguish of the friends and relatives of
the dead and wounded, with all the horrors of that memorable night, have been
painted in vivid colors by an HANCOCK and a WARREN* They have shown the
necessity of those exertions made by the town, which defeated at that time, the
designs of the enemies to American liberty, and preserved us, for the present,
from the calamities of war.

BUT the past year has presented us with a Tragedy more striking, because more
extensive, than this: A Tragedy, which more plainly proves the fatal effects of
keeping up standing armies in time of peace, than any arguments whatsoever: We
have seen the ground crimsoned with the gore of hundreds of our
fellow-citizens, -- we have seen the first city in America for wealth and
extent, depopulated, we have seen others destroyed, and heard our savage
enemies breathing out thirstings for our blood.

FINDING their arts insufficient to flatter, or their treasures to bribe the
people of America, out of their freedom, the British government determined, by
force, to subjugate them to their arbitrary will: In consequence of this
determination, a large party of their troops marched from Boston, on the
morning of the ever memorable nineteenth of April last, flushed with the hopes
of certain victory, and defying the armies of the living God, they broke
through every divine and political obligation; they wantoned in cruelty; they
shed again American blood.

AROUSED by the unprovoked injury, like a lion, awaking from his slumber, we
sprang to arms! we felt ourselves inspired with the spirit of our ancestors, we
heard our brethrens blood crying to us for vengeance, we rushed into the midst
of battle: we compelled our enemies to betake themselves to a disgraceful
flight, we pursued them with avidity, and desisted not till they took refuge in
that city, of which, by fraud and treachery, they had possessed themselves.

TRUSTING to the divine protection, from that hour we determined never to
sheathe the sword, till we had reparation for (...) injuries, till we had
secured our own freedom and the freedom of our posterity* From that hour the
den of our enemies has been surrounded by an American army, brave and
determined although they had before boasted of their superiority to all the
troops in the world, they have scarcely dared to set their feet out of their
strong holds since that time; and instead of ravaging the American Continent in
a single campaign, with a single regiment, they have proceeded -- one mile and
an half in the conquest of it.

THE heights of Charlestown witnessed to the world, that Americans, fighting in
the cause of freedom, were a formidable foe: although they were surrounded by
troops, hitherto deemed invincible; although they saw the habitations of their
countrymen inveloped with flames; ^ough the cannon roared on every quarter, and
they beheld scenes of (...) bloodshed, to which they were entirely unused, yet
they (...) had compelled their enemy twice to retreat, and had expended the
whole of their ammunition: The British forces gained the ground, but they lost
the flower of their army.

FROM one end of the continent to the other, a series of successes has
attended the American arms, instead of having troops of savages poured down to
our frontiers, (which the murderous policy of the tyrant of Britain induced him
to attempt) we have, through the favor of Heaven, carried our victorious arms
into the very bowels of Canada; instead of having our stores and provisions cut
off by the enemy, we have made important captures from them: Success has
crowned our enterprises, while disappointment has followed those who oppose us.

THAT elation of spirit, which is excited by our victories, is damped by our
feeling the calamities of war. To hear the expiring groans of our beloved
countrymen; to behold the flames of our habitations, once the abodes of peace
and plenty, ascending to Heaven, to see ruin and desolation spread over our
fruitful villages, must occasion sensations in the highest degree painful.

THIS Day, upon which the gloomy scene was first opened, calls upon us to mourn
for the Heroes who have already died in the bed of honor, fighting for GOD and
their country (...) does it lead us to recollect the name and the virtues of
General (...) the kind, the humane, the benevolent friend, in the private (...)
inflexible patriot, the undaunted commander in his public (...) recollected
with gratitude and esteem! This audience, acquainted, in the most intimate
manner, with his numberless virtues, must feel his loss, and bemoan their
beloved, their entrusted fellow-citizen! Ah! my countrymen, what tender, what
excruciating sensations rush at once upon our burdened minds, when we recall
his loved idea! when we reflect upon the manner of his death; when we fancy
that we see his savage enemies exulting over his corpse, beautiful even in
death; when we remember that destitute of the rites of sepulture, he was cast
into the ground, without the distinction due to his rank and merit; we cannot
restrain the starting tear, we cannot repress the bursting sigh! We mourn thine
exit, illustrious shade, with undissembled grief; we venerate thine exalted
character; we will erect a monument to thy memory in each of our grateful
breasts, and to the latest ages, will teach our tender infants to lisp the name
of WARREN, with veneration and applause!

WHEN we traverse the Canadian wilds, and come to the plains of Abraham, where
WOLF once fell, we are there again compelled to pay a tribute to exalted
merit, and to lament the fall of the great MONTGOMERY! Warmed with a spirit of
patriotism, too little felt by his venal countrymen, he espoused the cause of
American freedom: He left domestic ease and affluence: He girded on the sword
which he had long laid aside, and jeoparded his life on the high places of the
field: Victory followed his standard, she hovered over his head, and crowned it
with the laurel wreath: She was just ready to hail him the Conqueror of Canada,
when the fatal sisters snapped, in a moment the thread of life, and seized,
from his eager grasp, the untasted conquest! Americans, bear witness to his
humanity and his valor, for he died fighting in your cause and the cause of
mankind! let his memory live in your breasts; let it be handed down to your
posterity, that millions yet unborn may rise up and call him blessed!

THE tender feelings of the human heart are deeply affected with the fate of
these and the other heroes who have bled and died, that their country may be
free* But at the same time, sensations of indignant wrath, are excited in the
breast of every friend to freedom: He will listen to the voice of their blood,
which cries aloud to heaven, and to him for vengeance! He will feel himself
animated with new vigor in the glorious cause: Nothing daunted by their
untimely fate, he will rush into the midst of danger, that he may share their
glory, and avenge their death! Every idea which can warm and animate him to
glorious deeds, will rush at once upon his mind; and when engaged in the
warmest battle, he will hear them, from their heaven, urging him to action: He
will feel their spirits transfused into his breast; he will sacrifice whole
(...) of their murderers to their illustrious manes!

INDEED, my countrymen, the people of America have every thing (...) animate
and encourage them in the present contest. Formidable as was (...) the power of
the British Lion, he has now lost his teeth; universal (...) has taken place
of that simplicity of manners, and hardiness of integrity (...) which the
nation was once remarkable: The officers of the British army instead of inuring
themselves to discipline, and seeking for glory in the blood-stained field,
wish alone to captivate the softer sex, and triumph over their virtue. The
legislature of Great Britain is totally corrupt; her administration is
arbitrary and tyrannical; the people have lost their spirit of resentment; and
like the most contemptible of animals, bow the shoulder to bear and become
servants unto tribute. The national resources are cut off; she is loaded with
an intolerable public debt; she is become the scorn of those foreigners, to
whom she was once terrible; and it is easy to see that her glory is in the wane.

HOW different from this is the present state of our country! Descended from a
race of hardy ancestors, who loved their freedom better than they loved their
lives; the Americans are jealous of the least infringement of their rights;
strangers to that luxury, which effeminates the mind and body; they are capable
of enduring incredible hardships; with eagerness they rush into the field of
battle, and brave with coolness, every danger: They possess a rich and a
fruitful country, sufficient to supply, them with every necessary and
convenience of life; they have inexhaustible resources for carrying on war, and
bid fair soon to be courted for their alliance, by the proudest Monarchs of the
earth. Their statesmen are equal to the task of forming and defending a free
and extensive empire: Their Generals are brave and humane, intrepid and
prudent. When I name a WASHINGTON, my audience will feel the justice of the
remark, and acquit me of the charge of flattery.

POSSESSED of these advantages, we should be inexcusable to God, to our
posterity, to the whole world, if we hesitated, a single moment, in asserting
our right, and repelling the attacks of lawless power. Freedom is offered to
us, she invites us to accept her blessings; driven from the other regions of
the globe, she wishes to find an asylum in the wilds of America; with open
arms, let us receive the persecuted fair, let us imitate the example of our
venerable ancestors, who loved and courted her into these desert climes. With
determined bravery, let us resist the attacks of her impudent ravishers; by
resolution and firmness we may defend her from their power, and transmit her
blessings to millions upon millions of our posterity. Let us then arouse to
arms! For, upon our exertions, under God, depends their freedom, upon our
exertions depends the important question, whether the rising empire of America,
shall be an empire of slaves or of freemen.

ANIMATED by these considerations, my friends and fellow-citizens, let us
strain every nerve in the service of our country! What are our lives, when
viewed in competition with the happiness of such an empire! What is our private
interest, when opposed to that of three millions of men! Let our bosoms glow
with warmth of patriotism; let us sacrifice our ease, our fortunes and our
lives, that we may save our country.

THAT a spirit of public virtue may transcend every private consideration, you,
the respected inhabitants of the Town of Boston, have plainly manifested: With
pleasure you have sacrificed what selfish men hold most dear, to save this
oppressed land! With firmness you have resisted every attack of arbitrary
power! Like the sturdy oak, you have stood unmoved, and to you, under God, will
be owing the salvation of this extensive continent.

WE feel, my beloved friends, our obligations to you! Our hearts confess them;
we cordially wish it were in our power to reward you for your patriotism; to
restore you to that ease and affluence, of which, for our sakes, you have
deprived yourselves; it is not, But our morning and evening petitions to the
guardian God of America shall be, that he will bless and reward you.

WITH transport, my countrymen, let us look forward to the bright day, which
shall hail us a free and independent state. With earnestness let us implore the
forgiveness and the patronage of the Being of all beings, who holds the fate of
empires in his hands! With zeal let us exert ourselves in the service of our
country, in life: And when the earthly scene shall be closing with us, let us
expire with this prayer upon our quivering lips, O GOD, LET AMERICA BE FREE!

FINIS.

