POEM On the late distress of the TOWN Of BOSTON With some Remarks of the
sudden Flight of the MINISTERIAL Troops, after plundering and Destroying the
Property of theWorthy Inhabitants* they left the town in the greatest confusion
imaginable, not allowing themselves time to take with them great part of their
Warlike Stores, In short, they fled like Murderer's pursued by the Hand of
JUSTICE.
COME shout AMERICANS with Joy,
And let God's praise your tongues employ,
Who did our foes designs destroy,
That ^^uld our Liberties annoy.
Your officers and soldiers brave,
By God's kind hand, your land does save,
While britons seeking to inslave,
Sink deeper down into their grave.
Britanna's glory once was high,
While she sought peace and liberty;
Her fame around the earth did fly,
And King's her greatness did envy.
She might still greater glory see:
Her Princes, sons of (...) be,
Had she have let her Sons been free,
And never crowned the bramble-tree.
This bramble so in pride did rise,
So void of love and pitying eyes,
He would not hear the oppressed cries,
But did their ^umble suits despise.
My power unlimitted, I say
Shall over the whole Realm bear sway:
My taxing power they shall obey,
Through the whole North America.
My Parliament espouse my cause,
Men of true merit and applause;
My Commoners (...)ce my laws,
And from my help there is few withdraws:
Tall Cedars in America,
Shall bend their lofty tops to me,
And from taxes shall not be free,
Yet represented here shall not be.
AMERICANS could not endure
To fall beneath a tyrant's power;
And though his wrath would them devour,
Yet they submit not for one hour.
While they request superior aid;
They do refuse the bramble shade,
And while his laws are not obeyed,
They of his frowns are not afraid.
His wrath does first on BOSTON fall;
He stops our Ports and Harbour's all,
Then for his bloody troops does call
For to inslave or murder all.
Thus stoping our Commerce and trade,
The Town of BOSTON they invade,
And in her streets they do parade,
Till it a den of thives is made.
Her Liberty for to confound,
With fleets and armies her surround;
With trenches they threw up her ground,
While tyrants Drums and Trumpets sound.
In BOSTON they dominion bare,
I'ts owners treasure they don't spare,
But like bloodhounds that hungry were,
They rob and pillage every where.
This Town their garrison they make,
While it is true owner's hearts do ache:
At length the Town, they must forsake,
To other Town's for safety sake.
Before hostilitie's commence't,
They have the Town for their defense,
Their Cannon mounted to dispense,
Destruction to AMERICANS.
When they this Town had fortified,
With strong defense on every side:
There Is now no Bridle to their pride,
They think none can their force abide.
They then begin their murderers theme,
Well pleased wi^h their curs't plot they seem,
Their v^ctory (...) a ple^sing cream,
Till justice ov'rthrows their scheme.
AMERICANS this murder see,
And could no longer silent be,
But with one mind and heart agree,
To set unhappy BOSTON free,
In Seventy-Five this war began,
With fighting while the year was run,
With Cannon, bayonet and Gun,
While blood on either side did run.
Our Colonies unite as one,
Commanded by brave WASHINGTON,
Who to our help together run,
Whose bra^^ed swords and armor shone.
Brave WASHINGTON is valiant found,
His Me^ our tyrant foes surround*
Their cruel Plot he does confound,
And is at last with victory crowned.
Our foes through fear did melt away,
To see our F^r^s rise night and day:
The ADMIRAL to How did say,
These Rebels Drive, or I Will not stay.
These bloody Troops to m^mory call,
How they on BUNKER'S HILL did fall;
They have no courage left at all,
They run away Torries and all.
They quit their Fort on BUNKER'S HILL,
Though bitterly against their will,
They fear to stay, least they see hell,
Adue, BOSTON, BOSTON farewell.
On Seventeenth of March they flee,
Since there they could no safety see;
Left BOSTON to it is owner's free,
And trust the mercy of the sea,
With shame the City they resigned,
And left much of their store's behind,
Nor could they in our Harbor find,
A shelter from the stormy wind.
GOD grant these troops may never more,
Have footing on New England shore,
To lay her Son's in bloody gore,
To set up an oppressive power.
By sea they often defeated were,
Before their transports came a shore,
And lost much of their warlike ^or*
And many were laid in their gore.
Britanna now consider well,
Thy f^rces that used to excel,
By sad defeats does plainly tell,
The cause they are in is black as hell.
By (...) in AMERICA,
Does not blood's gilt upon the lay,
Then bid farewell to peace for aye,
Unless blood clences, blood's gilt away.
Bloods gilt does call for blood again*
Naught else can wash away it is stain,
If than thy murderer's are not slain,
You draw your swords for war in vain.
You that in BOSTON dwellers were,
And have been scattered here and there,
How does your hearts rejoice to hear,
Your City of those (...)'s clear.
Give glory to the LORD most high,
Who did defeat thine enemy,
That so few of thy son's did die,
Or went into captivity.
Some that were neighbor's once to you,
That joined with this bloody crew,
Through fear and shame, are now withdrew,
And those that stayed, their deeds may rue.
Should you again your Land posess,
And GOD should you increase and bless:
Avoid all (...) excess,
Lest GOD bring still greater distress.
AMERICANS consider all,
What fate on British tyrants fall,
And pattern not, by them a ^all,
Lest you in vain for helpers call.
While you behold GOD'S wondrous hand,
In guiding thee by sea and land:
Trust in his Name and as a friend,
He will thy glorious cause defend.
All covetous desires disdain,
Nor judge amiss for lukers gain,
But lovers of true peace remain,
And You Will not find GOD'S promise vain.
Oppress not in Religion still;
Tax none to Priest's against their will,
For this will peace and friendship kill,
And the whole state with tumult fill.
For as in things of GOD we see,
Men's conscience's are wholly free,
True sons of peace cannot agree,
That worldly mastership should be.
Christ's Kingdom here has true defense,
From the true Gospel influence:
Nor needs it fines or prisonments,
Or robing to bear it is expense.
Can Patriots for Liberty,
Against a civil tyrants cry,
And not give equal Liberty,
To every different sectery.
Then let AMERICA be free,
And love true peace and Liberty*
That GOD our lasting friend may be,
To the ^atest posterity.
If these afflictions should be blessed
And many should releave the oppressed*
That we in GOD may find true rest,
Thy friend E. R. has (...) request.
CHELMSFORD: Printed and Sold at N. Coverly's Printing-Office* Where may be
had, Verses by the Groze or Dozen. M.DCCLXXVI.


