AN ORATION, IN MEMORY OF GENERAL MONTGOMERY, AND OF THE OFFICERS AND SOLDIERS,
WHO FELL WITH HIM, DECEMBER 31, 1775, BEFORE QUEBEC; Drawn up (and delivered
February 19th, 1776,) AT THE DESIRE OF THE HONORABLE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

BY WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. Provost of the COLLEGE and ACADEMY OF PHILADELPHIA.

O thou, who bad'st them fall with honor crowned,
Soon make the bloody pride of war to cease!
May these the only sacrifice be found
To public freedom, and their country's peace.
PHILADELPHIA Printed: NEW YORK: Reprinted by JOHN ANDERSON, the Corner of
BEEKMAN'S-SLIP, M,DCC,LXXVI.

AN ORATION etc.
Fathers, Brethren, and Countrymen!
AN occasion truly solemn has assembled us this day; and, that your attention
may be alike solemn and serious, hear, in the first place, the voice of eternal
truth. It is better to go to the House of Mourning than to the House of
Feasting; for -- None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself;

But there are some men, illuminated with a purer ray of divinity; Patriots of
the first magnitude, who, in a peculiar sense, may be said to live and die, not
to themselves, but to others; and consequently to him who is the author of all
goodness, Endowed with that superior excellence which does honor to our whole
species, the virtuous of every nation claim kindred with them; and the general
interests of humanity are concerned in their character.

In veneration of such men, to exchange the accustomed walks of pleasure for
the House of Mourning; to bedew its sacred recesses with tears of gratitude to
their memory; to strive, if possible, to catch some portion of their eternal
spirit, as it mounts from this earthly sphere, into perfect union with
congenial spirits above, is a laudable custom, coeval with society, and
sanctified to us by the example of the wisest nations.

It was the manner of the Egyptians, the fathers of arts and science, not only
to celebrate the names, but to embalm the bodies, of their deceased heroes,
that they might be long preserved in public view, as examples of virtue; and,
although "dead, yet speaking,"

But this honor was not easily to be obtained; nor was it bestowed
indiscriminately upon the vulgar Great. It was decreed only by the public
voice, a venerable assembly of Judges, before whom the body of the deceased was
brought for trial, and solemnly acquitted or condemned upon the evidence of the
people.

Even Kings themselves, however much spared when alive, for the sake of public
tranquillity, had still this more than fiery Ordeal before their eyes; and, by
the example of some of their number, who had been refused sepulture in those
very tombs which their pride had prepared to their own memory, were taught both
to venerate and to dread a law, which extended its punishments beyond the usual
times of oblivion.

The moral of this institution was truly sublime, constantly inculcating a most
important lesson -- "That whatever distinctions our wants and vices may render
necessary, in this short and imperfect period of our being, they are all
cancelled by the hand of death; and, through the endless untried periods which
succeed, virtue and beneficence will make the true distinctions, and be the
only foundations of happiness and renown!

If from the Egyptians, we pass to the Greeks, particularly the enlightened
Athenians, we shall find that they had an express law, appointing Orations, and
public Funerals, in honor of those who gloriously sacrificed their lives to
their country. And this solemn office was performed before the great assemblies
of the people; sometimes for one, and sometimes for bands of heroes together.

Thucydides, has recorded a cerebrated Oration of this last kind, delivered by
Pericles. The illustrious speaker, after a most animating description of the
Amor Patriae, the love of our country -- which he exalts above all human
virtues, turns to the deceased.

Having bestowed their lives to the public, every one of them, says he, has
received a praise that will never decay; a sepulcher that will always be most
illustrious; not that in which their bones lie mouldering, but that in which
their fame is preserved. This whole earth is the sepulcher of illustrious
citizens -- and their inscription is written upon the hearts of all good men.

As for you, the survivors, from this very moment, emulating their virtues,
place your sole happiness in liberty, and be prepared to follow its call
through every danger. Then, addressing himself, with exquisite tenderness, to
the relicts and children of the deceased, he suggests to them, that the common
wealth was their husband, their father, and brother.

From this day forward, to the age of maturity, shall the Orphans be educated
at the public expense of the state. For this benevolent meed have the laws
appointed to all future relicts of those who may fall in the public contests.

Nor were the Romans less careful in this matter. Considering men in general as
brave, more by art than nature; and that honor is a more powerful incentive
than fear; they made frugality, temperance, patience, and labor, manly
exercise, and love of their country, the main principles of education.
Cowardice and neglect of duty in the field, were seldom punished with death or
corporal inflictions; but by what was accounted worse, a life decreed to
ignominious expulsion and degradation from Roman privileges.

On the contrary, deeds of public virtue were rewarded, according to their
magnitude, with statues, triumphs of various kinds, peculiar badges of dress at
public solemnities, and songs of praise to the living as well as the dead.

Next to the hymns composed in honor of the Gods; Poetry derived its origin
from the songs of triumph to heroes, who tamed the rude manners of mankind,
founded cities, repelled the incursions of enemies, and gave peace to their
country. And this custom began when Rome contained only a few shepherds,
gathering strength by an alluvies of the outcasts of neighboring nations.

Those first efforts of poetic eulogy, whether in prose or verse (like those of
a similar origin, which nature, always the same, teaches our savage neighbors)
although often sublime in substance, were yet so rude in structure, that Livy
forbears quoting them, as having become intolerable to the more refined taste
of their posterity; however suitable they might nave been to the era of their
production.

What a multitude of compositions of this kind must have existed between the
barbarous songs of the military upon the triumph of Cosius, and the celebrated
panegyric of Pliny upon Trajan! They are said to have been swelled into two
thousand volumes, even in the time of Augustus. In short, the praise of public
virtue was wrought into the whole texture of Roman polity; and Virgil, calling
Religion to his aid, gave it the highest finish.

He divides his Hades, or place of Ghosts, into different regions; and to the
gulf of deepest perdition, consigns those monsters of iniquity who delighted
in the destruction of mankind, betrayed their country, or violated its religion
and laws. There he excruciates them, in company with

"Gorgons and Hydras and Chimeras dire -- " Vultures prey upon their vitals, or
they are whirled eternally round with Ixion upon his wheel, or bound down with
Tantalus, whose burning lips hang quivering over the elusive waters it cannot
touch; or the Fury Tisyphone, her hair entwined with serpents, her garments red
with human gore, urges on their tortures with unrelenting hand!

The Poet having thus exhausted imagination as well as mythology, in the
description of punishments for the disturbers of mankind and foes to their
country, raises his conclusion to a height of horror beyond the reach of
expression -- "Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
"A voice of brass, and adamantine lungs;
"Not half the mighty scene could I disclose;
"Repeat their (...) their dreadful woes.
Nor has Virgil strayed any farther through the fields of fancy or fable in
this place, than to borrow strength of coloring for the garb of truth; and I
suspect, that he drank from a purer fountain than that of Helicon, when he
peopled his Tartarus with the ancient scourges of the human race. An authority
sacred among christians has indeed given us a most awful confirmation of his
doctrine.

A Prophet and Poet indeed, whose inspiration was truly from Heaven, the
incomparably sublime ISAIAH, foretelling the fall of Babylon, has an Ode of
triumph, wherein he exults over its haughty Monarch in strains of wonderful
irony and reproach. He reprobates him as a destroyer of mankind; who had "made
the world a wilderness." He represents the whole earth as delivered from a
curse by his fall! The trees of the forest rejoice, because he is laid low! The
very grave refuses a covering to his execrable corse! he is consigned to the
depths of misery; while the infernal mansions themselves are moved at his
approach, and the ghosts of departed tyrants rise up, in horrid array and
mockery of triumph, to bid him welcome to his final abode!

The astonishing grandeur and spirit of this passage, and indeed of the whole
Ode, are unrivalled by any Poet of Greek or Roman name.

How has the oppressor ceased! The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked!
He that smote the people in wrath -- that ruled the nations in anger -- is
persecuted and none hinders! The whole earth is at rest -- they break forth
into singing; yea the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon,
saying, since thou art laid down no seller is come up against us.

Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming. It stirs
up the dead for thee -- even the chiefs of the nations! They say unto thee, art
thouf also become weak as we? Thy pomp is brought down to the grave -- How art
thou fallen. O Lucifer, that did weaken the nations? All kings, (meaning just
and merciful kings) even all of them lie in glory, every one in his own house
(or sepulcher;) but thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch
etc.

But although the reward of heroes, in the christian's heaven, be our proper
theme on this solemn day; yet the passing view which we have taken of the
perdition decreed to the traitors of their country, in the Poet's hell,
confirmed also by the voice of scripture, is not foreign to our main purpose.

I know your bosoms glow with so strong an aversion to all the foes of liberty
in this life, that you will surely avoid every thought and action, which might
doom you to their company in the life to come; and therefore, bidding adieu --
and may it be an eternal adieu -- to those dreary regions and their miserable
inhabitants, let us now exalt our joyous view to those celestial mansions,
where the benefactors of mankind reap immortal triumphs! "Lo! the blessed train
advance along the meads,
"And snowy wreaths adorn their glorious heads
"Patriots who perished for their country's right
"Or nobly triumphed in the field of fight.
"Worthies, who life by useful arts refined,
"With those who leave a deathless name behind
"Friends of the world, and patrons of mankind,
"Some on the verdant plains are stretched along,
"Sweet to the ear, their tuneful Paeans rung.


But here, ye Pagan poets, and thou Prince of their choir, we leave you far
behind; for your sublimest flights are now infinitely short of the theme! Your
gloomy Theology gave you tolerable aid in forming a Hell, but the utmost
efforts of natural genius could not make a heaven worthy of a rational and
immortal soul! The glory of giving some animating description of that bliss
"which eye has not seen, nor ear before heard, nor could "the unenlightened
heart of man otherwise conceive," was left for a more divine teacher. From him
we learn, that a heart pure and detatched from sordid pleasures, a soul panting
after perfection, striving to imitate the goodness of heaven, anticipating its
approving sentence, and devoted to the service of mankind, shall at last rise
and mix in eternal fellowship with the beatified family of God.

Having now, my respected countrymen -- and I hope I do not weary you -- laid a
wide foundation upon the practice of the wisest nations -- in support of the
present solemnity; I shall add but little more concerning the public utility of
the thing itself.

Circumstanced as we now are, perhaps shall long be, in building up a fabric
for future ages, it would be a wise institution, if in imitation of the Genoese
'feast of union,' we should make at least an annual pause, for a review of past
incidents, and of the characters of those who have borne an illustrious share
in them; thereby animating our virtue, and uniting ourselves more closely in
the bonds of mutual friendship.

The world, in general, is more willing to imitate, than to be taught; and
examples of eminent characters have a stronger influence than written precepts.
Men's actions are a more faithful mirror of their lives than their words. The
former seldom deceive; but the latter often. The deeds of old, contract a
venerable authority over us, when sanctified by the voice of applauding ages;
and, even in our own day, our hearts take an immediate part with those who have
nobly triumphed, or greatly suffered in our behalf.

But the more useful the display of such characters may be to the world, the
more difficult is the work. And I am not to learn, that of all kinds of
writing, panegyric requires the most delicate hand. Men seldom endure the
praise of any actions, but those which their self-love represents as possible
to themselves. Whatever is held up as an example, if placed beyond the reach of
humanity duly exalted by public spirit, will exite no emulation; and whatever
is placed within the vulgar walks of life, will attract no attention.

There is a further difficulty, peculiar to certain times; particularly those
of civil dissension, when the minds of men are worked into a ferment. Whence it
happens, that they who have been the subjects of obliquy in one age, have
become the theme of praise in another. Such was Hampden -- in the days of
passive obedience; branded as a seditious disturber of his country's peace; and
at the blessed era of the revolution, exalted into the first rank of patriots.
Such was Sidney, condemned to a scaffold in the former period; and, in the
latter, immortalized by the delegated voice of the nation!

What judgment posterity will form of the present mighty contest, in which
these united colonies are engaged, I am at no loss to determine in my own
heart. But, while the same actions are, by one part of a great empire,
pronounced the most criminal resistance, and by another, the most laudable
efforts of self-preservation; no public character can be drawn alike acceptable
to all. Nevertheless, as the faithful historian is the best panegyrist of true
merit, he will not fashion himself to times and seasons, but exalt himself
above them; and, conscious of his dignity, as responsible to succeeding ages,
will take eternal truth as his support, which can alone (...) the impartial
test of future examination. He knows that the divine colors of virtue, although
they may give a temporary glare, will not blend or mellow into a groundwork of
vice.

Whatever events, disastrous or happy, may lie before us; yet some degree of
applause, even from an enemy, is certainly due to those illustrious men, who,
led by conscience and a clear persuasion of duty, sacrifice their ease, their
lives and fortunes to the public; and from their friends and country, they are
entitled to a deathless renown.

Perish that narrow pride, which will suffer men to acknowledge no virtue, but
among their own party. In this direful contest, the chief concern of a liberal
mind, will be, that so much personal virtue as may be found on both sides,
instead of being united in some great national point for the common good,
should be dreadfully employed to the purpose of mutual destruction. And a man
can as soon divest himself of his humanity, as refuse the tribute of
veneration, due to actions truly magnanimous.

When once it becomes criminal to plead the cause of a suffering people; when
their virtues can no longer be safely recorded, then tyranny has put the last
hand to her barbarous work. All the valuable purposes of society are
frustrated; and whatever other human fate remains will be wholly indifferent to
the wise and good.

There are also many whose minds are so little, that they can conceive nothing
great, which does not court the eye in all the trappings of dress, titles, and
external splendour. An American-Patriot! a Blanket-Hero! a General from the
plough! All these are terms of ridicule and reproach among many. Yet such was
Cincinnatus, in the best days of Roman virtue; and a British poet, already
quoted, has boldly taught his countrymen this noble lesson:

"Some, with whom compared, your insect-tribes
"Are but the beings of a summer's day,
"Have held the scale of empire, ruled the storm
"Of mighty war; then, with unwearied hand,
"Disdaining little delicacies, seized
"The plough, and greatly independent lived."
THOMPSON. The same noble lesson is also taught, by the well known story of the
two Spanish grandees, who were sent ambassadors to the Hague. Notwithstanding
all the pride of their nation, they did not despise the Dutch deputies, when
they met them in a plain habit, and saw them on a journey sit down upon the
grass, to a frugal repast of bread and cheese, out of their knapsacks. On the
contrary, they cried out, We shall never be able to conquer these people; we
must even make peace with them.

Should ambassadors honor us with a visit, upon a like occasion; let us be
prepared to meet them in the same majestic simplicity of dress and manners. Let
us convince them that public virtue is confined to no class of men; and that
although it sometimes basks in the sunshine of courts, it frequently lies hid
in the shades of obscurity, like the latent fire in flint, till called forth by
the collifive hand of oppression.

Adversity is the season which shows the spirit of a man in its full vigor; and
times of civil calamity never fail to strike forth lights, sometimes single,
and sometimes whole constellations, mingling their kindred rays to warm and to
illuminate the genius of their country.

The sacred flame thus enkindled, is not fed by the fuel of faction or party;
but by pure benevolence and love of the public. It therefore, soon rises above
the selfish principles, refines and brightens as it rises, and expands itself
into heavenly dimensions. Being inextinguishable in its own nature, the blood
of thousands on the scaffold or in the field, is but as oil poured into a
conflagration, increasing its vehemence, till it consumes all before it;
burning still clearer and stronger, unto the full day of peace and civil
happiness.

Those who enjoy a true portion of this divine flame, duly called forth into
exercise, stand in no need of further titles or distinctions, either by birth
or grant. For what can the world present greater to the fight of mortals, or
even immortals, than a man who knows and courts the blessings of peace, who
wishes to breathe out his last in its arms; and, keeping it still as his
object, is nevertheless roused by the first pang of his suffering country;
gives his whole illustrious spirit to her relief; rises above all human
allurements; never remits his zeal; fears nothing; regards nothing, but the
sentiments which virtue and magnanimity inspire? What higher qualities can be
required to entitle a man to the veneration and eulogies of his country? And
these too will be his most durable monument.

The magnificent structures raised by the gratitude of mankind to their
benefactors of old, had but a local and temporary use. They were beheld only by
one people, and for a few ages.

"The Heaven aspiring pyramid, the proud
"Triumphal arch, and all that ever upheld
"The worshipped name of hoar antiquity
"Are mouldering into dust."
In vain does the wayfaring man investigate the tottering ruins for the
divinity once enshrined there! A scanty resceptacle, about six feet in length,
and half the breadth, informs him, that it once contained some human dust, long
since mingled with the common mass. In vain does the prying antiquary dwell
upon the sculpture, or strive to collect and spell the scattered fragments of
letters. The inscription is gone -- long since gone, effaced, obliterated! And
fruitless were the search, through the whole world, for the Hero's name, if it
were not recorded in the Orator's page, and proclaimed by the faithful voice of
history.

There it shall live, while the smallest vestiges of literature remain upon
earth, yea, till the final dissolution of things human; nor shall it perish
then; but, being the immediate care of Heaven, the great Archangel, when he
sweeps suns and systems from their place, and kindles up their last fires,
stretching forth his mighty arm, shall pluck the deathless scroll from the
devouring conflagration, and give it a place among the archives of eternity!

But whither am I borne? to what heights have I ascended? I look down with
astonishment and tremble at my situation! O! Let your friendly arms be extended
to save me as I fall. For in the idea I have of my subject, I have undertaken
to guide the chariot of the sun; and how shall I steer through the exalted
tract that lies before me? -- Considering myself as honored with this day's
office, by the delegated voice of some millions of people through a vast
continent, upon an occasion, wherein their gratitude, their dignity, their love
of liberty, are all in some degree concerned; what language shall I use, or how
shall I accommodate myself to every circumstance, in the arduous work?

Truth alone must guide the hand that delineates a character, Should I affect
to soar aloft and dip my pencil in the colors of the sky, I should but
endanger my own wings, melt their wax, and be precipitated headlong. Nor is the
danger less in the other extreme.

Oh! then, for some better Phoebus, some presiding Genius, to guide me through
my remaining way; to point out the middle path, and teach me to unite dignity
with ease, strength with perspecuity; and truth with the unaffected graces of
elocution. Or rather, you shall be my Phoebus, my inspiring as well as
presiding genius, ye delegated fathers of your country! So far will I strive to
imitate him, who always animated himself with his subject, by thus accosting
himself before he went forth to speak.

"Remember, thou art this day going to address men born in the arms of liberty,
Grecians, Athenians!" -- Let no thought enter thy heart -- let no word fall
from thy tongue, unworthy of such an audience!

As to that hero, whose memory you celebrate as a Proto-Martyr to your rights,
for through whatever fields I have strayed, he has never escaped my view, as to
him I say, if any thing human could now reach his ear, nothing but the great
concerns of virtue, liberty, truth and justice would be tolerable to him; for
to these was his life devoted, from his early years.

He had received a liberal education in Ireland, his native country, before he
went into the army; and was indeed endued with talents which would have led him
to eminence in any profession. His own he studied with a folicity which soon
distinguished his military abilities; but war and conquest having no other
charms to him than as the necessary means of peace and happiness, to mankind;
he still found leisure, in the midst of camps, to cultivate an excellent taste
for philosophy, and polite literature. To these he added a careful study of the
arts of government, and the rights of mankind, looking forward to that time,
when he might descend into the still scenes of private life; and give a full
flow to the native and acquired virtues of a heart rich in moral excellence.

Above eighteen years ago he had attained the rank of Captain in the 17th
regiment, under General Monckton, and stood full in the way of higher
preferment; having borne a share in all the labors of our American wars, and
the reduction of Canada. Ill-fated region! short-sighted mortals! Little did he
foresee the scenes which that land had still in reserve for him! Little did
those generous Americans, who then stood by his side, think that they were
assisting to subdue a country, which would one day be held up over us, as a
greater scourge in the hands of friends, than ever it was in the hands of
enemies!

Had such a thought then entered our hearts, we should have started with
indignation from the deed of horror. Our heroism would have appeared madness
and parricide! The lifted steel would have dropped from the warrior's arm! The
axe and the hoe from the warrior's arm! The axe and the hoe from the laborer's
grasp! America would have weeped through all her forests; and her
well-cultivated fields refused to yield farther sustenance to her infatuated
sons!

But far different were our thoughts at that time. We considered ourselves as
cooperating with our brethren, for the glory of the empire; to enable them to
secure our common peace and liberty; to humanize, adorn, and dignify, with
British privileges, a vast continent; to become strong in our strength, happy
in our happiness; and to derive that from our affection, which no force can
extort from a free people; and which the miserable and oppressed cannot give!

And these, too, were the sentiments of our lamented Hero; for he had formed an
early attachment, amounting even to an enthusiastic love for this country! The
woodland and the plain; the face of nature, grand, venerable, and yet rejoicing
in her prime; our mighty rivers, descending in vast cataracts through wild and
shaggy mountains, or gliding in silent majesty through fertile vales; their
numerous branches and tributary springs; our romantic scenes of rural quiet;
our simplicity of manners, yet uncorrupted by luxury or flagrant vice; our love
of knowledge and ardor of liberty, all these served to convey the idea of
primaeval felicity to a heart which he had taught to beat unison with the
harmony of Heaven!

He therefore chose America, as the field of his future usefulness; and as soon
as the blessings of peace were restored to his country, and duty to his
sovereign would permit, he took his leave of the army, and having soon
connected himself, by marriage, with an ancient and honorable family, in the
province of New York, he chose a delightful retirement upon the banks of
Hudson's river, at a distance from the noise of the busy world! -- Having a
heart distended with benevolence, and panting to do good, he soon acquired,
without courting it from his neighbors, that authority, which an opinion of
superior talents, and inflexible integrity, never fail to create.

In this most eligible of all situations, the life of a country gentleman,
deriving its most exquisite relish from reflection upon past dangers, and past
services, he gave full scope to his philosophic spirit, and taste for rural
elegance, Self-satisfied and raised above vulgar ambition, he devoted his time
to sweet domestic intercourse with the amiable partner of his heart, friendly
converse with men of worth, the study of useful books, and the improvement of
his favored villa. Nor from that happy spot did he wish to stray, until he
should receive his last summons to happiness, more than terrestial.

But when the hand of power was stretched forth against the land of his
residence, he had a heart too noble not to sympathize in its distress. From
that fatal day -- and Oh! that it had never found a place in the volumes of
Time; from that fatal day, in which the first American blood was spilt by the
hostile hands of British brethren, and the better genius of the empire, veiling
her face in anguish, turned abhorrent from the strife of death among her
children; I say, from that fatal day, he chose his part.

Although his liberal spirit placed him above local prejudices, and he
considered himself as a member of the empire at large; yet America, struggling
in the cause of liberty, henceforth became his peculiar country; and that
country took full possession of his soul; lifting him above this earthly dross,
and every private affection! Worth like his, could be no longer hid in the
shades of obscurity; nor permit him to be placed in that inferior station with
which a mind, great in humility and self denial, would have been contented. It
was wisely considered, that he, who had so well learned to obey, was fittest to
command; and therefore, being well assured of his own heart, he resigned
himself to the public voice, nor hesitated a moment longer to accept the
important commission freely offered to him, and, with the firmness of another
Regulus, to bid farewell to his peaceful retirement, and domestic endearments.

Here followed a scene of undissembled tenderness and distress, which all who
hear me may, in some degree, conceive; but all cannot truly feel. You only who
are husbands, whose hearts have been intimately blended with the partners of
your bliss, and have known the pangs of separation, when launching into
dangers, uncertain of your fate. You only, would I now more directly address.
Give a moment's pause for reflection! Recall your own former feelings, your
inward struggles, your virtuous tears! Here bid them again freely flow, while
you listen to our hero's parting words, --

Ye scenes where home-felt pleasures dwell,
And thou, my dearer self, farewell!
"Perhaps the Cypress, only tree
"Of all these groves, shall follow me;"
But still, to Triumph or a Tomb,
Where virtue calls, I come, I come!
"I COME, I come!" Nor were these the words of disappointed ambition; nor
dictated by any sudden start of party zeal. He had weighed the contest well,
was intimately acquainted with the unalienable rights of freemen, and ready to
support them at every peril! He had long foreseen and lamented the fatal issue
to which things were hastening. He knew that the sword of civil destruction,
once drawn, is not easily sheathed; that men having their minds inflamed and
the weapons of defense in their hands, seldom know the just point where to
stop, even when they have it in their power; and often proceed to actions, the
bare contemplation of which would at first have astonished them.

It was therefore his desire rather to soften than inflame violent humors,
wishing that America, in all her actions, might stand justified in the sight of
God, and the world. He foresaw the horrid train of evils which would be let
loose by the stroke which should sever the ancient bond of union between
Great Britain and us. It was therefore his wish, that such a stroke should
never proceed first from the hand of America. Nor did it so proceed.

The resistance made at Lexington, was not the traitorous act of men conspiring
against the supreme powers; nor directed by the councils of any public body in
America; but rose immediately out of the case, and was dictated by
self-preservation, the first great law of nature as well as society. If there
was any premeditated scheme here, it was premeditated by those who created the
dreadful necessity, either of resistance of ruin. For could it be expected,
that any people, possessing the least remains of virtue and liberty, would
tamely submit to destruction and ravage; to be disarmed as slaves; stripped of
their property, and left a naked prey even to the insults of surrouding savages?

Was this an experiment worthy of Great Britain? Where was the wisdom of her
counselors? Had their justice, their moderation quite forsaken them? Could
they possibly expect obedience in such a case as this? Would they themselves,
in a similar case, even under a competent legislative authority, submit to laws
which would destroy the great end of all laws, Self-Preservation? Human nature
says, No; The Genius of the English constitution says, No. The nation itself
has heretofore said, No; and a great oracle (blackstone) of its laws has given
his sanction to the verdict -- In cases of national oppression, says he, the
nation has very justifiably risen as one man, to vindicate the original
contract, subsisting between King and people. And -- If the sovereign power
threatens desolation to a state, mankind will not be reasoned out of the
feelings of humanity, nor sacrifice liberty to a scrupulous adherence to
political maxims.

If the case of America does not come within the above description, there seems
to be no equity left upon earth; and whatever is exacted by force, must be
yielded through fear. But if justice be any thing more than a name, it is
surely a solecism in politics to say, that one part of a free country has a
right to command that which the other cannot obey without being slaves, nor
resist without being rebels. Yet to such a sad dilemma does the parliamentary
claim of a right to bind us "in all cases whatsoever," reduce America;
involving it in a total surrender of our liberties; superseding the use of our
own legislatures; marking us with such a badge of servitude as no freemen can
consent to wear; and subjecting us to burdens laid by those who are not only
unacquainted with our circumstances, and bear no part of the weight, but case
themselves in proportion as they load us. If this be law, if it be equity, it
has no example among any other people, possessing the least glimmerings of
virtue or native freedom.

But although this claim be so repugnant to every idea of natural as well as
legal justice, that the guilt of blood which it may occasion can be chargeable
only on those who attempt to enforce it; yet I am well assured that when
compelled at last by hard necessity, either to avert the dagger pointed at our
breast or crouch to unconditional servitude, our hero's heart bled for the
dreadful alternative.

His principles of loyalty to his sovereign [whom he had long served, and whose
true glory consists in healing those streaming wounds] remained firm and
unshaken. Love to our brethren whom we must oppose the interchange of good
offices, which had so intimately knit the bonds of friendship between them and
us; the memory of those better days, in which we fought and triumphed together;
the vast fabric of mutual happiness raised by our union, and ready to be
dissolved by our dissentions; the annihilation of those numerous plans of
improvement in which we were engaged for the glory of the empire; all these
considerations conspired to render this contest peculiarly abhorrent to him,
and every virtuous American, and could have been outweighed by nothing earthly,
but the unquenchable love of liberty, and that sacred duty which we owe to
ourselves and our posterity.

Hence, as appears from his papers, even in the full triumph of success, he
most ardently joined his worthy friend, General Schuyler, in praying that
Heaven may speedily reunite us in every bond of affection and interest; and
that the British empire may again become the envy and admiration of the
universe, and flourish till the consummation of earthly things.

This part of his character, I dwell upon with particular satisfaction; and
indeed had he evidenced a contrary sentiment, or gone forth in the rage of
conquest instead of the spirit of reconciliation; not all his other virtues,
nor yet the respect which I owe to the appointment wherewith I am now honored,
could have induced me to appear in this place, on this occasion.

God forbid that any of the profession to which I belong, should ever forget
their peculiar character, exercise a turbulent spirit, or prostitute their
voice to enslave men's minds to the purposes of wild ambition, or mutual
destruction. I am happy in knowing that nothing of this kind is wished from me;
nay, that the delegated voice of the continent, as well as of this particular
province, supports me in praying for a restoration of the former harmony
between Great Britain, and these colonies upon so firm a basis as to perpetuate
its blessings, uninterupted by any future dissentions, to succeeding
generations in both countries.

Indeed this matter rests in safe hands, and is clear in itself. If redress of
grievances, essential liberty, and security against future oppression can be
obtained, agreeable to our own desires; then, neither consistency, dignity, or
a regard to our illustrious British friends, who have defended our cause,
pledged themselves for our sincerity, and hope by our aid to restore and
perpetuate the glory of the whole empire, can suffer us to hesitate. To say,
let them look to their own safety, and we will look to ours, would be unworthy
of the liberal soul of any American, truly animated in our present cause, and
with the love of universal liberty.

But suppose these terms cannot be obtained? -- Why then, there will be no need
of further arguments, much less of aggravations. Timid as my heart, perhaps is,
and ill-tuned as my ear may be to the din of arms, and the clangor of the
trumpet; yet, in that case, sounds which are a thousand times more harsh; "even
the croaking of frogs in the uncultivated fen," or the howling of wild beasts
on the mountain top, where liberty dwells, would be "preferable to the
Nightingale's song," in vales of slavery, or the melting notes of Corelli, in
cities clanking their chains!

If this be a digression, pardon it as the last, and due to my own principles
and consistency. I now ha^^en to attend our hero through the remainder(...) his
career -- short indeed! but crowded with scenes of virtuous activity, which
would have dignified the longest life.

The Canada expedition is one of those measures, which the enemies of American
peace having first rendered necessary, will now strive to misconstrue into
hostility and offense. But when authentic proofs were obtained that a people
professing a religion, and subjected to laws, different from ours, together
with numerous tribes of savages were instigated and preparing to deluge our
frontiers in blood, let God and the world judge whether it was an act of
offense; or rather, whether it was not mercy to them, to ourselves, to the
whole British empire, to use the means in our power for frustrating the
barbarous attempt.

Indeed there was benevolence in the whole plan of his expedition. It was to be
executed not so much by force as by persuasion; and appearing in the country
with such a respectable strength, as might protect the inhabitants from the
insults and vengeace of those, who were striving to make them list up their
reluctant arm to the shedding fraternal blood. It was further wished to kindle
up the expiring lamp of liberty among them; to open their eyes to its divine
effulgence; and enable them to raise their drooping head, and claim its
blessing as their own.

This was a work, in all its parts, suited to the genius of a Montgomery. He
had a head and heart which equally pointed him out as a fit guide in such an
undertaking. He understood and could well explain the blessings of a free
government Persuasion dwelt upon his tongue. He had a soul, great,
disinterested, affectionate, delighting to alleviate distress, and to diffuse
happiness. He had an industry not to be wearied out; a vigilance not to be
imposed upon; and a courage, when necessary, equal to his other abilities.

But still, with a few new raised men, of different colonies, and perhaps
different tempers; ill supplied with arms and ammunition; worse disciplined;
unaccustomed to look cannon in the face; to make or to mount a breach -- in
such circumstances, I say, and in the short space of an autumnal and winter
campaign, in rigorous northern climes, to atchieve a work which cost
Great Britain and the colonies the labor of several campaigns, and what was a
sacrifice of infinitely more value -- the life of the immortal WOLF -- this
certainly required a degree of magnanimity beyond the ordinary reach, and the
exertion of the highest abilities of every kind.

The command and conduct of an army, were but small parts of this undertaking.
The Indians were to be treated with, restrained and kept in temper. The
Canadians were likewise to be managed, protected and supported: And even his
own army in some degree to be formed, disciplined, animated, accustomed to
marches, incampments, dangers, fatigues and the frequent want of necessaries.

Camps, of all wordly scenes, often exhibit the greatest pictures of distress.
The sick and the wounded -- the dying and the dead -- as well as the wants and
sufferings of the living -- all these call forth the most tender feelings, and
require of a General that, to the courage of a soldier, he should unite the
utmost benevolence of a man!

Our General possessed these united qualities in their highest luster; of which
there are numerous testimonies not only from his own army, but from the
prisoners, English as well as Canadians, now amongst us.

When his men labored under fatigue, wanted bread and other necessaries, had
their beds to make ^n snow or deep morasses, they were ashamed to complain,
finding that he was willing to share in the execution of whatever he commanded.
And the example which he thus set to others, did more to inspire patience,
obedience, love of order and discipline, than the most rigid exercise of power
could have done. The influence of this example was still stronger, as it did
not appear to be the effect of constraint or political necessity; but the
amiable expression of a sympathizing soul; leading him to condescend to all
capacities; exact in his own duties, and great even in common things. His
letters, confidential and official, are a full proof of this.

"Our incampment is so swampy, I feel, says he exceedingly for the troops; and
provisions so scarce, it will require not only dispatch, but good fortune, to
keep us from distress. Should things not go well, I tremble for the fate of the
poor Canadians, who have ventured so much. What shall I do with them, should I
be obliged to evacuate this country? I have assured them that the United
Colonies will as soon give up Massachusetts to resentment as them."

These sentiments were worthy of a heroic soul, and of the faith he had pledged
to those people. Nor is he less to be venerated for his tender regard toward
his own army. Instead of making a merit of his difficulties (which were indeed
more than ought to be mentioned in this place) he often seeks to conceal them;
ascribing any little faults or tardiness, in his young troops, to their want of
experience in forming; to their hard duty, the constant succession of bad
weather and the like -- still encouraging them to nobler efforts in future. And
if any impatience of discipline appeared, he nobly attributed it to that spirit
of freedom, which men accustomed to think for themselves, will even bring into
camps with them.

His own superior military knowledge he has been known to sacrifice to the
general voice, rather than interrupt that union on which success depended; and
when a measure was once resolved upon by the majority, however much contrary to
his own advice and judgment, he magnanimously supported it with his utmost
vigor; disdaining that work of low ambition, which will strive to defeat in the
execution what it could not direct in planing

His perserverance and conduct in gaining possession of St. John's and
Montreal, have already been the theme of every tongue, and need not be
mentioned in this place. His abilities in negotiation the precision with which
the various articles o^ treaties and capitulations are expressed; the generous
applause he gives, not only to every worth effort of his own officers, but to
the Commanding Officer and garrison of St. John's; his noble declaration to the
inhabitants of Montreal, that the Continental Armies despise every act of
oppression and violence, being come for the express purpose of giving liberty
and security -- all these I say, did honor to himself, and to that delegated
body, under whose authority he acted.

Leaving him, therefore for a while -- alas too short a while -- to enjoy the
noblest of all triumphs, the applause of his country, and the conscious
testimony of his own heart, let us enquire after another band of brave and
hardy men who are stemming rapid rivers, ascending pathless mountains;
traversing unpeopled deserts; and hastening through deep morasses and gloomy
woods to meet him in scenes of another issue --

-- Deserts in vain
Opposed their course, and deep rapacious floods,
And mountains in whose jaws destruction grin'd,
Hunger and toil -- Armenian snows and storms;
Greece in their view and glory yet untouched,
They held their fearless way -- O! strength of mind
Almost almighty in severe extremes!
This praise was paid to ten thousand heroes, sustaining every danger, in a
retreat to their own country, and is certainly due, so far as heroism is
concerned, to less than a tenth part of the number, marching through equal
difficulties against the capital of a hostile country.

Even the march of Hannibal over the Alps, so much celebrated in history,
allowing for the disparity of numbers, has nothing in it of superior merit, to
the march of Arnold; and in many circumstances there is a most striking
similitude.

The former had to encounter the rapid Kennebeck, through an immense length of
country. The former when he came to quit the river, found his further passage
barred by mountains, rearing their snowy crests to the sky, rugged, wild,
uncultivated. This was also the case with the latter, whose troops, carrying
their boats and baggage, were obliged to cross and recross the same mountains
sundry times. At the foot of the mountains, the former was deserted by three
thousand of his army, desponding at the length of the way, and terrified at the
hideous view of those stupendous heights, which they considered as impassable
-- In like circumstances, about a third part of the army of the latter,
deserted shall I say, or use the more courteous language "returned home." The
march of the former was about twelve hundred miles in five months. The Virginia
and Pennsylvania rifle-companies, belonging to the latter, including their
first march from their own habitations to Cambridge, and thence to Quebec,
marched near the same distance in about three months.

Besides these rifle companies, Arnold's corpse consisted of about 500 New
England troops, who sustained all the fatigues of the worst part of the march
by land and water, with the utmost fortitude. And General Montgomery, ever
ready to do justice to merit, having joined them before Quebec, gives their
commander and them this character.

They are an exceeding fine body of men, inured to fatigue, with a style of
discipline among them much superior to what I have been used to see this
campaign. He himself is active, intelligent, and enterprizing,

Having approached those plains which the blood of WOLF has consecrated to
deathless fame, our hero ^emed emulous of his glory, and animated with a
kindred spirit. The situation of his army pressed dispatch! Snows and frosts
only quickened his motions. He hoped by one succesful stroke, before the
arrival of succors to the garrison, to complete his plan, and save the future
effusion of much blood. He further flattered himself, that his success, if
speedy, might have some influence upon Parliament, in hastening a
reconciliation. He understood that maxim of Folard -- "No obstacle should break
our resolution, when there is but a moment between a bad situation and a worse"
-- This sentiment he expresses in his last letter, with a spirit of modesty,
and a sense of duty, as well as the danger attending it, which ought to be
forever recorded to his glory. I shall be sorry to be reduced to this mode of
attack; because I know the melancholy consequences. But the approaching
severity of the season, the weakness of the garrison, together with the nature
of the works, point it out too strong to be passed by. Fortune often baffles
the most sanguine expectations of poor mortals -- I am not intoxicated with the
favors I have received at her hands. But I think there is a fair prospect of
success.

Poor mortals indeed, if nothing was to remain of them after death; for while
he was courting this success, and gloriously leading on his troops in the front
of danger, he received the fatal stroke, which in an instant released his great
spirit, to follow and join the immortal spirit of WOLF!

O thou swift winged messenger of destruction, how did thou triumph in that
moment! the stroke that severed Montgomery from his army, deprived them of more
than a member. It reached the vitals, and struck the whole body with a
temporary death. (...) when the forked lightning, darting through the forre^^
amid the black tempests of night, rends some towering oak, and lays its honors
in the dust, the inferior tree which it had long sheltered from the storm,
stand mournful around, so stood the astonished band over their fallen Chiestan!
nor over him alone; but over others in their prime of glory, prostrate by his
side!

Here, ye Pennsylvanian youths, second to none in virtue, let a portion of your
tears be sacred to the manes of Macpherson! You remember his generous spirit in
his early years, for they drank of the same springs of science with many of you
now before me; and we who reached the cup to yon lip, rejoice that it
contributed to invigorate both him and you into wisdom and public spirit.
Having finished his scolastic education, he studied the laws of his country,
under a lawyer and a patriot of distinguished name; and animated by his
example, as well as precepts, had become eminent in his profession, at an age
when some have scarce begun to think of business. The love of liberty being his
ruling passion, he thought it his duty in the present struggle, to offer
himself to the service of his country, and he had soon an opportunity of
attaining that military pre-eminence, of which he was laudably ambitious.

Enjoying a hereditary bravery, joined to a well cultivated understanding, and
an active spirit, he soon became the bosom friend of General Montgomery, was
his Aid de camp, was entrusted with a share in the management of his most
important negociations, stood by his side in the attack upon Quebec, and being,
as it were, animated by one common soul, and dear to each other in life -- in
death, they were not a moment divided!

Here likewise fell Captain Cheesman, of the New York forces, covered with
honor, and lamented by all who knew him, as an active and gallant officer. His
paticular merits, as well as the merits of some others, who shared his fate,
ought to be more fully commemorated on this occasion, if proper accounts of
them could be collected.

I must not, however, omit the name of the brave Captain Hendricks, who
commanded one of the Pennsylvania rifle companies, and was known to me from his
infancy. He was indeed prodigal of his life, and courted danger out of his tour
of duty. The command of the guard belonged to him, on the morning of the attak;
but he solicited and obtained leave to make a more conspicuous post; and having
led his men through the barrier, where his commanding officer, General Arnold,
was wounded, he long sustained the fire of the garrison with unshaken firmn^^^
(...) receiving a shot in his breast, he immediately expired.

Such examples of magnanimity, filled even adversaries with veneration and
esteem. Forgetting the foes in the heroes, they gathered up their breathless
remains, and committed them to kindred dust, with pious hands, "and funeral
honors meet." So may your own remains, and particularly thine, O Carlton, be
honored, should it ever be your fate to fall in hostile fields! Or if amid the
various chances of war, your lot should be among the prisoners and the wounded,
may you be distinguished with an ample return of that benevolence which you
have shown to others. Such offices of humanity, softening the savage scenes of
war, will entitle you to an honor which all the pride of conquest cannot
bestow, much less a conquest over fellow subjects, contending for the common
rights of freemen.

Having now paid the honors due to the memories of our departed friends, what
need I add more? Illustrious, although short, was their race! "But old age is
not that which stands in length of time, nor is measured by number of years
-- wisdom is the gray hair to man, and an unspotted life is old age."

To such men, Rome in all her glory would have decreed honors; and the resolve
of Congress, to transmit the memory of their virtues, is worthy of that
magnanimity which ought to characterize public bodies. Jealous and arbitrary
rulers are sparing of honors to those who serve them, lest their own should be
thus eclipsed. But your luster, gentlemen, can suffer (...) dimunition this
way; and the glory you justly bestow upon others, will only be reflected to
increase your own!

FINIS.

