AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1777.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1777, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH of MARCH,
1770.

BY BENJAMIN HICHBORN, Esquire

-- Tum vos, O Tyrii, stirpem et genus omne futurum
Exercete odiis; cinerique haec mittite nostro
Munera: nullus amor populis; nec foedera sunto. --
VIRGIL. BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL. M,DCC,LXXVII.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly assembled at Faneuil-Hall, and held by Adjournment at the Old-Brick
Meeting House on Wednesday the Fifth of MARCH, Anno Domini, 1777.
UPON a Motion made, Voted Unanimously, That the Thanks of the Town be and
hereby are given to BENJAMIN HICHBORN, Esquire for the spirited Oration delivered
by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid Massacre perpetrated on
the Evening of the 5th of March, 1770, by a Party of Soldiers of the XXIXth
Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston, and that Jonathan
Williams, Esquire Mr. Ellis Gray, John Brown, Esquire Hon. Thomas Cushing, Esquire Col.
Henry Jackson, Mr. Herman Briminer, and Hon. William Cooper, Esquire
be a Committee to wait upon Benjamin Hichborn, Esquire and to desire a Copy of the
Oration for the Press.

Attest, William Cooper, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN!
ALWAYS esteeming myself a servant of the Town, I cannot so far gratify my own
wishes as to refuse a compliance with their request.

BENJAMIN HICHBORN.
March 7th, 1777.
AN ORATION.
FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN!
LEAVING apologies for my inability to act the part I am to take, in this day's
solemnity, to those who might have remedied the evil by a more suitable
appointment -- I shall offer my sentiments upon the subject with the same
freedom that I conceived them. --

The advantages of social Life, are the result of such evident necessity, so
extensively diffusive and universally felt, that all Mankind will readily
acknowledge their existence without the aid of metaphysics or history.

The right that every individual has to reason freely upon the nature of that
government he is called to submit to, having nature for its source, is no less
obvious and perceptable -- and hence as a necessary foundation for the exercise
of this right, I define civil liberty to be, not "a government by laws" made
agreeable to charters, bills of rights or compacts, but a power existing in the
people at large at any time, for any cause, or for no cause, but their own
sovereign pleasure, to alter or annihilate both the mode and essence of any
former government, and adopt a new one in its stead.

Placing ourselves then upon this broad basis of civil liberty, founded on
natural right, we will unawed by the standing armies of any tyrants, tools, The
petty states and princes who have raised their armies as a peasant would his
game cocks, and sent them to market for a price, are in the most infamous sense
of the word, tools.
or monarchs, deliberate freely upon the nature of their institutions, and
their dangerous tendency to the rights of man.

Every military force must necessarily imply a right of exercising an arbitrary
power, so far as respects the objects against which it is to be directed; and
what will be the objects against which it will be in constant exercise in
proportion to its extent, we may collect from the experience of ages, and the
well-known source of human actions.

The page of history seldom groans with the calamities of mankind, but we may
trace the source of their unhappiness to this engine of oppression.

Projected in the blackest principles of the human mind, and supported by
ambition and a lust of unbounded sway, this armed monster has spread havoc
and misery throughout the world -- We find the bloody traces of its footsteps
through all the ruins of greatness, and freedom, either in ancient or modern
times: the most free and opulent cities of the world, by conniving at its
birth, have at last fallen a prey to its relentless fury. Pisistratus of
Athens, Dyonisius of Syracuse, and Caesar of Rome, furnish a few among
numberless examples that history affords.


While we are ravished with the politeness, wisdom and greatness of the Grecian
states, we can scarce believe that the productions of such art, refinement and
learning, should ever be subdued by a power that never could have crept into
life, but through the channel of their indulgence.

But alas! their fate remains a standing MONUMENT of this truth, that freedom
at sufference is a solacism in politics.

To avoid the pain that humanity must suffer, upon finding so few instances of
virtue that have been proof against the temptations to prostitute a delegated
power -- I am inclined to think -- that the great FOUNDER of societies has
caused the CURSE of infatuating ambition and relentless cruelty to be entailed
on those whose vanity may lead them to assume his prerogative among any of his
people as they are cantoned about in the world, and to prevent mankind from
paying that adoration and respect to the most dignified mortal, which is due
only to infinite wisdom and goodness in the direction of Almighty power, and
therefore that he alone is fit to be a MONARCH.

Were we to traverse the whole field of human transactions, and expect any
where to find an exemption from this general charge, we should most naturally
fix our eyes upon the Romans -- But how mortified do we find ourselves by the
survey?

At the very time this people were most famed for their virtue and greatness,
-- while they were regaling themselves with luxurious ease in the lap of
freedom -- the provinces they obtained by fraud and violence were suffering
under every species of the vilest servitude, and made to contribute to that
very ease and luxury at the discretion of the most merciless unfeeling
taskmasters.

But they themselves, by the same tools they had armed to execute their bloody
purposes, in their turn, became the subjects of the same kind of oppression
they so liberally dealt out to others, and stand recorded in history equal
monuments of the greatness and depravity of human nature.

Taught by the experience of former ages -- that a general at the head of an
armed force would ever make himself superior to the laws, Europe for several
centuries raised effectual barriers against the danger (and I may say the
possibility) of their usurpations -- for the tenure The feudal tenure.
of their lands though they acknowledge a superior lord, was upon conditions so
abhorrent to the idea of standing armies, that it offered at once both a
promise and a pledge against them.

But to convince us that no human institutions can insure permanent felicity to
mankind; -- security, the offspring of ease and freedom, opened the door for
one enterprising usurper after another, Charles VII and Lewis XI of France
having set the example, all the crowned heads in Europe soon followed it.
till the inhabitants of the whole eastern world had but little left of the
property of their species but what they possessed in their shape. --

Strange Metamorphosis! -- But is it not much stranger still, to see these
pitable wretches stripped of every enjoyment that can render life a blessing,
meanly courting favor of protection from the tyrants who enslaved them, and
easily mistaken the chains of servitude for the garb of nature?

The formalities of a free and the ends of a despotic State (says a modern
writer) have often subsisted together. -- Britain furnishes a most unhappy
example of this shocking truth: -- As if the relish of liberty was pampered to
make slavery itself more intolerably loathsome, they feel all the mortifying
consequences of the basest servitude, and are left to console themselves with
this consideration, that the weight of their grievances can never be increased,
while they are complimented, or rather tantalized with the name of Free men.
These are some of the glorious effects of standing armies among foreign
nations. Let us now consider their consequences in that part of the world, in
whose affairs we take a more interesting part. --

It is easy to conceive that those men who would not scruple to make use of
every artisice and violence to reduce the very people to whose generosity they
were indebted for their splendour, wealth and greatness, to a state of
vassalage, would never hesitate to make their conquests as extensive as their
power, -- they can feel the influence of no law but that of the sword, and
therefore (whatever may be their pretentions) you will in every case find them
ultimately make an appeal to its decisions.

If such are the governors what must the people be? Having been robbed of
liberty themselves, without the faintest struggle in its defense, The murder of
two or three people in St. George's fields, seems to be all the ceremony
attending the death and burial of British liberty.
they are just fit to be made the instruments of wresting it from others.

How can we expect that they who know nothing of the happiness of freedom
themselves should feel any reluctance at reducing all mankind to their own
disgraceful situation? Indeed the reverse is true, for we generally find them
taking an unnatural pleasure, in striping others of the noblest ornaments and
gifts of nature to countenance their own deformity and wretchedness: --

A trifling farce therefore, upon the question of right in parliament, was all
the previous parade that was thought necessary to the introduction of a
standing army, with all the ensigns of war into the bowels of our country.

It is needless to recount the various preludes to hostilities, the fatal day
we now commemorate, opened a scene that filled every honest mind with
indignation, and every tender heart with distress. -- Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, dolopumve, aut duri miles ulyssei,
Temperet a lacrimis.

-- It is impossible for any who were not witnesses of that shocking event, to
conceive the terrors of that dreadful night, and they who were must have images
of horror upon the mind they never can communicate.

The variety of contending passions that once fall upon and distract the mind,
upon the arrival of such an important crisis, can never be realised but once.

To see the peaceful inhabitants of a city, deliberately murdered by the very
men, who in pretense, were supported for their protection -- to hear the
piercing groans, to see the mangled bodies and ghastly visages of the dying and
the dead -- to hear the shrieks and cries of the timid, with the promiscuous,
mingling horrid sound of arms, execrations and vengeance, produced a scene of
confusion and wretchedness so complicated and complete, that the power of the
richest language must ever fail in describing it. Non, mihi si linguae centum
sint oraque centum
Ferrea vox, omnis scelerum (...).



The eye of pity is yet called to drop a tear at the sufferings, and patriotism
to pour the balm of charity over the wounds of half-murdered citizens, draging
out a miserable life, and fresh bleeding with the blows aimed at our country.

We could dwell with a melancholy pleasure on this sad catastrophy, did not a
more ample field of violence, bloodshed and cruelty demand our attention.

The palpable absurdity of making use of the name of a king, to give a sanction
to those very operations which were carrying on against him, has been so
sensibly felt, through all ranks of men, that we have not yet altogether got
rid of its disagreeable effects.

And I must confess I should blush at the ludicrous figure in which this part
of our history must exhibit to view in future time, were we not countenanced by
the same, or more striking inconsistencies which are to be found attendant (and
perhaps necessarily so) (...) all important revolutions.

We can easily conceive a mixture of prejudice and fear, that will excite such
awful ideas of the person, to whom we have been taught from our cradles, to
annex the properties of a most gracious sovereign, most sacred majesty, and a
train of such godlike attributes, as would make us feel conscious of a degree
of impiety, in calling a villain by his proper name, while shrouded under this
garb of sanctity.

But it is exceedingly diverting to view the influence of this chimerical
divinity in those who are made the immediate tools of supporting it -- they
will tell you it is a task most ungrateful to men of their sensibility and
resinement, to be made the instruments of sending fire and death
indiscriminately among the innocent, the helpless, and the fair -- but they
have sworn to be faithful to their sovereign, and were they ordered to scale
the walls of the new Jerusalem, they should not dare to decline the impious
attempt.

Were it not for this ridiculous faith in the omnipotence of the tyrant whom
they serve, we must suppose them fools or madmen: -- Indeed that very faith
would justify the charge of extreme madness and folly against all mankind who
had not been nurtured in this cradle of infatuation.

Were it not for the indulgence that a generous mind will always show to the
weakness and prejudices of the worst of men, many whom the chance of war has
thrown into our hands must have felt the severity and contempt of a justly
enraged people, while they with all their vanity and ostentation remain the
unhurt objects of our pity.

It is surely rather a subject of merry ridicule than deserving of serious
resentment, to see many of (...) kind of gentry affecting to deny the character
of prisoners, and attributing that indulgence which is the effect of unparelled
generosity, to the mean motives of fear -- but we will let them know, that they
cannot provoke us even to justice in the line of punishment -- and we leave
them to their own consciences and the impartial censures of surrounding
nations, to make some returns for the unexampled cruelties that many of our
friends have suffered from their barbarous lands; Capt. Johnson and his crew,
the prisoners in general at New York and Halifax, Mr. Lovell and many others in
Boston, are instances sufficient to destroy the little credit they ever had for
humanity -- and the sufferings of some to which I have myself been a witness,
exposed to all the inconveniences and (...) of a languishing disease in
confinement on ship board, in view of the persons and habitations of their
nearest friends and a sympathizing parent turned over the side with reproaches
for attempting to speak to his sick, suffering, (...) child, must give the
characters of the polite, sensible, humane Admiral Graves, and his nephew Sam,
a stamp of infamy, which the power of time can never wipe away.
in lieu of that severity, which however just, humanity shudders to inflict.
But we cannot think it strange to find people in the subordinate departments of
life, influenced by such ridiculous notions, while their haughty masters seem
to labor under the misfortune of the same infatuation.

Slaves always rate the consequence of those they serve, by the treatment they
receive from them, and wonder that others do not feel the weight of the same
importance.

To call men of distinguished rank in any government, Knaves, Fools and
Scoundrels, however they may deserve it, is esteemed neither polite or decent:
-- I am therefore at a loss for names while I am describing the oppressors of
my country. -- Who without deserving these reproachful appellations, could have
conceived the horrid wish of decking his crown, with the idle plume of foreign
empire at, the expense of the peace, wealth and very being of a nation? And who
but a pompous blockhead, in the execution of this impious design could expect
to conquer a hardy, virtuous set of men, by ineffectual threats and empty
promises, contained in a set of proclamations he wanted either courage or
power to disperse among the people they were designed to subdue? The Generals,
Gage and How (...) playing this warlike game ever since they have been in the
(...).


Possibly they may conceive the length of their master's purse at the rate of
thirty crowns a man, to be equal to all the armed force of Europe, and
therefore they should be able ultimately to effect that by the point of the
bayonet which they rather wished, than expected to obtain on any other terms.

Here let us pause, and for the honor of our species, give a moment to
reflection upon this shocking idea! is it possible that any of the race of man,
should be so lost to a sense of the rights of nature and the dignity of their
rank in the chain of beings, as to suffer themselves (like the horses which
they ride) to be tutored to the field of war, to have a price set upon their
lives which their masters will receive, and then be sold into the service of
lust, ambition and avarice, and become the tools of eternal war against the
lives, the properties and freedom of the rest of mankind.

But thanks to heaven! this black combination of passions supported by the
unmasked-tyrant of Britain with all the mecenary forces of his powerful and
extensive allies, have hitherto proved unsuccessful (and I trust in God they
ever will) in every effort to contaminate the only column of free air in both
hemispheres -- however, one advantage we derive from their open attempts, which
is to expect no security for ourselves but in their ruin -- deliberate murders,
indiscriminate plunder and the most barbarous violence upon the delicacy and
virtue of the fair, have marked the few paces of imaginary conquest they have
trod. See accounts of their proceedings in the Jersies, and general orders in
the orderly book taken at Trenton.


Methinks I see the tender parent frantic with rage, defying hosts of ruffians
armed, and courting death in every dismal form, rather than live the witness of
his daughters shame -- ah! hear the shrieks of virgin innocence calling in vain
for succor from that arm which often defended her! but see the helpless victim
of their brutish lust, in wild despair wringing her guiltless hands, with looks
to heaven, as if, without a crime, she had lost her only title to those pure
abodes! where is the coward heart that does not beat to arms and glow with
unusual ardour for revenge?

Where are friends to reconciliation, with these foes to virtue? They will tell
us their power is formidable, and it is wise to accommodate ourselves to the
requisitions of superior force -- as soon I Would tamper with the power of heil! for

-- "'It Is the worst of slavery
"Tamely to bend our necks beneath the yoke
"And suffer fraud to talk us out of freedom."
They wish to sooth but to destroy us; and if this stale artifice of tyrants
should succeed, we well deserve the ruin it ensures: -- they never ask for what
they can demand and impotence alone prevents a general carnage.

Does courage want a stimulous in the defense of virtues; let us cast our eyes
on the example of our illustrious General; -- equally beyond the reach of
calumny and encomium, the tongue of slander has never dared to attack him,
while the ablest panegerist must blush when he is attempting to give him half
the eulogiums which are his due.

The generous sacrifice he has made of private interest, domestic felicity, and
all the consequent refined enjoyments of social life to the exigencies of his
country in the field of war -- the cheerfulness with which he has sustained all
the hardships, anxieties and disappointments of two important campaigns,
against a formidable body of well-disciplined veterans, with an army composed
of men different in their manners, and unused to the discipline of a camp,
without exciting the smallest jealousies in the CIVIL POWER on the one hand, or
giving occasion for the saintest murmurs among his soldiers on the other. --
And finally when his enemies were at the zenith of their glory, and in
imagination, already in possession of a conquered world; -- with the remnant of
his expiring army, to resume the field, and with this handful of his chosen
followers, disperse, destroy or captivate whole hosts of foes, must excite
sentiments of affection, gratitude and esteem, that border upon adoration.

Did not a life of the most disinterested patriotism and unremitted ardour in
the cause of virtue and of mankind, point him out as an exception to the charge
we have so fully supported against all who lived before him? I should dread
more from the virtues of this great man, than from all the standing armies in
the world.

But so full a confidence do I possess in his inviolable attachment to the
rights of humanity and the cause of freedom, that in some future emergencies of
the state -- (produced perhaps by the shifting fortune of war) -- to his
instinctive goodness and excentric operations, I would most cheerfully commit
supreme command.

I will explain my sentiments upon this subject, by those of a friend, in his
own words.

"'It Is best that reason govern man,
It Is calm, deliberate, wise,
Yet passions were not given in vain,
Here then the difference lies.
Reason, though sure, too slow is found
In great emergencies,
While passion instant feels the wound,
As quick the cure applies.
Yet that must not due bounds transgress,
But move at reason's nod,
Submit at last to her decrees
And own her for the GOD.
'Twas thus the synod of our land,
The reasoning power of state,
Gave WASHINGTON supreme command
And made his orders fate.
Yet as necessity impelled
The step -- when that is past
The Senate shall resume the field
And reign supreme at last."
In the support of such a cause, directed by such a leader, who would think his
life too dear a sacrifice? -- Let the mean, base, grovling soul, that wishes
for security on any terms -- through fear forget he is a man, cringe to the
creature he dispises, smile on the man he hates, alternately shake hands with
vice and virtue, and court protection from the power he wishes to destroy! --
Let us my friends! determined to maintain our sacred rights or perish in the
attempt, Justum et tenacem, propositi virum,
Non civium ardor, prava jubentium
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida: --

with vigor urge the war, frown on our foes wherever we meet them, despise
their mercy when we feel their power, and from this moment hold ourselves
beyond the reach of pardon.


