THE BLIND BEGGAR OF BETHNAL GREEN. A DRAMATIC PERFORMANCE. With several
Instructive and Entertaining Pieces.

THE BLIND BEGGAR OF BETHNAL GREEN.



A DRAMATIC PERFORMANCE: With several Instructive and Entertaining Pieces.

By ROBERT DODSLEY, Author of the Original Fables.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVII.

1777.

To the Worthy PATRON, AND ENCOURAGER OF ALL HUMAN PROJECTS, AND DESIGNS,
TOMORROW.
GREAT SIR!
THE following Pieces have most of them had the good fortune to be favorably
received by some of your predecessors; how much of that honor I must place to
the account of Indulgence, and how little to that of Merit, I doubt not but
your great penetration will easily discover. You will however be so just, as to
take into your consideration the author's want of that assistance and
improvement which a liberal education bestows, and make such allowances for it
as to your great wisdom and candor shall seem meet.

I shall perhaps be accused of presumption, in hoping that such small
productions should live long enough to throw themselves at your feet, or feel
the influence of that protection to which they aspire; but should they have the
happiness to arrive at so distant a period, the utmost bounds of my ambition
extend no farther than that they may be honored with a favorable
recommendation from YOU to your Worthy Son and Successor, the NEXT DAY.

SIR, I am, with great respect, Your most devoted and obedient Servant. ROBERT
DODSLEY.

PERSONS.
The Blind BEGGAR, Mr. Berry. BESSY, his Daughter, Mrs. Clive. SIR WILLIAM
MORLEY, in love with her, Mr. Cashell. WELFORD, in love with, and beloved by
her, Mr. Low. Suitors to BESSY as a Mistress,
Lord RANBY, Mr. Ridout. JOHN SLY, Mr. Taswel.
Neighbors, Passengers, etc.
SCENE, Bethnal Green, and the Beggar's House upon it.

THE BLIND BEGGAR OF BETHNAL GREEN.
SCENE I. The Beggars House.
WELFORD alone. TRUE, she is but a beggar's daughter, yet her person is a
miracle; and her amiable qualities such as might well befit a better station.
The fame of her uncommon beauty is now spread round the country, and every day
produces some new rival of my happiness. How can I hope her heart will continue
mine, against so many, and such powerful competitors? But him whom I most fear
is Sir WILLIAM MORLEY; and her letter to me concerning him has alarmed me. But
here she comes.


SCENE II.
WELFORD, and BESSY. WELFORD. Ah Bessy! What is it you tell me? Surely you will
not be so unkind!


BESSY. You ought not, Welford, you cannot justly accuse me of unkindness!


WELFORD. Is it not unkind, to tell me you will marry Sir William Morley?


BESSY. I will obey my father.


WELFORD. I am much afraid, Bessy, your duty to our father is not the only
motive to your obedience (...) this affair. -- Sir William has wealth and
titles to bestow.


BESSY. Now you are unkind, nay cruel, to think that any motive so mean as that
of interest or vanity could have the least influence over me.


WELFORD. What can I think?


BESSY. Think on the situation I am in; think on my father. Can I leave him,
blind and helpless, to struggle with infirmity and want, when it is in my power
to make his old age comfortable and happy?

SONG.
The faithful stork behold,
A duteous wing prepare,
It Is sire, grown weak and old,
To feed with constant care.
Should I my father leave,
Grown old, and weak, and blind,
To think on storks, would grieve
And shame my weaker mind.

WELFORD. That shall be no objection; no, ^essy, whilst these hands can work,
he never shall know want: Your father shall be mine, nay (...), a thousand
times dearer to me than my own (...)


BESSY. Why can I not requite such (...) love? [Aside.] But Welford, suppose my
fath^^ commands me to marry Sir William, would you (...) disobey him? It Is
true, he is but a poor man, ^^eggar, yet he is my father; and the best of
father (...) has been to me.


WELFORD. He is the best of men: and, if report say true, far from a common
beggar.


BESSY. Sometimes, indeed, I myself suspect that he is not what he seems; and
what principally induces me to it is the extraordinary care he has taken of my
education, instructing me himself, and teaching me a thousand things above my
sphere of lise; and this is a further reason why I ought not to disobey him.


WELFORD. You shall not disobey him, I will not desire it. But suppose it were
possible for me to gain his consent.


BESSY. Then you have mine; for believe me, Welford, I can propose no happiness
to myself, if not with you; and should I marry Sir William, it is only because
I choose rather to make myself unhappy than my father.


WELFORD. Unequalled goodness! Surely he will not make you miserable, who are
so afraid of making him so! And he is too wise to think all happiness confined
to greatness.

SONG.
Observe the fragrant blushing rose,
Though in the humble vale it spring,
It smells as sweet, as fair it blows,
As in the garden of a king:
So calm content as often is found complete
In the low cot, as in the lofty seat.

WELFORD. I will go this instant to him, and try how far I can prevail. I hope
your wishes will be in any favor.


BESSY. Go: I dare not wish, lest they should be too much so. For how strongly
soever I may be determined to obey my father, I fear that love will steal away
my heart in spite of duty.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III. Bethnal Green.
Enter the BLIND BEGGAR led in by a Boy. BEGGAR. So, boy, we are at our
journey's end I find: come stay by me, there is a good boy.

Two passengers cross the stage. Pray remember the blind!


FIRST PASSENGER. I have nothing for you, friend. One cannot stir a step
without being plagued with the cant of beggars.


SECOND PASSENGER. It Is an infamous thing in a trading country, that the poor
are not some way or other employed.

[They go out.
BEGGAR. I am afraid the rich are employed full as ill; and what is still
worse, the poor are not the only beggars. Wants, real or imaginary, reach all
states; and as some beg in rags, there are some not ashamed to beg even in
velvet. All men are beggars in some shape or other; those only are scandalous
ones, who beg by impudence what they should earn by merit.

SONG.
Let begging no more then be taunted.
If honest and free from offense;
Were each man to beg what he wanted,
How many would beggars commence!
Grave churchmen might beg for more grace,
Young soldiers for courage might call;
And many that beg for a pension or place,
Might beg for some merit withal.

SCENE IV.
Enter another Passenger. BEGGAR. Pray remember the blind!


PASSENGER. So, neighbor, you are got to your old seat this afternoon.


BEGGAR. Is not that my neighbor Greenfield?


PASSENGER. Ay.


BEGGAR. You have been in town, I suppose, what news?


PASSENGER. I hear none, but that the Earl of Essex is dead this morning.


BEGGAR. The earl of Essex dead! That Is greater news to me than you imagine


PASSENGER. I hope it is not bad.


BEGGAR. No.


PASSENGER. Here Is my lord Ranby seems to be coming this way, as if he wanted
to speak with you.


BEGGAR. Does he? Well, I am prepared for him. This worthy man is one of those
who has the goodness, because he thinks me poor, to solicit me to prostitute my
daughter, and sell her virtue for his borrowed gold.


PASSENGER. Very charitable truly! and I don't doubt but you will thank him as he
deserves. Good bye.


BEGGAR. I wish you a good walk.

[ Exit PASSENGER.
SCENE V.
Enter Lord RANBY. RANBY. Well, honest beggar, have you thought of the
proposals I made when I saw you last?


BEGGAR. Yes, I have thought of you and your proposals with contempt.


RANBY. With contempt!


BEGGAR. Yes, my Lord, with contempt.


RANBY. Don't be impudent, friend.


BEGGAR. It Is not I that am impudent, my Lord.


RANBY. Hark ye, old fellow, were it not ^or your daughter, your age should not
protect your insolence.


BEGGAR. And were it not for my age, young fellow, your quality should not
protect yours. -- Insolence! I Would have thee know, proud lord, my birth is at
least equal to thine; and though now a beggar, I have not yet disgraced my
family, as thou have done. Go home, young man, and pay your debts, it will more
become you than this infamous errand.


RANBY. It Is very well: but I shall perhaps make you repent this freedom.


BEGGAR. Repent your own follies, child; no honest freedom ought to be repented
of.


RANBY. You are a brave fellow!


BEGGAR. And you are not a brave fellow.


RANBY. The old wretch confounds me so, I don't know what to say. ( Aside.) --
I shall take a course with you, sir, for this impudence.


BEGGAR. An idle course you have taken all your life; be wise, and mend it.


RANBY. Damn him! Why should I talk to such a creature? I must enjoy his
daughter however; and since fair means will not prevail, foul must.

[Exit.
BEGGAR. What strange creatures are the greatest part of mankind! What a
composition of contradictions! Always pursuing happiness, yet generally through
such ways as lead to misery: admiring every virtue in others, indulging
themselves in every vice: fond of fame, yet laboring for infamy. In so bad a
world, the loss of sight is not really so great an evil as it may be
apprehended.

SONG.
Though darkness still attends me,
It aids internal sight;
And from such scenes defends me,
As blush to see the light.
No villain's smile deceives me,
No gilded fop offends,
No weeping object grieves me,
Kind darkness me befriends.
Henceforth no useless wailings,
I find no reason why;
Mankind to their own failings
Are all as blind as I.
Who painted vice desires,
Is blind, whatever he thinks;
Who virtue not admires,
Is either blind, or winks.

SCENE VI. Bethnal Green.
Enter JOHN SLY. SLY. Friend, if thou be at leisure, I would commune with
thee.


BEGGAR. Is not that Mr. Sly?


SLY. John Sly, at thy service.


BEGGAR. Well, friend Sly, what is your pleasure with me?


SLY. Thou have a daughter, friend, whose charms I have beheld with the eye of
wonder and admiration. As a goldfinch among sparrows, or as a peacock amongst
fowls, even such is thy child amongst the daughters of men. Her beauty makes
the rose to blush with shame, and the lilly turns pale with envy thereat. Ah,
friend (...) what pity it were this innocent lamb should fall amongst wolves,
and be devoured!


BEGGAR. It were great pity indeed.


SLY. My soul m^lteth with compassion, yea, my heart is moved with affection
unto her: Let her be mine handmaid, and I will protect her from the pollutions
of the ungodly.


BEGGAR. And so, friend, thou would debauch my daughter thyself, that the
wicked may not have the sin to answer for?


SLY. Nay, friend, thou should not call it debauching her. Come, come, I
will make a proposition that shall please thee. Thou art a poor man, and thou
know that I am rich; what part of my fortune shall I give unto her? Name the
sum, and it shall be settled upon her according to thy direction.


BEGGAR. How dare any man have the impudence to ask another the price of his
virtue? Surely, friend, thou must be very glad that I am blind.


SLY. Why so, friend?


BEGGAR. Because I cannot see how much like a rogue thou must now look. Out of
my reach, vile hypocrite! or I will make thee feel the weight of my resentment.


SLY. Verily, friend, thou know not the ways of the world, nor the wisdom
thereof -- But I will not be cast down, the daughter may perhaps have more wi^^
than her father; I will try at least.

[Exit.
SCENE VII.
Enter WELFORD. WELFORD. How shall I address him? Sure there is something
venerable about this poor old man; something that commands more than common
reverence and respect. ( Aside.) -- I am come, sir, to speak with you about an
affair that to me is of consequence, and I beg you will not think me
importinent or troublesome.


BEGGAR. Who is it that can be afraid of being impertinent to a poor beggar?


WELFORD. My name is Welford.


BEGGAR. O, I know you very well, Mr. Welford; your father was formerly my very
good friend and benefactor; I was sorry, poor gentleman, for his misfortunes;
all he had, I think, was lost at sea.


WELFORD. It Is true; and my chief misfortune in that loss, is, that it has
deprived me of the power of making it yours.


BEGGAR. I understand ye; you have a kindness for my daughter, and would have
married her; I have heard something of it, and suppose that is the business you
are come about, is it not?


WELFORD. It is; and I hope I shall have your consent.


BEGGAR. Mr. Welford, I had a respect for your father, for his sake I have a
regard for you; and as you have unhappily no fortune of your own, I would not
have you do so imprudent a thing as to marry the daughter of a beggar.


WELFORD. I have already learnt not to place any part of my happiness in the
enjoyment of riches; and my heart tells me, that the greatest pleasure I could
have, would be to maintain you and your daughter by the honest labor of my
hands.

SONG.
To keep my gentle Bessy,
What labor would seem hard?
Each toilsome task how easy!
Her love the sweet reward.
The be thus uncomplaining,
Esteems no toil severe,
The sweet reward obtaining,
Of honey all the year.

BEGGAR. Your intentions are very kind, and I don't doubt but your love to my
daughter is sincere; but I would have you suppress it: For, to deal plainly
with you, I have already determined to marry my daughter to sir William Morley.


WELFORD. But will you marry her to sir William against her consent?


BEGGAR. I doubt not her consent; she never disobeyed me yet; and will not now,
I dare say.


WELFORD. I know she will obey if you command? but surely, in an affair of so
much consequence to her, you will have some regard to her own happiness. Let me
only beg you to consider this, and then I leave it to your paternal affection.
At present I will trouble you no further.

[Exit.
BEGGAR. I have considered of it, and I hope she will consider of it too. I
would not make my child unhappy, nor will I marry her against her mind: but sir
William, besides the largeness of his fortune, is of so good-natured and
agreeable a disposition, that I hope she will soon be won to taste the
happiness of her condition, and then will thank me for my care. -- Come, boy,
the wind methinks blows cold here, we'll go to the other side of the green.

[Exit.
SCENE VIII.
SCENE changes to the BEGGAR'S house*. Sir WILLIAM MORLEY, and BESSY. BESSY. I
am very sensible, sir William, of the honor you do me in descending so much
beneath yourself, as to think of marrying the daughter of a beggar.


SIR WILLIAM. My dear Bessy, talk not of inequality; true love forgets
condition, and despises any thought so mean as that of interest.


BESSY. Some would esteem such love at best but weakness. Nay you yourself, as
passion cools, and reason gathers strength, perhaps may censure and regret as a
folly, what now you seriously fancy to be love.

SONG.
The boy thus of a bird possessed,
At first how great his joys!
He strokes it soft, and in his breast
The little favorite lies:
But soon as grown to riper age,
The passion quits his mind,
He hangs it up in some cold cage,
Neglected and confined.

SIR WILLIAM. This, my Bessy, is impossible; as your beauties have subdued my
heart, your virtues have endeared, and will secure the conquest.


BESSY. I wish, Sir William, you would excuse my fears; I was not born for
grandeur, and dare not venture on a state so much above my rank.


SIR WILLIAM. So far from truth is that unjust pretense, that it is your present
rank alone you are unfit for. You have not only beauty to adorn, but sense to
support a higher.


BESSY. I know you flatter me; but granting what you say were true, yet I had
rather attend my father on this humble green, than run the risk of falling from
that greatness which I neither covet nor deserve.


SIR WILLIAM. And am I then so much your aversion, that poverty, nay beggary
itself, is preferable to wealth when brought by me? What risk, what hazard do
you run? Do I not offer to marry you? Does not your father join with me in
desiring your compliance? And ought not you to rejoice at the hopes of being
protected from the insolence of those who daily invade your innocence, and
attempt your chastity? -- But we are interrupted. I Will go wait on your father
home, and be with you again immediately.

[Exit.
SCENE IX.
Enter Lord RANBY. RANBY. Ha! my little cherubim, is not that the grave knight,
that would fain seduce you to commit matrimony with him? Methinks he went away
in the dumps, as if you had rejected his suit.


BESSY. Suppose I did, sir, what then?


RANBY. Why then, my dear, you did wisely. It Is as ridiculous for a beautiful
woman to throw herself away upon a husband, in order to preserve her honor as
it would be for a man of fortune to give away his estate for fear he should
spend it.


BESSY. I rather think it were as foolish for a woman to trust herself to a man
without marriage, as it would be for a merchant to venture his ship to sea
without insurance.


RANBY. A husband, child, becomes your master; a gallant will continue your
adorer and your slave.


BESSY. A husband rather is the protector of that virtue which a gallant would
rob me of, and then desert me.

SONG.
As death alone the marriage knot unties,
So vows that lovers make
Last until sleep, death's image, close their eyes,
Dissolve when they awake;
And that fond love which was today their theme,
Is thought tomorrow but an idle dream.

RANBY. Do you think then, that love is more likely to continue when it is
constrained, than when it is free and voluntary?


BESSY. I should think I had but small security for the continuance of his
love, who was afraid of engaging with me any longer than from day to day.


RANBY. What better security can you have from a gentleman, than his honor?


BESSY. He that would refuse me all other security but his honor, I should be
afraid had too little of that to be trusted.


RANBY. Well then, my dear Bessy, to come close to the point, you cannot
suspect my sincerity, since I have not desired you to trust entirely to my
honor, but have offered to make you a handsome settlement.


BESSY. But, my lord, as I don't like the terms, I hope I may be excused
accepting it.


RANBY. Come, come, child, since I find you are so very obstinate, that you
will not accept of what is so much for your own good, I must be obliged to
force you to it, my dear.


BESSY. What do you mean, my lord?


RANBY. Only to make you happy, my angel, whether you will or no.


BESSY. O heaven, defend me!


RANBY. Look ye, my dear, no noise, no struggling; it will avail you nothing.
-- But let me not forget to turn the key.


SCENE X.
Enter SLY. SLY. Indeed, friend, thou should have done that before.


RANBY. Curse on the sanctified hypocrite! What envious d^mon^sent him here?


BESSY. Heaven rather sent him to preserve my virtue. O save me from the brutal
violence of that monster^^


SLY. Yea verily, I will protect thy virtue, and save thee -- for myself.
[Aside] -- Friend, friend, why walk thou in vanity? Verily, thou have done
the thing that is not right. --


RANBY. Verily, friend, and so have thou: And unless thou do immediately
return from whence thou came, I will exalt the arm of flesh against thee, and
thy iniquity shall be upon thy bones.


SLY. Hum! my spirit burns within me, yea, my inward man is moved to wrath.
Howbeit, I doubt he is stronger than I, therefore I will be peaceable, and try
if I cannot gain my point by seeming to join with him. [Aside.] -- Restrain thy
choler, friend; I mean not to disappoint thee; for, to confess the truth, I
came with the same design myself; wherefore I may, peradventure, be of service
unto thee, in persuading the virgin to yield unto our solicitations. What,
say thou, shall I try?


RANBY. And does the carnal passion lurk beneath this sober mask of sanctity?
What the devil can he say to her! It must be a ridiculous scene, I Will hear it.
[Aside.] -- Well, friend, pr'y thee try thy talent upon her; but, do ye hear,
don't play false.


SLY. Thy self shall judge.


BESSY. What means this parley? I don't like it.

[Aside.
SLY. Fair maiden, I am moved, yea I am strongly moved, and as it were push^^d
forth by the spirit toward thee: Suffer me therefore to entreat thee, and to
prevail upon thee to answer the end of thy creation. The sun of thy beauty
(...) my love as a plant; my soul l^ngeth, yea I do long exceedingly, to taste
thy sweets, to feel the softeness of thy painting breast. --


BESSY. First feel my hand, thou holy hypocrite. [Gives him a box on the ear.]
What will become of me!


RANBY. How like ye her salute? methinks she kissed you with a smack.


SLY. Verily, if her hand is the softest part of her, her heart must be
exceeding hard.


RANBY. I see no likelihood of prevailing with her by fair means; suppose we
force her into my coach, and drive her to a little house I have about ten miles
off, we shall there bring her to a compliance.


SLY. The proposal is good, and I will assist thee in it.


RANBY. Come, madam, it is in vain to resist, you must along with us this
instant.


BESSY kneeling. For heaven's sake, my lord, forbear! Think on my poor blind
father, and take not from him the support of his old age, his only child: alas!
he will die distracted.

SONG.
Behold me on my bended knee,
Think on my father's cries!
O think the gushing tears you see
Drop from his closed eyes!
Let this sad sight your soul possess,
Let kind regret take place;
And save my father from distress,
His daughter from disgrace.

RANBY. Off! it is vain.


BESSY. Good heaven protect my virtue. Help! help!

[As they are forcing her toward the door, enter WELFORD, who seizes Lord
RANBY'S sword.]
SCENE XI.
WELFORD. Villains! what means this outrage?


RANBY. Hell and furies! are we disappointed?


WELFORD. Unhand her, or this moment is thy last.

[Holds the sword to his breast.
RANBY. Hold! hold! I will: Have a care, the point may hurt one.


WELFORD. Base coward! why art thou so afraid to die? Should thou not rather
be ashamed to live? -- How fares my love?


BESSY. O my deliverer! my dear preserver! let my heart thank thee, for I
cannot speak.


WELFORD. Don't tremble so, my dear; compose yourself; the danger's over; come,
look up. Vile ravishers! how did you dare to rob the sacred dwelling of this
poor old man? did you not think the gods would take his part?


RANBY. The god of love, methinks, should have taken ours; and if he had been
true to his character he would.


SCENE XII.
Enter the BEGGAR and SIR WILLIAM. BESSY. O my dear father! do I live to see
you once again?


BEGGAR. What means my child?


RANBY. Ay, now we shall have a dismal story, how a trembling dove escaped the
bloody pounces of a hawk.


SLY. Or how an innocent lamb was snatched from the jaws of a devouring wolf.


WELFORD. And can you know your character so well, and not detest yourselves?


BEGGAR. Are not these, lord Ranby and friend Sly? What has been done?


SLY. Nothing, indeed.


BESSY. These wicked men had formed a base design against my virtue; and would
even now have forced me from you, had not the friendly arm of my dear Welford,
that instant interposed to save me. Forgive me, father, that I call him dear, I
owe my virtue and my life to his protection.


BEGGAR. Unworthy men! what had I done, that you should wish to make my old age
miserable?


RANBY. We did not think of thy old age at all, but of thy daughter's youth and
beauty.


BEGGAR. Which I will this instant put beyond the reach of your ungenerous and
ungoverned passions. Sir William, my daughter's virtue --


BESSY. My dearest father, suffer me a word, and I have done. The worth and
honor of Sir William Morley are what I highly do esteem; and if it is your
command that I must marry him, so much I value your repose beyond my own, that
I will sacrifice my happiness to my obedience, and endeavor to give my heart
where you command my hand. But O, forgive me, whilst I freely own, I feel my
heart would wish it otherwise.


BEGGAR. Let me proceed. My daughter's virtue, sir William -- has conquered me.
I did design to have given her to your honest love; but you yourself will own I
ought not to compel a child so gentle, and so tender of me. Can I make her
miserable, who prefers my happiness to her own?


SIR WILLIAM. I own your justice, though my heart would fain plead against it.
Dear Bessy, I will endeavor to subdue that love, which cannot make me happy,
since it would make you miserable.


WELFORD. Generous and kind!


RANBY. Well, there is a pleasure after all in virtue, which we loose fellows
know not how to taste.


BEGGAR. Welford, come hither. Your father was a worthy man, and my good
friend; his bounty often relieved my seeming want, and his good nature took me to
his friendship. I am glad to find that you inherit his worth, though not his
fortune. My daughter loves you; receive her therefore from my grateful hand,
and with her full five thousand pounds in gold.


WELFORD and BESSY. Five thousand pounds!


BEGGAR. Be not surpised. Though long concealed upon this green, beneath the
poor appearance of a beggar, I am no other than sir Simon Montford, whom the
world thinks dead some years ago. Here I have lived, and saved these poor
remains of a once noble fortune.


BESSY. I Am in amaze, and scarce know whether I should believe my senses! why
did my father conceal himself so long from me?


BEGGAR. It was necessary, child: but now I need no longer hide me from the
world. The Earl of Essex, who long sought my life, this morning died. The
reason of his enmity was this: His father, who was standard bearer in an
engagement against the Welsh, where I had some command, most cowardly gave way,
and occasioned the loss of the battle; which when I upbraided him with, he gave
me the lie, called me villain, and would have laid the blame on me. On this I
challenged him, and it being his ill fortune to fall by my hand, I have ever
since been obliged to conceal myself from the revenge of his son.


WELFORD. My dear Bessy, the surprise of this sudden turn in our favor, has
taken from me the power of expression.


BESSY. If your joy is but equal to mine, I am happy.


DUETT.
HE. The man who in a dungeon lies for debt,
Esteems not light and liberty so dear.

SHE. The frighted bird just escaped the fowler's net,
Its heart not flutters more 'twixt joy and fear.

HE. Come to my arms,
And on my breast
From all alarms
Securely rest.

SHE. In this kind heaven let me lie,
In mutual pleasure live and die.

BOTH. In mutual pleasure live and die.

WELFORD. Dear father, let me indulge the joy to call you so, the happiness you
give me with your daughter, is half destroyed by this unexpected fortune. The
pleasure I had promised myself in laboring with my hands to maintain the
father of my love, is now no more; but let me still rejoice, that by this means.

My Bessy's gentle heart is freed from care,
And her fair hand no labor needs to share.
Hence let this maxim to the world be given,
True love and virtue are the care of heaven.

THE END.
THE KING AND THE PRIEST: BEING AN ATTEMPT TO INTRODUCE UPON THE STA^^^ A NEW
SPECIES OF PANTOMIME.

PERSONS.
PAGAN, Jewish, Roman, and Mohammedan PRIESTS properly habited. TYRANNY, in a
coat of mail, a Gothic crown on his head, and chains in his hand. IMPOSTURE, a
phantom dressed up by the priests with a cloak, mask, etc. TRUTH, a beautiful
woman dressed in white, with great plainness and simplicity. LIBERTY, dressed in
her hair, with a flowing robe, a wand, etc. ZEAL, has a fool's cap on his head
painted with flames, a book in his hand, which he seems to read now and then,
casting up his eyes to heaven, and beating his breast with great violence.
PERSECUTION, has an axe in one hand and a lighted firebrand in the other.
AMBITION, is magnificently dressed with stars, ribbons, coronets, and other
ensigns of civil honor, eyeing them often. CORRUPTION, has a large bag of
money in one hand, and a serpent in the other. PHILOSOPHERS in Grecian habits.
The ARTS and the MUSES from antiquity.
THE KING AND THE PRIEST.
The curtain rises to solemn music, but something harsh and dissonant, and
discovers a magnificent temple; where a cabal of Egyptian Priests, Jewish
Rabbis, Mohammedan Mufti's, a Pope, a Cardinal, Jesuit, and Capuchin seem in
close combination, and are all earnestly employed in dressing up the figure of
IMPOSTURE. After a while they seem by their whispering, nodding, winking and
sneering amongst themselves, to have adjusted matters very much to their own
satisfaction. A large cloak is thrown over the shoulders of the figure, to hide
its deformities; a mask of a fine composed grave air is clapped upon its ugly
visage: and several others, curiously delineated for all occasions, are
cunningly disposed of beneath the cloak: which done, the Priests withdraw. Then
enters a band of ancient Philosophers, properly habited; who, examining the
figure of IMPOSTURE with great care, seem to debate amongst themselves with
calmness and moderation; and at length, having pulled off its cloak and mask,
and discovered and exposed its strange features and monstrous deformities, they
are just upon the point of demolishing the figure, when the priests re-enter,
leading in TYRANNY, with all the ensigns and officers of Civil Power attending
him: by the assistance of whom, the Philosophers are driven of the stage, and
IMPOSTURE is again invested with its cloak and mask. The Priests making
obeisance to the Civil Power, seem to beg the continuance of his protection,
and the chief of them addresses himself to TYRANNY, in the following manner.

RECITATIVE.
THOU, regal power! vicegerent of the skies!
Supreme on earth, and substitute of heaven!
O stretch thy powerful arm, protect and save
Its sacred ministers! nor let bold man,
With his presumptuous reason, dare to mock
Our holy myst'ries, or dispute our rights.
AIR,
Kings the rights of Priests defending,
More securely hold their own;
Priests to Kings assistance lending,
Merit succor from the throne:
Then give us supreme dominion
Over conscience and the soul;
YOU shall rule (by our opinion)
Lives and goods without control.

RECITATIVE. TYRANNY. Most reverend fathers! delegates to man
From heaven's high king! ambassadors divine!
Be it as you have said. Teach you mankind
That power unlimited belongs to Kings,
That subjects have no rights but to obey;
Then shall the arm of civil power protect
Your highest claims of reverence; and enforce
Assent to every tenet you shall judge
Conducive to establish Priestly rule
Over mind and conscience.
AIR.
Thus in fetters doubly binding,
Souls enslaving, bodies grinding,
We the stupid herd shall sway;
And, supreme in wealth and grandeur,
Silence every bold withstander
That shall dare to disobey.

PRIEST. But in this grand affair, this high attempt,
To blind, enslave, and fleece a bubbled world;
What instruments, what tools shall we employ?

TYRANNY. Ambition and corruption be my tools.

PRIEST. Be mine blind Zeal and furious Persecution.

Enter to the PRIESTS, at one door, Zeal and Persecution; and to the CIVIL
POWER, at the other, Ambition and Corruption, properly distinguished. TYRANNY.
Go forth, ye instruments of our high aims,
And in our cause possess the sons of men.
Cramp and intimidate the enquiring mind;
With base affections taint the human heart;
And tame the generous spirit that breathes in man,
And prompts him to resist and brave oppression:
So shall that headstrong beast, the multitude,
Yield to the bit, and crouch beneath its burden.

ZEAL, leading PERSECUTION, goes out one way; and CORRUPTION, leading AMBITION,
the other. Then enter the MUSES and the liberal ARTS, with proper habits and
ensigns, who seem to beg protection of the Priests and the Civil Power; but
being commanded to fall down and worship the figure of IMPOSTURE, they refuse;
upon which they are immediately chained and fettered, and cast down bound
before it.

And now the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers seem perfectly secure; they shake
hands, they embrace, and after a formal solemn dance, in which they alternately
bow and reverence each other, they are walking off the stage, when they meet
with the Goddess of LIBERTY, who leads in the Philosophers, walks boldly up to
the figure of IMPOSTURE, and striking it with her wand, speaks as follows.

Hence, Delusion, hence, away;
Nor in Britain dare to stay:
To some foreign land retire,
Where dull ignorance may admire:
Here, amongst the brave and free,
TRUTH shall rise, and dwell with ME.

Then waving her wand, IMPOSTURE immediately sinks; and the Goddess of TRUTH,
arrayed in robes of white, yet dressed with the greatest plainness and
simplicity, arises in its room, whom LIBERTY addresses in the following*

AIR.
Fairest daughter of the skies,
Hither turn thy radiant eyes;
Thou have lovers here shall trace*
Every charm and every grace:
Sons of wisdom, who admire,
Sons of freedom, all on fire;
Hither, Goddess, hither turn;
Britons for thy beauties burn.

And now the Arts and Muses seem rejoiced, they rise gradually upon their feet,
their chains are taken off by LIBERTY, who leads up a dance, in which the
Philosophers join with the Muses, all of them in the dance making frequent
obeisance to the Goddess of TRUTH.

During all this, the powers of Tyranny and Priestcraft are in great dread and
confusion. Tyranny threatens with his sword, and the Priest wields a
thunderbolt; but ineffectual and in vain; for at the end of the dance, TRUTH
and LIBERTY advancing fearless to their opposites, they drop their weapons and
submit. After which, LIBERTY, addressing herself to them, speaks as follows.

O why, ye powers, that rule the race of man,
And you that should instruct him to be wise
And good; why will ye join, O why, in league
Unnatural, to blind and to enslave!
When to reform his morals, and protect
His native rights, are your sole provinces,
From which performed, your safety, glory, all
That make kings great, and priests revered arise.
AIR.
He whose heart with social fire
Burns to do what good he can;
Sure, by the celestial fire,
Will be deemed the worthiest man:
So the patriot warmly pressed
In his country's sacred cause,
Of all subjects is the best,
Best deserves his king's applause.

TRUTH. Princes, give ear; give ear, ye reverend seers;
And let the words of TRUTH make deep impression,
Man was not made for Kings, but Kings for Man.
And that proud tyrant who invades the rights
His hand was sceptered to defend, becomes
A sovereign rebel. As that Priest, who for
The oracles of heaven gives human creeds,
And, wrapped in mysteries, sneering moral worth,
Delights to puzzle and confound the mind,
Which it is his sacred office to enlighten,
Falls from heaven's minister to that of hell;
And for man's teacher under God, becomes,
Under the devil, deputy seducer.
AIR.
Yet how sacred! how divine!
Kings and Priests have power to be!
At the throne, or at the shrine,
Man might bow, and still be free:
Let the Prelate virtue bring,
Let the Prince with goodness sway;
To the Priest and to the King,
All will due obedience pay.

CHORUS. Power and goodness, when they join,
Make Kings sacred, Priests divine.

THE END.
POEMS AND ESSAYS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS. BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

^N GOOD and ILL NATURE.
To Mr. POPE.
IN virtue's cause to draw a daring pen,
Defend the good, encounter wicked men:
Freely to praise the virtues of the few,
And boldly censure the degenerate crew.
To scorn, with equal justice, to deride
The poor man's worth, or sooth the great one's pride;
All this was once goodnature thought, not ill;
Nay, some there are so odd to think so still.
Old-fashioned souls! your men of modern taste,
Are with new virtue, new politeness graced.
Goodnature now has changed her honest face,
For smiling flattery, compliment, grimace:
Fool grins at fool, each coxcomb owns his brother,
And thieves and sharpers compliment each other.
To such extent goodnature now is spread,
To be sincere is monstrously ill-bred:
An equal brow to all is now the vogue,
And complaisance goes round from rogue to rogue.
If this be good -- it is gloriously true,
The most ill-natured man alive, is YOU.
THE CAVE OF POPE. A PROPHESY.
WHEN dark oblivion, in her sable cloak
Shall wrap the names of heroes and of kings;
And their high deeds, submitting to the stroke
Of time, shall fall amongst forgotten things:
Then (for the muse that distant day can see)
On Thames's bank the stranger shall arrive,
With curious wish thy sacred grott to see,
Thy sacred grott shall with thy name survive.
Grateful posterity, from age to age,
With pious hand the ruin shall repair:
Some good old man, to each enquiring sage
Pointing the place, shall cry, The bard lived there,
Whose song was music to the listening ear,
Yet taught audacious vice and folly, shame;
Easy his manners, but his life severe;
His word alone gave infamy or fame.
Sequestered from the fool, and coxcomb-wit,
Beneath this silent roof the muse he found:
'Twas here he slept inspired, or sat and writ,
Here with his friends the social glass went round.
With awful veneration shall they trace
The steps which thou so long before have trod;
With reverend wonder view the solemn place,
From whence thy genius soared to nature's God.
Then, some small gem, or moss, or shining oar,
Departing, each shall pilfer, in fond hope
To please their friends, on every distant shore,
Boasting a relick from the Cave of POPE.
MODERN REASONING. An EPISTLE.
WHENCE comes it, L --, that every fool,
In reason's spite, in spite of ridicule,
Fondly his own wild whims for truth maintains,
And all the blind deluded world disdains;
Himself the only person blessed with fight,
And his opinion the great rule of right?
It Is strange from folly this conceit should rise,
That want of sense should make us think we are wise:
Yet so it is. The most egregious elf
Thinks none so wise or witty as himself.
Who nothing knows, will all things comprehend;
And who can least confute, will most contend.
I love the man, I love him from my soul,
Whom neither weakness blinds, nor whims control;
With learning blessed, with solid reason fraught,
Who slowly thinks, and ponders every thought:
Yet conscious to himself how apt to err,
Suggests his notions with a modest fear;
Hears every reason, every passion hides,
Debates with calmness, and with care decides;
More pleased to learn, than eager to confute,
Not victory, but truth his sole pursuit.
But these are very rare. How happy he
Who tastes such converse, L --, with thee!
Each social hour is spent in joys sublime,
Whilst hand in hand over learning's Alps you climb;
Through reason's paths in search of TRUTH proceed,
And clear the flowery way from every weed;
Till from her ancient cavern raised to light,
The beauteous stranger stands revealed to sight.
How far from this the furious noisy crew,
Who, what they once assert, with zeal pursue?
Their greater right infer from louder tongues;
And strength of argument from strength of lungs,
Instead of sense, who stun your ears with sound,
And think they conquer, when they but confound.
Taurus, a bellowing champion, storms and swears,
And drives his argument through both your ears;
And whether truth or falsehood, right or wrong,
It Is still maintained, and proved by dint of -- tongue.
In all disputes he bravely wins the day,
No wonder -- for he hears not what you say.
But though to tire the ear's sufficient curse.
To tire one's patience is a plague still worse.
Prato, a formal sage, debates with care,
A strong opponent, take him up who dare.
His words are grave, deliberate, and cool,
He looks so wise -- it is pity he is a fool,
If he asserts, though what no man can doubt,
He Will bring ten thousand proofs to make it out.
This, this, and this -- is so, and so, and so;
And therefore, therefore -- that, and that, you know,
Circles no angles have; a square has four:
A square's no circle therefore -- to be sure.
The sum of Prato's wondrous wisdom is,
This is not that, and therefore, that not this.
Opposed to him, but much the greater dunce,
Is he who throws all knowledge off at once.
The first, for every trifle will contend;
But this has no opinions to defend.
In fire no heat, no sweetness in the rose;
The man's imposed on by his very nose:
Nor light nor color charms his doubting eye,
The world's a dream, and all his senses lie.
He thinks, yet doubts if he is possessed of thought;
Nay, even doubts his very power to doubt.
Ask him if he is a man, or beast, or bird;
He cannot tell, upon his honest word.
It Is strange, so plain a point's so hard to prove;
I Will tell you what you are -- a fool, by Jove.
Another class of disputants there are,
More numerous than the doubting tribe by far.
These are your wanderers, who from the point
Run wild in loose harangues, all out of joint.
Vagarius, and confute him if you can,
Will hold debate with any mortal man.
He roves from Genesis to Revelations,
And quite confounds you with divine quotations.
Should you affirm that Adam knew his wife,
And by that knowledge lost the tree of life;
He contradicts you, and in half an hour
Most plainly proves -- Pope Joan the scarlet whore.
Nor head nor tail his argument affords,
A jubling, incoherent mass of words;
Most of them true, but so together tossed
Without connection, that their sense is lost*
But leaving these to rove, and those to doubt,
Another clan alarm us; face about:
Se^, armed with grave authority they come,
And with great names and numbers strike us dumb.
With these an error ven'rable appears,
For having been believed three thousand years.
Reason, ^ay common sense, to names must fall,
And strength of argument's no strength at all.
But on, my muse, though multitudes oppose us,
Alas! truth is not proved by counting noses:
Nor fear, though ancient sages are subjoined;
A lie's a lie, though told by all mankind.
It Is true, I love the ancients -- but what then?
Plato and Aristotle were but men.
I grant'em wise -- the wisest disagree,
And therefore, no sufficient guides for me.
An error, though by half the world ^spous'd;
Is still an error, and may be opposed;
And truth, though much from mortal eyes concealed,
Is still the truth, and may be more revealed.
How foolish then will look your mighty wise,
Should half their IPSE DIXITS prove plain lies!
But on, my muse, another tribe demands
Thy censure yet: nor should they 'scape thy hands.
These are the passionate; who in dispute,
Demand submission, monarchs absolute.
So^e judges, in their own conceit, of wit,
They (...) all those for fools that will not submit.
Sir Testy (thwart sir Testy if you dare)
Swears there is inhabitants in every star.
If you presume to say this may not be true,
You lie, sir, you're a fool and blockhead too.
What he asserts, if any disbelieve,
How folks can be so dull he cannot conceive.
He knows he is right; he knows his judgment's clear;
But men are so perverse they will not hear.
With him, SWIFT treads a dull trite beaten way;
In YOUNG no wit, no humor smiles in GAY;
Nor truth, nor virtue, POPE, adorns thy page;
And THOMSON'S LIBERTY corrupts the age.
This to deny, if any dare presume,
Fool, coxcomb, sot, and puppy fill the room.
Hillario, who full well this humor knows,
Resolved one day his folly to expose,
Kindly invites him with some friends to dine,
And entertains 'em with a roast sir-loin:
Of this he knew sir Testy could not eat,
And purposely prepared it for his treat.
The rest begin -- sir Testy, pray fall to --
You love roast beef sir, come -- I know you do.
"Excuse me, sir, it is what I never eat."
How, sir! not love roast beef! the king of meat!
"'It Is true indeed." Indeed it is not true;
I love it, sir, and you must love it too.
"I cannot upon my word." Then you're a fool,
And don't know what is good eating, by my soul.
Not love roast beef! -- come, come, firs, fill his plate,
I Will make him love it -- Sir, G -- d -- ye, eat.
Sir Testy finding what it was they meant,
Rose in a passion, and away he went.
RELIGION. A SIMILE.
I AM often drawn to make a stop
And gaze upon a picture shop,
There have I seen (as who that tarries
Has not the same?) a head that varies;
And as in different views exposed,
A different figure is disclosed.
This way a fo^l's head is expressed.
Whose very countenance is a jest;
Such as were formerly at court,
Kept to make wiser people sport.
Turn it another way, you will have
A face ridiculously grave,
Something betwixt the fool and knave.
Again, but alter the position,
You're frighted with the apparition:
A hideous threatening Gorgon head
Appears, enough to fright the dead.
But place it in its proper light,
A lovely face accosts the sight;
Our eyes are charmed with every feature,
We own the whole a beauteous creature.
Thus true Religion fares. For when
By silly, or designing men,
In false or foolish lights it is placed,
It Is made a bugbear, or a jest.
Here by a set of men it is thought
A scheme, by politicians wrought,
To strengthen and enforce the law,
And keep the vulgar more in awe:
And these, to show sublimer parts,
Cast all religion from their hearts;
Brand all its vot'ries as the tools
Of priests, and politician's fools.
Some view it in another light,
Less wicked, but as foolish quite:
And these are such as blindly place it
In superstitions that disgrace it;
And think the essence of it lies
In ceremonious fooleries:
In points of faith and speculation,
Which tend to nothing but vexation.
With these it is a heinous crime
To cough or spit in sermon-time:
It Is worse to whistle on a SUNDAY,
Than cheat their neighbors on a MONDAY:
To dine without first saying grace, is
Enough to lose in heaven their places:
But goodness, honesty and virtue,
Are what they have not the least regard to.
Others there are, and not a few,
Who place it in the bugbear view!
Think it consists in strange severities:
In fastings, weepings, and austerities.
False notions their weak minds possess,
Of faith, and grace, and holiness:
And as the Lord's of purer eyes
Than to behold iniquities;
They think, unless they are pure and spotless,
All their endeavors will be bootless;
And dreadful furies in aeternum,
In unconsuming fires will burn'em.
But, O how happy are the few,
Who place it in its proper view!
To these it shines divinely bright,
No clouds obscure its native light;
Truth stamps conviction in the mind,
All doubts and fears are left behind,
And peace and joy at once an entrance find.
PAIN and PATIENCE. An ODE.
I.
TO scourge the riot and intemperate lust,
Or check the self-sufficient pride of man,
Offended heaven sent forth, in vengeance just,
The dire inexorable fury, PAIN;
Beneath whose griping hand, when she assails,
The firmest spirits sink, the strongest reasoning fails.
II.
Near to the confines of the infernal den,
Deep in a hollow cave's profound recess,
Her courts she holds; and to the sons of men
Sends out the ministers of dire distress:
Repentance, shame, despair, each acts her part;
Whets the vindictive steel, and aggravates the smart.
III.
He whose luxurious palate daily ranged
Earth, air, and ocean, to supply his board;
And to high-relish'd poisons madly changed
The wholesome gifts of nature's bounteous lord;
Shall find sick nauseous surfeit taint his blood;
And his abused palled stomach loath the daintiest food.
IV.
The midnight reveller's intemperate bowl,
To rage and riot fires his furious brain;
Remorse ensues, and agony of soul,
His future life condemned to ceaseless pain:
Gout, fever, stone, to madness heighten grief;
And temperance, called too late, affords him no relief.
V.
He whose hot blood excites to dangerous joy,
And headlong drives to seek the lewd embrace,
Startled at length, shall in his face descry
The mark indelible of foul disgrace:
Ulcers obscene corrode his akeing bones;
And his high raptures change to deep-felt sighs and groans.
VI.
The wild extravagant, whose thoughtless hand,
With lavish tasteless pride, commits expense;
Ruined, perceives his waining age demand
Sad reparation for his youth's offense:
Upbraiding riot points to follies past,
Presenting hollow want, fit successor to waste.
VII.
He too, whose high presuming health defies
The almighty hand of heaven to pull him down;
Who slights the care and caution of the wise,
Nor fears hot summer's rage, nor winter's frown:
Some trifling a^l shall seize this mighty man;
Blast all his boasted strength, rack every nerve with pain.
VIII.
Thus nature's God inflicts, by nature's law,
On every crime its proper punishment;
Creating Pain to keep mankind in awe,
And moral ills by physical prevent:
In wrath still gracious; claiming still our praise,
Even in those very groans our chastisements shall raise.
IX.
But lest the feeble heart of suffering man
Too low should sink beneath the keen distress;
Lest fell despair, in league with cruel pain,
Should drive him desperate in their wild excess;
Kind HOPE her daughter PATIENCE sent from high,
To ease the laboring breast, and wipe the trickling eye.
X.
Hail, mild divinity! calm PATIENCE, hail!
Soft-handed, meek-ey'd maid, yet whose firm breath,
And strong persuasive eloquence prevail
Against the rage of pain, the fear of death:
Come, lenient beauty, spread thy healing wing,
And smooth my restless couch, whilst I thy praises sing.
XI.
In all this toilsome round of weary life,
Where dullness teazes, or pert noise assails;
Where trifling follies end in serious strife,
And money purchases where merit fails;
What honest spirit would not rise in rage,
If Patience lent not aid his passion to assuage?
XII.
No state of life but must to Patience bow:
The tradesman must have Patience for his bill;
He must have Patience who to law will go,
And should he lose his right, more Patience still.
Yea, to prevent or heal full many a strife,
How often, how long must man have Patience with his wife?
XIII.
But heaven grant Patience to the wretched wight,
Whom pills, and draughts, and bollusses assail!
Which he must swallow down with all his might;
Even then when health, and strength, and spirits fail.
Dear Doctors, find some gentler ways to kill;
Lighten this load of drugs, contract you length of bill.
XIV.
When the dull, prating, loud, long-winded da^e,
Her tedious, vague, unmeaning ta^e repeats;
Perplexed and wandering round and round her theme,
Till lost and puzzled, she all theme forgets;
Yet still talks on with unabating speed;
Good gods! who hears her out, must Patience have indeed.
XV.
So when some grave, deep-learned, sound divine
Ascends the pulpit, and unfolds his text:
Dark and more dark grows what he would define,
And every sentence more and more perplexed;
(...) he blunders on the same blind course,
(...) his wearied hearers Patience upon force.
XVI.
Without firm Patience who could ever bear
The great man's levee, watching for a smile?
Then, with a whispered promise in his ear,
Wait its accomplishment a long, long while;
Yet through the bounds of Patience if he burst,
DANIEL'S long weeks of years may be accomplished first.
XVII.
O Patience! guardian of the tempered breast,
Against the insolence of pride and power;
Against the wit's keen sneer, the fool's dull jest;
Against the b^aster's lie, told over and over;
To thee this tributary lay I bring,
By whose firm aid empowered, in raging Pain I sing.
KITTY. A PASTORAL.
I.
BENEATH a cool shade, by the side of a stream,
Thus breathed a fond shepherd, his KITTY his theme:
Thy beauties comparing, my dearest, said he,
There Is nothing in nature so lovely as thee.
II.
Though distance divides us, I view thy dear face,
And wander in transport over every grace;
Now, now I behold thee, sweet-smiling and pretty,
O gods! you have made nothing so fair as my KITTY!
III.
Come, lovely idea, come fill my fond arms,
And whilst in soft rapture I gaze on thy charms,
The beautiful objects which round me arise,
Shall yield to those beauties that live in thine eyes.
IV.
NOW FLORA the meads and the groves does adorn,
With flowers and blossoms on every thorn;
But look on my KITTY! -- there sweetly does blow,
A spring of more beauties than FLORA can show.
V.
See, see how that rose there adorns the gay bush,
And proud of its color, would vie with her blush.
Vain boaster! thy beauties shall quickly decay,
She blushes -- and see how it withers away.
VI.
Observe that fair lily, the pride of the vale,
In whiteness unrivaled, now droop and look pale;
It sickens, and changes its beautiful hue,
And bows down its head in submission to you.
VII.
The zephyrs that fan me beneath the cool shade,
When panting with heat on the ground I am laid,
Are less grateful and sweet than the heavenly air
That breaths from her lips when she whispers -- my dea^.
VIII.
I hear the gay lark, as she mounts in the skies,
How sweet are her notes! how delightful her voice!
Go dwell in the air, little warbler, go!
I have music enough while my KITTY'S below.
IX.
With pleasure I watch the industrious be,
Extracting her sweets from each flower and tree:
Ah fools! thus to labor to keep you alive;
Fly, fly to her lips, and at once fill your hive.
X.
See there, on the top of that oak, how the doves
Sit brooding each other, and cooing their loves:
Our loves are thus tender, thus mutual our joy,
When folded on each other's bosom we lie.
XI.
It glads me to see how the pretty young lambs
Are fondled, and cherished, and loved by their dams:
The lambs are less pretty, my dearest, than thee;
Their dams are less fond, nor so tender as me.
XII.
As I gaze on the river that smoothly glides by,
Thus even and sweet is her temper, I cry;
Thus clear is her mind, thus calm and serene,
And virtues, like gems, at the bottom are seen.
XIII.
Here various flowers still paint the gay scene,
And as some fade and die, others bud and look green;
The cha^ms of my KITTY are constant as they;
Her virtues will bloom as her beauties decay.
XIV.
But in vain I compare her, here is nothing so bright,
And darkness approaches to hinder my sight:
To bed I will hasten, and there all her cha^ms,
In softer ideas, I Will bring to my arms.
The WIFE. A FRAGMENT.
THE virtues that endear and sweeten life,
And form that soft companion, called a Wife;
Demand my song. Thou who did first inspire
The tender theme, to thee I tune the lyre.
Hail, lovely woman! nature's blessing, hail!
Whose charms over all the powers of man prevail:
Thou healing balm of life, which bounteous heaven,
To pour on all our woes, has kindly given!
What were mankind without thee? or what joy,
Like thy soft converse, can his hours employ?
The dry, dull, drowsy bachelor surveys,
Alternative, joyless nights and lonesome days:
No tender transports wake his sullen breast,
No soft endearments lull his cares to rest:
Stupidly free from nature's tenderest ties,
Lost in his own ^ad self he lives and dies.
Not so the man, to whom indulgent heaven
That tender bosom-friend, a wife, has given:
Him, blessed in her kind arms, no fears dismay,
No secret checks of guilt his joys allay:
No husband wronged, no virgin honor spoiled,
No anxious parent weeps his ruined child;
No fell disease, no false embrace is here,
The joys are safe, the raptures are sincere.
Does fortune smile? How grateful must it prove
To tread life's pleasing round with one we love!
Or does she frown? The fair, with softening art,
Will sooth our woes, or bear a willing part.
" But are all women of the soothing kind?
" ^^husing wives no hazard shall we find?
" Will spleen, nor vapors, pride, nor prate molest?
" And is all fear of cuckoldom a jest?"
Grant some are bad: yet surely some remain,
Good without show, and lovely without stain;
Warm without lewdness; virtuous without pride;
Content to follow, yet with sense to guide.
Such is FIDELIA, fairest, fondest wife;
Observe the picture, for I draw from life.
Near that famed hill, from whose enchanting brow
Such various scenes enrich the vales below;
While gentle Thames, meandering glides along,
Meads, flocks, and groves, and rising towers among,
FIDELIA dwelt: fair as the fairest scene
Of smiling nature, when the sky's serene,
Full sixteen summers had adorned her face,
Warmed every sense, and wakened every grace;
Her eye looked sweetness, gently heaved her breast,
Her shape, her motion, graceful ease expressed.
And to this fair, this finished form, were joined
The softest passions, and the purest mind.
Amongst the neighboring youths who strove to gain FIDELIA'S heart, LYSANDER
made his addresses. He was a younger brother, of a good family, but small
fortune. His person was handsome and genteel, his manners easy and engaging.
With these advantages he soon obtained a place in young FIDELIA's heart; and,
as her fortune, which was very considerable, was in her own dispose, there was
no obstacle to their happiness; with all the eloquence of a lover, he pressed
the consummation of his wishes, a tender softness pleads within her breast, she
yields to the force of his persuasions, and they are married.

Who can express the pleasures which they now enjoy? To make her happy seemed
the scope of all his actions, and such a growing fondness warmed her heart,
that every day endeared him more and more. The fortune which she brought, he
managed with prudence and discretion; and the pleasure which he found in her
sweet behavior, and enchanting beauties, repaid his cares with interest. Thus
flew the hours, winged with delight; the day passed not without some new
endearment; and the night felt nameless raptures, or serene repose.

Before the end of two years their loves were crowned with a smiling boy. If
any thing could increase their fondness of each other, 'twas this engaging
pledge of their affection. But, alas! how variable is the heart of man! how
easily are his passions inflamed! how soon his best affections altered! and
reason, which should be his guide, is but as the light of a candle, which the
least gust of passion can puff out, and quite extinguish. Of this unhappy
truth, LYSANDER soon became a fatal instance.

It happened at this time, whether by accident of design, I know not, that a
creature of exquisite beauty, but of infamous character, came to lodge exactly
over against the house of this, till then, most happy pair. As LYSANDER was not
only possessed of a handsome person, but now also of an ample fortune,
immediately a thousand arts were tried by this inveigling harlot, to attract
his observation, and if possible to ensnare his heart. At her window, in his
sight, she would appear in a loose and tempting dishabille. Now in a seeming
negligence discover white her naked breasts, then with a leering smile pretend
to hide them from his sight. Her wanton eyes, all sparkling with delight, she
now would fix with eagerness upon him; then in a soft and languishing air by
slow degrees withdraw, yet looking back as loath to leave the place.

As LYSANDER had too much experience of the world, not to understand this
amorous language, so his heart was too susceptible of the tender passion, not
to feel its force. And unable to withstand the daily repetition of these
provoking temptations, he at last determined to go over privately one evening
and make her a visit. It will be needless to say he was kindly received, how
kindly, will be better imagined than expressed. Here had he stopped, this one
transgression might have been forgiven: But such was his infatuation, that from
this time his visits became frequent: he was so intoxicated with her charms
(for indeed she was handsome) and so bewitched with her alluring blandishments,
that the modest beauty of his fair and virtuous wife became at once neglected,
and at length despised.

Poor FIDELIA! who can express the agonies of her heart when first the fatal
secret she discovered? Conscious on how many accounts she merited his love,
pride and resentment for some time struggled with her affection; but such was
the softness of her nature, such the tenderness of her passion, that she was
not able to reproach him any other way than by a silent grief. Alone she pined,
and like a lily in the secret vale drooped her fair head, unfriended and
unseen. Of what must be his heart, that such endearing softness could not melt,
that such engaging virtue shamed not into goodness! But such is the nature of
vice, that it hardens the heart to all humane and generous impressions. At
first, perhaps, his virtue made some efforts in her favor; but the trouble it
cost him to suppress them when the rage of his newkindled flame returned, made
him by degrees unwilling to indulge them. Thus endeavoring to smother all
remains of gratitude or compassion, he became at length as insensible to her
grief as to her wrongs.

Barbarian! how can thou lavish on abandoned vileness, that wealth, which
love and unsuspecting virtue trusted to thy hand! how can thou leave that
angel sweetness, that untainted rose, for paint, polluted charms, and
prostitution! how can thou see thy tender innocent babe suck with its milk
those griefdistilling drops, that fall incessant on her snowy breast, for thy
unkind neglect! Unfeeling wretch! But what is man not capable to do, when blind
with passion, hardened with his guilt? Alas! this is but the beginning of her
woes; and nothing to the grief this hapless fair one is ordained to suffer.
Indifference is soon succeeded by ill nature and ill usage. He now no longer
makes a secret of his base intrigue. Whole days and nights are spent in her
lewd chambers, shameless and open in the sight of the world, and in the very
face of his insulted, injured, unoffending wife.

But this was not enough. Home, and the sight of this affronted, yet still
patient virtue, became uneasy and disgustful. He is therefore determined to
remove her from him. But the means of bringing this about were as infamous, as
the desire of doing it was cruel. His valet de chamber, whose name was Craven,
had lived with him some years, and was a man whom he found to be capable of any
villainy he should think fit to employ him in. This man he prevailed with, by
large gifts and many promises, to conceal himself in FIDELIA'S bedchamber, and
continue there, said he to him, till after she is in bed; when I will come in
and pretend to surprise you with her: and in the confusion which will follow,
do you slip out of the room, and make your escape. This detestable scheme was
no sooner concerted, than it was put in execution. He that very evening found
means to hide himself in (...) chamber of this innocent lady, who at her usual
h^ur repaired to rest. After committing herself to heaven, and with a shower of
tears bewailing her hard ^ate, she closed her eyes in sleep. Protect her,
heaven, support her in this hour, when he who should protect her and support,
is basely undermining and be^^^ying her!

S^eep had no sooner closed her grief-swoln eyes, than her husband rushed into
the chamber, and with reigned rage and frightful imprecations demanded the
ad^^terer. Surpised with terror and astonishment she started from her sleep,
and in a treambling voice (...) to know the occasion of his anger. He gave no
answer to her entreaties, but continuing his pre^^^ded rage, sought every
corner of the room; and (...) beneath the bed at length pulled out the hidden
(...). This unexpected sight, and the appearance of ^o shocking a discovery, so
terrified the poor amazed FIDELIA, that, for a time, her senses seemed
susupended. While thus her husband: Is this, madam, the truth, the purity which
you so much pretended! Is this your innoce^ce! Is this the secret idol of your
salse devotion! D^ssembling harlot! I long indeed have had suspicious what you
were, at last I have pulled off the m^sk, and my pretended saint is now
detected. O heaven and earth! cried out FIDELIA, (...) you then believe me
gu^lty! do you believe I know ^ught of this (...)! that I encouraged, or that I
concea^'d him* Suspected what I am* good heaven, what am I? am I not your wife?
would God I were not! O LYSANDER, there needed not this; my heart before was
broke, why would you murder too my innocence? Your innocence! returned the
brute; and have you the assurance after this to talk of innocence? no, no,
madam, I will not murder your innocence, the law shall do you justice. Saying
this, he turned from her and was going to leave the room; when falling on her
knees, and catching hold of his coat, in broken accents and a flood of tears,
she th^s addressed him. O LYSANDER, O my dear husband! if yet it is permitted me
to call you by that name, let me entreat, nay beg upon my knees, you will not
th^s expose my yet untainted name to public infamy, not let the lep'^ous blast
of scandal-bearing ^ongues make foul my spotless honor. I shall not long stand
in the way of your pleasures; my bursting heart can hold but very little while;
O let me leave the world unblemished! then I shall die in peace, and my last
parting breath shall bless and call you kind. But if I must not, as I sa^ly
fear, I must not stay; O let me in some friendly darksome night, when not an
eye can see me, steal from your house, my infant in my arms, and wandering to
some lonely hutt, or distant village, die the^e unknown in silent grief, for I
will never complain, and save you the reproach of having used me thus.

This last proposal was the very thing he wished; so turning to her with a
scornful look, he told her she might take her bra^ and go whither she would, as
soon as she pleased; then breaking rudely from her, left her on the floor. What
language can express the agonies she felt at this hard usage! she rose from the
floor where his barbarity had left her, and putting on the meanest clothes she
had, went to the bed where lay her sleeping babe, kissed and wept over it for
some time, then took it in her arms, and laying it to her breast, departed from
her house that very night.

Here for the present let us leave this poor unhappy wandered, with providence
her sole guide, and innocence her comfort; and turn to see what punishment will
be prepared for her perfidious and inhuman husband. Now unrestrained he lived
with his lewd paramour in all the heights of luxury and extravagance, and every
pleasure for a while appeared to wait on his command. But soon her wanton waste
and boundless riot brought him to distress.

ROME'S PARDONS. A TALE.
If Rome can pardon sins, as Romans hold;
And if those pardons may be bought and sold,
It were no sin to adore and worship gold.
ROCHESTER.
IT happened on a certain time,
Two Seigniors, who had spent the prime
Of youth in every wickedness,
Came to his holiness to confess;
Of which, the one had riches store,
The other (wicked wretch!) was poor.
But both grown old, had now a mind
To die in peace with all mankind;
And go to heaven a nearer way
Than those who all their lifetime pray:
Which may effected be they hope,
By buying pardon of the pope.
So calling fresh to mind their sins,
The rich offender thus begins.
" Most holy father, I have been,
" I must confess, in many a sin.
" All laws divine I Have thought a joke;
" All human laws for interest broke.
" And to increase my ill-got store,
" Thought it no crime to oppress the poor,
" To cheat the rich, betray my friends,
" Or any thing to gain my ends.
" But now grown old, and near to die,
" I do repent me heartily
" Of all my vile offenses past,
" And in particular the last,
" By which I wickedly beguiled
" A dead friend's son, my guardian child,
" Of all his dear paternal store,
" Which was ten thousand pounds or more;
" Who since is starved to death by want,
" And now sincerely I repent:
" Which that your holiness may see,
" One half the sum I Have brought with me,
" And thus I cast it at your feet,
" Dispote of it as you think meet,
" To pious uses, or your own,
" I hope 'twill all my faults atone.
" Friend, quoth the pope, I Am glad to see
" Such true repentance wrought in thee;
" But as your sins are very great,
" You have but half repented yet:
" Nor can your pardon be obtained,
" Unless the whole which thus you have gained,
" To pious uses be ordained.
" All! cried the man, I thought that half
" Had been a pretty price enough.
" Nay, quoth the pope, sir, if you hum
" And haw at parting with the sum,
" Go, keep it, do; and damn your soul:
" I tell you, I must have the whole.
" It Is not a little thing procures
" A pardon for such sins as yours,
Well -- rather than be doomed to go,
To dwell with everlasting woe,
One would give any things, you know:
So the other half was thrown down to'^,
And then he soon obtained his suit;
A pardon for his sins was given,
And home he went assured of heaven.
And now the poor man bends his knee;
" Most holy father, pardon me,
" A poor and humble penitent,
" Who all my substance vilely spent,
" In every wanton, youthful pleasure;
" But now I suffer out of measure;
" With dire diseases being fraught,
" And eke so poor not worth a groat.
" Poor! quoth the pope, then cease your suit,
" Indeed you may as well be m^te;
" Forbear your now too late contrition,
" You're in a reprobate condition.
" What! spend your wealth, and from the whole
" Not save one ^ouse to save your soul?
" O, you're a sinner, and a hard one,
" I wonder you can ask a pardon:
" Friend, they are not had unless you buy'^m,
" You're therefore damned, as sure I am --
" Vicegerent to the king of heaven:
" No, no, such sins cannot be forgiven.
" I cannot save you if I would,
" Nor would I do it if I could.
Home goes the man in deep despair,
And died soon after he came there;
And went, it is said, to hell: But sure
He was not damned for being poor!
But long he had not been below,
Before he saw his friend come too;
At this he was in great surprise,
And scarcely could believe his eyes;
" What, friend, said he, are you come too?
" I thought the pope had pardoned you.
" Yes, quoth the man, I thought so too;
" But I was by the pope trapan'd --
"The devil could not read his hand."
AN EPISTLE TO STEPHEN DUCK, AT HIS FIRST COMING TO COURT.
FORGIVE me, DUCK, that such a muse as mine,
Brings her weak aid to the support of thine;
In lines, which if the world should chance to see,
They Would find I pleaded for myself -- in thee.
Yet some indulgence sure they ought to show
An infant poet, and unlearned ^s you;
Unskilled in art, unexercis'd to sing;
I Have just but tasted the Pierian spring:
But though my stock of learning yet is low;
Though yet my numbers don't harmonious flow,
I fain would hope it will not be always so.
The morning sun emits a stronger ray,
Still as he rises toward meridian day:
Large hills at first obstruct the oblique beam,
And dark'ning shadows shoot along the gleam;
Impending mists yet hover in the air,
And distant objects undistinct appear.
But as he rises in the eastern sky,
The shadows shrink, the conquered vapors fly;
Objects their proper forms and colors gain;
In all her various beauties shines the enlightened plain.
So when the dawn of thought peeps out in man,
Mountains of ignorance shade at first his brain;
A gleam of reason by degrees appears,
Which brightens and increases with his years;
And as the rays of thought gain strength in youth,
Dark mists of error melt and brighten into truth.
Thus asking ignorance will to knowledge grow;
Conceited fools alone continue so.
On then, my friend, nor doubt but that in time
Our tender muses, learning now to climb,
May reach perfection's top, and grow sublime,
The ^LIAD scarce was HOMER'S first essay;
VIRGIL wrote not his AENEID in a day:
Nor is it impossible a time might be,
When POPE and PRIOR wrote like You and Me.
It Is true, more learning might their works adorn,
They wrote not from a pantry nor a barn:
Yet THEY, as well as WE, by slow degrees
Must reach perfection, and to write with ease.
Have you not seen? yes, often you must have seen,
When vernal suns adorn the woods with green,
And genial warmth, enkindling wanton love,
Fills with a various progeny the grov^,
The timorous young, just ventured from the nest,
First in low bushes hop, and often rest;
From twig to twig, their tender wings they try,
Yet only flutter when they seem to fly.
But as their strength and feathers more increase,
Short flights they take, and fly with greater ease:
Experienced soon, they boldly venture higher,
Forsake the hedge, to lofty trees aspire;
Transported thence, with strong and steady wing
They mount the skies, and soar aloft, and sing.
So you and I, just naked from the shell,
In chirping notes our future singing tell;
Unfeather'd yet, in judgment, thought, or skill,
Hop round the basis of Parnassus' hill:
Our flights are low, and want of art and strength,
Forbids to carry us to the wished for longth,
But fledged, and cherished with a kindly spring,
We'll mount the summit, and melodious sing.
ON RICHES. HUMBLY INSCRIBED To the RIGHT HONORABLE --
TO succor all whom grief or cares oppress,
To raise neglected merit from distress,
The dying arts t'encourage and revive,
And independent of mankind to live;
This, this is Riches' grand prerogative.
These all the wise and good with joy pursue,
And thousands feel, and bless their power in you.
But stay, my muse, nor rashly urge thy theme,
Examine well thy candidates for same;
Thy verse is praise. Consider -- very few
Can justly say one single line's their due:
Scorn thou with generous freedom to record,
Without his just credentials, duke or lord:
An honest line prefer to a polite,
So shall thy praise no conscious blush excite.
But as to paint a lovely female face,
With every charm adorned, and every grace,
Requires a finer hand, and greater care,
Than the rough features of a H -- R;
So praise than satire asks a nicer touch;
But si^isht well, there is nothing charms so much,
A shining character when drawn with art.
Like beauty, whilst it pleases, wins the heart.
MECAENAS first the noble list shall grace,
Learning's great patron merits the first place.
O dear to every muse! to every art!
Virtue's chief friend! supporter of desert!
Is there a man, though poor, despised, oppressed,
Yet whose superior genius shines confessed;
Whether the useful arts his soul inspire,
Or the politer muse's sacred fire,
Learning and arts t'encourage and extend?
In thee he finds a patron and a friend.
Wealth thus bestowed returns in lasting fame,
A grateful tribute to the donor's name.
Next him from whom true virtue meets reward,
Is he who shows to want a kind regard.
CARUS, though blessed with plenty, ease, and health,
His every want supplied from boundless wealth.
Yet feels humanity: his soul overflows
To see, or hear, or think on others woes.
Is there a wretch with pinching want oppressed?
His pain, till eased, is self in CARUS' breast.
Does any languish under dire disease?
CARUS prescribes, or pays the doctor's fees.
Has sad misfortune fatal ruin thrown,
And some expiring family undone?
CARUS repairs, and makes the loss his own.
To hear the widow's or the orphan's cries,
His soul in pity melts into his eyes:
O manly tenderness! good-natured grief!
To feel, to sympathize, and give relief.
Sure gods are CARUS' debtors. Gold thus given,
Lies out at interest in the bank of heaven.
But where is the advantage then, will CORVUS say,
If wealth is only lent to give away?
CORVUS, were that the sole prerogative,
How great, how godlike is the power to give,
Thou can not feel it: True, it is too divine
For such a selfish narrow soul as thine.
COMES is rich, beloved by all mankind,
To cheerful hospitality inclined;
His ponds with fish, with fowl his woods are stored,
Inviting plenty smiles upon his board;
Easy and free, his friends his fortune share,
Even traveling strangers find a welcome there;
Neighbors, domestics, all enjoy their parts,
He in return possesses all their hearts.
Who, foolish CORVUS, who but thee will say,
That COMES idly throws his wealth away?
Is then the noble privilege to give,
The sole advantage we from wealth receive?
Whilst others wants or merits we supply,
Have we ourselves no title to enjoy?
Doubtless you have. A thousand different ways
Wealth may be self-enjoy'd, and all with praise.
Whom truth and reason guides, or genius fires.
Never need fear indulging his desires.
But should pretending coxcombs, from this rule,
Plead equal privilege to play the fool;
The muse forbids. She only gives to sense
The dangerous province to contrive expense.
MARCUS in sumptuous buildings takes delight,
His house, his gardens charm the ravished sight:
With beauty use, with grandeur neatness joins.
And order with magnificence combines.
It Is costly: True, but who can blame the expense,
"Where splendour borrows all her rays from sense?"
SYLVIO retirement loves; smooth crystal floods,
Green meadows, hills and dales, and verdant woods
Delight his eye; the warbling birds to hear,
With rapture fills his soul, and charms his ear.
In shady walks, in groves, in secret bowers,
Plan'd by himself he spends the peaceful hours*
Here serious thought pursues her thread serene,
No interrupting follies intervene;
Propitious silence aids the attentive mind,
The God of nature in his works to find.
If this to enjoy affords him most delight,
Who says that SYLVIO is not in the right?
PUBLIUS in curious paintings wealth consumes,
The best, the finest hands adorn his rooms;
Varlous designs, from each enlivened wall,
Meet the pleased eyes, and something charms in all.
Here well-drawn landskips to the mind convey
A smiling country, or a stormy sea;
Towns, houses, trees, diversify the plain,
And ships in danger fright us from the main.
There the past actions of illustrious men,
In strong description charm the world again:
Love, anger, grief, in different scenes are wrought,
All its just passions animate the draught.
But see new charms break in a flood of day,
See Loves and Graces on the canvas play;
Beauty's imagined smiles our bosom warm,
And light and shade retains the power to charm.
Who censures PUBLIUS, or condemns his cost,
Must wish the noble art of painting lost.
Whilst PUBLIUS thus his taste in painting shows,
CRITUS admires her sister art, the muse.
Homer and Virgil, Horace and Bo^leau
Teach in his breast po^tick warmth to glow.
From these instructed, and from these inspired,
CRITUS for taste and judgment is admired.
Poets before him lay the work of years,
And from his sentence draw their hopes and fears.
H^^l, judge impartial! noble critic, hail!
In this thy day, good writing must prevail:
Our bards from you will hence be what they should,
Please and improve us, make us wi^e and good.
Thus blessed with wealth, his genius each pursues,
In building, planting, painting, or the muse.
O envied power! -- But you will object and say,
How few employ it in this envied way?
With all his heaps did CHREMES ever do good?
No: But they give him power, if once he would:
It Is not in riches to create the will,
Misers, in spite of wealth, are m^sers still.
Is it for gold the lawless villain spoils?
It Is for the same the honest lab'rer toils.
Does wealth to sloth, to luxury pervert?
Wealth too excites to industry, to art:
Many, no doubt, through power of wealth oppress,
But some, whom heaven reward, delight to bless!
Then blame not gold, that men are proud or vain,
Slothful or covetous; but blame the man.
When right affections rule a generous heart,
Gold may refine, but seldom will pervert.
A LADY'S SALUTATION TO HER GARDEN IN THE COUNTRY.
WElcome, fair scene; welcome, thou loved retreat,
From the vain hurry of the bustling great.
Here let me walk, or in this fragrant bower,
Wrapped in calm thought improve each fleeting hour.
My soul, while nature's beauties feast mine eyes,
To nature's God contemplative shall rise.
What are ye now, ye glittering, vain delights,
Which waste our days, and rob us of our nights?
What your allurements? what your sancy'd joys?
Dress, equipage, and show, and pomp, and noise.
Alas! how tasteless these, how low, how mean,
To the calm pleasures of this rural scene?
Come then, ye shades, beneath your bending arms
Enclose the fond admirer of your charms;
Come then, ye bowers, receive your joyful guest,
Glad to retire, and in retirement blessed;
Come, ye fair flowers, and open every sweet;
Come, little birds, your warbling songs repeat.
And O descend to sweeten all the rest,
Soft smiling peace, in white-rob'd virtue dressed;
Content unenvious, ease with freedom joined,
And contemplation calm, with truth refined:
Deign but in this fair scene with me to dwell,
All noise and nonsense, pomp and show farewell.
And see! O see! the heaven-born train appear!
Fix then, my heart; thy happiness is here.
AN EPIGRAM.
CRIES Sylvia to a reverend dean,
What reason can be given,
Since marriage is a holy thing,
That there are none in heaven?
There are no Women, he replied;
She quick returns the jest --
Women there are, but I Am afraid
They cannot find a Priest.
The KINGS of EUROPE. A JEST.
WHY pray, of late, do Europe's kings
No jester in their courts admit?
They Are grown such stately solemn things,
To bear a joke they think not fit.
But though each court a jester lacks,
To laugh at monarchs to their face;
All mankind behind their backs
Supply the honest jester's place.
The PROGRESS of LOVE. A SONG.
BEneath the myrtle's secret shade,
When Delia bl^st my eyes;
At first I viewed the lovely m^id
In silent soft surp^i^e.
With trembling voice, and anxious mind,
I softly whispered love;
She blushed a smile so sweetly kind,
Did all my fears remove.
Her lovely yielding form I pressed,
Sweet madde^ing kisses stole;
And soon her swimming eyes confessed
The wishes of her soul:
In wild tumultuous bliss, I cry,
O Delia, now be kind!
She pressed me close, and with a sigh,
To melting joys resigned.
SONG.
MAN's a poor deluded bubble,
Wandering in a mist of lies,
Seeing false, or seeing double,
Who would trust to such weak eyes?
Yet presuming on his senses,
On he goes most wondrous wise:
Doubts of truth, believes pretenses;
Lost in error, lives and dies,
PLEASURE the best RELIGION; OR, The Right of Mankind to do what they will,
asserted: WITH ANSWERS TO SEVERAL OBJECTIONS. AN IRONICAL DISCOURSE.
PROVERBS ii. Ver. 17. Her Ways are Ways of (...), and all her Paths are P^^ce.
IN considering these words, I shall endeavor to show.

1 st, That if the ways of religion are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
the paths of peace, mankind must have a right to do what they will.

2 dly, I shall prove that there is no pleasure in the practice of any one
virtue whatsoever, and consequently that virtue can be no part of that religion
whose ways are ways of pleasantness.

3 dly, I shall answer some objections, and so conclude.

In the first place I am to show, that if the ways of religion are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are paths of peace, mankind must have a right
to do what they will.

There is no proposition more evident, no maxim more generally ^anted, than
that liberty is essential to happiness. This therefore I hope will not be
contested with me. Now I shall endeavor to prove, that the very essence of
liberty consists in doing what one will. Man is a free agent; observe, I
beseech you, the strength and conciseness of my reasoning; man, I say, is a
free agent. Now whatsoever is a free agent, must be supposed in all
circumstances to have a liberty of acting or not acting; therefore every man
has a liberty of doing what he will. But some of you perhaps will object, that
there is a difference between the liberty of doing what one will, and the right
of so doing. Now, though the reasoning of the pu^pit might very well countenance
me in such (...) trifling inaccuracy, yet I scorn to take sanctuary under so
poor an indulgence. I will make this matter so plain, that the meanest capacity
in this congregation shall most easily comprehend it. I love to preach to the
common level of the common people; and this ought to be the rule of every
preacher, who has not more at heart the ostentation of his own learning, than
the instruction of his hearers. But to the point. Mankind have a right to
happiness; liberty is essential to happiness; therefore every man has a right
to liberty. Now if every man has a right to liberty, and and the very offense
of liberty consists (as before asserted) in doing what one will, then every man
has undoubtedly a right so to do. This reasoning is so d^ong and conclusive,
that I am under no apprehension of its being thought that the privilege of the
pulpit alone secures me from contradiction. The thing speaks itself, and every
action we do confirms the truth of it. How ready are we upon all occasions to
cry out, I will do so and so, or I will not do so and so? Now if mankind had
not a right to do what they will, these phrases would be absurd and ridiculous.
Besides, we have the authority of scripture to support this our opinion. St.
Paul, speaking of a young man, says, let him do what he will he sins not. In
the twelfth chapter of Deuteronomy it is written, we do here this day every man
whatsoever is right in his own eyes. And in the twenty-fifth chapter of
Leviticus, the Jews are commanded to proclaim liberty (that is, a right of
doing what they will) throughout all the land, and to all the inhabitants
thereof. N^y David, the man after God's own heart, declares, Psalm cxix. ver.
45. that he will walk at liberty. Now if any man shall pretend to say that
these texts are not fairly quoted, I will show him a hundred texts in the very
gravest authors more perversely quoted by half. And thus I think I have
sufficiently proved, both from reason and scripture, that mankind have an
undoubted right to do what they will.

2 dly, I am to prove. That there is no pleasure in the practice for any one
virtue whatsoever, and consequently that virtue can be no part of that religion
whose ways are ways of pleasantness.

Every body is sensible of, and cries out upon the mischiefs which arise from
religious disputes. The warmth and animosity with which men are divided against
each other, and the rage and fury with which they hate and persecute each other
on account of their different opinions, are melancholy considerations. Happy
were it for mankind, if a way could be found to put an end to th^^ tumu^^uous
extravagance, to tune their j^rring p^ssions, and unite them all (...)
brotherly love and affection; and well would that man deserve from his fellow
creatures who should accomplish the glorious task. Let us try what can be done.

It has been allowed by the best divines, that the only end, or at least the
chief motive, which God could have for creating us, was our own happiness: I
shall therefore take this for granted, without enquiring any farther into the
truth of it, and confine myself only to seek by what means this great end is
best to be acquired.

Some late writers have made a great stir with virtue, the real, the intrinsic
pleasures of virtue. But I am in hop^s that one single observation will be
sufficient to establish it in the minds of all this good congregation, that
pleasure and virtue are two different things. It is this: Mankind are natu^ally
prone to seek their own pleasure or happiness, this is allowed, this they are
upbraided with, and on all hands blamed for; but if their hypothesis is to be
granted, who place happiness or pleasure in the practice of virtue, it will
evidently follow that mankind are prone to virtue; which I am persuaded, my
dear brethren, you all know and feel to be so far from truth, that I need not
insist any further on the falsity of it. No, I believe it will easily be
granted me, that the strongest bent of mankind is to what some call vices, but
what I shall call natural pleasures, and which, if happiness is the end of our
creation, must consequently be allowed to be the readiest means of
accomplishing that end. But I am now, for the sake of some few who may be
obstinate in this error of the happiness of virtue, and hardened infidels with
respect to the duty of natural pleasure; for the sake of such as these, I say,
I am now to prove more particularly, that there is no such thing as happiness
in the practice of any one virtue whatsoever.

Let us first try Charity.

Charity, according to St. Paul's definition of it^ bears all things, hops
all things, believes all things. Now I w^nder where the happiness or the sense
of pract^sing such a virtue as this can lie? I appeal to all mankind, whether
he that bea^eth all th^^gs is not a great fool, whether he that hops all
things is not a greater fool, and whether he that believes all things is not
the greatest fool of all? But ch^rity is said (...) cover a multitude of sins;
so does hypocrisy, my beloved, as I doubt not but you all very ^^ll know: and
if that is all that can be said for it, I think I have dispatched this
pretended virtue with great dexteri^y*

Let us try next what pleasure there is (...) the practice of Justice. Justice
is that virtue which enjoins us to do and say what is right to every one with
whom we converse or have any dealings. But do you think, my brethren, that it
would be a very pleasant thing to be calling fool or knave at every turn? Now I
(...) afraid this must be the case if we were to do strict justice to the
greatest part of those with wh^^ (...) converse. And what would be the
consequence? perpetual broils and quarrels. And can this be consistent with
that religion, whose ways are way^ of pleasantness, and all whose paths are
peace? (...) persuaded, my beloved, you are convinced of the contrary; and that
you will never be so foolish a^ to practice this virtue in so obstinate a
manne^ as to (...) yourselves into such unpleasant and unpeaceful (...).
Besides, do but observe the common (...) of the world: Are all our nobles
honorable? (...) all our clergy reverend? Who is there that supposes it? Yet
who refuses them the titles? Nay, should we but direct a common letter to the
dishonorable Lord A, or to the irreverend Parson B, however justly they might
be directed, it is ten to one a Prosecution might ensue for scandal and
defamation; so dangerous, ^o imprudent, so unsafe is the practice of justice.

Let us hear next what Chastity can say for itself; that impudent virtue, which
dares to contradict the very first command of God almighty, increase and
multiply. This virtue relates only to our commerce with the other sex; and
would a man recommend himself to any woman by telling her that he was chaste? I
fancy not. It is a cold uncomfortable quality, and the man that is born with it
will do wisely to conceal his infirmity from all the world. But it will be
said, perhaps, this virtue belongs in a more peculiar manner to the female sex.
Let me ask you, my beloved; would any of you like a woman the better for
coldness and indifference? I tell ye no. If then this pretended virtue will
neither recommend a man to his mistress, nor a lady to her lover, of what use
is it in the world? You will say, the honor of families is concerned in it;
perhaps it may; let every man look to that as well as he can: but sure the
peace and harmony of families depend on something else. I could, my beloved,
but at present I will not push this virtue any further; but shall leave it to
your own pious endeavors, and doubt not but to the utmost of your abilities
you will strive to push it out of the world.

Let us now hear what the sneaking virtue of temperance can pretend to. Nature
has given us appetites, and the goodness of heaven has abundantly furnished the
world with agreeable gratifications; but this stern, this rigid pretender would
debar us the enjoyment of them; would impiously contradict the good and
gracious designs of heaven, and condemn us to fasting and mortification. But be
not deceived with idle pretenses; almighty wisdom has created naught in vain:
the good things of this world were made to be enjoyed, and all our appetites
were given to be indulged therein. Let us eat then, my beloved, and drink
without measure; always remembering the words of the wise son of Sirach, What
life is there to a man that is without wine? for it was good to make men glad.
Yea, let us treasure up in our hearts that golden saying of Solomon, the wisest
man on earth, There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and
drink, and make his soul enjoy made in his labor: for God gives to a man that
is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge, and JOY. Thus you see, my brethren,
that the wisdom and knowledge which God gives is accompanied with joy; and he
that pretends to either without out, his knowledge is vain, his wisdom is a
misery and a burden unto him.

I could go on with great facility to all the other virtues; I could show the
stupidity of Patience, the poor-spiritedness of Humility, the weakness of
Goodnature, the folly and danger of Courage, and the absolute madness of
Sincerity; but I doubt not that what I have said is sufficient to confirm you
all in the worthy principles which have hitherto influenced all your actions. I
appeal to your hearts, my beloved, whether I have not spoken their own
sentments, and whether what I have said is not secretly whispered to every one
of you from his own soul. I doubt not therefore of your hearty acquiescence in
my second proposition, that there is no pleasure in the practice of any one
virtue whatsover, and consequently that virtue can be no part of that religion
whose ways are ways of pleasantness.

I proceed, then, in the third-and last place, to answer some trifling
objections, and so conclude. And first, it may perhaps be objected on the
behalf of Charity, that it is humane and generous to feel and compassionate the
distresses and misfortunes of our fellow creatures. If a man is so utterly lost
to all steadiness and fortitude of soul, as to be affected, or in the least
moved with any thing that does not concern himself; to that man I have nothing
to say; his heart perhaps may be so strangely constituted, that for aught I
know it may be a pleasure to him to p^ty and relieve the miseries of others;
but his case is so very uncommon, and so directly contrary to the general
practice of the world, that it is not worth while to take up your time in
exp^sing his weakness* especially as I am ^ully persuaded there are but sew of
you, if any, that envy him his pleasure, or will imitate him in it.

In the next place, it may be objected wi^h regard ^o Justice, that the man
that is not just and fair in all his dealings, very often runs the hazard of
his life, and always of his character. I cannot help ow^^ing there is some
^^uth in this objection, which I am persuaded you are all very sorry for.
However, I hope you have sagacity enough to render it of no force, no
consideration. The rule which I shall give you is only this; take particular
care never to be (...); For to confess the truth, it is not a desirable thing
to be ^^ang'd, neither is it quite prudent to lose one's character.

Thirdly, it may perhaps be urged against the pleasures of Luxury and
Concupiscence, that they expose a man to many incoveniences, such as the loss
of time, health, fortune, character, and some few more such trifles as these. I
am afraid we must also allow that there is some weight in this objection. But
what then? the man that has not spirit enough to sacrifice these trifling
considerations to the sublime pleasures of eating, drinking, and whoring, is
undeserving of them. What are the pains of a fever or a ^^ur^eit, or what the
loss of health, strength, and (...), in comparison with the voluptuous
pleasures of a table, or the sprightly joys of midnight bowls? Is the loss of a
nose to be brought in competition wi^h the dear delights that occasioned it?
The wretch who can be so ungrateful to think so, is unworthy to wear the
honorable scar.

In fine, it may perhaps be objected against all manner of Vices in general,
that they are the constant parents of anxiety, care, repentance and misery; and
that (...) on the contrary is forever attended with health, peace, and
pleasure. The contrast is strong, my beloved, it must be confessed; but whether
it is just or not, I am persuaded none of you know. What then shall I advise?
or how shall I direct you? Suppose for once you should try, and enter on a
course of Virtue: It cannot be more disagreeable than a course of physic,
perhaps not so much so; and then, to use the doctor's phrase, it is perfectly
safe, and cannot possibly do you any (...). At first indeed, as you are quite
strangers to the relish of it, it may seem something nauseous and unpalatable;
but if you once get over the difficulty of the first trial, who knows, through
custom, how agreeable it may become? Should it operate kindly, you will be as a
man whose appetite through a long course of sickness has been so viciated as to
nauseate every thing which would nourish and support him; and how delightful
must be his surprise to find, upon his recovery, every thing that is good and
wholesome, agreeable to his palate, and the establishment of his health
following the rectitude of his appetite! If this should be your condition, who
knows but you may live to be enamored of VIRTUE, to court her beauteous form,
and cry out with the wise man in my text, Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace.

AN EPISTLE TO MR. POPE, Occasioned by his ESSAY on MAN.
GREAT bard! in whom united we admire,
The sage's wisdom, and the poet's fire:
In whom at once, the great and good commend
The fine companion, and the useful friend: --
'Twas thus the muse her eager flight began,
Ardent to ^ing the poet and the man:
But truth in verse is clad too like a lie,
And you, at least, would think it flattery;
Hating the thought, I check my forward strain,
I change my style, and thus begin again.
As when some student first with curious eye,
Through nature's wondrous frame attempts to pry;
His doubtful reason seeming faults surprise,
He asks if this be just? if that be wise?
Storms, tempests, earthquakes, virtue in distress,
And vice unpunished, with strange thoughts oppress:
Till thinking on, unclouded by degrees,
His mind is opened, fair is all he sees;
Storms, tempests, earthquakes, virtue's ragged plight,
And vice's triumph, all are just and right:
Beauty is found, and order, and design,
And the whole scheme acknowledged all divine.
So when at first I viewed thy wondrous plan,
Leading the of all the winding maze of man;
Be ^ilder'd, weak, unable to pursue,
My pride would fain have laid the fault on You.
This false, that ill-exprest, this thought not good,
And all was wrong which I misunderstood.
But reading more attentive, soon I found,
The diction nervous, and the doctrine ^ound.
Saw man, a part of that stupendous whole,
"Whose body nature is, and God the soul."
Saw in the scale of things his middle state,
And all his powers adapted just to that.
Saw reason, passion, weakness, how of use,
How all to g^od, to happiness conduce.
Saw my own weakness, thy superior power,
And still the more I read, admire the more.
This simile drawn out, I now began
To think of forming some design or plan,
To aid my muse, and guide her wandering lay,
When sudden to my mind came honest GAY.
For form or method I no more contend,
But strive to copy that ingenious friend: In his first Epistle.

Like him to catch my thoughts just as they rose --
And thus I caught them, laughing at thy foes.
Where are ye now -- ye critics, shall I say?
Or owls, who ^icken at this God of day?
What! mighty scriblers, will you let him go
Uncensur'd, unabus'd, unhonour'd so?
Step forth, some great distinguished daring dunce,
(Write but one page, you silence him at once:
Write without fear; you will, you must succeed;
He cannot answer -- for he will not read*
Here paused the muse -- alas! the jade is bit,
She fain would copy GAY, but wants his wit.
She paused, indeed -- broke off as he had done,
Wrote four unmeaning lines, and then went on.
Ye wits and fools; ye libertines and saints,
Come pour upon the foe your joint complaints.
First, you who often, with wisdom too refined,
Can censure and direct the ETERNAL MIND,
Ingenious wits, who modestly pretend
This bungling frame, the universe, to mend;
How can you bear, in your great reason's spite,
To hear him prove, " Whatever is, is right?
Alas! how easy to confute the song!
If all is right, how came your heads so wrong?
And come, ye solemn fools, a numerous band,
Who read and read, but never understand,
Pronounce it nonsense -- Cannot you prove it too?
Good faith, my friends, it may be so -- to You.
Come too, ye libertines, who lust for power,
Or wealth, or fame, or greatness, or a whore;
All who true sensual happiness adhere to,
And laugh him out of this old fashioned virtue:
Virtue, where he has whimsically placed
Your only bliss -- How odd is some men's taste!
And come, ye rigid saints, with looks demure,
Who boast yourselves right holy, just, and pure;
Come, and with pious zeal the lines decry,
Which give your proud hypocrisy the lie:
Which own the best have failings, not a few;
And prove the worst, sometimes, as good as You.
What! shall he taint such perfect souls with ill?
Shall sots not place their bliss in what they will?
Nor fools be fools? Nor wits sublime descend
In charity to heaven its works to mend?
Laughs he at these? -- It Is monstrous. To be plain,
I Would have ye write -- He can but laugh again.
Here lifting up my head, surpised, I see
Close at my elbow, flattering Vanity.
From her soft whispers soon I found it came,
That I supposed myself not one of them.
Alas! how easily ourselves we sooth!
I fear, in justice, he must laugh at both.
For Vanity abashed, up to my ear
Steps honest Truth, and these sharp words I hear;
"Forbear, vain bard, like them forbear thy lays;
"Alike to POPE such censure and such praise.
"Nor that can fink, nor this exalt his name,
"Who owes to virtue, and himself, his fame"
THE Husband, Wife, and the Doctor. A MATRIMONIAL HISTORY. From the French of
Monsieur De St. Evremont.
AT the time that Monsieur de Comminges was ambassador from the most Christian
King to his Majesty of Great Britain, there came to London a physician, who
called himself an Irishman: This person passed for a great philosopher, and a
mighty performer of wonders, according to the opinion of the credulous, and his
own persuasion; and the method he took to cure the distempered, made him to be
suspected in many places ^or a magician.

Some persons of quality having entreated Monsieur de Comminges to send for him
to his house, in order to see some of his prodigies, he was very willing to
grant them that satisfaction, as well to gratify his natural curi^sity, as his
complai^ance for them. So he sent notice to this pretended magician, to come to
his home.

Upon the noise, which this news made in all parts of the town, the (...) of
Monsieur de Comminges was soon filled with sick people, who came with a full
assurance to be cured.

The Irishman made them wait for him some time; and after an impatient
expectation, the s^^k and curious saw him ^^rive with a grave, but simple
c^^^tenance, which carried in it not the least mark of an impostor.

Monsieur de Comminges prepared himself to examine him nicely, hoping he should
be able to enlarge himself at pleasure upon all that he had read in Van-Helmont
and Bodin: but he could not effect it, to his great concern: for the crowd
became so trouble-some, and the infirm pressed on so eagerly to be cured first,
that they had much ado with menaces, and even force, to regulate their ranks.

This Irish physician ascribed all indispositions to spirits; and all
infirmities, according to him, were possessions.

The first man that was presented to him, was one troubled with the gout and
rheumatisms, which he had in vain endeavored to get cured of. Which our
wonder-maker observing, "I have seen long ago, says he, this sort of spirits in
Ireland. They are water-spirits which bring coldness, and excite superfluities
of humors in these poor bodies. Thou evil spirit, who have left the habitation
of the waters, to come and afflict this miserable body, I command thee to
abandon thy new abode, and to return to thy ancient habitation." Having said
this, the sick man retired; and another was brought in his room, who complained
he was tormented with melancholy vapors.

Indeed he was one of those whom we commonly call hypocondriacks, and sick of
imagination, although they are but too much ^o in effect. "Airy spirit, says
the Irishman, Return into the air to exercise thy trade in raising of tempests,
and stir up no more hurricanes in this sad and miserable body."

This sick person gave way to another who was disturbed, according to the
opinion of our physician, with a puny hobgoblin, who would not have force
enough to withstand his discourse a moment. He apprehended that he had found
him out by certain marks, which did not appear to us; and smiling upon the
assembly. "This sort of spirits, says he, are seldom troublesome, and almost
always diverting."

In short, he knew every thing that related to spirits. He was acquainted with
their numbers, their ranks, their names, their employments and functions; nay,
he boasted that he understood the intrigues of demons, much better than the
affairs of men.

You cannot imagine what a reputation he gained in a very little time.
Catholics and protestants came to him from all parts; and you would have said
that the power of heaven was lodged in the hands of this man, when an
unexpected adventure, destroyed the wonderful opinion which the puplic had
entertained of him.

An English gentleman and his lady, who had been married for some time, came to
seek some relief in his miracle-working virtue against certain spirits of
discord, said they, which disturbed their marriage, and ruined the peace of
their family.

The gentleman was about 45 years old, and looked like a person of estate and
quality. Methinks I have the lady yet before my eyes. She was about thirty
years old, and was personable enough; but one might easily read in her face,
that she had been much more handsome formerly. I have named the husband first,
for the dignity of his rank; yet the wife would speak first, whether it was
because she believed her self to be most tormented by her spirit, or that she
was only excited with that ambition of talking, which is so natural to her sex.

"My husband, said she, is one of the best men in the world, I give him a
thousand disquiets, and he gives me no fewer in his turn. I would willingly
live comfortably with him, and should not fail of my desires, if a strange
spirit, with which I feel myself possessed at certain times, did not make me so
peevish and ill*humour'd, that there is no enduring me. After these agitations
are over, I return to my natural good humor; I then omit nothing that may
serve to oblige my husband: But his demon possesses him, when mine forsakes me;
and this husband of mine, who bears my transports so patiently, is a downright
fury to me, when I am myself. And alas! I endure no less from him, than he from
me." Here stopped our lady, who in all appearance, stated her case truly; and the
husband, who seemed to be no less sincere then his wi^e, began his discourse,
as follows:

"Whatever reason I have to complain of my wife's devil, I am however obliged
to him, that he has not taught her to lie; for I must own that she has said
nothing but what is lit^^ally true. All the time that she appears to me ^o be
in these agitations, I am composed; but as soon as her spirit leaves her in
peace, mine torments me in its turn; and as it inspires (...) with rue co^^age,
and new forces, I make her then know the dependence of a wife, and the (...) of
a husband. Thus our lives pass in perpetual wa^, ^ither (...) or (...), which
makes our condition as miserable as can be imagined. Thus Doctor, I have
acquainted you with our case, and if you have a remedy for it, I desire you to
be our deliverer. The cure of a distemper so strange as this of ours, will
bring you no little honor."

"These are neither hobgoblins nor fairies, said the Irishman, they are spirits
of the first order, and belong to Lucifer's legion: Proud demons, great enemies
to obedience, and very hard to expel. You will not take it amiss, gentlemen,
pursued he, turning to the assembly, if I examine my books a little; for I have
occasion for words that are out of the common road." Upon this he withdrew into
a close, in order to turn over his books and papers; and after he had tried a
hundred forms, as too weak to combat such powerful enemies, he pitched at last
upon one, that was able, as he pretended, to confound and expel all the devils
in hell.

The first effect of the conjuration was upon himself; for his eyes began to
roll in his head, with so many grimaces and convulsions, that his patients
might very well take him for a distracted man.

After he had stared and looked about him, he fixed his eyes at length upon
this virtuous couple, and striking both of them with a wand, which could not be
without virtue: "Begone, ye spirits of dissension, says he, and exercise
discord in hell, and by your departure let that happy union be re-established,
which you have so impiously broken. Then he approached softly to the ears of
the pretended possessed, and raising the tone of his voice, I hear you murmur
devils, at the obedience which ye are forced to pay to me: But were ye to burst
with madness ye must be gone. Depart, depart, and you my friends, go and enjoy
that repose, which ye have been deprived of so long. It Is done, gentlemen, and
I protest to you that I am all over in a sweat with the fatigue, which the
opposition of these obstinate devils has given me. I believe I have had to do
with two thousand spirits in my time, who all together have not given me so
much pain and trouble as these." After this our Irishman retired, and all the
company went out of the house, and our good couple returned to their lodgings,
with a satisfaction more miraculous than the prodigy, which had been wrought in
their favor.

When they came home, every thing appeared agreeable to them upon this new
alteration of mind, which created a new disposition in their senses: They found
a smiling air in every thing; they looked upon themselves with pleasure, and
were not wanting in sweet and tender words to express their love. But, vain
delights, how little dependence is there upon your duration! And how
unseasonably, do persons that are born to misfortunes rejoice, when they obtain
one short moment of happiness.

Such was their tranquillity, when a lady of their acquaintance came, to
acquaint them with the general joy of the town for their cure.

They answered this civility in a very obliging manner, and the usual
compliments on this occasion being made and returned, the husband began a very
pertinent conversation upon the happy condition they were now in, after so many
miseries as they had endured. Our wife, either to cause a greater admiration of
this miracle, or else to please her own malicious humor, enlarged herself with
satisfaction upon the tricks which her devil had suggested to her, to torment
her husband. Upon which, the husband jealous of the honor of his devil, or at
least, of his own authority, gave her to understand, That she talked too
feelingly of things past, the remembrance whereof was troublesome to him. He
added, That considering all was now well, she ought to think of nothing else,
but that obedience which a wife owes to her husband; as he would only consider
on his side, how to make a lawful use of his privileges, in order to make their
condition as happy for the future, as it had been unfortunate till now.

Our wife, who deeply resented the word obedience; but especially the cruel
injunction to hold her tongue, brought all the arguments she could think of, to
prove an equality in marriage, saying, That the devils were not at such a
distance, but they might be recalled, in case this equality was violated.

The lady abovementioned, who was as discreet and judicious as any of her sex,
wisely represented to her the duty of wives, and at the same time preached up
the conduct and good management, that husbands are obliged to use. But her
reasons, instead of composing, did but more incense her, so that she became
more insupportable than before. You are in the right, dear wife, replied the
husband, "The devils were not gone so far, but they might easily be recalled;
or rather, you have been so kind to yours, that he resolves to continue with
you, notwithstanding the positive command that was laid upon him to leave you.
I am too weak of myself to be concerned alone with you and him; which obliges
me to retire, exposed as I am to such an unequal combat. And I likewise retire,
says she, with this spirit, that will not abandon me. He must be a very ill
humored ^ort of a devil indeed, if he is not more tractable than so
troublesome a husband. Then turning toward her friend: Before I go, said she
to her. I am glad I have an occasion, madam, to tell you freely, that I
expected quite another treatment from your friendship, and that you have forgot
the interest which obliges you, to take a wife's part against the ill usage of
her husband. It Is a very strange thing that I should be run down by one that
ought to have espoused my quarrel. Adieu, madam, adieu; your visits do me a
great deal of honor, but one may very well be without them, if this is all the
good they do."

Our good, but too discreet lady was extremely surpised at this compliment;
being now convinced by her own experience, that even wisdom may overshoot
itself, and that for the most part we make an ill use of our reason with those
who have none.

You may imagine she did not stay long alone in a house, where nothing was
talked of but devils, and nothing done but what was extravagant to the highest
degree.

The husband passed the rest of the day and all the night in his chamber,
ashamed of the short-lived joy he had received, vexed at the present state of
his affairs, and reflecting, with great anxiety of mind upon what he might
expect from this sudden return of his wife's distemper:

As the agitation of the wife had been much more violent, so it continued not
so long; and returning soon to herself, she made some reflections upon the loss
of those pleasures, of which she saw herself deprived.

A certain restless spirit that shall be nameless, suffered few moments to pass
without demanding a reason of the spirit of discord, why it should sacrifice
its interest and pleasure to it thus to no purpose. This spirit, which
particularly influenceth those of the fair sex, but chiefly a-nights when they
cannot sleep, had its desired effect upon our lady, so that resigning herself
up purely to the conduct of nature, she awaked her husband as soon as was day,
designing to ascribe all past disorders to a strange power, which is neither
natural nor human. "I am satisfied, said she, in the lucid interval I enjoy at
present, that our spirits did not immediately leave us, when our Irish Doctor
commanded them to be gone; but if you will take my advice, my dear, but too
unhappy husband, we will go again and ask him for a stronger and more effectual
charm."

The poor husband, oppressed with grief, as he was, and fainting under the
severity of his destiny, judge if he was not very glad to find so unexpected a
calm, and tenderly affected with this amorous return in his spouse: "Let us
bemoan, my dear, says he to her, Let us bemoan our common misfortunes, and go a
second time to scarch a remedy, which at first we could not obtain."

The wife was agreeably surprised at this discourse; for instead of a
troublesome demon whose insults she expected, she happily found a man tender
and compassionate, who gave her comfort for that very uneasiness she had given
him; and of which he himself had bore the greatest share.

They spent an hour or two to possess one another with a mutual confidence, and
placing all their hopes in the mighty skill of the physician, they returned to
the house of Monsieur de Comminges, in order to procure a more powerful relief,
than that which they had tried before.

Scarce were they entered into the house, but the Irishman perceived them, and
calling them pretty loud, that he might be heard by all the company; "Come,
says he to them, Publish the miracle which has been effected in you, and make
your acknowledgments to that all puissant power, which has delivered you from
the wretched slavery under which ye groaned."

The wife immediately replied of her own head, That as for the testimony he
demanded of them, they were ready to give him one of the obstinacy of the
devils, but not of his skill. "For in truth, venerable father, added she; since
your (...) operation they have tormented us, as it were out of spite, more
violently then ever."

"You are incredulous, cried out our good Irishman in a wonderful passion, or
at least ungrateful, who maliciously deny those benefits ye have received.
Approach hither, approach; that I may convict you of incredulity, or malice.

When they came near him, he nicely examined all the lines of their faces. He
particularly observed their looks, and as if he had discovered in the apple of
their eyes some impression of these spirits; "you are in the right, says he,
all amazed; you are in the right they are not yet dislodged. They are too
deeply rooted in your bodies to surrender at the first summons, but they must
hold fast indeed, if the words I am going now to pronounce, don't eject them.

Leave, you accursed race, an habitation of repose too good for you, and go and
rave for ever in places, where dwell horror, madness, and despair.

It Is done, my friends, you are most certainly delivered: But return no more, I
entreat ye. I owe my time to all the world, and you have had as much of it as
comes to your share."

Now our patients supposed themselves at the end of all their misfortunes: This
day seemed as happy to them as the first of their marriage, and the night was
expected with the same impatience, as that of their nuptials had been formerly.
This night so much desired came, but alas! How ill did it answer their
expectations!

Too much love causes the shame of lovers, and I leave the reader to imagine
the great confusion of an adventure, Where excess of desire,
Does extinguish the fire.


'Twas happy for the husband, that his wife accused the devils that were
innocent; for she was now satisfied that our famous physician was a true
Irishman, who, for all his pretenses, had not skill enough to conjure down an
Ignis Fatuus. Sometimes she imputed to herself this nonperformance of her
husband, after the example of the Spanish women, who attribute to themselves,
in these occasions, the failings of their lovers; as being persuaded that the
force of their charms ought neither to submit to the infirmity of nature, nor
to the power of witchcraft.

Thus our wife, who accused her husband in every thing else, where he was most
innocent, justifies him where he was most deficient, in paying the conjugal
tribute; and rather chose to impute a want of love in him, to a want of charms
in herself, than to a real defect, which would prove eternally destructive of
her pleasures. But as a lady does not willingly entertain a thought that hurts
the interest of her beauty, she immediately recalled in her mind the malice of
the devils, and turned her confusion into anger against the Irishman, who had
not skill enough to eject them.

"We have, says she, with anger sparkling in her eyes, we have been too long
made fools of by this sorry Bogg-Trotter, but now I find that it is nonsense to
expect our deliverance from him. However it is not enough that we are
undeceived; justice obliges us to undeceive others as well as ourselves, and to
make known to the world, the roguery of these quacks."

"My dear, replied the husband, It Is undoubtedly true, that the misfortune of
this night is purely owing to our devils. The Irishman thought to banter, but
they resolved to ridicule him and us in their turn. You know me, and I know
myself; such a strange impotence could not naturally happen, I say it could not
naturally happen, and I dare swear there was witchcraft in the case. But my
dear, continued he, when you take the impostor to task, don't mention the
particulars; and let nothing slip, which may tend to our shame. All family
secrets ought to be concealed: But this in a more particular manner."

The wife had like to have relapsed into one of her old fits to see herself
suspected of such an indiscretion: But not to embroil things anew, that were
tending to a good accommodation, she promised so to manage herself, that none
but the Irishman should find fault with her.

We usually seek the night to conceal our shame, but the day here appeared to
disperse it; and these unhappy persons who were not yet well recovered of their
misfortune, got up with the sun, who enlivens all things, in hopes their
affairs would change for the better.

They rose out of their bed with more tranquillity, than they had found there,
and after a small breakfast, and a little conversation to fortify their bodies,
and reconcile their minds, they went in peace and good union toward the house,
whither they had gone twice with confidence, and from whence they had twice
returned without any relief. They received advice there, that the Irishman was
gone to St. James's to perform some wonders there, at the instance of Monsieur
d'Aubigny, so well known to all the world, for one of the most agreeable men
that ever was* Behold then some of the prodigies which I remarked at St.
James's, with less credulity than the multitude, and with less prejudice than
Monsieur d'Aubigny.

Already did the blind suppose they saw that light they did not see; already
did the deaf imagine they heard, and heard not; the lame already thought they
were grown well; and the impotent reassumed in imagination the first use of all
their limbs. A strong idea of health had made the sick forget their distempers;
and imagination which was no less active in the curious, than in the sick, gave
the first a false prospect through their desire of seeing, as it gave a false
cure to the second, through their desire of being cured.

Such was the power of the Irishman upon our minds: Such was the force of our
minds upon our senses. Thus nothing was talked off but prodigies; and these
prodigies came from so great an authority, that the astonished multitude
received them with submission, whilst some more knowing persons durst not
reject them by their knowledge.

A timorous and slavish knowledge always pays respect to an imperious and
authorized error: The soul was weak when the understanding was sound, and those
who saw best into these imaginary cures, durst not speak their real sentiments
among a prejudiced and deluded herd of believers.

Such was the triumph of the Irishman, when our couple courageously broke
through the crowd, to come and insult him in all his majesty. "Art not thou
ashamed, said the wife to him, to abuse the simple and credolous people as thou
do, by pretending to a power, which thou never had? Thou have enjoined our
devils to leave us in repose, and they have but torment^ed us the more for it.
Thou have commanded them to be gone, yet they still persecute us, not
withstanding thy orders, and equally deride our sottish credulity, and thy
ineffectual impotence."

The husband continued the same reproaches with the same contempt so far as to
refuse him the name of impostor, because there was need of capacity, said he,
for an impostor, and this miserable wretch wanted even that; which was only
supported by the superstitious belief people had of him, that spirits were at
his command.

Our prophet lost his speech with losing the authority which made him
venerable; and this formidable power, came to nothing, so soon as there
appeared persons bold enough to disown it; thus surpised, non-plust and
confounded, our Irishman withdrew, and went out at the back door.

His confusion extremely mortified the assembly, there being nothing that a man
receives with so much satisfaction, as the opinion of a miracle, nor leaves
with more difficulty and concern.

As for Monsieur d'Aubigny, he soon reckoned this prophet in the same class
with others, whom he had tried; being resolved for the future to keep to those
of the country, without any inclination to make use of new comers, merely
because they were strangers.

All the company retired, ashamed of their easiness to be abused, and yet
ve^^ed at the loss of their error. Our married couple, glorious and triumphant,
enjoyed the pleasures of victory, without any further thoughts of the devils;
and Monsieur d'Aubigny, who easily passed from one opinion to another, quitted
his former belief of our miracle-monger, to give himself the pleasure of
laughing with me, at what had happened.

At my breaking out into a sudden fit of laughter, the husband turned his head
toward us, and perceiving Monsieur d'Aubigny, he came civilly up to him to
excuse himself for what he had done in his house, without asking his
permission. Mr. d'Aubigny answered him very courteously, and gave him thanks,
not only for disabusing the public, but also for undeceiving himself in
particular.

The wife immediately took her part in the conversation, which did not render
it less agreeable; for although she was really extravagant, yet it was a sort
of extravagance which proceeded rather from her humor than her mind: But now
she took care to conceal it; and we talked of nothing but mirth and pleasantry,
when Mr. d'Aubigny entertained them with the gravest discourse in the world,
which I little expected.

"I am, says he, a person of an acknowledging temper, and should be ungrateful
if I did not draw you out of your error, after I have been obliged to you for
drawing me out of mine. As it was not enough for your own minds to torment you,
and that there must be something else besides a long marriage to give you that
uneasiness which has persecuted you so long. There is no man but is sometimes
at a loss with himself. Is it possible you should believe that you were
possessed with evil spirits? The wisest are weary of themselves, after they
have been weary of others: And would you have a husband and wife, who are
always of different minds, and different humors, to live eternally together
without disgust, without vexation, and without disputes? Believe me, sir, of a
hundred married couples, fourscore and ten at least are possessed, after your
fashion, without any of the devil's assistance to make them so. The only
difference I find between them and you is, that they suffer their misfortunes
with patience, and conceal them with discretion, whereas you importune heaven
and hell for yours, in laying your unhappiness on demons that are innocent, and
in seeking a supernatural assistance when there is no occasion for it."

What may pass for a real prodigy, was the sudden alteration in the husband and
his wife, upon the discourse of Mr. d'Aubigny; they looked upon themselves with
astonishment, ashamed of having been their own devils, when there was nothing
of possession, but only contrariety of humors in the case.

The husband was the first who returned from his confusion to give a thousand
thanks to Mr. d'Aubigny, for having given them the true knowledge of their
misfortune. "But, Replied the wife, does this knowledge make us er'e the less
unhappy? And don't we as much want a remedy against the torment of marriage, as
we thought we did against that of the devils?

When I observed M^. d'Aubigny ready to say something pleasant upon so merry a
subject, I had a mind to preserve to him the merit of a gravity, which was not
ordinary with him. Whereupon I immediately took up the discourse.

"Of all the remedies one can use to alleviate the troubles of marriage, I know
none said I to them, more sure, nor more wisely practiced, than that of
believi^g one's self more happy than others; and to remain in this error, in
case one is mistaken in it. You will like an English proverb, better than all
the reasons I can allege to you, He that lives in this world without being
deceived, is an unhappy man. To convince you how far the pleasure of deceit
goes, the greatest of your enemies makes himself agreeable, when he imposes
upon you, and the best of your friends seldom undeceive you, but you are
offended with them.

Monsieur d'Aubigny, weary of his gravity, was now minded to end the
conference; and after the usual civilities at parting, every one returned to
his home, extremely well satisfied.

FINIS.
NEW PUBLICATIONS now selling at BELL's Book-Store next Door to St Paul's
Church, in Third Street, Philadelphia.
1 THE SEASONS, containing Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. With Poems on
several occasions. By James Thomson. To which are added, An accoun of the Life
and Writings of the Author.

2 PARADISE LOST. A POEM, in Twelve Books. Also PARADISE REGAINED. A POEM, in
Four Books To which are added, SAMSON AGONISTES: and Poems on several
Occasions* with the Mask of Comus. The Author JOHN MILTON, with the Life of the
Author. 2 vols.

3 The COMPLAINT; or NIGHT THOUGHTS on Life, Death, and Immortality, By the
Reverend EDWARD YOUNG, L L. D. To which are Added, A POETICAL PARAPHRASE on
Part of the Book of Job; and his POEM on the LAST DAY.

4 SELECT FABLES OF AESOP and other Fabulists. In Three Books. Containing,
First, Fables from the Ancients. Second, Fables from the Moderns Third,
Original Fables newly Invented. By ROBERT DODSLEY. With six Oriental Stories

5 SIX SKETCHES on the HISTORY of MAN* Containing, The Progress of Men as
Individuals. First, The Diversity of Men, and of Languages. Second, Of Food and
Population. Third, Of Property Fourth, The Origin and Progress of Commerce.
Fifth, The Origin and Progress of Arts. Sixth, The Progress of the Female Sex.
By HENRY HOME, Lord KA^M^

6 HORAE ^YRICAE Poems chiefly of the Ly^^c Kind. In Three Books. Sacred First,
To Dev^^^on and Pi^^y. Second, To Virtue, Honor and Friendship. Third, To the
Memory of the Dead. by ISAAC WA^TS, D. D

7 The B^TTLE OF BUNKER's HILL. A Dramatic Piece, of five Acts, in heroic
Measure. By a Gentleman of Maryland.

8 The DEATH OF GENERAL MONTGOMERY, in Storming the City of Quebec. A T^^ged^
With an Ode in honor of the Pennsylvania Mili^ia, and the small ba^d of
reg^l^^ Continental Troops, who sustained the C^mpaign, in the (...) of Winter,
January, 1777, and repulsed the British Forces from the Banks of the Delaware.
By the Author of a Dramatic ^iece, on the Battle of Bunker's Hill. To which are
added, EL^G^AC P^ECES, commemorative of dis^ingu^shed Characters. By different
Gentlemen.

9 The BLIND BEGGAR of Bethnal Green. A Dramatic Performance: With several
Instructive and Entertaining Pieces. By ROBERT DODSLEY, Author of the Original
Fables.

10 SELECT ESSAYS: Containing, The manner of raising and dressing Flax, and
Hemp. Also, the whole Method of Bleaching or whi^^ning Linen Cloth. Likewise,
Observations on the Management of Cows and Sheep. The Manner of raising
Radishes, Turnips, Cabbage and other such Plants. And an Enquiry, concerning
the Ma^erials that may be used in making Paper. With (...) Dissertations on
other useful Subjects. Collected from the (...) of Arts and Sciences, and from
various modern Authors.

BOOKS in Physic, Surgery, and Chemistry, now selling at BELL's BOOK-STORE.
1 NEUMAN's Chemical Works, with large Editions, containing the later
Discoveries and Improvements made in Chemistry, and the Arts depending thereon.
By William Lewis. M. B.

2 Cullen's Lectures on the Materia Medica.

3 Ve^^ingus's Anatomy of the Body of Man, with large Copper Plates and
Explanations.

4 Van Helmont's, Ortus Medicinae. Id est, Initia Physicae Inaudita.
Progressuss Medicinae novus, in Morborum Ultionem, ad Vitam Longam.

5 Pringle's Observations on the Diseases of the Army.

6 Van Swieten on the Diseases incident to Armies, with Northcote, Ranby, and
Jones on Gunshot Wounds and Fractures.

7 Quincy's Complete English Dispensatory.

8 The London Dispensatory in English, with Remarks by Pemberton.

9 Salmon's London Dispensatory, with the Practice of Chemistry.

10 Marty^ and Chambers's Philosophical History and Memoirs of the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Paris: Containing, Papers relating to Natural
Philosophy. 3 vols.

11 Quincy's Medicinal Dictionary.

12 Sharpe's Operations of Surgery,

13 Wins^ow's Anatomical Exposition of the Structure of the Human Body. 2 vols.

14 Alexander's Experimental Essays. I. On the external Application of
Antiseptics in Putrid Diseases. II. On the Doses and Effects of Medicines. III
On Diuretics and Sudorifics.

15 Lind's two Papers on Fevers and Infection.

16 A Treatise on the Virulent Gonorrhoea.

17 Warner's full and plain Account of the Gout, with new and important
Instructions for Relief.

18 Lind on the Nature, Causes, and Cure of the Scurvy.

19 Alberti Halleri Lineae Physiologiae.

20 Turner on the Venereal Disease, with his Discourse on Gleets.

21 Russel's Dissertation on the Use of Sea Water in the Diseases of the
Glands; with the Nature, Properties, and Uses of Mineral Waters.

22 Caroli Linnaei Species Plantarum. 2 Tom.

23 Lee's Introduction to Botany, according to the Linnaean System.

24 Van Swieten's Commentaries upon the Aphorisms of Boerhaave, concerning the
knowledge and cure of Diseases. 11 vols.

25 Rouppe's Observations on the Diseases incidental to Seamen.

26 Templeman's curious Remarks and Observations in Physic, Anatomy, Surgery,
Chemistry, Botany and Medicine.

27 Boerhaave's Elements of Chemistry, with curious and useful Notes, by
Strother.

28 Tournefort's Materia Medica, being a Description of simple Medicines
generally used in the practice of Physic, with their uses, virtues, and places
of growth; also the nature and use of Mini^ral Waters.

A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS
29 Paxton's Physico-Medical Directory for all who design to study and practice
Physic.

30 Freke's Essay on the Art of Healing.

31 Buchan's Family Physician.

32 Tissot's Advice to the People in general, with regard to their health; to
which is added the art of preserving Health: Containing the most important
rules of Physicians and Philosophers, by Dr. Mackenzie. 2 vols.

33 Duncan on the first principles of Physic. 2 vols.

34 Monro's Anatomy of the Human Bones, Nerves, and Lacteal Sac and Duct.

35 Douglas's comparative description of all the Muscles peculiar to a Man and
Woman.

36 Lemery 's Treatise of all sorts of Foods, both Animal and Vegetable: Also
of Drinkables.

37 Reflections Tirees de la Pratique sur les Plays d'Armes a Feupar Le Dran.

38 Le Dran's Reflections, drawn from practice on Gunshot wounds.

39 Aur. Corn. Cel^^ de Medicina Libri Octt. 2 Tom.

40 Boerhaave Aphorismi de Cognoscendis et Curandis Morbis.

41 Whytt's Essay on the virtues of Lime Water in the cure of the Stone.

42 Culpepper's Directory for Midwives: Being a guide for Women in their
Conception, Bearing, and Suckling their Children.

43 Cadogan's Essay upon Nursing, and the Management of Children, from their
Birth to three Years of Age.

44 The Ancient Physician's Legacy impartially surveyed, by Doctor Turner; With
a Discourse on Quick Silver.

45 Sermons upon Temperance and Exercise, by a Physician.

46 Hales's Natural History of Vegetation.

47 Floyer's Observations on the Pulse.

48 Brookes's General Practice of Physic. Vol. 1.

49 The Experienced Farrier for the Horses of Citizens, and Countrymen by
Markham. Jeffreys, and discreet Indians.

50 Surgeon Bartlet's Gentleman Farrier's Repository of elegant and approved
Remedies for the Diseases of Horses: Containing, the Surgical and Medical part
of Practical Farriery: Also, Directions for the proper Treatment of Horses,
after violent Exercise.

51 Lexicon Chymicum, per Johnson.

52 Secrets Revealed, being the greatest Treasure in Chemistry.

53 Culpepper's English Physician.

54 Culpepper's School of Physic.

55 Cockburn on the Nature, Cause, and Cure of the Gonorrhoea.

56 Van Helmont's Magnetic Cure of Wounds -- Nativity of Tartar in Wine --
Image of God in Man, being his Vision of the Soul -- Errors of Physicians
concerning Defluxions.

57 Monita et Praecepta Medica, per Mead.

58 Medical Essays and Observations, Published by a Society in Edinburgh. 5
vols.

At BELL's Book Store in Third-Street PHILADELPHIA, may be had* Great variety
of new and old Books in the Arts and Sciences; Likewise, Hebrew, Greek, Latin,
English and French Classics; With History, Divinity, Law, Plays, Novels; and
lnstructive Entertainment.
Among which are,

1 CHAMBERS's Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, 2 vols. 2 Johnson's large
Dictionary of the English Language, 2 vols. 3 Chambaud's French and English
Dictionary. 4 Boyer's Ro^al French and English Dictionary. 5 Smollet's History
of England, 4 vols. large Quarto. 6 Rapin's History of England, 2 vols. 7
Macau^ay's History of England, 3 vols. 8 Milton's and Bacon's History of
England, 3 vols. 9 S^ackhouse's History of the Bible, 2 vols. 10 Poole's
Annotations on the Bible, 2 vols. 11 Whitby on the New Testament, 2 vols. 12
Burkit on the New Testament. 13 Lock on St. Pau^'s Epist^^s. 14 Lock on Human
Understanding. 15 Mansfield's Law Reports, by Burrows, 3 vols. 16 Lord
Raymond's Reports, 3 vols. 17 Jacobs's Law Dictionary, 2 vols. 18 Wood's
Institutes of the Law. 19 Blackstore's Commentaries on the Law, 5 vols. 20
Justice of the Peace, by various Authors. 21 Hedericus, S^apu^a, and Grant's
Greek Lexicon. 22 Gouldman's, Cole's, and Young's Latin and English
Dictionaries. 23 Ba^ley's, Dyche's, and M^^tin's English Dictionaries. 24 The
Spectator, 8 vols. gi^t. 25 Plutarch's Lives, 6 vols. 26 Shakespeare's Works, 8
vols. 27 Sully's Memoirs, 5 vols. 28 Rollin's Ancient History, 10 vols. 29
Nature Displayed, 7 vols. 30 Lord Chesterfield's Letters, 4 vols. 31 Lives of
Great Men, by the British Plutarch, 12 vols. 32 Congreve's Works, 2 vols. 33
Garrick's Works, 3 vols. 34 Modern Miscellaneous Plays, 2 vols. 35 The Beauties
of Nature and Art Displayed, 14 vols. 36 Rollin's Belles Lettres, 4 vols. 37
Sterne's Works, 5 vols. 38 Hervey's Works, 6 vols. 39 Moliere's Works, 6 vols.
40 The World, by Adam Fitz-Adam, 6 vols.
N. B. Books for Books are given in Exchange, or Ready Money for Old Books, by
ROBERT BELL; at his Book-Store, next Door to St. Paul's Church, in
Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA.


