THE DOWNFALL OF JUSTICE; AND THE FARMER just returned from Meeting on
THANKSGIVING DAY.

A COMEDY, (...) acted in CONNECTICUT.

(...) SECOND EDITION is annexed, (...) by Way of An ADDRESS to a (...) on his
petitioning JUPITER for an (...) of his Circumstances.

DANVERS: Printed and Sold by E. Russell, next the Bell-Tavern. The (...) are
desired to remember he still continues to (...) Linen Rags, (...), and
Weaver's (...)

PLATE I. The DI^TRESSED (...).
The (...) suffer.

My dear Chil^dren (...) ^eart (...) for you, it is (...) of my power to (...)

Mamma, I want bread.



PLATE II. A Company of ENGROSSERS, or EXTORTIONERS, who were once Poor
TRADESMEN.
I shall have a fine haul amongst these Fellows.

Hitherto we have had a fine haul, a new Law now.

D -- m the New Law, I Will take no Permit.

D -- m the old shoes, I Will work no more! it is easier living this way.

I Have cleard more in 6 mo. than if I had worked at my trade 60 years.

PLATE III. The FARMER, who has thrown down JUSTICE and refuses selling the
Necessaries of Life.
That Is right I shall soon have you safe.

I Will take none of your money, must have salt or molasses.

Must barter be your theme, thou Extortioner!

PLATE IV. The SOLDIER in the Field doing duty.
I serve my country for sixteen pence per day, pinched with cold.

These d -- d Extortioners are the worst enemies to the country.

Keep up courage, my boys, we will soon bring these Villains to terms.

PLATE V. The FARMER'S FARM.
Any (...) ^o sell? for noth^ng b^t go^d*

PLATE VI. The FARMERS dining on THANKSGIVING DAY.
Pity the Poor (...)



In more than civil war while Patriots storm,
While genius is but cold, their passions warm;
While public good aloft, in pomp they wield,
And private interest skulks behind the shield.
A FARMER just returned from Meeting on THANKSGIVING DAY.
PROLOGUE.
[TO night the Muse attempts to show
The Miser and the awkward Beau;
Where Dan. and Joth. together join,
On sumptuous dish with Father dine.
While Mother she the table sets,
Both Sal. and Mat. assist her next;
Next Lion he puts in his clame,
And Mother thinks him much to blame*
She in a passion gives a kick,
Father he being fond of Jack,
Permitted the poor puppy in,
To lap the gravy spilt -- quite clean.
Master and Jack always agreed,
He taught him well to say his creed,
And all the words that ever they had,
Was Paper Money's being bad.
Master insists and makes it so,
That Paper Money would not do*
Jack he insists, and says no more,
But such examples hurts the Poor.]
FARMER. JACK, take care of the horses, give 'em some of that best rowen,


JACK. Yesse, Sir.


JONATHAN. Well, how does Father do -- and all your folks? -- It Is quite cold.


FARMER. Why thank ye child* how do you do? -- Mat. Draw a mug of cider, put a
good stout pepper-pad in it, heat it well -- I feel quite chilly myself. Why I
have got good cider enough; and this year intend to take care often. Why
Jonathan I have been offered five dollars a barrel, and wouldn't look at it, it
will fetch me fifteen in the spring.


JONATHAN. Yes, Father, that it will, and that will not be near so dear as rum is
now in town: I am glad we can say this of the town folks, that we a^e even with
them now, only that we should have six Continental dollars for a load of wood;
I Will sell no more for five, I know.


FARMER. Never fear, never fear, Jonathan, the times are now in our hands, and
if we don't improve this opportunity I don't see which way in the world we
could ever answer to ourselves with a good conscience. -- Hem. Daughter Sarah
my service to ye.


SARAH. Thank'e, pray Father.


JOTHAM. Father your health; Mother yours; herest'e all. [Drinks.] This is
right down good cider as ever man needs drink.


SARAH. Yes, Jotham, it is, and Mother's pudding looks charming too.


MAT. Come Father, dinner's ready.


WIFE. Come, You, do sit down, all sit down, sit down, the pudding will get
cold, and then 'twill be good for nothing.


FARMER. Well, come let us crave a bles^sing. [The Farmer proceeds to crave a
blessing* in the run of which he pities the poor and needy throughout the world.]


WIFE. Come cut for yourselves, I am quite ashamed of my pudding; I think it is
the poorest that ever I made; however I don't care, as the times is I believe
the town folks would jump at a bit on it poor as it is.


SARAH. Why it is said that scornful dogs sometimes jump* at a dirty pudding.


WIFE. Why Sarah! I Am sure my pudding is not dirty, I never was reckoned a slut
in all my life.


SARAH. Oh Mother! I don't mean ^o, only that the town folks used to scorn
every thing but the best, but now they would be glad even of a crust of your
pudding. I expect some of them along tomorrow or next day begging as the
Indians used to do the day after thanksgiving. I cannot but laugh to see how
foolish they will look. -- He! he! he!


WIFE. Ha! ha! ha! It would be a pretty sight too, Sarah. Ha! ha!


FARMER. Ha! ha! ha! Well, I cannot but laugh too. Ha! ha! ha! Draw another mug
of cider; take two cups with you.


JACK. Well Masser, I don't tink it is fair ting when poor fok he canno get no
noting in he belly; Masser every ting, I do ^o no what Masser mean; he pray, he
pray, he (...) Lord he pity poor ebery where; he no g^v^, he no selle; What he
du? Masser got (...) enuf, wheat enuf, cider enuf, ebery ting enuf; Jack he
trash, he trash, dis bin full, dat bin full, ebery bin full, poor fok he no
let have, what he du, what poor fok du* ah Masser! Jack pity poor fok.


FARMER. Why you black Bastard, have not you victuals enough to stop your mouth?


JACK. Yesse, Sir, only pity poor fok cause he got no round dollar.


DAN. Well, what is that to you whether it is round or square so you live well?
There Is a hundred mechanics don't live half so well as you do. --


JACK. I no dat, Masser.


WIFE. I do wish our Jack would mind his own business, and not be always a
talking of things that don't concern him at all.


FARMER. Come Wife, bring on the goose, else I sha'n't have no room for it; I Have
been obliged to unbutton to let in the beef. -- Come, who among you can
remember the text? -- Take care! don't grease my Sabbath Day coat, You.


JOTHAM. I cannot remember the chap^^r exactly, Father, but I think the words
was (...)* A ^ab of dove's dung was sold for -- I f^rget* for how much -- but
our Minister preached quite a good sermon, and stuck (...) down* well to his
text.


(...). I thought he seemed greatly (...) but my child was so tensome* and
(...) such a noise, I coud'n't tell head nor ^^ll of the (...), only that he
had one (...)*


FARM^^* (...) was that daughter Sarah?


SARA^. (...) this, pray Father, that He (...) people shall curse (...).


DAN. Does that mean so, Father? I think (...) heard Father say that (...)
would not sell any if they were to live on (...) as the Irish (...)*


FARMER. Why children* children* don't you know there is a spiritual meaning to
(...) which we have heard to day? [(...)] He (...) hem! -- why when Joseph's
(...) down into Egypt to buy (...) carried silver and (...) hem! -- and corn
was sold for nothing else in scripture times. Hem! -- now the true scriptural
meaning is hum -- why that if poor people come and bring me hard money* -- hem!
and I refuse them, why then I Am to be cursed, but if they have no hand money --
hem! -- I Am not obliged to let them have any. I choose to go always by the true
meaning of the bible, boys.


DAN. I think I have heard Father say, that a square dollar was as good as a
round one, and I do really think it is, if we would do what our Hartford paper
tells us, I don't remember much on it though; but think he called it, A Looking
Glass.


FARMER. A^! well I remember something often to -- why I Will tell ye, Dan; I have
said that it was as good to pay rates with as any, but nothing more; I have got
enough for that -- why should we be a spending our breath about that which will
be of no service to us. Come let us dismiss the table.


WIFE. Ay true enough You, I think it is very needless; do return thanks.
Children be still. [Here he proceeds, etc.]


FARMER. Well, boys, I feel mightily refreshed. Come Dan. Joth, come, go out to
the barn along with me, and see the oxen I intend to st^ll feed this year,
better I believe you never saw.


JOTHAM. Come so we will, Father. Come Dan.


Ex^^^nt* DAN. Comes on then.


MAT. Well, sister Sarah, now Father's gone I Will tell you what.


SARAH. Well what?


MAT. Didn't you see our Lion get hold of the goose's tail? Mother fetched him
a good kick: Father rolled his eyes, but c'u'dn't speak, because he was making
a beginning. He! he! he!


SARAH. Well I should laughed too if (...) had seen it. He! he! he! Be still!
Father's coming.


FARMER. Well, girls, how do you feel after dinner? Come make room! the boys
and I have been out to see my oxen, better you never saw, Dan. Say, Joth. don't
you think they will fetch me five pounds a hundred next spring*


DAN. Yes, Father, that they will, if the town folks don't rise and take them
away, and I am bloody 'fraid they will; and if they should I doubt but the
authority would justify them in it.


FARMER. Why so, why so, Dan?


DAN. Because the most of 'em an't able to buy at that price.


WIFE. That would be a fine thing for them to come and take our things without
liberty from us.


FARMER. If they should I would flail 'em.


JOTHAM. Well, Father, I believe I must go.


FARMER. Jack, fetch up the horse.


JACK. Yesse, Masser.


FARMER. Come boys, sit down; let us have one good song before you go, and part
in peace, as we ought to do on Thanksgiving-Day.


JOTHAM. Well, that is done Father; do begin, and Dan. and I will sing chorus --
what say Dan?


DAN. With all heart.


FARMER. Comes on then.


JOTHAM. Father, be short, I want to go.


FARMER. Ay, ay -- mind the chorus. He, he, him.

A Cabe of dove's dung on a time it was sold,
For nothing more short than silver and gold;
Silver and gold, silver and gold,
For nothing short of silver and gold.
No, but Jack would persuade and make us think so,
That I am to blame and you my sons too,
You my sons too, you my sons too,
That I am to blame and you my sons too
But now to conclude and I bid you good night*
I wish you well home, and so a good night:
So a good night, so a good night,
I wish you well home and then a good night.

END OF THE COMEDY
A FABLE, By way of an ADDRESS to a COUNTRYMAN, on his petitionin^ JUPITER for
an Amendment of his Ci^^^mstances.
Not published in the FIRST EDITION.
HAVE you a friend, look round and spy,
So fond, so prepossessed as I?
(...) faults, so obvious to mankind,
My partial eyes could never find.
When, by the breath of fortune blown,
Your airy castles were overthrown,
Have I been over prone to blame,
(...) mortified your hours with shame?
(...) I ever known to damp your spirit,
Or twit you with the want of merit?
It Is not so strange that fortune's frown,
Still perseveres to keep you down.
Look round, and see what others do.
Would you be rich and honest too?
Have you, like those she raised to place,
Been opportunely mean and base?
Have you, as times requi^'d, resigned
Truth, honor, virtue, peace of mind?
If these are scruples, give her over;
Write, practice m^^als, and be poor.
The gifts of fortune truly rate;
Then tell me what could mend your state,
If happiness on wealth were built,
Rich rogues might comfort find in guilt,
As grows the Mis^r's hoarded store,
His fears his wants increase the more.
Think, Peasant, what ^ay'n't be the case,
Should fortune take you into grace,
Would that your happiness augment?
What can she (...) beyond content?
Suppose yourself a we^lthy heir,
With a vast annual income cle^r;
In all the affluence you possess
You might not feel one care the less;
Might you not then, like others, find,
With change of fortune change of mind?
Perhaps, profuse beyond all rule,
You might start (...) a glaring fool;
Your luxury might break all bounds*
Plate, table, horses, stewards, hounds,
Might well your debts; then, lust of play
No regal income can defray.
Sunk is all credit, writ^ assail,
And doom your future life to jail.
Or were you dignified with power,
Would that avert one pensive hour!
You might give avarice its swing,
Defraud a nation, blind a king:
Then, from the hirelings in your cause
Though daily fed with false applause,
Could it a real j^y impart?
Great guilt knew never joy at heart.
I^ happiness your point in view?
(I mean the intrinsic and the true)
She nor in camps or courts resides,
Nor in the humble cottage ^ides;
Yet found alike in eve^^ sph^re;
Who finds content, will find her there.
O'erspent with ^oil, beneath the shade
A Peasant rested on a sp^de.
Good Gods, he cries, it is hard to bear
This load of life from year to year!
Soon as the morning streaks the skies,
Industrious labor bids me rise;
With sweat I earn my homely fare,
And every day renews my care.
Jove hea^d the discontented strain,
And thus rebuked the murmuring swain.
Speak out your wants then, honest friend,
Unjust complaints the Gods offend*
I^ you repine at partial fate,
Instruct me what could mend your state,
Mankind in every station see.
What wish you? Tell me what you would be.
So s^id, upborn upon a cloud,
The Peasant saw the anxious crowd.
You face of care, says Jove, behold;
His bulky bags are filled with gold;
See with what joy he counts it over!
That sum today has swelled his store
Were I that man, the Pe^s^nt ^^y'd,
What bl^ssing could I ask beside?
Hold, says the God; first learn to know
True happiness from outward show.
Th^s optic glass of intuition --
Here, take it, view (...) condition
He looked, and saw the Miser's breast,
A troubled ocean, never at rest;
Want ever stares him in the face,
And fear anticipates disgrace:
With conscious guilt he saw him start,
Extortion gnaws his throbbing heart,
And never, or in thought or dream,
His breast admits one happy gleam.
May Jove, he cries, reject my prayer,
And guard my life from guilt and care*
My soul abhors that wretch's fate.
O keep me in my humble state!
But see, amidst a gaudy crowd,
You Minister so gay and proud,
On him what happiness attends,
Who thus rewards his grateful friends*
First take the glass, the God replies,
Man views the world with partial eyes.
Good Gods! exclaims the startled wight,
Defend me from the hideous sight!
Corruption, with corrosive smart,
Lies cank'ring on his guilty heart;
I see him, with polluted hand,
Spread the contagion over the land,
Now avarice with insatiate jaws,
Now rapine with her harpy claws,
His bosom tears. His conscious breast,
Groans with a load of crimes oppressed.
See him, mad and drunk with power,
Stand tottering on ambition's tower:
Sometimes, in speeches vain and proud,
His boasts insult the nether crowd*
Now, seized with giddiness and fear,
He trembles lest his fall is near.
Was ever wretch like this, he cries*
Such misery in such disguise!
The change, O Jove I disavow,
Still be my lot the spade and plough.
He next, confirmed by speculation
Rejects the Lawyer's occupation:
For he the Statesman seemed in part,
And bore similitude of heart.
Nor did the Soldier's trade inflame
His hopes with thirst of spoil and fame:
The miseries of war he mourned,
Whole nations into deserts turned.
By these have laws and rights been braved;
By these was freeborn man enslaved:
When battles and invasion cease,
Why swarm they in the lands of peace?
Such change, sa^s he, may I decline;
The scythe and civil arms be mine!
Thus, weighing life in each condition,
The Clown withdrew his rash petition.
When thus the God. How mortals err!
If you true happiness prefer,
It Is to no rank of life confined,
But dw^lls in every honest mind.
Be justice then your sole pursuit,
Plant virtue, and content's the fruit.
So Jove, to gratify the Clown,
Where first he found him set him down
FINIS.

