Divine judgments upon tyrants: And compassion to the oppressed. A SERMON,
PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, APRIL 20th, 1778. In commemoration of the MURDEROUS WAR
and RAPINE, inhumanly perpetrated, by two brigades of British troops, in that
town and neighborhood, on the NINETEENTH of APRIL, 1775.

BY JACOB CUSHING, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in WALTHAM.

According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries,
recompense to his enemies. ISAIAH lix. 18. Say to them that are of a fearful
heart, be strong, fear not; behold! your God will come with vengeance, even
with a recompense he will come and save you. IBID. XXXV. 4.
MASSACHUSETTS-STATE; BOSTON: PRINTED BY POWARS AND WILLIS. M,DCC,LXXVIII.

Divine judgments upon tyrants: And compassion to the oppressed.
DEUTERONOMY, XXXII. 43. REJOICE, O ye nations, with his people, for he will
avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries;
and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.
THAT there is a GOD, "is the prime foundation of all religion." We should
therefore employ our utmost diligence to establish our minds in the steadfast
belief of it. For when once we have firmly settled in our minds the belief of
GOD'S being, it will mightily influence all our powers of action; it will
invite our hope, alarm our fear, and address to every passion within us, that
is capable of persuasion, and be in us a never-failing source of devotion and
religion.

A GOD without a providence, is a solitary kind of being, and affords but
gloomy apprehensions. For it is by his providence that all intercourse between
GOD and his rational creatures is maintained, -- therein he exercises and
displays his perfections, -- therein his power executes the contrivances of his
wisdom, and his wisdom plans the methods of his goodness and grace, which open
to the view and admiration of the wise and good, through successive ages and
generations.

BUT that branch of providence, which, in a peculiar manner, demands our
attention on this occasion, and should excite our gratitude, is GOD'S
uninterrupted government of the rational part of his creation, -- mankind in
particular. For as all government, so the divine, supposes laws, and laws
suppose rewards and punishments, of which intelligences only are capable.

SINCE, therefore, GOD interests himself in the affairs of mankind, and the
universal administration of his providence extends to all his works, a large
field opens for the employment of our contemplative minds. And we are naturally
led to consider this divine government, as respecting communities; the affairs
whereof are important, and upon which the order and felicity of the world
greatly depend.

GOD is the sovereign of the world, and disposes all things in the best manner.
All blessings and calamities, of a public nature, and the revolutions of
kingdoms and states, are to be viewed as under the special direction of heaven.
Hence the scripture says, that GOD "increases the nations, and destroys
them, he enlarges the nations, and straitneth them again -- sometimes he
blesses them, so that they are multiplied greatly; again, they are minished,
and brought low, through oppression, affliction, and sorrow."

THESE truths being necessarily interwoven with religion, and extensively
useful under the varying scenes of life, and mysteries in providence -- the
main design of the present discourse, is to awaken our attention to the
passages of divine providence -- and lead us to a religious improvement of
GOD'S hand, in the tragical events that took place on the nineteenth of April,
1775. I mean the MURDEROUS WAR, rapine and devastation of that day, which we
are now met to commemorate.

UNDER this visitation, or the greatest trials imaginable, we have abundant
consolation, that GOD rules in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of this earth.

THE words but now read, may be, perhaps, not unfitly applied to us, for
comfort and encouragement under GOD'S chastisements, and his usual conduct
toward the enemies of his church and people: -- "Rejoice, O ye nations, with
his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render
vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his
people." These are the concluding words of Moses his song, which sets forth
GOD'S works of mercy and judgment toward the children of Israel, his covenant
people. And though, in their primary meaning, they respect that nation only,
yet they may be accommodated and fairly applied to GOD'S faithful and obedient
people, at all times, and in all ages; inasmuch as the latter part of the
prophecy reaches unto the latter days, and is not yet wholly fulfilled.

SOME interpret the former part of the verse thus, -- "Rejoice ye nations, who
are his people," supposing it to be a prophecy of the Gentiles becoming one
body with the people of Israel; -- because Moses had supposed in this song,
great enmity between them, and that sometimes they had sorely plagued Israel;
as at others, GOD rendered to them according to what they had done unto his
people: but now breaks out in a rapture of joy, to think that they should one
day be reconciled, and made one people of GOD.

THE prophecy then before us, is not limited to the Israelites; but may be
understood as extending to all GOD'S chosen, though oppressed and injured
people, in all generations, -- that he will recompense their wrongs -- plead
their cause -- and do justice upon their enemies. And taking it in this
latitude, we may collect several things from it, as worthy our notice, and
pertinent to this occasion. Accordingly I observe,

First, THAT GOD, in the righteous administrations of his providence, permits
the sons of violence to oppress his saints and people; and, in their malice and
rage, to attempt their ruin, by waging war with them.

GOD is a being of infinite power and inflexible justice, as well as consumate
wisdom; and does according to his sovereign pleasure, in the paternal and moral
world. He overrules all things for his own glory, and in subordination to
that, has a particular regard to the happiness of his covenant people: -- His
church and chosen are not without mistakes and errors, in this imperfect state
-- hence they are prone to degenerate and transgress -- to be too regardless of
GOD, and deficient in their obedience -- nay, to be guilty of great wickedness.
And it becomes necessary, to punish such revolters from the ways of GOD, and
purity of manners. Hence, when the all-wise GOD designs the chastisement and
reformation of his backsliding people, he "visits their transgressions with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes," -- and uses those methods, that shall
best promote his moral government; inflicting this or that judgment, as pleases
him. The divine providence then is to be devoutly acknowledged in all events,
in all public evils and calamities.

SOMETIMES there are visible marks of GOD's anger and displeasure against his
people. Their counsels are divided, and their strength impaired -- their
enemies are permitted to distress and injure them -- or they have been
harrassed by the will and conduct of ambitious, designing men, who have
contributed to the ruin of their country, even at the same time they pretend a
mighty zeal for its interest: -- Or, they are scourged by haughty tyrants and
cruel oppressors: -- Yet the hand of GOD, and his overruling providence is to
be acknowledged in these things, as much as when a people suffer by famine,
pestilence, earthquakes, storms and tempests, etc. which are commonly regarded
as the more immediate tokens of GOD's anger, and works of his providence.

IN all public evils, calamities and distresses of GOD's people, He in his
providence, proceeds according to equal rules, and for wise and salutary
purposes. Hence the promises of temporal blessings made to the Israelites, in
case of their obedience to the divine commandments, and the threatenings of
temporal evils and plagues denounced against them, in case of their
disobedience, recited in Levit. XXVI, and Deuteronomy. XXVIII chapters; related
chiefly to them as a body politic, because with regard to the public, they
always took place. When religion and virtue flourished among them, and they
walked in obedience to the divine laws, they prospered, were successful in
their wars, had great plenty, and all things conducive to their welfare and
happiness.

BUT when they revolted from GOD, and were generally corrupt and dissolute,
they were (...) miserable, and a prey to their jealous and envious neighbors.
And it may be noted, in general, that when public calamities were inflicted
upon them, whether by the more immediate hand of Heaven, as drought,
pestilence, famine, and the like; or, by instruments in providence, as the
hands of their enemies and oppressors; it was always as a just punishment for
their national iniquities; their idolatry, irreligion and abounding wickedness.
And upon their repentance and reformation, these calamities were removed, and
their prosperity restored.

NOR was this course of providence peculiar to the Jews. The established rule
of the divine procedure toward nations is ascertained in Jer. XVIII, 7, etc.
"At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them. -- And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to build, and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight,
that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I
would benefit them."

WE are assured, in the oracles of truth, that 'Righteousness exalts a
nation; but sin,' i. e. abounding vice and wickedness, "is a reproach to any
people." And with regard to mankind in all ages, may it not be said, that when
a people have been remarkable for justice, temperance, industry, and zeal for
the public good, they have prospered in all their affairs, and been high in
reputation? And, perhaps, no instance can be produced of a nation's being given
up to exterminating judgments and calamities, so long as virtue, probity and
religion flourished among them. But when falsehood and perfidy, injustice and
general corruption, with a contempt of religion, have generally prevailed among
them, they have fallen into many calamities, and been deprived of those
advantages they so much abused.

THUS GOD, in a variety of ways, may correct and punish his degenerate people;
and, among others, permit enemies to oppress them, shed blood in their land,
and lay them waste.

IT by no means reflects upon the righteousness of GOD, that those whom he
employs as instruments in the execution of his judgments upon a revolting,
sinful people, are themselves chargeable with injustice and cruelty; and have
nothing in view but the gratifying their own ambition, avarice and lust of
power. And commonly they who are the authors, or perpetrators of such violence
and severity upon a people, are afterward, in GOD's time, justly punished in
their turn, for their vices, their pride, wantonness and barbarity.

WHEREFORE, if we make a religious improvement of such dispensations, we shall
resolve all into the good pleasure of Him, who is "higher than the highest,"
and has the absolute disposal of all in his hands. And however undeserving we
may be of such unrighteous treatment from men, our fellow-mortals; yet we are
to adore the great -- the wise -- the powerful GOD, -- humble ourselves under
his mighty hand, -- accept the punishment of our sins, -- learn righteousness,
-- patiently bear the indignation of the Lord, and quietly submit to his
providence; and, while his judgments are upon us, repent and reform, confide
in his almighty power, hope in his mercy, and plead his compassion and the
riches of his grace, that in his own way and time, which is the fittest, we may
see his salvation. Pass we, therefore,

Secondly, To observe, the dispensations of heaven toward oppressors and
tyrants, the enemies of GOD's people. "For he will avenge the blood of his
servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries," -- none shall hinder
his proceedings, to be fully avenged of them.

HE is the supreme Lord, governor and judge of the world, therefore will he
chastise offenders; to him belongs vengeance, -- therefore the wicked shall
not go unpunished.

THE enemies of GOD's church and people, are GOD's adversaries. "The Lord's
portion is his people, -- he keeps them as the apple of his eye" -- verses 9,
10, of the context. Whoever grieves or afflicts them, provokes GOD, for they
are "his peculiar treasure." And having a singular concern for them, he will be
their shield and their defense, however they may be persecuted by their
enemies. "For the Lord shall judge his people;" verse 36. i. e. plead their
cause, and deliver them from the oppression of their enemies; as this phrase is
frequently used in the book of Psalms. He will have mercy upon his servants,
and turn his hand, which punishes them, upon their adversaries.

THUS utter destruction is denounced upon Edom, for their unnatural enmity
against the Jews, and cruelty toward their brethren, in Obad. ver. 10, "For
thy violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall
be cut off forever."

To confirm our faith and hope in GOD, in troublous times, in days of darkness
and misery, it may be proper to look back, and devoutly contemplate that most
signal act of divine providence, that when the primitive religion which had
been derived from the beginning, was in danger of being lost among men, and the
world became generally involved in gross superstition and idolatry, it pleased
GOD to single out a nation from the rest of mankind, and to erect them into a
sacred polity, set apart by their fundamental constitution for the profession
and worship, the faith and obedience of the one true GOD, in opposition to the
worshipping idols or false deities, and to the worshipping the true GOD by
images. The more effectually to awaken the attention of mankind, and to give
the more illustrious confirmation to that church constitution, it was wisely
ordered, that in the founding and establishing of it, there were repeated and
amazing exertions of the power of GOD.

AND the whole of that dispensation was admirably so contrived, as to prepare
the way for a more spiritual and perfect state of the church, which was to
succeed it, and was to be more universally diffused; in the founding of which,
providence interposed in a yet more remarkable manner, by a series of most
astonishing events.

THROUGH the powerful influence of a wise providence, events that were designed
for the destruction of the church, have been made subservient to its greater
stability. Thus Haman's malicious, revengeful plot, which threatened utter ruin
to the Jewish nation and religion, was most marvellously overruled to
contribute to the confirmation thereof.

LIKEWISE the christian church, though the world ever was an enemy to it, has
been firmly established: It has been maintained against cruel persecution, and
the greatest violence. -- And though continually burning, it has not been
consumed, -- though tossed with tempests, and worried by its oppressors and
adversaries, frequently passing through the furnace of affliction; yet it
retains a form more bright and beautiful, as of the spouse of Christ, and the
joyful mother of children, which no man can number.

INDEED churches are not perfect or complete; they are apt to decline and
transgress; -- nothing therefore can be more equal and fit, than that GOD
should, in his holy providence, manifest his righteous displeasure against
backsliding churches that have fallen from (...) the power and purity of
religion, into a state of (...).

(...) happen that, in times of persecution, bloodshed and ^^ar, the church may
be reduced in its members, (...) the remnant may become more refined, holy and
heavenly. The faith and patience of the saints be more exercised, their zeal
and piety more eminent, and practical godliness more gloriously appear. And
then, in due season, GOD raises his church and people from their afflicted and
oppressed state, and rendereth vengeance to their adversaries and persecutors.
Thus Babylon of old was punished for her cruelty and oppression of the Jewish
church. And thus shall it likewise be in the case of mystical Babylon; which,
after having been long suffered to prevail, and to "make war with the saints of
the most High," shall have a mighty downfall, wherein the vengeance and justice
of almighty GOD, shall be illustriously displayed; of which we have a striking
description in XVIII. chap. of the Revelation.

AND that we may be established in the faith of the prophecy before us, that
GOD "will avenge the blood of his servants," and execute "vengeance upon their
adversaries," we may advert to the animating promise of our blessed Savior, in
the parable of the unjust judge, who, neither fearing GOD nor regarding man,
was nevertheless prevailed on by the continual cries of the widow, to do her
justice against her adversary; our Lord adds, And shall not GOD avenge his own
elect? -- Will he not much more be moved to vindicate his chosen and dearly
beloved people, that cry to him day and night, under the cruel oppression of
their insulting enemies, even though he may seem to bear long with them, to
give them space for repentance? I tell you, he will certainly vindicate them,
and when once he undertakes it, he will do it speedily too." Herein, "our
condescending Lord only intended to intimate, that if the repeated, importunate
cries of the afflicted, may at length prevail even upon an inhuman heart, they
will be much more regarded by a righteous and merciful GOD, who is always ready
to bestow his favors, when he sees we are prepared to receive them. We may
rely upon it, that GOD will vindicate his saints. Let this encourage them,
though the rod of the wicked may for a while rest on them -- and let it
intimidate the proud oppressors of the earth, who, in the midst of all their
pomp and power, are so wretched, as to have the prayers of GOD's people against
them."

WE have encouragement then, to hope in GOD, that he will build up Zion -- that
he will appear still for us, under all our distresses and oppression -- that he
will avenge the innocent blood of our brethren, inhumanly shed in the beginning
of the present unjust war -- that he will render vengeance to his and our
adversaries -- and one day restore tranquillity to our country -- that he will
make our land "a quiet habitation," when we may view it in perfect peace, and
free from all fears of hostile invasions. For, to use the words of the prophet
Isaiah, "The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our King,
he will save us." Hence we are naturally led, in the last place, to observe
from the concluding words of my text.

Thirdly, THE kindness and compassion of GOD, to his penitent, praying and
obedient people: "And will be merciful unto his land, and to his people."

THOUGH GOD chastise his people with the rod of his hand, or permit enemies to
oppose and oppress them, yet he will remember his holy covenant, and show
compassion to them, upon their humiliation and repentance. This is illustrated
in Neh. ix chap. wherein the Levites make a religious confession of GOD's
goodness, and the Israelites wickedness -- greatly provoking GOD by their
disobedience and rebellion against him, and contempt of his law; Therefore, as
in verse 27, "Thou deliveredst them into the hands of their enemies, who vexed
them, and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou
heardest them from heaven; and according to thy manifold mercies thou gave
them saviors, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies."

GOD will not "cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance:
The Lord will not cast off forever -- but though he cause grief, yet will he
have compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies." He will arise, and
have mercy upon Sion, when the set time to favor her, is come.

To represent the perpetual love of GOD to his church and people, the prophet
Isaiah utters himself in this rapturous strain, "Sing, O heaven, and be joyful,
O earth, and break forth into singing. O mountains, for GOD has comforted his
people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted" -- chap. XLIX. 13. And speaking
of their deliverance at last, says, ver. 26. "And I will feed them that
oppress thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own
blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know that I the Lord, am thy
Savior, and thy redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob."

THE intention of GOD's severe dispensations being not the destruction of his
people, but their amendment, it becomes them to acknowledge his hand, confess
and forsake their sins, and importunately seek to him for needed salvation. --
Hence, we are frequently exhorted in scripture to repentance, as the surest way
to obtain mercy from GOD; Job v. 17. "Behold, happy is the man whom GOD
corrects; therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty -- For he
makes sore, and binds up, he wounds, and his hands make whole. He shall
deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven, there shall no evil touch thee. In
famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword."

THE corrections of his hand are the scourges of a faithful GOD, who retains
not his anger forever, because he delights in mercy. To this purpose we have
a more general exhortation to repentance, in Hos. VI. I. "Come, and let us
return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten,
and he will bind us up." The same GOD that punishes us, can only remove his
judgments, and show us mercy. GOD will "speak peace to his people, and to his
saints, if they return not again to folly -- Surely his salvation is nigh them
that fear him."

AND the church of Christ, notwithstanding all oppression and persecution,
shall one day break forth as the morning, clear as the sun, fair as the moon,
and triumph over all its potent, cruel adversaries; even when the glorious
things spoken of her, in the latter days, shall be accomplished; --
corresponding to the prophecy of Isaiah, chap. lx. wherein describing the Jews
restoration from captivity, takes occasion therefrom to represent the glories
of Christ's kingdom, which began upon the first publication of the gospel, but
will not be completed 'till the fullness of Jews and Gentiles are come into
the church; and faith, "Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting
nor destruction within thy borders: Thy sun shall no more go down, neither
shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light,
and the days of thy mourning shall be ended: Thy people also shall all be
righteous; they shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the
work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one shall become a
thousand, and a small one a strong nation: -- I the Lord will hasten it in his
time."

FROM the proceeding discourse, in connection with our context, arise the
following truths, for instruction and improvement of the dispensations of
heaven; and therefore proper for our meditation on the present occasion. As,

THAT we should extol the Lord of heaven and earth, who is possessed of
glorious perfections, which render him the only fit object of our religious
worship.

THAT we should acknowledge the infinite power of our GOD, and his sovereign
dominion over all; and give honor and service to none other.

THAT his works of providence, no less than of creation, are most perfect;
since he does nothing without the greatest reason, and according to the rules
of exact justice.

THAT we are ignorant of the methods and reasons of GOD's judgments, that take
place in the world.

THAT all the evil, and all the good, that befalls any man, or the whole
church, proceeds from the just and equal administrations of divine providence.

THAT in GOD we may find a sure refuge, at all times, for he is in one mind,
and changes not.

THAT He will render vengeance to his adversaries, and do justice to the
enemies of his church.

THAT he will be merciful to his people, his humble, penitent, praying people,
and will, in his own way and time, avenge the blood of his servants.

THAT therefore we have abundant cause to rejoice with his people; and to yield
cheerful and constant obedience to him.

THESE hints might be profitably enlarged upon; but I must leave the more
particular improvement of them, to your own private meditations; and fall in
closer with the design of this anniversary, which is to keep in mind a solemn
remembrance of the origin of the present MURDEROUS WAR, and more especially of
the innocent blood wantonly shed around this sacred temple; and the subsequent
slaughter and desolation by British troops, on that memorable day, APRIL
NINETEENTH, one thousand, seven hundred, seventy-five: A day religiously to be
regarded by all professed christians.

THE distress and anxiety of the inhabitants of this town, and the adjacent,
arising from the singular and horrid scenes of that dismal and dark day, though
diminished by time, can never be effaced in the human breast.

WITH compassion and tender sympathy, we renew the sorrow and lamentation of
the bereaved, for their deceased friends and relatives, who then fell a
sacrifice, bled and died, in the cause of GOD and their country, by the sons of
violence, and (...) of murderers, -- as multitudes have fallen since in our
land, -- whose blood we hope in GOD, he will speedily and righteously avenge,
and restore peace and tranquillity.

THE all-interesting events of that day, -- that distressing day, have been
painted in lively colors, by my worthy Brother: The Rev. Mr. Clark, in his
printed Sermon, preached (...) 19, 1776, and his annexed ^^^artial narrative.
-- and the leading steps, or rather stretches of parliamentary power, and
hasty strides of British ministerial vengeance, to reduce Americans to
submission and object slavery (as introductory to this unjust and ruinous war)
have been set in a striking point of light, by my Rev. Father, The Rev. Mr.
Cook, in his printed Sermon, preached April 19, 1777.
-- who have gone before me in this lecture.

NOTHING new therefore, can be suggested by me on this occasion. -- I have only
to stir up your pure minds, by way of remembrance, of the transactions of that
awful day; to excite your devotion, and to recommend a religious improvement of
GOD'S righteous dispensations then, and through three revolving years now
completed.

IN pursuance of their oppressive measures (if not intentionally to begin the
barbarous and bloody scene) the enemy came upon us like a flood, stealing a
march from Boston, through by-ways, under the darkness and silence of the
night; and like cowards and robbers, attacked us altogether defenseless; and
cruelly murdered the innocent, the aged and helpless. Accordingly they are
described by the prophet as persons whose hands are defiled with blood; --
adding, "their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their
hands. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood;
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their
paths."

WITH astonishment and gratitude we recollect the kindness of our almighthy
Preserver, that no more were slain by the hand of violence; and that the people
willingly offered themselves to the help of the Lord against the mighty, who
manfully opposed the efforts of British pride, power and barbarity. -- The hand
of GOD was visible in these things; and the power and goodness of GOD
manifested in our deliverance, from the enraged, disappointed enemy, is to be
devoutly retained in memory, and thankfully acknowledged. When we consider, how
weak and unprepared we were at that time, for such a sudden assault, (though
the behavior of the British troops might have led us to expect hostile
measures would ensue Witness their numerous insults to the inhabitants of town
and country: -- And their warlike preparations, and formidable fortifications
on Boston-Neck, and at the entrance of the town, erected in (...))
we may, not unfitly, adopt the words of the Psalmist, concerning the church of
old; in Ps. 124, whererein she blesses GOD for a miraculous deliverance from a
formidable enemy; I say we may apply the words in the beginning of the Psalm,
to ourselves and circumstances, with a little variation; "If it had not been
the Lord, who was on our side, now may New England say: If it had not been the
Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us; then they had swallowed
us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us," and began to break out
in fierceness: -- In their furious rage they would have suddenly devoured us,
and laid waste the country.

BUT blessed be GOD, to whose infinite mercy we ascribe our deliverance, who
was then a present help. These barbarous savage enemies were put into fear;
they were made to flee before us, and hastily to retreat (as wild beasts to
their dens) before a few scattered undisciplined Freemen: From the best
accounts it appeared, that not more than 300 of these, were, at any time
properly engaged with the two British brigades, (in their flight from (...) to
Charlestown.) near 2000 strong.
Not to our courage or conduct, but to GOD's name be all the praise and glory.

A close attention to the occurrences in this unnatural war, from its rise to
the present time, affords us great occasion to sing of GOD's mercy, (...)
rejoice with his people; -- and likewise to (...) and tremble before the Lord,
that his anger is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

IF this war be just and necessary on our part, as past all doubt it is, then
we are engaged in the work of the Lord, which obliges us (under GOD mighty in
battle) to use our "swords as instruments of righteousness, and calls us to the
shocking, but necessary, important duty of shedding human blood; not only in
defense of our property, life and religion, but in obedience to him who has
said, "Cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood."

HERE I shall take occasion, to address the companies of militia in this town;
Under the command of Capt. John (...)
our Brethren, now under arms. My Friends, Having early distinguished
yourselves in a readiness to promote the common good, and safety of your
country; by opposing, with others, its invaders, and the murderers of your
brethren in this town and neighborhood, on that day we are now commemorating:
-- You escaped the arrows of death, when perhaps equally exposed, as those that
were cut off by the hand of violence: To the GOD of your life, and who was
then, in a peculiar sense, your preserver, defense and shield, you owe
everlasting love and obedience.

YOU were spared, it may be, further to signalize yourselves, and to do yet
greater service for GOD and your bleeding country, which calls aloud to you,
and all its hearty friends, to rouse and exert themselves, for the destruction
of the common enemy and oppressor; and to wipe away the blood wherewith this
land has been stained. To arms! To action, and the battle of the warrior! is
the language of divine providence; and you have every motive imaginable to
awaken, and excite you to be up and doing the work of the Lord faithfully. --
The honor and glory of GOD, and the salvation of your country under GOD, call
aloud upon all. -- Duty, interest, liberty, religion and life, every thing
worth enjoyment, demand speedy and the utmost exertions.

CULTIVATE, my friends, a martial spirit, strive to excel in the art of war,
that you may be qualified to act the part of soldiers well; and, under
providence, be helpful in vanquishing and subduing the enemies of GOD and this
people; and be numbered among those who shall be worthy to wear the laurels of
victory and triumph.

ABOVE all, let me recommend and urge it upon you to strive for a more
honorable and shining character; I mean, that of true christians, good soldiers
of JESUS CHRIST; and to fight manfully under his banner, as the high priest of
your profession, and great captain of your salvation. Then whatever service he
shall call you to, or sufferings allot you; -- wherever he shall lead, you will
cheerfully follow, -- be ready to face the enemy and every danger, and meet
death with calmness and intrepidity, wherever arrested, and be conquerors
through Him.

WE wish you, and all our friends and brethren, called to bear arms, and
jeopard their lives in defense of their country, and support of the common
rights of mankind, the presence of GOD, and a blessing this day, from the house
of the Lord, all grace and good in time, and glory everlasting.

FINALLY, Let us all devoutly worship and honor, fear and serve the Lord of
hosts, and GOD of armies; hearken to his word, and seriously attend to every
providence. -- Let us continue our fervent cries to GOD, and offer up
importunate, unceasing supplications to the most High, to "avenge the blood of
his servants," -- and be "merciful to" this "his land, and to his people." We
are encouraged to this from the providence and promises of a powerful and
faithful GOD. -- The repeated successes during this calamitous war, from its
beginning to the present day, have been great and wonderful; and give us
confidence in GOD, and hope of a happy conclusion, if we amend our ways and
doings. Our enemies, indeed, have been permitted to make great destruction in
diverse parts of our land (in their rage and cruelty unequalled) who have
attempted, with fire and sword, to spread desolation far and wide. Among many
instances, may be mentioned the burning of Charlestown, Falmouth, Norfolk,
Kingston: -- The rapine and devastation in New York and the Jersies; and their
unparalleled treatment of the inhabitants there, both for inhumanity and
debauchery. -- To which may be added, their murdering our friends, whom the
fortune of war put into their hands; I mean their starving them to death;
inhumanity more than savage! And to complete their accursed plan, they have
hired and let loose upon us the Indians, to scalp and butcher of every age and
sex, to plunder and lay waste wherever they came: All this has been acted by
Britons, who glory in their valor and humanity.
-- For as they began the war with a mean, dastardly spirit, so they have
prosecuted it, in all their measures, with a rigor and barbarity, exceeding
the savages of the wilderness; yet, through the interposition of heaven, they
have been frustrated in their grand design, defeated and disgraced.

IN various instances, particularly in the last campaign, a merciful GOD has
crowned our arms, with singular success and victory; Our army in the Northern
Department, was remarkably successful in diverse actions; particulary on the 7th
October, in which they attacked the lines of the enemy, and drove them from
their works, killing and captivating several of their principal officers, and
many privates; gaining great advantages. On the 17th October, 1777, Lieut. Genesis
Burgoyne surrendered himself, and his whole army into the hands of the brave
Major General Gates, at the head of well-disciplined continental troops, and
intrepid militia of New England.
enabling us to destroy and break up a whole army, under one of the greatest
Generals, parhaps, that Britain can boast of. This is the Lord's doing, and
it is marvelous in in our eyes.

THE Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save. We may then confidently
put our trust in the living GOD, and refer our cause to him that judges
righteously, the cause of our oppressed and bleeding country -- insasmuch as
"he will be merciful to his land." We are assured, "The Lord loves the gates
of Sion:" That he "will bless his own inheritance;" And that when "the Lord
shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. He will regard the prayer of
the destitute -- the children of his servants shall continue, and their seed
shall be established before" him; and enjoy the tokens of the divine presence
among them.

THESE assurances of our covenant-GOD and Father, may well animate our spirits,
invigorate our faith, confirm our hope, and establish our confidence in him,
under the severest trials and miseries that befall us, in this day of calamity
and war.

WHETHER the prophecy and promise in our text, shall be accomplished, while we
of the present generation, are upon the stage of action; I known only to him,
who is the Lord of life and death. However, we may piously and cheerfully leave
the event to GOD. Whose righteoussness remains, and his faithfulness to all
generations.

I cannot conclude, without just hinting, that though we must necessarily
concern ourselves, in some degree, with the things of this present evil world,
so long as GOD shall protract our lives; yet our highest interest lies in
another region, far beyond this state of noise and war, danger and misery. And
whoever faithfully serves GOD and their generation here, in a wise improvement
of their talents, shall in the end, receive a crown of life, unfading and
eternal.

HERE is nothing, my hearers, nothing worthy your highest affection, and
unceasing pursuit. -- "All that comes is vanity." -- All things are liable to
change, and in perpetual uncertainty. Every thing tends to dissolution, and GOD
alone is invariable.

We are all children of mortality and must die out of this world. -- Blessed be
GOD, honor and immortality beyond the grave is ascertained by divine
revelation. Being called to glory by virtue, let us diligently and
conscientiously perform all the duties of our holy religion; labor to secure
our peace with GOD, through Jesus Christ our only Savior -- that we may be
perfect and complete in him, as our head.

THAT so, when contending powers and jarring nations on earth shall be removed
-- all kingdoms and states dissolved -- and all empire and dominion blotted
out, excepting His who is the first cause, and last end of all things: -- We
may have a place in the highest heavens; -- be admitted to dwell in GOD's
immediate presence -- and join the heavenly host in the warmest ascriptions of
blessing, and honor, and praise and glory to GOD and the lamb, for ever and
ever.

AMEN.
Erratum. P. 8, l. 16 -- for paternal read natural.


