THE COMPLAINT; OR NIGHT-THOUGHTS ON LIFE, DEATH, AND IMMORTALITY.

Norman (...)


THE COMPLAINT; OR NIGHT-THOUGHTS ON LIFE, DEATH, AND IMMORTALITY.

BY THE REVEREND EDWARD YOUNG, L L. D.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, A POETICAL PARAPHRASE ON PART OF THE BOOK OF JOB; AND HIS
POEM ON THE LAST DAY.

Of man's employs, the greatest should be this,
To find the road to -- EVERLASTING BLISS;
To aid the Christian who'd not walk in vain,
Here marks are fixed to make the journey plain.
Read then this work, the path is plainly shown,
The steps directed, and the way made known.
FLEETWOOD PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street.
MDCCLXXVII.

PREFACE
AS the occasion of this Poem was real, not fictitious, so the method pursued
in it, was rather imposed, by what spontaneously arose in the Author's mind, on
that occasion, than meditated, or designed. Which will appear very probable
from the nature of it. For it differs from the common mode of Poetry; which is,
from long narrations to draw short morals. Here, on the contrary, the narrative
is short, and the morality arising from it makes the bulk of the Poem. The
reason of it is, That the facts mentioned did naturally pour these moral
reflections on the thought of the writer.

A PANEGYRIC On Young's NIGHT-THOUGHTS, from Hervey's MEDITATIONS.
Death's terror is the mountain faith removes:
It Is faith disarms destruction. --
Believe, and look with triumph on the tomb.

THESE, and some other quotations, I am proud to borrow from the Night-Thoughts
especially from Night the Fourth. In which, energy of language, sublimity of
sentiment, and the most exquisite beauties of poetry, are the least perfections
to be admired. Almost every line glows with devotion; rises into the most
exalted apprehensions of the adorable Redeemer; and is animated with the most
lively faith in his all-sufficient mediation. The author of this excellent
performance has the peculiar felicity, of ennobling all the strength of style,
and every delicacy of imagination, with the grand and distinguishing truths of
Christianity. These thoughts give the highest entertainment to the fancy, and
impart the noblest improvement to the mind. They not only refine our taste, but
prepare us for death, and ripen us for glory. I never take up this admirable
piece, but I am ready to cry out. -- Tecun. vivere amem, tecum obeam libens; i.
e. Inspire me with such a spirit, and life shall be delightful, nor death
itself unwelcome.

Mrs. ROWE's Approbation of these Works, being the Dedication of her celebrated
Letters.
To the REVEREND DOCTOR YOUNG. SIR,
I HAVE no design in this Dedication, but to express my gratitude, for the
pleasure and advantage I have received from your POEM on the LAST JUDGMENT, and
the PARAPHRASE on part of the Book of JOB.

[His Night Thoughts were not published at this time.]

The Author of these letters is above any view of interest, and can have no
prospect of reputation, resolving to be concealed: But if they prove a serious
entertainment to persons whose leisure hours are not always innocently
employed, the end is fully answered.

The greatest Infidel must own, there is at least as much probability in this
scheme, as in that of the Fairy Tales, which however visionary, are some of
them moral and entertaining,

SIR, I am, Your most humble Servant, ELIZABETH ROW.

THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE FIRST. ON LIFE, DEATH, AND IMMORTALITY.
To the RIGHT HONORABLE ARTHUR ONSLOW, ESQUIRE. SPEAKER of the BRITISH HOUSE of
COMMONS.
TIRED nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep!
He, like the world, his ready visit pays
Where fortune smiles; the wretched he forsakes;
Swift on his downy Pinion flies from woe,
And lights on lids unsullied with a tear.
From short (as usual) and disturbed repose,
I wake: How happy they, who wake no more!
Yet that were vain, if dreams infest the grave.
I wake, emerging from a sea of dreams
Tumultuous; where my wrecked desponding thought,
From wave to wave of fancied misery,
At random drove, her helm of reason lost.
Though now restored, it is only change of pain,
(A bitter change!) severer for severe.
The day too short for my distress! and night,
Even in the Zenith of her dark domain,
Is sunshine, to the color of my fate.
Night, sable Goddess! from her Ebon throne,
In rayless majesty, now stretches forth
Her leaden scepter over a slumbering world.
Silence, how dead! and darkness, how profound!
Nor eye, nor listening ear, an object finds;
Creation sleeps. It Is as the general pulse
Of life stood still, and nature made a pause;
An aweful pause! prophetic of her end,
And let her prophecy be soon fulfilled;
Fate! drop the curtain; I can lose no more.
Silence and darkness! solemn sisters! twins
From ancient night, who nurse the tender thought
To reason, and on reason build resolve,
(That column of true majesty in man)
Assist me: I will thank you in the grave;
The grave, your kingdom: There this frame shall fall
A victim sacred to your dreary shrine.
But what are Ye? --
THOU, who did put to flight
Primaeval silence, when the morning stars,
Exulting, shouted over the rising ball;
O THOU, whose word from solid darkness struck
That spark, the sun, strike wisdom from my soul;
My soul, which flies to thee, her trust, her treasure,
As misers to their gold, while others rest.
Through this opaque of nature, and of soul,
This double night, transmit one pitying ray,
To lighten, and to cheer. O lead my mind,
(A mind that fain would wander from its woe)
Lead it through various scenes of life and death;
And from each scene, the noblest truths inspire.
Nor less inspire my conduct, than my song;
Teach my best reason, reason; my best will
Teach rectitude; and fix my firm resolve
Wisdom to wed, and pay her long arrear:
Nor let the phial of thy vegeance, poured
On this devoted head, be poured in vain.
The bell strikes one. We take no note of time,
But from its loss. To give it then a tongue,
Is wise in man. As if an angel spoke,
I feel the solemn sound. If heard aright,
It is the knell of my departed hours:
Where are they? With the years beyond the flood.
It is the signal that demands dispatch:
How much is to be done? My hopes and fears
Start up alarmed, and over life's narrow verge
Look down -- On what? A fathomless abyss;
A dread eternity! how surely mine!
And can eternity belong to me,
Poor pensioner on the bounties of an hour?
How poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
How complicate, how wonderful, is man?
How passing wonder HE, who made him such?
Who centred in our make such strange extremes?
From different natures marvelously mixed,
Connection exquisite of distant worlds!
Distinguished link in Being's endless chain!
Midway from nothing to the Deity!
A beam ethereal, sullied, and absorpt!
Though sullied, and dishonored, still divine!
Dim miniature of greatness absolute!
An heir of glory! A frail child of dust!
Helpless immortal! Insect infinite!
A worm! a God! -- I tremble at myself,
And in myself am lost! At home a stranger,
Thought wanders up and down, surpised, aghast,
And wondering at her own: How reason reels!
O what a miracle to man is man,
Triumphantly distressed! what joy, what dread!
Alternately transported, and alarmed!
What can preserve my life? or what destroy?
An angel's arm cannot snatch me from the grave;
Legions of angels cannot confine me there.
It Is past conjecture; all things rise in proof:
While over my limbs sleep's soft dominion spread,
What though my soul phantastic measures trod
Over fairy fields; or mourned along the gloom
Of pathless woods; or down the craggy steep
Hurled headlong, swam with pain the mantled pool;
Or scaled the cliff; or danced on hollow winds,
With antic shapes, wild natives of the brain?
Her ceaseless flight, though devious, speaks her nature
Of subtler essence than the trodden clod;
Active, aereal, towering; unconfined,
Unfettered with her gross companion's fall.
Even silent night proclaims my soul immortal:
Even silent night proclaims eternal day.
For human weal, heaven husbands all events;
Dull sleep instructs, nor sport vain dreams in vain.
Why then their loss deplore, that are not lost?
Why wanders wretched thought their tombs around,
In infidel distress? Are angels there?
Slumbers, raked up in dust, ethereal fire?
They live! they greatly live a life on earth
Unkindled, unconceiv'd; and from an eye
Of tenderness, let heavenly pity fall
On me, more justly numbered with the dead.
This is the desert, this the solitude:
How populous! how vital is the grave!
This is creation's melancholy vault,
The vale funereal, the sad Cypress gloom;
The land of apparitions, empty shades!
All, all on earth is shadow, all beyond
Is substance; the reverse is Folly's creed:
How solid all, where change shall be no more?
This is the bud of being, the dim dawn,
The twilight of our day, the vestibule;
Life's theater as yet is shut, and death.
Strong death, alone can heave the massy bar,
This gross impediment of clay remove,
And make us embryos of existence free.
From real life, but little more remote
Is he, not yet a candidate for light,
The future embryo, slumbering in his fire,
Embryos we must be, till we burst the shell,
Yon ambient azure shell, and spring to life,
The life of Gods, O transport! and of man.
Yet man, fool man! here buries all his thoughts:
Interrs celestial hopes without one sigh.
Prisoner of earth, and pent beneath the moon,
Here pinions all his wishes; winged by heaven
To fly at infinite; and reach it there,
Where Seraphs gather immortality,
On life's fair tree, fast by the throne of God.
What golden joys ambrosial clust'ring glow,
In HIS full beam, and ripen for the just,
Where momentary ages are no more!
Where time, and pain, and chance, and death, expire?
And is it in the flight of threescore years,
To push eternity from human thought,
And smother souls immortal in the dust?
A soul immortal, spending all her fires,
Wasting her strength in strenuous idleness,
Thrown into tumult, raptu^'d, or alarmed,
At aught this scene can threaten, or indulge,
Resembles ocean into tempest wrought,
To waft a feather, or to drown a fly.
Where falls this censure? It o'erwhelms myself;
How was my heart incrusted by the world!
O how self-fetter'd was my groveling soul!
How, like a worm, was I wrapped round and round
In silken thought, which reptile fancy spun,
Till darkened reason lay quite clouded over
With soft conceit of endless comfort here,
Nor yet put forth her wings to reach the skies!
Night-visions may befriend (as sung above):
Our waking dreams are fatal. How I dreamt
Of things impossible? (Could sleep do more?)
Of joys perpetual in perpetual change?
Of stable pleasures on the tossing wave?
Eternal sunshine in the storms of life?
How richly were my noontide trances hung
With gorgeous tapestries of pictured joys?
Joy behind joy, in endless perspective!
Till at Death's toll, whose restless iron tongue
Calls daily for his millions at a meal,
Starting I woke, and found myself undone.
Where now my phrensy's pompous furniture?
The cobweb'd cottage, with its ragged wall
Of mouldering mud, is royalty to me!
The spider's most attenuated thread
Is cord, is cable, to man's tender tie
On earthly bliss; it breaks at every breeze.
O ye blessed scenes of permanent delight!
Full, above measure! lasting, beyond bound!
A perpetuity of bliss is bliss.
Could you, so rich in rapture, fear an end,
That ghastly thought would drink up all your joy,
And quite unparadise the realms of light.
Safe are you lodged above these rolling spheres;
The baleful influence of whose giddy dance
Sheds sad vicissitude on all beneath.
Here teems with revolutions every hour;
And rarely for the better; or the best,
More mortal than the common births of fate.
Each moment has its sickle, emulous
Of Time's enormous scythe, whose ample sweep
Strikes empires from the root; each moment plays
His little weapon in the narrower sphere
Of sweet domestic comfort, and cuts down
The fairest bloom of sublunary bliss.
Bliss! sublunary bliss! -- Proud words, and vain!
Implicit treason to divine decree!
A bold invasion of the rights of heaven!
I clasped the phantoms, and I found them air.
O had I weighed it ever my fond embrace!
What darts of agony had missed my heart!
Death! great proprietor of all! it is thine
To tread out empire, and to quench the stars.
The sun himself by thy permission shines:
And, one day, thou shall pluck him from his sphere.
Amid such mighty plunder, why exhaust
Thy partial quiver on a mark so mean?
Why thy peculiar rancour wreak'd on me?
In^atiate archer! could not one suffice?
Thy shaft flew thrice; and thrice my peace was slain;
And thrice, ere thrice yon moon had filled her horn.
O Cynthia! why so pale? Do thou lament
Thy wretched neighbor? Grieve to see thy wheel
Of ceaseless change outwhirl'd in human life?
How wanes my borrowed bliss! from Fortune's smile,
Precarious courtesy! Not Virtue's sure,
Self-given, solar, ray of sound delight.
In every varied posture, place, and hour,
How widowed every thought of every joy!
Thought, busy thought! too busy for my peace!
Through the dark postern of time long elapsed,
Led softly, by the stilness of the night,
Led, like a murderer, (and such it proves!)
Strays (wretched rover!) over the pleasing past;
In quest of wretchedness perversely strays;
And finds all desert now, and meets the ghosts
Of my departed joys; a numerous train!
I rue the riches of my former fate;
Sweet comfort's blasted clusters I lament;
I tremble at the blessings once so dear;
And every pleasure pains me to the heart.
Yet why complain! or why complain for one?
Hangs out the sun his luster but for me,
The single man? Are Angels all beside?
I mourn for millions: It Is the common lot;
In this shape, or in that, has fate entailed
The mother's throes on all of woman born,
Not more the children, than sure heirs of pain.
War, famine, pest, volcano, storm, and fire,
Intestine broils, oppression, with her heart
Wrapped up in triple brass, besiege mankind.
God's image disinherited of day,
Here, plunged in mines, forgets a sun was made.
There, beings deathless as their haughty Lord,
Are hammered to the galling oar for life;
And plow the winter's wave, and reap despair.
Some, for hard masters, broken under arms,
In battle lopt away, with half their limbs,
Beg bitter bread through realms their (...),
If so the tyrant, or his minion, doom.
Want, and incurable disease, (fell pair!)
On hopeless multitudes remorseless seize
At once; and make a refuge of the grave
How groaning hospitals eject their dead!
What numbers groan for sad admission there!
What numbers, once in fortune's lap high-fed,
Solicit the cold hand of charity!
To sho^k us more, solicit it in vain!
Ye silken sons of pleasure! since in pains
You rue more modish visits, visit here,
And breathe from your debauch: Give, and reduce
Surfeit's dominion over you: But so great
Your impudence, you blush at what is right.
Happy! did sorrow seize on such alone.
Not prudence can defend, or virtue save;
Disease invades the chastest temperance;
And punishment the guiltless; and alarm,
Through thickest shades, pursues the fond of peace.
Man's caution often into danger turns,
And his guard falling, crushes him to death.
Not happiness itself makes good her name;
Our very wishes give us not our wish.
How distant often the thing we dote on most,
From that for which we dote, felicity?
The smoothest course of nature has its pains;
And truest friends, through error, wound our rest.
Without misfortune, what calamities?
And what hostilities, without a foe?
Nor are foes wanting to the best on earth.
But endless is the list of human ills,
And sighs might sooner fail, than cause to sigh.
A part how small of the terraqueous globe
Is tenanted by man! the rest a waste,
Rocks, deserts, frozen seas, and burning sands!
Wild haunts of monsters poisons, stings, and death.
Such is earth's melancholy map! But far
More sad! this earth is a true map of man.
So bounded are its haughty Lord's delights
To woe's wide empire; where deep troubles toss,
Loud sorrows howl, envenomed passions bite,
Ravenous calamities our vitals seize,
And threatening fate wide opens to devour.
What then am I, who sorrow for myself?
In age, in infancy, from others aid
Is all our hope; to teach us to be kind.
That, nature's first, last lesson to mankind;
The selfish heart deserves the pain it feels.
More generous sorrow, while it sinks, exalts;
And conscious virtue mitigates the pang.
Nor virtue, more than prudence, bids me give
Swollen thought a second channel; who divide,
They weaken too, the torrent of their grief.
Take then, O world! thy much indebted tear:
How sad a sight is human happiness,
To those whose thought can pierce beyond an hour?
O thou, whatever thou art, whose heart exults!
Would thou I should congratulate thy fate?
I know thou would; thy pride demands it from me.
Let thy pride pardon, what thy nature needs,
The salutary censure of a friend.
Thou happy wretch! by blindness thou art blessed;
By dotage dandled to perpetual smiles.
Know, smiler! at thy peril art thou pleased;
Thy pleasure is the promise of thy pain.
Misfortune, like a creditor severe,
But rises, in demand for her delay;
She makes a scourge of past prosperity,
To sting thee more, and double thy distress.
Lorenzo, fortune makes her court to thee.
Thy fond heart dances, while the Siren sings.
Dear is thy welfare; think me not unkind;
I would not damp, but to secure thy joys.
Think not that ^ear is sacred to the storm,
Stand on thy guard against the smiles of fate.
Is heaven tremendous in its frowns? most sure;
And in its favors formidable too:
Its favors here are trials, not rewards;
A call to duty, not discharge from care;
And should alarm us, full as much as woes;
Awake us to their cause, and consequence;
And make us tremble, weighed with our desert;
Awe Nature's tumult, and chastise her joys,
Lest while we clasp, we kill them; nay, invert
To worse than simple misery, their charms.
Revolted joys, like foes in civil war,
Like bosom friendships to resentment sour'd,
With rage envenomed rise against our peace.
Beware what earth calls happiness; beware
All joys, but joys that never can expire.
Who builds on less than an immortal base,
Fond as he seems, condemns his joys to Death.
Mine died with thee, Philander! thy last sigh
Dissolved the charm; the disinchanted earth
Lost all her luster. Where, her glittering towers?
Her golden mountains, where? all darkened down
To naked waste; a dreary vale of tears:
The great Magician's dead! Thou poor, pale piece
Of outcast earth, in darkness! what a change
From yesterday! thy darling hope so near,
(Long-labour'd prize!) O how ambition flushed
Thy glowing cheek! Ambition truly great,
Of virtuous praise. Death's subtle seed within,
(Sly, treacherous miner!) working in the dark,
Smiled at thy well-concerted scheme, and beckoned
The worm to riot on that rose so red,
Unfaded ere it fell; one moment's prey!
Man's foresight is conditionally wise;
Lorenzo! Wisdom into folly turns
Often, the first instant, its idea fair
To laboring thought is born. How dim our eye!
The present moment terminates our sight;
Clouds, thick as those on doomsday, drown the next;
We penetrate, we prophesy in vain.
Time is dealt out by particles; and each,
Ere mingled with the streaming sands of life,
By fate's inviolable oath is sworn
Deep silence, "Where eternity begins."
By Nature's law, what may be, may be now;
There Is to prerogative in human hours
In human hearts what bolder thought can rise,
Than man's presumption on tomorrow's dawn?
Where is tomorrow? in another world.
For numbers this is certain; the reverse
Is sure to none; and yet on this perhaps,
This peradventure, infamous for lies,
As on a rock of adamant we build
Our mountain hopes; spin out eternal schemes,
As we the fatal sisters could out-spin,
And, big with life's futurities, expire.
Not even Philander had bespoke his shroud.
Nor had he cause; a warning was denied:
How many fail as sudden, not as safe;
As sudden, though for years admonisht home?
Of human ills the last extreme beware,
Beware, Lorenzo! a now sudden death.
How dreadful that deliberate surprise;
Be wise today; it is madness to defer;
Next day the fatal precedent will plead;
Thus on, till wisdom is pushed out of life.
Procrastination is the thief of time;
Year after year it steals, till all are fled,
And to the mercies of a moment leaves
The vast concerns of an eternal scene.
If not so frequent, would not this be strange?
That it is so frequent, this is stranger still.
Of man's miraculous mistakes, this bears
The palm, "That all men are about to live,"
For ever on the brink of being born.
All pay themselves the compliment to think
They one day shall not drivel; and their pride
On this reversion takes up ready praise;
At least their own; their future selves applauds;
How excellent that life they never will lead!
Time lodged in their own hands is solly's vails;
That lodged in fate's, to wisdom they consign;
The thing they cannot but purpose, they postpone;
It Is not in folly, not to scorn a fool;
And scarce in human wisdom to do more.
All promise is poor dilatory man,
And that through every stage: When young, indeed,
In full content we, sometimes, nobly rest,
Un-anxious for ourselves; and only wish,
As duteous sons, our fathers were more wise.
At thirty man suspects himself a fool;
Knows it at forty, and reforms his plan;
At fifty chides his infamous delay,
Pushes his prudent purpose to resolve;
In all the magnanimity of thought
Resolves; and re-resolves; then dies the same.
And why? Because he thinks himself immortal.
All men think all men mortal, but themselves;
Themselves, when some alarming shock of fate
Strikes through their wounded hearts the sudden dread;
But their hearts wounded, like the wounded air,
Soon close; where past the shaft, no trace is found.
As from the wing no sear the sky retains;
The parted wave no furrow from the keel;
So dies in human hearts the thought of death.
Even with the tender tear which nature sheds
Over those we love, we drop it in their grave.
Can I forget Philander? That were strange;
O my full heart! -- But should I give it vent,
The longest night, though longer far, would fail,
And the Lark listen to my midnight song.
The spritely Lark's shrill Mati^ wakes the morn;
Grief's sharpest thorn hard pressing on my breast,
I strive, with wakeful melody, to cheer
The sullen gloom, sweet Philomel! like thee,
And call the stars to listen: every star
Is deaf to mine, enamored of thy lay.
Yet be not vain; there are, who thine excel,
And charm through distant ages: wrapped in shade,
Prisoner of darkness! to the silent hours,
How often I repeat their rage divine,
To lull my griefs, and steal my heart from woe!
I roll their raptures, but not catch their fire.
Dark, though not blind, like thee, Maeonides!
Or, Milton! thee; ah! could I reach your strain!
O^ ^is, who made Maeonides our own.
Man too he ^^^g: Immortal man I sing;
Often (...) my song beyond the bounds of life;
What, now, but immortality can please?
O had he pressed his theme, pursued the track,
Which opens out of darkness into day!
O had ^e mounted on his wing of fire,
Soared, where I sink, and sung immortal man!
How had it blessed mankind, and rescued me?
THE END OF THE FIRST NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE SECOND. ON TIME, DEATH, FRIENDSHIP.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF WILMINGTON.
"WHEN the cock crew, he wept" -- Smote by that eye,
Which looks on me, on all: that power, who bids
This midnight sentinel, with clarion shrill,
Emblem of that which shall awake the dead,
Rouse souls from slumber, into thoughts of heaven.
Shall I too weep? Where then is fortitude?
And fortitude abandoned, where is man?
I know the terms on which he sees the light;
He that is born, is listed; life is war;
Eternal war with woe. Who bears it best,
Deserves it least. -- On other themes I Will dwell.
Lorenzo! let me turn my thoughts on thee,
And thine, on themes may profit; profit there,
Where most they need. Themes, too, the genuine
Of dear Philander's dust. He, thus, though dead, [growth,
May still befriend -- What themes? Time's wondrous
Death, friendship, and Philander's final scene. [price,
So could I touch these themes, as might obtain
Thine ear, nor leave thy heart quite disengaged,
The good deed would delight me; half-impress
On my dark cloud an Iris; and from grief
Call glory -- Do thou mourn Philander's fate?
I know thou say it: says thy life the same?
He mourns the dead, who lives as they desire.
Where is that thrift, that avarice of TIME,
(O glorious avarice!) Thought of Death inspires,
As rumored robberies endear our gold?
O Time! than gold more sacred; more a load
Than lead, to fools; and fools reputed wise.
What moment granted man without account?
What years are squandered, Wisdom's debt unpaid?
Our wealth in days all due to that discharge.
Haste, haste, he lies in wait, he is at the door,
Insidious Death! should his strong hand arrest,
No composition sets the prisoner free.
Eternity's inexorable chain
Fast binds; and vengeance claims the full arrear.
How late I shudder'd on the brink! how late
Life called for her last refuge in despair?
That Time is mine, O Mead, to thee I owe;
Fain would I pay thee with eternity.
But ill my genius answers my desire;
My sickly song is mortal, past thy cure,
Accept the will; -- That dies not with my strain.
For what calls thy disease, Lorenzo! Not
For esculapian, but for moral aid.
Thou think it folly to be wise too soon.
Youth is not rich in Time, it may be, poor;
Part with it as with money, sparing; pay
No moment, but in purchase of its worth;
And what its worth, ask deathbeds; they can tell.
Part with it as with life, reluctant; big
With holy hope of nobler time to come;
Time higher-aim'd, still nearer the great mark
Of men and angels; virtue more divine.
Is this our duty, wisdom, glory, gain?
(These heaven benign in vital union binds)
And sport we like the natives of the bough,
When vernal suns inspire? Amusement reigns
Man's great demand: To trifle is to live:
And is it then a trifle, too, to die?
Thou say I preach, Lorenzo! it is confessed.
What, if, for once, I preach thee quite awake?
Who wants amusement in the flame of battle?
Is it not treason, to the soul immortal,
Her foes in arms, eternity the prize?
Will toys amuse, when medicines cannot cure?
When spirits ebb, when life's enchanting scenes
Their luster lose, and lessen in our sight,
As lands, and cities with their glittering spires,
To the poor shattered bark, by sudden storm
Thrown off to sea, and soon to perish there;
Will toys amuse? No: Thrones will then be toys,
And earth and skies seem dust upon the scale.
Redeem we time? -- Its loss we dearly buy.
What pleads Lorenzo for his high prized sports?
He pleads time's numerous blanks; he loudly pleads
The straw-like trifles on life's common stream.
From whom those blanks and trifles, but from thee?
No blank, no trifle, nature made, or meant.
Virtue, or purposed virtue, still be thine;
This cancels thy complaint at once; This leaves
In act no trifle, and no blank in time.
This g^eatens, fills, immortalizes all;
This, the blessed art of turning all to gold;
This, the good heart's prerogative to raise
A royal tribute, from the poorest hours;
Immense revenue! every moment pays.
If nothing more than purpose in thy power;
Thy purpose firm, is equal to the deed:
Who does the best his circumstance allows,
Does well, acts nobly; angels could no more.
Our outward act, indeed, admits restraint;
It Is not in things over thought to domineer;
Guard well thy thought; our thoughts are heard in heaven.
On all-important time, through every age,
Though much, and warm, the wise have urged; the man
Is yet unborn, who duly weighs an hour.
"I Have lost a day" -- The Prince who nobly cried,
Had been an emperor without his crown;
Of Rome? say, rather, Lord of human race:
He spoke, as if deputed by mankind.
So should all speak: So reason speaks in all:
From the soft whispers of that God in man,
Why fly to folly, why to frenzy fly,
For rescue from the blessings we possess?
Time, the supreme! -- Time is eternity;
Pregnant with all eternity can give;
Pregnant with all, that makes archangels smile.
Who murders time, He crushes in the birth
A power ethereal, only not adored.
Ah! how unjust to nature, and himself,
Is thoughtless, thankless, inconsistent man!
Like children babbling nonsense in their sports,
We censure nature for a span too short;
That span too short, we tax as tedious too;
Torture invention, all expedients tire,
To lash the lingering moments into speed,
And whirl us (happy riddance!) from ourselves,
Art, brainless art! our furious charioteer
(For nature's voice unstifled would recall)
Drives headlong toward the precipice of death;
Death, most our dread; death thus more dreadful made:
O what a riddle of absurdity!
Leisure is pain; takes off our chariot-wheels;
How heavily we drag the load of life!
Blessed leisure is our curse; like that of Cain,
It makes us wander; wander earth around
To fly that tyrant, thought. As Atlas groaned
The world beneath, we groan beneath an hour.
We cry for mercy to the next amusement;
The next amusement mortgages our fields!
Slight inconvenience! prisons hardly frown,
From hateful time if prisons set us free.
Yet when death kindly tenders us relief,
We call him cruel; years to moments shrink,
Ages to years. The telescope is turned.
To man's false optics (from his folly false)
Time, in advance, behind him hides his wings,
And seems to creep, decrepit with his age;
Behold him, when past by; what then is seen,
But his broad pinions swifter than the winds?
And all mankind, in contradiction strong,
Rueful, aghast; cry out on his career.
Leave to thy foes these errors, and these ills;
To nature just, their cause and cure explore.
Not short heaven's bounty, boundless our expense;
No niggard, nature; men are prodigals.
We waste, not use our time; we breathe, not live.
Time wasted is existence, used in life.
And bare existence, man, to live ordained,
Wrings, and oppresses with enormous weight.
And why? since time was given for use, not waste,
Enjoined to fly; with tempest, tide, and stars,
To keep his speed, nor ever wait for man;
Time's use was doomed a pleasure; waste, a pain;
That man might feel his error, if unseen:
And, feeling, fly to labor for his cure;
Not, blund'ring split, on idleness for ease,
Life's care's are comforts; such by heaven designed:
He that has none, must make them, or be wretched*
Cares are employments; and without employ
The soul is on a rack; the rack of rest,
To souls most adverse, action all their joy.
Here, then, the riddle, marked above, unfolds;
Then time turns torment, when man turns a fool.
We rave, we wrestle with great nature's plan;
We thwart the Deity; and it is decreed,
Who thwart His will, shall contradict their own:
Hence our unnatural quarrel with ourselves;
Our thoughts at enmity; our bosom broil;
We push time from us, and we wish him back;
Lavish of lustrums, and yet fond of life;
Life we think long, and short; death seek, and shun;
Body and soul, like peevish man and wife,
United jar, and yet are loath to part.
Oh the dark days of vanity! while here,
How ^asteless! and how terrible, when gone!
Gone? they ^e'er go; when past, they haunt, us still;
The spirit walks of every day deceased;
And smiles an angel, or a fury frowns.
Nor death, nor life delight us. If time past,
And time postest, both pain us, what can please?
That which the Deity to please ordained,
Time used. The man who consecrates his hours
By vigorous effort, and an honest aim,
At once he draws the sting of life and death;
He walks with nature; and her paths are peace.
Our error's cause and cure are seen: She next
Time's nature, origin, importance, speed;
And thy great gain from urging his career. --
All sensual man, because untouched, unseen,
He looks on time as nothing. Nothing else
Is truly man's; it is Fortune's. -- Time's a God,
Have thou never heard of Time's omnipotence?
For, or against, what wonders can he do!
And will: to stand blank neuter he disdains.
Not on those terms was Time (heaven's stranger!) sent
On his important embassy to man.
Lorenzo! no: on the long-destin'd hour,
From everlasting ages growing ripe,
That memorable hour of of wondrous birth,
When the dread Sire, on emanation bent,
And big with nature, rising in his might,
Called forth creation (for then Time was born),
By Godhead streaming through a thousand worlds?
Not on those terms, from the great days of Heaven,
From old eternity's mysterious orb,
Was Time cut off, and cast beneath the skies:
The skies, which watch him in his new abode,
Measuring his motions by revolving spheres;
That horologe machinery divine.
Hours, days, and months, and years, his children play,
Like numerous wings around him, as he flies:
Or, rather, as unequal plum^s they shape
His ample pinions, swift as darted flame,
To gain his goal, to reach his ancient rest,
And join anew Eternity his ^ire;
In his immutability to nest,
When worlds, that count his circles now, unhinged,
(Fate the loud signal sounding) headlong rush
To timeless night, and chaos, whence they rose.
Why spur the speedy? why with levities
New-wing thy short, short day's too rapid flight?
Know thou, or what thou do, or what is done?
Man flies from Time, and Time from man: too soon
In sad divorce this double flight must end:
And then, where are we? where, Lorenzo! then,
Thy sports? thy pomps? -- I grant thee, in a state
Not unambitious; in the ruffled shroud,
Thy parian tomb's triumphant arch beneath.
Has Death his fopperies? then well may life
Put on her plume, and in her rainbow shine.
Ye well-array'd! ye lilies of our land!
Ye lilies male* who neither toil, nor spin,
(As sister lilies might) if not so wise
As Solomon, more sumptuous to the sight!
Ye delicate! who nothing can support,
Yourselves most insupportable! for whom
The winter rose must blow, the sun put on
A brighter beam in Leo; silky-soft
Favonius breathe still softer, or be chid;
And other worlds send odours, sauce, and song,
And robes, and notions, framed in foreign looms!
O ye Lorenzos of our age! who deem
One moment unamus'd, a misery
Not made for feeble man who call aloud
For every bawble, drivell'd over by sense;
For rattles, and conceits of every cast,
For change of follies, and relays of joy,
To drag your patient through the tedious length
Of a short winter's day -- say, sages! say,
Wit's oracles! say, dreamers of gay dreams!
How will you weather an eternal night,
Where such expedients fail?
O treacherous conscience! while she seems to sleep
On rose and myrtle, lulled with siren song;
While she seems, nodding over her charge, to drop
On headlong appetite the slackened rein,
And give us up to license, unrecall'd,
Unmarkt; -- See, from behind her secret stand,
The sly informer minutes every fault,
And her dread diary with horror fills.
Not the gross act alone employs her pen;
She reconnoitres fancy's airy band,
A watchful foe! the formidable spy,
Listening, o'erhears the whispers of our camp:
Our dawning purposes of heart explores,
And steals our embryos of iniquity.
As all-rapacious usurers conceal
Their doomsday book from all consuming heirs;
Thus, with indulgence most severe, she treats
Us spendthrifts of inestimable Time;
Unnoted; notes each moment misapplied:
In leaves more durable than leaves of brass,
Writes our whole history; which Death shall read
In every pale delinquent's private ear;
And judgment publish; publish to more worlds
Than this; and endless age in groans resound.
Lorenzo, such that sleeper in thy breast!
Such is her slumber; and her vengeance such
For slighted counsel; such thy future peace!
And think thou still thou can be wise too soon?
But why on time so lavish is my song?
On this great theme kind nature keeps a school,
To teach her sons herself. Each night we die,
Each morn are born anew: each day, a life!
And shall we kill each day? if trifling kills:
Sure vice must butcher. O what heaps of slain
Cry out for vengeance on us! Time destroyed
Is suicide, where more than blood is spilt.
Time flies, Death urges, knells call, Heaven invites,
Hell threatens: all exerts; in effort, all;
More than creation labors! -- labors more?
And is there in creation; what, amidst
This tumult universal, winged dispatch,
And ardent energy, supinely yawns? --
Man sleeps; and man alone; and man, whose fate,
Fate irreversible, entire, extreme,
Endless, hair-hung, breeze-shaken, over the gulf
A moment trembles; drops! and man, for whom
All else is in alarm; man, the sole cause
Of this surrounding storm! and yet he sleeps,
As the storm rocked to rest. -- throw years away?
Throw empires, and be blameless. Moments seize;
Heaven's on their wing: a moment we may wish,
When worlds want wealth to buy. Bid day stand still,
Bid him drive back his car, and reimport
The period past, regive the given hour.
Lorenzo, more than miracles we want:
Lorenzo -- O for yesterdays to come!
Such is the language of the man awake;
His ardor such, for what oppresses thee.
And is his ardor vain, Lorenzo? no;
That more than miracle the Gods indulge;
Today is yesterday returned; returned
Full power'd to cancel, expiate, raise, adorn,
And reinstate us on the rock of peace.
Let it not share its predecessor's fate;
Nor like its elder sisters, die a fool.
Shall it evaporate in fume? fly off
Fuliginous, and stain us deeper still?
Shall we be poorer for the plenty poured?
More wretched for the clemencies of Heaven?
Where shall I find him? Angels! tell me where.
You know him: he is near you: point him out:
Shall I see glories beaming from his brow?
Or trace his footsteps by the rising flowers?
Your golden wings, now hovering over him, shed
Protection; now, are waving in applause
To that blessed son of foresight! Lord of fate!
That aweful independent on tomorrow!
Whose work is done; who triumphs in the past;
Whose yesterdays look backwards with a smile;
Nor, like the Parthian, wound him as they fly;
That common, but opprobrious lot! Past hours,
If not by guilt, yet wound us by their flight,
If folly bounds our prospect by the grave,
All feeling of futurity benumbed;
All God-like passion for eternals quenched;
All relish of realities expired;
Renounced all correspondence with the skies;
Our freedom chained; quite wingless our desire;
In sense dark-prison'd all that ought to soar;
Prone to the center; crawling in the dust;
Dismounted every great and glorious aim;
Embruted every faculty divine;
Heart-bury'd in the rubbish of the world.
The world, that gulf of souls, immortal souls,
Souls elevate, angelic, winged with fire
To reach the distant skies, and triumph there
On thrones, which shall not mourn their masters changed;
Though we from earth; ethereal, They that fell.
Such veneration due, O man, to man.
Who venerate themselves, the world despise.
For what, gay friend! is this eschutcheon'd world,
Which hangs out DEATH in one eternal night?
A night, that glooms us in the noontide ray,
And wraps our thought, at banquets, in the shroud.
Life's little stage is a small eminence,
Inch-high the grave above; that home of man,
Where dwells the multitude: We gaze around;
We read their monuments; we sigh; and while
We sigh, we sink; and are what we deplored;
Lamenting, or lamented, all our lot!
Is death at distance? No: He has been on thee;
And given sure earnest of his final blow.
Those hours, which lately smiled, where are they now?
Pallid to thought, and ghastly! drowned, all drowned
In that great deep, which nothing disembogues!
And, dying, they bequeathed thee small renown.
The rest are on the wing: How fleet their flight!
Already has the fatal train took fire;
A moment, and the world's blown up to thee;
The sun is darkness, and the stars are dust.
It Is greatly wise to talk with our past hours;
And ask them, what report they bore to heaven;
And how they might have borne more welcome news.
Their answers form what men experience call;
If wisdom's friend, her best; if not, worst foe.
O reconcile them! kind experience cries,
" There Is nothing here, but what as nothing weighs;
" The more our joy, the more we know it vain;
" And by success are tutored to despair."
Nor is it only thus, but must be so.
Who knows not this, though gray, is still a child.
Loose then from earth the grasp of fond desire,
Weigh anchor, and some happier clime explore.
Art thou so moored thou can not disengage,
Nor give thy thoughts a ply to future scenes?
Since, by life's passing breath, blown up from earth,
Light, as the summer's dust, we take in air
A moment's giddy flight, and fall again;
Join the dull mass, increase the trodden soil,
And sleep, till earth herself shall be no more;
Since then (as Emmets, their small world overthrown)
We, sore-amaz'd, from out earth's ruins crawl,
And rise to fate extreme of foul or fair,
As man's own choice (controuler of the skies!)
As man's despotic will, perhaps one hour,
(O how omnipotent is time!) decrees;
Should not each warning give a strong alarm?
Warning, far less than that of bosom torn
From bosom, bleeding over the sacred dead!
Should not each dial strike us as we pass,
Portentous, as the written wall, which struck,
Over midnight bowls, the proud Assyrian pale,
Ere-while high flusht with insolence, and wine?
Like that, the dial speaks; and points to thee,
Lorenzo! loath to break thy banquet up:
" O man, thy kingdom is departing from thee;
" And, while it lasts, is emptier than my shade."
Its silent language such: Nor need'st thou call
Thy Magi, to decypher what it means.
Know, like the Median, fate is in thy walls:
Do ask, How? Whence? Belshazzar-like, amazed?
Man's make incloses the sure seeds of death;
Life feeds the murderer: Ingrate! he thrives
On her own meal, and then his nurse devours.
But here, Lorenzo, the delusion lies;
That solar shadow, as it measures life,
It life resembles too: Life speeds away
From point to point, though seeming to stand still.
The cunning fugitive is swift by stealth:
Too subtle is the movement to be seen;
Yet soon man's hour is up, and we are gone.
Warnings point out our danger; Gnomons, time:
As these are useless when the sun is set;
So those, but when more glorious reason shines.
Reason should judge in all; in reason's eye,
That sedentary shadow travels hard.
But such our gravitation to the wrong,
So prone our hearts to whisper what we wish,
It Is later with the wise, than he is aware;
A Wilmington goes flower than the Sun:
And all mankind mistake their time of day;
Even age itself. Fresh hopes are hourly sown
In furrowed brows. So gentle life's descent,
We shut our eyes, and think it is a plain,
We take fair days in winter, for the Spring;
And turn our blessings into bane. Since often
Man must compute that age He cannot feel,
He scarce believes he is older for his years.
Thus, as life's latest eve, we keep in store
One disappointment sure, to crown the rest;
The disappointment of a promised hour.
On this, or similar, Philander! Thou
Whose mind was moral, as the Preacher's tongue;
And strong, to weild all science, worth the name;
How often we talked down the Summer's Sun,
And cooled our passions by the breezy stream!
How often thawed and shortened Winter's eve,
By conflict kind, that struck out latent truth,
Best found, so sought; to the recluse more coy!
Thoughts disintangle passing over the lip;
Clean runs the thread; if not, it is thrown away,
Or kept to tie up nonsense for a song;
Song, fashionably fruitless: such as stains
The fancy, and unhallowed passion fires;
Chi^^^^ her saints to Cytherea's fane.
Know (...) thou, Lorenzo! what a friend contains?
As Bees mixt^^^ctar draw from fragrant flowers,
So men from FRIENDSHIP, wisdom, and delight;
Twins tied by nature, if they part, they die.
Have thou no friend to set thy mind abroach?
Good sense will ^agnate. Thoughts shut up, want air,
And (...), like bales, unopen'd to the Sun.
Had thought been all, sweet speech had been denied;
Speech, thought's canal! speech, thought's criterion tool
Thought in the mine, may come forth gold, or dross;
When coined in word, we know its real worth.
If sterling, store it for thy future use;
'Twill buy thee benefit; perhaps, renown.
Thought, too, delivered, is the more possessed;
Teaching, we learn; and, giving, we retain
The births of intellect; when dumb, forgot.
Speech ventilates our intellectual fire;
Speech burnishes our mental magazine;
Brightens, for ornament; and whets, for use.
What numbers, sheathed in erudition, lie,
Plunged to the hilts in venerable tomes,
And rusted in; who might have borne an edge,
And played a sprightly beam, if born to speech;
If born blast heirs of half their mother's tongue!
It Is thought's exchange, which, like the alternate push
Of waves conflicting, breaks the learned scum,
And defecates the students standing pool.
In contemplation is his proud resource?
It Is poor, as proud, by converse unsustain'd.
Rude thought runs wild in contemplation's field;
Converse, the menage, breaks it to the bit
Of due restraint; and emulation's spur
Gives graceful energy, by rivals awed.
It Is converse qualifies for solitude;
As exercise, for salutary rest.
By that untutored, contemplation raves;
And Nature's fool, by Wisdom's is outdone.
Wisdom, though richer than Peruvian mines,
And sweeter than the sweet ambrosial hive,
What is she, but the means of happiness?
That unobtained, than folly more a fool;
A melancholy fool, without her bells.
Friendship, the means of wisdom, richly gives
The precious end, which makes our wisdom wise.
Nature, in zeal for human amity,
Denies, or damps, an undivided joy.
Joy is an import; joy is an exchange;
Joy flies monopolists: it calls for two;
Rich fruit! heaven planted! never plucked by one.
Needful auxiliars are our friends, to give
To social man true relish of himself.
Full on ourselves descending in a line
Pleasure's bright beam, is feeble in delight:
Delight intense, is taken by rebound;
Reverberated pleasures fire the breast.
Celestial happiness, whenever she stoops
To visit earth, one shrine the Goddess finds,
And one alone, to make her sweet amends
For absent Heaven -- the bosom of a friend;
Where heart meets heart, reciprocally soft,
Each other's pillow to repose divine.
Beware the counterfeit: in passion's flame
Hearts melt; but melt like ice, soon harder froze.
True love strikes root in reason; passion's foe:
Virtue alone entenders us for life:
I wrong her much -- entenders us for ever:
Of Friendship's fairest fruits, the fruit most fair
Is virtue kindling at a rival fire,
And, emulously, rapid in her race.
O the soft enmity! endearing strife!
This carries friendship to her noontide point,
And gives the rivet of eternity.
From Friendship, which outlives my former Themes,
Glorious survivor of old Time, and Death!
From Friendship, thus, that flower of heavenly seed,
The wise extract earth's most Hyblean bliss,
Superior wisdom, crowned with smiling joy.
But for whom blossoms this Elysian flower?
Abroad they find, who cherish it at home.
Lorenzo! pardon what my love extorts,
An honest love, and not afraid to frown.
Though choice of follies fasten on the great,
None clings more obstinate, than fancy fond
That sacred friendship is their easy prey;
Caught by the wafture of a golden lure,
Or fascination of a highborn smile.
Their smiles, the great, and the coquet, throw out
For others hearts, tenacious of their own;
And we no less of ours, when such the bait.
Ye fortune's cofferers! Ye powers of wealth!
Can gold gain friendship? Impudence of hope!
As well mere man an angel might beget.
Love, and love only, is the loan for love.
Lorenzo! pride repress; nor hope to find
A friend, but what has found a friend in Thee.
All like the purchase? few the price will pay;
And this makes friends such miracles below.
What if (since daring on so nice a theme)
I show thee friendship delicate, as dear,
Of tender violations apt to die?
Reserve will wound it; and distrust, destroy.
Deliberate on all things with thy friend.
But since friends grow not thick on every bough,
Nor every friend unrotten at the core;
First, on thy friend, delib'rate with Thyself;
Pause, ponder, sift; not eager in the choice,
Nor jealous of the chosen: Fixing, fix;
Judge before friendship; then confide till death.
Well, for thy friend; but nobler far for Thee;
How gallant danger for earth's highest prize!
A friend is worth all hazards we can run.
" Poor is the friendless master of a world:
" A world in purchase for a friend is gain."
So sung he (Angels hear that Angel sing!
Angels from Friendship gather half their joy)
So sung Philander, as his friend went round
In the rich Ichor, in the generous blood
Of Bacchus, purple God of joyous wit.
A brow solute, and ever-laughing eye.
He drank long health, and virtue, to his friend;
His friend, who warmed him more, who more inspired.
Friendship's the wine of life; but Friendship new
(Not such was his) is neither strong, nor pure.
O! for the bright complexion, cordial warmth,
And elevating spirit, of a Friend,
For twenty summers ripening by my side;
All feculence of falsehood long thrown down;
All social virtues rising in his soul;
As crystal clear; and smiling, as they rise!
Here Nectar flows; it sparkles in our sight;
Rich to the taste, and genuine from the heart.
High-flavour'd bliss for Gods! on earth how rare!
On earth how lost! -- Philander is no more.
Think thou the theme intoxicates my song?
Am I too warm? -- too warm I cannot be.
I loved him much; but now I love him more.
Like birds, whose beauties languish, half-conceal'd,
Till, mounted on the wing, their glossy plumes
Expanded shine with azure, green, and gold;
How blessings brighten as they take their flight!
His flight Philander took; his upward flight,
If ever soul ascended. Had he dropped,
(That eagle genius!) O had he let fall
One feather as he flew; I, then, had wrote,
What Friends might flatter; prudent foes forbear;
Rivals scarce damn; and Zoilus reprieve.
Yet what I can, I must: it were profane
To quench a glory lighted at the skies,
And cast in shadows his illustrious close:
Strange! the theme most affecting, most sublime,
Momentous most to man, should sleep unsung!
And yet it sleeps, by genius unawak'd,
Painim or christian; to the blush of wit.
Man's highest triumph! man's profoundest fall!
The deathbed of the just! Is yet undrawn
By mortal hand; it merits a divine:
Angels should paint it, angels ever There;
There, on a post of honor, and of joy.
Dare I presume, then? But Philander bids;
And glory tempts, and inclination calls --
Yet am I struck; as struck the soul, beneath
Aereal groves impenetrable gloom;
Or, in some mighty ruin's solemn shade;
Or, gazing by pale lamps on highborn dust,
In vaults; thin courts of poor unflatter'd kings;
Or, at the midnight altar's hallowed flame.
It is religion to proceed: I pause --
And enter, awed, the temple of my theme.
Is it his deathbed? No: It is his shrine:
Behold him, there, just rising to a God.
The chamber where the good man meets his fate,
Is privileged beyond the common walk
Of virtuous life, quite in the verge of heaven.
Fly, ye profane! If not, draw near with awe,
Receive the blessing, and adore the chance,
That threw in this Bethesda your disease;
If unrestor'd by This, despair your cure,
For, Here, resistless demonstration dwells;
A death-bed's a detector of the heart.
Here tired dissimulation drops her masque,
Through life's grimace, that mistress of the scene!
Here real, and apparent, are the same.
You see the man; you see his hold on heaven;
If sound his virtue; as Philander's, sound,
Heaven waits not the last moment; owns her friends
On this side death; and points them out to men,
A lecture, silent, but of sovereign power!
To vice, confusion; and to virtue, peace.
Whatever farce the boastful hero plays,
Virtue alone has Majesty in death;
And greater still, the more the tyrant frowns.
Philander! he severely frowned on Thee.
" No warning given! Unceremonious fate!
" A sudden rush from life's meridian joys!
" A wrench from all we love! from all we are!
" A restless bed of pain! a plunge opaque
" Beyond conjecture! Feeble nature's dread!
" Strong reason's shudder at the dark unknown!
" A Sun extinguished! a just opening grave!
" And Oh! the last, last; what? (can words express?
" Thought reach it?) the last -- Silence of a friend!"
Where are those horrors, that amazement, where,
This hideous group of ills, which singly shock,
Demand from man? -- I thought him man till now.
Through nature's wreck, through vanquished agonies,
(Like the star struggling through this midnight gloom)
What gleams of joy? what more than human peace?
Where, the frail mortal? the poor abject worm?
No, not in death, the mortal to be found.
His conduct is a legacy for all.
Richer than Mammon's for his single heir.
His comforters he comforts; Great in ruin,
With unreluctant grandeur, gives, not yields
His soul sublime; and closes with his fate.
How our hearts burnt within us at the scene!
Whence, This brave bound over limits fixed to man?
His God sustains him in his final hour!
His final hour brings glory to his God!
Man's glory heaven vouchsafes to call her own.
We gaze; we weep; mixed tears of grief and joy!
Amazement strikes! Devotion bursts to flame!
Christians adore! and infidels believe.
As some tall tower, or lofty mountain's brow,
Detains the Sun, illustrious from its height;
While rising vapors, and descending shades,
With damps, and darkness, drown the spacious vale:
Undampt by doubt, undarken'd by despair,
Philander, thus, augustly rears his head,
At that black hour, which general horror sheds
On the low level of the inglorious throng:
Sweet peace, and heavenly hope, and humble joy,
Divinely beam on his exalted soul;
Destruction gild, and crown him for the skies,
With incommunicable luster, bright.
THE END OF THE SECOND NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE THIRD. NARCISSA.
TO HER GRACE THE DUCHESS OF PORTLAND.
Pardonable, if the Ghosts could Pardon.
VIRGIL.
FROM dreams, where thought in fancy's maze runs mad
To reason, that heaven-lighted lamp in man,
Once more I wake; and at the destined hour,
Punctual as lovers to the moment sworn,
I keep my assignation with my woe.
O lost to virtue, lost to manly thought,
Lost to the noble sallies of the soul!
Who think it solitude, to be alone.
Communion sweet! Communion large, and high!
Our reason, guardian angel, and our God;
Then nearest These, when others most remote;
And all, ere long, shall be remote, but These.
How dreadful, Then, to meet them all alone,
A stranger! unacknowledg'd! unapprov'd!
Now woe them; wed them; bind them to thy breast;
To win thy wish, creation has no more.
Or if we wish a fourth, it is a friend --
But friends, how mortal! dangerous the desire.
Take Phoebus to yourselves, ye basking bards!
Inebriate at fair Fortune's fountainhead;
And reeling through the wilderness of joy;
Where sense runs savage, broke from reason's chain,
And sings false peace, till smothered by the pall.
My fortune is unlike; unlike my song;
Unlike the Deity my song invokes.
I to day's soft-ey'd sister pay my court,
(Endymion's rival) and her aid implore;
Now first implored in succor to the muse.
Thou, who did lately borrow At the Duke of Norfolk's Masquerade.
Cynthia's form,
And modestly forego thine own! O thou,
Who did thyself, at midnight hours, inspire!
Say, why not Cynthia patroness of song?
As thou her crescent, she thy character
Assumes; still more a Goddess by the change.
Are there demurring wits, who dare dispute
This revolution in the world inspired?
Ye train Pierian! to the Lunar sphere,
In silent hour address your ardent call
For aid immortal; less her brother's right,
She, with the spheres harmonious, nightly leads
The mazy dance, and hears their matchless strain.
A strain for Gods, denied to mortal ear.
Transmit it heard, thou silver queen of Heaven!
What title, or what name, endears thee most!
Cynthia! Cyllene! Phoebe! -- or do hear
With higher gust, fair Portland of the skies?
Is that the soft enchantment calls thee down,
More powerful than of old Circean charm?
Come; but from heavenly banquets with thee bring
The soul of song, and whisper in mine ear
The theft divine; or in propitious dreams
(For dreams are thine) transfuse it through the breast
Of thy first votary -- but not thy last;
If, like thy namesake, thou art ever kind.
And kind thou will be; kind on such a theme;
A theme so like thee, a quite Lunar theme,
Soft, modest, melancholy, female, fair!
A theme that rose all pale, and told my soul,
'Twas night; on her fond hopes perpetual night;
A night which struck a damp, a deadlier damp,
Than that which smote me from Philander's tomb.
Narcissa follows, ere his tomb is closed.
Woes cluster; rare are solitary woes;
They love a train, they tread each other's heel;
Her death invades his mournful right, and claims
The grief that started from my lids for him:
Seizes the faithless, alienated tear,
Or shares it, ere it falls. So frequent Death,
Sorrow, he more than causes, he confounds;
For human sighs his rival strokes contend,
And make distress, distraction. Oh Philander!
What was thy fate? a double fate to me;
Po^^^nt and pain! a menace, and a blow!
Like the black raven hovering over my peace,
Not less a bird of omen, than of prey.
It called Narcissa long before her hour;
It called her tender soul, by break of bliss,
From the first blossom, from the buds of joy;
Those few our noxious fate unblasted leaves
In this inclement clime of human life.
Sweet harmonist! and beautiful as sweet!
And young as beautiful! and soft as young!
And gay as soft! and innocent as gay!
And happy (if aught happy here) as good!
For fortune fond had built her nest on high.
Like birds quite exquisite of note and plume,
Transfixt by fate (who loves a lofty mark)
How from the summit of the grove she fell,
And left it unharmonious! all its charm
Extinguished in the wonders of her song!
Her song still vibrates in my ravished ear,
Still melting there, and with voluptuous pain
(O to forget her) thrilling through my heart!
Song, beauty, youth, love, virtue, joy! this group
O bright ideas, flowers of Paradise,
As yet unforfeit! in one blaze we bind,
Kneel, and present it to the skies; as all
We guess of Heaven: and these were all her own.
And she was mine; and I was -- was most blessed --
Gay title of the deepest misery!
As bodies grow more ponderous, robbed of life;
Good lost weighs more in grief, than gained, in joy.
Like blossomed trees o'erturn'd by vernal storm,
Lovely in Death the beauteous ruin lay;
And if in death still lovely, lovelier there;
Far lovelier! pity swells the tide of love.
And will not the severe excuse a sigh?
Scorn the proud man that is ashamed to weep;
Our tears indulged indeed deserve our shame.
Ye that ever lost an Angel! pity me.
Soon as the luster languisht in her eye,
Dawning a dimmer day on human sight;
And on her cheek, the residence of spring,
Pale omen sat; and scattered fears around
On all that saw (and who would cease to gaze,
That once had seen?) with haste, parental haste,
I flew, I snatched her from the rigid north,
Her native bed, on which bleak Boreas blew,
And bore her nearer to the sun; the sun
(As if the sun could envy) checked his beam,
Denied his wonted succor; nor with more
Regret beheld her drooping, than the bells
Of lilies; fairest lilies, not so fair!
Queen lilies! and ye painted populace!
Who dwell in fields, and lead ambrosial lives;
In morn and evening dew, your beauties bathe,
And drink the Sun; which gives your cheeks to glow,
And out-blush (mine excepted) every fair;
You gladlier grew, ambitious of her hand,
Which often cropped your odours. Incense meet
To thought so pure. Ye lovely fugitives!
Coaeval race with man! for man you smile;
Why not smile at him too? You share indeed
His sudden pass; but not his constant pain.
So man is made, naught ministers delight,
But what his glowing passions can engage;
And glowing passions, bent on aught below,
Must, soon or late, with anguish turn the scale;
And anguish, after rapture, how severe!
Rapture? Bold man! who tempts the wrath divine,
By plucking fruit denied to mortal taste,
Whilst Here, presuming on the rights of heaven.
For transport do Thou call on every hour,
Lorenzo? At thy friend's expense be wise;
Lean not on earth; 'twill pierce thee to the heart;
A broken reed, at best; but, often, a spear;
On its sharp point peace bleeds, and hope expires.
Turn, hopeless thought! turn from her: -- Thought repelled
Resenting rallies, and wakes every woe.
Snatched ere thy prime! and in thy bridal hour!
And when kind fortune, with thy lover, smiled!
And when high-flavour'd thy fresh-op'ning joys!
And when blind man pronounced thy bliss complete!
And on a foreign shore; where strangers wept!
Strangers to Thee; and, more surprising still,
Strangers to kindness wept: Their eyes let fall
Inhuman tears; strange tears! that trickled down
From marble hearts! obdurate tenderness!
A tenderness that called them more severe;
In spite of nature's soft persuasion, steeled;
While nature melted, superstition raved;
That mourned the dead; and This denied a grave.
Their sighs incenst; sighs foreign to the will!
Their will the Tiger sucked, outrag'd the storm.
For Oh! the cursed ungodliness of zeal!
While sinful flesh relented, spirit nursed
In blind infallibility's embrace,
The sainted spirit petrified the breast;
Denied the charity of dust, to spread
Over dust! a charity their dogs enjoy.
What could I do? What succor? What resource?
With pious sacrilege a grave I stole;
With impious piety that grave I wronged;
Short in my duty; coward in my grief!
More like her murderer, than friend, I crept,
With soft-suspended step; and muffled deep
In midnight darkness, whispered my last sigh.
I whispered what should echo through their realms:
Nor writ her name, whose tomb should pierce the skies.
Presumptuous fear! how durst I dread her foes,
While nature's loudest dictates I obeyed?
Pardon necessity, blessed shade! Of grief
And indignation rival bursts I poured;
Half execration mingled with my prayer;
Kindled at man, while I his God adored;
Sore-grudg'd the savage land her sacred dust;
Stamped the cursed soil; and with humanity
(Denied Narcissa) wished them all a grave.
Glows my resentment into guilt? What guilt
Can equal violations of the dead?
The dead how sacred! sacred is the dust
Of this heaven labored form, erect, divine!
This heav'n-assum'd majestic robe of earth,
He deigned to wear, who hung the vast expanse
With azure bright, and clothed the Sun in gold.
When every passion sleeps that can offend;
When strikes us every motive that can melt;
When man can wreak his rancour uncontrolled,
That strongest curb on insult and ill will;
Then, spleen to dust? the dust of innocence?
An angel's dust! -- This Lucifer transcends;
When he contended for the Patriarch's bones,
'T was not the strife of malice, but of pride;
The strife of pontiff pride, not pontiff gall.
Far less than this is shocking in a race
Most wretched, but from streams of mutual love;
And uncreated, but for love divine;
And, but for love divine, this moment, lost,
By fate resorb'd, and sunk in endless night.
Man hard of heart to man! Of horrid things
Most horrid! 'Midst stupendous, highly strange!
Yet often his courtesies are smoother wrongs;
Pride brandishes the favors He confers,
And contumelious his humanity:
What then his vengeance? Hear it not, ye stars!
And thou, pale Moon! turn paler at the sound;
Man is to man the sorest, s^rest ill.
A previous blast foretells the rising storm;
O'erwhelming turrets threaten ere they fall;
Volcano's bellow ere they disembogue;
Earth trembles ere her yawning jaws devour;
And smoke betrays the wide-consuming fire:
Ruin from Man is most concealed when near,
And fends the dreadful tidings in the blow.
Is this the flight of fancy? Would it were!
Heaven's Sovereign saves all Beings but Himself,
That hideous sight, a naked human heart.
Fired is the Muse? And let the Muse be fired:
Who not inflamed, when what He speaks, He feels,
And in the nerve most tender, in his friends?
Shame to mankind! Philander had his foes:
He felt the truths I sing, and I in Him.
But He, nor I, feel more: Past ills, Narcissa!
Are sunk in Thee, Thou recent wound of heart!
Which bleeds with other cares, with other pangs;
Pangs numerous, as the numerous ills that swarmed
Over thy distinguished fate, and, clust'ring There
Thick as the Locust on the land of Nile,
Made death more deadly, and more dark the grave
Reflect (if not forgot my touching tale)
How was each circumstance with aspics armed?
An aspic, each; and all, an Hydra-woe:
What strong Herculean virtue could suffice? --
Or is it virtue to be conquered Here?
This hoary check a train of tears bedews;
And each tear mourns its own distinct distress;
And each distress, distinctly mourned, demands
Of grief still more, as heightened by the whole.
A grief like this proprietors excludes:
Not friends alone such obsequies deplore;
They make mankind the mourner; carry sighs
Far as the fatal fame can wing her way;
And turn the gayest thought of gayest age,
Down their right channel, through the vale of death.
The vale of death! that hushed Cimmerian vale,
Where darkness, brooding over unfinisht fates,
With Raven wing incumbent, waits the day
(Dread day!) that interdicts all future change!
That subterranean world, that land of ruin!
Fit walk, Lorenzo, for proud human thought!
There let my thought expatiate; and explore
Balsamic truths, and healing sentiments,
Of all most wanted, and most welcome, Here.
For gay Lorenzo's sake, and for thy own,
My soul! "The fruits of dying friends survey;
" Expose the vain of life; weigh life and death:
" Give death his eulogy; Thy fear subdue;
" And labor that first palm of noble minds,
" A manly scorn of terror from the tomb."
This harvest reap from thy Narcissa's grave.
As poets feigned from Ajax' streaming blood
Arose, with grief inscribed, a mournful flower;
Let wisdom blossom from my mortal wound.
And first, of dying friends; what fruit from these?
It brings us more than triple aid; an aid
To chase our thoughtlesness, fear, pride, and guilt.
Our dying friends come over us like a cloud,
To damp our brainless ardors; and abate
That glare of life, which often blinds the wise.
Our dying friends are pioneers, to smooth
Our rugged pass to death; to break those bars
Of terror, and abhorrence, nature throws
Cross our obstructed way; and, thus, to make
Welcome, as safe, our port from every storm.
Each friend by fate snatched from us, is a plume
Pl^ckt from the wing of human vanity,
Which makes us stoop from our aereal heights,
And, dampt with omen of our own decease,
On drooping pinions of ambition lowered,
Just skim earth's surface, ere we break it up,
Over putrid earth to scratch a little dust,
And save the world a nuisance, smitton friends
Are angels sent on errands full of love;
For us they languish, and for us they die:
And shall they ^anguish, shall they die, in vain?
Ungrateful, shall we grieve their hovering shades,
Which wait the revolution in our hearts?
Shall we disdain their silent, soft address;
Their posthumous advice, and pious prayer?
Senseless, as herds, that graze their hallowed graves,
Tread under-foot their agonies and groans;
Frustrate their anguish, and destroy their deaths?
Lorenzo! no; the thought of death indulge;
Give it its wholesome empire! let it reign,
That kind chastiser of thy soul in joy!
Its reign will spread thy glorious conquests far,
And still the tumults of thy ruffled breast:
Auspicious era! golden days, begin!
The thought of death, shall, like a God, inspire.
And why not think on death? Is life the theme
Of every thought? and wish of every hour?
And song of every joy? Surprising truth!
The beaten Spaniel's fondness not so strange.
To wave the numerous ills that seize on life
As their own property, their lawful prey;
Ere man has measured half his weary stage,
His luxuries have left him no reserve,
No maiden relishes, unbroacht delights;
On cold-serv'd repetitions He subsists,
And in the tasteless present chews the past;
Disgusted chews, and scarce can swallow down.
Like lavish ancestors, his earlier years
Have disinherited his future hours,
Which starve on Orts, and glean their former field.
Live ever Here, Lorenzo! -- Shocking thought!
So shocking, they who wish, disown it too;
Disown from shame, what they from folly crave.
Live ever in the womb, nor see the light?
For what live ever Here? -- With laboring step
To tread our former footsteps? Pace the round
Eternal? To climb life's worn, heavy wheel,
Which draws up nothing new? To beat, and beat,
The beaten track? To bid each wretched day
The former mock? To surfeit on the same,
And yawn our joys? or thank a misery
For change, though sad? To see what we have seen?
Hear, till unheard, the same old slabber'd tale?
To taste the tasted, and at each return
Less tasteful? Over our palates to decant
Another vintage? Strain a flatter year,
Through loaded vessels, and a laxer tone?
Crazy machines to grind earth's wasted fruits!
Ill ground, and worse-concocted! Load, not life!*
The rational foul kennels of excess?
Still-streaming thorough-fares of dull debauch!
Trembling each gulp, lest death should snatch the bowl.
Such of our fine ones is the wish refined!
So would they have it: Elegant desire!
Why not invite the bellowing stalls, and wilds?
But such examples might their riot awe.
Through want of virtue, that is, Want of thought,
(Though on bright thought they father all their flights)
To what are they reduced? To love, and hate,
The same vain world; To censure, and espouse,
This painted shrew of life, who calls them fool
Each moment of each day; To flatter bad
Through dread of worse; To cling to this rude rock,
Barren, to them, of good, and sharp with ills,
And hourly blackened with impending storms,
And infamous for wrecks of human hope --
Scared at the gloomy gulf, that yawns beneath.
Such are their triumphs! such their pangs of joy?
It Is time, high time, to shift this dismal scene.
This hugged, this hideous state, what art can cure?
One only; but that One, what all may reach;
Virtue -- She, wonder-working Goddess! charms
That rock to bloom; and tames the painted shrew;
And what will more surprise, Lorenzo! gives
To life's sick nauseous iteration, change;
And straitens nature's circle to a line.
Believ'st Thou This, Lorenzo? Lend an ear,
A patient ear, Thou Wilt blush to disbelieve.
A languid, leaden iteration reigns,
And ever must, over Those, whose joys are joys
Of sight, smell, taste: The Cuckow-seasons sing
The same dull note to such as nothing prize,
But what those seasons, from the teeming earth,
To doting sense indulge. But nobler minds,
Which relish fruits unripen'd by the Sun,
Make their days various; various as the dies
On the Dove's neck, which wanton in his rays.
On minds of Dove-like innocence possessed,
On lightened minds, that bask in virtue's beams,
Nothing hangs tedious, nothing old revolves
In That, for which they long; for which they live.
Their glorious efforts, winged with heavenly hope,
Each rising morning sees still higher rise;
Each bounteous dawn its novelty presents
To worth maturing, new strength, luster, fame;
While nature's circle, like a chariot-wheel
Rolling beneath their elevated aims,
Makes their fair prospect fairer every hour;
Advancing virtue, in a line to bliss;
Virtue, which christian motives best inspire!
And bliss, which christian schemes alone ensure!
And shall we then, for virtue's sake, commence
Apostates? and turn infidels for joy?
A truth it is, few doubt, but fewer trust,
" He sins against this life, who slights the next."
What is this life? How few their favorite know?
Fond in the dark, and blind in our embrace,
By passionately loving life, we make
Loved life unlovely; hugging her to death.
We give to time eternity's regard;
And, dreaming, take our passage for our port.
Life has no value as an end, but means;
An end deplorable! a means divine!
When it is our all, it is nothing; worse than naught;
A nest of pains; when held as nothing, much:
Like some fair hum'rists, life is most enjoyed,
When courted least; most worth, when disesteem'd;
Then it is the seat of comfort, rich in peace;
In prospect richer far; important! aweful!
Not to be mentioned but with shouts of praise!
Not to be thought on, but with tides of joy!
The mighty basis of eternal bliss!
Where now the barren rock? the painted shrew?
Where, now, Lorenzo? Life's eternal round?
Have I not made my triple promise good?
Vain is the world; but only to the vain.
To what compare we then this varying scene,
Whose worth ambiguous rises, and declines?
Waxes, and wanes? (in all propitious, night
Assists me here) compare it to the Moon;
Dark in herself, and indigent; but rich
In borrowed luster from a higher sphere.
When gross guilt interposes, laboring earth,
O'ershadow'd, mourns a deep eclipse of joy;
Her joys, at brightest, pallid, to that font
Of full effulgent glory, whence they flow.
Nor is that glory distant: Oh Lorenzo!
A good man, and an angel! These between
How thin the barrier? What divides their fate?
Perhaps a moment, or perhaps a year;
Or, if an age, it is a moment still;
A moment, or eternity's forgot.
Then be, what once they were, who now are Gods;
Be what Philander was, and claim the skies.
Starts timid nature at the gloomy pass?
The soft transition call it; and be cheered:
Such it is often, and why not to Thee?
To hope the best is pious, brave, and wise;
And may itself procure, what it presumes.
Life is much flattered, death is much traduced;
Compare the rivals, and the kinder crown.
" Strange competition!" -- True, Lorenzo! Strange!
So little life can cast into the scale.
Life makes the soul dependent on the dust;
Death gives her wings to mount above the spheres.
Through chinks, styled organs, dim life peeps at light;
Death bursts the involving cloud, and all is day;
All eye, all ear, the disembody'd power.
Death has feigned evils, nature shall not feel;
Life, ills substantial, wisdom cannot shun.
Is not the mighty mind, that son of heaven!
By tyrant life dethroned, imprisoned, pained?
By death enlarged, ennobled, deify'd?
Death but intombs the body; life the soul.
" Is death then guiltless? How he marks his way
" With dreadful waste of what deserves to shine!
" Art, genius, fortune, elevated Power!
" With various lustres These light up the world,
" Which death puts out, and darkens human race."
I grant, Lorenzo! this indictment just:
The Sage, Peer, Potentate, King, Conqueror!
Death humbles These; more barbarous life, the man.
Life is the triumph of our mouldering clay;
Death, of the spirit infinite! divine!
Death has no dread, but what frail life imparts;
Nor life true joy, but what kind death improves,
No bliss has life to boast, till death can give
For greater; life's a debtor to the grave,
Dark lattice! letting in eternal day.
Lorenzo! blush at fondness for a life,
Which sends celestial souls on errands vile,
To cater for the sense; and serve at boards,
Where every ranger of the wilds, perhaps
Each reptile, justly claims our upper hand.
Luxurious feast! a soul, a soul immortal,
In all the dainties of a brute bemir'd!
Lorenzo! blush at terror for a death,
Which gives thee to repose in festive bowers,
Where Nectars sparkle, angels minister,
And more than angels share, and raise, and crown,
And eternize, the birth, bloom, bursts of bliss.
What need I more? O death, the palm is thine.
Then welcome, death! thy dreaded harbingers,
Age, and disease; disease, though long my guest;
That plucks my nerves, those tender strings of life;
Which, plucked a little more, will toll the bell,
That calls my few friends to my funeral;
Where feeble nature drops, perhaps a tear,
While reason and religion, better taught,
Congratulate the dead, and crown his tomb
With wreath triumphant. Death is victory;
It binds in chains the raging ills of life:
Lust and ambition, wrath, and avarice,
Dragged at his chariot-wheel, applaud his power.
That ills corrosive, cares importunate,
Are not immortal too! -- O death! is Thine.
Our day of dissolution! -- Name it right;
It Is our great Pay-day; it is our harvest, rich
And ripe: What though the sickle, sometimes keen,
Just scars us as we reap the golden grain?
More than thy balm, O Gilead! heals the wound
Birth's feebly cry, and death's deep dismal groan,
Are slender tributes low text nature pays
For mighty gain: The gain of each a life!
But O! the last the former so transcends,
Life dies, compared; life lives beyond the grave.
And feel I, death! no joy from thought of Thee?
Death, the great Counselor, who man inspires
With every nobler thought, and fairer deed!
Death, the deliverer, who rescues man!
Death, the rewarder, who the rescued crowns!
Death, that absolves my birth; a curse without it!
Rich death, that realizes all my cares,
Toils, virtues, hopes; without it a chimera!
Death, of all pain the period, not of joy;
Joy's source, and subject, still subsist unhurt;
One, in my soul; and one, in her great ^ire;
Though the four winds were war^ing for my dust.
Yes, and from winds, and waves, and central night,
Though imprisoned there, my dust too I reclaim,
(To dust when drop proud nature's proudest spheres)
And live entire. Death is the crown of life;
Were death denied, poor man would live in vain;
Were death denied, to live would not be life;
Were death denied, even fools would wish to die.
Death wounds to cure: We fall; we rise; we reign!
Spring from our fetters; fasten in the skies;
Where blooming Eden withers in our sight:
Death gives us more than was in Eden lost.
This King of terrors is the Prince of peace.
When shall I die to vanity, pain, death?
When shall I die! -- When shall I live for ever?
THE END OF THE THIRD NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE FOURTH. THE CHRISTIAN TRIUMPH. CONTAINING Our only
CURE for the FEAR of DEATH, AND Proper SENTIMENTS of HEART on that Inestimable
Blessing.
To the Hon. Mr. YORK.
A MUCH-indebted muse, O York! intrudes.
Amid the smiles of fortune, and of youth,
Thine ear is patient of a serious song.
How deep-implanted in the breast of man
The dread of death? I sing its sovereign cure.
Why start at death? Where is he? Death arrived,
Is past; not come, or gone, He Is never here.
Ere hope, sensation fails; black-boding man
Receives, not suffers, death's tremendous blow.
The knell, the shroud, the mattock, and the grave;
The deep damp vault, the darkness, and the worm;
These are the b^gbears of a Winter's eve,
The terrors of the living, not the dead.
Imagination's fool, and error's wretch,
Man makes a death, which nature never made;
Then on the point of his own fancy falls;
And feels a thousand deaths, in fearing one.
But were death frightful, what has age to sear?
If prudent, age should meet the friendly foe,
And shelter in his hospitable gloom.
I scarce can meet a monument, but holds
My younger; every date cries -- "Come away."
And what recalls me? Look the world around,
And tell me what: The wisest cannot tell.
Should any born of woman give his thought
Full range, on just dislike's unbounded field;
Of things, the vanity; of men, the flaws;
Flaws in the best; the many, flaw all over;
As Leopards, spotted, or, as Ethiops, dark;
Vivacious ills; good dying immature;
(How immature, Narcissa's marble tells)
And at its death bequeathing endless pain;
His heart, though bold, would sicken at the sight,
And spend itself in sighs, for future scenes.
But grant to life (and just it is to grant
To lucky life) some perquisites of joy;
A time there is, when, like a thrice-told tale,
Long-rifled life of sweet can yield no more,
But from our comment on the Comedy,
Pleasing reflections on parts well-sustain'd,
Or purposed emendations where we failed,
Or hopes of plaudits from our candid judge,
When, on their exit, souls are bid unrobe,
Toss fortune back her tinsel, and her plume,
And drop this mask of flesh behind the scene.
With me, that time is come; my world is dead;
A new world rises* and new manners reign:
Foreign Comedians, a spruce band! arrive,
To push me from the scene, or hiss me there.
What a pert race starts up! the strangers gaze,
And I at them; my neighbor is unknown;
Nor that the worst: Ah me! the dire effect
Of loit'ring here, of death defrauded long;
Of old so gracious (and let that suffice,)
My very master (...) not. --
Shall I dare say, (...) the fate?
I Have been so long remembered, I Am forgot.
An object ever pressing dims the sight,
And hides behind its ardor to be seen.
When in his courtiers ears I pour my plaint,
They drink it as the nectar of the great;
And squeeze my hand, and beg me come tomorrow;
Refusal! can thou wear a smoother form?
Indulge me, nor conceive I drop my theme:
Who cheapens life, abates the fear of death:
Twice-told the period spent on stubborn Troy,
Court-favour, yet untaken, I besiege;
Ambition's ill-judg'd effort to be rich.
Alas! ambition makes my little, less;
Embitt'ring the possessed: Why wish for more?
Wishing, of all employments, is the worst;
Philosophy's reverse; and health's decay!
Were I as plump, as stall'd theology,
Wishing would waste me to this shade again.
Were I as wealthy as a South Sea dream,
Wishing is an expedient to be poor.
Wishing, that constant hectic of a fool;
Caught at a court; purged off by purer air,
And simpler diet; gifts of rural life!
Blessed be that hand divine, which gently laid
My heart at rest, beneath this humble shed.
The world's a stately bark, on dangerous seas,
With pleasure seen, but boarded at our peril:
Here, on a single plank, thrown safe ashore,
I hear the tumult of the distant throng,
As that of seas remote, or dying storms;
And meditate on scenes, more silent still;
Pursue my theme, and fight the fear of death.
Here, like a shepherd gazing from his hut,
Touching his reed, or leaning on his staff,
Eager ambition's fiery chase I see;
I see the circling hunt, of noisy men,
Burst law's enclosure, leap the mounds of right,
Pursuing, and pursued, each other's prey;
As Wolves, for rapine; as the Fox, for wiles;
Till death, that mighty hunter, earths them all.
Why all this toil for triumphs of an hour?
What, though we wade in wealth, or soar in fame?
Earth's highest station ends in, "Here he lies:"
And "Dust to dust" concludes her noblest song.
If this song lives, posterity shall know
One, though in Britain born, with courtiers bred,
Who thought even gold might come a day too late;
Nor on his subtle deathbed planned his scheme
For future vacancies in church or state;
Some avocation deeming it -- to die;
Unbit by rage canine of dying rich;
Guilt's blunder! and the loudest laugh of hell.
O my coevals! remnants of yourselves!
Poor human ruins, tottering over the grave!
Shall we, shall aged men, like aged trees,
Strike deeper their vile root, and closer cling,
Still more enamored of this wretched soil?
Shall our pale, withered hands, be still stretched out,
Trembling, at once, with eagerness and age?
With avarice, and convulsions, grasping hard?
Grasping at air! for what has earth beside?
Man wants but little; not that little, long;
How soon must he resign his very dust,
Which frugal nature lent him for an hour!
Years unexperienced rush on numerous ills;
And soon as man, expert from time, has found
The key of life, it opes the gates of death.
When in this vale of years I backward look,
And miss such numbers, numbers too of such,
Firmer in health, and greener in their age,
And stricter on their guard, and fitter far
To play life's subtle game, I scarce believe
I still survive: And am I fond of life,
Who scarce can think it possible, I live?
Alive by miracle! or, what is next,
Alive by Mead! if I am still alive,
Who long have b^ry'd what gives life to live,
Firmness of nerve, an energy of thought.
Life's lee is not more shallow, than impure,
And vapid; sense and reason show the door,
Call for my bier, and point me to the dust.
O Thou great arbiter of life and death!
Nature's immortal, immaterial Sun!
Whose all prolific beam late called me forth
From darkness, teeming darkness, where I lay
The Worm's inferior, and, in rank, beneath
The dust I tread on, high to bear my brow,
To drink the spirit of the golden day,
And triumph in existence; and could know
No motive, but my bliss; and have ordained
A rise in blessing! with the Patriarch's joy,
Thy call I follow to the land unknown;
I trust in Thee, and know in whom I trust;
Or life, or death, is equal; neither weighs.
All weight in this -- O let me live to Thee!
Though nature's terrors, thus, may be represt;
Still frowns grim death; guilt points the tyrant's spear.
And whence all human guilt? from death forgot.
Ah me! too long I set at naught the swarm
Of friendly warnings, which around me flew;
And smiled, unsmitten: Small my cause to smile!
Death's admonitions, like shafts upwards shot,
More dreadful by delay, the longer ere
They strike our hearts, the deeper is their wound;
O think how deep, Lorenzo! here it stings:
Who can appease its anguish? How it burns!
What hand the barb'd, envenomed, thought can draw?
What healing hand can pour the balm of peace?
And turn my ^^ght undaunted on the tomb?
With joy, -- with grief, that healing hand I see;
Ah! too conspicuous! It is fixed on high.
On high? -- What means my phrenzy? I blaspheme;
Alas! how low? how far beneath the skies?
The skies it formed; and now it bleeds for me --
But bleeds the balm I want -- yet still it bleeds;
Draw the dire steel -- Ah no! -- the dreadful blessing
What heart or can sustain, or dares forego?
There hangs all human hope; that nail supports
The falling universe: That gone, we drop;
Horror receives us, and the dismal wish
Creation had been smothered in her birth --
Darkness his curtain, and his bed the dust;
When Stars and Sun are dust beneath his throne?
In heaven itself can such indulgence dwell?
O what a groan was there! a groan not His.
He seized our dreadful right; the load sustained;
And heaved the mountain from a guilty world.
A thousand worlds, so bought, were bought too dear:
Sensations new in angels bosoms rise;
Suspend their song; and make a pause in bliss.
O for their song to reach my lofty theme!
Inspire me, night! with all thy tuneful spheres;
Whilst I with Seraphs share seraphic themes,
And show to men the dignity of man;
Lest I blaspheme my subject with my song:
Shall Pagan pages glow celestial flame,
And christian languish? On our hearts, not heads,
Falls the foul infamy: My heart! awake
What can awake thee, unawak'd by this,
" Expended deity on human weal?"
Feel the great truths, which burst the tenfold night
Of heathen error, with a golden flood
Of endless day: To feel, is to be fired;
And to believe, Lorenzo! is to feel.
Thou most indulgent, most tremendous power!
Still more tremendous, for thy wondrous love!
That arms, with awe more aweful, thy commands;
And foul transgression dips in sev'nfold guilt,
How our hearts tremble at thy love immense!
In love immense, inviolably just!
Thou, rather than thy justice should be stained,
Did stain the cross; and, work of wonders far
The greatest, that thy dearest far might bleed.
Bold thought! Shall I dare speak it, or repress?
Should man more execrate, or boast, the guilt
Which roused such vengeance? which such love inflamed?
Over guilt (how mountainous!) with out stretched arms,
Stern justice, and soft-smiling love, embrace,
Supporting, in full majesty, thy throne,
When seemed its majesty to need support,
Or that, or man, inevitably lost:
What, but the fathomless of thought divine,
Could labor such expedient from despair
And rescue both? Both rescue! Both exalt!
O how are both exalted by the deed!
The wondrous deed! or shall I call it more?
A wonder in omnipotence itself!
A mystery, no less to Gods than men!
Not, thus, our infidels the eternal draw,
A God all over, consummate, absolute,
Full-orb'd, in his whole round of rays complete:
They set at odds heaven's jarring attributes;
And, with one excellence, another wound;
Maim heaven's perfection, break its equal beams,
Bid mercy triumph over -- God himself,
Undeify'd by their opprobrious praise:
A God all mercy, is a God unjust.
Ye brainless wits! ye baptized infidels!
Ye worse for mending! washed to fouler stains!
The ransom was paid down; the fund of heaven,
Heaven's inexhaustible, exhausted fund,
Amazing, and amazed, poured forth the price,
All price beyond: Though curious to compute,
Archangels failed to cast the mighty sum:
Its value vast ungraspt by minds create,
For ever hides, and glows, in the supreme.
And was the ransom paid? It was: And paid
(What can exalt the bounty more?) for You.
The Sun beheld it -- No, the shocking scene
Dr^ve back his chariot: Midnight veiled his face;
Not such as This; not such as nature makes;
A midnight, nature shudder'd to behold;
A midnight, new! a dread eclipse (without
Opposing spheres) from her Creator's frown!
Sun! did thou fly thy Maker's pain? Or start
At that enormous load of human guilt,
Which bowed his blessed head; overwhelmed his cross;
Made groan the center; burst earth's marble womb.
With pangs, strange pangs! delivered of her dead?
Hell howled; and heaven that hour let fall a tear;
Heaven wept, that men might smile! heaven bled that man
Might never die! --
And is devotion virtue? It Is compelled:
What heart of stone, but glows at thoughts like these?
Such contemplations mount us; and should mount
The mind still higher; nor ever glance on man,
Unraptur'd, uninflam'd. -- Where roll my thoughts
To rest from wonders? Other wonders rise;
And strike wherever they roll: my soul is caught:
Heaven's sovereign blessings, clust'ring from the cross,
Rush on her, in a throng, and close her round,
The prisoner of amaze! -- In his blessed life,
I see the path, and, in his death, the price,
And in his great ascent, the proof supreme
Of immortality. -- And did he rise?
Hear, O ye nations! hear it, O ye dead!
He rose! he rose! he burst the bars of death.
Lift up your ^eads, ye everlasting gates!
And give the King of glory to come in:
W^^ is the King of glory? He who left
His throne of glory, for the pang of death:
Lift up your heads, ye everlasting gates!
And give the King of glory to come in.
Who is the King of glory? He who slew
The ravenous foe, that gorged all human race!
The King of glory, He, whose glory filled
Heaven with amazement at his love to man;
And with divine complacency beheld
Powers most illumined, wilder'd in the theme.
The theme, the joy, how then shall man sustain?
Oh the burst gates! crushed sting! demolished throne!
Last gasp! of vanquished death. Shout earth and heaven!
This sum of good to man. Whose nature, then,
Took wing, and mounted with him from the tomb?
Then, then, I rose; then first humanity
Triumphant past the crystal ports of light,
(Stupendous guest!) and seized eternal youth,
Seized in our name. Ever since, it is blasphemous
To call man mortal. Man's mortality
Was, then, transferred to death; and heaven's duration
Unalienably sealed to this frail frame,
This child of dust, -- Man, all immortal! hail;
Hail, heaven! all-lavish of strange gifts to man!
Thine all the glory; man's the boundless bliss.
Where am I rapt by this triumphant theme,
On christian joy's exulting wing, above
The Aonian mount? -- Alas, small cause for joy
What if to pain immortal? If extent
Of being, to preclude a close of woe?
Where, then, my boast of immortality?
I boast it still, though covered over with guilt;
For guilt, not innocence, his life he poured;
It Is guilt alone can justify his death;
Nor that, unless his death can justify
Relenting guilt in heaven's indulgent sight.
If, sick of folly, I relent; he writes
My name in heaven, with tha^ inverted spear
(A spear deep-dipt in blood!) which pierced his side,
And opened there a font for all mankind
Who strive, who combat crimes, to drink, and live:
This, only this, subdues the fear of death.
And what is this? -- Survey the wondrous cure:
And at each step, let higher wonder rise!
" Pardon for infinite offense! and pardon
" Through means, that speak its value infinite!
" A pardon bought with blood! with blood divine!
" With blood divine of him, I made my foe!
" Persisted to provoke! though wooed, and awed,
" Blessed, and chastis'd, a flagrant rebel still!
" A rebel, 'midst the thunders of his throne!
" Nor I alone! a rebel universe!
" My species up in arms! not one exempt!
" Yet for the foulest of the foul, he dies,
" Most joy'd, for the redeemed from deepest guilt!
" As if our race were held of highest rank;
" And Godhead dearer, as more kind to man!"
Bound, every heart! and, every bosom, burn!
Oh what a scale of miracles is here!
Its lowest round, high-planted on the skies;
Its towering summit lost beyond the thought
Of man or angel! Oh that I could climb
The wonderful ascent, with equal praise!
Praise! flow for ever, (if astonishment
Will give thee leave) my praise! for ever flow;
Praise ardent, cordial, constant to high heaven
More fragrant, than Arabia sacrificed;
And all her spicy mountains in a flame.
So dear, so due to heaven, shall praise descend,
With her soft plume (from plausive angels wing
First plucked by man) to tickle mortal ears,
Thus diving in the pockets of the great?
Is praise the perquisite of every paw,
Though black as hell, that grapples well for gold?
Oh love of gold! thou meanest of amors!
Shall praise her odours waste on virtue's dead,
Embalm the base, perfume the stench of guilt,
Earn dirty bread by washing Ethiops fair,
Removing filth, or sinking it from sight.
A scavenger in scenes, where vacant posts,
Like gibbets yet untenanted, expect
Their future ornaments? From courts and thrones,
Return, apostate praise! thou vagabond!
Thou prostitute! to thy first love return,
Thy first, thy greatest, once unrivaled theme.
There flow redundant; like Meander flow,
Back to thy fountain; to that parent power,
Who gives-the tongue to sound, the thought to soar,
The soul to be. Men homage pay to men,
Thoughtless beneath whose dreadful eye they bow
In mutual awe profound, of clay to clay,
Of guilt to guilt; and turn their backs on Thee,
Great sire! whom thrones celestial ceaseless sing;
To prostrate angels, an amazing scene!
O the presumption of man's awe for man! --
Man's author! end! restorer! law! and judge!
Thine, all; day thine, and thine this gloom of night,
With all her wealth, with all her radiant worlds:
What, night eternal, but a frown from Thee?
What, heaven's meridian glory, but thy smile?
And shall not praise be Thine? Not human praise?
While heaven's high host on hallelujahs live?
O may I breathe no longer, than I breathe
My soul in praise to him, who gave my soul,
And all her infinite of prospect fair,
Cut through the shades of hell, great love! by Thee,
Oh most adorable! most unador'd!
Where shall that praise begin, which never should end?
Where ever I turn, what claim on all applause!
How is night's sable mantle labored over,
How richly wrought with attributes divine!
What wisdom shines! what love! this midnight pomp*
This go^geous arch, with golden worlds inlay'd!
B^^it with divine ambition! naught to Thee;
For others this profusion: Thou, apart,
Above! beyond! Oh tell me, mighty mind!
Where art thou? Shall I dive into the deep?
Call to the Sun, or ask the roaring winds,
For their Creator? Shall I question loud
The thunder, if in that the Almighty dwells?
Or holds He furious storms in streighten'd reins;
And bids fierce whirlwinds wheel his rapid car?
What mean these questions? -- Trembling I retract;
My prostrate soul adores the present God:
Praise I a distant deity? He tunes
My voice (if tuned;) the nerve, that writes, sustains:
Wrapped in his being, I resound his praise:
But though past all diffused, without a shore,
His essence; local is his throne (as meet,)
To gather the dispersed (as standards call
The listed from afar;) to fix a point,
A central point, collective of his sons,
Since finite every nature, but his own.
The nameless He, whose nod is nature's birth;
And nature's shield, the shadow of his hand;
Her dissolution, his suspended smile!
The great first last! pavilion high he sits
In darkness, from excessive splendour, born,
By Gods, unseen, unless through luster lost.
His glory, to created glory, bright,
As that to central horrors; he looks down
On all that soars; and spans immensity.
Though night unnumber'd worlds unfolds to view,
Boundless creation! what art thou? A beam,
A mere effluvium of his Majesty:
And shall an atom of this atom-world
Mutter, in dust and sin, the theme of heaven?
Down to the center should I send my thought
Through beds of glittering ore, and glowing gems,
Their beggared blaze wants luster for my lay;
Goes out in darkness: If, on towering wing,
I send it through the boundless vault of star^;
The stars, though rich, what dross their gold to Thee,
Great! good! wise! wonderful! eternal King!
If to those conscious stars thy throne around,
Praise ever-pouring, and imbibing bliss:
And ask their strain; they want it, more they want,
Poor their abundance, humble their sublime,
Languid their energy, their ardor cold,
Indebted still, their highest rapture burns;
Short of its mark, defective, though divine.
Still more -- This theme is man's and man's alone;
Their vast appointments reach it not: They see
On earth a bounty not indulged on high;
And downward look for heaven's superior praise!
Firstborn of Either! high in fields of light!
View man, to see the glory of your God!
Could angels envy, they had envied here;
And some did envy; and the rest, though Gods,
Yet still Gods unredeem'd (there triumphs man,
Tempted to weigh the dust against the skies)
They less would feel, though more adorn, my theme.
They sung creation (for in that they shared;)
How rose in melody, that child of love!
Creation's great superior, man! is thine;
Thine is redemption; they just gave the key;
It Is thine to raise, and eternize, the song;
Though human, yet divine; for should not this
Raise man over man, and kindle seraphs here?
Redemption! 'twas creation more sublime;
Redemption! 'twas the labor of the skies;
Far more than labor -- It was death in heaven.
A truth so strange! 'twere bold to think it true;
If not far bolder still, to disbelieve.
Here pause, and ponder: Was there death in heaven?
What then on earth? On earth, which struck the blow?
Who struck it? Who? -- O how is man enlarged,
Seen through this medium! how the Pygmy towers!
How counterpois'd his origin from dust!
How counterpois'd, to dust his sad return!
How voided his vast distance from the skies?
How near he presses on the Seraph's wing!
Which is the Seraph? Which the born of clay?
How This demonstrates, through the thickest cloud
Of guilt, and clay condenst, the Son of heaven!
The double Son, the made, and the re-made!
And shall heaven's double property be lost?
Man's double madness only can destroy.
To man the bleeding cross has promised all;
The bleeding cross has sworn eternal grace;
Who gave his life, what grace shall He deny?
O ye! who, from this rock of ages, leap,
Apostates, plunging headlong in the deep!
What cordial joy, what consolation strong,
Whatever winds arise, or billows roll,
Our interest in the master of the storm?
Cling there, and in wrecked nature's ruin smile;
While vile apostates tremble in a calm.
Man! know thyself. All wisdom centres there:
To none man seems ignoble, but to man;
Angels that grandeur, men o'erlook, admire:
How long shall human nature be Their book,
Degenerate mortal! and unread by Thee?
The beam dim reason sheds shows wonders there;
What high contents! illustrious faculties!
But the grand comment, which displays at full
Our human height, scarce severed from divine,
By heaven composed, was published on the cross.
Who looks on That, and sees not in himself
An aweful stranger, a terrestrial God?
A glorious partner with the deity
In that high attribute, immortal life?
If a God bleeds, he bleeds not for a worm:
I gaze, and, as I gaze, my mounting soul
Catches strange fire, eternity! at Thee;
And drops the world -- or rather, more enjoys:
How changed the face of nature! how improved!
What seemed a chaos, shines a glorious world,
Or, what a world, an Eden; heightened all!
It is another scene! another self!
And still another, as time rolls along;
And that a self far more illustrious still.
Beyond long ages, yet rolled up in shades
Unpierc'd by bold conjecture's keenest ray,
What evolutions of surprising fate!
How nature opens, and receives my soul
In boundless walks of raptured thought! where Gods
Encounter, and embrace me! What new births
Of strange adventure, foreign to the Sun,
Where, what now charms, perhaps, whatever exists,
Old time, and fair creation, are forgot!
Is this extravagant? Of man we form
Extravagant conception, to be just:
Conception unconfined wants wings to reach him:
Beyond its reach, the Godhead only, more.
He, the great Father! kindled at one flame
The world of rationals; one spirit poured
From spirit's aweful fountain; poured himself
Through all their souls; but not in equal stream,
Profuse, or frugal, of the inspiring God,
As his wise plan demanded; and when past
Their various trials, in their various spheres,
If they continue rational, as made,
Resorbs them all into himself again;
His throne their center, and his smile their crown.
Why doubt we, then, the glorious truth to sing*
Though yet unsung, as deemed, perhaps, too bold?
Angels are men of a superior kind;
Angels are men in lighter habit clad,
High over celestial mountains winged in flight;
And men are angels, loaded for an hour,
Who wade this m^ry vale, and climb with pain,
And slipp'^y step, the bottom of the steep.
Angels their failings, mortals have their praise;
While here, of corpse ethereal, such enrolled,
And summoned to the glorious standard soon,
Which flames eternal crimson through the skies.
Nor are our brothers thoughtless of their kin,
Yet absent; but not absent from their love.
Michael has fought our battles; Raphael sung
Our triumphs; Gabriel on our errands flown,
Sent by the SOVEREIGN: And are these, O man!
Thy friends, thy warm allies? And thou (shame burn
The cheek to cinder!) rival to the brute?
Religion's all. Descending from the skies
To wretched man, the Goddess in her left
Holds out this world, and, in her right, the next;
Religion! the sole voucher man is man;
Supporter sole of man above himself;
Even in this night of frailty, change, and death,
She gives the soul a soul that acts a God.
Religion! providence! an after-state!
Here is firm footing; here is solid rock;
This can support us; all is sea besides;
Sinks under us; bestorms, and then devours.
His hand the good man fastens on the skies,
And bids earth roll, nor feels her idle whirl.
As when a wretch, from thick, polluted air,
Darkness, and stench, and suffocating damps,
And dungeon-horrors, by kind fate, discharged,
Climbs some fair eminence, where either pure
Surrounds him, and Elysian prospects rise,
His heart exults, his spirits cast their load;
As if newborn, he triumphs in the change;
So joys the soul, when from inglorious aims,
And sordid sweets, from feculence and froth
Of ties terrestrial, set at large, she mounts
To reason's region, her own element,
Breathes hopes immortal, and affects the skies.
Religion! thou the soul of happiness;
And, groaning Calvary, of thee! There shine
The noblest truths; there strongest motives sting;
There sacred violence assaults the soul;
There, nothing but compulsion is forborne.
Can love allure us? or can terror awe?
He weeps! -- the falling drop puts out the Sun;
He sighs -- the sigh earth's deep foundation shakes.
If, in his love, so terrible, what then
His wrath inflamed? his tenderness on fire?
L^ke soft, smooth oil, outblazing other fires?
Can prayer, can praise avert it? -- Thou, my all!
My theme! my inspiration! and my crown!
My strength in age! my rise in low estate!
My soul's ambition, pleasure, wealth! -- My world!
My light in darkness! and my life in death!
My boast through time! bliss through eternity!
Eternity, too short to speak thy praise!
Or fathom thy profound of love to man!
To man of men the meanest, even to me;
My sacrifice! my God! -- what things are these!
What then art THOU? by what name shall I call Thee?
Knew I the name devout archangels use,
Devout archangels should the name enjoy,
By me unrivaled; thousands more sublime,
None half so dear, as that, which, though unspoke,
Still glows at heart: O how omnipotence
Is lost in love! thou great PHILANTHROPIST!
Father of angels! but the friend of man!
Like Jacob, fondest of the younger born!
Thou, who did save him, snatch the smoking brand
From out the flames, and quench it in thy blood!
How art thou pleased, by bounty to distress!
To make us groan beneath our gratitude,
Too big for birth! to favor, and confound;
To challenge, and to distance all return!
Of lavish love stupendous heights to soar,
And leave praise panting in the distant vale!
Thy right too great defrauds thee of thy due;
And sacrilegious our sublimest song.
But since the naked will obtains thy smile?
Beneath this monument of praise unpaid,
And future life symphonious to my strain,
(That noblest hymn to heaven!) for ever lie
Entombed my fear of death! and every fear,
The dread of every evil, but Thy frown.
Whom see I yonder, so demurely smile?
Laughter a labor, and might break their rest.
Ye quietists, in homage to the skies!
Serene! of soft address! who mildly make
An unobtrusive tender of your hearts,
Abhorring violence! who halt indeed;
But, for the blessing, wrestle not with heaven!
Think you my song too turbulent? too warm?
Are passions, then, the pagans of the soul?
Reason alone baptized? alone ordained
To touch things sacred? Oh for warmer still!
Guilt chills my zeal, and age benumbs my powers;
Oh for an humbler heart, and prouder song!
THOU, my much injured theme! with that soft eye,
Which melted over doomed Salem, deign to look
Compassion to the coldness of my breast;
And pardon to the winter in my strain.
O ye cold-hearted, frozen formalists!
On such a theme, it is impious to be calm;
Passion is reason, transport temper, here.
Shall heaven, which gave us ardor, and has shown
Her own for man so strongly, not disdain
What smooth emollients in theology,
Recumbent virtue's downy doctors preach,
That prose of piety, a lukewarm praise?
Rise odours sweet from incense uninflam'd?
Devotion, when lukewarm, is undevout;
But when it glows, its heat is struck to heaven;
To human hearts her golden harps are strung;
High heaven's orchestra chaunts amen to man.
Hear I, or dream I hear, their distant strain,
Sweet to the soul, and tasting strong of heaven,
Soft-wafted on celestial pity's plume,
Through the vast spaces of the universe,
To cheer me in this melancholy gloom?
Oh when will death (now stingless,) like a friend,
Admit me of their choir? Oh when will death,
This mouldering, old, partition wall throw down?
Give beings, one in nature, one abode?
Oh death divine! that giv'st us to the skies!
Great future! glorious patron of the past,
And present! when shall I thy shrine adore?
From nature's continent, immensely wide,
Immensely blessed, this little isle of life,
This dark, incarcerating colony,
Divides us. Happy day! that breaks our chain;
That manumits; that calls from exile home;
That leads to nature's great metropolis,
And re-admits us, through the guardian hand
Of elder brothers, to our Father's throne;
Who hears our advocate, and, through his wounds
Beholding man, allows that tender name.
It Is this makes christian triumph a command:
It Is this makes joy a duty to the wise;
It Is impious, in a good man, to be sad.
See thou, Lorenzo! where hangs all our hope?
Touched by the cross, we live; or, more than die;
That touch which touched not angels; more divine
Than that, which touched confusion into form,
And darkness into glory; partial touch!
Ineffably pre-eminent regard!
Sacred to man, and sovereign through the whole
Long golden chain of miracles, which hangs
From heaven through all duration, and supports
In one illustrious, and amazing plan,
Thy welfare, nature! and thy God's renown;
That touch, with charms celestial, heals the soul
Diseased, drives pain from guilt, lights life in death,
Turns earth to heaven, to heavenly thrones transforms
The ghastly ruins of the mouldering tomb.
Do ask me when? -- When He who died returns;
Returns, how changed! Where then the man of woe?
In glory's terrors all the Godhead burns;
And all his courts, exhausted by the tide
Of deities triumphant in his train,
Leave a stupendous solitude in heaven;
Replenisht soon, replenisht with increase
Of pomp and multitude; a radiant band
Of angels new; of angels from the tomb.
Is this by fancy thrown remote? and ri^e
Dark doubts between the promise, and event?
I send thee not to volumes for thy cure;
Read nature; nature is a friend to truth;
Nature is christian; preaches to mankind;
And bids dead matter aid us in our creed.
Have thou never seen the comet's flaming flight?
The illustrious stranger passing, terror sheds
O^^gazing nations, from his fiery train
Or length enormous, takes his ample round
Through depths of either; coasts unnumber'd worlds,
Of more than solar glory; doubles wide
Heaven's mighty cape; and then revisits earth,
From the long travel of a thousand years.
Thus, at the destined period, shall return
He, once on earth, who bids the comet blaze:
And, with him, all our triumph over the tomb.
Nature is dumb on this important point;
Or hope precarious in low whisper breathes;
Faith speaks aloud, distinct; even Adders hear;
But turn, and dart into the dark again.
Faith builds a bridge across the gulf of death,
To break the shock blind nature cannot shun,
And lands thought smoothly on the farther shore,
Death's terror is the mountain faith removes;
That mountain barrier between man and peace.
It Is faith disarms destruction; and absolves
From every clamorous charge, the guiltless tomb.
Why disbelieve? Lorenzo! -- "Reason bids,
" All-sacred reason." -- Hold her sacred still;
Nor shall thou want a rival in thy flame:
All-sacred reason! source, and soul, of all
Demanding praise, on earth, or earth above!
My heart is thine: Deep in its inmost folds,
Live thou with life; live dearer of the two.
Wear I the blessed cross, by fortune stamped
On passive nature, before thought was born?
My birth's blind bigot! fired with local zeal!
No; reason rebaptiz'd me when adult;
Weighed true, and false, in her impartial scale;
My heart became the convert of my head;
And made that choice, which once was but my fate.
" On argument alone my faith is built:"
Reason pursued is faith; and, unpursu'd*
Where proof invites, it is reason, then, no more:
And such our proof, That, or our faith is right,
Or reason lies, and heaven designed it wrong:
Absolve we This? What, then, is blasphemy?
Fond as we are, and justly fond of faith,
Reason, we grant, demands our first regard;
The mother honored, as the daughter dear.
Reason the root; fair faith is but the flower;
The fading flower shall die; but reason lives
Immortal, as her father in the skies.
When faith is virtue, reason makes it so.
Wrong not the christian; think not reason yours;
It Is reason our great master holds so dear;
It Is reason's injured rights His wrath resents;
It Is reason's voice obeyed His glories crown;
To give lost reason life, He poured his own:
Believe, and show the reason of a man;
Believe, and taste the pleasure of a God;
Believe, and look with triumph on the tomb:
Through reason's wounds alone thy faith can die;
Which dying, tenfold terror gives to death,
And dips in venom his twice-mortal sting.
Learn hence what honors, what loud Paeans, due
To those, who push our antedote aside;
Those boasted friends to reason, and to man,
Whose fatal love stabs every joy, and leaves
Death's terror heightened, gnawing on his heart.
These pompous sons of reason idolized,
And vilify'd at once; of reason dead,
Then deify'd, as monarchs were of old;
What conduct plants proud laurels on their brow?
While love of truth through all their camp resounds,
They draw pride's curtain over the noontide ray,
Spike up their inch of reason, on the point
Of philosophic wit, called argument:
And then, exulting in their taper, cry,
" Behold the Sun:" And, Indian-like, adore.
Talk they of morals? O thou bleeding love!
Thou maker of new morals to mankind!
The grand morality is love of Thee.
As wise as Socrates, if such they were,
(Nor will they 'bate of that sublime renown)
As wise as Socrates, might justly stand
The definition of a modern fool.
A CHRISTIAN is the highest style of man.
And is there, who the blessed cross wipes off,
As a foul blot, from his dishonored brow?
If angels tremble, it is at such a sight:
The wretch they quit, desponding of their charge,
More struck with grief or wonder, who can tell?
Ye sold ^o sense! ye citizens of earth!
(For such alone the christian banner fly)
Know ye how wise your choice, how great your gain!
Behold the picture of earth's happiest man:
" He calls his wish, it comes; he sends it back,
" And says, he called another; that arrives,
" Meets the same welcome; yet he still calls on;
" Till One calls him, who varies not his call,
" But holds him fast, in chains of darkness bound,
" Till nature dies, and judgment sets him free;
" A freedom far less welcome than his chain."
But grant man happy; grant him happy long;
Add to life's highest prize her latest hour;
That hour, so late, is nimble in approach,
That, like a post, comes on in full career:
How swift the shuttle flies, that weaves thy shroud!
Where is the fable of thy former years?
Thrown down the gulf of time; as far from Thee
As they had never been thine; the day in hand,
Like a bird struggling to get loose, is going;
Scarce now possessed, so suddenly it is gone;
And each swift moment fled, is death advanced
By strides as swift: Eternity is all;
And whose eternity? Who triumphs there?
Bathing for ever in the font of bliss!
For ever basking in the deity!
Lorenzo! who? -- Thy conscience shall reply.
O give it leave to speak; 'twill speak ere long,
Thy leave unaskt: Lorenzo! hear it now,
While useful its advice, its accent mild,
By the great edict, the divine decree,
Truth is deposited with man's last hour;
An honest hour, and faithful to her trust;
Truth, eldest daughter of the deity;
Truth, of his council, when he made the worlds;
Nor less, when he shall judge the worlds he made;
Though silent long, and sleeping never so sound,
Smothered with errors, and oppressed with toys,
That heav'n-commission'd hour no sooner calls,
But from her cavern in the soul's abyss,
Like him they fable under AEtna whelmed,
The Goddess bursts in thunder, and in flame;
Loudly convinces, and severely pains.
Dark Demons I discharge, and Hydra-stings;
The keen vibration of bright truth -- is hell:
Just definition! though by schools untaught.
Ye deaf to truth! peruse this parson'd page,
And trust, for once, a prophet, and a priest;
" Men may live fools, but fools they cannot die."
THE END OF THE FOURTH NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE FIFTH. THE RELAPSE.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Earl of LITCHFIELD.
LORENZO! to recriminate is just.
Fondness for fame is avarice of air.
I grant the man is vain who writes for praise.
Praise no man ever deserved, who sought no more.
As just thy second charge. I grant the muse
Has often blushed at her degenerate sons,
Retained by sense to plead her filthy cause;
To raise the low, to magnify the mean,
And subtilize the gross into refined:
As if to magic numbers powerful charm
'Twas given, to make a Civet of their song
Obscene, and sweeten ordure to perfume.
Wit, a true Pagan, deifies the brute,
And lifts our Swine-enjoyments from the mire.
The fact notorious, nor obscure the cause.
We wear the chains of pleasure, and of pride.
These share the man; and these distract him too;
Draw different ways, and clash in their commands.
Pride, like an Eagle, builds among the stars;
But pleasure, Lark like, nests upon the ground.
Joys shared by brute-creation, pride resents;
Pleasure embraces: Man would both enjoy,
And both at once: A point how hard to gain!
But, what cannot wit, when stung by strong desire?
Wit dares attempt this arduous enterprise.
Since joys of sense cannot rise to reason's taste
In subtle Sophistry's laborious forge,
Wit hammers out a reason new, that stoops
To sordid scenes, and meets them with applause.
Wit calls the Graces the chaste Zone to loose;
Nor less than a plump God to fill the bowl:
A thousand phantoms, and a thousand spells,
A thousand opiates scatters, to delude,
To fascinate, inebriate, lay asleep,
And the fooled mind of man delightfully confound.
Thus that which shocked the judgment, shocks no more*
That which gave pride offense, no more offends,
Pleasure and pride, by nature mortal foes,
At war eternal, which in man shall reign,
By wit's address, patch up a fatal peace,
And hand in hand lead on the rank debauch,
From rank, refined to delicate and gay.
Art, cursed art! wipes off the indebted blush
From nature's cheek, and bronzes every shame.
Man smiles in ruin, glories in his guilt,
And infamy stands candidate for praise.
All writ by man in favor of the soul,
These sensual Ethics, far, in bulk, transcend.
The flowers of ^loquence, profusely poured
Over spotted vice, fill half the lettered world.
Can powers of genius exorcise their page,
And consecrate enormities with song?
But let not these inexpiable strains
Condemn the muse that knows her dignity;
Nor meanly stops at time, but holds the world
As it is, in nature's ample field, a point,
A point in her esteem; from whence to start,
And rust the round of universal space,
To visit being universal there,
And being's source, that utmost flight of mind*
Yet, spite of this so vast circumference,
Well knows, but what is moral, naught is great:
Sing Sirens only? Do not angels sing?
There is in poesy a decent pride,
Which well becomes her when she speaks to prose*
Her younger sister; happily, not more wise:
Think thou, Lorenzo! to find pastimes here?
No guilty passion blown into a flame,
No foible flattered, dignity disgraced,
No fairy field of fiction, all on flower,
No Rainbow colors, here, or silken tale;
But solemn counsels, images of awe,
Truths, which eternity lets fall on man
With double weight, through these revolving spheres,
This death-deep silence, and incumbent shade:
Thoughts, such as shall revisit your last hour;
Visit uncalled, and live when life expires;
And thy dark pencil, midnight! darker still
In melancholy dipped, embrowns the whole.
Yet this, even This, my laughter-loving friends!
Lorenzo! and thy brothers of the smile!
If, what imports you most, can most engage,
Shall steal your ear, and chain you to my song.
Or if you fail me, know, the wi^e shall taste
The truths I sing; the truths I sing shall feel;
And feeling, give assent; and their assent
Is ample recompense; is more than praise.
But chiefly thine, O Litchfield! nor mistake;
Think not un-introduc'd I force my way;
Narcissa, not unknown, not unally'd,
By virtue, (...) by blood, illustrious youth!
To thee, from blooming Amaranthine bowers,
Where all the language harmony, descends
Uncalled, and asks admittance for the muse:
A muse that will not pain thee with thy praise;
Thy praise she drops, by nobler still inspired.
O thou! blessed spirit! whether the supreme,
Great antemundane Father! in whose breast
Embryo creation, unborn being, dwelt,
And all its various revolutions rolled
Present, though future; prior to themselves;
Whose breath can blow it into naught again;
Or, from his throne some delegated power,
Who, studious of our peace, do turn the thought
From vain and vile, to solid and sublime!
Unseen, thou lead'st me to delicious draughts
Of inspiration, from a purer stream,
And fuller of the God, than that which burst
From famed Castalia: Nor is yet allayed
My sacred thirst; though long my soul has ranged
Through pleasing paths of moral, and divine,
By Thee sustained, and lighted by the STARS.
By Them best lighted are the paths of thought;
Nights are their days, their most illumined hours.
By day, the soul, o'erborne by life's career,
Stunned by the din, and giddy with the glare,
Reels far from reason, jostled by the throng.
By day the soul is passive, all her thoughts
Imposed, precarious, broken, ere mature.
By night from objects free, from passion cool,
Thoughts uncontrolled, and unimpress'd, the births
Of pure election, arbitrary range,
Not to the limits of one world confined;
But from ethereal travels light on earth,
As voyagers drop anchor, for repose.
Let Indians, and the gay, like Indians, fond
Of feathered fopperies, the Sun adore:
Darkness has more divinity for me;
^t strikes thought inward; it drives back the soul
To settle on herself, our point supreme!
There lies our theater; there sits our judge.
Darkness the curtain drops over life's dull scene;
It Is the kind hand of Providence stretched out
'Twixt man and vanity; it is reason's reign,
And virtue's too; these tutelary shades
Are man's asylum from the tainted throng.
Night is the good man's friend, and guardian too;
It no less rescues virtue, than inspires.
Virtue for ever frail, as fair, below,
Her tender nature suffers in the crowd,
Nor touches on the world, without a stain:
The world's infectious; few bring back at Eve,
Immaculate, the manners of the morn.
Something we thought, is blotted; we resolved,
Is shaken; we renounced, returns again.
Each salutation may slide in a sin
Unthought before, or fix a former flaw.
Nor is it strange: Light, motion, concourse, noise,
All, scatter us abroad; thought outward-bound,
Neglectful of our home-affairs, flies off
In ^ume and dissipation, quits her charge,
And leaves the breast unguarded to the foe.
Present example gets within our guard,
And acts with double force, by few repelled.
Ambition fires ambition; love of gain
Strikes, like a pestilence, from breast to breast;
Riot, pride, perfidy, blue vapors breathe;
And inhumanity is caught from man,
From smiling man. A slight, a single glance
And shot at random, often has brought home
A sudden fever, to the throbbing heart,
Of envy, rancour, or impure desire.
We see, we hear, with peril; safety dwells
Remote from multitude; the world's a school
Of wrong, and what proficients swarm around!
We must, or imitate, or disapprove;
Must list, as their accomplices, or foes;
That stains our innocence; this wounds our peace.
From nature's birth, hence, wisdom has been smit
With sweet recess, and languisht for the shade.
This sacred shade, and solitude, what is it?
It Is the felt presence of the Deity.
Few are the faults we flatter when alone.
Vice sinks in her allurements, is ungilt,
And looks, like other objects, black by night.
By night an atheist half-believes a God.
Night is fair virtue's immemorial friend;
The conscious Moon, through every distant age,
Has held a lamp to wisdom, and let fall,
On contemplation's eye, her purging ray.
The famed Athenian, he who wooed from heaven
Philosophy the fair, to dwell with men,
And form their manners, not inflame their pride,
While over his head, as fearful to molest
His laboring mind, the stars in silence slide,
And seem all gazing on their future guest,
^ee him soliciting his ardent suit
In private audience: All the live-long night,
Rigid in thought, and motionless, he stands;
Nor quits his theme, or posture, till the Sun
(Rude drunkard rising rosy from the main!)
Disturbs his nobler intellectual beam,
And gives him to the tumult of the world.
Hail, precious moments! stolen from the black waste
Of murdered time! auspicious midnight! hail!
The world excluded every passion hushed,
And opened a calm intercourse with heaven,
Here the soul sits in council; ponders past,
Predestines future action; sees, not feels,
Tumultuous life, and reasons with the storm;
All her lies answers, and thinks down her charms.
What aweful joy! what mental liberty!
I am not pent in darkness; rather say
(If not too bold) in darkness I Am embow'r'd.
Delightful gloom! the clust'ring thoughts around
Spontaneous rise, and blossom in the shade;
But droop by day, and sicken in the Sun.
Thought borrows light elsewhere; from that first fire,
Fountain of animation! whence descends
Urania, my celestial guest! who deigns
Nightly to visit me, so mean; and now
Conscious how needful discipline to man,
From pleasing dalliance with the charms of night
My wandering thought recalls, to what excites
Far other beat of heart! Narcissa's tomb!
Or is it feeble nature calls me back,
And breaks my spirit into grief again?
Is it a Stygian vapor in my blood?
A cold, slow puddle, creeping through my veins?
Or is it thus with all men? -- Thus with all.
What are we? How unequal! now we soar,
And now we sink; to be the same, transcends
Our present prowess. Dearly pays the soul
For lodging ill; too dearly rents her clay.
Reason, a baffled counselor! but adds
The blush of weakness, to the bane of woe.
The noblest spirit fighting her hard fate,
In this damp, dusky region, charged with storms,
But feebly flutters, yet untaught to fly;
Or, flying short her flight, and sure her fall.
Our utmost strength, when down, to rise again;
And not to yield, though beaten, all our praise.
It Is vain to seek in men for more than man.
Though proud in promise, big in previous thought,
Experience damps our triumph. I, who late,
Emerging from the shadows of the grave,
Where grief detained me prisoner, mounting high,
Threw wide the gates of everlasting day,
And called mankind to glory, shook off pain,
Mortality shook off, in ether pure,
And struck the stars; now feel my spirits fail;
They drop me from the Zenith; down I rush,
Like him whom fable fledged with waxen wings,
In sorrow drowned -- but not, in sorrow; lost.
How wretched is the man, who never mourned!
I dive for precious pearl, in sorrow's stream:
Not so the thoughtless man that only grieves;
Takes all the torment, and rejects the gain
(Inestimable gain!) and gives heaven leave
To make him but more wretched, not more wise.
If wisdom is our lesson (and what else
Ennobles man? What else have angels learnt?)
Grief! more proficients in thy school are made,
Than genius, or proud learning, ever could boast.
Voracious learning, often over-fed,
Digests not into sense her motley meal.
This book case, with dark booty almost burst,
This forager on other's wisdom, leaves
Her native farm, her reason, quite untilled.
With mixed manure she surfeits the rank soil,
Dung'd, but not dressed; and rich to beggary.
A pomp untameable of weeds prevails.
Her servant's wealth, encumbered wisdom mourns.
And what says genius? "Let the dull be wise."
Genius, too hard for right, can prove it wrong;
And loves to boast, where blush men less inspired.
It pleads exemption from the laws of sense;
Considers reason as a leveller;
And scorns to share a blessing with the crowd.
That wise it could be, thinks an ample claim
To glory, and to pleasure gives the rest.
Crassus but sleeps, Ardelio is undone.
Wisdom less shudders at a fool, than wit.
But wisdom smiles, when humbled mortals weep.
When sorrow wounds the breast, as ploughs the glebe,
And hearts obdurate feel her softening shower;
Her seed celestial, then, glad wisdom sows:
Her golden harvest triumphs in the soil.
If so, Narcissa! welcome my relapse;
I Will raise a tax on my calamity.
And reap rich compensation from my pain.
I Will range the plenteous intellectual field;
And gather every thought of sovereign power
To chase the moral maladies of man;
Thoughts, which may bear transplanting to the skies,
Though natives of this coarse penurious soil;
Nor wholly wither there, where Seraphs sing,
Refined, exalted, not annulled, in heaven.
Reason, the Sun that gives them birth, the same
In either clime, though more illustrious There.
These choicely culled, and elegantly ranged,
Shall form a garland for Narcissa's tomb;
And, peradventure, of no fading flowers.
Say, On what themes shall puzzled choice descend?
" The importance of con^emplating the tomb;
" Why men decline it; suicide's foul birth;
" The various kinds of grief; the faults of age;
" And death's dread character -- invite my song."
And, first, the importance of our end surveyed.
Friends counsel quick dismission of our grief:
Mistaken kindness! our hearts heal too soon.
Are They more kind than He, who struck the blow?
Who bid it do his errand in our hearts,
And banish peace, till nobler guests arrive,
And bring it back, a true, and endless peace?
Calamities are friends: As glaring day
Of these unnumber'd lustres robs our sight;
Prosperity puts out unnumber'd thoughts
Of import high, and light divine, to man.
The man how blessed, who, sick of gaudy scenes,
(Scenes apt to thrust between Us and ourselves!)
Is led by choice to take his favorite walk,
Beneath death's gloomy, silent, cypress shades,
Unpierc'd by vanity's fantastic ray;
To read his monuments, to weigh his dust,
Visit his vaults, and dwell among the tombs!
Lorenzo! read with me Narcissa's stone;
(Narcissa was thy favorite) let us read
Her moral stone; few doctors preach so well;
Few orators so tenderly can touch
The feeling heart. What Pathos in the date!
Apt words can strike; and yet in them we see
Faint images of what we, here, enjoy.
What cause have we to build on length of life?
Temptations seize, when fear is laid asleep;
And ill foreboded is our strongest guard.
See from her tomb, as from an humble shrine,
Truth, radiant Goddess! sallies on my soul,
And puts delusion's dusky train to flight;
Dispels the mist our sultry passions raise,
From objects low, terrestrial, and obscene;
And shows the real estimate of things;
Which no man, unafflicted, ever saw;
Pulls off the veil from virtue's rising charms;
Detects temptation in a thousand lies.
Truth bids me look on men, as Autumn leaves,
And all they bleed for, as the Summer's dust,
Driven by the whirlwind: Lighted by her beams,
I widen my horizon, gain new powers,
See things invisible, feel things remote,
Am present with futurities! think naught
To man so foreign, as the joys possessed;
Naught so much his, as those beyond the grave.
No folly keeps its color in her sight;
Pale worldly wisdom loses all her charms;
In pompous promise from her schemes profound,
If future fate she plans it is all in leaves;
Like Sybil, unsubstantial, fleeting bliss!
At the first blast it vanishes in air.
Not so, Celestial: Would thou know, Lorenzo!
How differ worldly wisdom, and divine?
Just as the waning, and the waxing Moon.
More empty worldly wisdom every day;
And every day more fair her rival shines.
When later, there is less time to play the fool.
Soon our whole term for wisdom is expired
(Thou know she calls no council in the grave:
And everlasting fool is writ in fire,
Or real wisdom wafts us to the skies.
As worldly schemes resemble Sibyl's leaves,
The good man's days to Sibyl's books compare,
(In ancient story read, thou know the tale)
In price still rising, as in number less,
Inestimable quite his final hour.
For that who thrones can offer, offer thrones;
Insolvent worlds the purchase cannot pay.
" Oh let me die his death!" all nature cries.
" Then live his life." -- All nature falters there.
Our great physician daily to consult,
To commune with the grave, our only cure.
What grave prescribes the best? -- A friends; and yet,
From a friend's grave, how soon we disengage!
Even to the dearest, as his marble, cold.
Why are friends ravished from us? It Is to bind,
By soft affection's ties, on human hearts,
The thought of death, which reason, too supine,
Or misemploy'd, so rarely fastens there.
Nor reason, nor affection, no nor both
Combined, can break the witchcrafts of the world.
Behold the inexorable hour at hand!
Behold the inexorable hour forgot!
And to forget it, the chief aim of life,
Though well to ponder it, is life's chief end.
Is death, that ever threatening, never remote,
That all-important, and that only sure,
(Come when he will) an unexpected guest?
Nay, though invited by the loudest calls
Of blind imprudence, unexpected still?
Though numerous messengers are sent before,
To warn his great arrival. What the cause,
The wondrous cause, of this mysterious ill?
All heaven looks down astonished at the sight.
Is it that life has sown her joys so thick,
We cannot thrust in a single care between?
Is it, that life has such a swarm of cares,
The thought of death cannot enter for the throng?
Is it, that time steals on with downy feet,
Nor wakes indulgence from her golden dream?
Today is so like yesterday, it cheats;
We take the lying sister for the same.
Life glides away, Lorenzo! like a brook;
For ever changing, unperceived the change.
In the same brook none ever bathed him twice:
To the same life none ever twice awoke.
We call the brook the same; the same we think
Our life, though still more rapid in its flow;
Nor mark the much irrevocably lapsed,
And mingled with the sea. Or shall we say
(Retaining still the brook to bear us on)
That life is like a vessel on the stream?
In life embarked, we smoothly down the tide
Of time descend, but not on time intent;
Am^s'd, unconscious of the gliding wave;
Till on a sudden we perceive a shock;
We start, awake, look out; what see we there?
Our brittle bark is burst on Charon's shore.
Is this the cause death (...) human thought?
Or is it judgment, by the will struck blind,
That domineering mistress of the soul!
Like him so strong by Dalilah the fair?
Or is it fear turns startled reason back,
From looking down a precipice so steep?
It Is d^ead^ul; and the dread is wisely placed,
By nature conscious of the make of man.
A dreadful friend it is, a terror kind,
A flaming sword to guard the tree of life,
By that unawed, in life's most smiling hour,
The good man would repine; would suffer joys,
And burn impatient for his promised skies.
The bad, on each punctilious pique of pride,
Or gloom of humor, would give rage the rein,
Bound over the barrie^, rush into the dark,
And mar the scenes of Providence below.
What groan was that, Lorenzo? -- Furies! rise;
And drown, in your less execrable yell,
Britannia's shame. There took her gloomy flight,
On wing impetuous, a black sullen soul,
Blasted from hell, with horrid lust of death.
Thy friend, the brave, the gallant Altamont.
So called, so thought -- And then he fled the field.
Less base the fear of death, than fear of life.
O Britain, infamous for suicide!
An island in thy manners! far disjoined
From the whole world of rationals beside!
In ambient waves plunge thy polluted head,
Wash the dire stain, nor shock the continent.
But thou be shocked, while I detect the cause
Of self-assault, expose the monster's birth,
And bid abhorrence hiss it round the world.
Blame not thy clime, nor chide the distant Sun;
The Sun is innocent, thy clime absolved:
Immoral climes kind nature never made.
The cause I sing, in Eden might prevail,
And proves, It is thy folly, not thy fate.
The soul of man (let man in homage bow,
Who names his soul,) a native of the skies!
Highborn, and free, her freedom should maintain,
Unsold, unmortgag'd for earth's little bribes.
The illustrious stranger, in this foreign land,
Like strangers, jealous of her dignity,
Studious of home, and ardent to return,
Of earth suspicious, earth's enchanted cup
With cool reserve light touching, should indulge,
On immortality, her godlike taste;
There take large draughts; make her chief banquet there.
But some reject this sustenance divine;
To beggarly vile appetites descend;
Ask alms of earth, for guests that came from heaven;
Sink into slaves; and sell, for present hire,
Their rich reversion, and (what shares its fate)
Their native freedom, to the Prince who sways
This nether world. And when his payments fail,
When his foul basket gorges them no more,
Or their palled palates loath the basket full;
Are instantly, with wild demoniac rage,
For breaking all the chains of Providence,
And bursting their confinement; though fast barred
By laws divine and human; guarded strong
With horrors doubled to defend the pass,
The blackest, nature, or dire guilt, can raise;
And moated round, with fathomless destruction,
Sure to receive, and whelm them in their fall.
Such, Britons! is the cause, to you unknown,
Or worse, o'erlook'd; o'erlook'd by magistrates,
Thus criminals themselves. I grant the deed
Is madness; but the madness of the heart.
And what is that? Our utmost bound of guilt.
A sensual, unreflecting life, is big
With monstrous births, and suicide, to ^^own
The black infernal brood. The bold to break
Heaven's law supreme, and desperately rush
Through sacred nature's murder, on their own,
Because they never think of death, they die.
It Is equally man's duty, glory, gain,
At once to shun, and meditate, his end.
When by the bed of languishment we sit,
(The seat of wisdom! if our choice, not fate)
Or, over our dying friends, in anguish hang,
Wipe the cold dew, or stay the sinking head,
Number their moments, and, in every clock,
Start at the voice of an eternity;
See the dim lamp of life just feebly lift
An agonizing beam, at us to gaze,
Then sink again, and quiver into death,
That most pathetic herald of our own;
How read we such sad scenes? As sent to man
In perfect vengeance? No; in pity sent,
To melt him down, like wax, and then impress,
Indelible, death's image on his heart;
Bleeding for others, trembling for himself.
We bleed, we tremble, we forget, we smile.
The mind turns fool, before the cheek is dry.
Our quick-returning folly cancels all;
As the tide rushing rases what is writ
In yielding sands, and smooths the lettered shore.
Lorenzo! have thou ever weighed a sigh?
Or studied the philosophy of tears?
(A science, yet, unlectur'd in our schools!)
Have thou descended deep into the breast,
And seen their source? If not, descend with me,
And trace these briny riv'lets to their springs.
Our ^un'ral tears, from different causes, rise.
As if from separate cisterns in the soul,
Of various kinds, they flow. From tender hearts,
By soft contagion called, some burst at once,
And stream obsequious to the leading eye.
Some ask more time, by curious art distilled.
Some hearts in secret hard, unapt to melt,
Struck by the magic of the public eye,
Like Moses's smitten rock gush out amain.
Some weep to share the fame of the deceased,
So high in merit, and to them so dear.
They dwell on praises, which they think they share;
And thus, without a blush, commend themselves.
Some mourn in proof, that something they could love;
They weep not to relieve their grief, but show.
Some weep in perfect justice to the dead,
As conscious all their love is in arrear.
Some mischievously weep, not unappris'd,
Tears, sometimes, aid the conquest of an eye.
With what address the soft Eph^sians draw
Their sable network over entangled hearts?
As seen through crystal, how their roses glow,
While liquid pearl runs trickling down their cheek?
Of hers not prouder Egypt's wanton Queen,
Carousing gems, herself dissolved in love.
Some weep at death, abstracted from the dead,
And celebrate, like Charles, their own decease.
By kind construction some are deemed to weep,
Because a decent veil conceals their joy.
Some weep in earnest, and yet weep in vain;
As deep in indiscretion, as in woe.
Passion, blind passion! impotently pours
Tears, that deserve more tears; while reason sleeps;
Or gazes, like an idiot, unconcerned;
Nor comprehends the meaning of the storm;
Knows not it speaks to Her, and her alone.
Irrationals all sorrow are beneath,
That noble gift! that privilege of man!
From sorrow's pang, the birth of endless joy,
But these are barren of that birth divine:
They weep impetuous, as the Summer-storm,
And full as short! the cruel grief soon tamed,
They make a pastime of the stingless tale;
Far as the deep-resounding knell, they spread
The dreadful news, and hardly feel it more.
No grain of wisdom pays them for their woe.
Half-round the globe, the tears pumpt up by death
Are spent in wat'ring vanities of life;
In making folly flourish still more fair.
When the sick soul, her wonted stay withdrawn,
Reclines on earth, and sorrows in the dust;
Instead of learning, there, her true support,
Though there thrown down her true support to learn,
Without heaven's aid, impatient to be blessed,
She crawls to the next shrub, or bramble vile,
Though from the stately cedar's arms she fell;
With stale, foresworn embraces, clings anew.
The stranger weds, and blossoms, as before,
In all the fruitless fopperies of life:
Presents her weed, well-fansy'd, at the ball,
And raffles for the death's head on the ring.
So wept Aurelia, till the destined youth
Stepped in, with his receipt for making smiles,
And blanching sables into bridal bloom.
So wept Lorenzo fair Clarissa's fate;
Who gave that angel boy, on whom he doats;
And died to give him, orphan'd in his birth!
Not such, Narcissa, my distress for Thee.
I Will make an altar of thy sacred tomb,
To sacrifice to wisdom. -- What wast Thou?
" Young, gay, and fortunate?" Each yields a theme
I Will dwell on each, to shun thought more severe;
(Heaven knows I labor with severer still!)
I Will dwell on each, and quite exhaust thy death.
A soul without reflection, like a pile
Without inhabitant, to ruin runs.
And, first, thy youth. What says it to gray hairs?
Narcissa, I Am become thy pupil now --
Early, bright, transient, chaste, as morning dew,
She sparkled, was exhaled, and went to heaven.
Time on this head has snow'd; yet still it is borne
Aloft; nor thinks but on another's grave.
Covered with shame I speak it, age severe
Old worn-out vice sets down for virtue fair;
With graceless gravity, chastising youth,
That youth chastis'd surpassing in a fault,
Father of all, forgetfulness of death:
As if, like objects pressing on the sight,
Death had advanced too near us to be seen:
Or, that life's loan time ripened into right;
And men might plead prescription from the grave;
Deathless, from repetition of ^eprieve.
Deathless? far from it! such are dead already;
Their hearts are buried, and the world their grave.
Tell me, some God! my guardian angel! tell,
What thus infatuates? what enchantment plants
The phantom of an age 'twixt us, and death
Already at the door? He knocks, we hear him,
And yet we will not hear. What mail defends
Our untouched hearts? What miracle turns off
The pointed thought, which from a thousand quivers
Is daily darted, and is daily shunned?
We stand, as in a battle, throngs on throngs
Around us falling; wounded often ourselves;
Though bleeding with our wounds, immortal still!
We see time's furrows on another's brow,
And death entrenched, preparing his assault;
How few themselves, in that just mirror, see!
Or, seeing, draw their inference as strong!
There death is certain; doubtful here: He must,
And soon; We may, within an age, expire.
Though gray our heads, our thoughts and aims are green;
Like damaged clocks, whose hand and bell dissent;
Folly sings six, while nature points at twelve.
Absurd longevity! More, More, it cries:
More life, more wealth, more trash of every kind.
And wherefore mad for more, when relish fails?
Object, and appetite, must club for joy;
Shall folly labor hard to mend the bow,
Baubles, I mean, that strike us from without,
While nature is relaxing every string?
Ask thought for joy; grow rich, and hoard within.
Think you the soul, when this life's rattles cease,
Has nothing of more manly to succeed?
Contract the taste immortal; learn even now
To relish what alone subsists hereafter.
Divine, or none, henceforth your joys for ever.
Of age the glory is, to wish to die.
That wish is praise and promise; it applauds
Past life, and promises our future bliss.
What weakness see not children in their Sires?
Grand-climacterical absurdities!
Grey-hair'd authority, to faults of youth,
How shocking! It makes folly thrice a fool;
And our first childhood might our last despise.
Peace and esteem is all that age can hope.
Nothing but wisdom gives the first; the last,
Nothing, but the repute of being wise.
Folly bars both; our age is quite undone.
What folly can be ranker? Like our shadows,
Our wishes lengthen, as our Sun declines.
No wish should loiter, then, this side the grave.
Our hearts should leave the world, before the knell
Calls for our carcasses to mend the soil.
Enough to live in tempest, die in port;
Age should fly concourse, cover in retreat
Defects of judgment; and the will's subdue;
Walk thoughtful on the silent, solemn shore
Of that vast ocean it must sail so soon;
And put good-works on board; and wait the wind
That shortly blows us into worlds unknown.
If unconsider'd too, a dreadful scene!
All should be prophets to themselves; foresee
Their future fate; their future fate foretaste;
This art would waste the bitterness of death.
The thought of death alone, the fear destroys.
A disaffection to that precious thought
Is more than midnight darkness on the soul,
Which sleeps beneath it, on a precipice,
Puffed off by the first blast, and lost for ever.
Do ask, Lorenzo, why so warmly pressed,
By repetition hammered on thine ear,
The thought of death? That thought is the machine,
The grand machine! that heaves us from the dust,
And rears us into men. That thought plied home
Will soon reduce the ghastly precipice
O'er-hanging hell, will soften the descent,
And gently slope our passage to the grave;
How warmly to be wished! What heart of flesh
Would trifle with tremendous? dare extremes?
Yawn over the fate of infinite? What hand,
Beyond the blackest brand of censure bold,
(To speak a language too well known to Thee)
Would at a moment give its all to chance,
And stamp the die for an eternity?
Aid me, Narcissa! aid me to keep pace
With destiny; and ere her scissars cut
My thread of life, to break this tougher thread
Of moral death, that ties me to the world.
Sting thou my slumbering reason to send forth
A thought of observation on the foe;
To sally; and survey the rapid march
Of his ten thousand messengers to man;
Who, Jehu-like, behind him turns them all.
All accident apart, by nature signed,
My warrant is gone out, though dormant yet;
Perhaps behind one moment lurks my fate.
Must I then forward only look for death?
Backward I turn mine eye, and find him there.
Man is a self-survivor every year.
Man, like a stream, is in perpetual flow.
Death's a destroyer of quotidian prey.
My youth, my noontide, his; my yesterday;
The bold invader shares the present hour.
Each moment on the former shuts the grave.
While man is growing, life is in decrease;
And cradles rock us nearer to the tomb.
Our birth is nothing but our death begun;
As tapers waste, that instant they take fire.
Shall we then fear, lest that should come to pass,
Which comes to pass each moment of our lives?
If fear we must, let that death turn us pale,
Which murders strength and ardor; what remains
Should rather call on death, than dread his call.
Ye partners of my fault, and my decline!
Thoughtless of death, but when your neighbor's knell
(Rud^ visitant!) knocks hard at your dull sense,
And with its thunder scarce obtains your ear!
Be death your theme, in every place and hour;
Nor longer want, ye monumental sires!
A brother tomb to tell you you shall die.
That death you dread (so great is nature's skill!)
Know, you shall court, before you shall enjoy.
But you are learned; in volumes deep you sit;
In wisdom, shallow: Pompous ignorance!
Would you be still more learned, than the learned?
Learn well to know how much need not be known,
And what that knowledge, which impairs your sense,
Our needful knowledge, like our needful food,
Unhedg'd, lies open in life's common field;
And bids all welcome to the vital feast.
You scorn what lies before you in the page
Of nature, and experience, moral truth;
Of indispensable, eternal fruit;
Fruit, on which mortals feeding, turn to Gods:
And dive in science for distinguished names,
Dishonest fomentation of your pride;
Sinking in virtue, as you rise in fame.
Your learning, like the lunar beam, affords
Light, but not heat; it leaves you undevout,
Frozen at heart, while speculation shines.
Awake, ye curious indagators! fond
Of knowing all, but what avails you, known.
If you would learn death's character, attend.
All casts of conduct, all degrees of health,
All dies of fortune, and all dates of age,
Together shock in his impartial urn,
Come forth at random: Or if choice is made,
The choice is quite sarcastic, and insults
All bold conjecture, and fond hopes of man.
What countless multitudes, not only leave,
But deeply disappoint us, by their deaths!
Though great our sorrow, greater our surprise.
Like other tyrants, death delights to smite,
What, smitten, most proclaims the pride of power,
And arbitrary nod. His joy supreme,
To bid the wretch survive the fortunate;
The feeble wrap the Athletic in his shroud;
And weeping fathers build their childrens tomb:
Me Thine, Narcissa! -- What though short thy date?
Virtue, not rolling Suns, the mind matures.
That life is long, which answers life's great end.
The time that bears no fruit, deserves no name;
The man of wisdom is the man of years.
In hoary youth Methusalems may die;
O how misdated on their flattering tombs!
Narcissa's youth has lectur'd me thus far.
And can her gaiety give counsel too?
That, like the Jews famed oracle of gems,
Sparkles instruction; such as throws new light,
And opens more the character of death,
Ill known to thee Lorenzo! this thy vaunt:
"Give death his due, the wretched, and the old;
"Even let him sweep his rubbish to the grave;
"Let him not violate kind nature's laws,
"But own man born to live, as well as die."
Wretched and old thou giv'st him; young and gay
He takes; and plunder is a tyrant's joy.
What if I prove, "The farthest from the fear,
"Are often nearest to the stroke of fate?"
All, more than common, menaces an end.
A blaze betokens brevity of life:
As if bright embers should emit a flame,
Glad spirits sparkled from Narcissa's eye,
And made youth younger, and taught life to live.
As natures opposites wage endless war,
For this offense, as treason to the deep
Inviolable stupor of his reign,
Where lust, and turbulent ambition, sleep,
Death took swift vengeance. As he life detests,
More life is still more odious; and, reduced
By conquest, aggrandizes more his power.
But wherefore aggrandiz'd? By heaven's decree,
To plant the soul on her eternal guard,
In aweful expectation of our end.
Thus runs death's dread commission: "Strike, but so,
"As m^st alarms the living by the dead."
Hence stratagem delights him, and surprise,
And cruel sport with man's securities.
Not simple conquest, triumph is his aim:
And, where least feared, there conquest triumphs most,
This proves my bold assertion not too bold.
What are his arts to lay our fears asleep?
Tib^rian arts his purposes wrap up
In deep dissimulation's darkest night.
Like Princes unconfest in foreign courts,
Who travel under cover, death assumes
The name and look of life, and dwells among us.
He takes all shapes that serve his black designs:
Though master of a wider empire far
Than that, over which the Roman Eagle flew;
Like Nero, he is a fiddler, charioteer,
Or drives his phaeton, in female guise;
Quite unsuspected, till, the wheel beneath,
His disarray'd oblation he devours.
He most affects the forms least like himself,
His slender self. Hence burly corpulence
Is his familiar wear, and sleek disguise.
Behind the rosy bloom he loves to lurk,
Or ambush in a smile; or wanton dive
In dimples deep; Love's eddies, which draw in
Unwary hearts, and sink them in despair.
Such, on Narcissa's couch, he loiter'd long
Unknown; and, when detected, still was seen
To smile; such peace has innocence in death!
Most happy they! whom least his arts deceive.
One eye on death, and one full fixed on heaven,
Becomes a mortal, and immortal man.
Long on his wiles a piqu'd and jealous spy,
I Have seen, or dreamt I saw, the tyrant dress;
Lay by his horrors, and put on his smiles.
Say, muse, for thou remember'st, call it back,
And show Lorenzo the surprising scene;
If 'twas a dream, his genius can explain,
'Twas in a circle of the gay I stood.
Death would have entered; nature pusht him back,
Supported by a doctor of renown,
His point he gained. Then artfully dismissed
The sage; for death designed to be concealed.
He gave an old vivacious usurer
His meagre aspect, and his naked bones;
In gratitude for plumping up his prey,
A pampered spendthrift; whose fantastic air,
Well-fashion'd figure, and cockaded brow,
He took in change, and underneath the pride
Of costly linen, tucked his filthy shroud.
His crooked bow he straightened to a cane;
And hid his deadly shafts in Myra's eye.
The dreadful masquerader, thus equipt,
Out-sallies on adventures. Ask you where?
Where is he not? For his peculiar haunts,
Let this suffice; sure as night follows day,
Death treads in pleasure's footsteps round the world,
When pleasure treads the paths, which reason shuns.
When, against reason, riot shuts the door,
And gaiety supplies the place of sense,
Then, foremost at the banquet, and the ball,
Death leads the dance, or stamps the deadly die;
No^ eve^ fails the midnight bowl to crown.
(...) carousing to his gay compeers,
(...) he laughs, to see them laugh at him,
As absent ^ar: And when the revel burns,
When fear is banished, and triumphant thought,
Calling for all the joys beneath the moon,
Against him turns the key; and bids him sup
With their progenitors -- He drops his mask:
Frowns out at full; they start, despair, expire.
Scarce with more sudden terror and surprise,
From his black masque of nitre, touched by fire,
He bursts, expands, roars, blazes, and devours.
And is not this triumphant treachery.
And more than simple conquest, in the fiend?
And now, Lorenzo, do thou wrap thy soul
In soft security, because unknown
Which moment is commissioned to destroy?
In death's uncertainty thy Danger lies.
Is Death uncertain? Therefore Thou be fixed;
Fixed as a sentinel, all eye, all ear,
All expectation of the coming foe.
Rouse, stand in arms, no^ lean against thy spear;
Lest slumber steal one moment over thy soul,
And fate surprise thee nodding. Watch, be strong!
Thus give each day the merit, and renown,
Of dying well; though doomed but once to die.
Nor let life's period hidden (as from most)
Hide too from thee the precious use of life.
Early, not sudden, was Narchissa's fate.
Soon, not surprising, death his visit paid.
Her thought went forth to meet him on his way,
Nor gaiety forgot it was to die.
Though fortune too (our third and final theme,)
As an accomplice, played her gaudy plumes,
And every glittering gewgaw, on her sight,
To dazzle, and debauch it from its mark.
Death's dreadful advent is the mark of man;
And every thought that misses it, is blind.
Fortune, with youth and gaiety, conspired
To weave a triple wreath of happiness
(If happiness on earth) to crown her brow.
And could death charge through such a shining shield?
That shining shield invites the tyrant's spear.
As if to damp our elevated aims,
And strongly preach humility to man.
O h^w portentous is prosperity!
How comet-like, it threatens, while it shines!
Few years (...) yield us proof of death's ambition,
To (...) victims from the fairest fold,
And sheath his shafts in all the pride of life.
When flooded with abundance, purpled over
With recent honors, bloomed with every bliss,
Set up in ostentation, made the gaze,
The gaudy center, of the public eye,
When fortune thus has tossed her child in air,
Snatched from the covert of an humble state,
How often have I seen him dropped at once,
Our morning's envy! and our ev'ning's sigh!
As if her bounties were the signal given,
The flowery wreath to mark the sacrifice,
And call death's arrows on the destined prey,
High fortune seems in cruel league with ^ate.
Ask you for what? To give his war on man
The deeper dread, and more illustrious spoil;
Thus to keep daring mortals more in awe.
And burns Lorenzo still for the sublime
Of life? to hang his airy nest on high,
On the slight timber of the top most bough,
Rockt at each breeze, and menacing a fall?
Granting grim death at equal distance there:
Yet peace begins just where ambition ends.
What makes man wretched? Happiness denied?
Lorenzo! no: It Is happiness disdained.
She comes too meanly dressed to win our smile;
And calls herself content, a homely name!
Our flame is transport, and content our scorn.
Ambition turns, and shuts the door against her,
And weds a toil, a tempest, in her stead;
A tempest to warm transport near of kin.
Unknowing what our mortal state admits,
Life's modest joys we ruin, while we raise;
And all our ecstasies are wounds to peace;
Peace, the full portion of mankind below.
And since thy peace is dear, ambitious youth!
Of fortune fond! as thoughtless of thy fate!
As late I drew death's picture, to stir up
Thy wholesome fears; now, drawn in contrast, see
Gay fortune's, thy vain hopes to reprimand.
See, high in air, the sportive goddess hangs,
Unlocks her casket, spreads her glittering ware,
And calls the giddy winds to puff abroad
Her random bounties over the gaping throng.
All rush rapacious; friends over trodden friends;
Sons over their fathers, subjects over their kings,
Priests over their gods, and lovers over the fair,
(Still more adored) to snatch the golden shower.
Gold glitters most, where virtue shines no more;
As stars from absent suns have leave to shine.
O what a precious pack of votaries
Unkennell'd from the prisons, and the stews,
Pour in, all opening in their idol's praise!
All, ardent, eye each wafture of her hand,
And, wide-expanding their voracious jaws,
Morsel on morsel swallow down unchew'd,
Untasted, through mad appetite for more;
Gorged to the throat, yet lean and ravenous still.
Sagacious all, to trace the smallest game,
And bold to seize the greatest. If (blessed chance!)
Court Zephyrs sweetly breathe, they launch, they fly,
Over just, over sacred, all forbidden ground.
Drunk with the burning scent of place or power,
Staunch to the foot of Lucre, till they die.
Or, if for men you take them, as I mark
Their manners, Thou their various fates survey.
With aim mis-measur'd, and impetuous speed
Some darting, strike their ardent wish far off,
Through fury to possess it: Some succeed
But stumble, and let fall the taken prize.
From some, by sudden blasts, it is whirled away,
And lodged in bosoms that never dreamed of gain.
To some it sticks so close, that, when torn off,
Torn is the man, and mortal is the wound.
Some, o'er-enamour'd of their bags, run mad,
Groan under gold, yet weep for want of bread.
Together some (unhappy rivals!) seize,
And rend abundance into poverty;
Loud croaks the raven of the law, and smiles:
Smiles too the goddess; but smiles most at those,
(Just victims of exorbitant desire!)
Who perish at their own request, and, whelmed
Beneath her load of lavish grants, expire.
Fortune is famous for her numbers slain.
The number small, which happiness can bear.
Though various for a while their fates; at last
One curse involves them all: at death's approach,
All read their riches backward into loss.
And mourn, in just proportion to their store.
And death's approach (if orthodox my song)
Is hastened by the lure of fortune's smiles.
And art thou still a glutton of bright gold?
And art thou still rapacious of thy ruin?
Death loves a shining mark, a signal blow;
A blow, which, while it executes, alarms;
As startles thousands with a single fall.
As when some stately growth of oak, or pine,
Which nods aloft, and proudly spreads her shade,
The sun's defiance, and the flock's defense;
By the strong strokes of laboring hinds subdued,
Loud groans her last, and, rushing from her height,
In cumb'rous ruin, thunders to the ground:
The conscious forest trembles at the shock,
And hill, and stream, and distant dale, resound.
These high-aim'd darts of death, and these alone,
Should I collect, my quiver would be full.
A quiver, which, suspended in mid air,
Or near heaven's archer, in the zodiac, hung,
(So could it be) should draw the public eye,
The gaze and contemplation of mankind!
A constellation aweful, yet benign,
To guide the gay through life's tempestuous wave;
Nor suffer them to strike the common rock,
" From greater danger to grow more secure,
" And, wrapped in happiness, forget their fate."
Lysander, happy past the common lot,
Was warned of danger, but too gay to fear.
He wooed the fair Aspasia: She was kind:
In youth, form, fortune, fame, they both were blessed:
All who knew, envied; yet in envy loved:
Can fancy form more finished happiness?
Fixed was the nuptial hour. Her stately dome
Rose on the sounding beach. The glittering spires
Float in the wave, and break against the shore:
So break those glittering shadows, human joys.
The faithless morning smiled: He takes his leave,
To re-embrace in ecstasies, at Eve.
The rising storm forbids. The news arrives:
Untold, she saw it in her servant's eye.
She felt it seen (her heart was apt to feel;)
And, drowned, without the furious ocean's aid,
In suffocating sorrows, shares his tomb.
Now, round the sumptuous, bridal monument,
The guilty billows innocently r^ar;
And the roug^ sailor passing drops a tear.
A tear? -- Can tears suffice? -- But not for me.
How vain our efforts! and our arts, how vain!
The distant train of thought I took, to shun,
Has thrown me on my fate -- These died together;
Happy in ruin! undivorc'd by death!
Or never to meet, or never to part, is peace --
Narcissa! Pity bleeds at thought of thee.
Yet thou wast only near me; not myself.
Survive myself? -- That cures all other woe,
Narcissa lives; Philander is forgot.
O the soft commerce! O the tender ties,
Close-twisted with the fibers of the heart!
Which, broken, break them; and drain off the soul
Of human joy; and make it pain to live --
And is it then to live? When such friends part,
It Is the survivor dies -- My heart! no more.
THE END OF THE FIFTH NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE SIXTH. THE INFIDEL Reclaimed. IN TWO PARTS.
Containing, The NATURE, PROOF, and IMPORTANCE, of IMMORALITY.

PART THE FIRST. Where, among other Things GLORY and RICHES are particularly
considered.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY PELHAM, First LORD COMMISSIONER of the TREASURY,
and CHANCELLOR of the EXCHEQUER.

PREFACE.
FEW ages have been deeper in dispute about religion, than this. The dispute
about religion, and the practice of it, seldom go together. The shorter,
therefore, the dispute, the better. I think it may be reduced to this single
question, Is Man Immortal, or is he not? If he is not, all our disputes are
mere amusements, or trials of skill. In this case, Truth, Reason, Religion,
which give our Discourses such pomp and solemnity, are (as will be shown) mere
empty sounds, without any meaning in them. But if man is immortal, it will
beho^^ him to be very serious about eternal consequences; or, in other Words,
to be truly religious. And this great fundamental truth, unestablished, or
unawaken'd in the minds of men, is, I conceive, the real source and support of
all our infidelity; how remote soever the particular objections advanced may
seem to be from it.

Sensible appearances affect most men much more than abstract reasonings; and
we daily see bodies drop around us, but the soul is invisible. The power which
inclination has over the judgment, is greater than can be well conceived by
those that have not had an experience of it; and of what numbers is it the sad
interest, that soul should not survive! The heathen world confessed, that they
rather hoped, than firmly believed immortality! and how many heathens have we
still amongst us! The sacred page assures us, that life and immortality is
brought to light by the gospel: But by how many is the gospel rejected, or
overlooked! From these considerations, and from my being, accidentally, privy
to the sentiments of some particular persons, I have been long persuaded, that
most, if not all, our infidels (whatever name they take, and whatever scheme,
for argument's sake, and to keep themselves in countenance, they patronize) are
supported in their deplorable error, by some doubt of their immortality, a^ the
bottom. And I am satisfied, that men once thoroughly convinced of their
immortality, are not far from being Christians. For it is hard to conceive,
that a man fully conscious eternal pain or happiness will certainly be his lot,
should not earnestly, and impartially, inquire after the surest means of
escaping one, and securing the other. And of such an earnest and impartial
inquiry, I well know the consequence.

Here, therefore, in proof of this most fundamental truth, some plain arguments
are offered; arguments derived from principles which infidels admit in common
with believers; arguments, which appear to me altogether irresistible; and such
as, I am satisfied, will have great weight with all, who give themselves the
small trouble of looking seriously into their own bosoms, and of observing,
with any tolerable degree of attention, what daily passes round about them in
the world. If some arguments shall, Here, occur, which others have declined,
they are submitted, with all deference, to better judgments in this, of all
points, the most important. For, as to the being of a God, that is no longer
disputed; but it is undisputed for this reason only, viz. Because where the
least pretense to reason is admitted, it must for ever be indisputable. And of
consequence no man can be betrayed into a dispute of that nature by vanity;
which has a principal share in animating our modern combatants against other
articles of our belief.

THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE SIXTH. THE INFIDEL Reclaimed. PART THE FIRST.
SHE Referring to Night the Fifth.
(for I know not yet her name in Heaven)
Not early like NARCISSA, left the scene;
Nor sudden, like PHILANDER. What avail?
This seeming mitigation but inflames;
This fancied medicine heightens the disease.
The longer known, the closer still she grew;
And gradual parting is a gradual death.
It Is the grim tyrant's engine, which extorts
By tardy pressure's still-increasing weight,
From hardest hearts, confession of distress.
O the long, dark approach through years of pain,
Death's gall'ry! (might I dare to call it so)
With dismal doubt, and sable terror, hung;
Sick Hope's pale lamp, its only glimmering ray:
There, fate my melancholy walk ordained,
Forbid self-love itself to flatter, there.
How often I gazed, prophetically sad!
How often I saw her dead, while yet in smiles!
In Smiles she sunk her grief, to lessen mine.
She spoke me comfort, and increased my pain.
Like powerful armies trenching at a town,
By slow, and silent, but resistless sap,
In his pale progress gently gaining ground,
Death urged his deadly siege; in spite of art,
Of all the balmy blessings nature lends
To succor frail humanity. Ye stars!
(Not now first made familiar to my sight)
And thou, O moon! bear witness; many a night
He tore the pillow from beneath my head,
Tied down my sore attention to the shock,
By ceaseless depredations on a life
Dearer than that he left me. Dreadful post
Of observation! darker every hour!
Less dread the day that drove me to the brink,
And pointed at eternity below;
When my soul shudder'd at futurity;
When, on a moment's point, the important dye
Of life and death spun doubtful, 'ere it fell,
And turned up life; my title to more woe.
But why more Woe? more comfort let it be.
Nothing is dead, but that which wished to die;
Nothing is dead, but wretchedness and pain;
Nothing is dead, but what encumbered, galled,
Blocked up the pass, and barred from real life.
Where dwells that wish most ardent of the wise?
Too dark the sun to see it; highest stars
Too low to reach it; death, great death alone,
Over stars and sun, triumphant, lands us there.
Nor dreadful our transition; though the mind,
An artist at creating self-alarms,
Rich in experience for inquietude,
Is prone to paint it dreadful. Who can take
Death's portrait true? the tyrant never ^at.
Our sketch all random strokes, conjecture all;
Close shuts the grave, nor tells one single tale.
Death, and his image rising in the brain,
Bear faint resemblance; never are alike;
Fear shakes the pencil; fancy loves excess,
Dark ignorance is lavish of her shades:
And these the formidable picture draw.
But grant the worst; it is past; new prospects rise;
And drop a veil eternal over her tomb.
Far other views our contemplation claim,
Views that o'erpay the rigours of our life;
Views that suspend our agonies in death.
Wrapped in the thought of immortality,
Wrapped in the single, the triumphant thought!
Long life might lapse, age unperceived come on;
And find the soul unsated with her theme.
Its nature, proof, importance, fire my song.
O that my song could emulate my soul!
Like her, immortal. No! -- the soul disdains
A mark so mean; far nobler hope inflames;
If endless ages can outweigh an hour,
Let not the laurel, but the palm, inspire.
Thy Nature, immortality! who knows?
And yet who knows it not? It is but life
In stronger thread of brighter color spun,
And spun forever; dipped by cruel fate
In Stygian dye, how black, how brittle here!
How short our correspondence with the sun!
And while it lasts, inglorious! our best deeds,
How wanting in their weight! our highest joys
Small cordials to support us in our pain.
And give us strength to suffer. But how great
To mingle interests, converse, amities,
With all the sons of reason, scattered wide
Through habitable space, wherever born,
However endowed! To live free citizens
Of universal nature! to lay hold
By more than feeble faith on the supreme!
To call heaven's rich unfathomable mines
(Mines, which support archangels in their state)
Our own! to rise in science, as in bliss,
Initiate in the secrets of the skies!
To read creation; read its mighty plan
In the bare bosom of the deity!
The plan, and execution, to collate!
To see, before each glance of piercing thought,
All cloud, all shadow, blown remote! and leave
No mystery -- but that of love divine,
Which lifts us on the seraph's flaming wing,
From earth's Aceldama, this field of blood,
Of inward anguish, and of outward ill,
From darkness, and from dust, to such a scene!
Love's element! true joy's illustrious home!
From earth's sad contrast (now deplored) more fair!
What exquisite vicissitude of fate!
Blessed absolution of our blackest hour!
LORENZO, these are thoughts that make man, man,
The wise illumine, aggrandize the great.
How great (while yet we tread the kindred clod,
And every moment fear to sink beneath
The clod we tread; soon trodden by our sons)
How great, in the wild whirl of time's pursuits,
To stop, and pause, involved in high presage,
Through the long visto of a thousand years,
To stand contemplating our distant selves,
(...) ^^fying mirror seen,
(...) ennobled, elevate, divine!
To prophesy our own futurities!
To gaze in thought on what all thought transcends!
To talk, with fellow-candidates, of joys
As far beyond conception, as desert,
Ourselves the astonished talkers, and the tale!
LORENZO, swells thy bosom at the thought!
The swell becomes thee: It Is an honest pride.
Revere thyself; -- and yet thyself despise.
His nature no man can o'er-rate; and none
Can under-rate his merit. Take good heed,
Nor there be modest, where thou should be proud;
That almost universal error shun.
How just our pride, when we behold those heights!
Not those ambition paints in air, but those
Reason points out, and ardent virtue gains;
And angels emulate; our pride how just!
When mount we? when these shackles cast? when quit
This cell of the creation? this small nest,
Stuck in a corner of the universe,
Wrapped up in fleecy cloud, and fine-spun air?
Fine-spun to sense; but gross and feculent
To souls celestial; souls ordained to breathe
Ambrosial gales, and drink a purer sky;
Greatly triumphant on time's farther shore,
Where virtue reigns, enriched with full arrears;
While pomp imperial begs an alms of peace.
In empire high, or in proud science deep,
Ye born of earth! on what can you confer,
With half the dignity, with half the gain,
The gust, the glow of rational delight,
As on this theme, which angels praise and share?
Man's fates and favors are a theme in heaven.
What wretched repetition cloys us here!
What periodic potions for the sick!
Distempered bodies! and distempered minds!
In an eternity, what scenes shall strike!
Adventures thicken; novelties surprise!
What webs of wonder shall unravel, there!
What full day pour on all the paths of heaven.
And light the Almighty's footsteps in the deep!
How shall the blessed day of our discharge
Unwind, at once, the labyrinths of fate,
And straiten its inextricable maze!
If inextinguishable thirst in man
To know; how rich, how full, our banquet there!
There, not the moral world alone unfolds;
The world material, lately seen in shades,
And, in those shades, by fragments only seen,
(...) those fragments by the laboring eye,
U^^^roken, then, illustrious, and entire,
Its ample sphere, its universal frame,
In full dimensions, swells to the survey;
And enters, at one glance, the ravished sight.
From some superior point (where who can tell!
Suffice it, it is a point where gods reside)
How shall the stranger man's illumined eye,
In the vast ocean of unbounded space,
Behold an infinite of floating worlds
Divide the crystal waves of either pure,
In endless voyage, without port? the least
Of these disseminated orbs, how great!
Great as they are, what numbers these surpass,
Huge, as Leviathan, to that small race,
Those twinkling multitudes of little life,
He swallows unperceived! stupendous these!
Yet what are these stupendous to the whole?
As particles, as atoms ill-perceiv'd;
As circulating globules in our veins;
So vast the plan: fecundity divine!
Exub'rant ^ource! perhaps, I wrong thee still.
If admiration is a source of joy,
What transport hence! yet this the least in heaven.
What this to that illustrious robe he wears,
Who tossed this mass of wonders from his hand,
A specimen, an earnest, of his power?
It Is, to that glory, whence all glory flows,
As the mead's meanest flow'ret to the sun,
Which gave it birth. But what, this sun of heaven!
This bliss supreme of the supremely blessed?
Death, only death, the question can resolve.
By death, cheap-bought the ideas of our joy;
The bare ideas! solid happiness
So distant from its shadow chased below.
And chase we still the phantom through the fire,
Over bog, and brake, and precipice, till death?
And toil we still for sublunary pay?
Defy the dangers of the field and flood,
Or, spider-like, spin out our precious all,
Our more than vitals spin (if no regard
To great futurity) in curious webs
Of subtle thought, and exquisite design;
(Fine network of the brain!) to catch a fly!
The momentary buz of vain renown!
A name! a mortal immortality!
Or (meaner still!) instead of grasping air,
For sordid lucre plunge we in the mire?
Drudge, sweat, through every shame, for every gain,
For vile contaminating trash; throw up
Our hope in heaven, our dignity with man?
And deify the dirt, matur'd to gold?
Ambition, avarice; the two demons these,
Which goad through every slough our human herd,
Hard-travell'd from the cradle to the grave.
How low the wretches stoop! How steep they climb!
These demons burn mankind; but most possess
LORENZO's bosom, and turn out the skies.
Is it in time to hide eternity?
And why not in an atom on the shore,
To cover ocean? or a mote the sun?
Glory and wealth! have they this blinding power?
What if to them I prove LORENZO blind?
Would it surprise thee? be thou then surprised,
Thou neither know: their nature learn from me.
Mark well, as foreign as these subjects seem,
What close connection ties them to my theme.
First, what is true ambition? the pursuit
Of glory, nothing less than man can share:
Were they as vain, as gaudy-minded man.
As flatulent with fumes of self-applause,
Their arts and conquests animals might boast,
And claim their laurel crowns, as well as we;
But not celestial. Here we stand alone;
As in our form, distinct, pre-eminent;
If prone in thought, our stature is our shame;
And man should blush, his forehead meets the skies.
The visible and present are for brutes,
A slender portion! and a narrow bound!
These reason, with an energy divine,
O'erleaps; and claims the future and unseen;
The vast unseen! the future f^thomless!
When the great soul buoys up to this high point,
Leaving gross Nature's sediments below,
Then, and then only, Adam's offspring quits
The sage and hero of the fields and woods,
Asserts his rank, and rises into man.
This is ambition: this is human fire.
Can parts or place (two bold pretenders!) make
LORENZO great, and pluck him from the throng?
Genius and art, ambition's boasted wings,
Our boast but ill deserve. A feeble aid;
Dedalian engin'ry! if these alone
Assist our flight, fame's flight is glory's fall.
Heart-merit wanting, mount we never so high,
Our height is but the gibbet of our name.
A celebrated wretch when I behold,
When I behold a genius bright, and base,
Of towering talents, and terrestrial aims;
Methinks I see, as thrown from her high sphere,
The glorious fragments of a soul immortal,
With Rubbish mixed, and glittering in the dust.
Struck at the splendid, melancholy sight,
At once compassion soft, and envy, rise --
But wherefore envy? talents angel-bright,
If wanting worth, are shining instruments
In false ambition's hand, to finish faults
Illustrious, and give infamy renown.
Great ill is an achievement of great powers.
Plain sense but rarely leads us far astray.
Reason the means, affections choose our end;
Means have no merit, if our end amiss.
If wrong our hearts, our heads are right in vain;
What is a PELHAM's head to PELHAM's heart?
Hearts are proprietors of all applause.
Right ends, and means, make wisdom: worldly-wise
Is but half-witted, at its highest praise.
Let genius then despair to make thee great:
Nor flatter station: what is station high?
It Is a proud mendicant; it boasts, and begs;
It begs an alms of homage from the throng,
And often the throng denies its charity.
Monarchs and ministers are awful names;
Whoever wear them, challenge our devoir.
Religion, public order, both exact
External homage, and a supple knee,
To beings pompously set up, to serve
The meanest slave; all more is merit's due,
Her sacred and inviolable right;
Nor ever paid the monarch, but the man.
Our hearts never bow but to superior worth:
Nor ever fail of their allegiance there.
Fools, indeed, drop the man in their account,
And vote the mantle into Majesty.
Let the small savage boast his silver fur;
His royal robe unborrow'd, and unbought,
His own, descending fairly from his sires.
Shall man be proud to wear his livery,
And soul^ in ermin scorn a soul without?
Can place or lessen us, or aggrandize?
Pygmies are pygmies still, though percht on alps;
And pyramids are pyramids in vales.
Each man makes his own stature, builds himself;
Virtue alone out-builds the pyramids;
Her monuments shall last, when Egypt's fall.
Of these sure truths do thou demand the cause?
The cause is lodged in immortality.
Hear, and assent. Thy bosom burns for power;
What station charms thee? I Will install thee there;
It Is thine. And art thou greater than before?
Then thou before wast something less than man.
Has thy new post betrayed thee into pride?
That treacherous pride betrays thy dignity;
That pride defames humanity, and calls
The being mean, which staffs or strings can raise.
That pride, like hooded hawks, in darkness soars,
From blindness bold, and towering to the skies.
It Is born of ignorance, which knows not man:
An angel's second; nor his second, long.
A NERO quitting his imperial throne,
And courting glory from the tinkling string,
But faintly shadows an immortal soul,
With empire's self, to pride, or rapture, fired.
If nobler motives minister no cure,
Even vanity forbids thee to be vain.
High worth is elevated place: it is more;
It makes the post stand candidate for thee;
Makes more than monarchs, makes an honest man;
Though no exchequer it commands, it is wealth;
And tho it wears no ribband, it is renown;
Renown, that would not quit thee, though disgraced,
Nor leave the^ pendent on a master's smile.
Other ambition nature interdicts;
Nature proclaims it m^st absurd in man,
By pointing at his origin, and end;
Milk, and a swathe, at first, his whole demand;
His whole domain, at last, a turf, or stone;
To whom, between, a world may seem too small.
Souls truly great dart forward on the wing
Of just ambition, to the grand result,
The curtain's fall; there, see the buskined chief
Unshod behind this momentary scene;
Reduced to his own stature, low or high,
As vice, or virtue, sinks him, or sublimes;
And laugh at this fantastic mummery,
This antic prelude of grotesque events,
Where dwarfs are often stilted, and betray
A littleness of soul by world's o'er-run,
And nations laid in blood. Dread sacrifice
To christian pride! which had with horror shockt
The darkest pagans, offered to their gods.
O thou most christian enemy to peace!
Again in arms? again provoking fate?
That prince, and that alone, is truly great,
Who draws the sword reluctant, gladly sheaths;
On empire builds what empire far outweighs,
And makes his throne a scaffold to the skies.
Why this so rare? because forgot of all
The day of death; that venerable day,
Which sits as judge; that day, which shall pronounce
On all our days, absolve them, or condemn.
LORENZO, never shut thy thought against it;
Be levees never so full, afford it room,
And give it audience in the cabinet.
That friend consulted. Flatteries apart,
Will tell thee fair, if thou art great, or mean.
To dote on aught may leave us, or be left,
Is that ambition? then let flames descend,
Point to the center their inverted spires,
And learn humiliation from a soul,
Which boasts her lineage from celestial fire.
Yet these are they, the world pronounces wise;
The world, which cancels nature's right and wrong,
And casts new wisdom: Even the grave man lends
His solemn face, to countenance the coin.
Wisdom for parts is madness for the whole.
This stamps the paradox, and gives us leave
To call the wisest weak, the richest poor,
The most ambitious, unambitious, mean;
In triumph, mean; and abject, on a throne.
Nothing can make it less than mad in man,
To put forth all his ardour, all his art,
And give his soul her full unbounded flight,
But reaching him, who gave her wings to fly.
When blind ambition quite mistakes her road,
And downwards pores, for that which shines above,
Substantial happiness, and true renown;
Then, like an idiot, gazing on the brook,
We leap at stars, and fasten in the mud;
At glory grasp, and sink in infamy.
Ambition! powerful source of good and Ill!
Thy strength in man, like length of wing in birds,
When disengaged from earth, with greater ease,
And swifter flight, transports us to the skies;
By toys entangled, or in guilt bemir'd,
It turns a curse; it is our chain and scourge,
In this dark dungeon, where confined we lie,
Close-grated by the sordid bars of sense;
All prospect of eternity shut out;
And, but for execution, never set free.
With error in ambition justly charged,
Find we LORENZO wiser in his wealth?
What if thy rental I reform? and draw
An inventory new to set thee right?
Where, thy true treasure? gold says, "not in me:"
And, "not in me," the di'mond. Gold is poor;
India's insolvent: seek it in thyself,
Seek in thy naked self, and find it there;
In being so descended, formed, endowed;
Sky-born, sky-guided, sky-returning race!
Erect, immortal, rational, divine!
In senses, which inherit earth, and heavens;
Enjoy the various riches nature yields;
Far nobler! give the riches they enjoy;
Give taste to fruits; and harmony to groves;
Their radiant beams to gold, and gold's bright sire:
Take in at once, the landscape of the world,
At a small inlet, which a grain might close,
And half create the wondrous world they see.
Our senses, as our reason, are divine.
But for the magic organ's powerful charm,
Earth were a rude, uncolour'd chaos, still
Objects are but the occasion; ours the exploit;
Ours is the cloth, the pencil, and the paint,
Which natures's admirable picture draws;
And beautifies creation's ample dome.
Like Milton's eve, when gazing on the lake,
Man makes the matchless image, man admires.
Say then, shall man, his thoughts all sent abroad,
Superior wonders in himself forgot,
His admiration waste on objects round,
When heaven makes him the soul of all he sees?
Absurd! not rare! so great, so mean, is man.
What wealth in senses such as these! what wealth
In fancy, fired to form a fairer scene
Than sense surveys! in mem'ry's firm record,
Which, should it perish, could this world recall
From the dark shadows of o'erwhelming years!
In colors fresh, originally bright
Preserve its portrait, and report its fate!
What wealth in intellect, that sovereign power!
Which sense, and fancy, summons to the bar;
Interrogates, approves, or reprehends;
And from the mass those underlings import,
From their materials sifted, and refined,
And in truth's balance accurately weighed,
Forms art, and science, government, and law;
The solid basis, and the beauteous frame,
The vitals, and the grace of civil life!
And manners (sad exception!) set aside,
Strikes out, with master-hand, a copy fair
Of his idea, whose indulgent thought
Long, long, ere chaos teemed, planned human bliss.
What wealth in souls that soar, dive, range around,
Disdaining limit, or from place, or time;
And hear at once, in thought extensive, hear
The almighty fiat, and the trumpet's sound!
Bold, on creation's outside walk and view
What was, and is, and more than ever shall be;
Commanding, with omnipotence of thought,
Creations new in fancy's field to rise!
Souls, that can grasp whatever the almighty made,
And wander wild through things impossible!
What wealth, in faculties of endless growth,
In quenchless passions violent to crave,
In liberty to choose, in power to reach,
And in duration (how thy riches rise!)
Duration to perpetuate -- boundless bliss!
Ask you, what power resides in feeble man
That bliss to gain? Is virtue's, then, unknown!
Virtue, our present peace, our future prize.
Man's unprecarious, natural estate,
Improveable at will, in virtue lies;
Its tenure sure; its income is divine.
High-built abundance, heap on heap! for what?
To breed new wants, and beggar us the more;
Then, make a richer scramble for the throng?
Soon as this feeble pulse, which leaps so long
Almost by miracle, is tired with play,
Like rubbish from disploding engines thrown,
Our magazines of hoarded trifles fly;
Fly diverse; fly to foreigners, to foes;
New masters court, and call the former fool
(How justly!) for dependence on their stay.
Wide scatter, first, our play-things; then, our dust.
Do court abundance for the sake of peace?
Learn, and lament thy self-defeated scheme:
Riches enable to be richer still;
And, richer still, what mortal can resist?
Thus wealth (a cruel task-master!) injoins
New toils, succeeding toils, and endless train!
And murders peace, which taught it first to shine.
The poor are half as wretched, as the rich;
Whose proud and painful privilege it is,
At once, to bear a double load of woe;
To feel the stings of envy, and of want,
Outrageous want! both Indies cannot cure.
A competence is vital to content.
Much wealth is corpulence, if not disease;
Sick, or encumbered, is our happiness.
A competence is all we can enjoy.
O be content, where heaven can give no more!
More, like a flash of water from a lock,
Quickens our spirit's movement for an hour;
But soon its force is spent, nor rise our joys
Above our native temper's common stream.
Hence disappointment lurks in every prize.
As ^ees in flowers; and stings us with success.
The rich man, who denies it, proudly feigns;
Nor knows the wise are privy to the lie.
Much learning shows how little mortals know;
Much wealth, how little worldlings can enjoy:
At best, it babies us with endless toys,
And keeps us children till we drop to dust.
As monkies at a mirror stand amazed,
They fail to find, what they so plainly see;
Thus men, in shining riches, see the face
Of happiness, nor know it is a shade;
But gaze, and touch, and peep, and peep again,
And wish, and wonder it is absent still.
How few can rescue opulence from want!
Who lives to nature, rarely can be poor;
Who lives to fancy, never can be rich.
Poor is the man in debt; the man of gold,
In debt to fortune, trembles at her power.
The man of reason smiles at her, and death.
O what a patrimony this! a being
Of such inherent strength and majesty.
Not worlds possessed can raise; worlds destroyed
Cannot injure; which holds on its glorious course,
When thine, O nature! ends; too blessed to mourn
Creation's obsequies. What treasure, this!
The monarch is a beggar to the man.
Immortal! ages past, yet nothing gone!
Morn without eve! a race without a goal?
Unshorten'd by progression infinite!
Futurity for ever future! life
Beginning still, where computation ends!
It Is the description of a deity!
It Is the description of the meanest slave:
The meanest slave dares then LORENZO scorn?
The meanest slave thy sovereign glory shares.
Proud youth! fastidious of the lower world!
Man's lawful pride includes humility;
Stoops to the lowest; is too great to find
Inferiors: all immortal! brothers all!
Proprietors eternal of thy love.
IMMORTAL! what can strike the sense so strong,
As this the soul? it thunders to the thought;
Reason amazes; gratitude o'erwhelms;
No more we slumber on the brink of fate;
Roused at the sound, the exulting soul ascends,
And breathes her native air; an air that feeds
Ambitions high, and fans ethereal fires;
Quick-kindles all that is divine within us;
Nor leaves one loit'ring thought beneath the stars.
Has not LORENZO's bosom caugh the flame?
Immortal? Were but one immortal, how
Would others envy! how would thrones adore!
Because it is common, is the blessing lost?
How this ties up the bounteous ^and of heaven!
O vain, vain, vain! all else! eternity!
A glorious, and a needful refuge, that,
From vile imprisonment in abject views.
It Is immortality, it is that alone,
Amid life's pains, abasements, emptiness,
The soul can comfort, elevate, and fill.
That only, and that amply, this performs;
Lifts us above life's pains, her joys above;
Their terror those; and these their luster lose;
Eternity depending covers all;
Eternity depending all atchieves;
Sets earth at distance; casts her into shades;
Blends her distinctions; abrogates her powers;
The low, the! fty, joyous, and severe.
(...) dread frowns, and fascinating smiles,
Make one promiscuous and neglected heap,
The man beneath; if I may call him man,
Whom immortality's full force inspires.
Nothing terrestrial touches his high thought;
Suns shine unseen, and thunders roll unheard.
By minds quite conscious of their high descent,
Their present province, and their future prize;
Divinely darting upward every wish,
Warm on the wing, in glorious absence lost!
Doubt you this truth? why labors your belief?
If earth's whole orb, by some due-distanc'd eye
Were seen at once, her towering alps would sink,
And levelled Atlas leave an even sphere.
Thus earth, and all that earthly minds admire,
Is swallowed in eternity's vast round.
To that stupendous view, when souls awake,
So large of late, so mountainous to man,
Times's toys subside; and equal all below.
Enthusiastic, this? then all are weak,
But rank Enthusiasts. To this godlike height
Some souls have soared; or martyrs never had bled.
And all may do, what has by man been done.
Who, beaten by these sublunary storms,
Boundless, interminable joys can weigh,
Unraptur'd, unexalted, uninflam'd?
What slave unblest, who from tomorrow's dawn
Expects an empire? he forgets his chain,
And thro^'d in thought, his absent scepter waves.
And, what a scepter waits us! what a throne!
Her own immense appointments to compute,
Or comprehend her high prerogatives,
In this her dark minority, how toils,
How vainly pants, the human soul divine!
Too great the bounty seems for earthly joy;
What heart but trembles at so strange a bliss?
In spite of all the truths the muse has sung,
Never to be prized enough! enough revolved!
Are there who wrap the world so close about them,
They see no farther than the clouds; and dance
On heedless vanity's phantastic toe,
Till, stumbling at a straw, in their career,
Headlong they plunge, where end both dance and song?
Are there LORENZO? is it possible?
Are there on earth (let me not call them men)
Who lodge a soul immortal in their breasts;
Unconscious as the mountain of its ore;
Or rock, of its inestimable gem?
When rocks shall melt, and mountains vanish, these
Shall know their treasure; treasure, then, no more.
Are there (still more amazing!) who resist
The rising thought? who smother, in its birth,
The glorious truth? who struggle to be brutes?
Who through this bosom barrier burst their way?
And, with reverst ambition, strive to sink:
Who labor downwards through the opposing powers
Of instinct, reason, and the world against them,
To dismal hopes, and shelter in the shock
Of endless night? night darker than the grave's?
Who fight the proofs of immortality?
With horrid zeal, and execrable arts,
Work all their engines, level their black fires,
To blot from man this attribute divine,
(Than vital blood far dearer to the wise)
Blasphemers, and rank atheists to themselves?
To contradict them, see all nature rise!
What object, what event, the moon beneath,
But argues, or endears, an after-scene?
To reason proves, or weds it to desire?
All things proclaim it needful; some advance
One precious step beyond, and prove it sure.
A thousand arguments swarm round my pen,
From heaven, and earth, and man. Indulge a few,
By nature, as her common habit, worn;
So pressing providence a truth to teach,
Which truth untaught, all other truths were vain.
THOU! whose all-providential eye surveys,
Whose hand directs, whose spirit fills and warms
Creation, and holds empire far beyond!
Eternity's inhabitant august!
Of two eternities amazing Lord!
One past, ere man's, or angel's, had begun;
Aid! while I rescue from the foe's assault
Thy glorious immortality in man.
A theme for ever, and for all, of weight,
Of moment infinite! but relisht most
By those, who love thee most, who most adore.
Nature, thy daughter, ever-changing birth
Of thee the great immutable, to man
Speaks wisdom; is his oracle supreme;
And he who most consults her, is most wise.
LORENZO, to this heavenly delphos haste;
And come back all-immortal; all-divine:
Look nature through, it is revolution all;
All change, no death. Day follows night; and night
The dying day; stars rise, and set, and rise;
Earth takes the example. See, the summer gay,
With her green chaplet, and ambrosial flowers,
Droops into pallid autumn: winter gray,
Horrid with frost, and turbulent with storm,
Blows autumn, and his golden fruits, away:
Then melts into the spring: soft spring, with breath
Favonian, from warm chambers of the south,
Recalls the first. All, to reflourish, fades.
As in a wheel, all sinks, to reascend.
Emblems of man, who passes, not expires.
With this minute distinction, emblems just,
Nature revolves, but man advances; both
Eternal, that a circle, this a line.
That gravitates, this soars. The aspiring soul
Ardent, and tremulous, like flame, ascends;
Zeal, and humility, her wings to heaven.
The world of matter, with its various forms,
All dies into new life. Life born from death
Rolls the vast mass, and shall forever roll.
No single atom, once in being, lost,
With change of counsel charges the most high.
What hence infers LORENZO? can it be?
Matter immortal? and shall spirit die?
Above the nobler, shall less noble rise?
Shall man alone, for whom all else revives,
No resurrection know? shall man alone,
Imperial man! be sown in barren ground,
Less privileged than grain, on which he feeds?
Is man, in whom alone is power to prize
The bliss of being, or with previous pain
Deplore its period, by the spleen of fate,
Severely doomed death's single unredeem'd?
If nature's revolution speaks aloud,
In her gradation hear her louder still.
Look nature through, it is neat gradation all.
By what minute degrees her scale ascends!
Each middle nature joined at each extreme,
To that above it joined, to that beneath,
Parts into parts reciprocally shot,
Abhor divorce: what love of union reigns!
Here, dormant matter waits a call to life:
Half-life, half-death, join there; here, life and sense;
There, sense from reason steals a glimmering ray;
Reason shines out in man. But how preserved
The chain unbroken upward, to the realms
Of incorporeal life? those realms of bliss,
Where death has no dominion? grant a make
Half-mortal, half immortal; earthy, part;
And part ethereal; grant the soul of man
Eternal; or in man the series ends.
Wide yawns the gap; connection is no more;
Checked reason halts; her next step wants support;
Striving to climb, she tumbles from her scheme!
A scheme, analogy pronounced so true;
Analogy, man's surest guide below.
Thus far, all nature calls on thy belief.
And will LORENZO, careless of the call,
False attestation on all nature charge,
Rather than violate his league with death?
Renounce his reason, rather than renounce
The dust beloved, and run the risque of heaven?
O what indignity to deathless souls!
What treason to the majesty of man!
Of man immortal! hear the lofty style:
" If so decreed, the Almighty will be done.
" Let earth dissolve, yon ponderous orbs descend,
" And grind us into dust: the soul is safe;
" The man emerges; mounts above the wreck.
" As towering flame from nature's funeral pyre;
" Over devastation, as a gainer, smiles;
" His charter, his inviolable rights,
" Well-pleased to learn from thunder's impotence,
" Death's pointless darts, and hell's defeated storms."
But these chimaeras touch not thee, LORENZO!
The glories of the world, thy sev'nfold shield.
Other ambition than of crowns in air,
And superlunary felicities,
Thy bosom warm. I Will cool it, if I can;
And turn those glories that inchant, against thee.
What ties thee to this life, proclaims the next.
If wise, the cause that wounds thee is thy cure.
Come, my ambitious! let us mount together
(To mount LORENZO never can refuse);
And from the clouds, where pride delights to dwell,
Look down on earth. -- What see thou? wondrous things!
Terrestrial wonders, that eclipse the skies.
What lengths of labored lands! what loaded seas!
Loaded by man, for pleasure, wealth, or war!
Seas, winds, and planets, into service brought,
His art acknowledge, and promote his ends.
Nor can the eternal rocks his will withstand;
What levelled mountains! and what lifted vales!
Over vales and mountains sumptuous cities swell,
And gild our landscape with their glittering spires.
Some ^mid the wondering waves majestic rise;
And Neptune holds a mirror to their charms.
Far greater still! (what cannot mortal might?)
See, wide dominions ravished from the deep!
The narrow'd deep with indignation foams.
Or southward turn; to delicate, and grand,
The finer arts there ripen in the sun.
How the tall temples, as to meet their Gods,
Ascend the skies! the proud triumphal arch
Shows us half heaven beneath its ample bend.
High through mid air, here, streams are taught to flow;
Whole rivers, there, laid by in basins, sleep.
Here, plains turn oceans; there, vast oceans join
Through kingdoms chanel'd deep from shore to shore;
And changed creation takes its face from man.
Beats thy brave breast for formidable scenes,
Where fame and empire wait upon the sword?
See fields in blood; hear naval thunders rise;
BRITANNIA's voice! that awes the world to peace.
How yon enormous mole projecting breaks
The mid-sea, furious waves! their roar amidst,
Out speaks the deity, and says, "O main!
" Thus far, nor farther; new restraints obey."
Earth's disembowel'd! measured are the skies!
Stars are detected in their deep recess!
Creation widens! vanquished nature yields!
Her secrets are extorted! art prevails!
What monument of genius, spirit, power!
And now, LORENZO! raptured at this scene,
Whose glories render Heaven superflous! say,
Whose footsteps these? -- immortals have been here.
Could less than souls immortal this have done?
Earth's covered over with proofs of souls immortal;
And proofs of immortality forgot.
To flatter thy grand foible, I confess,
These are ambition's works: and these are great:
But this, the least immortal souls can do;
Transcend them all -- But what can these transcend?
Do ask me, what? -- One sigh for the distressed.
What then for Infidels? a deeper sigh.
It Is moral grandeur makes the mighty man:
How little they, who think aught great below?
All our ambitions death defeats, but one;
And that it crowns. -- Here cease we: but, ere long,
More powerful proof shall take the field against thee,
Stronger than death, and smiling at the tomb.
THE END OF THE SIXTH NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE SEVENTH. BEING THE SECOND PART OF THE INFIDEL
Reclaimed; CONTAINING THE NATURE, PROOF, AND IMPORTANCE OF IMMORTALITY.

PREFACE.
AS we are at war with the power, it were well if we were at war with the
manners, of France. A land of levity, is a land of guilt. A serious mind is the
native soil of every virtue; and the single character that does true honor to
mankind. The soul's immortality has been the favorite theme with the serious
of all ages. Nor is it strange; it is a subject by far the most interesting,
and important, that can enter the mind of man. Of highest moment this subject
always was, and always will be. Yet this its highest moment seems to admit of
increase, at this day; a sort of occasional importance is superadded to the
natural weight of it; if that opinion which is advanced in the Preface to the
preceding Night, be just. It is there supposed, that all our infidels, whatever
scheme, for argument's sake, and to keep themselves in countenance, they
patronize, are betrayed into their deplorable error, by some doubt of their
immortality, at the bottom. And the more I consider this point, the more I am
persuaded of the truth of that opinion. Though the distrust of a futurity is a
strange error; yet it is an error into which bad men may naturally be
distressed. For it is impossible to bid defiance to final ruin, without some
refuge in imagination, some presumption of escape. And what presumption is
there? There are but two in nature; but two, within the compass of human
thought. And these are, -- That either God will not, or can not punish.
Considering the divine attributes, the first is too gross to be digested by our
strongest wishes. And since omnipotence is as much a divine attribute as
holiness, that God cannot punish, is as absurd a supposition, as the former.
God certainly can punish, as long as the wicked man exists. In nonexistence,
therefore, is their only refuge; and, consequently, nonexistence is their
strongest wish. And strong wishes have a strange influence on our opinions;
they bias the judgment in a manner, almost, incredible. And since on this
member of their alternative, there are some very small appearances in their
favor, and none at all on the other, they catch at this reed, they lay hold on
this chimaera, to save themselves from the shock, and horror, of an immediate,
and absolute, despair.

On reviewing my subject, by the light which this argument, and others of like
tendency, threw upon it, I was more inclined than ever, to pursue it; as it
appeared to me to strike directly at the main root of all our infidelity. In
the following pages, it is, accordingly, pursued at large; and some arguments
for immortality, new (at least, to me,) are ventured on in them. There also the
writer has made an attempt to set the gross absurdities and horrors of
annihilation in a fuller and more affecting view, than is (I think) to be met
with elsewhere.

The gentlemen, for whose sake this attempt was chiefly made, profess great
admiration for the wisdom of heathen antiquity: What pity it is, they are not
sincere! If they were sincere, how would it mortify them to consider, with what
contempt, and abhorrence, their notions would have been received, by those whom
they so much admire? What degree of contempt, and abhorrence, would fall to
their share, may be conjectured by the following matter of fact (in my opinion)
extremely memorable. Of all their heathen worthies, Socrates ('it is well known)
was the most guarded, dispassionate, and composed: Yet this great master of
temper was angry; and angry at his last hour; and angry with his friend; and
angry for what deserved acknowledgment; angry, for a right and tender instance
of true friendship toward him. Is not this surprising? What could be the
cause? The cause was for his honor; it was a truly noble, though, perhaps, a too
punctilious, regard for immortality: For his friend asking him, with such an
affectionate concern as became a friend, Where he should deposit his remains?
it was resented by Socrates, as implying a dishonorable supposition, that He
could be so mean, as to have a regard for any thing, even in himself, that was
not immortal.

This fact well considered, would make our infidels withdraw their admiration
from Socrates; or make them endeavor, by their imitation of this illustrious
example, to share his glory: And, consequently, It would incline them to peruse
the following pages with candor and impartiality: Which is all I desire; and
that, for their sakes: For I am persuaded, that an unprejudiced infidel must,
necessarily, receive some advantageous impressions from them.

July 7. 1744.
CONTENTS of the Seventh Night.
IN the Sixth Night arguments were drawn, from nature, in proof of immortality:
Here, others are drawn from man: From his discontent, p. 141; from his passions
and powers, 142; from the gradual growth of reason, ibid. from his fear of
death, ibid. from the nature of hope, 143; and of virtue, 144, etc. from
knowledge, and love, as being the most essential properties of the soul, 147;
from the order of creation, 148; from the nature of ambition, 149, etc.
Avarice, 152, 153; Pleasure, 153. A digression on the grandeur of the passions,
154, 155. Immortality alone renders our present state intelligible, 156. An
objection from the Stoics disbelief of immortality answered, 156, 157. Endless
questions unresolvable, but on supposition of our immortality, 157, 158. The
natural, most melancholy, and pathetic complaint of a worthy man under the
persuasion of no futurity, 159, etc. The gross absurdities and horrors of
annihilation urged home on Lorenzo, 163, etc. The soul's vast importance, 168,
etc. from whence it arises, 171, 172. The difficulty of being an infidel, 173.
The infamy, ibid. the cause, 174, and the Character, 174, 175, of an
infidel-state. What true free thinking is, 175, 176. The necessary punishment
of the false, 177. Man's ruin is from himself, ibid. An infidel accuses himself
of guilt, and hypocrisy; and that of the worst sort, 178. His obligation to
christians, ibid. What danger ^e incurs by virtue, 179. Vice recommended to
him, 180. His high pretenses to virtue, and benevolence, exploded, ibid. The
conclusion, on the nature of faith, ibid. Reason, 181; and Hope, 181, 182; with
an apology for this attempt, 182.

THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE SEVENTH, etc.
HEAVEN gives the needful, but neglected, call.
What day, what hour, but knocks at human hearts,
To wake the soul to sense of future scenes?
Deaths stand, like Mercurys, in every way;
And kindly point us to our journey's end.
POPE, who could make immortals! art thou dead?
I give thee joy: nor will I take my leave;
So soon to follow. Man but dives in death;
Dives from the sun, in fairer day to rise;
The grave, his subterranean road to bliss.
Yes, infinite indulgence planned it so;
Through various parts our glorious story runs;
Time gives the preface, endless age unrolls
The volume (never unroll'd!) of human fate,
This, earth and skies Night the Sixth.
already have proclaimed.
The world's a prophecy of worlds to come;
And who, what GOD foretells (who speaks in things,
Still louder than in words) shall dare deny?
If nature's arguments appear too weak,
Turn a new leaf, and stronger read in man.
If man sleeps on, untaught by what he sees,
Can he prove infidel to what he feels?
He, whose blind thought futurity denies,
Unconscious, bears, BELLEROPHON! like thee,
His own indictment; he condemns himself;
Who reads his bosom, reads immortal life;
Or, nature, there, imposing on her sons,
Has written fables; man was made a lie.
Why discontent for ever harbored there?
Incurable consumption of our peace!
Resolve me, why, the cottager, and king,
He whom sea-sever'd realms obey, and he
Who steals his whole dominion from the waste,
Repelling winter blasts with mud and straw,
Disquieted alike, draw sigh for sigh,
In fate so distant, in complaint so near?
Is it, that things terrestrial cannot content?
Deep in rich pasture, will thy flocks complain?
Not so; but to their master is denied
To share their sweet serene. Man, ill at ease,
In this, not his own place, this foreign field,
Where nature fodders him with other food,
Than was ordained his cravings to suffice,
Poor in abundance, famished at a feast,
Sighs on for something more, when most enjoyed.
Is Heaven then kinder to thy flocks, than thee?
Not so; thy pasture richer, but remote;
In part, remote; for that remoter part
Man bleats from instinct, though, perhaps, debauched
By sense, his reason sleeps, nor dreams the cause.
The cause how obvious, when his reason wakes!
His grief ^s but his grandeur in disguise;
And discontent is immortality.
Shall sons of Ether, shall the blood of Heaven,
Set up their hopes on earth, and stable here,
With brutal acquiescence in the mire?
LORENZO! no! they shall be nobly pained;
The glorious foreigners, distressed, shall sigh
On thrones; and thou congratulate the sigh:
Man's misery declares him born for bliss;
His anxious heart asserts the truth I sing,
And gives the skeptic in his head the lie.
Our heads, our hearts, our passions, and our powers,
Speak the same language; call us to the skies:
Unripen'd these in this inclement clime,
Scarce rise above conjecture, and mistake;
And for this land of trifles those too strong
Tumultuous rise, and tempest human life:
What prize on earth can pay us for the storm?
Meet objects for our passions Heaven ordained,
Objects that challenge all their fire and leave
No fault, but in defect: blessed Heaven! avert
A bounded ardor for unbounded bliss;
O for a bliss unbounded! far beneath
A soul immortal, is a mortal joy.
Nor are our powers to perish immature;
But, after feeble effort here, beneath
A brighter sun, and in a nobler soil,
Transplanted from this sublunary bed,
Shall flourish fair, and put forth all their bloom.
Reason progressive, instinct is complete;
Swift instinct leaps; slow reason feebly climbs.
Brutes soon their zenith reach; their little all
Flows in at once; in ages they no more
Could know, or do, or covet, or enjoy.
Were man to live coeval with the sun
The Patriarch-pupil would be learning still;
Yet, dying, leave his lesson half-unlearnt.
Men perish in advance, as if the sun
Should set ere noon, in eastern oceans drowned;
If fit, with dim, illustrious to compare,
The sun's meridian, with the soul of man.
To man, why, stepdame nature! so severe?
Why thrown aside thy masterpiece half-wrought,
While meaner efforts thy last hand enjoy?
Or, if abortively poor man must die,
Nor reach, what reach he might, why die in dread?
Why cursed with foresight? wise to misery?
Why of his proud prerogative the prey?
Why less pre-eminent in rank, than pain?
His immortality alone can tell;
Full ample fund to balance all amiss,
And turn the scale in favor of the just!
His immortality alone can solve
That darkest of AEnigmas, human hope;
Of all the darkest, if a^ death we die.
Hope, eager hope, the assassin of our joy,
All present blessings treading under-foot,
Is scarce a milder tyrant than despair.
With no past toils content, still planning new,
Hope turns us over to death alone for ease.
Possession, why, more tasteless than pursuit?
Why is a wish far dearer than a crown?
That wish accomplished, why, the grave of bliss?
Because, in the great future buried deep,
Beyond our plans of empire, and renown,
Lies all that man with ardor should pursue;
And he who made him, bent him to the right.
Man's heart the ALMIGHTY to the future sets,
By secret and inviolable springs;
And makes his hope his sublunary joy.
Man's heart eats all things, and is hungry still;
"More, more!" the glutton cries: for something new
So rages appetite, if man cannot mount,
He will descend. He starves on the possessed.
Hence, the world's master, from ambition's spire,
In caprea plunged; and dived beneath the brute.
In that rank sty why wallow'd empire's son
Supreme? because he could not higher fly;
His riot was ambition in despair.
Old Rome consulted birds; LORENZO! thou
With more success, the flight of hope survey;
Of restless hope, for ever on the wing.
High-perch'd over every thought that Falcon sits,
To fly at all that rises in her sight;
And, never stooping, but to mount again
Next moment, she betrays her aim's mistake,
And owns her quarry lodged beyond the grave.
There should it fail us (it must fail us there,
If being fails), more mournful riddles rise,
And virtue vies with hope in mystery.
Why virtue? where its praise, its being, fled?
Virtue is true self-interest pursued:
What true self-interest of quite-mortal man?
To close with all that makes him happy here,
If vice (as sometimes) is our friend on earth,
Then vice is virtue; it is our sovereign good.
In self-applause is virtue's golden prize;
No self-applause attends it on thy scheme:
Whence self-applause? from conscience of the right.
And what is right, but means of happiness?
No means of happiness when virtue yields;
That basis failing, falls the building too,
And lays in ruin every virtuous joy.
The rigid guardian of a blameless heart,
So long revered, so long reputed wise,
Is weak; with rank knight-errantries o'er-run.
Why beats thy bosom with illustrious dreams
Of self-exposure, laudable and great?
Of gallant enterprise, and glorious death?
Die for thy country? -- thou romantic fool!
Seize, seize the plank thyself, and let her sink:
Thy country! what to thee? -- the godhead, what?
(I speak with awe!) though he should bid thee bleed;
If, with thy blood, thy final hope is spilt,
Nor can omnipotence reward the blow,
Be deaf; preserve thy being; disobey.
Nor is it disobedience: know, LORENZO!
Whatever the ALMIGHTY's subsequent command,
His first command is this: -- "Man, love thyself."
In this alone, free-agents are not free.
Existence is the basis, bliss the prize;
If virtue costs existence, it is a crime;
Bold violation of our law supreme,
Black suicide; though nations, which consult
Their gain, at thy expense resound applause.
Since virtue's recompense is doubtful, here,
If man dies wholly, well may we demand,
Why is man suffered to be good in vain?
Why to be good in vain, is man enjoined?
Why to be good in vain, is man betrayed?
Betrayed by traitors lodged in his own breast,
By sweet complacencies from virtue felt?
Why whispers nature lies on virtue's part?
Or if blind instinct (which assumes the name
Of sacred conscience) plays the fool in man,
Why reason made accomplice in the cheat?
Why are the wisest loudest in her praise?
Can man by reason's beam be led astray?
Or, at his peril, imitate his God?
Since virtue sometimes ruins us on earth,
Or both are true; or, man survives the grave.
Or man survives the grave, or own, LORENZO,
Thy boast supreme, a wild absurdity.
Dauntless thy spirit; cowards are thy scorn.
Grant man immortal, and thy scorn is just.
The man immortal, rationally brave,
Dares rush on death -- because he cannot die.
But if man loses all, when life is lost,
He lives a coward, or a fool expires.
A daring Infidel (and such there are,
From pride, example, lure, rage, revenge,
Or pure heroical defect of thought),
Of all earth's madmen, most deserves a chain.
When to the grave we follow the renowned
For valor, virtue, science, all we love,
And all we praise; for worth, whose noontide beam,
Enabling us to think in higher style,
Mends our ideas of ethereal powers;
Dream we, that luster of the moral world
Goes out in stench, and rottenness the close?
Why was he wise to know, and warm to praise,
And strenuous to transcribe, in human life,
The mind almighty? could it be that fate,
Just when the lineaments began to shine,
And dawn the DEITY, should snatch the draught,
With night eternal blot it out, and give
The skies alarm, lest angels too might die?
If human souls, why not angelic too
Extinguished? and a solitary GOD,
Over ghastly ruin, frowning from his throne?
Shall we this moment gaze on GOD in man?
The next lose man for ever in the dust?
From dust we disengage, or man mistakes;
And there, where least his judgment fears a flaw.
Wisdom and worth, how boldly he commends!
Wisdom and worth, are sacred names; revered,
Where not embraced; applauded! deify'd!
Why not compassion'd too? if spirits die,
Both are calamities, inflicted both,
To make us but more wretched: wisdom's eye
Acute, for what? to spy more miseries;
And worth, so recompensed, new-points their stings.
Or man surmounts the grave, or gain is loss,
And worth exalted humbles us the more.
Thou will not patronize a scheme that makes
Weakness, and vice, the refuge of mankind.
"Has virtue, then, no joys?" -- Yes joys dear bought.
Talk never so long, in this imperfect state,
Virtue, and vice, are at eternal war,
Virtue's a combat; and who fights for naught?
Or for precarious, or for small reward?
Who virtue's self-reward so loud resound,
Would take degrees angelic here below,
And virtue, while they compliment, betray,
By feeble motives, and unfaithful guards.
The crown, the unfading crown, her soul inspires:
It Is that, and that alone, can countervail
The body's treach'ries, and the world's assaults:
On earths poor pay our famisht virtue dies.
Truth incontestable! in spite of all
A BAIL has preached, or a V -- E believed.
In man the more we dive, the more we see
Heaven's signet stamping an immortal make.
Dive to the bottom of his soul, the base
Sustaining all; what find we? knowledge, love.
As light, and heat, essential to the sun,
These to the soul. And why, if souls expire?
How little lovely here? how little known!
Small knowledge we dig up with endless toil;
And love unfeigned may purchase perfect hate.
Why starved, on earth, our angel-appetites;
While brutal are indulged their fulsome fill?
Were then capacities divine conferred,
As a mock-diadem, in savage sport,
Rank insult of our pompous poverty,
Which reaps but pain, from seeming claims so fair?
In future age lies no redress? and shuts
Eternity the door on our complaint?
If so, for what strange ends were mortals made!
The worst to wallow, and the best to weep;
The man who merits most, must most complain:
Can we conceive a disregard in Heaven,
What the worst perpetrate, or best endure?
This cannot be. To love, and know, in man
Is boundless appetite, and boundless power;
And these demonstrate boundless objects too.
Objects, powers, appetites, Heaven suits in all;
Nor, nature through, ever violates this sweet,
Eternal concord, on her tuneful string
Is man the sole exception from her laws?
Eternity struck off from human hope,
I speak with truth, but veneration too)
Man is a monster, the reproach of He^^'^*
A stain, a dark impenetrable cloud
On nature's beauteous aspect; and deforms.
(Amazing blot!) deforms her with her lord.
If such is man's allotment, what is Heaven?
O'r own the soul immortal, or blaspheme.
Or own the soul immortal, or invert
All order. Go, mock-majesty! go, man!
And bow to thy superiors of the stall;
Through every scene of sense superior far:
They graze the tuft untilled; they drink the stream
Unbrew'd, and ever full, and un-embitter'd
With doubts, fears, fruitless hopes, regrets, despairs;
Mankind's peculiar! reason's precious dower!
No foreign clime they ransack for their robes;
Nor brothers cite to the litigious bar;
Their good is good entire, unmixt, unmarr'd;
They find a Paradise in every field,
On boughs forbidden where no curses hang:
Their ill, no more than strikes the sense; unstretcht
By previous dread, or murmur in the rear:
When the worst comes, it comes unfear'd; one stroke
Begins, and ends, their woe: They die but once;
Blessed, incommunicable privilege! for which
Proud man who rules the globe, and reads the stars,
Philosopher, or hero, sighs in vain.
Account for this prerogative in brutes.
No day, no glimpse of day, to solve the knot,
But what beams on it from eternity.
O sole, and sweet solution! that unties
The difficult, and softens the severe;
The cloud on nature's beauteous face dispels;
Restores bright order; casts the brute beneath;
And re-inthrones us in supremacy
Of joy, even here: admit immortal life,
And virtue is knight-errantry no more;
Each virtue brings in hand a golden dower,
Far richer in reversion: hope exults;
And though much bitter in our cup is thrown,
Predominates, and gives the taste of Heaven.
O wherefore is the DEITY so kind?
Astonishing beyond astonishment!
Heaven our reward -- for Heaven enjoyed below.
Still unsubdu'd thy stubborn heart? -- for there
The traitor lurks, who doubts the truth I sing.
Reason is guiltless; will alone rebels.
What, in that stubborn heart, if I should find
New, unexpected witnesses against thee?
Ambition, pleasure, and the love of gain!
Can thou suspect, that these, which make the soul
The slave of earth, should own her heir of Heaven?
Can thou suspect what makes us disbelieve
Our immortality, should prove it sure?
First. then, ambition summon to the bar,
Ambition's shame, extravagance, disgust,
And inextinguishable nature, speak.
Each much deposes; hear them in their turn.
Thy soul, how passionately fond of same!
How anxious, that fond passion to conceal!
We blush, detected in designs on praise,
Though for best deeds, and from the best of men;
And why? because immortal. Art divine
Has made the body tutor to the soul;
Heaven kindly gives our blood a moral flow;
Bids it ascend the glowing cheek, and there
Upbraid that little heart's inglorious aim.
Which stoops to court a character from man;
While over us, in tremendous judgment sit
Far more than man, with endless praise, and blame,
Ambition's boundless appetite outspeaks
The verdict of its shame. When souls take fire
At high presumptions of their own desert,
One age is poor applause; the mighty shout,
The thunder by the living few begun,
Late time must echo; worlds unborn, resound.
We wish our names eternally to live:
Wild dream! which never had haunted human thought,
Had not our natures been eternal too.
Instinct points out an interest in hereafter;
But our blind reason sees not where it lies;
Or, seeing, gives the substance for the shade.
Fame is the shade of immortality,
And, in itself a shadow. Soon as caught,
Contemned; it shrinks to nothing in the grasp.
Consult the ambitious, it is ambition's cure.
"And is this all?" cried CAESAR at his height,
Disgusted. This third proof ambition brings
Of immortality. The first in fame,
Observe him near, your envy will abate:
Shamed at the disproportion vast, between
The passion, and the purchase, he will sigh
At such success, and blush at his renown.
And why? because far richer prize invites
His heart; far more illustrious glory calls;
It calls in whispers, yet the deafest hear.
And can ambition a fourth proof supply?
It can, and stronger than the former three;
Yet quite o'er-look'd by some reputed wise.
Though disappointments in ambition pain,
And though success disgusts; yet still, LORENZO!
In vain we strive to pluck it from our hearts;
By nature planted for the noblest ends.
Absurd the famed advice to PYRRHUS given,
More praised, than pondered; specious, but unsound:
Sooner that hero's sword the world had quelled,
Than reason his ambition. Man must soar.
An obstinate activity within,
An insuppressive spring, will toss him up
In spite of fortune's load. Not Kings alone,
Each villager has his ambition too;
No Sultan prouder than his fettered slave:
Slaves build their little Babylons of straw.
Echo the proud Assyrian, in their hearts,
And cry, -- "Behold the wonders of my might!"
And why? because immortal as their Lord;
And souls immortal must forever heave
At something great; the glitter, or the gold;
The praise of mortals, or the praise of Heaven.
Nor absolutely vain is human praise,
When human is supported by divine.
I Will introduce LORENZO to himself;
Pleasure and pride (bad masters!) share our hearts.
As love of pleasure is ordained to guard
And feed our bodies, and extend our race;
The love of praise is planted to protect;
And propagate the glories of the mind.
What is it, but the love of praise, inspires,
Matures, refines, embellishes, exalts,
Earth's happiness? from that, the delicate,
The grand, the mavelous, of civil life.
Want and convenience, under-workers, lay
The basis, on which love of glory builds.
Nor is thy life, O virtue! less in debt
To praise, thy secret stimulating friend.
Were men not proud, what merit should we miss!
Pride made the virtues of the Pagan world.
Praise is the salt that seasons right to man,
And whets his appetite for moral good.
Thirst of applause is virtue's second guard;
Reason, her first; but reason wants an aid;
Our private reason is a flatterer;
Thirst of applause calls public judgment in,
To poise our own, to keep an even scale,
And give endangered virtue fairer play.
Here a fifth proof arises, stronger still:
Why this so nice construction of our hearts?
These delicate moralities of sense;
This constitutional reserve of aid
To succor virtue, when our reason fails;
If virtue, kept alive by care and toil,
And, often, the mark of injuries on earth,
When labored to maturity (its bill
Of disciplines, and pains, unpaid) must die?
Why freighted rich, to dash against a rock?
Were man to perish when most fit to live,
O how misspent were all these stratagems,
By skill divine in woven in our frame?
Where are Heaven's holiness and mercy fled?
Laughs Heaven, at once, at virtue, and at man?
If not, why that discouraged, this destroyed?
Thus far ambition. What says avarice?
This her chief maxim, which has long been thine:
" The wise and wealthy are the same." -- I grant it.
To store up treasure, with incessant toil,
This is man's province, this his highest praise,
To this great end keen instinct stings him on.
To guide that instinct, reason! is thy charge;
It Is thine to tell us where true treasure lies:
But, reason failing to discharge her trust,
Or to the deaf discharging it in vain,
A blunder follows; and blind industry,
Galled by the spur but stranger to the course,
(The course where stakes of more than gold are won)
O'erloading, with the cares of distant age,
The jaded spirits of the present hour,
Provides for an eternity below.
" Thou shall not covet," is a wise command;
But bounded to the wealth the sun surveys:
Look farther, the command stands quite reversed,
And avarice is a virtue most divine.
Is faith a refuge for our happiness?
Most sure: And is it not for reason too?
Nothing this world unriddles, but the next.
Whence inextinguishable thirst of gain?
From inextinguishable life in man:
Man, if not meant, by worth, to reach the skies,
Had wanted wing to fly so far in guilt.
Sour grapes, I grant, ambition, avarice:
Yet still their root is immortality,
These its wild growths so bitter, and so base,
(Pain and reproach!) religion can reclaim,
Refine, exalt, throw down their poisonous lee,
And make them sparkle in the bowl of bliss.
See, the third witness laughs at bliss remote,
And falsely promises an Eden here:
Truth she shall speak for once, though prone to lie,
A common cheat, and pleasure is her name.
To pleasure never was LORENZO deaf;
Then hear her now, now first thy real friend.
Since nature made us not more fond than proud
Of happiness (whence hypocrites in joy!
Makers of mirth! artificers of smiles!)
Why should the joy most poignant sense affords,
Burn us with blushes, and rebuke our pride? --
Those heaven-born blushes tell us man descends,
Even in the zenith of his earthly bliss:
Should reason take her infidel repose,
This honest instinct speaks our lineage high;
This instinct calls on darkness to conceal
Our rapturous relation to the stalls.
Our glory covers us with noble shame,
And he that is unconfounded, is unmann'd.
The man that blushes, is not quite a brute.
Thus far with thee, LORENZO! will I close,
Pleasure is good, and man for pleasure made;
But pleasure full of glory, as of joy;
Pleasure, which neither blushes, nor expires.
The witnesses are heard; the cause is over;
Let conscience file the sentence in her court,
Dearer than deeds that half a realm convey:
Thus sealed by truth, the authentic record runs.
" Know, all; know, Infidels, -- unapt to know!
" It Is immortality your nature solves;
" It Is immortality decyphers man,
" And opens all the myst'ries of his make.
" Without it, half his instincts are a riddle;
" Without it, all his virtues are a dream.
" His very crimes attest his dignity;
" His ^ateless thirst of pleasure, gold, and fame,
" Declares him born for blessings infinite:
" What less than infinite, makes un-absurd
" Passions, which all on earth but more inflames?
" Fierce passions, so mis-measur'd to this scene,
" Stretched out, like eagles wings, beyond our nest,
" Far, far beyond the worth of all below,
" For earth too large, presage a nobler flight,
" And evidence our title to the skies."
Ye gentle theologues, of calmer kind!
Whose constitution dictates to your pen,
Who, cold yourselves, think ardor comes from hell!
Think not our passions from corruption sprung,
Though to corruption now they lend their wings;
That is their mistress, not their mother. All
(And justly) reason deem divine: I see,
I feel a grandeur in the passions too,
Which speaks their high descent, and glorious end;
Which speaks them rays of an eternal fire.
In Paradise itself they burnt as strong,
Ere ADAM fell; though wiser in their aim.
Like the proud Eastern, struck by providence,
What though our passions are run mad, and stoop
With low, terrestrial appetite to graze
On trash, on toys, dethroned from high desire?
Yet still, through their disgrace, no feeble ray
Of greatness shines, and tells us whence they fell:
But these (like that fallen monarch when reclaimed),
When reason moderates the reign aright,
Shall re-ascend, remount their former sphere,
Where once they soared illustrious; ere seduced
By wanton EVE's debauch, to stroll on earth,
And set the sublunary world on fire.
But grant their phrensy lasts; their phrensy fails
To disappoint one providential end,
For which Heaven blew up ardor in our hearts:
Were reason silent, boundless passion speaks
A future scene of boundless objects too,
And brings glad tidings of eternal day.
Eternal day! it is that enlightens all;
And all, by that enlightened, proves it sure.
Consider man as an immortal being,
Intelligible all; and all is great;
A chrystalline transparency prevails,
And strikes full luster through the human sphere;
Consider man as mortal, all is dark,
And wretched; reason weeps at the survey.
The learned LORENZO cries, "and let her weep,
" Weak, modern reason: ancient times were wise.
" Authority, that venerable guide,
" Stands on my part; the famed Athenian porch
" (And who for wisdom so renowned as they?)
" Deny this immortality to man."
I grant it; but affirm, they proved it too.
A riddle this! -- Have patience; I Will explain.
What noble vanities, what moral flights,
Glittering through their romantic wisdom's page,
Make us, at once, despise them, and admire?
Fable is flat to these high seasoned ^ires;
They leave the extravagance of song below,
" Flesh shall not feel; or, feeling, shall enjoy
" The dagger, or the rack; to them, alike
" A bed of roses, or the burning bull."
In men exploding all beyond the grave,
Strange doctrine, this! as doctrine, it was strange;
But not, as prophecy; for such it proved,
And, to their own amazement, was fulfilled:
They feigned a firmness christians need not feign.
The christian truly triumphed in the flame;
The stoic saw, in double wonder lost,
Wonder at them, and wonder at himself,
To find the bold adventures of his thought
Not bold, and that he strove to lie in vain.
Whence, then, those thoughts? those towering Thoughts, that flew
Such monstrous heights? from instinct, and from pride.
The glorious instinct of a deathless soul.
Confusedly conscious of her dignity,
Suggested truths they could not understand.
In lust's dominion, and in passion's storm,
Truth's system broken, scattered fragments lay,
As light in chaos, glimmering through the gloom:
Smit with the pomp of lofty, sentiments.
Pleased pride proclaimed, what reason disbeliev'd.
Pride, like the Delphic priestess, with a swell,
Raved nonsense, destined to be future sense,
When life immortal, in full day, should shine;
And death's dark shadows fly the gospel sun.
They spoke, what nothing but immortal souls!
Could speak; and thus the truth they questioned, proved.
Can then absurdities, as well as crimes,
Speak man immortal? all things speak him so.
Much has been urged; and do thou call for more?
Call; and with endless questions be distressed,
All unresolveable, if earth is all.
" Why life, a moment; infinite, desire?
" Our wish, eternity; our home, the grave?
" Heaven's promise dormant lies in human hope;
" Who wishes li^e immortal, proves it too.
" Why happiness pursued, though never found?
" Man's thirst of happiness declares it is
" (For nature never gravitates to naught);
" That thirst unquincht declares it is not here.
" My LUCIA, thy CLARISSA, call to thought;
" Why cordial friendship riveted so deep,
" As hearts to pierce at first, at parting, rend,
" If friend, and friendship, vanish in an hour?
" Is not this torment in the mask of joy?
" Why by reflection marred the joys of sense?
" Why past, and future, preying on our hearts?
" And putting all our present joys to death?
" Why labors reason? instinct were as well;
" Instinct, far better; what can choose, can err:
" O how infallible the thoughtless brute!
" 'Twere well his holiness were half as sure.
" Reason with inclination, why at war?
" Why sense of guilt? why conscience up in arms?"
Conscience of guilt, is prophecy of pain,
And bosom-counsel to decline the blow.
Reason with inclination never had jarr'd,
If nothing future paid forbearance here.
Thus on -- These, and a thousand pleas uncalled,
All promise, some ensure, a second scene;
Which, were it doubtful, would be dearer far
Than all things else most certain; were it false,
What truth on earth so precious as the lie?
This world it gives us, let what will ensue;
This world it gives, in that high cordial, hope:
The future of the present is the soul:
How this life groans, when severed from the next?
Poor, mutilated wretch, that disbelieves!
By dark distrust his being cut in two,
In both parts perishes; life void of joy,
Sad prelude of eternity in pain!
Could thou persuade me, the next life could fail
Our ardent wishes; how should I pour out
My bleeding heart in anguish, new, as deep!
Oh! with what thoughts, thy hope, and my despair,
Abhorred ANNIHILATION! blasts the soul,
And wide extends the bounds of human woe!
Could I believe LORENZO's system true,
In this black channel would my ravings run.
" Grief from the future borrowed peace, ere-while.
" The future vanished! and the present pained!
" Strange import of unprecedented ill!
" Fall, how profound! like LUCIFER's, the fall!
" Unequal fate! his fall, without his guilt!
" From where fond hope built her pavilion high,
" The Gods among, hurled headlong, hurled at once
" To night! to nothing! darker still than night.
" If 'twas a dream, why wake me, my worst foe,
" LORENZO! boastful of the name of friend!
" O for delusion! O for error still!
" Could vengeance strike much stronger than to plant
" A thinking being in a world like this,
" Not over-rich before, now beggared quite;
" More cursed than at the fall? -- The sun goes out!
" The thorns shoot up! what thorns in every thought!
" Why sense of better? it imbitters worse.
" Why sense? why life? if but to sigh, then sink
" To what I was! twice nothing! and much woe?
" Woe, from Heaven's bounties! woe, from what was wont
" To flatter most, high intellectual powers.
" Thought, virtue, knowledge! blessings, by thy scheme,
" All poisoned into pains. First, knowledge, once
" My soul's ambition, now her greatest dread.
" To know myself, true wisdom? -- No, to shun
" That shocking science, parent of despair!
" Avert thy mirror: if I see, I die.
" Know my Creator? climb his blessed abode
" By painful speculation, pierce the veil,
" Dive in his nature, read his attributes,
" And gaze in admiration -- on a foe,
" Obtruding life, withholding happiness!
" From the full rivers that surround his throne,
" Nor letting fall one drop of joy on man;
" Man gasping for one drop, that he might cease
" To curse his birth, nor envy reptiles more!
" Ye sable clouds! Ye darkest shades of night!
" Hide him, for ever hide him, from my thought,
" Once all my comfort; source, and soul of joy!
" Now leagued with furies, and with Lorenzo.
thee, against me.
" Know his achievements? study his renown?
" Contemplate this amazing, universe,
" Dropped from his hand, with miracles replete!
" For what? 'mid miracles of nobler name,
" To find one miracle of misery?
" To find the being, which alone can know
" And praise his works, a blemish on his praise?
" Through nature's ample range, in thought, to stroll,
" And start at man, the single mourner there,
" Breathing high hope! chained down to pangs and death
" Knowing is suffering: and shall virtue share
" The sigh of knowledge? -- Virtue shares the sigh,
" By straining up the steep of excellent,
" By battles fought, and, from temptation, won,
" What gains she, but the pang of seeing worth,
" Angelic worth, soon shuffled in the dark
" With every vice, and swept to brutal dust?
" Merit is madness; Virtue is a crime;
" A crime to reason, if it costs us pain
" Unpaid: what pain, amidst a thousand more,
" To think the most abandoned, after days
" Of triumph over their betters, find in death
" As soft a pillow, nor make fouler clay!
" Duty! religion! -- These, our duty done,
" Imply reward. Religion is mistake.
" Duty! -- There Is none, but to repel the cheat.
" Ye cheats! away! ye daughters of my pride!
" Who feign yourselves the favorites of the skies:
" Ye towering hopes! abortive energies!
" That toss, and struggle, in my lying breast,
" To scale the skies, and build presumptions there,
" As I were heir of an eternity.
" Vain, vain ambitions! trouble me no more.
" Why travel far in quest of sure defeat?
" As bounded as my being, be my wish.
" All is inverted, wisdom is a fool.
" Sense! take the rein; blind passion! drive us on;
" And, ignorance! befriend us on our way;
" Ye new, but truest patrons of our peace!
" Yes; give the pulse full empire; live the brute,
" Since, as the brute, we die. The sum of man,
" Of godlike man! to revel, and to rot.
" But not on equal terms with other brutes:
" Their revels a more poignant relish yield,
" And safer too; they never poisons choose.
" Instinct, than reason, makes more wholesome meals,
" And sends all-marring murmur far away.
" For sensual life they best philosophize;
" Theirs, that serene, the sages sought in vain:
" It Is man alone expostulates with Heaven;
" His, all the power, and all the cause, to mourn.
" Shall human eyes alone dissolve in tears?
" And bleed, in anguish, none but human hearts?
" The wide-stretcht realm of intellectual woe,
" Surpassing sensual far, is all our own.
" In life so fatally distinguished, why
" Cast in one lot, confounded, lumpt, in death?
" Ere yet in being, was mankind in guilt?
" Why thundered this peculiar clause against us,
" All-mortal, and all-wretched! -- Have the skies
" Reasons of state, their subjects may not scan,
" Nor humbly reason, when they sorely sigh?
" All-mortal, and all-wretched! -- It Is too much;
" Unparalled in nature: it is too much
" On being unrequested at thy hands,
" OMNIPOTENT! for I see naught but power.
" And why see that? why thought? to toil and eat,
" Then make our bed in darkness, needs no thought.
" What superfluities are reasoning souls!
" O give eternity! or thought destroy.
" But without thought our curse were half unfelt;
" Its blunted edge would spare the throbbing heart;
" And, therefore, it is bestowed. I thank thee, reason!
" For aiding life's too small calamities,
" And giving being to the dread of death.
" Such are thy bounties! -- Was it then too much
" For me, to trespass on the brutal rights?
" Too much for Heaven to make one emmet more?
" Too much for chaos to permit my mass
" A longer stay with essences unwrought,
" Unfashion'd, untormented into man?
" Wretched preferment to this round of pains!
" Wretched capacity of phrensy, thought!
" Wretched capacity of dying, life!
" Life, thought, worth, wisdom, all (O foul revolt!)
" Once friends to peace, gone over to the foe.
" Death, then, has changed its nature too: O death!
" Come to my bosom, thou best gift of Heaven!
" Best friend of man! since man is man no more.
" Why in this thorny wilderness so long,
" Since there is no promised land's ambrosial bower,
" To pay me with its honey for my stings?
" If needful to the selfish schemes of Heaven
" To sting us fore, why mocked our misery?
" Why this so sumptuous insult over our heads?
" Why this illustrious canopy displayed?
" Why so magnificently lodged despair?
" At stated periods, sure returning, roll
" These glorious orbs, that mortals may compute
" Their length of labors, and of pains; nor lose
" Their misery's full measure? -- Smiles with flowers,
" And fruits, promiscuous, ever-teeming earth,
" That man may languish in luxurious scenes,
" And in an Eden mourn his withered joys?
" Claim earth and skies man's admiration, due
" For such delights? blessed animals! too wise
" To wonder; and too happy to complain!
" Our doom decreed demands a mournful scene:
" Why not a dungeon dark, for the condemned?
" Why not the dragon's subterranean den,
" For man to howl in? why not his abode
" Of the same dismal color with his fate?
" A Thebes, a Babylon, at vast expense
" Of time, toil, treasure, art, for owls and adders,
" As congruous, as, for man, this lofty dome,
" Which prompts proud thought, and kindles high desire;
" If, from her humble chamber in the dust,
" While proud thought swells, and high desire inflames,
" The poor worm calls us for her inmates there;
" And, round us, death's inexorable hand
" Draws the dark curtain close; undrawn no more.
" Undrawn no more! -- Behind the cloud of death,
" Once I beheld a sun; a sun which gilt
" That sable cloud, and turned it all to gold;
" How the grave's altered! fathomless, as hell!
" A real hell to those who dreamt of Heaven.
" ANNIHILATION! how it yawns before me!
" Next moment I may drop from thought, from sense,
" The privilege of angels, and of worms,
" An outcast from existence! and this spirit,
" This all-pervading, this all-conscious soul,
" This particle of energy divine,
" Which travels nature, flies from star to star,
" And visits Gods, and emulates their powers,
" For ever is extinguished. Horror! death!
" Death of that death I fearless once surveyed! --
" When horror universal shall descend,
" And Heaven's dark concave urn all human race,
" On that enormous, unrefunding tomb,
" How just this verse! this monumental sigh!"
Beneath the lumber of demolisht worlds,
Deep in the rubbish of the general wreck,
Swept ignominious to the common mass
Of matter, never dignified with life,
Here lie proud rationals; the sons of Heaven!
The lords of earth! the property of worms!
Beings of yesterday, and no tomorrow!
Who lived in terror, and in pangs expired!
All gone to rot in chaos: or, to make
Their happy transit into blocks or brutes,
Nor longer sully their CREATOR's name.
LORENZO! hear, pause, ponder, and pronounce.
Just is this history? if such is man,
Mankind's historian, though divine, might weep.
And dares LORENZO smile! -- I know thee proud;
For once let pride befriend thee; pride looks pale
At such a scene, and sighs for something more.
Amid thy boasts, presumptions, and displays,
And art thou then a shadow? less than shade?
A nothing? less than nothing? to have been,
And not to be, is lower than unborn.
Art thou ambitious? why then make the worm
Thine equal? runs thy taste of pleasure high?
Why patronize sure death of every joy?
Charm riches? why choose begg'ry in the grave,
Of every hope a bankrupt! and for ever?
Ambition, pleasure, avarice, persuade thee
To make that world of glory, rapture, wealth.
They In the Sixth Night.
lately proved, thy soul's supreme desire.
What art thou made of? rather, how unmade?
Great nature's master-appetite destroyed!
Is endless life, and happiness, despised?
Or both wished, here, where neither can be found?
Such man's perverse, eternal war with Heaven!
Dare thou persist? and is there naught on earth,
But a long train of transitory forms,
Rising, and breaking, millions in an hour?
Bubbles of a fantastic deity, blown up
In sport, and then in cruelty destroyed?
Oh! for what crime, unmerciful LORENZO!
Destroys thy scheme the whole of human race?
Kind is fell LUCIFER, compared to thee:
Oh! spare this waste of being half-divine;
And vindicate the economy of Heaven.
Heaven is all love; all joy in giving joy:
It never had created, but to bliss:
And shall it, then, strike off the list of life,
A being blessed, or worthy so to be?
Heaven starts at an annihilating GOD.
Is that, all nature starts at, thy desire?
Art such a clod to wish thyself all clay?
What is that dreadful wish? -- The dying groan
Of nature, murdered by the blackest guilt.
What deadly poison has thy nature drank?
To nature undebaucht no shock so great;
Nature's first wish is endless happiness;
Annihilation is an after-thought,
A monstrous wish, unborn till virtue dies.
And oh! what depth of horror lies enclosed!
For nonexistence no man ever wished,
But, first, he wished the DEITY destroyed.
If so; what words are dark enough to draw
Thy picture true? the darkest are too fair.
Beneath what baneful planet, in what hour
Of desperation, by what fury's aid,
In what infernal posture of the soul,
All hell invited, and all hell in joy
At such a birth, a birth so near of kin,
Did thy foul fancy whelp so black a scheme
Of hopes abortive, faculties half-blown,
And deities begun, reduced to dust?
There Is naught (thou say) but one eternal flux
Of feeble essences, tumultuous driven
Through time's rough billows into night's abyss.
Say, in this rapid tide of human ruin,
Is there no rock, on which man's tossing thought
Can rest from terror, dare his fate survey,
And boldly think it something to be born?
Amid such hourly wrecks of being fair,
Is there no central, all-sustaining base,
All-realizing, all-connecting power,
Which, as it called forth all things, can recall,
And force destruction to refund her spoil?
Command the grave restore her taken prey?
Bid death's dark vale its human harvest yield,
And earth, and ocean, pay their debt of man,
True to the grand deposit trusted there?
Is there no potentate, whose out-stretcht arm,
When ripening time calls forth the appointed hour,
Plucked from soul devastation's famisht maw,
Binds present, past, and future, to his throne?
His throne, how glorious, thus divinely graced.
By germinating beings clust'ring round!
A garland worthy the divinity!
A throne, by Heaven's omnipotence in smiles,
Built (like a Pharos towering in the waves)
Amidst immense effusions of his love!
An ocean of communicated bliss!
An all-prolific, all-preserving GOD!
This were a GOD indeed. -- And such is man,
As here presumed: he rises from his fall.
Think thou Omnipotence a naked root,
Each blossom fair of DEITY destroyed?
Nothing is dead; nay, nothing sleeps; each soul,
That ever animated human clay,
Now wakes; is on the wing: and where, O where,
Will the swarm settle? -- When the trumpet's call,
As sounding brass, collects us, round Heaven's throne
Conglob'd, we bask in everlasting day,
(Paternal splendour!) and adhere for ever.
Had not the soul this outlet to the skies,
In this vast vessel of the universe,
How should we grasp, as in an empty void!
How in the pangs of famisht hope expire!
How bright my prospect shines! how gloomy, thine!
A trembling world! and a devouring GOD!
Earth, but the shambles of Omnipotence!
Heaven's face all stained with causless massacres
Of countless millions, born to feel the pang
Of being lost. LORENZO! can it be?
This bids us shudder at the thoughts of life.
Who would be born to such a phantom world,
Where naught substantial, but our misery?
Where joy (if joy) but heightens our distress,
So soon to perish, and revive no more?
The greater such a joy, the more it pains.
A world, so far from great (and yet how great
It shines to thee!) there is nothing real in it;
Being, a shadow! consciousness, a dream!
A dream, how dreadful! universal blank
Before it, and behind! poor man, a spark
From nonexistence struck by wrath divine,
Glittering a moment, nor that moment sure,
'Midst upper, nether, and surrounding night,
His sad, sure, sudden, and eternal tomb!
LORENZO! do thou feel these arguments?
Or is there naught but vengeance can be felt?
How have thou dared the DEITY dethrone?
How dared indict him of a world like this?
If such the world, creation was a crime;
For what is crime, but cause of misery?
Retract, blasphemer! and unriddle this,
(...) endless arguments above, below,
Without us, and within, the short result --
" If man's immortal, there is a GOD in Heaven."
But wherefore such redundancy? such waste
Of argument? one sets my soul at rest;
One obvious, and at hand, and, oh! -- at heart.
So just the skies, PHILANDER's life so pained,
His heart so pure; that, or succeeding scenes
Have palms to give, or never had he been born.
" What an old tale is this!" LORENZO cries --
I grant this argument is old; but truth
No years impair; and had not this been true,
Thou never had despised it for its age.
Truth is immortal as thy soul; and fable
As fleeting as thy joys: be wise, nor make
Heaven's highest blessings, vengeance; O be wise!
Nor make a curse of immortality.
Say, know thou what it is? or what thou art?
Know thou the importance of a soul immortal?
Behold this midnight glory: worlds on worlds!
Amazing pomp! redouble this amaze;
Ten thousand add; add twice ten thousand more;
Then weigh the whole; one soul outweighs them all;
And calls the astonishing magnificence
Of unintelligent creation poor.
For this, believe not me; no man believe;
Trust not in words, but deeds; and deeds no less
Than those of the SUPREME; nor his, a few;
Consult them all; consulted, all proclaim
Thy soul's importance: tremble at thy self;
For whom Omnipotence has waked so long:
Has waked, and worked, for ages; from the birth
Of nature to this unbelieving hour.
In this small province of his vast domain
(All nature bow, while I pronounce his name!)
What has GOD done, and not for this sole end,
To rescue souls from death? the soul's high price
Is writ in all the conduct of the skies.
The soul's high price is the creation's key,
Unlocks its mysteries, and naked lays
The genuine cause of every deed divine:
That, is the chain of ages, which maintains
Their obvious correspondence, and unites
Most distant periods in one blessed design:
That, is the mighty hinge, on which have turned
All revolutions, whether we regard
The natural, civil, or religious, world;
The former two, but servants to the third:
To that their duty done, they both expire,
Their mass new-cast, forgot their deeds renowned;
And angels ask, "Where once they shone so fair?
To lift us from this abject, to sublime;
This flux, to permanent; this dark, to day;
This foul, to pure; this turbid, to serene;
This mean, to mighty! -- for this glorious end
The ALMIGHTY, rising, his long sabbath broke:
The world was made; was ruined; was restored;
Laws from the skies were published; were repealed;
On earth kings, kingdoms, rose; kings, kingdoms, fell;
Famed sages lighted up the pagan world;
Prophets from Sion darted a keen glance
Through distant age; saints traveled; martyrs bled;
By wonders sacred nature stood controlled;
The living were translated; dead were raised;
Angels, and more than angels, came from Heaven;
And, oh! for this, descended lower still;
Gilt was hell's gloom; astonished at his guest,
For one short moment LUCIFER adored:
LORENZO! and will thou do less? -- For this,
That hallowed page, fools scoff at, was inspired,
Of all these truths thrice-venerable code!
Deists! perform your quarentine; and then
Fall prostrate, ere you touch it, least you die.
Nor less intensely bent infernal powers
To mar, than those of light, this end to gain.
O what a scene is here! -- LORENZO! wake;
Rise to the thought; exert, expand, thy soul
To take the vast idea: it denies
All else the name of great. Two warring worlds!
Not Europe against Afric; warring worlds.
Of more than mortal! mounted on the wing!
On ardent wings of energy, and zeal,
High-hov'ring over this little brand of strife!
This sublunary ball -- But strife, for what?
In their own cause conflicting? no; in thine,
In man's. His single interest blows the flame;
His the sole stake; his ^ate the trumpet sounds,
Which kindles war immortal. How it burns!
Tumultuous swarms of deities in arms!
Force, force opposing, till the waves run high,
And tempest nature's universal sphere.
Such opposites eternal, steadfast, stern,
Such foes implacable, are good, and ill;
Yet man, vain man, would mediate peace between them.
Think not this fiction. "There was war in heaven."
From Heaven's high crystal mountain, where it hung.
The ALMIGHTY's out-stretcht arm took down his bow:
And shot his indignation at the deep:
Re-thunder'd hell, and darted all her fires. --
And seems the stake of little moment still?
And sl^mbers man, who ^^ngly caused the storm?
He sleeps. -- And art thou ^^ockt at mysteries?
The greatest, thou. How dreadful to reflect,
What ardor, care, and counsel, mortals cause
In breasts divine! how little in their own!
Wherever I turn, how new proofs pour upon me!
How happily this wondrous view supports
My former argument! how strongly strikes
Immortal life's full demonstration, here!
Why this exertion? why this strange regard
From Heaven's Omnipotent indulged to man? --
Because, in man, the glorious, dreadful power,
Extremely to be pained, or blessed, for ever.
Duration gives importance; swells the price.
An angel, if a creature of a day,
What would he be? a trifle of no weight;
Or stand, or fall; no matter which; he is gone.
Because IMMORTAL, therefore is indulged
This strange regard of deities to dust.
Hence, Heaven looks down on earth with all her eyes
Hence, the soul's mighty moment in her ^ight:
Hence, every soul has partisans above,
And every thought a critic in the skies:
Hence, clay, vile clay! has angels for its guard,
And every guard a passion for his charge:
Hence, from all age, the cabinet divine
Has held high counsel over the fate of man.
Nor have the clouds those gracious counsels hid.
Angels undrew the curtain of the throne,
And PROVIDENCE came forth to meet mankind:
In various modes of emphasis and awe,
He spoke his will, and trembling nature heard;
He spoke it loud, in thunder, and in storm.
Witness, thou Sinai! whose cloud-cover'd height,
And shaken basis, owned the present GOD:
Witness, ye billows! whose returning tide,
Breaking the chain that fastened it in air,
Swept Egypt, and her menaces, to hell:
Witness, ye flames! the Assyrian tyrant blew
To sev'nfold rage, as impotent, as strong:
And thou, earth! witness, whose expanding jaws
Closed over Korah, etc.
presumption's sacrilegious sons.
Has not each element, in turn, subscribed
The soul's high price, and sworn it to the wise?
Has not flame, ocean, ether, earthquake, strove
To strike this truth, through adamantine man?
If not all-adamant, LORENZO! hear;
All is delusion; nature is wrapped up,
In tenfold night, from reason's keenest eye;
There Is no consistence, meaning, plan, or end,
In all beneath the sun, in all above,
(As far as man can penetrate) or Heaven
Is an immense, inestimable prize;
Or all is nothing, or that prize is all. --
And shall each toy be still a match for Heaven?
And full equivalent for groans below?
Who would not give a trifle to prevent
What he would give a thousand worlds to cure?
LORENZO! thou have seen (if thine, to see)
All nature, and her GOD (by nature's course,
And nature's course controlled) declare for me:
The skies above proclaim "immortal man!"
And, "man immortal!" all below resounds.
The world's a system of theology,
Read, by the greatest strangers to the schools;
If honest, learned; and sages over a plough.
Is not, LORENZO! then, imposed on thee
This hard alternative; or, to renounce
Thy reason, and thy sense; or, to believe?
What then is unbelief? it is an exploit;
A strenuous enterprise: to gain it, man
Must burst through every bar of common sense,
Of common shame, magnanimously wrong;
And what rewards the sturdy combatant?
His prize, repentance; infamy, his crown.
But wherefore, infamy? -- For want of faith,
Down the steep precipice of wrong he slides;
There Is nothing to support him in the right.
Faith in the future wanting, is, at least
In embryo, every weakness, every guilt;
And strong temptation ripens it to birth.
If this life's gain invites him to the deed,
Why not his country sold, his father slain?
It Is virtue to pursue our good supreme;
And his supreme, his only good is here.
Ambition, avarice, by the wise disdained,
Is perfect wisdom, while mankind are fools,
And think a turf, or tombstone, covers all:
These find employment, and provide for sense
A richer pasture, and a larger range;
And sense by right divine ascends the throne,
When virtue's prize and prospect are no more;
Virtue no more we think the will of Heaven.
Would Heaven quite beggar virtue, if beloved?
" Has virtue charms?" -- I grant her heavenly fair;
But if unportion'd, all will interest wed;
Though that our admiration, this our choice.
The virtues grow on immortality;
That root destroyed, they wither and expire.
A DEITY believed, will naught avail;
Rewards and punishments make GOD adored;
And hopes and fears give conscience all her power.
As in the dying parent dies the child,
Virtue, with immortality, expires.
Who tells me he denies his soul immortal,
Whatever his boast, has told me, he is a knave.
His duty it is, to love himself alone;
Nor care though mankind perish, if he smiles.
Who thinks ere-long the man shall wholly die,
Is dead already; naught but brute survives.
And are there such? -- Such candidates there are
For more than death; for utter loss of being,
Being, the basis of the DEITY!
Ask you the cause? -- The cause they will not tell;
Nor need they: oh the sorceries of sense!
They work this transformation on the soul,
Dismount her like the serpent at the fall,
Dismount her from her native wing (which soa^'d
Ere-while ethereal heights), and throw her down,
To lick the dust, and crawl, in such a thought.
Is it in words to paint you? O ye fallen!
Fallen from the wings of reason, and of hope!
Erect in stature, prone in appetite!
Patrons of pleasure, posting into pain!
Lovers of argument, averse to sense!
Boasters of liberty, fast-bound in chains!
Lords of the wide creation, and the shame!
More senseless than the irrationals you scorn!
More base than those you rule! than those you pity,
Far more undone! O ye most infamous
Of beings, from superior dignity!
Deepest in woe from means of boundless bliss!
Ye cursed by blessings infinite! because
Most highly favored, most profoundly lost!
Ye motly mass of contradiction strong!
And are you, too, convinced, your souls fly off
In exhalation soft, and die in air,
From the full flood of evidence against you?
In the coarse drudgeries, and sinks of sense,
Your souls have quite worn out the make of Heaven,
By vice new-cast, and creatures of your own:
But though you can deform, you cannot destroy;
To curse, not uncreate, is all your power.
LORENZO! this black brotherhood renounce;
Renounce St. Evremont, and read St. Paul.
Ere rapt by miracle, by reason winged,
His mounting mind made long abode in Heaven.
This is freethinking, unconfined to parts,
To send the soul on curious travel bent,
Through all the provinces of human thought;
To dart her flight, through the whole sphere of man;
Of this vast universe to make the tour;
In each recess of space and time, at home;
Familiar with their wonders; diving deep;
And, like a prince of boundless interests there,
Still most ambitious of the most remote;
To look on truth unbroken, and entire;
Truth in the system, the full orb; where truths
By truths enlightened, and sustained, afford
An arch-like, strong foundation, to support
The incumbent weight of absolute, complete
Conviction; here, the more we press, we stand
More firm; who most examine most believe.
Parts, like half-sentences, confound; the whole
Conveys the sense, and GOD is understood;
Who not in fragments writers to human race:
Read his whole volume, skeptic! then reply.
This, this, is thinking-free, a thought that grasps
Beyond a grain, and looks beyond an hour.
Turn up thine eye, survey this midnight scene;
What are earth's kingdoms, to you boundless orbs,
Of human souls, one day, the destined range?
And what you boundless orbs, to godlike man?
Those numerous worlds that throng the firmament,
And ask more space in Heaven, can roll at large
In man's capacious thought, and still leave room
For am^ler orbs; for new creations, there.
Can such a soul contract itself, to gripe
A point of no dimension, of no weight?
It can; it does: the world is such a point:
And, of that point, how small a part enslaves!
How small a part -- of nothing, shall I say?
Why not? -- Friends, our chief treasure! how they drop!
LUCIA, NARCISSA fair, PHILANDER, gone!
The grave, like fabled Cerberus, has opened
A triple mouth; and, in an aweful voice,
Loud calls my soul, and utters all I sing.
How the world falls to pieces round about us,
And leaves us in a ruin of our joy!
What says this transportation of my friends?
It bids me love the place where now they dwell,
And scorn this wretched spot, they leave so poor.
Eternity's vast ocean lies before thee;
There, there, LORENZO! thy CLARISSA sails.
Give thy mind sea-room; keep it wide of earth,
That rock of souls immortal; cut thy cord;
Weigh anchor: spread thy sails; call every wind;
Eye thy great pole star; make the land of life.
Two kinds of life has double-natur'd man,
And two of death; the last far more severe.
Life animal is nurtured by the sun;
Thrives on his bounties, triumphs in his beams.
Life rational subsists on higher food,
Triumphant in his beams, who made the day.
When we leave that sun, and are left by this,
(The fate of all who die in stubborn guilt)
It Is utter darkness; strickly double death.
We sink by no judicial stroke of Heaven,
But nature's course; as sure as plumbets fall.
Since GOD, or man, must alter, ere they meet,
(Since light and darkness blend not in one sphere)
It Is manifest, LORENZO! who must change.
If, then, that double death should prove thy lot,
Blame not the bowels of the DEITY;
Man shall be blessed, as far as man permits.
Not man alone, all rationals, Heaven arms
With an illustrious, but tremendous, power
To counter-act its own most gracious ends;
And this, of strict necessity, not choice;
That power denied, men, angels, were no more,
But passive engines, void of praise, or blame.
A nature rational implies the power
Of being blessed, or wretched, as we please;
Else idle reason would have naught to do;
And he that would be barred capacity
Of pain, courts incapacity of bliss.
Heaven wills our happiness, allows our doom;
Invites us ardently, but not compels;
Heaven but persuades, almighty man decrees;
Man is the maker of immortal fates,
Man falls by man, if finally he falls;
And fall he must, who learns from death alone,
The dreadful secret, -- That he lives for ever.
Why this to thee? thee yet, perhaps, in doubt
Of second life? but wherefore doubtful still?
Eternal life is nature's ardent wish:
What ardently we wish, we soon believe:
Thy tardy faith declares that wish destroyed:
What has destroyed it? -- Shall I tell thee, what?
When feared the future, it is no longer wished;
And, when unwisht, we strive to disbelieve.
" Thus infidelity our guilt betrays."
Nor that the sole detection! blush, LORENZO!
Blush for hypocrisy, if not for guilt.
The future feared? an infidel, and fear?
Fear what? a dream? a fable? -- how thy dread,
Unwilling evidence, and therefore strong,
Affords my cause an undesign'd support?
How disbelief affirms, what it denies?
" It, unawares, asserts immortal life." --
Surprising! infidelity turns out
A creed, and a confession of our sins:
Apostates, thus, are orthodox divines.
LORENZO! with LORENZO clash no more!
Nor longer a transparent vizor wear.
Think thou, RELIGION only has her mask?
Our infidels are Satan's hypocrites,
Pretend the worst, and, at the bottom, fail.
When visited by thought (thought will intrude),
Like him they serve, they tremble, and believe.
Is there hypocrisy so foul as this?
So fatal to the welfare of the world!
What detestation, what contempt, their due!
And, if unpaid, be thanked for their escape
That christian candor they strive hard to scorn:
If not for that asylum, they might find
A hell on earth; nor 'scape a worse below.
With insolence, and impotence of thought,
Instead of racking fancy, to refute,
Reform thy manners, and the truth enjoy. --
But shall I dare confess the dire result?
Can thy proud reason brook so black a brand?
From purer manners, to sublimer faith,
Is nature's unavoidable ascent;
An honest Deist, where the gospel shines,
Matur'd to nobler, in the christian ends.
When that blessed change arrives, even cast aside
This song superfluous; life immortal strikes
Conviction, in a flood of light divine.
A christian dwells, like Milton.
URIEL, in the sun.
Meridian evidence puts doubt to flight;
And ardent hope anticipates the skies.
Of that bright sun, LORENZO! scale the sphere;
It Is easy; it invites thee; it descends
From Heaven to woo, and waft thee whence it came:
Read and revere the sacred page; a page
Where triumphs immortality; a page
Which not the whole creation could produce;
Which not the conflagration shall destroy;
In nature's ruins not one letter lost:
It Is printed in the mind of Gods for ever.
In proud disdain of what even Gods adore,
Do smile? -- Poor wretch! thy guardian angel weeps.
Angels, and men, assent to what I sing;
Wits smile, and thank me for my midnight dream.
How vicious hearts fume phrensy to the brain!
Parts push us on to pride, and pride to shame;
Pert infidelity is wit's cockade,
To grace the brazen brow that braves the skies,
By loss of being, dreadfully secure.
LORENZO! if thy doctrine wins the day,
And drives my dreams, defeated, from the field:
If this is all, if earth a final scene,
Take heed; stand fast; be sure to be a knave;
A knave in grain! never deviate to the right:
Should thou be good -- How infinite thy loss!
Guilt only makes annihilation gain.
Blessed scheme! which life deprives of comfort, death
Of hope; and which vice only recommends.
If so; where, infidels! your bait thrown out
To catch weak converts? where your lofty boast
Of zeal for virtue, and of love to man?
ANNIHILATION! I confess, in these.
What can reclaim you? dare I hope profound
Philosophers the converts of a song?
Yet know, its The Infidel Reclaimed.
title flatters you, not me;
Yours be the praise to make my title good;
Mine, to bless Heaven, and triumph in your praise.
But since so pestilential your disease,
Though sovereign is the medicine I prescribe,
As yet, I Will neither triumph, nor despair:
But hope, ere long, my midnight dream will wake
Your hearts, and teach your wisdom -- to be wise:
For why should souls immortal, made for bliss,
Ever wish (and wish in vain!) that souls could die?
What never can die, oh! grant to live; and crown
The wish, and aim, and labor of the skies;
Increase, and enter on the joys of Heaven:
Thus shall my title pass a sacred seal,
Receive an imprimatur from above,
While angels shout -- An Infidel reclaimed!
To close, LORENZO! spite of all my pains,
Still seems it strange, that thou should live for ever?
Is it less strange, that thou should live at all?
This is a miracle; and that no more.
Who gave beginning, can exclude an end.
Deny thou art: Then, doubt if thou shall be.
A miracle with miracles enclosed,
Is man: and starts his faith at what is strange?
What less than wonders, from the wonderful;
What less than miracles, from GOD, can flow?
Admit a GOD -- that mystery supreme!
That cause uncaus'd! all other wonders cease;
Nothing is mavelous for him to do:
Deny him -- all is mystery besides;
Millions of mysteries! each darker far,
Than that thy wisdom would, unwisely, shun.
If weak thy faith, why choose the harder side?
We nothing know, but what is mavelous;
Yet what is mavelous, we cannot believe.
So weak our reason, and so great our GOD,
What most surprises in the sacred page,
Or full as strange, or stranger, must be true.
Faith is not reason's labor, but repose.
To faith, and virtue, why so backward man?
From hence: -- The present strongly strikes us all;
The future, faintly: can we, then, be men?
If men, LORENZO! the reverse is right.
Reason is man's peculiar: sense, the brute's.
The present is the scanty realm of sense;
The future, reason's empire unconfined:
On that expending all her godlike power,
She plans, provides, expatiates, triumphs, there;
There builds her blessings! there, expects her praise;
And nothing asks of fortune, or of men.
And what is reason? be she, thus, defined;
Reason is upright stature in the soul.
Oh! be a man; -- and strive to be a GOD.
" For what? (thou say): to damp the joys of life?"
No; to give heart and substance to thy joys.
That tyrant, hope, mark, how she domineers;
She bids us quit realities, for dreams;
Safety, and peace, for hazard, and alarm;
That tyrant over the tyrants of the soul,
She bids ambition quit its taken prize,
Spurn the luxuriant branch on which it sits,
Though bearing crowns, to spring at distant game;
And plunge in toils and dangers -- for repose.
If hope precarious, and of things, when gained,
Of little moment, and as little stay,
Can sweeten toils and dangers into joys;
What then, that hope, which nothing can defeat,
Our leave unasked? rich hope of boundless bliss!
Bliss, past man's power to pain^ it; time's, to close
This hope is earth's most estimable prize:
This is man's portion, while no more than man:
Hope, of all passions, most befriends us here;
Passions of prouder name befriend us less.
Joy has her tears* and transport has her death;
Hope, like a cordial, innocent, though strong,
Man's heart, at once, inspirits, and serenes;
Nor makes him pay his wisdom for his joys;
It Is all, our present state can safely bear,
Health to the frame! and vigor to the mind!
A joy attemper'd! a chastis'd delight!
Like the fair summer-ev'ning, mild, and sweet!
It Is man's full cup; his Paradise below!
A blessed hereafter, then, or hoped, or gained,
Is all; -- our whole of happiness: full proof,
I chose (...) trivial or inglorious theme.
And know, ye foes to song! (well-meaning men,
Though quite forgotten The poetical parts of it.
half your bible's praise!)
Important truths, in spite of verse, may please:
Grave minds you praise; nor can you praise too much:
If there is weight in an ETERNITY,
Let the grave listen; -- and be graver still.
THE END OF THE SEVENTH NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT THE EIGHTH. VIRTUE's APOLOGY: OR THE MAN OF THE WORLD
ANSWERED. In which are Considered, The LOVE OF THIS LIFE; The AMBITION and
PLEASURE, with the WIT and WISDOM, of the WORLD.
AND has all nature, then, espoused my part?
Have I bribed Heaven, and earth, to plead against thee?
And is thy soul immortal? -- What remains?
All, all, LORENZO; -- Make immortal, blessed.
Unblest immortals! what can shock us more?
And yet LORENZO, still affects the world;
There, stows his treasure; thence, his title draws,
Man of the world! (for such would thou be called)
And art thou proud of that inglorious style?
Proud of reproach? for a reproach it was,
In ancient days; and christian, -- in an age,
When men were men, and not ashamed of Heaven,
Fired their ambition, as it crowned their joy,
Sprinkled with dews from the Castalian font,
Fain would I re-baptize thee, and confer
A purer spirit, and a nobler name.
Thy fond attachments fatal, and inflamed,
Point out my path, and dictate to my song:
To thee, the world how fair! how strongly strikes
Ambition! and gay pleasure stronger still!
Thy triple bane! the triple bolt, that lays
Thy virtue dead! be these my triple theme;
Nor shall thy wit or wisdom, be forgot.
Common the theme; not so the song; if she
My song invokes, URANIA, deigns to smile.
The charm that chains us to the world, her foe,
If she dissolves, the man of earth, at once,
Starts from his trance, and sighs for other scenes;
Scenes, where these sparks of night, these stars, shall shine
Unnumber'd suns (for all things, as they are,
The blessed behold); and, in one glory, pour
Their blended blaze on man's astonished sight;
A blaze, -- the least illustrious object there.
LORENZO! since eternal is at hand,
To swallow time's ambitions; as the vast
Leviathan, the bubbles vain, that ride
High on the foaming billow; what avail
High titles, high descent, seize high,
If unattain'd our highest? O LORENZO!
What lofty thoughts, these elements above.
What towering hopes, what sallies from the sun,
What grand surveys of destiny divine,
And pompous presage of unfathomed fate,
Should roll in bosoms, where a spirit burns,
Bound for eternity! in bosoms read
By him, who foibles in archangels sees!
On human hearts he bends a jealous eye,
And marks, and in Heaven's register inrolls,
The rise, and progress, of each option there;
Sacred to doomsday! that the page unfolds,
And spreads us to the gaze of Gods and men.
And what an option, O LORENZO! thine?
This world! and this, unrivaled by the skies!
A world, where lust of pleasure, grandeur, gold,
Three demons that divide its realms between them,
With strokes alternate buffet to and fro
Man's restless heart, their sport* their flying ball;
Till, with the giddy circle, sick, and tired,
It pants for peace, and drops into despair,
Such is the world LORENZO sets above
That glorious promise angels were esteemed
Too mean to bring; a promise, their adored
Descended to communicate; and press,
By counsel, miracle, life, death, on man.
Such is the world LORENZO's wisdom wooes,
And on its thorny pillow seeks repose;
A pillow, which, like opiates ill prepared,
Intoxicates, but not composes; fills
The visionary mind with gay chimaeras,
All the wild trash of sleep, without the rest;
What unfeigned travel, and what dreams of joy!
How frail, men, things! how momentary, both*
Fantastic chase, of shadows hunting shades!
The gay, the busy, equal, though unlike;
Equal in wisdom, differently wise!
Through flowery meadows, and through dreary wastes,
One bustling, and one dancing, into death.
There Is not a day, but, to the man of thought,
Betrays some secret, that throws new reproach
On life, and makes him sick of seeing more.
The scenes of business tell us -- "What are men;"
The scenes of pleasure -- "What is all beside;"
There, others we despise; and here, ourselves.
Amid disgust eternal, dwells delight?
It Is approbation strikes the string of joy.
What wondrous prize has kindled this career,
Stuns with the din, and choaks us with the dust,
On life's gay stage, one inch above the grave?
The proud run up and down in quest of eyes;
The sensual in pursuit of something worse;
The grave, of gold; the politic, of power;
And all, of other butterflies, as vain!
As eddies draw things frivolous, and light,
How is man's heart by vanity drawn in;
On the swift circle of returning toys,
Whirled, straw-like, round and round, and then ingulph'd
Where gay delusion darkens to despair!
" This is a beaten track." -- Is this a track
Should not be beaten? never beat enough,
Till enough learnt the truths it would inspire.
Shall truth be silent, because folly frowns?
Turn the world's history; what find we there,
But fortune's sports, or nature's cruel claims,
Or woman's artifice, or man's revenge,
And endless inhumanities on man?
Fame's trumpet seldom sounds, but, like the knell,
It brings bad tidings: how it hourly blows
Man's misadventures round the listening world!
Man is the tale of narrative old time;
Sad tale; which high as Paradise begins;
As if, the toil of travel to delude,
From stage to stage, in his eternal round,
The days, his daughters, as they spin ou^ hours
On fortune's wheel, where accident unthought
Often, in a moment, snaps life's strongest thread,
Each, in her turn. some tragic story tells,
With, now-and-then, a wretched farce between;
And fills his chronicle with human woes.
Time's daughters, true as those of men, deceive us;
Not one, but puts some cheat on all mankind:
While in their fathers bosom, not yet ours,
They flatter our fond hopes; and promise much
Of amiable; but hold him not over wise,
Who dares to trust them; and laugh round the year,
At still-confiding, still-confounded, man,
Confiding, though confounded; hoping on,
Untaught by trial, unconvinc'd by proof,
And ever-looking for the never-seen.
Life, to the last, like hardened felons, lies;
Nor owns itself a cheat, till it expires.
Its little joys go out by one and one,
And leave poor man, at length, in perfect night;
Night darker, than what, now, involves the pole.
O THOU, who do permit these ills to fall,
For gracious ends, and would that man should mourn!
O THOU, whose hands this goodly fabric framed,
Who know it best, and would that man should know!
What is this sublunary world? a vapor;
A vapor all it holds; itself, a vapor;
From the damp bed of chaos, by thy beam
Exhaled, ordained to swim its destined hour
In ambient air, then melt, and disappear.
Earth's days are numbered, nor remote her doom;
As mortal, though less transient than her sons;
Yet they dote on her, as the world and they
Were both eternal, solid; THOU, a dream.
They dote, on what! immortal views apart,
A region of outsides! a land of shadows!
A fruitful field of flowery promises!
A wilderness for joys! perplexed with doubts,
And sharp with thorns! a troubled ocean spread
With bold adventurers, their all on board;
No second hope, if here their fortune frowns;
Frown soon it must. Of various rates they sail,
(...) ensigns various; all alike in this,
All restless, anxious; tossed with hopes, and fears,
In calmest skies; obnoxious all to storm!
And stormy the most general blast of life:
All bound for happiness; yet few provide
The chart of knowledge, pointing where it lies;
Or virtue's helm, to shape the course designed:
All, more or less, capricious fate lament,
Now lifted by the tide, and now resorb'd,
And farther from their wishes, than before:
All, more or less, against each other dash,
To mutual hurt, by gusts of passion driven,
And suffering more from folly, than from fate.
Ocean! thou dreadful and tumultuous home
Of dangers, at eternal war with man!
Death's capital, where most he domineers,
With all his chosen terrors frowning round,
(Though lately feasted high at Admiral ^al^hen, etc
Albion's cost)
Wide-op'ning, and loud-roaring still for more!
Too faithful mirror! how do thou reflect
The melancholy face of human life!
The strong resemblance tempts me farther still:
And, happily, Britain may be deeper struck
By moral truth, in such a mirror seen,
Which nature holds for ever at her eye.
Self-flatter'd, unexperienced, high in hope,
When young, with sanguine cheer, and streamers gay,
We ^ut our cable, launch into the world,
And fondly dream each wind and star our friend;
All, in some darling enterprise embarkt:
But where is he can fathom its event?
Amid a multitude of artless hands,
Ruin's sure perquisite! her lawful prize!
Some steer aright; but the black blast blows hard,
And puffs them wide of hope: with hearts of proof,
Full against wind, and tide, some win their way;
And when strong effort has deserved the port,
And tugged it into view, it is won! it is lost!
Though strong their our, still stronger is their fate:
They strike; and, while they triumph, they expire.
In stress of weather, most; some sink outright;
Over them, and over their names, the billows close;
Tomorrow knows not they were ever born.
Others a short memorial leave behind,
Like a flag floating, when the bark's ingulph'd;
I^ floats a moment, and is seen no more:
One CAESAR lives; a thousand are forgot.
How (...), beneath auspicious planets born,
(Darlings of Providence! fond fate's elect!)
With swelling sails make good the promised port,
With all their wishes freighted! yet even these,
Freighted with all their wishes, soon complain;
Free from misfortune, not from nature free.
They still are men; and when are men secure?
As fatal time, as storm! the rush of years
Beats down their strength; their numberless escapes
In ruin end: And, now, their proud success
But plants new terrors on the victor's brow:
What pain to quit the world, just made their own,
Their nest so deeply down'd, and built so high!
Too low they build, who build beneath the stars.
Woe then apart (if woe apart can be
From mortal man), and fortune at our nod,
The gay! rich! great! triumphant! and august!
What are they? -- The most happy (strange to say!)
Convince me most of human misery:
What are they? smiling wretches of tomorrow!
More wretched, then, than ever their slave can be;
Their treacherous blessings, at the day of need,
Like other faithless friends, unmask, and sting:
Then, what provoking indigence in wealth!
What aggravated impotence in power!
High titles, then, what insult of their pain!
If that sole anchor, equal to the waves,
Immortal hope! defies not the rude storm,
Takes comfort from the foaming billow's rage,
And makes a welcome harbor of the tomb.
Is this a sketch of what thy soul admires?
" But here (thou say) the miseries of life
" Are huddled in a group. A more distinct
" Survey, perhaps, might bring thee better news."
Look on life's stages: they speak plainer still;
The plainer they, the deeper will thou sigh.
Look on thy lovely boy; in him behold
The best that can befall the best on earth;
The boy has virtue by his mother's side:
Yes, on FLORELLO look: a father's heart
Is tender, though the man's is made of stone;
The truth, through such a medium seen, may make
Impression deep, and fondness prove thy friend.
FLORELLO lately cast on this rude coast
A helpless infant; now a heedless child;
To poor CLARISSA's throes, thy care succeeds;
Care full of love, and yet severe as hate!
Over thy soul's joy how often thy fondness frowns?
Needful austerities his will restrain;
As thorns fence in the tender plant from harm.
As yet, his reason cannot go alone;
But asks a sterner nurse to lead it on.
His little heart is often terrified;
The blush of morning, in his cheek, turns pale;
Its pearly dew-drop trembles in his eye;
His harmless eye! and drowns an angel there.
Ah! what avails his innocence? the task
In joined must discipline his early powers;
He learns to sigh, ere he is known to sin;
Guiltless, and sad! A wretch before the fall!
How cruel this! more cruel to forbear.
Our nature such, with necessary pains,
We purchase prospects of precarious peace:
Though not a father, this might steal a sigh.
Suppose him disciplined aright (if not,
'Twill sink our poor account to poorer still);
Ripe from the tutor, proud of Liberty,
He leaps enclosure, bounds into the World;
The World is taken, after ten years toil,
Like ancient Troy; and all its joys his own.
Alas! the World's a tutor more severe;
Its lessons hard, and ill deserve his pains;
Unteaching all his virtuous nature taught,
Or books (fair Virtue's advocates!) inspired.
For who receives him into public life?
Men of the World, the Terrae-filial breed,
Welcome the modest Stranger to their sphere,
(Which glittered long, at distance, in his sight)
And, in their hospitable arms, enclose:
Men, who think naught so strong of the romance,
So rank Knight Errant, as a real friend:
Men, that act up to Reason's golden rule,
All weakness of affection quite subdued:
Men, that would blush at being thought sincere,
And feign, for glory, the few faults they want;
That love a Lie, where truth would pay as well;
As if, to them, vice shone her own reward.
LORENZO! can thou bear a shocking Sight?
Such, for FLORELLO's Sake, 'twill now appear:
See, the steeled files of seasoned Veterans,
Trained to the world, in burnisht Falsehood bright;
Deep in the fatal Stratagems of Peace;
All soft sensation, in the Throng, rubbed off;
All their keen purpose, in politeness, sheathed;
His friends eternal -- during interest;
His foes implacable -- when worth their while;
At war with every welfare, but their own;
As wise as Lucifer; and half as good;
And by whom none, but Lucifer, can gain --
Naked, through these (so common fate ordains)
Naked of heart, his cruel course he runs,
Stung out of all, most amiable in life,
Prompt truth, and open thought, and smiles unfeigned;
Affection, as his species, wide diffused;
Noble presumptions to mankind's renown;
Ingenuous trust, and confidence of love.
These claims to joy (if mortals joy might claim)
Will cost him many a sigh; till time, and pains,
From the slow mistress of this school, Experience,
And her assistant, pausing, pale Distrust,
Purchase a dear bought clue to lead his youth
Through serpentine obliquities of life,
And the dark labyrinth of human hearts.
And happy! if the clue shall come so cheap;
For, while we learn to fence with public guilt,
Full often we feel its foul contagion too,
If less than heavenly virtue is our guard.
Thus, a strange kind of cursed necessity
Brings down the sterling temper of his soul,
By base alloy, to bear the current stamp,
Below called wisdom; sinks him into safety;
And brands him into credit with the world;
Where specious titles dignify disgrace,
And nature's injuries are arts of life;
Where brighter reason prompts to bolder crimes;
And heavenly talents make infernal hearts;
That unsurmountable extreme of guilt!
Poor MACHIAVEL! who labored hard his plan,
Forgot, that genius needs not go to school;
Forgot, that man, without a tutor wise,
His plan had practiced, long before 'twas writ.
The world's all title page, there is no contents;
The world's all face; the man who shows his heart,
Is whooted for his nudities, and scorned.
A man I knew, who lived upon a smile;
And well it fed him; he looked plump and fair;
While rankest venom foamed through every vein.
LORENZO! what I tell thee, take not ill!
Living, he fawned on every fool alive;
And, dying, cursed the friend on whom he lived.
To such proficients thou art half a saint.
In foreign realms (for thou have traveled far)
How curious to contemplate two state-rooks,
Studious their nests to feather in a trice,
With all the Necromantics of their art,
Playing the game of faces on each other,
Making court sweetmeats of their latent gall,
In foolish hope, to steal each other's trust;
Both cheating, both exulting, both deceived;
And, sometimes, both (let earth rejoice) undone!
Their parts we doubt not; but be that their shame;
Shall men of talents, fit to rule mankind,
Stoop to mean wiles, that would disgrace a fool?
And lose the thanks of those few friends they serve?
For who can thank the man, he cannot see?
Why so much cover? it defeats itself.
Ye, that know all things! know ye not, men's heart
Are therefore known, because they are concealed?
For why concealed? -- The cause they need not tell.
I give him joy, that is awkward at a lie;
Whose feeble nature truth keeps still in awe;
His incapacity in his renown.
It Is great, it is manly, to disdain disguise;
It shows our spirit, or it proves our strength.
Thou say, it is needful: Is it therefore right!
However, I grant it some small sign of grace,
To strain at an excuse: and would thou then
Escape, that cruel need? thou may, with ease;
Think no post needful that demands a knave.
When late our civil helm was shifting hands,
So Pult^ney thought: think better if you can.
But this, how rate! the public path of life
Is dirty: -- Yet allow that dirt its due,
It makes the noble mind more noble still:
The world's no neuter; it will wound or save;
Our virtue quench, or indignation fire.
You say; the world, well known, will make a man: --
The world, well known, will give our hearts to heaven,
Or make us demons, long before we die.
To show how fair the world, thy mistress, shines,
Take either part, sure ills attend the choice;
Sure, though not equal, detriment ensues.
Not virtue-self is deify'd on earth;
Virtue has her relapses, conflicts, foes:
Foes, that never fail to make her feel their hate:
Virtue has her peculiar set of pains.
True; friends to virtue, last and least, complain;
But if they sigh, can others hope to smile?
If wisdom has her miseries to mourn,
How can poor folly lead a happy life?
And if both suffer, what has earth to boast,
Where he most happy, who the least laments?
Where much, much patience, the most envied state,
And some forgiveness, needs, the best of friends?
For friend, or happy life, who looks not higher,
Of neither shall he find the shadow here.
The world's sworn advocate, without a fee,
LORENZO smartly, with a smile, replies;
"Thus far thy song is right; and all must own,
"Virtue has her peculiar set of pains --
"And joys peculiar who to vice denies?
"If vice it is, with nature to comply:
"If pride, and sense, are so predominant,
"To check, not overcome, them, makes a saint,
"Can nature in a plainer voice proclaim
"Pleasure, and glory, the chief good of man?"
Can pride, and sensuality, rejoice?
From purity of thought, all pleasure springs;
And, from an humble spirit, all our peace.
Ambition, pleasure! let us talk of these:
Of these, the porch, and academy, talked;
Of these, each following age had much to say;
Yet unexhausted, still, the needful theme.
Who talks of these, to mankind all at once
He talks; for where the saint from either free?
Are these thy refuge? -- No; these rush upon thee:
Thy vitals seize, and, vulture-like, devour:
I Will try if I can pluck thee from thy rock,
PROMETHEUS! from this barren ball of earth:
If reason can unchain thee, thou art free.
And, first, thy caucasus, ambition calls;
Mountain of torments! eminence of woes!
Of courted woes! and courted through mistake!
It Is not ambition charms thee; it is a cheat
Will make thee start, as H -- at his moor.
Do grasp at greatness? first, know what it is:
Think thou thy greatness in distinction lies?
Not in the feather, wave it ever so high,
By fortune stuck, to mark us from the throng,
Is glory lodged: it is lodged in the reverse;
In that which joins, in that which equals, all,
The monarch, and his slave; -- "A deathless soul,
"Unbounded prospect, and immortal kin,
"A father God, and brothers in the skies;"
Elder, indeed, in time; but less remote
In excellence, perhaps, than thought by man;
Why greater what can fall, than what can rise?
If still delirious, now, LORENZO! go;
And with thy full-blown brothers of the world,
Throw scorn around thee; cast it on thy slaves:
Thy slaves, and equals: how scorn cast on them
Rebounds on thee! If man is mean, as man,
Art thou a God? If fortune makes him so,
Beware the consequence: a maxim that,
Which draws a monstrous picture of mankind,
Where, in the drapery, the man is lost;
Externals fluttering, and the soul forgot.
Thy greatest glory, when disposed to boast,
Boast that aloud, in which thy servants share.
We wisely strip the steed we mean to buy:
Judge we, in their caparisons, of men?
It thought avails thee, where, but what, thou art;
All the dictinctions of this little life
Are quite cutaneous, foreign to the man.
When through death's streights, earth's subtle serpents creep,
Which wriggle into wealth, or climb renown,
As crooked Satan the forbidden tree,
They leave their party-colored robe behind,
All that now glitters, while they rear aloft
Their brazen crests, and hiss at us below.
Of fortune's fucus strip them, yet alive
Strip them of body, too; nay, closer still,
Away with all but moral in their minds;
And let, what then remains, impose their name,
Pronounce them weak, or worthy; great, or mean
How mean that ^nuff of glory fortune lights,
And death puts out! do thou demand a test,
A test, at once, infallible, and short,
Of real greatness! that man greatly lives,
Whatever his fate, or fame, who greatly dies.
High flushed with hope, where heroes shall despa^^
If this a true criterion, many courts,
Illustrious, might afford but few grandees.
The Almighty, from his throne, on earth surveys
Naught greater, than an honest, humble heart;
An humble heart, his residence! pronounced
His second seat; and rival to the skies.
The private path, the secret acts of men,
If noble, far the noblest of our lives!
How far above LORENZO's glory sits
The illustrious master of a name unknown;
Wh^^e worth un^vall'd and unwitness'd, loves
L^e's sacred shades, where Gods converse with men;
And peace, beyond the world's conceptions smiles!
As (...) (now dark), before we part, shall see.
But thy great (...) this skulking glory scorns.
LORENZO's sick, but when LORENZO's seen;
And, when he sh^ugs at public ^us'ness, lies.
Denied the public eye, the public voice,
As if he lived on others breath, he dies.
Fain would he make the world his pedestal;
Mankind the gazers, the sole figure, he.
Knows he, that mankind praise against their will.
And mix as much detraction as they can?
Knows he, that faithless fame her whisper has,
(...) well as trumpet? that his vanity
Is so much tickled from not ^earing all?
Knows this all-knower, that from itch if praise,
Or, from an itch more sordid, when he shines,
Taking his country by five hundred ears,
Senates at once admire him, and despise,
With modest laughter lining loud applause,
Which makes the smile more mortal to his fame?
His fame, which (like the mighty Caesar), crowned
With laurels, in full senate, greatly falls,
By seeming friends, that honor, and destroy.
We rise in glory, as we sink in pride:
Where boasting ends, there dignity begins:
And yet, mistaken beyond all mistake,
The blind LORENZO's proud -- of being proud:
And dreams himself ascending in his fall.
An eminence, though fansy'd, turns the brain;
All vice wants hellebore; but of all vice,
Pride loudest calls, and for the largest bowl;
Because, all other vice unlike, it flies,
In fact, the point, in fancy most pursued.
Who court applause, oblige the world in this;
They gratify man's passion to refuse.
Superior honor, when assumed, is lost;
Even good men turn banditti, and rejoice,
Like KOULI-KAN, in plunder of the proud.
Though somewhat disconcerted, steady still
To the world's cause, with half a face of joy,
LORENZO cries -- "Be, then, ambition cast;
"Ambition's dearer far stands unimpeach'd,
"Gay pleasure! proud ambition is her slave;
"For her, he soars at great, and hazards ill;
"For her, he fights, and bleeds, or overcomes;
"And paves his way, with crowns, to reach her smile.
"Who can resist her charms? -- Or, should? LORENZO!
What mortal shall resist, where angels yield?
Pleasure's the mistress of ethereal powers;
For her contend the rival Gods above;
Pleasure's the mistress of the world below;
And well it is for man, that pleasure charms;
How would all stagnate, but for pleasure's ray!
How would the frozen stream of action cease!
What is the pulse of this so busy world?
The love of pleasure: that through every vein,
Throws motion, warmth; and shuts out death from life.
Though various are the tempers of mankind,
Pleasure's gay family holds all in chains:
Some most affect the black; and some, the fair;
Some honest pleasure court; and some, obscene.
Pleasures obscene are various, as the throng
Of passions, that can err in human hearts;
Mistake their objects, or trangress their bounds.
Think you there is but one whoredom? whoredom, all,
But when our reason licenses delight.
Do doubt LORENZO? thou shall doubt no more.
Thy father chides thy gallantries; yet hugs
An ugly, common harlot, in the dark;
A rank adulterer with others gold:
And that hag, vengeance, in a corner, charms.
Hatred, her brothel has, as well as love,
Where horrid epicures debauch in blood.
Whatever the motive, pleasure is the mark:
For her, the black assassin draws his sword;
For her, dark statesmen trim their midnight lamp,
To which no single sacrifice may fall;
For her, the saint abstains; the miser starves;
The stoic proud, for pleasure, pleasure scorned;
For her, affliction's daughters grief indulge,
And find, or hope, a luxury in tears!
For her, guilt, shame, toil, danger, we defy;
And, with an aim voluptuous, rush on death.
Thus universal her despotic power,
And as her empire wide, her praise is just.
Patron of pleasure! doater on delight^
I am thy rival: pleasure I profess;
Pleasure the purpose of my gloomy song.
Pleasure is naught but virtue's gayer name;
I wrong her still, I rate her worth too low;
Virtue the root, and pleasure is the flower;
And honest Epicurus' foes were fools.
But this sounds harsh, and gives the wise offense;
If o'erstrain'd wisdom still retains the name.
How knits austerity her cloudy brow,
And blames, as bold, and hazardous, the praise
Of pleasure to mankind, unprais'd, too dear!
Ye modern stoics! hear my soft reply;
Their senses men will trust: we cannot impose;
Or, if we could, is imposition right?
Own honey sweet, but, owning, add this sting;
"When mixed with poison, it is deadly too."
Truth never was indebted to a lie.
Is naught but virtue to be praised, as good?
Why then is health preferred before disease!
What nature loves is good, without our leave.
And where no future drawback cries, "beware:"
Pleasure, though not from virtue, should prevail.
It Is balm to life, and gratitude to Heaven;
How could our thanks for bounties unenjoy'd!
The love of pleasure is man's eldest-born,
Born in his cradle, living to his tomb;
Wisdom, her younger sister, though more grave,
Was meant to minister, and not to mar,
Imperial pleasure, queen of human hearts.
LORENZO! thou, her majesty's renowned,
Though uncoift, counsel, learned in the world!
Who think thyself a MURRAY, with disdain
May look on me. Yet, my DEMOSTHENES!
Can thou plead pleasure's cause as well as I?
Know^st thou her nature, purpose, parentage?
Attend my song, and thou shall know them all;
And know thyself; and know thyself to be
(Strange truth!) the most abstemious man alive.
Tell not CALISTA; she will laugh thee dead;
Or send thee to her hermitage with L --.
Absurd presumption! thou, who never know
A serious thought! shall thou dare dream of joy?
No man ever found a happy life by chance;
Or yawn'd it into being, with a wish;
Or, with the snout of groveling appetite,
Ever smelt it out, and grubb'd it from the dirt;
An art it is, and must be learnt; and learnt
With unremitting effort, or be lost;
And leaves us perfect blockheads, in our bliss.
The clouds may drop down titles and estates;
Wealth may seek us; but wisdom must be sought;
Sought before all; but (how unlike all else
We seek on earth!) it is never sought in vain.
First, pleasure's birth, rise, strength, and grandeur* see;
Brought forth by wisdom, nursed by discipline,
By patience taught, by perseverance crowned,
She rears her head majestic; round her throne
Erected in the bosom of the just,
Each virtue, listed, forms her manly guard.
For what are virtues? (formidable name!)
What, but the fountain, or defense, of joy?
Why, then, commanded? need mankind commands;
At once to merit, and to make, their bliss? --
Great legislator! scarce so great, as kind!
If men are rational, and love delight,
Thy gracious law but flatters human choice:
In the transgression lies the penalty;
And they the most indulge, who most obey.
Of pleasure, next, the final cause explore;
Its mighty purpose, its important end.
Not to turn human brutal, but to build
Divine on human, pleasure came from Heaven:
In aid to reason was the goddess sent;
To call up all its strength by such a charm.
Pleasure, first, succors virtue; in return,
Virtue gives pleasure an eternal reign.
What, but the pleasure of food, friendship, faith,
Supports life natural, civil, and divine?
It Is from the pleasure of repast, we live;
It Is from the pleasure of applause, we please;
It Is from the pleasure of belief, we pray
(All prayer would cease, if unbeliev'd the prize):
It serves ourselves, our species, and our God;
And to serve more, is past the sphere of man.
Glide, then, for ever, pleasure's sacred stream!
Through Eden, as Euphrates ran, it runs,
And fosters every growth of happy life;
Makes a new Eden where it flows; -- but such
As must be lost, LORENZO! by thy fall.
"What mean I by thy fall?" -- Thou Wilt shortly see,
While pleasure's nature is at large displayed;
Already sung her origin, and ends.
Those glorious ends, by kind, or by degree,
When pleasure violates, it is then a vice,
And vengeance too; it hastens into pain.
From due refreshment, life, health, reason joy;
From wild excess, pain, grief, distraction, death;
Heaven's justice this proclaims, and that her love.
What greater evil can I wish my foe,
That his full draught of pleasure, from a cask
Unbroach'd by just authority, ungaug'd
By temperance, by reason unrefin'd?
A thousand demons lurk within the lee.
Heaven, others, and ourselves! uninjur'd these,
Drink deep; the deeper, then, the more divine;
Angels are angels from indulgence there;
It Is unrepenting pleasure makes a God.
Do think thyself a God from other joys?
A victim rather! shortly sure to bleed.
The wrong must mourn: can Heaven's appointments fail?
Can man outwit Omnipotence? strike out
A self-wrought happiness unmeant by him
Who made us, and the world we would enjoy?
Who forms an instrument, ordains from whence
Its dissonance, or harmony, shall rise.
Heaven bid the soul this mortal frame inspire;
Bid virtue's ray divine inspire the soul
With unprecarious flows of vital joy;
And, without breathing, man as well might hope
For life, as, without piety, for peace.
Is virtue, then, and piety the same?" --
No; piety is more; it is virtue's source;
Mother of every worth, as that of joy.
Men of the world this doctrine ill digest;
They smile at piety; yet boast aloud
Good Will to men; nor know they strive to part
What nature joins; and thus confute themselves.
With piety begins all good on earth;
It Is the firstborn of rationality.
Conscience, her first law broken, wounded lies;
Enfeebled, lifeless, impotent to good;
A feigned affection bounds her utmost power.
Some we cannot love, but for the Almighty's sake;
A foe to God was never true friend to man;
Some sinister intent taints all he does;
And, in his kindest actions he is unkind.
On piety, humanity is built:
And, on humanity, much happiness;
And yet still more on piety itself.
A soul in commerce with her God, is Heaven;
Feels not the tumults and the shocks of life;
The whirls of passions, and the strokes of heart.
A Deity believed, is joy begun;
A Deity adored, is joy advanced;
A Deity beloved, is joy matur'd.
Each branch of piety delight inspires;
Faith builds a bridge from this world to the next,
Over death's dark gulf, and all its horror hides;
Praise, the sweet exhalation of our joy,
That joy exalts, and makes it sweeter still;
Prayer ardent opens Heaven, lets down a stream
Of glory on the consecrated hour
Of man, in audience with the Deity.
Who worships the great God, that instant joins
The first in Heaven, and sets his foot on hell.
LORENZO! when wast thou at church before?
Thou think the service long: but is it just?
Though just, unwelcome: thou had rather tread
Unhallowed ground; the muse to win thine ear,
Must take an air less solemn. She complies.
Good conscience! at the ^ound the world retires;
Verse disaffects it, and LORENZO smiles;
Yet has she her seraglio full of charms;
And such as age shall heighten, not impair.
Art thou dejected? is thy mind overcast?
Amid her fair ones, thou the fairest choose,
To cha^e thy gloom. -- "Go, fix some weighty truth;
To Chain down some passion; do some generous good;
To Teach ignorance to see, or grief to smile;
To Correct thy friend; befriend thy greatest foe;
To Or, with warm heart, and confidence divine,
To Spring up, and lay strong hold on him who made thee.
Thy gloom is scattered, sprightly spirits flow;
Th^^ withered is thy yine, and harp unstrung.
Do call the bowl, the viol, and the dance,
(...) mirth mad laughter? wretched comforters!
Physicians! more than half of thy disease.
Laughter, though never censured yet as sin,
(Pardon a thought that only seems severe)
Is half-immortal: is it much indulged?
By venting spleen, or dissipating thought,
It shows a scorner, or it makes a fool;
And sins, as hurting others, or ourselves.
It Is pride, or emptiness, applies the straw,
That tickles little minds to mirth effuse;
Of grief as impotent, portentous sign!
The house of laughter makes a house of woe.
A man triumphant is a monstrous ^ight;
A man dejected is a sight as mean.
What cause for triumph, where such ills abound?
What for dejection, where presides a power,
Who called us into being to be blessed?
So grieve, as conscious grief may rise to joy;
So joy, as conscious grief to joy may fall.
Most true, a wise man never will be sad;
But neither will sonorous, bubbling mirth,
A shallow stream of happiness betray:
Too happy to be sportive, he is serene.
Yet would thou laugh (but at thy own expense),
This counsel strange should I presume to give --
"Retire and read thy bible to be gay."
There truths abound of sovereign aid to peace;
Ah! do not prise them less, because inspired,
As thou, and thine, are apt and proud to do.
If not inspired, that pregnant page had stood,
Time's treasure! and the wonder of the wise!
Thou think, perhaps, thy soul alone at stake;
Alas! -- Should men mistake thee for a fool; --
What man of taste for genius, wisdom, truth,
Though tender of thy fame, could interpose?
Believe me, sense, here, acts a double part,
And the true critic is a christian too.
But these, thou think, are gloomy paths to joy. --
True joy in sunshine never was found at first;
They, first, themselves offend, who greatly please;
And travel only gives us sound repose.
Heaven sells all pleasure; effort is the price:
The joys of conquest, are the joys of man;
And glory the victorious laurel spreads
Over pleasure's pure, perpetual, placid stream.
There is a time when toil must be preferred,
Or joy, by mis-tim'd fondness, is undone.
A man of pleasure is a man of pains.
Thou will not take the trouble to be blessed.
False joys, indeed, are born from want of thought;
From thought's full bent, and energy, the true;
And that demands a mind in equal poize,
Remote from gloomy grief, and glaring joy.
Much joy not only speaks small happiness,
But happiness that shortly must expire.
Can joy, unbottom'd in reflection, stand?
And, in a tempest, can reflection live?
Can joy, like thine, secure itself an hour?
Can joy, like thine, meet accident unshock'd?
Or open the door to honest poverty?
Or talk with threatening death, and not turn pale?
In such a world, and such a nature, these
Are needful fundamentals of delight:
These fundamentals give delight indeed;
Delight, pure, delicate, and durable;
Delight, unshaken, masculine, divine;
A constant, and a sound, but serious joy.
Is joy the daughter of severity?
It is: -- Yet far my doctrine from severe.
"Rejoice for ever;" it becomes a man;
Exalts and sets him nearer to the Gods.
"Rejoice for ever." nature cries, "rejoice;"
And drinks to man in her nectareous cup,
Mixed up of delicates for every sense;
To the great founder of the bounteous feast,
Drinks glory, gratitude, eternal praise;
And he that will not pledge her, is a churl.
Ill firmly to support, good fully taste,
Is the whole science of felicity:
Yet sparing pledge: her bowl is not the best
Mankind can boast. -- "A rational repast;
" Exertion, vigilance, a mind in arms,
" A military discipline of thought,
" To foil temptation in the doubtful field;
" And ever-waking ardor for the right."
It Is these, first, give, then guard, a cheerful heart.
Naught that is right, think little; well aware,
What reason bids, God bids; by his command
How aggrandiz'd, the smallest thing we do!
Thus, nothing is insipid to the wise;
To thee, insipid all, but what is mad;
Joys seasoned high, and tasting strong of guilt.
" Mad! (thou reply'st, with indignation fired)
" Of ancient sages proud to tread the steps,
" I follow nature." -- Follow nature still,
But look it be thine own: is conscience, then,
No part of nature? is she not supreme?
Thou regicide! O raise her from the dead!
Then follow nature; and resemble God.
When, spite of conscience, pleasure is pursued,
Man's nature is unnaturally pleased:
And what is unnatural, is painful too
At intervals, and must disgust ev;n thee!
The fact thou know; but not, perhaps, the cause.
Virtue's foundations with the world's were laid;
Heaven mixed her with our make, and twisted close
Her sacred interests with the strings of life.
Who breaks her aweful mandate, shocks himself,
His better self: and is it greater pain,
Our soul should murmur, or our dust repine?
And one, in their eternal war, must bleed.
If one most suffer, which should least be spared?
The pains of mind surpass the pains of sense:
Ask, then, the gout, what torment is in guilt.
The joys of sense to mental joys are mean:
Sense on the present only feeds; the soul
On past, and future, forages for joy.
It Is hers, by retrospect, through time to range;
And forward time's great sequel to survey.
Could human courts take vengeance on the mind,
Axes might rust, and racks, and gibbets, fall:
Guard then thy mind, and leave the rest to fate.
LORENZO! will thou never be a man?
The man is dead, who for the body lives,
Lured by the beating of his pulse, to list
With every lust, that wars against his peace;
And sets him quite at variance with himself.
Thyself, first, know; then love: a self there is
Of virtue fond, that kindles at her charms.
A self there is, as fond of every vice,
While every virtue wounds it to the heart:
Humility degrades it, justice robs,
Blessed bounty beggars it, fair truth betrays,
And godlike magnanimity destroys.
This self, when rival to the former, scorn;
When not in competition, kindly treat,
Defend it, feed it: -- But when virtue bids,
Toss it, or to the fowls, or to the flames.
And why? It Is love of pleasure bids thee bleed;
Comply, or own self-love extinct, or blind.
For what is vice? self-love in a mistake:
A poor blind merchant buying joys too dear.
And virtue, what? it is self-love in her wits,
Quite skilful in the market of delight.
Self-love's good sense is love of that dread power,
From whom herself, and all she can enjoy.
Other self-love is but disguised self-hate;
More mortal than the malice of our foes;
A self-hate, now scarce felt; then felt full-sore,
When being, cursed; extinction, loud implored;
And every thing preferred to what we are.
Yet this self-love LORENZO makes his choice;
And, in this choice triumphant, boasts of joy.
How is his want of happiness betray^d,
By disaffection to the present hour!
Imagination wanders far afield:
The future pleases: why? the present pains. --
"But that is a secret." -- Yes, which all men know;
And know from thee, discovered unawares.
Thy ceaseless agitation, restless roll
From cheat to cheat, impatient of a pause;
What is it? -- It Is the cradle of the soul,
From instinct sent, to rock her in disease,
Which her physician, reason, will not cure.
A poor expedient! yet thy best; and while
It mitigates thy pain, it owns it too.
Such are LORENZO's wretched remedies!
The weak have remedies; the wise have joys.
Superior wisdom is superior bliss.
And what sure mark distinguishes the wise?
Consistent wisdom ever wills the same;
Thy fickle wish is ever on the wing.
Sick of herself, is folly's character.
As wisdom's is, a modest self-applause.
A change of evils is thy good supreme;
Nor, but in motion, can thou find thy rest.
Man's greatest strength is shown in standing still.
The first sure symptom of a mind in health,
Is rest of heart, and pleasure felt at home.
False pleasure from abroad her joys imports;
Rich from within, and self-sustain'd, the true.
The true is fixed, and solid as a rock;
Slippery the false, and tossing, as the wave.
This a wild wanderer on earth, like Cain
That, like the fabled, self-enamour'd boy,
Home-contemplation her supreme delight;
She dreads an interruption from without,
Smit with her own condition; and the more
Intense she gazes, still it charms the more.
No man is happy, till he thinks, on earth
There breathes not a more happy than himself:
Then envy dies, and love overflows on all;
And love overflowing makes an angel here.
Such angels all, entitled to repose
On him who governs fate: though tempest frowns,
Though nature shakes, how soft to lean on Heaven!
To lean on him, on whom archangels lean!
With inward eyes, and silent as the grave,
They stand collecting every beam of thought.
Till their hearts kindle with divine delight;
For all their thoughts, like angels seen of old
In ISRAEL's dream, come from, and go to, Heaven:
Hence, are they studious of sequestered scenes;
While noise, and dissipation, comfort thee.
Were all men happy, revellings would cease,
That opiate for inquietude within.
LORENZO! never man was truly blessed,
But it composed and gave him such a cast,
As folly might mistake for want of joy.
A cast, unlike the triumph of the proud;
A modest aspect, and a smile at heart.
O for a joy from thy PHILANDER's spring!
A spring perennial, rising in the breast,
And permanent, as pure! no turbid stream
Of rapturous exultation, swelling high;
Which, like land-floods, impetuous pour awhile,
Then sink at once, and leave us in the mire.
What does the man, who transient joy prefers?
What, but prefer the bubbles to the stream?
Vain are all sudden sallies of delight;
Convulsions of a weak distempered joy.
Joy's a fixed state; a tenor, not a start.
Bliss there is none, but unprecarious bliss:
That is the gem: sell all, and purchase that.
Why go a begging to contingencies,
Not gained with ease, nor safely loved, if gained?
At good fortuitous, draw back, and pause;
Suspect it; what thou can ensure, enjoy;
And naught but what thou giv'st thyself, is sure.
Reason perpetuates joy that reason gives,
And makes it as immortal as herself:
To mortals, naught immortal, but their worth.
Worth, conscious worth! should absolutely reign;
And other joys ask leave for their approach;
Nor, unexamin'd, ever leave obtain.
Thou art all anarchy; a mob of joys
Wage war, and perish in intestine broils;
Not the least promise of internal peace!
No bosom-comfort! or unborrow'd bliss!
Thy thoughts are vagabonds; all outward-bound,
Mid sands, and rocks, and storms, to cruise for pleasure;
If gained, dear bought; and better missed than gained.
Much pain must expiate, what much pain procured.
Fancy, and sense, from an infected shore,
Thy cargo bring; and pestilence the prize.
Then, such thy thirst (insatiable thirst!
By fond indulgence but inflamed the more!)
Fancy still cruises, when poor sense is tired.
Imagination is the paphian shop,
Where feeble happiness, like Vulcan, lame,
Bids foul ideas, in their dark recess,
And hot as hell (which kindled the black fires),
With wanton art, those fatal arrows form,
Which murder all thy time, health, wealth, and fame.
Would thou receive them, other thoughts there are,
On angel-wing, descending from above,
Which these, with art divine, would counterwork,
And form celestial armor for thy peace.
In this is seen imagination's guilt;
But who can count her follies? she betrays thee,
To think in grandeur there is something great.
For works of curious art, and ancient fame,
Thy genius hungers, elegantly pained;
And foreign climes must cater for thy taste.
Hence, what disaster! -- Though the price was paid,
That persecuting priest, the Turk of Rome,
Whose foot (ye Gods!) through cloven, must be kissed,
Detained thy dinner on the Latian shore;
(Such is the fate of honest protestants!)
And poor magnificence is starved to death.
Hence just resentment, indignation, ire! --
Be pacified; if outward things are great,
It Is magnanimity great things to scorn;
Pompous expenses, and parades august,
And courts; that insalubrious soil to peace.
True happiness never entered at an eye;
True happiness resides in things unseen.
No smiles of fortune ever blessed the bad,
Nor can her frowns rob innocence of joys;
That jewel wanting, triple crowns are poor:
So tell his holiness, and be revenged.
Pleasure, we both agree, is man's chief good;
Our only contest, what deserves the name.
Give pleasure's name to naught, but what has passed
The authentic Seal of reason (which, like YORK,
Demurs on what it passes), and defies
The tooth of time; when past, a pleasure still;
Dearer on trial lovelier for its age,
And doubly to be prized, as it promotes
Our future, while it forms our present, joy.
Some joys the future overcast; and some
Throw all their beams that way, and gild the tomb.
Some joys endear eternity; some give
Abhorred annihilation dreadful charms,
Are rival joys contending for thy choice?
Consult thy whole existence, and be safe;
That oracle will put all doubt to flight.
Short is the lesson, though my lecture long,
Be good -- and let Heaven answer for the rest.
Yet, with a sigh over all mankind, I grant
In this our day of proof, our land of hope,
The good man (...) clouds that intervene;
Clouds, that obscure his ^^^lunary day,
But never conquer: even the best must own,
Patience and resignation, are the pillars
Of human peace on earth. The pillars, these:
But those of S^th not more remote from thee,
Till this heroic lesson thou have learnt;
To frown at pleasure, and to smile in pain.
Fired at the prospect of unclouded bliss,
Heaven in reversion, like the Sun, as yet
Beneath the horizon, chears us in this world;
It sheds, on souls susceptible of light,
The glorious dawn of our eternal day.
" This (says LORENZO) is a fair harangue:
" But can harangues blow back strong nature's stream;
" Or stem the tide Heaven pushes through our veins,
" Which sweeps away man's impotent resolves,
And lays his labor level with the world?"
Themselves men make their comment on mankind;
And think naught is, but what they find at home:
Thus, weakness to chimaera turns the truth.
Nothing romantic has the muse prescribed.
In a former night.
Above, LORENZO saw the man of earth,
The mortal man; and wretched was the sight.
To balance that, to comfort, and exalt,
Now see the man immortal: him, I mean,
Who lives as such; whose heart, full bent on Heaven,
Leans all that way, his byas to the starts.
The world's dark shades, in contrast set, shall raise
His luster more: though bright, without a foil:
Observe his aweful portrait, and admire;
Nor stop at wonder; imitate, and live.
Some angel guide my pencil, while I draw,
What nothing less than angel can exceed,
A man on earth devoted to the skies;
Like ships in Seas, while in, above the world.
With aspect mild, and elevated eye,
Behold, him seated on a mount serene,
Above the fogs of Sense, and passion's storm:
All the black cares, and tumults, of this life,
Like harmless thunders, breaking at his feet,
Excite his pity, not impair his peace.
Earth's genuine sons, the sceptred, and the slave,
A mingled mob! a wandering herd! he sees,
Bewildered in the vale; in all unlike!
His full reverse in all! what higher praise?
What stronger demonstration of the right?
The present all their care; the future, his.
When public welfare calls, or private want,
They give to fame: his bounty he conceals.
Their virtues varnish nature; his exalt.
Mankind's esteem they court; and he, his own*
Theirs, the wild chase of false felicities;
His, the composed possession of the true.
Alike throughout is his consistent peace,
All of one color, and an even thread;
While party colored shreds of happiness,
With hideous gaps between, patch up for them
A madman's robe; each puff of fortune blows
The tatters by, and shows their nakedness.
He sees with other eyes than theirs: where they
Behold a sun, he spies a deity;
What makes them only smile, makes him adore.
Where they see mountains, he but atoms sees;
An empire, in his balance, weighs a grain.
They things terrestrial worship, as divine;
His hopes immortal blow them by, as dust,
That dims his sight, and shortens his survey,
Which longs, in infinite, to lose all bound.
Titles and honors (if they prove his fate)
He lays aside to find his dignity;
No dignity they find in ought besides.
They triumph in externals (which conceal
Man's real glory), proud of an eclipse.
Himself too much he prizes to be proud,
And nothing thinks so great in man, as man.
Too dear he holds his interest, to neglect
Another's welfare, or his right invade;
Their interest, like a lion, lives on prey
They kindle at the shadow of a wrong;
Wrong he sustains with temper, looks on Heaven,
Nor stoops to think his injurer his foe;
Naught, but what wounds his virtue, wounds his peace.
A covered heart their character defends;
A covered heart denies him half his praise.
With nakedness his innocence agrees;
While their broad foliage testifies their fall.
Their no joys end, where his full feast begins;
His joys create, theirs murder, future bliss.
To triumph in existence, his alone,
And his alone, triumphantly to think
His true existence is not yet begun.
His glorious course was, yesterday, complete;
Death, then, was welcome; yet life still is sweet.
But nothing charms LORENZO, like the firm,
Undaunted breast -- And whose is that high praise?
They yield to pleasure, though they danger brave,
And show no fortitude, but in the field;
If there they show it, it is for glory shown;
Nor will that cordial always man their hearts.
A cordial his sustains, that cannot fail;
By pleasure unsubdu'd, unbroke by pain,
He shares in that omnipotence he trusts.
All-bearing, all-attempting, till he falls;
And when he falls, writes VICI on his shield.
From magnanimity, all fear above;
From nobler recompense, above applause;
Which owes to man's short out look all its charms.
Backward to credit what he never felt,
LORENZO cries, -- "Where shines this miracle?
"From what root rises this immortal man?"
A root that grows not in LORENZO's ground;
The root dissect, nor wonder at the flower.
He follows nature (not like See page 207. Line 23.
thee) and shows us
An uninverted system of a man.
His appetite wears reason's golden chain,
And finds, in due restraint, its luxury.
His passion, like an eagle well-reclaim'd,
Is taught to fly at naught, but infinite.
Patient his hope, un-anxious is his care,
His caution fearless, and his grief (if grief
The Gods ordain) a stranger to despair.
And why? -- Because affection, more than meet,
His wisdom leaves not disengaged from Heaven.
Those secondary goods that smile on earth,
He, loving in proportion, loves in peace.
They most the world enjoy, who least admire.
His understanding escapes the common cloud
Of fumes, arising from a boiling breast.
His head is clear, because his heart is cool,
By worldly competions uninflam'd.
The moderate movements of his soul admit
Distinct ideas, and matur'd debate,
An eye impartial, and an even scale;
Whence judgment sound, and unrepenting choice.
Thus, in a double sense, the good are wise;
On its own dunghill, wiser than the world.
What, then, the world? it must be doubly weak;
Strange truth! as soon would they believe their creed.
Yet thus it is; nor otherwise can be;
So far from aught romantic, what I sing.
Bliss has no being, virtue has no strength
But from the prospect of immortal life.
Who think earth all, or (what weighs just the same)
Who care no farther, must prize what it yields;
Fond of its fancies, proud of its parades.
Who thinks earth nothing, cannot its charms admire;
He cannot a foe, though most malignant, hate,
Because that hate would prove his greater foe.
It Is hard for them (yet who so loudly boast
Good Will to men?) to love their dearest friend;
For may not he invade their good supreme,
Where the least jealousy turns love to gall?
All shines to them, that for a season shines.
Each act, each thought, he questions, "what its weight,
"Its color what, a thousand ages hence?" --
And what it there appears, he deems it now.
Hence, pure are the recesses of his soul.
The God-like man has nothing to conceal.
His virtue, constitutionally deep,
Has habit's firmness, and affection's flame;
Angels, allied, descend to feed the fire;
And death, which others slays, makes him a God.
And now, LORENZO! bigot of this world!
Wont to disdain poor bigots caught by Heaven!
Stand by thy scorn, and be reduced to naught:
For what art thou? -- Thou boaster! while thy glare,
Thy gaudy grandeur, and mere worldly worth,
Like a broad mist, at distance, strikes us most;
And, like a mist, is nothing when at hand;
His merit, like a mountain, on approach,
Swells more, and rises nearer to the skies,
By promise, now, and by possession, soon,
(Too soon, too much, it cannot be) his own.
From this thy just annihilation rise,
LORENZO! rise to something, by reply.
The world, thy client, listens, and expects;
And longs to crown thee with immortal praise.
Can thou be silent? no; for wit is thine;
And wit talks most, when least she has to say,
And reason interrupts not her career.
She Will say -- That mists above the mountains rise;
And, with a thousand pleasantries, amuse;
She Will sparkle, puzzle, flutter, raise a dust,
And fly conviction, in the dust she raised.
Wit, how delicious to man's dainty taste!
It Is precious, as the vehicle of sense;
But, as its substitute, a dire disease.
Pernicious talent! flattered by the world,
By the blind world, which thinks the talent rare.
Wisdom is rare, LORENZO! wit abounds;
Passion can give it; sometime wine inspires
The lucky flash; and madness rarely fails.
Whatever cause the spirit strongly stirs,
Confers the bays, and rivals thy renown.
For thy renown, 'twere well, was this the worst;
Chance often hits it; and, to pique thee more,
See dullness, blund'ring on vivacities,
Shakes her sage head at the calamity,
Which has exposed, and let her down to thee.
But wisdom, aweful wisdom! which inspects,
Discerns, compares, weighs, separates, infers,
Seizes the right, and holds it to the last;
How rare! in senates, synods, sought in vain;
Or if there found, it is sacred to the few;
While a lewd prostitute to multitudes,
Frequent, as fatal, wit: in civil life,
Wit makes an enterpriser; sense, a man.
Wit hates authority; commotion loves,
And thinks herself the lightning of the storm.
In states, it is dangerous; in religion, death:
Shall wit turn christian, when the dull believe?
Sense is our helmet, wit is but the plume;
The plume exposes, it is our helmet saves.
Sense is the di'mond, weighty, solid, sound;
When cut by wit, it casts a brighter beam;
Yet, wit apart, it is a di'mond still.
Wit, widowed of good sense, is worse than naught;
It hoists more sail to run against a rock.
Thus, a half-CHESTERFIELD is quite a fool;
Whom dull fools scorn, and bless their want of wit.
How ruinous the rock I warn thee shun,
Where Sirens sit, to sing thee to thy fate?
A joy, in which our reason bears no part,
Is but a sorrow tickling, ere it stings.
Let not the coo^ngs of the world allure thee;
Which of her lovers ever found her true?
Happy! of this bad world who little know! --
And yet, we much must know her, to be safe.
To know the world, not love her, is thy point;
She gives but little, nor that little, long.
There is, I grant, a triumph of the pulse;
A dance of spirits, a mere froth of joy.
Our thoughtless agitation's idle child,
That mantles high, that sparkles, and expires,
Leaving the soul more vapid than before.
An animal ovation! such as holds
No commerce with our reason, but subsists
On juices, through the well-ton'd tubes, well-strain'd;
A nice machine! scarce ever tuned aright;
And when it jars -- thy Sirens sing no more,
Thy dance is done; the demi-god is thrown
(Short Apotheosis!) beneath the man,
In coward gloom immersed, or fell despair.
Art thou yet dull enough despair to dread,
And startle at destruction? if thou art,
Accept a buckler, take it to the field;
(A field of battle is this mortal life!)
When danger threatens, lay it on thy heart;
A single sentence proof against the world.
" Soul, body, fortune! every good pertains
" To one of these; but prize not all alike;
" The goods of fortune to thy body's health,
" Body to soul, and soul submit to God."
Would thou build lasting happiness? do this;
The inverted pyramid can never stand.
Is this truth doubtful? it outshines the sun;
Nay, the sun shines not, but to show us this,
The single lesson of mankind on earth.
And yet -- Yet, what? no news! mankind is mad;
Such mighty numbers list against the right,
(And what cannot numbers, when bewitched, atchieve!)
They talk themselves to something like belief,
That all earth's joys are theirs: as Athens' fool
Grinn'd from the port, on every sail his own.
They grin; but wherefore? and how long the laugh?
Half ignorance, their mirth; and half, a lie;
To cheat the world, and cheat themselves, they smile*
Hard either task! the most abandoned own,
That others, if abandoned, are undone:
Then, for themselves, the moment reason wakes,
(And Providence denies it long repose)
O how laborious is their gaiety!
They scarce can swallow their ebullient spleen,
Scarce muster patience to support the farce,
And pump sad laughter till the curtain falls.
Scarce, did I say? some cannot sit it out;
Often their own daring hands the curtain draw,
And show us what their joy, by their despair.
The clotted hair! gored breast! blaspheming eye!
Its impious fury still alive in death!
Shut, shut the shocking scen^. -- But Heaven denies
A cover to such guilt; and so should man.
Look round, LORENZO! see the reeking blade,
The envenomed phial, and the fatal ball;
The strangling cord, and suffocating stream;
The loathsome rottenness, and foul decays
From raging riot (flower suicides!);
And pride in these, more execrable still!
How horrid all to thought! -- But horrors, these,
That vouch the truth; and aid my feeble song.
From vice, sense, fancy, no man can be blessed:
Bliss is too great, to lodge within an hour:
When an immortal being aims at bliss,
Duration is essential to the name.
O for a joy from reason! joy from that,
Which makes man man; and, exercised aright,
Will make him more: a bounteous joy! that gives,
And promises; that weaves, with art divine,
The richest prospect into present peace:
A joy ambitious! joy in common held
With thrones ethereal, and their greater far;
A joy high privileged from chance, time, death!
A joy, which death shall double, judgment crown!
Crowned higher, and still higher, at each stage,
Through blessed eternity's long day; yet still,
Not more remote from sorrow, than from him,
Whose lavish hand, whose love stupendous, pours
So much of Deity on guilty dust.
There, O my LUCIA! may I meet thee there,
Where not thy presence can improve my bliss!
Affects not this the sages of the world?
Can naught affect them, but what fools them too?
Eternity, depending on an hour,
Makes serious thought man's wisdom, joy, and praise.
Nor need you blush (though sometimes your designs
May shun the light) at your designs on Heaven:
Sole point! where over-bashful is your blame.
Are you not wise? -- You know you are: yet hear
One truth, amid your numerous schemes mislaid,
Or overlooked, or thrown aside, if seen;
" Our schemes to plan by this world, or the next,
" Is the sole difference between wise and fool."
All worthy men will weigh you in this scale;
What wonder then, if they pronounce you light?
Is their esteem alone not worth your care?
Accept my simple scheme of common sense:
Thus, save your fame, and make two worlds your own.
The world replies not; -- but the world persists;
And puts the cause off to the longest day,
Planning evasions for the day of doom.
So far, at that re-hearing, from redress,
They then turn witnesses against themselves.
Hear that, LORENZO! nor be wise tomorrow.
Haste, haste! a man, by nature, is in haste;
For who shall answer for another hour?
It Is highly prudent, to make one sure friend;
And that thou can not do, this side the skies.
Ye sons of earth! (nor willing to be more!)
Since verse you think from priestcraft somewhat free,
Thus, in an age so gay, the muse plain truths
(Truths, which, at church, you might have heard in prose)
Has ventured into light; well-pleased the verse
Should be forgot, if you the truths retain;
And crown her with your welfare, not your praise.
But praise she need not fear: I see my fate;
And headlong leap, like CURTIUS, down the gulf
Since many an ample volume, mighty tome,
Must die; and die unwept; O thou minute,
Devoted page! go forth among thy foes;
Go, nobly proud of martyrdom for truth,
And die a double death: mankind, incensed,
Denies thee long to live: nor shall thou rest,
When thou art dead; in Stygian shades arraigned
By LUCIFER, as traitor to his throne;
And bold blasphemer of his friend, -- the world;
The world, whose legions cost him slender pay,
And volunteers, around his banner swarm;
Prudent, as Prussia, in her zeal for gaul.
"Are all, then, fools?" LORENZO cries. -- Yes, all,
But such as hold this doctrine (new to thee);
"The mother of true wisdom is the will;"
The noblest intellect, a fool without it.
World-wisdom much has done, and more may do,
In arts and sciences, in wars, and peace;
But art and science, like thy wealth, will leave thee,
And make thee twice a beggar at thy death.
This is the most indulgence can afford; --
"Thy wisdom all can do, but -- make thee wise."
Nor think this censure is severe on thee;
Satan, thy master, I dare call a dunce.
THE END OF THE EIGHTH NIGHT.
THE COMPLAINT. NIGHT the NINTH and LAST. THE CONSOLATION.
Containing, among other things, I. A Moral Survey of the Nocturnal Heavens.
II. A Night Address to the DEITY.

Humbly Inscribed to His GRACE The DUKE of NEW CASTLE, One of His Majesty's
Principle Secretaries of State.
-- Fatis Contraria Fata rependens. VIRG.
AS when a traveller, a long day past
In painful search of what he cannot find,
At night's approach, content with the next cot,
There ruminates, awhile, his labor lost;
Then chears his heart with what his fate affords,
And chants his sonnet to deceive the time,
Till the due season calls him to repose:
Thus I, long traveled in the ways of men,
And dancing, with the rest, the giddy maze,
Where disappointment smiles at hope's career;
Warned by the languor of life's evening ray,
At length have housed me in an humble shed;
Where, future wandering banished from my thought,
And waiting, patient, the sweet hour of rest;
I chase the moments with a serious song.
Song sooths our pains; and age has pains to sooth.
When age, care, crime, and friends embraced at heart,
Torn from my bleeding breast, and death's dark shade,
Which hovers over me, quenched the ethereal fire;
Can thou, O night! indulge one labor more?
One labor more indulge! then sleep, my strain!
Till, happily, waked by RAPHAEL's golden lyre,
Where night, death, age, care, crime, and sorrow, cease;
To bear a part in everlasting lays;
Though far, far higher set, in aim, I trust,
Symphonious to this humble prelude here.
Has not the muse asserted pleasures pure.
Like those above; exploding other joys?
Weigh what was urged, LORENZO! fairly weigh;
And tell me, have thou cause to triumph still?
I think, thou will forbear a boast so bold.
But if, beneath the favor of mistake,
Thy smile's sincere; not more sincere can be
LORENZO's smile, than my compassion for him.
The sick in body call for aid; the sick
In mind are covetous of more disease;
And when at worst, they dream themselves quite well,
To know ourselves diseased, is half our cure.
When nature's blush by custom is wiped off,
And conscience, deaden'd by repeated strokes,
Has into manners naturalized our crimes;
The curse of curses is, our curse to love;
To triumph in the blackness of our guilt,
(As Indians glory in the deepest jet);
And throw aside our senses with our peace.
But, grant no guilt, no shame, no least alloy;
Grant joy and glory, quite unfully'd, shone;
Yet, still, it ill deserves LORENZO's heart.
No joy, no glory, glitters in thy sight,
But through the thin partition of an hour,
I see its sables wove by destiny;
And that in sorrow buried; this in shame;
While howling furies ring the doleful knell;
And conscience, now so soft thou scarce can hear
Her whisper, echoes her eternal peal.
Where, the prime actors of the last year's scene;
Their port so proud, their buskin, and their plume?
How many sleep, who kept the world awake
With luster, and with noise! has death proclaimed
A truce, and hung his fated lance on high?
It Is brandished still; nor shall the present year
Be more tenacious of her human leaf,
Or spread of feeble life a thinner fall.
But needless monuments to wake the thought;
Life's gayest scenes speak man's mortality;
Though in a style more florid, full as plain,
As mausoleums, pyramids, and tombs.
What are our noblest ornaments, but deaths
Turned flatterers of life, in paint, or marble,
The well-stain'd canvas, or the featured stone?
Our fathers grace, or rather haunt, the scene.
Joy peoples her pavillion from the dead.
"Professed diversions! cannot these escape?"
Far from it: these present us with a shroud;
And talk of death, like garlands, over a grave.
As some bold plunderers, for buried wealth,
We ransack tombs for pastime; from the dust
Call up the sleeping hero; bid him tread
The scene for our amusement: how like Gods
We sit; and, wrapped in immortality,
Shed generous tears on wretches born to die;
Their fate deploring, to forget our own!
What, all the pomps and triumphs of our lives,
But legacies in blossom? our lean soil,
Luxuriant grown, and rank in vanities,
From friends interred beneath; a rich manure!
Like other worms, we banquet on the dead;
Like other worms, shall we crawl on, nor know
Our present frailties, or approaching fate?
LORENZO! such the glories of the world!
What is the world itself? thy world? -- A grave.
Where is the dust that has not been alive?
The spade, the plough, disturb our ancestors;
From human mould we reap our daily bread.
The globe around earth's hallow surface shakes,
And is the cieling of her sleeping sons.
Over devastation we blind revels keep;
Whole buried towns support the dancer's heel.
The most of human frame the sun exhales;
Winds scatter, through the mighty void, the dry;
Earth repossesses part of what she gave,
And the freed spirit mounts on wings of fire;
Each element partakes our scattered spoils;
As nature, wide, our ruins spread; man's death
Inhabits all things, but the thought of man.
Nor man alone; his breathing bust expires,
His tomb is mortal; empires die: where, now,
The Roman? Greek? they stalk, an empty name!
Yet few regard them in this useful light;
Though half our learning is their epitaph.
When down thy vale unlocked by midnight thought,
That loves to wander in thy sunless realms,
O death! I stretch my view; what visions rise!
What triumphs! toils imperial! arts divine!
In withered laurels glide before my sight!
What lengths of far-fam'd ages, billow'd high
With human agitation, roll along
In unsubstantial images of air!
The melancholy ghosts of dead renown,
Whispering faint echoes of the world's applause,
With penitential aspect, as they pass,
All point at earth, and hiss at human pride,
The wisdom of the wise, and prancings of the great:
But, O LORENZO! far the rest above,
Of ghastly nature, and enormous size,
One form assaults my sight, and chills my blood,
And shakes my frame. Of one departed world
I see the mighty shadow: oozy wreath
And dismal sea-weed crown her; over her urn
Reclined, she weeps her desolated realms,
And bloated sons; and weeping prophesies
Another's dissolution, soon, in flames.
But, like CASSANDRA, prophesies in vain;
In vain, to many; not, I trust, to thee.
For, know thou not, or art thou loath to know,
The great decree, the counsel of the skies?
Deluge and conflagration, dreadful powers!
Prime ministers of vengeance! chained in caves
Distinct, apart the giant furies roar;
Apart; or such their horrid rage for ruin,
In mutual conflict would they rise, and wage
Eternal war, till one was quite devoured.
But not for this, ordained their boundless rage:
When Heaven's inferior instruments of wrath,
War, famine pestilence, are found too weak
To scourge a world for her enormous crimes,
These are let loose, alternate: down they rush,
Swift and tempestuous, from the eternal throne,
With irresistible commission armed,
The world, in vain corrected, to destroy.
And ease creation of the shocking scene.
See thou, LORENZO! what depends on man?
The fate of nature; as for man, her birth.
Earth's actors change earth's transitory scenes,
And make creation groan with human guilt.
How must it groan, in a new deluge whelmed,
But not of waters! at the destined hour,
By the loud trumpet summoned to the charge,
See, all the formidable sons of fire,
Eruptions, earthquakes, comets, lightnings, play
Their various engines; all at once disgorge
Their blazing magazines; and take, by storm,
This poor terrestrial citadel of man.
Amazing period! when each mountain-height
Out-burns Vesuvius; rocks eternal pour
Their melted mass, as rivers once they poured;
Stars rush; and final ruin fiercely drives
Her ploughshare over creation! while aloft,
More than astonishment! if more can be!
Far other firmament than ever was seen,
Than ever was thought by man! far other stars!
Stars animate, that govern these of fire;
Far other sun! -- A sun, O how unlike
The babe at Bethle'm! how unlike the man
That groaned on Calvary! -- Yet he it is;
That man of sorrows! O how changed! what pomp!
In grandeur terrible, all Heaven descends!
And Gods, ambitious, triumph in his train.
A swift archangel, with his golden wing,
As blots and clouds, that darken and disgrace
The scene divine, sweeps stars and suns aside.
And, now, all dross removed, Heaven's own pure day,
Full on the confines of our Ether, flames.
While, (dreadful contrast!) far, how far beneath!
Hell bursting, belches forth her blazing seas,
And storms sulphurous; her voracious jaws
Expanding wide, and roaring for her prey.
LORENZO! welcome to this scene; the last
In nature's course; the first in wisdom's thought.
This strikes, if aught can strike thee; this awakes
The most supine; this snatches man from death.
Rouse, rouse, LORENZO, then, and follow me,
Where truth, the most momentous man can hear,
Loud call my soul, and ardor wings her flight.
I find my inspiration in my theme;
The grandeur of my subject is my muse.
At midnight, when mankind is wrapped in peace,
And worldly fancy feeds on golden dreams;
To give more dread to man's most dreadful hour,
At midnight, it is presumed this pomp will burst
From tenfold darkness; sudden, as the spark
From smitten steel; from nitrous grain, the blaze.
Man, starting from his couch, shall sleep no more!
The day is broke, which never more shall close!
Above, around, beneath, amazement all!
Terror and glory joined in their extremes!
Our GOD in grandeur, and our world on fire!
All nature struggling in the pangs of death!
Do thou not hear her? do thou not deplore
Her strong convulsions, and her final groan?
Where are we now? ah me! the ground is gone,
On which we stood, LORENZO! while thou may,
Provide more firm support, or sink for ever!
Where? how? from whence? vain hope! it is too late?
Where, where, for shelter, shall the guilty fly,
When consternation turns the good man pale?
Great day! for which all other days were made;
For which earth rose from chaos, man from earth;
And an eternity, the date of Gods,
Descended of poor earth-created man!
Great day of dread, decision, and despair!
At thought of thee each sublunary wish
Lets go its eager grasp, and drops the world;
And catches at each reed of hope in Heaven.
At thought of thee! -- And art thou absent then?
LORENZO! no; it is here; -- it is begun; --
Already is begun the grand assize,
In thee, in all: deputed conscience scales
The dread tribunal, and forestalls our doom;
Forestalls; and, by forestalling, proves it sure.
Why on himself should man void judgment pass?
Is idle nature laughing at her sons?
Who conscience sent, her sentence will support,
And GOD above assert that GOD in man.
Thrice happy they! that enter now the court
Heaven opens in their bosoms: but, how rare,
Ah me! that magnanimity, how rare!
What hero, like the man who stands himself;
Who dares to meet his naked heart alone;
Who hears, intrepid, the full charge it brings,
Resolved to silence future murmurs there?
The coward flies; and, flying, is undone.
(Art thou a coward? no): the coward flies;
Thinks, but thinks slightly; asks, but fears to know;
Asks, "what is truth?" with PILATE; and retires;
Dissolves the court, and mingles with the throng;
Asylum sad! from reason, hope, and Heaven!
Shall all, but man, look out with ardent eye,
For that great day, which was ordained for man?
O day of consummation! mark supreme
(If men are wise) of human thought! nor least,
Or in the sight of angels, or their King!
Angels, whose radiant circles, height over height,
Order over order, rising, blaze over blaze,
As in a theater, surround this scene,
Intent on man, and anxious for his fate.
Angels look out for thee; for thee, their LORD,
To vindicate his glory; and for thee,
Creation universal calls aloud,
To dis-involve the moral world, and give
To nature's renovation brighter charms.
Shall man alone, whose fate, whose final fate,
Hangs, on that hour, exclude it from his thought;
I think of nothing else; I see! I feel it!
All nature, like an earthquake, trembling round!
All Deities, like summer's swarms, on wing!
All basking in the full meridian blaze!
I see the Judge enthroned! the flaming guard!
The volume opened! opened every hear^!
A sunbeam pointing out each secret thought!
No patron! intercessor none! now past
The sweet, the clement, mediatorial hour!
For guilt no plea! to pain, no pause! no bound!
Inexorable, all! and all, extreme!
For man alone; the foe of GOD and man,
From his dark den, blaspheming, drags his chain,
And rears his brazen front, with thunder scarr'd;
Receives his sentence, and begins his hell.
All vengeance past, now, seems abundant grace:
Like meteors in a stormy sky, how roll
His baleful eyes! he curses whom he dreads;
And deems it the first moment of his fall.
It Is present to my thought! -- And yet where is it?
Angels cannot tell me; angels cannot guess
The period; from created beings locked
In darkness. But the process, and the place,
Are less obscure; for these may man inquire.
Say, thou great close of human hopes and fears!
Great key of hearts! great finisher of fates!
Great end! and great beginning! say, where art thou?
Art thou in time, or in eternity?
Nor in eternity, nor time, I find thee.
These, as two monarchs, on their borders meet,
(Monarchs of all elapsed, or unarriv'd!)
As in debate, how best their powers allied
May swell the grandeur, or discharge the wrath,
Of HIM, who both their monarchies obey.
Time, this vast fabric for him built (and doomed
With him to fall) now bursting over his head;
His lamp, the sun, extinguished; from beneath
The frown of hideous darkness, calls his sons
From their long slumber; from earth's heaving womb,
To second birth; contemporary throng!
Roused at one call, upstarting from one bed,
Pressed in one crowd, appalled with one amaze,
He turns them over, eternity! to thee.
Then (as a King deposed disdains to live)
He falls on his own scythe; nor falls alone;
His greatest foe falls with him; time, and he
Who murdered all time's offspring, death, expire.
TIME was! ETERNITY now reigns alone!
Aweful eternity! offended queen!
And her resentment to mankind, how just!
With kind intent, soliciting access,
How often has she knocked at human hearts!
Rich to repay their hospitality,
How often called! and with the voice of GOD!
Yet bore repuse, excluded as a cheat!
A dream! while foulest foes found welcome there!
A dream, a cheat, now, all things, but her smile.
For, lo! her twice ten thousand gates thrown wide,
As thrice from Indus to the frozen pole,
With banners, streaming as the comet's blaze,
And clarions, louder than the deep in storms,
Sonorous as immortal breath can blow,
Pour forth their myriads, potentates, and powers,
Of light, of darkness; in a middle field,
Wide, as creation! populous, as wide!
A neutral region! there to mark the event
Of that great drama, whose preceding scenes
Detained them close spectators, through a length
Of ages, ripening to this grand result;
Ages, as yet unnumber'd, but by GOD;
Who now, pronouncing sentence, vindicates
The rights of virtue, and his own renown.
ETERNITY, the various sentence past,
Assigns the severed throng distinct abodes,
Sulphurous, or ambrosial: what ensues?
The deed predominant! the deed of deeds!
Which makes a hell of hell, a Heaven of Heaven.
The goddess, with determined aspect, turns
Her adamantine key's enormous size
Through destiny's inextricable wards,
Deep driving every bolt, on both their fates.
Then, from the crystal battlements of heaven,
Down, down* she hurls it through the dark profound,
Ten thousand thousand fathom; there to rust,
And never unlock her resolution more.
The deep resounds, and hell, through all her glooms,
Returns, in groans, the melancholy roar.
O how unlike the chorus of the skies!
O how unlike those shouts of joy, that shake
The whole ethereal! how the concave rings!
Nor strange! when Deities their voice exalt;
And louder far, than when creation rose,
To see creation's godlike aim, and end,
So well accomplished! so divinely closed!
To see the mighty Dramatist's last act
(As meet) in glory rising over the rest.
No fancied GOD, a GOD, indeed, descends,
To solve all knots; to strike the moral home;
To throw full day on darkest scenes of time;
To clear, commend, exalt, and crown the whole.
Hence, in one peal of loud, eternal praise,
The charmed spectators thunder their applause;
And the vast void beyond, applause resounds.
WHAT THEN AM I? --
Amidst applauding worlds,
And worlds celestial, is there found on earth,
A peevish, dissonant, rebellious string,
Which jars in the grand chorus, and complains?
Censure on thee, LORENZO! I suspend,
And turn it on myself; how greatly due!
All, all is right; by GOD ordained or done;
And who, but GOD, resumed the friends he gave?
And have I been complaining, then, so long?
Complaining of his favors; pain, and death?
Who, without pain's advice, would ever be good?
Who, without death, but would be good in vain?
Pain is to save from pain; all punishment,
To make for peace; and death to save from death;
And second death, to guard immortal life;
To rouse the careless, the presumptuous awe,
And turn the tide of souls another way;
By the same tenderness divine ordained,
That planted Eden, and high-bloom'd for man,
A fairer Eden, endless, in the skies.
Heaven gives us friends to bless the present scene;
Resumes them, to pepare us for the next.
All evils natural are moral goods;
All discipline, indulgence, on the whole.
N^ne are unhappy; all have cause to smile,
But such as to themselves that cause deny.
Our faults are at the bottom of our pains;
Error, in act, or judgment, is the source
Of endless sighs: we sin, or we mistake;
And nature tax, when false opinion stings.
Let impious grief be banished joy indulged;
But chiefly then, when grief puts in her claim.
Joy from the joyous, frequently betrays,
Often lives in vanity, and dies in woe.
Joy, amidst ills, corroborates, exalts;
It Is joy, and conquest; joy, and virtue too.
A noble fortitude in ills delights
Heaven, earth, ourselves; it is duty, glory, peace.
Affliction is the good man's shining scene;
Prosperity conceals his brightest ray;
As night to stars, woe luster gives to man.
Heroes in battle, pilots in the storm,
And virtue in calamities, admire.
The crown of manhood is a winter-joy;
An evergreen, that stands the northern blast,
And blossoms in the rigor of our fate.
It Is a prime part of happiness, to know
How much unhappiness must prove our lot;
A part which few possess! I Will pay life's tax,
Without one rebel murmur, from this hour,
Nor think it misery to be a man;
Who thinks it is, shall never be a God;
Some ills we wish for, when we wish to live.
What spoke proud passion? -- ' Referring to the first night.
Wish my being lost!'
Presumptuous! blasphemous! absurd! and false!
The triumph of my soul is, -- That I am;
And therefore that I may be -- What? LORENZO!
Look inward, and look deep; and deeper still;
Unfathomably deep our treasure runs
In golden veins, through all eternity!
Ages, and ages, and succeeding still
New ages, where this phantom of an hour,
Which courts, each night, dull slumber, for repair,
Shall wake, and wonder, and exult, and praise,
And fly through infinite, and all, unlock;
And (if deserved) by Heaven's redundant love,
Made half-adorable itself, adore;
And find, in adoration, endless joy!
Where thou, not master of a moment here,
Frail as the flower and fleeting as the gale,
May boast a whole eternity, enriched
With all a kind Omnipotence can pour.
Since Adam fell, no mortal, un-inspir'd,
Has ever yet conceived, or ever shall,
How kind is God, how great (if good) is man.
No man too largely from Heaven's love can hope,
If what is hoped be labors to secure.
Ills? -- There are none: all-gracious! none from thee;
From man full many! numerous is the race
Of blackest ills, and those immortal too,
Begot by madness on fair liberty;
Heaven's daughter, hell-debauch'd! her hand alone
Unlocks destruction to the sons of men,
Fast barred by thine; high-wall'd with adamant,
Guarded with terrors reaching to this world,
And, covered with the thunders of thy law;
Whose threats are mercies, whose injunctions, guides,
Assisting, not restraining, reason's choice;
Whose sanctions, unavoidable results
From nature's course, indulgently revealed;
If unreveal'd, more dangerous, not less sure.
Thus, an indulgent father warns his sons,
"Do this; fly that" -- nor always tells the cause;
Pleased to reward, as duty to his will,
A conduct needful to their own repose.
Great GOD of wonders! (if, thy love surveyed,
Aught else the name of wonderful retains)
What rocks are these, on which to build our trus^?
Thy ways admit no blemish; none I find;
Or this alone -- "That none is to be found."
Not one, to soften censure's hardy crime;
Not one, to palliate peevish grief's complaint,
Who, like a Demon, murmuring from the dust,
Dares into judgment call her Judge. -- Supreme!
For all I bless thee; most, for the severe;
LUCIA.
Her death -- my own at hand -- the fiery gulf,
That flaming bound of wrath Omnipotent!
It thunders; but it thunders to preserve;
It strengthens what it strikes; its wholesome dread
Averts the dreaded pain; its hideous groans
Join Heaven's sweet hallelujahs in thy praise,
Great source of good alone! how kind in all!
In vengeance kind! pain, death, gehenna, SAVE.
Thus, in thy world material, mighty mind!
Not that alone which solaces, and shines,
The rough and gloomy, challenges our praise.
The winter is as needful as the spring;
The thunder as the sun; a stagnate mass
Of vapors breeds a pestilential air:
Nor more propitious the favonian breeze
To nature's health, than purifying storms;
The dread Volcano ministers to good.
Its smothered flames might undermine the world.
Loud AEtnas fulminate in love to man;
Comets good omens are, when duly scanned;
And, in their use, eclipses learn to shine.
Man is responsible for ills received;
Those we call wretched are a chosen band,
Compelled to refuge in the right, for peace.
Amid my list of blessings infinite,
Stand this the foremost, "That my heart has bled."
It Is Heaven's last effort of good will to man;
When pain cannot bless, Heaven quits us in despair.
Who fails to grieve, when just occasion calls,
Or grieves too much, deserves not to be blessed;
Inhuman, or effeminate, his heart;
Reason absolves the grief, which reason ends.
May Heaven never trust my friend with happiness,
Till it has taught him how to bear it well,
By previous pain; and made it safe to smile!
Such smiles are mine, and such may they remain;
Nor hazard their extinction, from excess.
My change of heart a change of style demands;
The CONSOLATION cancels the COMPLAINT,
And makes a convert of my guilty song.
As when o'er-labour'd, and inclined to breathe,
A panting traveller, some rising ground,
Some small ascent has gained, he turns him round,
And measures with his eye the various vale,
The fields, woods, meads, and rivers, he has past;
And, satiate of his journey, thinks of home
Endeared by distance, nor affects more toil;
Thus I, though small, indeed, is that ascent
The muse has gained, review the paths she trod;
Various, extensive, beaten but by few:
And, conscious of her prudence in repose,
Pause; and with pleasure meditate an end,
Though still remote; so fruitful is my theme.
Through many a field of moral and divine,
The muse has strayed; and much of sorrow seen
In human ways; and much of false and vain;
Which none, who travel this bad road, can miss.
Over friends deceased full heartily she wept;
Of love divine the wonders she displayed;
Proved man immortal; showed the source of joy;
The grand tribunal raised; assigned the bounds
Of human grief: in few, to close the whole,
The moral muse has shadowed out a sketch,
Though not in form, nor with a RAPHAEL-stroke,
Of most our weakness needs believe, or do,
In this our land of travel, and of hope,
For peace on earth, or prospect of the skies.
What then remains? -- Much! much! a mighty debt
To be discharged: these thoughts, O night! are thine;
From thee they came, like lovers secret sighs,
While others slept. So, CYNTHIA (poets feign)
In shadows veiled soft sliding from her sphere,
Her shepherd cheered; of her enamored less,
Than I of thee. -- And art thou still unsung,
Beneath whose brow, and by whose aid, I sing?
Immortal silence! -- Where shall I begin?
Where end? or how steal music from the spheres,
To sooth their goddess?
O majestic night!
Nature's great ancestor! day's elder-born!
And fated to survive the transient sun!
By mortals, and immortals, seen with awe!
A starry crown thy raven brow adorns,
An azure zone thy waist; clouds, in Heaven's loom
Wrought through varieties of shape and shade,
In ample folds of drapery divine,
Thy flowing mantle form, and, Heaven throughout,
Voluminously pour thy pompous train.
Thy gloomy grandeurs (nature's most august,
Inspiring aspect!) claim a grateful verse;
And, like a sable curtain starr'd with gold,
Drawn over my labors past, shall close the scene.
And what, O man! so worthy to be sung?
What more prepares us for the songs of Heaven?
Creation of archangels is the theme!
What, to be sung, so needful? what so well
Celestial joys prepares us to sustain?
The soul of man, his face designed to see,
Who gave these wonders to be seen by man,
Has here a previous scene of objects great,
On which to dwell; to stretch to that expanse
Of thought, to rise to that exalted height
Of admiration, to contract that awe,
And give her whole capacities that strength,
Which best may qualify for final joy.
The more our spirits are enlarged on earth,
The deeper draught shall they receive of Heaven.
Heaven's KING! whose face unveiled consummates bliss;
Redundant bliss! which fills that mighty void,
The whole creation leaves in human hearts!
THOU, who did touch the lip of Jesse's son,
Wrapped in sweet contemplation of these fires,
And set his harp in concert with the spheres!
While of thy works material the supreme
I dare attempt, assist my daring song.
Loose me from earth's enclosure, from the sun's
Contracted circle set my heart at large;
Eliminate my spirit, give it range
Through provinces of thought yet unexplor'd;
Teach me, by this stupendous scaffolding,
Creation's golden steps, to climb to THEE.
Teach me with art great nature to control,
And spread a luster over the shades of night.
Feel I thy kind assent? and shall the sun
Be seen at midnight, rising in my song?
LORENZO! come, and warm thee: thou, whose heart,
Whose little heart, is moored within a nook
Of this obscure terrestrial, anchor weigh.
Another ocean calls, a nobler port;
I am thy pilot, I thy prosperous gale.
Gainful thy voyage through you azure main;
Main, without tempest, pirate, rock, or shore;
And whence thou may import eternal wealth;
And leave to beggared minds the pearl and gold.
Thy travels do thou boast over foreign realms?
Thou stranger to the world! thy tour begin;
Thy tour through nature's universal orb.
Nature delineates her whole chart at large,
On soaring souls, that sail among the spheres;
And man how purblind, if unknown the whole!
Who circles spacious earth, then travels here,
Shall own, he never was from home before!
Come, my Night the Eighth.
PROMETHEUS, from thy pointed rock
Of false ambition if unchain'd, we'll mount;
We'll, innocently, steal celestial fire,
And kindle our devotion at the stars;
A theft, that shall not chain, but set thee free.
Above our atmosphere's intestine wars,
Rain's fountainhead, the magazine of hail;
Above the northern nests of feathered snows,
The brew of thunders, and the flaming forge
That forms the crooked lightning; 'bove the caves
Where infant tempests wait their growing wings,
And tune their tender voices to that roar,
Which soon, perhaps, shall shake a guilty world;
Above misconstru'd omens of the sky,
Far traveled comets calculated blaze,
Elance thy thought, and think of more than man.
Thy soul, till now, contracted, withered, shrunk,
Blighted by blasts of earth's unwholesome air,
Will blossom here, spread all her faculties
To these bright ardors; every power unfold,
And rise into sublimities of thought.
Stars teach, as well as shine. At nature's birth,
Thus, their commission ran -- "Be kind to man."
Where art thou, poor benighted traveller!
The stars will light thee; though the moon should fail.
Where art thou, more benighted! more astray!
In ways immortal? the stars call thee back;
And, if obeyed their counsel, set thee right.
This prospect vast, what is it? -- Weighed aright,
(...) system of divinity,
(...) student of the night inspires.
(...) Scripture, writ by GOD's own hand;
(...)! un^o r^pt by man.
LORENZO! with my Radius (the rich gift
(...) nocturnal!) I Will point out to thee
(...) lessons; some that may surprise
As on a^ept in mysteries of night;
(...) perhaps, expected in her school,
Nor thought to grow on planet, or on star.
Bulls, Lions, Scorpions, monsters here we feign;
Ourselves more monstrous, not to sue what here
Exists indeed; -- a lecture to mankind.
What read we here? -- The existence of a GOD?
Yes; and of other beings, man above;
Natives of Ether! sons of higher climes!
And, what may move LORENZO's wonder more,
ETERNITY is written in the skies.
And where eterni^y -- LORENZO? thine;
Mankind's eternity. Not faith alone,
VIRTUE grows here; here springs the sovereign cure
Of almost every vice; but chiefly thine;
Wrath, pride, ambition, and Impure desire.
LORENZO! thou can wake at midnight too,
Though not on morals bent: ambition pleasure!
(...) tyrants I for thee so: lately fought,
Afford their harrass'd slaves but slender rest.
Thou, to whom midnight is immortal noon,
And the sun's noontide blaze, prime dawn of day;
Not by thy climate, but capricious crime,
Commencing one of our Antipodes!
In thy nocturnal rove, one moment halt,
"Twixt stage and stage, of riot, and cabal;
And lift thine eye (if ^old an eye to lift,
If bold to meet the face of injured Heaven)
To yonder stars: for other ends they shine,
Than to light revellers from shame to shame,
And, thus, be made accomplices in guilt.
Why from yon arch, that infinite of space,
With infinite of lucid orbs replete,
Which set the living firmament on fire,
At the first glance in such an overwhelm
Of wonderful, on man's astonished sight,
Rushes Omnipotence? -- To curb our pride;
Our reason rouse, and lead it to that power,
Whose love lets down these silver chains of light;
To draw up man's ambition to himself,
And bind our chaste affections to his throne.
Thus the three virtues, least alive on earth,
And welcomed on Heaven's coast with most applause,
And humble, pure, and heav'nly-minded heart,
Are here inspi^'d: -- And can thou gaze too long?
Nor stands thy wrath deprived of its reproof,
Or un-upbraided by this radiant choir.
The planets of each system represent
Kind neighbors; mutual amity prevails;
Sweet interchange of rays, received, returned;
Enlight'ning, and enlightened! all, at once,
Attracting, and attracted! patriot-like,
None sins against the welfare of the whole;
But their reciprocal, unselfish aid,
Affords an emblem of millennial love.
Nothing in nature, much less conscious being,
Was ever created solely for itself:
Thus man his sovereign duty learns in this
Material picture of benevolence.
And know, of all our supercilious race,
Thou most inflammable! thou wasp of men!
Man's angry heart, inspected, would be found
As rightly set, as are the starry spheres;
It Is nature's structure, broke by stubborn will,
Breeds all that un-celestial discord there.
Will thou not feel the bias nature gave?
Can thou descend from converse with the skies,
And seize thy brother's throat? -- For what -- a clod,
An inch of earth? the planets cry, "Forbear."
They chase our double darkness; nature's gloom,
And (kinder still!) our intellectual night.
And see, day's amiable sister sends
Her invitation, in the softest rays
Of mitigated luster; courts thy sight,
Which suffers from her tyrant brother's blaze.
Night grants the full freedom of the skies,
Nor rudely reprimands thy lifted eye;
With gain, and joy, she bribes thee to be wise.
Night opes the noblest scenes, and sheds an awe,
Which gives those venerable scenes full weight,
And deep reception, in the intender'd heart;
While light peeps through the darkness, like a spy;
And darkness shows its grandeur by the light.
Nor is the profit greater than the joy,
If human hearts at glorious objects glow,
And admiration can inspire delight.
What speak I more, than I, this moment, feel?
With pleasing stupor first the Soul is struck
(Stupor ordained to make her truly wife!)
Then into transport starting from her (...),
With love and admiration, how he ^ows!
This gorgeous apparatus! this display!
This ostentation of creative power!
This theater! -- what eye can take it in?
By what divine enchantment was it raised,
For minds of the first magnitude to launch,
In endless speculation, and adore?
One sun by day, by night (...) thousand shine;
And light us deep into the DEITY,
How boundless in magnificence and might!
O what a confluence of ethereal fires,
From urns un-number'd, down the steep of Heaven,
Streams to a point, and centres in my sight!
Nor tarries there; I feel it at my heart.
My heart, at once, it humbles, and exalts;
Lays it in dust, and calls it to the skies.
Who sees it unexalted? or unawed?
Who sees it, and can stop at what is seen?
Material offspring of Omnipotence!
Inanimate, all-animating birth!
Work worthy him who made it! worthy praise!
All praise! praise more than human! nor denied
Thy praise divine! -- But though man, drowned in sleep
Withholds his homage, not alone I wake;
Bright legions swarm unseen, and sing, unheard
By mortal ear, the glorious architect,
In this his universal temple hung
With lustres, with innumerable lights,
That shed religion on the soul; at once,
The temple, and the preacher! O how loud
It calls devotion! genuine growth of night!
Devotion! daughter of astronomy!
An undevout astronomer is mad.
True; all things speak a GOD; but in the small,
Men grace out him; in great, he seizes man;
Seizes, and elevates, and raps, and fills
With new inquiries, 'mid associates new.
Tell me, ye stars! ye planets! tell me, all
Ye starr'd and planeted, inhabitants! what is it?
What are these sons of wonder? Say, proud arch!
(Within whose azure palaces they dwell)
Built with divine ambition! in disdain
Of limits built! built in the taste of Heaven!
Vast concave! ample dome! wast thou designed
A meet apartment for the DEITY? --
Not so; that thought alone thy state impairs,
Thy lofty sinks, and shallows thy profound,
And strengthens thy diffusive; dwarfs the whole,
And makes an universe an orrery.
But when I drop mine eye, and look on man,
Thy right regained, thy grandeur is restored,
O nature! wide flies off the expanding round.
As when whole magazines, at once are fired,
The smitten air is hollowed by the blow;
The vast displosion dissipates the clouds;
Shocked AEther's billows dash the distant skies;
Thus (but far more) the expanding round shes off,
And leaves a mighty void, a spacious womb,
Might teem with new creation; re-inflam'd
Thy luminaries triumph, and assume
Divinity themselves. Nor was it strange,
Matter high-wrought to such surprising pomp,
Such godlike glory, stole the style of Gods,
From ages dark, obtuse, and steeped in sense;
For, sure, to sense, they truly are divine,
And half-absolv'd idolatry from guilt;
Nay, turned it into virtue. Such it was
In those, who put forth all they had of man
Unlost, to lift their thought, nor mounted higher;
But, weak of wing, on planets perched; and thought
What was their highest, must be their adored.
But they how weak, who could no higher mount?
And are there, then LORENZO! those, to whom
Unseen, and unexistent, are the same?
And, if incomprehensible is joined,
Who dare pronounce it madness, to believe?
Why has the mighty Builder thrown aside
All measure in his work; stretched out his line
So far, and spread amazement over the whole?
Then (as he took delight in wide extremes),
Deep in the bosom of his universe,
Dropped down that reasoning mite, that insect, man*
To crawl, and gaze, and wonder at the scene? --
That man might never presume to plead amazement
For disbelief of wonders in himself.
Shall God be less miraculous, than what
His hand has formed? shall mysteries descend
From un-mysterious? things more elevate,
Be more familiar? uncreated lie
More obvious us than created, to the grasp
Of human thought? the more of wonderful
Is heard in him, the more we should assent.
Could we conceive him, GOD he could not be;
Or he not GOD, or we could not be men.
A GOD alone can comprehend a GOD;
Man's distance how immense! on such a theme,
Know this, LORENZO! (seem it never so strange)
Nothing can satisfy, but what confounds;
Nothing, but what astonishes, is true.
The scene thou see, attests the truth I sing,
And every star sheds light upon thy creed,
These stars, this furniture, this cost of Heaven,
If but reported, thou had never believed;
But thine eye tells thee, the romance is true.
The grand of nature is the Almighty's oath,
In reason's court, to silence unbelief.
How my mind, opening at this scene, imbibes
The moral emanations of the skies,
While naught, perhaps, LORENZO less admires!
Has the great Sovereign sent ten thousand worlds
To tell us, he resides above them all,
In glory's unapproachable recess?
And dare earth's bold inhabitants deny
The sumptuous, the magnific embassy
A moment's audience? turn we, nor will hear
From whom they come, or what they would impart
For man's emolument; sole cause that stoops
Their grandeur to man's eye? LORENZO! rouse;
Let thought, awakened, take the lightning's wing,
And glance from east to west, from pole to pole.
Who sees, but is confounded* or convinced?
Renounces reason, or a GOD adores?
Mankind was sent into the world to see:
Sight gives the science needful to their peace;
That obvious science asks small learning's aid.
Would thou on metaphysic pinions soar?
Or wound thy patience amid logic thorns?
Or travel history's enormous round?
Nature no such hard task enjoins: she gave
A make to man directive of his thought;
A make set upright, pointing to the stars,
As who should say, "Read thy chief lesson there."
Too late to read this manuscript of Heaven,
When, like a parchment-scroll, shrunk up by flames,
It folds LORENZO's lesson from his sight.
Lesson how various! not the GOD alone,
I see his ministers; I see, diffused
In radiant orders, essences sublime,
Of various offices, of various plume,
In heavenly liveries, distinctly, clad,
Azure, Green, purple, pearl, or downy gold,
Or all commix'd; they stand, with wings outspread,
Listening to catch the master's least command,
And fly through nature, ere the moment ends;
Numbers innumerable! -- Well conceived
By pagan, and by christian! over each sphere
Presides an angel, to direct it course,
And feed, or fan, its flames; or to discharge
Other high trust unknown. For who can see
Such pomp of matter, and imagine, mind,
For which alone inanimate was made,
More sparingly dispensed? that nobler son,
Far liker the great SIRE! -- It Is thus the skies
Inform us of superiors numberless,
As much, in excellence, above mankind,
As above earth, in magnitude, the spheres.
These, as a cloud of witnesses hang over us;
In a thronged theater are all our deeds;
Perhaps, a thousand demigods descend
On every beam we see, to walk with men.
Aweful reflection! strong restraint from ill!
Yet, here, our virtue finds still stronger aid,
From these ethereal glories sense surveys.
Something, like magic, strikes from this blue vault;
With just attention is it viewed? we feel
A sudden succor, un-implor'd, unthought;
Nature herself does half the work of man.
Seas, rivers, mountains, forests, deserts, rocks,
The promontory's height, the depth profound
Of subterranean, excavated gro^^,
Black-brow'd, and vaulted high, and yawning wide
From nature's structure, or the scoop of time;
If ample of dimension, vast of size,
Even these an aggrandizing impulse give;
Of solemn thought enthusiastic heights
Even these infuse. -- But what of vast in these?
Nothing; -- or we must own the skies forgot.
Much less in art. -- Vain art! thou pigmy-power!
How do thou swell, and strut, with human pride,
To show thy littleness! what childish toys,
Thy watery columns squirted to the clouds!
Thy bason'd rivers, and imprisoned seas!
Thy mountains molded into forms of men!
Thy hundred-gated capitals! or those
Where three days travel left us much to ride;
Gaz^ng on miracles by mortals wrought,
Arches triumphal theaters immense,
Or nodding gardens pendent in mid-air!
Or temples proud to meet their GODS halfway!
Yet these affect us in no common kind.
What then the force of such superior scenes?
Enter a temple, it will strike an awe:
What awe from this the DEITY has built?
A good man seen, though silent, counsel gives:
The touched spectator wishes to be wise:
In a bright mirror his own hands have made,
Here we see something like the face of GOD.
Seems it not then enough, to say, LORENZO!
To man abandoned, "Have thou seen the skies?"
And yet, so thwarted nature's kind design
By daring man, he makes her sacred awe
(That guard from ill) his shelter, his temptation
To more than common guilt, and quite inverts
Celestial art's intent. The trembling stars
See crimes gigantic, stalking through the gloom
With front erect, that hide their head by day,
And making night still darker by their deeds.
Slumbering in covert, till the shades descend,
Rapine and murder, linked, now prowl for prey.
The miser earths his treasures; and the thief,
Watching the mole, half-beggars him ere morn.
Now plots, and foul conspiracies, awake;
And, muffling up their horrors from the moon,
Havoc and devastation they prepare,
And kingdoms tot^'ring in the field of blood.
Now Sons of riot in mid-revel rage.
What shall I do? -- Suppress it? or proclaim? --
Why sleeps the thunder? now LORENZO! now,
His best friend's couch the rank adulterer
Ascends secure; and laughs at Gods and men,
Prepost'rous madmen, void of fear or shame,
Lay their crimes bare to these chaste eyes of Heaven;
Yet shrink, and shudder, at a mortal's sight.
Were moon, and stars, for villains only made?
To guide, yet screen them, with teneb^ious light?
No; they were made to fashion the sublime
Of human hearts, and wiser make the wise.
Those ends were answered once; when mortals lived
Of stronger wing, of aquiline ascent
In theory sublime. O how unlike
Those vermin of the night, this moment sung.
Who crawl on earth, and on her venom feed!
Those ancient Sage, human stars! they met
Their brothers of the skies, at midnight hour;
Their counsel asked; and, what they asked, obeyed
The Stagirite, and PLATO, he who drank
The poisoned bowl, and he of Tusculum,
With him of Corduba (immortal names!)
In these unbounded, and Elysian, walks,
An area fit for GODS, and godlike men,
They took their nightly round, through radiant paths
By Seraphs trod; instructed, chiefly, thus,
To tread in their bright footsteps here below;
To walk in worth still brighter than the skies.
There, they contracted their contempt of earth;
Of hopes eternal kindled, there, the fire;
There, as in near approach, they glowed, and grew
(Great visitants!) more intimate with GOD,
More worth to men, more joyous to themselves.
Through various virtues, then, with ardor, ran
The zodiac of their learned, illustrious lives.
In christian hearts, O for a Pagan zeal!
A needful, but opprobri^us prayer! as much
Our ardor less, as greater is our light.
How monstrous this in mo^als! Scarce more strange
Would this phenomenon in nature strike,
A sun, that froze us, or a star, that warmed.
What taught these heroes of the moral world?
To these thou giv'st thy praise, give credit too.
These doctors never was pension'd to deceive thee,
And Pagan tutors are thy taste. -- They taught,
That, narrow views betray to misery:
That, wise it is to comprehend the whole:
That, virtue rose from nature, pondered well,
The single base of virtue built to Heaven:
That, GOD, and nature, our attention cla'm:
That, nature is the glass reflecting GOD,
As, by the Sea, reflected is the Sun,
Too glorious to be gazed on in his Sphere:
That, mind, immortal loves immortal aims:
That, boundless mind affects a boundless space:
That, vast Surveys, and the Sublime of things,
The Soul assimilate, and make her great:
That, therefore, Heaven her glories, as a fund
Of inspiration, thus spreads out to man.
Such are their doctrines; such the night inspired.
And what more true? what truth of greater weight?
The Soul of man was made to walk the skies;
Delightful outlet of her prison here!
There, disincumber'd from her chains, the ties
Of toys terrestrial, she can rove at large;
There, freely can respire, dilate, extend,
In full proportion let loose all her powers;
And, undeluded, grasp at something great.
Nor, as a stranger, does she wander there;
But, wonderful herself, through wonder strays;
Contemplating their grandeur, finds her' own;
Dives deep in their economy divine,
Sits high in judgment on their various laws,
And, like a master, judges not amiss.
Hence greatly pleased, and justly proud, the Soul
Grows conscious of her birth celestial; breathes
More life, more vigor, in her native air;
And feels herself at home among the Stars;
And feeling, emulates her country's praise.
What call we, then, the firmament, LORENZO? --
As earth the body, since the Skies sustain
The Soul with food, that gives immortal life,
Call it, the noble pasture of the mind;
Which there expatiates, strengthens, and exults,
And riots through the luxuries of thought.
Call it, the garden of the DEITY,
Blossomed with stars, redundant in the growth
Of fruit ambrosial; moral fruit to man.
Call it, the breast plate of the true high priest,
Ardent with gems oracular, that give,
In points of highest moment, right response;
And ill neglected, if we prize our peace.
Thus, have we found a true astrology;
Thus, have we found a new, and noble Sense,
In which alone stars govern human fates.
O that the stars (as some have feigned) let fall
Bloodshed, and havoc, on embattled realms,
And rescued monarchs from to black a guilt!
BOURBON! this wish how generous in a foe!
Would thou be great, would thou become a God,
And stick thy deathless name among the stars,
For mighty conquests on a needle's point!
Instead of forging chains for foreigners,
Bastile thy tutor: grandeur all thy aim?
As yet thou know not what it is: how great,
How glorious, then, appears the mind of man,
When in it all the stars, and planets, roll!
And what it seems, it is: great objects make
Great minds, enlarging as their views enlarge;
Those still more godlike, as these more divine.
And more divine than these, thou can not see.
Dazzled, o'erpower'd, with the delicious draught
Of miscellaneous Splendors, how I reel
From thought to thought, inebriate, without end!
An Eden, this! a PARADISE unlost!
I meet the DEITY in every view,
And tremble at my nakedness before him!
O that I could but reach the tree of life!
For here it grows, unguarded from our taste;
No flaming Sword denies our entrance here;
Would man but gather, he might live for ever.
LORENZO! much of moral have thou seen.
Of curious arts art thou more fond? then mark
The mathematic glories of the skies,
In number, weight, and measure, all ordained.
LORENZO's boasted builders, chance, and fate,
Are left to finish his a^real towers:
Wisdom, and choice, their well known characters
Here deep impress; and claim it for their own.
Though splended all, no Splendour void of use;
Use rivals beauty: art contends with power;
No wanton waste, amid effuse expense;
The great OECONOMIST adjusting all
To prudent pomp, magnificently wise.
How rich the prospect! and for ever new!
And newest to the man that views it most;
For newer still in infinite succeeds.
Then, these aereal racers, O how swift!
How the shaft loiters from the strongest string!
Spirit alone can distance the career.
Orb above orb ascending without end!
Circle in circle, without end, enclosed!
Wheel within wheel; EZEKIEL! like to thine!
Like thine, it seems, a vision, or a dream;
Though seen, we labor to believe it true!
What involution! what extent! what swarms
Of worlds, that laugh at earth! immensely great!
Immensely distant from each other's Spheres!
What then, the wondrous Space through which they roll?
At once it quite ingulphs all human thought;
It Is comprehension's absolute defeat.
Nor think thou see a wild disorder here;
Through this illustrious chaos to the sight,
Arrangement neat, and chastest order, reign,
The path prescribed, inviolably kept,
Upbraids the lawless sallies of mankind.
Worlds ever thwarting, never interfere;
What knots are tied! how soon are they dissolved,
And let the seeming married planets free!
They rove for ever, without error rove;
Confusion unconfus'd! nor less admire
This tumult untumultuous; all on wing!
In motion, all! yet what profound repose!
What fervid action; yet no noise! as awed
To silence, by the presence of their LORD;
Or hushed, by his command, in love to man,
And bid let fail soft beams on human rest,
Restless themselves. On you coerulean plain,
In exultation to their GOD, and thine,
They dance, they sing eternal jubilee,
Eternal celebration of his praise.
But, since their song arrives not at our ear,
Their dance perplexed exhibits to the sight
Fair Hieroglyphic of his peerless power.
Mark, how the labyrinthian turns they take,
The circles intricate, and mystic maze,
Weave the grand cipher of Omnipotence;
To Gods, how great! how legible to man!
Leaves so much wonder greater wonder still?
Where are the pillars that support the skies?
What more than Atlantean shoulder props
The incumbent load? what magic, what strange art,
In fluid air these ponderous orbs sustains?
Who would not think them hung in golden chains? --
And so they are; in the high will of Heaven,
Which fixes all; makes adamant of air,
Or air of adamant; makes all of naught,
Or naught of all; if such the dread decree.
Imagine from their deep foundations torn
The most gigantic Sons of earth, the broad
And towering Alps, all tossed into the Sea;
And, light as down, or volatile as air,
Their bulks enormous dancing on the waves,
In time, and measure, exquisite; while all
The winds, in emulation of the Spheres,
Tune their sonorous instruments aloft;
The concert swell, and animate the ball.
Would this appear amazing? what, then, worlds,
In a far thinner element sustained,
And acting the same part, with greater skill,
More rapid movement, and for noblest ends?
More obvious ends to pass, are not these stars
The seats majestic, proud imperial thrones,
On which angelic deligates of Heaven,
At certain periods, as the SOVEREIGN nods,
Discharge high trusts of vengeance, or of love;
To cloathe, in outward grandeur, grand design,
And acts most solemn still more solemnize?
Ye citizens of air! what ardent thanks,
What full effusion of the grateful heart,
Is due from man indulged in such a sight!
A sight so noble! and a sight so kind!
It drops new truths at every new Survey!
Feels not LORENZO something stir within,
That sweeps away all period? as these Spheres
Measure duration, they no less inspire
The godlike hope of ages without end.
The boundless Space, through which these rovers take
Their restless roam, suggests the sister-thought
Of boundless time. Thus, by kind nature's Skill,
To man unlabored, that important guest,
ETERNITY, finds entrance at the sight:
And an eternity, for man ordained,
Or these his destined midnight counselors,
The stars, had never whispered it to man.
NATURE informs, but never insults, her sons.
Could she then kindle the most ardent wish
To disappoint it? -- That is blasphemy,
Thus, of thy creed a Second article,
Momentous, as the existence of a GOD,
Is found (as I conceive) where rarely sought;
And thou may read thy Soul immortal, here.
Here, then LORENZO! on these glories dwell;
Nor want the gilt, illuminated, roof,
That calls the wretched gay to dark delights.
Assemblies? -- This is one divinely bright;
Here, un-endanger'd in health, wealth, or fame,
Range through the fairest, and the SULTAN scorn.
He, wise, as thou, no crescent holds so fair,
As that, which on his turbant awes a world;
And thinks the moon is proud to copy him.
Look on her, and gain more than worlds can give,
A mind superior to the charms of power.
Thou muffled in delusions of this life!
Can yonder moon turn ocean in his bed,
From side to side, in constant ebb, and flow,
And purify from stench his watery realms?
And fails her moral influence? wants she power
To turn LORENZO's stubborn tide of thought
From stagnating on earth's infected Shore,
And purge from nuisance his corrupted heart;
Fails her attraction when it draws to Heaven?
Nay, and to what thou valu'st more, earth's joy?
M^^ds elevate, and panting for unseen,
And defecate from sense, alone obtain
Full relish of existence undefl^^wer'd,
The life of life, the zest of worldly bliss.
Ah else on earth amounts -- to what? to this:
"BAD to be suffered; BLESSINGS to be left:"
Earth's richest inventory boasts no more.
Of higher scenes be, then, the call obeyed.
O let me gaze! -- O* gazing there is no end.
O let me think! -- Thought too is wilder'd here;
In midway flight imagination tires;
Yet soon re-prunes her wing to soar anew,
Her point unable to forbear, or gain;
So great the pleasure, so profound the plan!
A banquet, this, where men, and angels, meet,
Eat the same manna, mingle earth, and Heaven.
How distant some of these nocturnal Suns!
So distant (says the Sage), 'twere not absurd
To doub^, if beams, set out at nature's birth,
Are yet arrived at this so foreign world;
Though nothing half so rapid as their flight.
An eye of awe and wonder let me roll, Hugenius

And roll for ever: who can satiate sight
In such a scene? in such an ocean wide
Of deep astonishment? where depth, height, breadth,
Are lost in their extremes; and where to count
The thick-sown glories in this field of fire,
Perhaps a Seraph's computation fails.
Now, go, ambition! boast thy boundless might
In conquest, over ^e^th part of a grain.
And yet LORENZO calls for miracles,
To give his torte'ring faith a solid base.
Why call for less than is already thine?
Thou art no novice in theology;
What is a miracle? -- It Is a reproach,
It Is an implicit Sa^^re, on mankind;
And while it satisfies, it censures too.
To Common-Sense, great nature's course proclaims
A DEITY: when mankind falls asleep,
A miracle is sent, as an alarm,
To wake the world, and prove him over again,
By recent argument, but not more strong.
Say, which imports more plenitude of power,
Or nature's laws to fix, or to repeal?
To make, a Sun, or stop his mid career?
To countermand his orders, and send back
The flaming courier to the frighted east,
Warmed and astonished, at his evening ray?
Or bid the moon, as with her journey tired,
In Aj^lon's soft, flowery vale repose?
Great things are these; still greater, to create.
From ADAM's bower look down through the whole train
Of miracles; -- Resistless is their power?
They do not, can not, more amaze the mind,
Than this, called un-miraculous Survey,
If duly weighed, if rationally seen,
If seen with human eyes, The brute, indeed,
Sees naught but Spangles here; the fool, no more:
Say thou, " The course of nature governs all?"
The course of nature is the art of GOD.
The miracles thou call'st for, this attest;
For say, could nature, nature's course control?
But, miracles apart, who sees HIM not,
Nature's CONTROULER, AUTHOR, GUIDE, and END?
Who turns his eye on nature's midnight face,
But must inquire -- " What hand behind the Scene,
" What arm almighty, put these wheeling globes
" In motion, and wound up the vast machine?
" Who rounded in his palm these spacious orbs?
" Who bowl'd them flaming through the dark profound,
" Numerous as glittering gems of morning-dew,
" Or Sparks from populous cities in a blaze,
" And set the bosom of old night on fire?
" Peopled her desert, and made horror smile?"
Or, if the military Style delight thee,
(For stars have fought their battles, leagued with man)
" Who marshals this bright host? enrolls their names?
" Appoints their post, their marches, and returns,
" Punctual, at stated periods? who disbands
" These vet'ran troops, their final duty done,
" If ever disbanded?" -- HE, whole potent word,
Like the loud trumpet, levied first their powers
In night's inglorious empire, where they slept
In beds of darkness; armed them with fierce flames,
Arrang'd, and disciplined, and clothed in gold;
And called them out of chaos to the field,
Where now they war with vice and unbelief.
O let us join this army! joining these,
Will give us hearts intrepid, at that hour,
When brighter flames shall cut a darker night;
When these strong demonstrations of a GOD
Shall hide their heads, or tumble from their spheres,
And one eternal curtain cover all!
Struck at that thought, as new-awak'd, I lift
A more enlightened eye, and read the stars
To man still more propitious; and their aid
(Though guiltless of idolatry) implore;
Nor longer rob them of their noblest name.
O ye dividers of my time! ye bright
Accomptants of my days, and months, and years,
In your fair calendar distinctly marked!
Since that authentic, radiant register,
Though man inspects it not, stands good against him;
Since you, and years, roll on, though man stands still;
Teach me my days to number, and apply
My trembling heart to wisdom; now beyond
All shadows of excuse for fooling on.
Age smooths our path to prudence; sweeps aside
The snares, keen appetites, and passion, spread
To catch stray Souls; and woe to that gray head,
Whose folly would undo, what age has done!
Aid, then, aid, all ye stars! -- Much rather, THOU,
Great ARTIST! THOU, whose finger let aright
This exquisite machine, with all its wheels,
Though intervolv'd, exact; and pointing out
Life's rapid, and irrevocable flight,
With such an index fair, as none can miss,
Who lifts an eye, nor sleeps till it is closed.
Open mine eye, dread DEITY! to read
The tacit doctrine of thy works; to see
Things as they are, unaltered through the glass
Of worldly wishes. Time, eternity!
('It Is these, mis-measur'd, ruin all mankind)
Set them before me; let me lay them both
In equal Scale, and learn their various weight.
Let time appear a moment, as it is;
And let eternity's full orb, at once,
Turn on my Soul, and strike it in o Heaven.
When shall I see far more than charms me now?
Gaze on creation's model in thy breast
U^v^il'd, nor wonder at the transcript more?
When, this vile foreign, dust, which smothers all
That travel earth's deep vale, shall I shake off?
When shall my Soul her incarnation quit,
And, re-adopted to thy blessed embrace,
Obtain her apotheosis in THEE?
Do think, LORENZO! this is wandering wide;
No, it is directly striking at the mark;
To wake thy dead devotion Page 243.
was my point;
And how I bless night's consecrating shades,
Which to a temple turn an universe;
Fill us with great ideas, full of Heaven,
And antidote the pestilential earth!
In every storm, that either frowns, or falls,
What an asylum has the Soul in prayer!
And what a fane is this, is which to pray!
And what a GOD must dwell in such a fane!
O what a genius must inform the skies?
And is LORENZO's Salamander-heart
Cold, and untouched, amid these sacred fires?
O ye nocturnal Sparks! ye glowing embers,
On Heaven's broad hearth! who burn, or burn no more,
Who blaze, or die, as grant JEHOVAH's breath
Or blows you, or forbears; assist my song;
Pour your whole influence; exercise his heart,
So long possessed; and bring him back to man.
And is LORENZO a demurrer still?
Pride in thy parts provokes thee to contest
Truths, which, contested, put thy parts to shame.
Nor shame they more LORENZO's head, than heart;
A faithless heart, how despicably small!
Too straight, aught great, or generous, to receive!
Filled with an atom! filled, and foul'd, with self!
And self mistaken! self that lasts an hour!
Instincts and passions, of the nob^er kind,
Lie suffocated there; or they alone,
Reason apart, would wake high hope; and open,
To ravished thought, that intellectual sphere,
Where order, wisdom, goodness, providence,
Their endless miracles of love display,
And promise all the truly great desire.
The mind that would be happy, must be great;
Great, in its wishes; great, in its surveys.
Extended views a narrow mind extend;
Push out its corrugate, expansive make,
Which, ere-long, more than planets shall embrace.
A man of compass makes a man of worth;
Divine contemplate, and become divine.
As man was made for glory, and for bliss,
All littleness is in approach to woe;
Open thy bosom, set thy wishes wide,
And let in manhood; let in happiness;
Admit the boundless theater of thought
From nothing, up to GOD; which makes a man.
Take GOD from nature, nothing great is left;
Man's mind is in a pit, and nothing sees;
Man's heart is in a jakes, and loves the mire.
Emerge from thy profound; erect thine eye;
See thy distress! how close art thou besieged!
Besieged by nature, the proud sceptic's foe!
Enclosed by these innumerable worlds,
Sparkling conviction on the darkest mind,
As in a golden net of Providence.
How art thou caught, sure captive of belief!
From this thy blessed captivity, what art,
What blasphemy to reason, sets thee free!
This scene is Heaven's indulgent violence:
Can thou bear up against this tide of glory?
What is earth bosomed in these ambient orbs,
But, faith in GOD imposed, and pressed on man?
Dare thou still litigate thy desperate cause,
Spite of these numerous, aweful, witnesses,
And doubt the deposition of the skies?
O how laborious is thy way to ruin!
Laborious? it is impracticable quite;
To sink beyond a doubt, in this debate,
With all his weight of wisdom, and of will,
And crime flagitious, I defy a fool.
Some wish they did; but no man disbelieves.
GOD is a spirit; spirit cannot strike
These gross, material organs; GOD by man
As much is seen, as man a GOD can see,
In these astonishing exploits of power.
What order, beauty, motion, distance, size!
Concertion of design, how exquisite!
How complicate, in their divine police!
Apt means! great ends! consent to general good! --
Each attribute of these material Gods.
So long (and that with specious pleas) adored,
A separate conquest gains over rebel thought;
And leads in triumph the whole mind of man.
LORENZO! this may seem harangue to thee;
Such all is apt to seem, that thwarts our will.
And do thou, then, demand a simple proof
Of this great master-moral of the skies,
Unskilled, or dis-inclin'd, to read it there?
Since it is the basis, and all drops without it,
Take it, in once compact, unbroken chain.
Such proof insists on an attentive ear;
'Twill not make one amid a mob of thoughts.
And, for thy notice, struggle with the world.
Retire; -- The world shut out; -- Thy thoughts call home; --
Imagination's airy wing repress; --
Lock up thy senses; -- Let no passion stir; --
Wake all to reason; -- Let her reign alone; --
Then, in thy Soul's deep silence, and the depth
Of nature's silence, midnight, thus inquire,
As I have done; and shall inquire no more.
In nature's channel, thus the questions run.
" What am I? and from whence? -- I nothing know,
" But that I am; and, since I am, conclude
" Something eternal: had there ever been naught,
" Naught still had been: eternal there must be. --
" But what eternal? -- Why not human race?
" And ADAM's ancestors without an end?
" That Is hard to be conceived; since every link
" Of that long-chain'd succession is so frail,
" Can every part depend, and not the whole?
" Yet grant it true; new difficulties rise;
" I Am still quite out at sea; nor see the shore.
" Whence earth, and these bright orbs? -- Eternal oo --
" Grant matter was eternal; still these orbs
" Would want some other father; -- Much design
" Is seen in all their motions, all their makes;
" Design implies intelligence, and art:
" That cannot be from themselves -- or man; that art
" Man scarce can comprehend, could man bestow?
" And nothing greater, yet allowed, than man. --
" Who, motion, foreign to the smallest grant,
" Shot through vast masses of enormous weight?
" Who bid brute matter's restive lump ass^^^?
" Such various forms, and gave it wings to (...)?
" Has matter innate motion? then each ato^^
" Asserting its indisputable right
" To dance, would form an universe of dust:
" Has matter none? then whence these glorious ^orms.
" And boundless flights, from st^peless, and (...)?
" Has matter more than motion? has it thought,
" Judgment, and genius? is it deeply learned
" In mathematics? has it framed such laws,
" Which, but to guess, a Newton made immortal? --
" If so, how each sage atom laughs at m^,
" Who think a clod inferior to a man!
" If art, to form; and counsel, to conduct;
" And that with greater far, than human skill;
" Resides not in each block; -- a Godhead reigns. --
" Grant, then, invisible, eternal, MIND;
" That granted, all is solved. -- But, granting that,
" Draw I not over me a still darker cloud?
" Grant I not that which I can never conceive?
" A being without origin, or end! --
" Hail, human liberty! there is no GOD! --
" Yet, why? on either scheme that knot subsists;
" Submit it must, in GOD, or human race;
" If in the last, how many knots beside,
" Indissoluble all? -- Why choose it there,
" Where, chosen, still subsist ten thousand more?
" Reject, it, where, that chosen, all the rest
" Dispersed, leave reason's whole horizon clear?
" This is not reason's dictate; reason says,
" Close with the side where one grain turns the scale;
" What vast preponderance is here! can reason
" With louder voice exclaim -- Believe a GOD?
" And reason heard, is the sole mark of man.
" What things impossible must man think true,
" On any other system! and how strange
" To d^sbelieve, through mere credulity!"
If, in this chain, LORENZO finds no flaw,
Let it for ever bind him to belief.
And where the link, in which a flaw he finds?
And, if a GOD there is, that GOD how great!
How great that power, whose providential care
Through these bright orbs dark centres darts a ray!
Of nature universal threads the whole!
And hangs creation, like a precious gem,
Though little, on the footstool of his throne!
That little gem, how large! a weight let fall
From a fixed star, in ages can it reach
This distant earth? Say, then, LORENZO! where,
Where, ends this mighty building? where, begin
The suburbs of creation? where the wall
Whose battlements look over into the vale
Of nonexistence? nothing's strange abode!
Say, at what point of Space JEHOVAH dropped
His slackened line, and laid his balance by;
Weighed worlds, and measured infinite, no more?
Where, rears his terminating pillar high
Its extra-mundane head? and says, to Gods,
In characters illustrious as the Sun,
I stand, the plan's proud period; I pronounce
The work accomplished; the creation closed:
Shout, all ye Gods! nor shout, ye Gods alone;
Of all that lives, or, if devoid of life,
That rests, or rolls, ye heights, and depths, resound!
Resound! resound! ye depths, and heights, resound!
Hard are those questions? -- Answer harder still.
Is this the sole exploit, the single birth,
The solitary Son, of power divine?
Or has the Almighty FATHER, with a breath,
Impregnated the womb of distant Space?
Has he not bid, in various provinces,
Brother creations the dark bowels burst
Of night primaeval; barren, now, no more?
And he the central Sun, transpiercing all
Those grant generations, which disport,
And dance, as motes, in his meridian ray;
That ray withdrawn, benighted, or absorbed,
In that abyss of horror, whence they sprung;
While chaos triumphs, repossest of all
Rival creation ravished from his throne?
CHAOS! of nature both the womb, and grave!
Think thou, my Scheme, LORENZO, spreads too wide?
Is this extravagant? -- No; this is just;
Just, in conjecture, though '^were fall in fact.
If it is an error, it is an error sprung
From noble root, high thought of the MOST-HIGH.
But wherefore error? who can prove it such: --
He that can set OMNIPOTENCE a bound.
Can man conceive beyond what GOD can do?
Nothing, but quite impossible, is hard.
He summons into being, with like ease,
A whole creation, and a single grain.
Speaks he the word? a thousand worlds are born! --
A thousand worlds? there is space for millions more;
And in what Space can his great fiat fail?
Condemn me not, cold critic! but indulge
The warm imagination: why condemn?
Why not indulge such thoughts, as swell our hearts
With fuller admiration of that power,
Who gives our hearts with such high thoughts to swell?
Why not indulge in his augmented praise?
Darts not his glory a still brighter ray,
The less is left to chaos, and the realms
Of hideous night, where fancy strays aghast;
And, though most talkative, makes no report?
Still seems my thought enormous? think again; --
Experience 'self shall aid thy lame belief.
Glasses (that revelation to the sight!)
Have they not led us in the deep disclose
Of fine spun nature, exquisitely small,
And, though demonstrated, still ill-conceiv'd?
If, then, on the reverse, the mind would mount
In magnitude, what mind can mount too far,
To keep the balance, and creation poise?
Defect alone can err on such a theme;
What is too great, if we the cause survey?
Stupendous ARCHITECT! THOU, THOU art all!
My Soul flies up and down in thoughts of THEE,
And finds herself but at the center still!
I AM, thy name! existence, all thine own!
Creation's nothing; flattered much, if styled
"The thin, the fleeting atmosphere of GOD."
O for the voice -- of what? of whom? -- What voice
Can answer to my wants, in such ascent,
As dares to deem one universe too small?
Tell me, LORENZO! (for now fancy glows,
Fired in the vortex of Almighty Power)
Is not this home-creation, in the map
Of universal nature, as a speck,
Like fair BRITANNIA in our little ball;
Exceeding fair, and glorious, for its size,
But, elsewhere, far out-measur'd, far outshone?
In fancy (for the fact beyond us lies)
Can thou not figure it, an isle, almost
Too sm^^^ for notice, in the vast of being;
Severed by mighty Seas of un-built Space,
From other realms; from ample continents
Of higher life, where nobler natives dwell;
Less northern, less remote from DEITY,
Glowing beneath the line of the SUPREME;
Where Souls in excellence make haste, put forth
Luxuriant growths; nor the late autumn wait
Of human worth, but ripen soon to Gods?
Yet why drown fancy in such depths as these?
Return, presumptuous rover! and confess
The bounds of man; nor blame them, as too small.
Enjoy we not full scope in what is seen?
Full ample the dominions of the Sun!
Full glorious to behold! how far, how wide,
The matchless monarch, from his flaming throne,
Lavish of luster, throws his beams about him,
Farther, and faster, than a thought can fly,
And feeds his planets with eternal fires!
This Heliopolis, by greater far,
Than the proud tyrant of the Nile, was built;
And he alone, who built it, can destroy.
Beyond this city, why strays human thought?
One wonderful, enough for man to know!
One infinite, enough for man to rang!
One firmament, enough for man to read!
O what voluminous instruction here!
What page of wisdom is denied him? none;
If learning his chief lesson makes him wise.
Nor is instruction, here, our only gain;
There dwells a noble pathos in the skies,
Which warms our passions, proselytes our hearts.
How eloquently shines the glowing pole!
With what authority it gives its charge,
Remonstrating great truths in style sublime,
Though silent, loud! heard earth around; above
The planets heard; and not unheard in hell;
Hell has her wonder, though too proud to praise.
Is earth, then, more infernal? has she those,
Who neither praise (LORENZO!) nor admire?
LORENZO's admiration, pre-engag'd,
Never asked the moon one question; never held
Least correspondence with a single star;
Never reared an altar to the Queen of Heaven
Walking in brightness; or her train adored.
Their sublunary rivals have long since
Engrossed his whole devotion; stars malign,
Which made their fond astronomer run mad;
Dark in his intellect, corrupt his heart;
Cause him to sacrifice his fame and peace
To momentary madness, called delight.
Idolater, more gross than ever kissed
The lifted hand to LUNA, or poured out
The blood to JOVE! -- O THOU, to whom belongs
All Sacrifice! O thou great JOVE unfeigned!
DIVINE INSTRUCTOR! thy first volume, this,
For man's perusal; all in capitals!
In moon and stars (Heaven's golden alphabet!)
Emblaz'd to seize the sight; who runs may read;
Who reads can understand. It Is unconfined
To christian land, or Jewry; fairly writ,
In language universal, to mankind:
A language, lofty to the learned; yet plain
To those that feed the flock, or guide the plough,
Or, from its husk, strike out the bounding grain.
A language, worthy the Great Mind, that speaks!
Preface, and comment, to the sacred page!
Which often refers its reader to the skies,
As pre-supposing his first lesson there,
And Scripture self a fragment, that unread.
Stupendous book of wisdom, to the wise!
Stupendous book! and opened, NIGHT! by thee.
By thee much opened, I confess, O night!
Yet more I wish; but how shall I prevail?
Say, gentle night! whose modest, maiden beams,
Give us a new creation, and present
The world's great picture softened to the sight;
Nay, kinder far, far more indulgent still,
Say, thou, whose mild dominion's silver key
Unlocks our hemisphere, and sets to view
Worlds beyond number; worlds concealed by day
Behind the proud, and envious star of noon!
Can thou not draw a deeper scene? -- And show
The mighty potentate, to whom belong
These rich regalia pompously displayed
To kindle that high hope? like him of Uz,
I gaze around; I search on every side --
O for a glimpse of HIM my Soul adores!
As the chased heart, amid the desert waste,
Pants for the living stream; for him who made her,
So pants the thirsty Soul, amid the blank
Of sublunary joys. Say, goddess! where?
Where, blazes his bright court? where burns his throne?
Thou know; for thou art near him; by thee, round
His grand pavillion, sacred fame reports
The sable curtain drawn. If not, can none
Of thy fair daughter-train, so swift of wing,
Who travel far, discover where he dwells?
A star his dwelling pointed out below.
Ye Pleiades! Arcturus! Mazaroth!
And thou, Orion! of still keener eye!
Say ye, who guide the wilder'd in the waves,
And bring them out of tempest into port!
On which hand must I bend my course to find him?
These courtiers keep the Secret of their king;
I wake whole nights, in vain, to steal it from them.
I wake; and, waking, climb night's radiant Scale,
From Sphere to Sphere; the steps by nature set
For man's ascent; at once to tempt and aid;
To tempt his eye, and aid his towering thought;
Till it arrives at the great goal of all.
In ardent contemplation's rapid car,
From earth, as from my barrier, I set out.
How swift I mount! diminished earth recedes;
I pass the moon; and, from her farther side,
Pierce Heaven's blue curtain; strike into remote;
Where, with his lifted tube, the subtle sage
His artificial, airy journey takes,
And to celestial lengthens human sight.
I pause at every planet on my road,
And ask for him who gives their orbs to roll,
Their foreheads fair to shine. From Saturn's ring,
In which, of earths an army might be lost,
With the bold comet, take my bolder flight,
Amid those Sovereign glories of the skies,
Of independent, native luster, proud;
The souls of systems! and the Lords of life,
Through their wide empires! -- What behold I now?
A wilderness of wonders burning round;
Where larger suns inhabit higher spheres;
Perhaps the Villas of descending Gods!
Nor halt I here; my toil is but begun;
It Is but the threshold of the Deity;
Or, far beneath it, I am grovelling still.
Nor is it strange; I built on a mistake;
The grandeur of his works, whence folly sought
For aid to reason sets his glory higher;
Who built thus high for worms (mere worms to him);
O where, LORENZO! must be Builder dwell?
Pause, then; and, for a moment, here respire --
If human thought can keep its station here.
Where am I? -- Where is earth? -- Nay, where art thou,
O sun? -- Is the sun turned recluse? -- And are
His boasted expeditions short to mine? --
To mine, how short! on nature's Alps I stand,
And see a thousand firmaments beneath!
A thousand systems! as a thousand grains!
So much a stranger, and so late arrived,
How can man's curious spirit not inquire,
What are the natives of this world sublime,
O this so foreign, un-terrestrial Sphere,
Where mortal, untranslated, never strayed?
" O ye, as distant from my little home,
" As swiftest Sunbeams in an age can fly!
" Far from my native element I roam,
" In quest of new, and wonderful, to man.
" What province this, of his immense domain,
" Whom all obeys? or mortals here, or Gods?
" Ye board'rers on the coasts of bliss! what are you?
" A colony from Heaven? or, only raised,
" By frequent visit from Heaven's neighboring realms,
" To secondary Gods, and half divine? --
" Whatever your nature, this is past dispute,
" Far other life you live, far other tongue
" You talk, far other thought, perhaps, you think,
" Than man, how various are the works of God!
" But say, what thought? is reason here in h^o^^'d,
" And absolute? or Sense in arms against her?
" Have you two lights? or need you no reveal'^?
" Enjoy your happy realms their golden age?
" And had your Eden an abstemious Eve;
" Our Eve's fair daughters prove their pedigree,
" And ask their Adams -- 'Who would not be wise?'
" Or, if your mother fell, are you redeemed?
" And if redeemed -- is your Redeemer scorned?
" Is this your final residence? if not,
" Change you your scene, translated? or by death?
" And ^f by death; what death? -- Know you disease?
" Or horrid war? -- With war, this fatal hour,
" EUROPA groans (to call we a small field,
" Where kings run mad). In our world, death deputes
" Intemperance to do the work of age;
" And, hanging up the the quiver nature gave him,
" As slew of execution, for dispatch
" Sends forth imperial butchers; bids them slay
" Their sheep (the filly sheep they flee^'d before),
" And toss him twice ten thousand at a meal.
" Sit all your executioners on thro^^es?
" With you, can rage for plunder make a God?
" And bloodshed wash out every other stain? --
" But you, perhaps, cannot bleed: from matter gross
" Your Spirits clean, are delicately clad
" In fine-spun ae her, privileged to soar,
" Unloaded, unintected; how unlike
" The lot of man! how few of human race
" B^ their own mud unmurd^r'd! how we wage
" S^li-war eternal! -- Is your painful day
" Or hardy conflict over? or, are you still
" Raw candidates at School? and have you those
" Who disaffect reve^sions, as with us? --
" But what are we? you never heard of man,
" Or earth; the Bedlam of the universe!
" Where reason (undiseas'd with you) runs mad,
" And nurses folly's child en as her own;
" Fond of the foulest. In the sacred mount
" Of holiness, where reason is pronounced
" In^gilible and thunders, like a God;
" E^'n there by Saints, the demons are outdone;
" What these think wrong, our Saints refine to right,
" And kindly teach dull hell her own black arts;
" Satan, instructed, over their morals smiles --
" But th^s, how strange to you, who know not man!
" Has the least rumor of (...) race arrived?
" Called here Elijah, in his flaming car?
" Past by you the good En^en on his road
" To those fair fields, whence Lucifer was hurled:
" Who brushed, perhaps, your Sphere, in his descent,
" S^ain'd your pure crystal ae her, or let fall
" A short eclipse from his portentous Shade?
" O! that the fiend had lodged on some broad orb
" Athwart his way; nor reached his present home,
" Then blackened earth with footsteps foul'd in hell,
" Nor washed in ocean, as from Rome we past
" To Britain's isle; too, too, conspicuous there!"
But this is all digression: where is he,
That over Heaven's battlements the felon hurled
To groans, and chains, and darkness? where is he,
Who sees creation's Summet in a vale?
He, whom, while man is man, he cannot but seek;
And if he finds, commences more than man?
O for a telescope his throne to reach!
Tell me, ye learned on earth! or blessed above!
Ye searching, ye Newtonian angels! tell,
Where, your great Master's orb; his planets, where?
Those conscious Satellites, those morning-stars,
Firstborn of Deity! from central love,
By veneration most profound, thrown off;
By sweet attraction, no less strongly drawn;
Awed, and yet raptured; raptured, yet serene;
Past thought, illustrious, but with borrowed beams;
In still approaching circles, still remote,
Revolving round the Sun's eternal Sire?
Or sent, in lines direct, or embassies
To nations -- in what latitude? -- Beyond
Terrestrial thought's horizon! -- And on what
High errands sent? -- Here human effort ends;
And leaves me still a stranger to his throne.
Full well it might! I quite mistook my road.
Born in an age more curious than devout;
More fond to fix the place of Heaven, or Hell,
Than studious this to shun, or that secure.
It Is not the curious, but the pious path,
That leads me to my point: LORENZO! know,
Without or star, or angel, for their guide,
Who worship God, shall find him. Humble love,
And not proud reason, keeps the door of Heaven;
Love find admission, where proud Science fails.
Man's Science is the culture of his heart;
And not to lose his plumbet in the depths
Of nature, or the more profound of God.
Either to know, is an attempt that sets
The wisest on a level with the fool.
To fathom nature (ill-attempted here!)
Past doubt is deep philosophy above;
Higher degrees in bliss archangels take,
As deeper learned; the deepest learning still.
For, what a thunder of Omnipotence
(So might I dare to speak!) is seen in all!
In man! in earth! in more amazing skies!
Teaching this lesson, pride is loath to learn --
" Not deeply to discern, not much to know,
" Mankind was born to wonder, and adore."
And is there cause for higher wonder still,
Than that which struck us from our past Surveys?
Yes; and for deeper adoration too.
From my late airy travel unconfined,
Have I learned nothing? -- Yes, LORENZO! this;
Each of these stars is a religious house;
I saw their altars smoke, their incense rise,
And heard Hosannas ring through every Sphere,
A Seminary fraught with future Gods.
Nature all over is consecrated ground,
Teeming with growths immortal, and divine.
The great Proprietor's all-bounteous hand
Leaves nothing waste; but sows these fiery fields
With Seeds of reason, which to virtues rise
Beneath his genial ray; and, if escaped
The pestilential blasts of stubborn will,
When grown mature, are gathered for the skies.
And is devotion thought too much on earth,
When beings, so superior, homage boast,
And triumph in prostrations to the throne?
But wherefore more of planets, or of stars?
Ethereal journeys, and discovered there,
Ten thousand worlds, ten thou and ways devout,
All nature sending incense to the throne,
Except the bold LORENZO's of our Sphere?
O ^ing he solemn sources of my soul,
Since I (...) like feigned Eridanus,
My flowing numbers over the flaming skies,
Nor see, of fancy, or of fact, what more,
Invites the muse -- Here turn we, and review
Our past nocturnal landscape wide: -- Then say,
Say then, LORENZO! with what burst o'heart,
The whole, at once, revolving in his thought,
Must man exclaim, adoring, and aghast?
" O what a root! O what a branch is here!
" O what a father! what a family!
" Worlds! Systems! and creations! -- And creations,
" In one agglomerated cluster, hung
" John xv. 1.
Great Vine! on thee, on thee the cluster hangs;
" The filial cluster! infinitely spread
" In glowing globes, with various beings fraught;
" And drinks (nectareous draught!) immortal life.
" Or, shall I say (for who can say enough?)
" A constellation of ten thousand gems,
" (And, O! of what dimension! of what weight!)
" Set in one signet, flames on the right hand
" Of Majesty divine! the blazing Seal,
" That deeply stamps, on all created mind,
" Indelible, his sovereign attributes,
" Omnipotence, and love! that, passing bound:
" And this, surpassing that. Nor stop we here,
" For want of power in God, but thought in man.
" Even this ackn^wleg'd, leaves us still in debt;
" If greater aught, that greater all is thine,
" Dread Sire! -- Accept this miniature of thee;
" And pardon an attempt from mortal thought,
" In which Archangels might have failed, unblam'd."
How such Ideas of the Almighty's Power,
And such ideas of the Almighty's plan,
(Ideas not absurd) distend the thought
Of feeble mortals! nor of them alone!
The fullness of the Deity breaks forth
In inconceivables to men, and Gods.
Think, then, O think: nor ever drop the thought;
How low must man descend, when Gods adore! --
Have I not, then, accomplished my proud boast?
Did I not tell thee, " Page. 243.
We would mount, LORENZO!
" And kindle our devotion at the stars?"
And have I failed? and did I flatter thee?
And art all adamant? and do confute
All urged, with one irrefragable Smile?
LORENZO! mirth how miserable here!
Swear by the stars, by him who made them, swear,
Thy heart, henceforth, shall be as pure as they:
Then thou, like them, shall shine; like them, shall rise
From low to lofty; from obscure to bright;
By due gradation, nature's sacred law.
The stars, from whence? -- Ask chaos -- He can tell.
These bright temptations to idolatry,
From darkness, and confusion, took their birth;
Sons of deformity! from fluid dregs
Tartarean, first they rose to masses rude;
And then, to spheres opaque; then dimly shone;
Then brightened; then blazed out in perfect day.
Nature delights in progress; in advance
From worse to better: but, when minds ascend,
Progress, in part, depends upon themselves.
Heaven aids exertion; greater makes the great;
The voluntary little lessons more.
O be a man! and thou shall be a God!
And half self-made! -- Ambition how divine!
O thou, ambitious of disgrace alone!
Still undevout? unkindled! -- Though high-taught,
Schooled by the skies; and pupil of the stars;
Rank coward to the fashionable world!
Art thou ashamed to bend thy knee to Heaven?
Cursed fume of pride, exhaled from deepest hell!
Pride in religion is man's highest praise.
Bent on destruction! and in love with death!
Not all these luminaries, quenched at once,
Were half so sad, as one benighted mind,
Which gropes for happiness, and meets despair.
How, like a widow in her weeds, the night,
Amid her glimmering tapers, silent sits!
How sorrowful, how desolate, she weeps
Perpetual dews, and saddens nature's Scene!
A Scene more sad Sin makes the darkened Soul,
All comfort kills, nor leaves one Spark alive.
Though blind of heart, still open is thine eye:
Why such magnificence in all thou see?
Of matter's grandeur, know, one end is this,
To tell the rational, who gazes on it --
" Though that immensely great, still greater he,
" Whose breast, capacious, can embrace, and lodge,
" Unburden'd, nature's universal scheme;
" Can grasp creation with a single thought;
" Creation grasp; and not exclude its Sire". --
To tell him farther -- "It behooves him much
" To guard the important, yet depending, fate
" Of being, brighter than a thousand Suns:
" One single ray of thought outshines them all. --
And if man hears obedient, soon he will soar
Superior heights, and on his purple wing,
His purple wing bedrop'd with eyes of gold,
Rising, where thought is now denied to rise,
Look down triumphant on these dazzling Spheres.
Why then persist? -- No mortal ever lived
But, dying, he pronounced (when words are true!)
The whole that charms thee, absolutely vain;
Vain, and far worse! -- Think thou, with dying men;
O condescend to think as angels think!
O tolerate a chance for happiness!
Our nature such, ill choice ensures ill fate;
And hell had been, though there had been no God.
Do thou not know, my new astronomer!
Earth, turning from the Sun, brings, night to man?
Man, turning from his God, brings endless night;
Where thou can read no morals, find no friend,
Amend no manners, and expect no peace.
How deep the darkness! and the groan, how loud!
And far, how far, from lambent are the flames!
Such is LORENZO's purchase! such his praise!
The proud, the politic, LORENZO's praise!
Though in his ear, and levelled at his heart,
I Have half read over the volume of the skies.
For think not thou have heard all this from me;
My Song but echoes what great nature speaks.
What has she spoken? thus the goddess spoke,
That speaks for ever: -- "Place, at nature's head,
" A Sovereign, which over all things rolls his eye,
" Extends his wing, promulgates his commands,
" But, above all, diffuses endless good;
" To whom, for sure redress, the wronged may fly;
" The vile, for mercy; and the pained, for peace;
" By whom, the various tenants of these Spheres,
" Diversified in fortunes, place, and powers,
" Raised in enjoyment, as in worth they rise,
" Arrive at length (if worthy such approach)
" At that blessed fountainhead, from which (...) stream;
" Where conflict past redoubles present joy;
" And present joy looks forward on increase;
" And that, on more; no period! every step
" A double boon! a promise, and a bliss."
How easy sits this Scheme on human hearts!
It suits their make; it sooths their vast desires;
Passion is pleased; and reason asks no more;
It Is rational! it is great! -- But what is thine?
It darkens! shocks! excruciates! and confounds!
Leaves us quite naked, both of help, and hope,
S^^king from bad to worse; few years, the sport
Of fortune; then, the morsel of despair.
Say, then, LORENZO! (for thou know it well)
What Is vice? -- Mere want of compass in our thought.
Religion what? -- The proof of common-sense;
How art thou whooted, where the least prevails!
Is it my fault, if these truths call thee fool?
And thou shall never be miscalled by me.
Can neither shame, nor terror, stand thy friend?
And art thou still an insect in the mire?
How, like thy guardian angel, have I flown;
Snatched thee from earth; escorted thee through all
The ethereal; armies; walked thee, like a God,
Though splendors of first magnitude, arrang'd
On either hand; clouds thrown beneath thy feet;
Close cruis'd on the bright Paradise of GOD;
And almost introduced thee to the throne!
And art thou still carousing, for delight,
Rank poison; first, fermenting to mere froth,
And then subsiding into final gall?
To beings of sublime, immortal make,
How shocking is all joy, whose end is sure!
Such joy more shocking still, the more it charms!
And do thou choose what ends, ere well-begun;
And infamous, as short? and do thou choose
(Thou, to whose palate glory is so sweet)
To wade into perdition, through contempt,
Not of poor bigots only, but thy own?
For I have peeped into thy covered heart,
And seen it blush beneath a boastful brow;
For, by strong guilt's most violent assault,
Conscience is but disabled, not destroyed.
O thou most aweful Being! and most vain;
Thy will, how frail! how glorious is thy power!
Though dread eternity has sown her Seeds
Of bliss and woe, in thy despotic breast,
Though Heaven, and hell, depend upon thy choice;
A butterfly comes cross, and both are fled.
Is this the picture of a rational?
This horrid image, shall it be most just?
LORENZO! no: it cannot, -- shall not be,
If there is force in reason; or in Sounds
Chanted beneath the glimpses of the moon,
A magic, at this planetary hour,
When slumber locks the general lip, and dreams
Through senseless mazes hunt Souls un-inspir'd.
Attend -- The sacred mysteries begin --
My solemn night-born adjuration hear;
Hear, and I Will raise thy Spirit from the dust:
While the stars gaze on this enchantment new;
Enchantment, not infernal, but divine!
" By silence, Death's peculiar attribute;
" By darkness, Guilt's inevitable doom;
" By darkness, and by silence, sisters dread!
" That draw the curtain round night's ebon throne,
"And raise ideas, solemn as the Scene;
" By night, and all of aweful, night presents
To thought, or sense (of aweful much, to both,
" The goddess brings)! by these her trembling fires,
" Like Vesta's, ever-burning; and, like hers,
" Sacred to thoughts immaculate, and pure!
" By these bright orators, that prove, and praise,
" And press thee to revere, the Deity;
" Perhaps, too, aid thee, when revered awhile,
" To reach his throne; as Stages of the Soul,
" Through which, at different periods, he shall pass,
" Refining gradual, for her final height,
" And purging off some dross at every Sphere!
" By this dark pall thrown over the silent world!
" By the world's kings, and kingdoms, most renowned,
" From short ambition's zenith set for ever;
" Sad presage to vain boasters, now in bloom!
" By the long list of swift mortality,
" From Adam downward to this evening knell,
" Which midnight waves in fancy's startled eye; thought!
" And shocks her with an hundred centuries
" Round death's black banner thronged, in human
" By thousands, now, resigning their last breath,
" And calling thee -- were thou so wise to hear!
" By tombs over tombs arising; human earth
" Ejected, to make room for -- human earth;
" The Monarch's terror! and the Sexton's trade!
" By pompous obsequies, that shun the day,
" The torch funereal, and the nodding plume,
" Which makes poor man's humiliation proud;
" Boast of our ruin! triumph of our dust!
" By the damp vault that weeps over royal bones;
" And the pale lamp, that shows the ghastly dead,
" More ghastly, through the thick incumbent gloom!
" By visits (if there are) from darker Scenes,
" The gliding Spectre! and the groaning grove!
" By groans, and graves, and miseries that groan
" For the grave's shelter! by desponding men,
" Senseless to pains of death, from pangs of guilt!
" By guilt's last audit! by yon moon in blood,
" The rocking firmament, the falling stars,
" And thunder's last discharge, great nature's knell!
" By second chaos; and eternal night " --
Be wise -- Nor let PHILANDER blame my charm;
But own not ill discharged my double debt,
Love to the living; duty to the dead.
For know, I Am but executor; he left
This moral legacy; I make it over
By his command; PHILANDER hear in me;
And Heaven in both. -- If deaf to these, oh! hear
FLORELLO's tender voice; his weal depends
On thy resolve; it trembles at thy choice;
For his sake -- love thyself: example strikes
All human hearts; a bad example more;
More still a father's; that ensures his ruin.
As parent of his being, would thou prove
The unnatural parent of his miseries,
And make him curse the being which thou gav'st?
Is this the blessing of so fond a father?
If careless of LORENZO! spare, oh! spare,
FLORELLO's father, and PHILANDER's friend;
FLORELLO's father ruined, ruins him;
And from PHILANDER's friend the world expects
A conduct no dishonor to the dead.
Let passion do, what nobler motive should;
Let love, and emulation, rise in aid
To reason; and persuade thee to be -- blessed.
This seems not a request to be denied;
Yet (such the infatuation of mankind!)
It Is the most hopeless, man can make to man.
Shall I, then, rise in argument, and warmth?
And urge PHILANDER's posthumous advice,
From topics yet unbroach'd? --
But oh! I faint! my Spirits fail! -- Nor strange!
So long on wing, and in no middle clime;
To which my great CREATOR's glory called:
And calls -- but now in vain. Sleep's dewy wand
Has strok'd my drooping lids, and promises
My long arrear of rest; the downy God
(Wont to return with our returning peace)
Will pay, ere-long, and bless me with repose.
Haste, haste, sweet stranger! from the peasant's cot,
The Ship-boy's hammock, or the Soldier's straw,
Whence Sorrow never chased thee; with thee bring,
Not hideous visions, as of late; but draughts
Delicious of well-tasted cordial, rest;
Man's rich restorative; his balmy bath,
That supples lubricates, and keeps in play,
The various movements of this nice machine,
Which asks such frequent periods of repair.
When tired with vain rotations of the day,
Sleep winds us up for the succeeding dawn;
Fresh we spin on, till sickness clogs our wheels,
Or death quite breaks the Spring, and motion ends.
When will it end with me?
-- "THOU only know
" Thou, whose broad eye the future, and the past,
" Joins to the present; making one of three
" To mortal thought! thou know, and thou alone,
" All-knowing! All unknown! And yet well-known!
" Near, though remote! and, though unfathomed, felt!
" And, though invisible, for ever seen!
" And seen in all! the great, and the minute;
" Each globe above, with its gigantic race,
" Each flower, each leaf, with its small people swarmed,
" (Those puny vouchers of Omnipotence!)
" To the first thought, that asks, "From whence?" declare
" Their common Source. Thou fountain running over
" In rivers of communicated joy!
" Who gav'st us Speech for far, far humbler themes!
" Say, by what name shall I presume to call
" Him I see burning in these countless suns,
" As Moses, in the bush? Illustrious mind!
" The whole creation, less, far less to thee,
" Than that to the creation's ample round.
" How shall I name thee? -- How my laboring soul
" Heaves underneath the thought, too big for birth!
" Great system of perfections! mighty cause
" Of causes mighty! cause uncaus'd! sole root
" Of nature, that luxuriant growth of God!
" First father of effects! that progeny
" Of endless series; where the golden chain's
" Last link admits a period, who can tell?
" Father of all that is or heard, or hears!
" Father of all that is or seen, or sees!
" Father of all that is, or shall arise!
" Father of this immeasurable mass
" Of matter multiform; or dense, or rare;
" Opaque, or lucid; rapid, or at rest;
" Minute, or passing bound! in each extreme
" Of like amaze, and mystery, to man.
" Father of these bright millions of the night!
" Of which the least full godhead had proclaimed,
" And thrown the gazer on his knee -- Or, say,
" Is appellation higher still, thy choice?
" Father of matter's temporary Lo^^
" Father of Spirits! nobler offspring! sparks
" Of high paternal glory; rich endowed
" With various measures, and with various modes
" Of instinct, reason, intuition; beams
" More pale, or bright from day, divine, to break
" The dark of matter organized (the ware
" Of all created Spirit); beams, that rise
"Each over other in superior light,
" Till the last ripens into luster strong,
" Of next approach to Godhead. Father fond
" Far fonder than ever bore that name on earth)
" Of intellectual beings! beings blessed
" With powers to please thee; not of passive ply
" To laws they know not; beings lodged in seats
" Of well-adapted joys, in different domes
" Of this imperial palace for thy sons;
" Of this proud, populous, well-policy'd,
" Though boundless habitation, planned by thee;
" Whose several clans their several climates suit;
" And transposition, doubtless, would destroy.
" Or, oh! indulge, immortal King! indulge
" A title, less august indeed, but more
" Endearing; ah! how sweet in human ears!
" Sweet in our ears, and triumph in our hearts!
" Father of immortality to man!
" A theme that Night the Sixth, and Seventh.
lately set my soul on fire. --
" And thou the next! yet equal! thou, by whom
" That blessing was conveyed; far more! was bought;
" Ineffable the price! by whom all worlds
" Were made; and one, redeemed! illustrious light
" From light illustrious! thou, whose regal power,
" Finite in time, but infinite in space,
" On more than adamantine basis fixed,
" Over more, far more, than diadems, and thrones,
" Inviolably reigns; the dread of Gods!
" And oh! the friend of man! beneath whose foot,
" And by the mandate of whose aweful nod,
" All regions, revolutions, fortunes, fates,
" Of high, of low, of mind, and matter, roll
" Through the short channels of expiring time,
" Or shoreless ocean of eternity,
" Calm, or tempestuous (as thy spirit breathes),
" In absolute subjection! -- And, O thou
" The glorious Third! distinct, not separate!
" Beaming from both! with both incorporate!
" And (strange to tell!) incorporate with dust!
" By condescension, as thy glory, great,
" Enshrined in man! of human hearts, if pure,
" Divine inhabitant! the tie divine
" Of Heaven with distant earth! by whom I trust,
" (If not inspired) uncensur'd this address
" To thee, to them -- To whom? -- Mysterious power
" Revealed -- yet unreveal'd! darkness in light;
" Number in unity! our joy! our dread!
" The triple bolt that lays all wrong in ruin!
" That animates all right, the triple sun!
" Sun of the soul; her never-setting sun!
" Triune, unutterable unconceiv'd,
" Absconding, yet demonstrable, great GOD!
" Greater than greatest! better than the best!
" Kinder than kindest! with soft pity's eye,
" Or (stronger still to speak it) with thine own,
" From thy bright home, from that high firmament,
" Where thou, from all eternity, have dwelt;
" Beyond, archangels unassisted ken;
" From far above what mortals highest call;
" From elevation's pinnacle; look down,
" Through -- What? confounding interval! through all,
" And more, than laboring fancy can conceive;
" Through radiant ranks of essences unknown;
" Through hierarchies from hierarchies detached
" Round various banners of Omnipotence,
" With endless change of rapturous duties fired;
" Through wondrous beings interposing swarms,
" All clust'ring at the call, to dwell in thee;
" Through this wide waste of worlds; this vista vast,
" All sanded over with suns: suns turned to night
" Before thy feeblest beam -- look down -- down -- down
" On a poor breathing particle in dust,
" Or, I were, -- an immortal in his crimes.
" His crimes forgive! forgive his virtues, too!
" Those smaller faults, half-converts to the right.
" Nor let me close these eyes, which never more
" May see the sun (though night's descending scale
" Now weighs up morn), unpitied, and unblest!
" In thy displeasure dwells eternal pain;
" Pain, our aversion; pain, which strikes me now;
" And, since all pain is terrible to man,
" Though transient, terrible; at thy good hour,
" Gently, ah gently, lay me in my bed,
" My clay-cold bed! by nature, now, so near;
" By nature, near; still nearer by disease!
" Till then, be this, an emblem of my grave:
" Let it out-preach the preacher; every night
" Let it outcry the boy at PHILIP's ear;
" That tongue of death! that herald of the tomb!
" And when (the shelter of thy wing implored)
" My senses, soothed, shall sink in soft repose;
" O sink this truth still deeper in my soul,
" Suggested by my pillow, signed by fate,
" First, in fate's volume, at the page of man --
" Man's sickly soul, though turned and tossed for ever,
" From side to side, can rest on naught but thee:
" Here, in full trust; hereafter, in full joy;
" On thee, the promised, sure, eternal down
" Of spirits, toiled in travel through this vale.
" Nor of that pillow shall my soul despond;
" For -- Love Almighty! Love Almighty! (Sing,
" Exult, creation?) Love Almighty, reigns!
" That death of death! that cordial of despair!
" And loud ETERNITY's triumphant Song!
" Of whom, no more: -- For, O thou Patron-God!
" Thou God, and mortal! thence more God to man!
" Man's theme eternal! man's eternal theme!
" Thou can not 'scape uninjur'd from our praise.
" Uninjur'd from our praise can he escape,
" Who, disembosom'd from the FATHER, bows
" The Heaven of Heavens, to kiss the distant earth!
" Breathes out in agonies a sinless soul!
" Against the cross, death's iron Scepter breaks!
" From famish'st ruin plucks her human prey!
" Thows wide the gates celestial to his foes!
" Their gratitude for such a boundless debt,
" Deputes their suffering brothers to receive!
" And, if deep human guilt in payment fails;
" As deeper guilt prohibits our despair!
" Injoins it, as our duty, to rejoice!
" And (to close all) omnipotently kind,
" Prove. Chap. viii.
Takes his delights among the sons of men"
What words are these! -- And did they come from heaven?
And were they spoke to man? to guilty man?
What are all mysteries to love like this?
The Song of angels, all the melodies
Of choral Gods, are wafted in the Sound;
Head and exhilarate the broken heart,
Though pl^ng'd, before, in horrors, dark as night:
Rich pre^bation of comsummate joy!
Nor wait we dissolution to be blessed.
This final effort of the moral muse,
How justly The Consolation.
titled! nor for me alone:
For all that read; what Spirit of Support
What heights of CONSOLATION, crown my Song!
Then, farewell Night! of darkness, now, no more:
Joy breaks; shines! triumphs; it is eternal day.
Shall that which rises out of naught complain
Of a few evils, paid with endless joys?
My Soul! henceforth, in sweetest union join
The two Supports of human happiness,
Which some, erroneous, think can never meet;
True taste of life, and constant thought of death;
The thought of death, sole victor of its dread!
Hope be thy joy; and probity thy skill;
Thy patron he, whose diadem has dropped
Yon gems of Heaven; eternity, thy prize:
And leave the racers of the world their own,
Their feather, and their froth, for endless toils:
They part with all for that which is not bread;
They mortify, they starve, on wealth, fame, power;
And laugh to scorn the fools that aim at more,
How must a spirit, late escaped from earth,
Suppose PHILANDER's, LUCIA's, or NARCISSA's,
The truth of things new-blazing in its eye,
Look back, astonished, on the ways of men,
Whose lives whole drift is to forget their graves!
And when our present privilege is past,
To scourge us with due Sense of its abuse,
The same astonishment will seize us all.
What then must pain us, would preserve us now.
LORENZO! it is not yet too late: LORENZO!
Seize wisdom, ere it is torment to be wise;
That is, seize wisdom, ere she seizes thee.
For, what, my small philosopher! is hell?
It Is nothing, but full knowledge of the truth,
When truth, resisted long, is sworn our foe;
And calls ETERNITY to do her right.
Thus, darkness aiding intellectual light,
And Sacred Silence whispering truths divine,
And truths divine converting pain to peace,
My Song the midnight raven has outwing'd,
And shot, ambitious of unbounded Scenes,
Beyong the flaming limits of the world,
Her gloomy flight. But what avails the flight
Of fancy, when our hearts remain below?
Virtue abounds in flatterers, and foes;
It Is pride, to praise her; penance, to perform.
To more than words, to more than worth of tongue,
LORENZO! rise, at this auspicious hour;
An hour, when Heaven's most intimate with man;
When, like a falling star, the ray divine
Glides swift into the bosom of the just;
And just are all, determined to reclaim;
Which sets that title high, within thy reach.
Awake, then: thy PHILANDER calls: awake!
Thou, who shall wake, when the creation sleeps:
When, like a taper, all these Suns expire;
When time, like him of Gaza in his wrath,
Plucking the pillars that support the world,
In NATURE's ample ruins lies entombed!
And MIDNIGHT, universal midnight! reigns.
THE END OF THE NIGHT-THOUGHTS.
A PARAPHRASE ON PART OF THE BOOK OF JOB.
THRICE happy Job long lived in regal State,
Nor saw the Sumptuous east a prince so great;
Whose worldly Stores in such abundance flowed,
Whose heart with such exalted virtue glowed.
At length misfortunes take their turn to reign,
And ills on ills succeed; a dreadful train!
What now but deaths, and poverty, and wrong,
The Sword wide-wasting, the reproachful tongue,
And spotted plagues, that marked his limbs all over
So thick with pains, they wanted room for more?
A change so sad what mortal heart could bear?
Exhausted woe had left him naught to fear;
But gave him all to grief. Low earth he pressed,
Wept in the dust, and sorely smote his breast.
His friends (...) the deep affliction mourned,
Fell (...) pangs, and groan for groan returned;
In anguish of their hearts their mantles rent,
And Sev'n long days in solemn Silence spent;
A debt of reverence to distress so great!
Then Job contained no more; but cursed his fate.
His day of birth, its inauspicious light,
He wishes sunk in Shades of endless night,
And blotted from the year: nor fears to crave
Death, instant death; impatient for the grave.
That Seat of peace, that mansion of repose,
Where rest and mortals are no longer foes;
Where counselors are hushed, and mighty kings
(O happy turn!) no more are wretched things.
His words were daring, and displeased his friends;
His conduct they reprove, and he defends;
And now they kindled into warm debate,
And Sentiments opposed with equal heat;
Fixed in opinion, both refuse to yield,
And summon all their reason to the field:
So high at length their arguments were wrought,
They reached the last extent of human thought:
A pause ensued. -- When, lo! Heaven interposed,
And awefully the long contention closed.
Full over their heads, with terrible Surprise,
A sudden whirlwind blackened all the skies:
(They saw and trembled!) from the darkness broke
A dreadful voice, and thus the Almighty spoke.
Who gives his tongue a loose so bold and vain,
Censures my conduct, and reproves my reign?
Lifts up his thought against me from the dust,
And tells the world's Creator what is just?
Of late so brave, now lift a dauntless eye,
Face my demand, and give it a reply:
Where did thou dwell at nature's early birth?
Who laid foundations for the spacious earth?
Who on the Surface did extend the line,
Its form determine, and its bulk confine?
Who fixed the cornerstone? what hand, declare,
Hung it on naught, and fastened it in air;
When the bright morning stars in concert sung,
When Heaven's high arch with loud Hosanna's rung;
When shouting Sons of God, the triumph crowned
And the wide concave thundered with the Sound?
Earth's numerous kingdoms, have thou viewed them all?
And can thy Span of knowledge grasp the ball?
Who heaved the mountain, which sublimely stands,
And casts its shadow into distant lands?
Who, stretching forth his Scepter over the deep,
Can that wild world in due subjection keep?
I broke the globe, I scoop'd its hollowed side,
And did a basin for the floods provide;
I chain them with my word; the boiling Sea,
Worked up in tempests, hears my great decree;
" Thus far, thy floating tide shall be conveyed;
" And here, O main, be thy proved billows stayed"
Have thou explored the Secrets of the deep,
Where, shut from use, unnumber'd treasure's sleep;
Where, down a thousand fathoms from the day,
Springs the great fountain, mother of the Sea?
Those gloomy paths did thy bold foot ever tread,
Whole worlds of waters rolling over thy head?
Has the cleft center opened wide to thee?
Death's inmost chambers did thou ever see?
Ever knock at his tremendous gate, and wade
To the black portal through the incumbent shade?
Deep are those shades; but shades still deeper hide
My counsels from the ken of human pride.
Where dwells the light? in what refulgent dome?
And where has darkness made her dismal home?
Thou know, no doubt, since thy large heart is fraught
With ripened wisdom through long ages brought,
Since nature was called forth when thou wast by,
And into being rose beneath thine eye!
Are mists begotten? who their father knew?
From whom descend the pearly drops of dew?
To bind the stream by night, what hand can boast,
O whiten morning, with the hoary frost?
Whole powerful breath, from northern regions blown,
Touches the Sea, and turns it into stone?
A sudden desert spreads over realms defaced,
And lays one half of the creation waste?
Thou know me not; thy blindness cannot see
How vast a distance parts thy God from thee.
Can thou in whirlwinds mount aloft? can thou
In clouds and darkness wrap thy aweful brow?
And, when day triumphs in meridian light,
Put, forth thy hand, and shade the world with night?
Who launched the clouds in air, and bid them roll
Suspended Seas aloft, from pole to pole?
Who can refresh the burning sandy plain,
And quench the Summer with a waste of rain?
Who in rough deserts, far from human toil,
Made rocks bring forth, and desolation smile?
There blooms the rose, where human face never shone,
And spreads its beauties to the Sun alone.
To check the Shower, who lifts his hand on high,
And shuts the sluices of the exhausted sky,
When earth no longer mourns her gaping veins,
Her naked mountains, and her russet plains;
But, new in life, a cheerful prospect yields
Of shining rivers, and of verdant fields;
When groves and forests lavish all their bloom,
And earth and Heaven are filled with rich perfume?
Have thou ever scaled my wintry skies, and seen
Of hail and Snows my northern magazine?
These the dread treasures of mine anger are,
My fund of vengeance for the day of war,
When clouds rain death, and storms, at my command,
Rage through the world, or waste a guilty land.
Who taught the rapid winds to fly so fast,
Or shak s the center with his eastern blast?
Who from the skies can a whole deluge pour?
Who strikes through nature with the solemn roar
Of dreadful thunder, points it where to fall,
And in fierce lightning wraps the flying ball?
Not he who trembles at the darted fires,
Falls at the Sound, and in the flash expires.
Who drew the comet out to such a size,
And, (...) train over half the skies?
(...) rele^^m (...) hang him out? does he
(...) the nations, and denounce, from thee?
(...) earth can moderate the rein,
That guides the Stars along the ethereal plain?
Appointment Seasons, and direct their course,
(...) brighten, and supply their force?
(...) the skies benevolence restrain,
(...) the Pleiades to shine in vain?
(...) Orion sparkles from his Sphere,
Th^^ he cold Season, and unbind the year?
Bid Mazza^oth his destined Station know,
And teach the bright Arcturus where to glow?
Mine is the night, with all her stars; I pour
Myriads, and myriads I reserve in store,
Do thou pronounce where daylight shall be born,
And draw the purple curtain of the morn;
Awake the Sun, and bid him come away,
And glad thy world with his obsequious ray?
Have thou, enthroned in flaming glory, driven
Triumphant round the spacious ring of Heaven?
That pomp of light, what hand so far displays,
That distant earth lies basking in the blaze?
Who did the Soul with her rich powers invest,
And light up reason in the human breast?
To shine, with fresh increase of luster, bright,
When stars and sun are set in endless night?
To these my various questions make reply.
The Almighty spoke; and speaking, shook the sky.
What then, Chaldaean Sire, was thy Surprise!
Thus thou, with trembling heart, and down cast eyes:
" Once and again, which I in groans deplore,
" My tongue has erred; but shall presume no more.
" My voice is in eternal silence bound,
" And all my Soul falls prostrate to the ground."
He ceased: when, lo! again the Almighty spoke;
The same dread voice from the black whirlwind broke.
Can that arm measure with an arm divine?
And can thou thunder with a voice like mine?
Or in the hollow of thy hand contain
The bulk of waters, the wide-spreading main,
When, mad with tempests, all the billows rise
In all their rage, and dash the distant skies?
Come forth, in beauty's excellence arrayed;
And be the grandeur of thy power displayed;
Put on Omnipotence, and frowning make
The spacious round of the creation shake;
Dispatch thy vengeance, bid it overthrow
Triumphant vice, lay lofty tyrants low,
And crumble them to dust. When this is done,
I grant thy Safety lodged in thee alone;
Of thee thou art, and may undaunted stand
Behind the buckler of thine own right hand.
Fond man! the vision of a moment made!
Dream of a dream! and shadow of a shade!
What worlds have thou produced, what creatures framed,
What insects cherished, that thy God is blamed?
When, pained with hunger, the wild Raven's brood
Calls upon God, importunate for food,
Who hears their cry, who grants their hoarse request,
And stills the clamor of the craving nest?
Who in the cruel Ostrich has subdued
A parent's care, and fond inquietude?
While far she flies, her scattered eggs are found,
Without an owner, on the sandy ground;
Cast out on fortune, they at mercy lie,
And borrow life from an indulgent sky;
Adopted by the Sun, in blaze of day,
They ripen under his prolific ray.
Unmindful she, that! some unhappy tread
May crush her young in their neglected bed.
What time she skims along the field with speed,
She scorns the rider, and pursuing steed.
How rich the Peacock! what bright glories run
From plume to plume, and vary in the sun!
He proudly spreads them to the golden ray,
Gives all his colors, and adorns the day;
With conscious state the spacious round displays,
And slowly moves amid the waving blaze.
Who taught the Hawk to find, in seasons wise,
Perpetual summer, and a change of skies?
When clouds deform the year, she mounts the wind,
Shoots to the south, nor fears the storm behind;
The sun returning, she returns again,
Lives in his beams, and leaves ill days to men.
Though strong the Hawk, though practiced well to fly,
An eagle drops her in a lower sky;
An eagle, when, deserting human sight,
She seeks the sun in her unwearied flight.
Did thy command her yellow pinion lift
So high in air, and seat her on the clift,
Where far above thy world she dwells alone,
And proudly makes the strength of rocks her own;
Thence wide over nature takes her dread Survey,
And with a glance predestinates her prey?
She feasts her young with blood, and, hovering over
The unslaughter'd host, enjoys the promised gore.
Know thou how many moons, by me assigned,
Roll over the mountain Goat, and forest Hind,
While pregnant they a mother's load sustain?
They bend in anguish, and cast forth their pain.
Hale are their young, from human frailties freed,
Walk unsustain'd, and unassisted feed;
They live at once; forsake the dam's warm side;
Take the wide world, with nature for their guide;
Bound over the lawn, or seek the distant glade;
And find a home in each delightful Shade.
Will the tall reem, which knows no Lord but me,
Low at the crib, and ask an alms of thee?
Submit his unworn Shoulder to the yoke,
Break the stiff clod, and over thy furrow smoke?
Since great his strength, go trust him, void of care;
Lay on his neck the toil of all the year;
Bid him bring home the Seasons to thy Doors,
And cast his load among thy gathered Stores.
Did thou from Service the Wild-Ass discharge,
And break his bonds, and bid him live at large,
Through the wide waste, his ample mansion, roam,
And loss himself in his unbounded home?
By nature's hand magnificently fed,
His meal is on the range of mountains spread*
As in pure air aloft he bounds along,
He fees in distant Smoke the city throng;
Conscious of freedom, scorns the smothered train,
The threatening driver, and the servile rein.
Survey the warlike horse! did thou invest
With thunder, his robust distended chest?
No sense of fear his dauntless soul allays;
It Is dreadful to behold his nostrils blaze;
To paw the vale he proudly takes delight,
And triumphs in the fullness of his might;
High-rais'd he snuffs the battle from afar,
And-burns to plunge amid the raging war;
And mocks at death, and throws his foam around,
And in a storm of fury shakes the ground.
How does his firm, his rising heart, advance
Full on the brandished sword, and shaken lance;
While his fixed eye balls meet the dazzling shield,
G^ze, and return the lightning of the field!
He sinks the sense of pain in generous pride,
Nor feels the shaft that trembles in his side;
But neighs to the shrill trumpet's dreadful blast
Till death; and when he groans, he groans his last.
But, fiercer still, the lordly Lion stalks,
Grimly majestic in his lonely walks;
When round he glares, all living creatures fly;
He clears the desert with his rolling eye.
Say, mortal, does he rouse at thy command,
And roar to thee, and live upon thy hand?
Do thou for him in forests bend thy bow,
And to his gloomy den the morsel throw,
Where bent on death lie hid his tawny brood,
And, couched in dreadful ambush, pant for blood,
Or, stretched on broken limbs, consume the day,
In darkness wrapped, and slumber over their prey?
By the pale moon they take their destined round,
And lash their sides, and furious tear the ground.
Now shrieks, and dying groans, the desert fill;
They rage, they rend, their ravenous jaws distill
With crimson foam; and, when the banquet's over,
They stride away, and paint their steps with gore;
In flight alone the shepherd puts his trust,
And shudders at the talon in the dust.
Mild is my Behemoth, though large his frame;
Smooth is his temper, and represt his flame,
While unprovoked. This native of the flood
Lifts his broad foot, and puts ashore for food;
Earth sinks beneath him, as he moves along
To seek the herbs, and mingle with the throng.
See, with what strength his hardened loins are bound,
All over proof, and shut against a wound.
How like a mountain cedar moves his tail!
Nor can his complicated sinews fail.
Built high and wide, his solid bones surpass
The bars of steel; his ribs are ribs of brass;
His port majestic, and his armed jaw,
Give the wide forest and the mountain, law.
The mountains feed him; there the beasts admire
The mighty Stranger, and in dread retire:
At length his greatness nearer they survey,
Graze in his shadow, and his eye obey.
The fens and marshes are his cool retreat,
His noontide shelter from the burning heat;
Their sedgy bosoms his wide couch are made,
And groves of willows give him all their shade.
His eye drinks Jordan up, when, fired with drought,
He trusts to turn its current down his throat;
In lessened waves it creeps along the plain:
He sinks a river, and he thirsts again.
Go to the Nile, and, from its fruitful side,
Cast forth thy line into the swelling tide:
With slender hair Leviathan command,
And stretch his vastness on the loaded Strand.
Will he become thy Servant? will he own
Thy lordly nod, and tremble at thy frown?
Or with his sport amuse thy leisure day,
And, bound in silk, with thy soft maidens play?
Shall pompous banquets swell with such a prize?
And the bowl journey round his ample size?
Or the debating merchants share the prey,
And various limbs to various marts convey?
Through his firm skull what steel its way can win?
What forceful engine can subdue his skin?
Fly far, and live; tempt not his matchless might;
The bravest shrink to cowards in his sight;
The rashest dare not rouse him up: who then
Shall turn on me, among the Sons of men?
Am I a debtor? have thou ever heard
Whence come the gifts which are on me conferred;
My lavish fruit a thousand valleys fills,
And mine the herds, that graze a thousand hills:
Earth, sea, and air, all nature is my own;
And Stars, and Sun are dust beneath my throne.
And dare thou with the world's great Father vye,
Thou, who do tremble at my creature's eye?
At full my large Leviathan shall rise,
Boast all his Strength, and spread his wondrous size.
Who, great in arms, ever stripped his shining mail,
Or crowned his triumph with a single Scale?
Whose heart sustains him to draw near? behold,
Destruction yawns; his spacious jaws unfold,
And, marshaled round the wide expanse, disclose
Teeth edged with death, and crouding rows on rows:
What hideous fangs on either side arise!
And what a deep abyss between them lies!
Mete with thy lance, and with thy plumbet sound,
The one how long, the other how profound.
His bulk is charged with such a furious Soul,
That clouds of Smoke from his spread nostrils roll,
As from a furnace; and, when roused his ire,
Fate issues from his jaws in streams of fire.
The rage of tempests, and the roar of Seas,
Thy terror, this thy great Superior please;
Strength on his ample shoulder fits in state;
His well joined limbs are dreadfully complete;
His flakes of solid flesh are slow to part;
As steel his nerves, as adamant his heart.
When, late-awak'd, he rears him from the floods,
And, stretching forth his stature to the clouds,
Writhes in the Sun aloft his scaly height,
And strikes the distant hills with transient light,
Far round are fatal damps of terror spread,
The mighty fear, nor blush to own their dread.
Large is his front; and, when his burnished eyes
Lift their broad lids, the morning seems to rise.
In vain may death in various Shapes invade,
The swift-wing'd arrow, the descending blade;
His naked breast their impotence defies;
The dart rebounds, the brittle faulchion flies,
Shut in himself, the war without he hears,
Safe in the tempest of their rattling Spears;
The cumber'd strand their wasted vollies strew;
His Sport, the rage and labor of the foe.
His pastimes like a chaldron boil the flood,
And blacken ocean with the rising mud;
The billows feel him, as he works his way;
His hoary footsteps shine along the Sea;
The foam high-wrought, with white, divides the green,
And distant Sailors point where death has been.
His like earth bears not on her spacious face:
Alone in nature stands his dauntless race,
For utter ignorance of fear renowned,
In wrath he rolls his baleful eye around;
Makes every swollen, disdainful heart, subside,
And holds dominion over the Sons of pride.
Then the Chaldaean eased his laboring breast,
With full conviction of his crime oppressed.
" Thou can accomplish all things, Lord of might:
" And every thought is naked to thy fight.
" But oh! Thy ways are wonderful, and lie
" Beyond the deepest reach of mortal eye.
" O^t have I heard of thine Almighty power;
" But never saw thee till this dreadful hour.
" Overwhelmed with shame, the Lord of life I see,
" Abhor myself, and give my Soul to thee.
" Nor shall my weakness tempt thine anger more:
" Man was not made to question, but adore."
NOTES. ON the BOOK of JOB.
IT is disputed among the Critics who was the Author of the Book of Job. Some
give it to Moses; some to others. As I was engaged in this little Performance,
some Arguments occurred to me, which favor the former of these Opinions; which
Arguments I have flung into the following Notes, where little else is to be
expected.

Page 297. Thrice Happy Job, etc.] The Almighty's Speech, Chapter xxxviii. etc.
which is what I paraphrase in this little Work, is by much the finest Part of
the noblest, and most ancient Poem in the World. Bishop Patrick says, its
Grandeur is as much above all other Poetry, as Thunder is louder than a
Whisper. In order to set this distinguished Part of the Poem in a fuller Light,
and give the Reader a clearer Conception of it, I have abridg'd the preceding
and subsequent Parts of the Poem, and joined them it; so that this Piece is a
sort of an Epitome of the whole Book of Job.

I use the Word Paraphrase, because I want another which might better answer to
the uncommon Liberties I have taken. I have omitted, added, and transposed. The
Mountain, the Comet, the Sun, and other Parts, are entirely added: The Peacock,
the Lion, etc are much enlarged: And I have thrown the Whole into a Method more
suitable to our Notions of Regularity. The judicious, if they compare this
Piece with the Original, will, I flatter myself, find the Reasons for the great
Liberties I have indulged myself in through the Whole.

Longinus has a Chapter on Interrogations, which shows that they contribute
much to the Sublime. This Speech of the Almighty is made up of them.
Interrogation seems indeed the proper Style of Majesty incensed. It differs
from other manner of Reproof, as bidding a Person execute himself, does from a
common Execution; for he that asks the Guilty a proper Question, makes him, in
effect, pass Sentence on himself.

Page 298.

-- from the darkness broke
A dreadful voice, and thus the Almighty spoke.]
The Book of Job is well known to be Dramatic, and, like the Tragedies of old
Greece, is Fiction built on Truth. Probably this most noble Part of it, the
Almighty speaking out of the Whirlwind (so suitable to the After-practice of
the Greek Stage. when there happened Dignus Vindice Nodus), is fictitious; but
it is a Fiction more agreeable to the Time in which Job lived, than to any
since. Frequent, before the Law, were the Appearances of the Almighty after
this manner, Exodus chapter xix. Ezekiel ch i etc. Hence is He said to dwell in
think Darkness: And have his Way in the Whirlwind.

Page 299. Thus far thy floating Tide, etc.] There is a very great Air in all
that precedes; but this is signally Sublime. We are struck with Admiration to
see the vast and ungovernable Ocean receiving Commands, and punctually obeying
them; to find it like a managed Horse, raging, tossing, and foaming, but by the
Rule and Direction of its Master This Passage yields in Sublimity to that of
Let there be Light, etc. so much only, as the absolute Government of Nature
yields to the Creation of it.

The like Spirit in these two Passages is no bad concurrent Argument, that
Moses is Author of the Book of Job.

Page 303.] When, pained with hunger, the wild Raven's brood, etc] Another
Argument that Moses was the Author, is, that most of the Creatures here
mentioned are Egyptian. The reason given why the Raven is particularly
mentioned as an object of the Care of Providence, is, because, by her clamorous
and importunate Voice, she particularly seems always always calling upon it; to
ask earnestly, AElian. 1. ii. e. 48. And since there were Ravens on the Banks
of the Nile more clamorous than the rest of that Species, Those probably are
meant in this Place.

Page 303. Who in the cruel Ostrich has subdued, etc] There are many Instances
of this Bird's Supidity; let two suffice.

First, It covers its Head in the Reeds, and thinks itself all out of Sight.

-- Stat lumine clause
Ridendum revoluta caput: creditque latere,
Quae non ipsa videt --
Claud. Secondly, They that go in Pursuit of them, draw the Skin of an
Ostrich's Neck on one Hand, which proves a sufficient Lure to take them with
the other.

They have so little Brain, that Heliogabalus had six hundred Heads for his
Supper.

Here we may observe, that our Judicious as well as Sublime Author, just
touches the great Points of Distinction in each Creature, and then hastens to
another. A Description is exact when you cannot add, but what is common to
another thing; nor withdraw, but something peculiarly belonging to the thing
described. A Likeness is lost in too much Description, as a Meaning often in
too much Illustration.

Ibid. What time she skims along the Field, etc.] Here is marked another
Peculiar Quality of this Creature, which neither flies, nor runs distinctly,
but has a Motion composed of both, and, using its Wings as Sails, makes great
Speed.

Vasta velut Libyae venantum vocibus ales
Cum premitur, calidas cursu transmittit arends
Inque modum veli finuatis flamine pennis
Pulverulenta volat --
Claud. In E^tr. Page 303. She scorns the Rider, and pursuing Steed.] Xenophon
says, Cyrus had Horses that could overtake the Goat, and the WildAss; but none
that could reach this Creature. A thousand goldenDucats, or a hundred Camels,
was the stated Price of a Horse that could equal their Speed.

Ibid. How rich the Peacock, etc.] Though this Bird is (...) just mentioned in
my Author, I could not forbear going a little farther, and spreading those
beautiful Plumes (which are there shut up) into half a dozen Lines. The
circumstance I have marked of his opening his Plumes to the Sun is true.
Expandit colores adverso maxim soli quia sic fulgentius radiant. Plin. 1. x.
c. 20.

Ibid. Though strong the Hawk, though practiced well to fly.] Thuanus (de Re
Accip.) mentions a Hawk that flew from Paris to London in a Night.

And the Egyptians, in regard to its Swiftness, made it their Symbol for the
Wind; for which Reason we may suppose the Hawk, as well as the Crow above, to
have been a Bird of Note in Egypt.

Page 304. Thence wide over Nature takes her dread Survey, etc] The Eagle is
said to be of so acute a Sight, that when she is so high in Air, that Man
cannot see her, she can discern the smallest Fish under Water. My Author
accurately understood the Nature of the Creatures he describes, and seems to
have been a Naturalist as well as a Poet, which the next Note will confirm.

Ibid. Know thou how many Moons, by Me assigned, etc.] The Meaning of this
Question is, Know thou the Time and Circumstances of their bringing forth?
for to know the Time only was easy, and had nothing extraordinary in it; but
the Circumstances had something peculiarly expressive of God's Providence,
which makes the Question proper in this Place. Pliny observes, that the Hind
with Young is by Instinct directed to a certain Herb called Seselis, which
facilitates the Birth. Thunder also (which looks like the more immediate Hand
of Providence) has the same Effect. Ps. xxix. In so early an Age to observe
these things may style our Author a Naturalist.

Page 305. Survey the Warlike Horse, etc.] The Description of the Horse is the
most celebrated of any in the Poem. There is an excellent Critique on it in the
Guardians. I shall therefore only observe, that, in this Description as in
other Parts of this Speech, our Vulgar Translation has much more Spirit than
the Septuagint; it always takes the Original in the most poetical and exalted
Sense, so that most Commentators, even on the Hebrew itself, fall beneath it.

Page 305. By the pale Moon they take their destined Round.] Pursuing their
Prey by Night is true of most wild Beasts, particularly the Lion, Ps. civ. V.
20. The Arabians have One among their 500 Names for the Lion, which signifies
the Hunter by Moonshine.

Page 306. He sinks a river, and he thirsts again, etc.] Cephisi glaciale
caput, quo suetus anbelam
Far sitim Python, amnemque avertere ponto.
Stat. Theb. V. 349. Qui spiris tegerit montes, hauriret hiatu
Flumina, etc.
Claud. Praef. in Ruf.

Let not then this Hyperbole seem too much for an Eastern Poet, though some
Commentators of Name strain hard in this Place for a new Construction, through
fear of it.

Ibid. Go to the Nile, and from its fruitful Side, etc.] The taking the
Crocodile is most difficult, Diodorus says they are not to be taken but by Iron
Nets. When Augustus conquered Egypt, he struck a Medal, the Impress of which
was a Crocodile chained to a Palm Tree, with this Inscription, Nemo antea
religavit.

Page 307. The rashest dare not rouse him up, etc.] This alludes to a custom of
this Creature, which is, when sated with Fish, to come ashore, and sleep among
the Reeds.

Ibid. -- Behold, Destruction yawns, his spacious Jaws unfold, etc.] The
Crocodile's Mouth is exceeding wide. When he gapes, says Pliny, Fit totum Os.
Martial says to his old Woman, Cum comparata rictibus tuis ora
Niliacus habet crocodilus angusta.
So that the Expression here is barely just.

Page 308. Fate issues from his Jaws in Streams of Fire.] This too is nearer
Truth than at first View may be imagined. The Crocodile, say the Naturalists,
lying long under Water, and being there forced to hold its Breath, when it
emerges, the Breath long represt is hot, and bursts out so violently, that it
resembles Fire and Smoke. The Horse suppresses not his Breath by any means so
long, neither is he so fierce and animated; yet the most correct of Poets
ventures to use the same Metaphor concerning him.

Collectumque premens volvit sub naribus ignem. By this and the foregoing Note
I would caution against a false Opinion of the Eastern boldness, from Passages
in them ill understood.

Ibid. Large is his Front; and, when his burnished Eyes, etc.] His Eyes are
like the Eyelids of the Morning. I think this gives us as great an Image of the
Thing it would express, as can enter the Thought of Man. It is not improbable,
that the Egyptians stole their Hieroglyphic for the Morning, which is the
Crocodile's Eye, from this Passage, though no Commentator I have seen mentions
it. It is easy to conceive how the Egyptians should be both Readers and
Admirers of the Writings of Moses, whom I suppose the Author of this Poem.

I have observed already, that three or four of the Creatures here described
are Egpptian; the two last are notoriously so; they are the River-Horse and the
Crocodile, those celebrated Inhabitants of the Nile; and on these two it is
that our Author chiefly dwells. It would have been expected from an Author more
remote from that River than Moses, in a Catalogue of Creatures produced to
magnify their Creator, to have dwelt on the two largest Works of his Hand, viz.
the Elephant and the Whale: This is so natural an Expectation, that some
Commentators have rendered Behemoth and Leviathan, the Elephant and Whale, though
the Descriptions in our Author will not admit of it; but Moses being (as we may
well suppose) under an immediate Terror of the Hippopotamos and Crocodile from
their daily Mischiefs and Ravages around him, it is very accountable why he
should permit them to take place.

END OF THE NOTES.
POEM ON THE LAST DAY. IN THREE BOOKS.

BY THE REVEREND EDWARD YOUNG, LL. D.

Venit summa dies.
VIRGIL. The important Day is come.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, and SOLD by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. M,DCC,LXXVII

To a LADY, with the LAST DAY.
MADAM,
HERE, sacred truths, in lofty numbers told,
The prospect of a future state unfold:
The realms of night to mortal view display,
And the glad regions of eternal day.
This daring author scorns, by vulgar ways
Of guilty wit, to merit worthless praise.
Full of her glorious theme, his towering muse,
With generous zeal a nobler flame pursues:
Religion's cause her ravisn'd heart inspires,
And with a thousand bright ideas fires;
Transports her quick, impatient, piercing eye,
Over the strait limits of mortality,
To boundless orbs, and bids her fearless soar
Where only Milton gained renown before;
Where various scenes alternately excite
Amazement, pity, terror, and delight.
Thus did the muses sing in early times,
Ere skilled to flatter vice, and varnish crimes:
Their lyres were tuned to virtuous songs alone,
And the chaste poet, and the priest, were one.
But now, forgetful of their infant state,
They soothe the wanton pleasures of the great:
And from the press, and the licentious stage,
With luscious poison taint the thoughtless age;
Deceitful charms attract our wondering eyes,
And specious ruin unsuspected lies.
So the rich soil of India's blooming shores,
Adorned with lavish nature's choicest stores,
Where serpents lurk, by flowers concealed from sight,
Hides fatal danger under gay delight.
These purer thoughts, from gross alloys refined,
With heavenly raptures elevate the mind:
Not framed to raise a giddy short-lived joy,
Whose false allurements, while they please, ^story;
But bliss resembling that of saints above,
Sprung from the vision of the Almighty love:
Firm, solid bliss, for ever great and new,
The more it is known, the more admired, like you;
Like you, fair nymph, in whom united meet
Endearing sweetness, unaffected wit,
And all the glories of your sparkling race,
While inward virtues heighten every grace.
By these secured, you will with pleasure read
" Of future judgment, and the rising dead;
" Of time's grand period, heaven and earth overthrown;
" And gasping nature's last tremendous groan."
These, when the stars and sun shall be no more,
Shall beauty to your ravaged form restore:
Then shall you shine with an immortal ray,
Improved by death, and brightened by decay.
Pemb. Coll. Oxen. T. TRISTRAM.

To the AUTHOR, On his LAST DAY and UNIVERSAL PASSION.
AND must it be as thou have sung,
Celestial bard, seraphic YOU (...)?
Will there no trace, no point be found
Of all this spacious glorious round?
Yon lamps of night, must they decay?
On nature's self destruction prey?
Then fame, the most immortal thing
Even thou can hope, is on the wing.
Shall Newton's system be admired,
When time and motion are expired?
Shall souls be curious to explore
Who ruled an orb that is no more?
Or shall they quote the pictured age;
From Pope's and thy corrective page,
When vice and virtue lose their name
In deathless joy, or endless shame?
While wears away the grand machine,
The works of genius shall be seen?
Beyond, what laurels can there be,
For Homer, Horace, Pope, or thee?
Through life we chase, with fond pursuit,
What mocks our hope, like Sodom's fruits
And sure, thy plan was well designed,
To cure this madness of the mind;
First, beyond time, our thoughts to raise;
Then lash our love of transient praise.
In both, we own thy doctrine just;
And fame's a breath, and men are dust.
1736. J. BANCKS.

VERSES TO THE AUTHOR.
NOW let the atheist tremble; thou alone
Can bid his conscious heart the Godhead own.
Whom shall thou not reform? O thou have seen,
How God descends to judge the souls of men!
Thou heardst the sentence, how the guilty mourn,
Driven out from GOD, and never to return?
Yet more behold ten thousand thunders fall,
And sudden vengeance wrap the flaming ball:
When nature sunk, when every bolt was hurled,
Thou sawst the boundless ruins of the world.
When guilty Sodom felt the burning rain,
And sulphur fell on the devoted plain;
The patriarch thus, the fiery tempest past,
With pious horror viewed the desert waste;
The restless smoke still waved its curls around,
For ever rising from the glowing ground.
But tell me, oh! What heavenly pleasure tell,
To think so greatly, and describe so well!
How waft thou pleased the wondrous theme to try,
And find the thought of man could rise so high?
Beyond this world the labor to pursue,
And open all ETERNITY to view?
But thou art best delighted to rehearse
Heavens holy dictates in exalted verse;
O thou have power the hardened heart to warm,
To grieve, to raise, to terrify, to charm!
To fix the soul on GOD; to teach the mind
To know the dignity of human-kind;
By stricter rules well-governed life to scan,
And practice over the angel in the man.
Magd. Coll. Oxon. T. WHARTON.

THE LAST DAY. BOOK I.
Ipse Pater, media nimborum in nocte corusca
Fulmina molitur dextra; quo maxima motu
Terra tremit, fugere ferae, et mortalia corda
Per gentes humilis stravit pavor. --
VIRGIL.
The great Creator, amidst a night of clouds, lances the flashing thunder from
his right hand: its violence causes the whole earth to tremble; the beasts are
fled, and the hearts of men are overwhelmed in dismal horror. --

WHILE others sing the fortune of the great;
Empire, and arms, and all the pomp of state;
With Britain's hero The Duke of Marlborough.
set their Souls on fire,
And grow immortal as his deeds inspire;
I draw a deeper Scene: a Scene that yields
A louder trumpet, and more dreadful fields;
The world alarmed, both earth and heaven overthrown,
And gasping nature's last tremendous groan;
Death's ancient scepter broke, the teeming tomb,
The righteous judge, and man's eternal doom.
'Twixt joy and pain I view the bold design,
And ask my anxious heart, if it be mine.
Whatever great or dreadful has been done,
Within the sight of conscious stars or sun,
Is far beneath my daring: I look down
On all the splendors of the British crown.
This globe is for my verse a narrow bound;
Attend me, all ye glorious worlds around!
Oh! all ye angels, howsoe'er disjoined,
Of every various order, place, and kind,
Hear and assist a feeble mortal's lays,
It Is your eternal King I strive to praise.
But chiefly thou, great Ruler! Lord of all!
Before whose throne archangels prostrate fall;
If at thy nod, from discord and from night
Sprang beauty, and yon sparkling worlds of light,
Exalt even me; all inward tumults quell;
The clouds and darkness of my mind dispel;
To my great subject thou my breast inspire,
And raise my laboring Soul with equal fire.
Man, bear thy brow aloft; view every grace
In GOD's great offspring, beauteous nature's face:
See Spring's gay bloom; see golden Autumn's store;
See how earth smiles, and hear old ocean roar.
Leviathans but heave their cumb'rous mail,
It makes a tide, and wind-bound navies sail.
Here, forests rise, the mountains aweful pride;
Here, rivers measure climes, and worlds divide:
There, valleys fraught with gold's resplendent seeds,
Hold kings, and kingdoms fortunes in their beds:
There, to the skies aspiring hills ascend,
And into distant lands their shades extend.
View cities, armies, fleets; of fleets the pride,
See Europe's law, in Albion's channel ride.
View the whole earth's vast landscape unconfined,
Or view in Britain all her glories joined.
Then let the firmament thy wonder raise;
'Twill raise thy wonder, but transcend thy praise.
How far from east to west? the laboring eye
Can sca^ce the distant azure bounds descry:
Wide theater! where tempests play at large,
And GOD's right hand can all its wrath discharge.
Mark how those radiant lamps inflame the pole,
Call forth the Seasons, and the year control:
They shine through time, with an unaltered ray:
See this grand period rise, and that decay:
So vast, this world's a grain; yet myriads grace
With golden pomp the thronged ethereal Space;
So bright, with such a wealth of glory stored,
'Twere sin in heathens not to have adored.
How great, how firm, how sacred all appears!
How worthy an immortal round of years!
Yet all must drop, as autumn's sickliest grain,
And earth and firmament be sought in vain:
The tract forgot where constellations shone,
Or where the Stuarts filled an aweful throne:
Time shall be slain, all nature be destroyed,
Nor leave an atom in the mighty void.
Sooner, or later, in some future date,
(A dreadful Secret in the book of fate!)
This hour, for aught all human wisdom knows,
Or when ten thousand harvests more have rose;
When Scenes are changed on this revolving earth,
Old empires fall, and give new empires birth:
While other Bourbons rule in other lands,
And (if man's sin forbids not) other Annes:
While the still busy world is treading over
The paths they trod five thousand years before,
Thoughtless as those who now life's mazes run,
Of earth dissolved, or an extinguished Sun.
(Ye sublunary worlds, awake, awake!
Ye rulers of the nations, hear and shake!)
Thick clouds of darkness shall arise on day,
In sudden night all earth's dominions lay;
Impetuous winds the scattered forests rend,
Eternal mountains like their cedars bend;
The valleys yawn, the troubled ocean roar,
And break the bondage of his wonted shore;
A sanguine stain the silver moon overspread,
Darkness the circle of the Sun invade;
From inmost heaven incessant thunders roll,
And the strong echo bound from pole to pole.
When lo! a mighty trump, one half concealed
In clouds, one half to mortal eye revealed,
Shall pour a dreadful note: the piercing call
Shall rattle in the center of the ball;
The extended circuit of creation shake,
The living die with fear, the dead awake.
Oh powerful blast! to which no equal Sound
Did ever the frighted ear of nature wound,
Though rival clarions have been strained on high,
And kindled wars immortal through the sky,
Though GOD's whole enginery dischar'd, and all
The rebel angels bellowed in their fall.
Have angels sinned? and shall not man beware?
How shall a Son of earth decline the snare?
Not folded arms, and slackness of the mind,
Can promise for the safety of mankind.
None are supinely good: through care and pain,
And various arts, the steep ascent we gain.
This is the scene of combat, not of rest,
Man's is laborious happiness at best;
On this side death his dangers never cease,
His joys are joys of conquest, not of peace.
If then, obsequious to the will of fate,
And bending to the terms of human state,
When guilty joys invite us to their arms,
When beauty smiles, or grandeur spreads her charms,
The conscious Soul would this great Scene display,
Call down the immortal hosts in dread array,
The trumpet sound, the christian banner spread,
And raise from silent graves the trembling dead;
Such deep impression would the picture make,
No power on earth her firm resolve could shake;
Engaged with angels, she would greatly stand,
And look regardless down on sea and land:
Not profer'd worlds her ardor could restrain,
And death might shake his threatening lance in vain;
Her certain conquest would endear the fight,
And danger serve but to supply delight.
Instructed thus to shun the fatal spring,
Whence flow the terrors of that day I sing;
More boldly we our labors may pursue,
And all the dreadful image set to view.
The sparkling eye, the sleek and painted breast,
The burnished scale, curled train, and rising crest,
All that is lovely in the noxious snake,
Provokes our fear, and bids us fly the brake:
The sting once drawn, his guiltless beauties rise
In pleasing luster, and detain our eyes;
We view with joy, what once did horror move,
And strong aversion softens into love.
Say then, my muse, whom dismal Scenes delight,
Frequent at tombs, and in the realms of night;
Say, melancholy maid, if bold to dare
The last extremes of terror and despair,
Oh say, what change on earth, what heart in man,
This blackest moment since the world began!
Ah mournful turn! the blissful earth, who late
At leisure on her axle rolled in state;
While thousand golden planets knew not rest,
Still onward in their circling journey pressed;
A grateful change of Seasons some to bring,
And sweet vicissitude of Fall and Spring:
Some through vast oceans to conduct the keel,
And some those watery worlds to sink, or swell.
Around her some their splendors to display,
And gild her globe with tributary day;
This world so great, of joy the bright abode,
Heaven's darling child, and favorite of her GOD,
Now looks an exile from her father's care,
Delivered over to darkness and despair.
No Sun in radiant glory shines on high;
No light, but from the terrors of the sky:
Fallen are her mountains, her famed rivers lost,
And all into a second chaos tossed:
One universal ruin spreads abroad;
Nothing is safe beneath the throne of GOD,
Such, earth, thy fate: what then can thou afford
To comfort, and support thy guilty lord?
Man, haughty lord of all beneath the moon,
How must he bend his Soul's ambition down?
Prostrate the reptile own, and disavow
His boasted stature, and assuming brow?
Claim kindred with the clay, and curse his form,
That speaks distinction from his sister worm?
What dreadful pangs the trembling heart invade?
LORD, why do thou forsake, whom thou have made?
Who can sustain thy anger? who can stand
Beneath the terrors of thy lifted hand?
It flies the reach of thought; oh save me, power
Of powers supreme, in that tremendous hour!
Thou, who beneath the frown of fate have stood,
And in thy dreadful agony sweat blood;
Thou, who for me through every throbbing vein
Have felt the keenest edge of mortal pain;
Whom death led captive through the realms below,
And taught those horrid mysteries of woe;
Defend me, O my GOD! oh save me, power
Of power's supreme, in that tremendous hour!
From east to west they fly, from pole to line,
Imploring shelter from the wrath divine;
Beg flames to wrap, or whelming Seas to sweep,
Or rocks to yawn compassionately deep:
Seas cast the monster forth to meet his doom,
And rocks but prison up for wrath to come.
So fares a traitor to an earthly crown:
While death sits threatening in his prince's frown,
His heart's dismayed; and now his fears command
To change his native for a distant land:
Swift orders fly, the King's severe decree
Stands in the channel, and locks up the Sea;
The port he seeks, obedient to her Lord,
Hurls back the rebel to his lifted Sword.
But why this idle toil to paint that DAY?
This time elaborately thrown away?
Words all in vain pant after the distress;
The height of eloquence would make it less:
Heavens! how the good man trembles --
And is there a LAST DAY? and must there come
A sure, a fixed, inexorable doom?
Ambition swell, and, thy proud Sails to show,
Take all the winds that vanity can blow:
Wealth, on a golden mountain blazing stand,
And reach an India forth in either hand;
Spread all thy purple clusters, tempting vine:
And thou, more dreaded foe, bright beauty, shine;
Shine all; in all your charms together rise;
That all, in all your charms, I may despise,
While I mount upward on a strong desire,
Borne, like Elijah, in a car of fire.
In hopes of glory to be quite involved!
To smile at death! to long to be dissolved!
From our decays a pleasure to receive!
And kindle into transport at a grave!
What equals this? and shall the victor now
Boast the proud laurels on his loaded brow?
Religion! oh thou cherub, heavenly bright?
Oh joys unmixed, and fathomless delight!
Thou, thou art all; nor find I in the whole
Creation aught, but God and my own Soul.
For ever then, my Soul, thy God adore,
Nor let the brute creation praise him more.
Shall things inanimate my conduct blame,
And flush my conscious cheek with spreading shame?
They all for him pursue, or quit their end;
The mounting flames their burning power suspend;
In solid heaps the unfrozen billows stand,
To rest and silence awed by his command:
Nay, the dire monsters that infest the flood,
By nature dreadful, and a thirst for blood,
His will can calm, their savage tempers bind,
And turn to mild protectors of mankind.
Did not the prophet this great truth maintain
In the deep chambers of the gloomy main;
When darkness round him all her horrors spread,
And the loud ocean bellowed over his head?
When now the thunder roars, the lightning flies,
And all the warring winds tumultuous rise;
When now the foaming surges tossed on high,
Disclose the Sands beneath, and touch the sky;
When death draws near, the mariners aghast
Look back with terror on their actions past;
Their courage sickens into deep dismay,
Their hearts through fear and anguish melt away;
Nor tears, nor prayers, the tempests can appease;
Now they devote their treasure to the Seas;
Unload their shattered barque, though richly fraught,
And think the hopes of life are cheaply bought
With gems and gold; but oh, the storm so high!
Nor gems nor gold the hopes of life can buy.
The trembling prophet then, themselves to save,
They headlong plunge into the briny wave;
Down he descends, and booming over his head
The billows close; he is numbered with the dead.
(Hear, O ye just! attend ye virtuous few!
And the bright paths of piety pursue.)
Lo! the great Ruler of the world from high
Looks smiling down with a propitious eye,
Covers his Servant with his gracious hand,
And bids tempestous nature silent stand;
Commands the peaceful waters to give place,
Or kindly fold him in a soft embrace:
He bridles in the monsters of the deep,
The bridled monsters awful distance keep;
Forget their hunger, while they view their prey;
And guiltless gaze, and round the stranger play.
But still arise new wonders; nature's Lord
Sends forth into the deep his powerful word,
And calls the great Leviathan: the great
Leviathan attends in all his state;
Exults for joy, and with a mighty bound
Makes the Sea shake, and Heaven and earth resound;
Blackens the waters with the rising Sand,
And drives vast billows to the distant land.
As yawns an earthquake, when imprisoned air
Struggles for vent, and lays the center bare,
The whale expands his jaws enormous size:
The prophet views the cavern with surprise;
Measures his monstrous teeth afar descried,
And rolls his wondering eyes from side to side:
Then takes possession of this spacious seat,
And sails secure within the dark retreat.
Now is he pleased the northern blasts to hear,
And hangs on liquid mountains void of fear;
Or falls immerss'd into the deeps below,
Where the dead silent waters never flow;
To the foundations of the hills conveyed,
Dwells in the shelving mountains dreadful shade:
Where plummet never reached, he draws his breath,
And glides serenely through the paths of death.
Two wondrous days and nights through coral groves,
Through labyrinths of rocks and sands he roves:
When the third morning with its level rays
The mountains gilds, and on the billows plays,
It sees the king of waters rise, and pour
His sacred guest uninjured on the shore:
A type of that great blessing which the muse
In her next labor ardently pursues.
THE LAST DAY. BOOK II.
-- We hope that the departed will rise again from the dust:
After which, like the Gods, they will be immortal.
PHOCYLIDES.
NOW man awakes, and from his silent bed,
Where he has slept for ages, lifts his head;
Shakes off the slumber of ten thousand years,
And on the borders of new worlds appears.
Whatever the bold, the rash adventure cost,
In wide eternity I dare be lost.
The muse is wont in narrow bounds to sing,
To teach the Swain, or celebrate the King;
I grasp the whole, no more to parts confined;
I lift my voice, and sing to human-kind:
I sing to men an angels; angels join,
While such the theme, their sacred Songs with mine.
Again the trumpet's intermitted Sound
Rolls the wide circuit of creation round,
An universal concourse to prepare
Of all that ever breathed the vital air;
In some wide field, which active whirlwinds sweep,
Drive cities, forests, mountains to the deep,
To smoothe and lengthen out the unbounded Space,
And spread an area for all human race.
Now monuments prove faithful to their trust,
And render back their long committed dust.
Now charnels rattle; scattered limbs, and all
The various bones, obsequious to the call,
Self-mov'd advance; the neck perhaps to meet
The distant head, the distant legs the feet.
Dreadful to view, see through the dusky sky
Fragments of bodies in confusion fly,
To distant regions journeying, there to claim
Deserted members, and complete the frame.
When the world bowed to Rome's almighty Sword,
Rome bowed to Pompey, and confessed her lord,
Yet one day lost, this deity below
Became the Scorn and pity of his foe.
His blood a traitor's sacrifice was made,
And smoked indignant on a ruffian's blade.
No trumpet's Sound, no gasping army's yell,
Bid with due horror his great Soul farewell.
Obscure his fall! all welt'ring in his gore,
His trunk was cast to perish on the shore!
While Julius frowned the bloody monster dead,
Who brought the world in his great rival's head.
This severed head and trunk shall join once more,
Though realms now rise between, and oceans roar.
The trumpet's Sound each vagrant mote shall hear;
Or fixed in earth, or if a-float in air,
Obey the signal wafted in the wind,
And not one sleeping atom lag behind.
So swarming beer, that on a Summer's day
In airy rings, and wild meanders play,
Charmed with the brazen Sound, their wandering end,
And gently circling on a bough descend.
The body thus renewed, the conscious Soul,
Which has perhaps been fluttering near the pole,
Or 'midst the burning planets wondering strayed,
Or hovered over where her pale corpse was laid;
Or rather coasted on her final state,
And feared, or wished for her appointed fate:
This Soul returning with a constant flame,
Now weds for ever her immortal frame.
Life, which ran down before, so high is wound,
The Springs maintain an everlasting round.
Thus a frail model of the work designed
First takes a copy of the builder's mind,
Before the structure firm with lasting oak,
And marble bowels of the solid rock,
Turns the strong arch, and bids the columns rise,
And bear the lofty palace to the skies;
The wrongs of time enabled to surpass,
With bars of adamant, and ribs of brass.
That ancient, sacred, and illustrious Westminster-Abbey.
dome,
Where soon or late fair Albion's heroes come,
From camps, and courts, though great, or wise, or just,
To feed the worm, and moulder into dust;
That solemn mansion of the royal dead,
Where passing slaves over sleeping monarchs tread,
Now populous overflows: a numerous race
Of rising kings fills all the extended Space:
A life well spent, not the victorious Sword,
Awards the crown, and styles the greater lord.
Nor monuments alone, and burial-earth,
Labors with man to this his second birth;
But where gay palaces in pomp arise,
And gilded theaters invade the skies,
Nations shall wake, whose unrespected bones
Support the pride of their luxurious Sons.
The most magnificent and costly dome,
Is but an upper chamber to a tomb.
No Spot on earth, but has supplied a grave,
And human skulls the spacious ocean pave.
All Is full of man, and at this dreadful turn,
The Swarm shall issue, and the hive shall burn.
Not all at once, nor in like manner rise:
Some lift with pain their slow unwilling eyes;
Shrink backward from the terror of the light,
And bless the grave, and call for lasting night.
Others, whose long-attempted virtue stood
Fixed as a rock, and broke the rushing flood,
Whose firm resolve, nor beauty could melt down,
Nor raging tyrants from their posture frown;
Such in this day of horrors shall be seen,
To face the thunder with a godlike mein;
The planets drop, their thoughts are fixed above;
The center shakes, their hearts disdain to move:
An earth dissolving, and a Heaven thrown wide,
A yawning gulf, and fiends on every side,
Serene they view, impatient of delay,
And bless the dawn of everlasting day.
Here, greatness prostrate falls, there strength gives place;
Here Lazars smile; there, Beauty hides her face.
Christians, and Jews, and Turks, and Pagans stand,
A blended throng, one undistinguished band.
Some who perhaps by mutual wounds expired,
With (...) for (...) distinct persuasions fired,
In mutual friendship, their long slumber break,
And hand in hand their Savior's love partake.
But none are flushed with brighter joy, or warm
With juster confidence enjoy the storm,
Than those, whose pious bounties unconfined
Have made them public fathers of mankind.
In that illustrious rank, what shining light
With such distinguished glory fills my sight?
Bend down my greatful muse; that homage show,
Which to such worthies thou art proud to owe.
Wickham! Fox! Chickley! hail, illustrious Founders of New-College, Corpus
Christi, and All Souls in Oxford, of all which the Author was was a member.
names,
Who to far-distant times dispense your beams;
Beneath your shades, and near your crystal springs,
I first presumed to touch the trembling strings.
All hail, thrice-honour'd! 'twas your great renown
To bless a people, and oblige a crown.
And now you rise eternally to shine,
Eternally to drink the rays divine.
Indulgent GOD! oh how shall mortal raise
His soul to due returns of grateful praise,
For bounty so profuse to human kind,
Thy wondrous gift of an eternal mind?
Shall I, who some few years ago was less
Than worm, or mite or shadow can express,
Was nothing; shall I live, when every fire,
And every star shall languish or expire?
When earth's no more, shall I survive above,
And through the radiant files of angels move?
Or, as before the throne of GOD I stand,
See new worlds rolling from his spacious hand,
Where our adventures shall perhaps be taught,
As we now tell how MICHAEL sung o^ fought?
All that has being in full concert join,
And celebrate the depths of love divine!
But oh! before this blissful state, before
The aspiring soul this wondrous height can soar,
The Judge, descending, thunders from afar,
And all mankind is summoned to the bar.
This mighty scene I next presume to draw:
Attend great Anna, with religious awe.
Expect not here the known successful arts
To win attention, and command our hearts:
Fiction be far away, let no machine
Descending here, no fabled god be seen;
Behold the GOD of gods indeed descend,
And worlds unnumber'd his approach attend.
Lo! the wide theater, whose ample space
Must entertain the whole of human race,
At Heaven's all-pow'rful edict is prepared,
And fenced around with an immortal guard.
Tribes, provinces, dominions, worlds overflow
The mighty plain and deluge all below:
And every age, and nation pours along:
Nimrod and Bourbon mingle in the throng:
Adam salutes his youngest son; no sign
Of all those ages, which their births disjoin.
How empty learning, and how vain is art,
But as it mends the life, and guides the heart!
What volumes have been swelled, what time been spent,
To fix a hero's birthday, or descent?
What joy must it now yield, what raptures raise,
To see the glorious race of ancient days?
To greet those worthies, who perhaps have stood
Illustrious on record before the flood?
Alas! a nearer care your soul demands,
Caesar un-noted in your presence stands.
How vast the concourse! not in number more
The waves that break on the resounding shore,
The leaves that tremble in the shady grove,
The lamps that gild the spangled vaults above.
Those overwhelming armies, whose command
Said to one empire, fall; another, stand:
Whose rear lay wrapped in night, while breaking dawn
Roused the broad front, and called the battle on:
Great XERXES' world in arms, proud Cannae's field,
Where Carthage taught victorious Rome to yield;
(Another blow had broke the fates' decree,
And earth had wanted her fourth monarchy.)
Immortal Blenheim, famed Ramillia's host,
They all are here, and here they all are lost:
Their millions swell to be discerned in vain,
Lost as a billow in the unbounded main.
This echoing voice now rends the yielding air,
For judgment, judgment, sons of men prepare!
Earth shakes anew, I hear her groans profound,
And hell through all her trembling realms resound.
Whoever thou art, thou greatest power of earth,
Blessed with most equal planets at thy birth;
Whose valor drew the most successful sword,
Most realms united in one common lord;
Who on the day of triumph said, be thine
The skies, JEHOVAH, all this world is mine:
Dare not to lift thine eyes. -- Alas! my muse,
How art thou lost! what numbers can thou choose?
A sudden blush inflames the waving sky,
And now the crimson curtains open fly;
Lo! far within, and far above all height,
Where heaven's great Sovereign reigns in worlds of light,
Whence nature he informs, and with one ray
Shot from his eye, does all her works survey,
Creates, supports, confounds! where time and place,
Matter and form, and fortune, life and grace,
Wait humbly at the footstool of their GOD,
And move obedient at his aweful nod;
Whence he beholds us, vagrant emmets, crawl
At random on this air suspended ball,
(Speck of creation) if he pour one breath,
The bubble breaks, and it is eternal death.
Thence issuing I behold (but mortal sight
Sustains not such a rushing Sea of light!)
I see, on an empyreal flying throne
Sublimely raised, heaven's everlasting SON;
Crowned with that majesty which formed the world,
And the grand rebel flaming downward hurled.
Virtue, dominion, praise, omnipotence,
Support the train of their triumphant prince.
A zone, beyond the thought of angels bright,
Around him like the zodiac, winds its light.
Night shades the solemn arches of his brows,
And in his cheek the purple morning glows.
Wherever serene he turns propitious eyes,
Or we expect, or find a paradise;
But if resentment reddens their mild beams,
The Eden kindles, and the world's in flames.
On one hand knowledge shines in purest light,
On one the Sword of justice fiercely bright.
Now bend the knee in Sport, present the reed,
Now tell the scourged impostor he shall bleed!
Thus glorious through the courts of heaven, the source
Of life and death eternal, bends his course;
Loud thunders round him roll, and lightenings play,
The angelic host is ranged in bright array:
Some touch the string, some strike the sounding shell,
And mingling voices in rich concert swell;
Voices seraphic, blessed with such a strain,
Could Satan hear, he were a god again.
Triumphant King of glory! Soul of bliss!
What a stupendous turn of fate is this?
Oh! whither art thou raised above the Scorn
And indigence of him in Bethlem born,
A needy, helpless, unaccounted guest,
And but a Second to the fother'd beast?
How changed from him, who meekly prostrate laid,
Vouchsafed to wash the feet himself had made?
From him who was betrayed, forsook, denied,
Wept, languish'd, prayed, bled, thirsted, groaned and died;
Hung pierced and bare, insulted by the foe,
All heaven in tears above, earth unconcerned below.
And was it enough to bid the Sun retire?
Why did not nature at thy groan expire?
I see, I hear, I feel the pangs divine,
The world is vanished -- I am wholly thine.
Mistaken Caiaphas! ah! which blasphemed,
Thou or thy prisoner? which shall be condemned?
Well might thou rend thy garments, well exclaim;
Deep are the horrors of eternal flame!
But God is good! it is wondrous all! even he
Thou gav'st to death, shame, torture, died for thee.
Now the descending triumph stops its flight
From earth full twice a planetary height
There all the clouds, condensed, two columns raise,
Distinct with orient veins and golden blaze.
One fixed on earth, and one on Sea, and round
Its ample foot the swelling billows sound.
These an unmeasurable arch support,
The grand tribunal of this awful court.
Sheets of bright azure, from the purest sky,
Stream from the crystal arch, and round the columns fly.
Death wrapped in chains low at the basis lies,
And on the point of his own arrow dies.
Here high enthroned the eternal Judge is placed,
With all the grandeur of his godhead graced;
Stars on his robes in beauteous order meet,
And the Sun burns beneath his awful feet.
Now an archangel, eminently bright,
From off his silver staff of wondrous height,
Unfurls the christian flag, which waving flies,
And shuts and opens more than half the skies:
The cross so strong a red, it sheds a stain,
Wherever it floats, on earth, and air, and main;
Flushes the hill. and sets on fire the wood,
And turns the deep-dy'd ocean into blood.
Oh formidable glory! dreadful bright!
Refulgent torture to the guilty sight.
Ah turn, unwary muse, nor dare reveal
What horrid thoughts with the polluted dwell.
Say not, (to make the Sun shrink in his beam)
Dare not affirm, they wish it all a dream;
Wish, or their Souls may with their limbs decay,
Or GOD be spoiled of his eternal Sway.
But rather, if thou know the means, unfold
How they with transport might the Scene behold.
Ah how! but by repentance, by a mind
Quick and severe its own offense to find?
By tears, and groans, and never-ceasing care,
And all the pious violence of prayer?
Thus then, with fervency till now unknown,
I cast my heart before the eternal throne,
In this great temple, which the skies surround,
For homage to its Lord a narrow bound.
" O thou! whose balance does the mountains weigh,
" Whose will the wild tumultuous Seas obey,
" Whose breath can turn those watery worlds to flame,
" That flame to tempest, and that tempest tame;
" Earth's meanest Son, all trembling, prostrate falls,
" And on the boundless of thy goodness calls.
" Ah! give the winds all past offense to sweep,
" To scatter wide, or bury in the deep:
" Thy power, my weakness, may I ever see,
" And wholly dedicate my Soul to thee.
" Reign over my will; my passions ebb and flow
" At thy command, nor human motive know!
" If anger boil, let anger be my praise,
" And sin the graceful indignation raise.
" My love be warm to succor the distressed,
" And lift the burden from the Soul oppressed.
" Oh may my understanding ever read
" This glorious volume, which thy wisdom made!
" Who decks the maiden Spring with flowery pride?
" Who calls forth Summer like a sparkling bride?
" Who joys the mother autumn's bed to crown?
" And bids old winter lay her honors down?
" Not the great Ottoman, or greater Czar,
" Not Europe's arbitress of peace and war:
" May sea and land, and earth and heaven be joined,
" To bring the eternal author to my mind!
" When oceans roar, or aweful thunders roll,
" May thoughts of thy dread vengeance shake my soul;
" When earth's in bloom, or planets proudly shine,
" Adore my heart, the Majesty divine.
" Through every Scene of life, or peace, or war,
" Plenty, or want, thy glory be my care!
" Shine we in arms? or sing beneath our vine?
" Thine is the vintage, and the conquest thine:
" Thy pleasure points the shaft, and bends the bow;
" The cluster blasts, or bids it brightly glow;
" It Is thou that lead'st our powerful armies forth,
" And gives great Anne thy scepter over the north.
" Grant I may ever, at the morning ray,
" Open with prayer the consecrated day;
" Tune thy great praise, and bid my Soul arise,
" And with the mounting Sun, ascend the skies;
" As that advances, let my zeal improve,
" And glow with ardor of consummate love;
" Nor cease at eve, but with the setting sun
" My endless worship shall be still begun.
" And oh! permit the gloom of solemn night
" To sacred thought may forcibly invite,
" When this world's shut, and aweful planets rise,
" Call on our minds, and raise them to the skies;
" Compose our souls with a less dazzling sight,
" And show all nature in a milder light;
" How every boisterous thought in calm subsides!
" How the smooth spirit into goodness glides!
" O how divine to tread the milky way,
" To the bright palace of the LORD of day;
" His court admire, or for his favor sue,
" Or leagues of friendship with his saints renew;
" Pleased to look down, and see the world asleep,
" While I long vigils to its founder keep.
" Can thou not shake the center? oh control,
" Subdue by force the rebel in my soul:
" Thou who can still the raging of the flood,
" Restrain the various tumults of my blood;
" Teach me with equal firmness to sustain
" Alluring pleasure and assaulting pain.
" O may I pant for thee in each desire!
" And with strong faith foment the holy fire!
" Stretch out my soul in hope, and grasp the prize,
" Which in eternity's deep bosom lies!
" At the great day of recompense behold,
" Devoid of fear, the fatal book unfold!
" Then, wafted upward to the blissful seat,
" From age to age my grateful song repeat;
" My light, my life, my GOD, my Savior see,
" And rival angels in the praise of thee."
THE LAST DAY. BOOK III.
Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regai coeli
Ardeat, et mundi moles operosa laboret.
OVID. MET.
He remembers, that it was in the decrees of the fates, that a time should
come, when the sea, the land, and the Palace of Heaven, seized by the flames,
should be on fire, and the unwieldly mass of the world be totally consumed.
THE book unfolding, the resplendent Seat
Of Saints and Angels, the tremendous fate
Of guilty Souls, the gloomy realms of woe,
And all the horrors of the world below,
I next presume to sing: what yet remains
Demands my last, but most exalted strains.
And let the muse or now affect the sky,
Or in inglorious shades for ever ly.
She kindles, she is inflamed so near the goal;
She mounts, she gains upon the starry pole;
The world grows less as she pursues her flight,
And the Sun darkens to her distant sight.
Heaven opening all its sacred pomp, displays,
and overwhelms her with the rushing blaze!
The triumph rings! archangels shout around!
And echoing nature lengthens out the sound!
Ten thousand trumpets now at once advance;
Now deepest silence lulls the vast expanse;
So deep the silence and so strong the blast,
As nature died, when she had groaned her last,
Nor man nor angel moves; the Judge on high
Looks round, and with his glory fills the sky:
Then on the fatal book his hand he lays,
Which high to view supporting Seraphs raise;
In solemn form the rituals are prepared,
The Seal is broken, and a groan is heard.
And thou, my Soul, (oh fall to sudden prayer,
And let the thought sink deep!) shall thou be there?
See on the left, (for by the great command
The throng divided falls on either hand)
How weak how pale how haggard, how obscene!
What more than death in every face and mein!
With what distress, and glarings of affright,
They shock the heart, and turn away the sight!
In gloomy orbs their trembling eye balls roll,
And tell the horrid Secrets of the Soul.
Each gesture mourns, each look is black with care,
And every groan is laden with despair.
Reader, if guilty, spare the muse, and find
A truer image pictured in thy mind.
Shoulst thou behold thy brother, father, wife,
And all the soft companions of thy life,
Whose blended interests levelled at one aim,
Whose mixed desires sent up one common flame,
Divided far; thy wretched Self alone
Cast on the left, of all whom thou have known;
How would it wound? what millions would thou give
For one more trial, one day more to live?
Flung back in time an hour, a moment's Space,
To grasp with eagerness the means of grace;
Contend for mercy with a pious rage,
And in that moment to redeem an age?
Drive back the tide, suspend a storm in air,
Arrest the Sun; but still of this despair.
Mark, on the right, how amiable a grace!
Their Maker's image fresh in every face!
What purple bloom my ravished Soul admires,
And their eyes sparkling with immortal fires!
Triumphant beauty! charms that rise above
This world, and in blessed angels kindle love!
To the great Judge with holy pride they turn,
And dare behold the Almighty's anger burn;
Its flash sustain, against its terror rise,
And on the dread tribunal fix their eyes.
Are these the forms that moulder'd in the dust?
Oh the transcendent glory of the just!
Yet still some thin remains of fear and doubt
The infected brightness of their joy pollute.
Thus the chaste bridegroom, when the priest draws nigh,
Beholds his blessing with a trembling eye;
Feels doubtful passions throb in every vein;
And in his cheeks are mingled joy and pain;
Lest still some intervening chance should rise,
Leap forth at once, and snatch the golden prize,
Inflame his woe by bringing it so late,
And stab him in the crisis of his fate.
Since Adam's family from first to last,
Now into one distinct survey is cast,
Look round, vainglorious muse, and you whoever
Devote yourselves to fame, and think her fair,
Look round, and seek the lights of human race,
Whose shining acts time's brightest annals grace;
Who founded sects, crowns conquered, or resigned,
Gave names to nations, or famed empires joined;
Who raised the vale, and laid the mountain low,
And taught obedient rivers where to flow;
Who with vast fleets, as with a mighty chain,
Could bind the madness of the roaring main;
All lost! all undistinguished! no where found!
How will this truth in Bourbon's palace sound?
That hour, on which the Almighty King on high
From all eternity has fixed his eye,
Whether his right hand favored or annoyed,
Continued, altered, threatened, or destroyed,
Southern or eastern scepter downward hurled,
Gave north or west dominion over the world;
The point of time for which the world was built.
For which the blood of God himself was spilt,
That dreadful moment is arrived.
Aloft the seats of bliss their pomp display,
Brighter than brightness, this distinguished day;
Less glorious, when of old the eternal Son
From realms of night returned with trophies won;
Through heaven's high gates when he triumphant rode,
And shouting angels hailed the victor GOD.
Horrors beneath, darkness in darkness, hell
Of hell, where torments behind torments dwell;
A furnace formidable, deep and wide,
O'erboiling with a mad sulphurous tide,
Expands its jaws, most dreadful to survey,
And roars outrageous for the destined prey.
The Sons of light scarce unappall'd look down,
And nearer press Heaven's everlasting throne.
Such is the Scene, and one short moment's space
Concludes the hopes and fears of human race.
Proceed who dares -- I tremble as I write;
The whole creation swims before my sight;
I see, I see the Judge's frowning brow:
Say not it is distant, I behold it now;
I faint, my tardy blood forgets to flow,
My Soul recoils at the stupendous woe;
That woe, those pangs, which from the guilty breast,
In these, or words like these, shall be expressed.
" Who burst the barriers of my peaceful grave?
" Ah! cruel death that would no longer save,
" But grudged me even that narrow dark abode,
" And cast me out into the wrath of GOD;
" Where shrieks, the roaring flame, the rattling chain,
" And all the dreadful eloquence of pain,
" Our only song; black fire's malignant light,
" The sole refreshment of the blasted sight.
" Must all those powers Heaven gave me to supply
" My Soul with pleasure, and bring in my joy,
" Rise up in arms against me, join the foe,
" Sense, reason, memory, increase my woe?
" And shall my voice, ordained on hymns to dwell,
" Corrupt to groans, and blow the fires of hell?
" Oh! must I look with terror on my gain,
" And with existence only measure pain!
" What! no reprieve, no least indulgence given,
" No beam of hope from any point of Heaven!
" Ah! mercy! mercy! art thou dead above?
" Is love extinguished in the source of love?
" Bold that I am, did Heaven stoop down to hell?
" The expiring Lord of life my ransom seal?
" Have I not been industrious to provoke;
" From his embraces obstinately broke;
" Pursued and panted for his mortal hate;
" Earned my destruction, labored out my fate?
" And dare I on extinguished love exclaim?
" Take, take full vengeance, rouse the slack'ning flame;
" Just is my lot -- But, oh! must it transcend
" The reach of time, despair a distant end?
" With dreadful growth shoot forward, and arise
" Where thought cannot follow, and bold fancy dies!
" Never! where falls the soul at that dread sound?
" Down an abyss how dark? and how profound?
" Down, down (I still am falling, horrid pain!)
" Ten thousand thousand fathoms still remain:
" My plunge but still begun -- And this for sin?
" Could I offend, if I had never been,
" But still increased the senseless happy mass,
" Flowed in the stream, or flourished in the grass?
" Father of mercies! why from silent earth
" Did thou awake, and curse me into birth?
" Tear me from quiet, ravish me from night,
" And make a thankless present of thy light?
" Push into being a reverse of thee,
" And animate a clod with misery?
" The beasts are happy, they come forth and keep
" Short watch on earth, and then ly down to sleep.
" Pain is for man; and oh! how vast a pain
" For crimes which made the Godhead bleed in vain?
" Annulled his groans, as far as in them lay,
" And flung his agonies and death away?
" As our dire punishment for ever strong,
" Our constitution too for ever young,
" Cursed with returns of vigor still the same,
" Powerful to bear, and satisfy the flame;
" Still to be caught, and still to be pursued!
" To perish still, and still to be renewed?
" And this, my help! my God! at thy decree!
" Nature is changed, and hell should succor me.
" And can thou then look down from perfect bliss,
" And see me plunging in the dark abyss,
" Calling thee father in a sea of fire,
" Or pouring blasphemies at thy desire!
" With mortals anguish will thou raise thy name,
" And by my pangs Omnipotence proclaim?
" Thou who can toss the planets to and fro,
" Contract not thy great vengeance to my woe:
" Crush worlds; in hotter flames fallen angels lay;
" On me almighty wrath is cast away.
" Call back thy thunders, Lord, hold in thy rage,
" Nor with a speck of wretchedness engage:
" Forget me quite, nor stoop a worm to blame,
" But lose me in the greatness of thy name.
" Thou art all love, all mercy, all divine,
" And shall I make those glories cease to shine?
" Shall sinful man grow great by his offense,
" And from its course turn back Omnipotence?
" Forbid it! and oh! grant, great GOD, at least
" This one, this slender, almost no request;
" When I have wept a thousand lives away,
" When torment is grown weary of its prey,
" When I have raved ten thousand years in fire,
" Ten thousand thousands, let me then expire."
Deep anguish! but too late; the hopeless Soul^
Bound to the bottom of the burning pool,
Though loath, and ever loud blaspheming owns
He Is justly doomed to pour eternal groans;
Enclosed with horrors, and transfixed with pain,
Rolling in vengeance, struggling with his chain;
To talk to fiery tempests, to implore
The raging flame to give its burnings over,
To toss, to writhe, to pant beneath his load,
And bear the weight of an offended GOD.
The favored of their Judge in triumph move
To take possession of their thrones above;
Satan's accursed desertion to supply,
And fill the vacant stations of the sky;
Again to kindle long-extinguish'd rays,
And with new lights dilate the heavenly blaze;
To crop the roses of immortal youth,
And drink the fountainhead of sacred truth;
To swim in seas of bliss, to strike the string,
And lift the voice to their Almighty KING;
To lose eternity in grateful lays,
And fill Heaven's wide circumference with praise.
But I attempt the wondrous height in vain,
And leave unfinished the too lofty strain:
What boldly I begin, let others end;
My strength exhausted, fainting I descend,
And choose a less, but no ignoble theme,
Dissolving elements, and worlds in flame.
The fatal period, the great hour is come,
And nature shrinks at her approaching doom;
L^ud peals of thunder give the sign, and all
Heaven's terrors in array surround the ball;
Sharp lightnings with the meteors blaze conspire,
And darted downward set the world on fire;
Black rising clouds the thickened ether choke,
And spiry flames shoot through the rolling Smoke,
With keen vibrations cut the sullen night,
And strike the darkened sky with dreadful light;
From Heaven's four regions, with immortal force,
Angels drive on the winds impetuous course,
TO enrage the flame; it spreads, it soars on high,
Swells in the storm, and billows through the sky.
Here winding pyramids of fire ascend,
Cities and deserts in one ruin blend;
Here blazing volumes wafted overwhelm
The spacious face of a far distant realm:
There, undermined, down rush eternal hills,
The neighboring vales the vast destruction fills.
Hear'st thou that dreadful crack, that sound which
Like peals of thunder, and the center shook [broke
What wonders must that groan of nature tell!
Olympus there, and mightier Atlas fell,
Which seemed above the reach of sat to stand,
A towering monument of GOD's right hand;
Now dust and Smoke, whose brow so lately spread
Over sheltered countries its diffusive shade.
Show me that celebrated Spot, where all
The various rulers of the severed ball
Have humbly sought wealth, honor, and redress,
That land which Heaven seemed diligent to bless,
Once called Britannia; can her glories end?
And cannot surrounding Seas her realms defend?
Alas, in flames behold surrounding Seas!
Like oil their waters but augment the blaze.
Some angels say, where ran proud Asia's bound.
Or where with fruits was fair Europe crowned?
Where stretched waste Lybia? where did India's store
Sparkle in diamonds, and her golden ore?
Each lost in each, their mingling kingdoms glow,
And all dissolved, one fiery deluge flow:
Thus earth's contending monarchies are joined,
And a full period of ambition find.
And now whatever or swims, or walks, or files,
Inhabitants of Sea, or earth, or skies;
All on whom Adam's wisdom fixed a name,
All plunge and perish in the conquering flame.
This globe alone would but defraud the fire,
Starve its devouring rage: the flakes aspire,
And catch the clouds, and make the heavens their prey;
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars all melt away,
All, all is lost; no monument, no sign,
Where once so proudly blazed the gay machine.
So bubbles on the foaming stream expire,
So sparks that scatter from the kindling fire;
The devastations of one dreadful hour,
The great Creator's six days work devour.
A mighty mighty ruin! yet one soul
Has more to boast, and far outweighs the whole;
Exalted in superior excellence,
Casts down to nothing such a vast expense.
Have ye not seen the eternal mountains nod,
An earth dissolving, a descending GOD?
What strange surprises through all nature ran?
For whom these revolutions, but for man?
For him Omnipotence new measures takes;
For him through all eternity awakes;
Pours on him gifts sufficient to supply
Heaven's loss, and with fresh glories fill the sky.
Think deeply then, O man, how great thou art,
Pay thyself homage with a trembling heart;
What angels guard, no longer dare neglect,
Slighting thyself, affront not GOD's respect:
Enter the sacred temple of thy breast,
And gaze, and wander there a ravished guest:
Gaze on those hidden treasures thou shall find,
Wander through all the glories of thy mind.
Of prefect knowledge, see, the dawning light
Foretells a noon most exquisitely bright!
Here springs of endless joy are breaking forth!
There buds the promise of celestial worth!
Worth which must ripen in a happier clime
And brighter sun, beyond the bounds of time.
Thou, minor, can not guess thy vast estate,
What stores on foreign coasts thy landing wait.
Lose not thy claim, let virtue's paths be trod;
Thus glad all heaven, and please that bounteous GOD;
Who, to light thee to pleasures, hung on high
Yon radiant orb, proud regent of the sky:
That service done, its beams shall fade away,
And GOD shine forth in one eternal day.
FINIS.
The GENTLEMEN, of the AMERICAN ARMY, who intend to excel in the Art Military:
Are informed, that the following Military Works, with the Lives of several
Famous Military Men, may be had at ROBERT BELLS's Book-Store, next Door to St.
Paul's Church in Third-street, Philadelphia.
VIZ.
1 GENERAL Manstein's Military Memoirs of Russia 2 Military History of Eugene
and Marlborough, 4 vols. 3 Military History of Marlborough, from 1708 to 1715.
4 Voltaire's History of the War, begun in 1741. 5 Burke's History of the War,
begun in 1755, 2 vols. 6 History of the Scottish Rebellion, in 1745 and 1746. 7
Vertot's History of Gustavus of Sweden. 8 History of Lewis the 11th. of France.
9 -- Of Lewis the 13th. 10 -- Of Lewis the 14th. 3 vols. 11 Life of Peter the
Great. 12 Life of Charles the 12th. 13 History of the Wars of Flanders. 14
Rollin's History of the Art Military of the Ancients, 4 vols. 15 Xenophon's
History of the Wars of the Greeks. 16 Caesar's History of the Wars of the
Gauls, and of the Roman Civi. Wars. 17 Quintus Curtius's Wars of Alexander 18
(...) Agricula, by Tacitus and Gordon 19 Wars of (...), during the Reigns of
Francis the First of France, and Charles the Fifth of Germany, by Robertson, 2
vols. 20 Wars between the English and Irish, by Leland, 4 vols 21 Robertson on
Fortification, 2 vols 22 Martin on Fortification and Gunnery 23 Ewing on
Gunnery. 24 Wars of the Jews, by Josephus, 4 vols. 25 Discourse Politiques et
Militaires 26 L' Art La Guerre de Macchiavel et Discourse sur la Decades de
Tite-Live 27 General Grandmaison on Light Horse and Infantry 28 The Art of War,
by three French Generals. 29 Clairac's Field Engineer. 30 General Howe's
Military Discipline. 31 Stevenson's Military Instructions. 32 Simes's Military
Guide for Officers, 2 vols. 33 The Works of Salust, with Political Discourses
upon that Author, by the celebrated Gordon, Author of the Independent Whig. 34
The Wars of Cataline and Jugurtha, by Salust 35 Nepos's Lives of the great
Commanders. 36 Life of Prince Eugene. 37 Life of the Duke of Marlborough. 38
Life of the present King of Prussia. 39 Fuller's History of the Holy Wars,
between the Christians and the Turks. 40 Plutarch's Lives of the Heroes of
Greece and Rome, by Langhorne, 6 vols.
At said BELL's may also be had: Great variety of new and old Books in the Arts
and Sciences; Likewise, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French and English Classics; With
History, Divinity, Law, Plays, Novels and Instructive Entertainment.
Among which are,
41 Chambers's Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, 2 vols. 42 Johnson's large
Dictionary of the English Language, 2 vols. 43 Chambaud's French and English
Dictionary. 44 Boyer's French and English Dictionary. 45 Stevens's Spanish and
English Dictionary. 46 Minsheu's Spanish and English Dictionary. 47 Veneroni's
Italian and French Dictionary. 48 Smollett's History of England, 4 vols. large
Quarto. 49 Rapin's History of England, 2 vols. 50 Macaulay's History of
England, 3 vols. 51 Milton's and Bacon's History of England, 3 vols. 52
Stackhouse's History of the Bible, 2 vols. 53 Poole's Annotations on the Bible,
2 vols. 54 Whitby on the New Testament, 2 vols. 55 Burkit on the New Testament.
56 Lock on St. Paul's Epistles. 57 Lock on Human Understanding. 58 The Pilot
for America and the West Indies. 59 The Pilot for the Coast of France. 60
Mansfield's Law Reports, by Burrows, 3 vols 61 Lord Raymond's Reports, 3 vols.
62 Jacob's Dictionary of the Law, 2 vols. 63 Wood's Institute of the Law. 64
Blackstone's Commentaries on the Law, 5 vols. 65 Justice of the Peace, by
various Authors. 66 Hedericus, Scapula, and Grant's Greek Lexicons. 67
Cambridge, Gouldman, Coals, and Young's Latin and English Dictionaries. 68
Bailey's, Dyche's, Martin's, and Brown's English Dictionaries. 69 The
Spectator, 8 vols. gilt. 70 Swift's Works, 15 vols. 71 Shakespeare's Works, 8
vols. 72 Addison's Works, 4 vols. 73 Sully's Memoirs, 5 vols. 74 Rollin's
Ancient History, 10 vols. 75 Nature Displayed, 7 vols. 76 Lord Chesterfield's
Letters, 4 vols. 77 Lives of Great Men by the British Plutarch. 12 vols. 78
Congreve's Works, 2 vols. 79 Garrick's Works, 3 vols. 80 Modern Miscellaneous
Plays, 2 vols. 81 The Beauties of Nature and Art Displayed, 14 vols. 82
Rollin's Belles Lettres, 4 vols. 83 Sterne's Works, 5 vols. 84 Hervey's Works,
6 vols. 85 Moliere's Works, (...) vols. 86 Don Quixote, 4 vols. 87 Gil Blas, 4
vols. 89 The World, by Adam Fitz-Adam, otherwise Lord Chesterfield and others,
6 vols.
CLASSICS GREEK, LATIN, AND ENGLISH.
90 Schrevelius's Lexicon, Greek and Latin. 91 Cole's Latin and English
Dictionary. 92 Young's Latin and English Dictionary. 93 Clarke's Homer, Greek
and Latin, 2 vols. 94 Pearce's Longinus, Greek and Latin. 95 Hutchinson's
Xenophon, Greek and Latin. 96 Kent's Dialogues of Lucian, Greek and Latin. 97
New Testament in Greek. 98 Davidson's Virgil, Latin, and English, 2 vols. 99
Watson's Horace, Latin and English, 2 vols. 100 Virgil, cum Notis in usum
Delphini. 101 Horace, cum Notis in usum Delphini. 102 Ovid Metamorphoseon, cum
Notis in usum Delphini. 103 Cicero Orationes, cum Notis in usum Delphini. 104
Justin, cum Notis in usum Delphini. 105 Salust, Latin and English, by Clarke.
106 Nepos, Latin and English, by Clarke. 107 Nepos, Latin and English, by
Arrol. 108 Ovid's Metamorphoses, Latin and English, by Clarke. 109 Ovid's
Epistles, cum Notis in usum Delphini. 110 Terentia Afria Comoediae Sex. 111
Colman's Terrence's Comedies, an elegant Edition, 2 vols. 112 Florus Delphini.
113 Florus, by Clarke. 114 Phoedrus, by Stirling. 115 Phaedrus Delphini. 116
Phoedrus, by Bailey. 117 Phoedrus, by Johnson. 118 Caesar's Commentaries, by
Mattaire. 119 Caesar's First Four Books, Latin and English, by Mair. 120
Erasmus, by Clarke. 121 Corderius, by Willymott. 122 Latin Testament, by
Castalio. 123 Latin Testament, by Beza. 124 Virgil, by Minellius. 125 Horace,
by Minellius. 126 Terence, by Minellius. 127 Tooke's Pantheon of the Heathen
Gods. 129 Boyse's New Pantheon.
N. B. Books for Books are given in Exchange, or Ready Money for Old Books, by
ROBERT BELL, at his Book Store, next Door to St Paul's Church, in Third-Street,
PHILADELPHIA.


