A First Book for CHILDREN.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and A B C D E F G H I J
K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
Y Z a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and

Note, When the above Alphabets are defaced, this leaf may be pasted upon the
cover, and that on the other side used.

By ANTHONY BENEZET.

Philadelphia: Printed and sold by J. Crukshank, in Market-street, between
Second and Third-streets. 1778.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and A B C D E F G H I J
K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z ct sh st ff si fi sl fl ssi ffi ffl sb sk
ba be by bo bu da de di do du fa fe fi fo fu ha he hi ho hu la le li lo lu ma
me mi mo mu na ne ni no nu pa pe pi po pu ra re ri to ru sa se si so su ta te
ti to tu wa we wi woe wu za ze zi zo zu ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id
od ud af of if of uf al el il ol ul am em im om um an en in on un ap ep ip op
up ar er ir or ur as es is os us at et it ot ut ax ex ix ox ux bla ble bli blo
blu bra bre bri bro bru cha che chi cho chu cla cle cli clo clu cra cre cri cro
cru dra dre dri dro dru fra fre fri fro fru gla gle gli glo glu Am an as at ax
If in is it do To by ty vy it Be he me we ye Go ho do so woe Of on or up ox I
am, he is, we go; An ax, an ox, to us; Ye do, it is, on us; I am up, we go in,
Go on it, be at it. Is it in? is it up? As we go up. Go by, As it is, as I am;
As we go, so ye do; Am I to go? so is he; Go up to it, go in. Is it an ax? It
is an ox? Is it of us? Is it on me? To us be no woe, so be it. Bag cag nag rag
bat cat hat rat ben den men pen bob mob rob sob Bar far tar war bed fed led red
big dig wig bit bog cog hog log but cut hut nut can fan man pan cry dry fry try
dew few new pew fan tan nan ran foe two roe toe inn pin sin win pay day say way
bet met set wet sod nod pod iod day hay may nay din pin tin win fop mop sop top
gun run sun tun leg beg keg peg put hut nut sup Act air ask all bad be boy toy
mat cat cow cup due die dim dog woe ear eel elm sky fly for fox had has hay way
hot hat hit how jar joy jet jug led lie lid lip nag net new nip old one own out
pap pig pin pay And ape ant are bid box bed but cur cry did dig she eat egg end
eye fat far fig gap gay God gun him his hot pot way was ill ink low lie leg let
mad may men mug not nor now nut pay pan pen peg ran son see sow (...) (...) See
for the boy Is he yet in bed? Bid him get up A pot and a mug; A fly in a jug.
And yet do no ill. You run all day, How far did he go? Was she yet up? The sky
is red. Pay the boy his due, and let him go. The air is hot; and the way is
bad. All call fall Ark bark mark ache cake take band hand sand cart dart wart
bail pail nail bare care mare bill fill kill book cook hook cold fold hold ball
fall hall damp camp lamp dice tice rice dine fine line hare mare pare ink link
pink fear hear near gain pain rain kick lick sick made laid paid lace pace race
pine vine wine leek seek week pipe ripe wipe rent sent tent seed deed feed ride
side wide ship trip whip save pave wave weed feed need alms aunt arts book born
beam back bear bean care cart chub bell belt band child comb comes bled blot
bird lock cock crow boot meal root each east ease dark does door down deed done
from fall fear deep dust dull feed fish find food feel fowl have hate heal gain
give gave heat meat moon goat good grew heart help hard hand hear hair high
hill hand lead let left hold hope rope land live look king kind know love lime
time laid lamb last lamp land like Lord love loud make meat mark lead left lend
meek made mind like life light name nine pray mild mind mine pile pole pain
meat nest next most lame tame nail pail rail next noise night nine vine hurt
part poor play fish fear found path play peace race rain read salt safe seam
rest rise rude seat send seek ripe rock bush sees soon sick said seek sink just
show sins sing skin sure that them thee slip star slow they this thus soul such
swim thou still took talk tall tell tree true tend vain vice whom warm west
will walk were wash wild wind wing w^^k weep well wish with wise went what when
wool work worn (...) Ad-am Cam-el Fan-cy hea-vy A-bel can-dle far-mer hin-der
ac-tor can-not fa-vour ho-ly ad-der car-ry fe-ver hum-ble af-ter cat-tle
flat-ter In-to an-ger chap-ter flow-er Lad-der al-so cho-sen fin-ger la-dy
an-gel cof-fin fol-low lap-pet a-ny co-lour fol-ly la-zy Ba-bel cor-ner for-ty
lat-ter ba-ker cri-er fu-ry let-ter bar-rel cus-tom Gal-lop li-ar beg-gar Di-al
gar-den lin-ger bet-ter di-ed gar-ret li-on bit-ter dig-ged gar-ter lof-ty
bo-dy din-ner glo-ry lit-tle bo-som doc-tor god-ly Ma-ry bles-sed dri-ver
gos-pel ma-ker bro-ken du-ty gun-ner man-ger bro-ther E-ver Han-dy man-ner
bu-ry en-ter hap-pen ma-ny but-ter en-vy hap-py mar-vel bu-sy e-vil har-vest
mas-ter mat-ter sil-ver tru-ly after mem-ber slip-per tu-lip anger mil-ler
sin-ner tu-tor baker mo-ment sis-ter Val-ley better mo-ney so-ber va-pour
blessed mut-ter sor-row ve-ry cannot Ne-ver sto-ny vir-gin chapter new-ly
sto-ry Wa-ter driver On-ly spi-rit welfare flatter or-der sum-mer wick-ed
gospel Pa-per sun-der win-ter hinder par-don sup-per wil-low manner plen-ty
seem-ly will-ing mutter pen-ny Ta-ble win-dow pardon pep-per tay-lor wor-thy
penny pi-per tem-ple wis-dom silver pis-tol tem-per wit-ness sinner pup-py
ten-der wo-man temple Sad-ler tin-der won-der valley san-dy tor-ment wor-ship
winter ser-vant tra-der wri-ter willow ser-pent trav-el yon-der wonder Beast
climb found Large bless clean forth least blind close frame laugh bliss cross
fruit leave blood Dealt Ghost learn birth death glass light black ditch grain
Mean bones dread grave might bring dress grace mouth blush drink great mourn
boast dross green Noise bough drown groan north bread dwarf guide Ought break
dwell guile ounce brink Earth guilt Peace broad Faint Heart place broke false
hedge plant built fault house plead Christ feast Judge pluck cause field Knew
plumb cheat flame knock press child flock know print proud shock stork twelve
psalm shore store Voice purge short storm Watch Queen shoot swear waste quick
stand sweet weave Raise slave sweep wheat reach state sword wheel reign smote
Taint where roast snare taste while round sound teach white Saint sought teeth
whole scorn space tempt which screw spark thank wound sense spare thing would
shame spent those world shake speak three wrong shall speech their Year sheaf
stand throw yield sheep steal twice youth sheet strive trust young shown sting
truth Zeal (...) Ad-der cus-tom hear-ed always al-ways Dai-ly high-est custom
an-swer deal-er hoa-ry answer au-thor de-vil hun-gred either Bap-tist dis-tance
hus-band binding be-ing Ear-ly In-ward favor bind-ing ei-ther Jo-seph brings
bre-thren Fa-ther jour-ney feather bring-eth fa-vour judg-ment clothed Call-ed
fill-ed jus-tice garment chil-dren fea-ther King-dom hallow chim-ney fer-vent
kind-ness hardened cloth-ed flow-er kins-folks cursed con-stant Gar-ment
know-ing heaven crea-ture good-ness Landlord healing curs-ed Hal-low law-yer
hearken crim-son hard-ned last-ing highest cru-el hea-ven light-ed husband
cud-gel heal-ing Ma-ker journey cum-min hear-ing man-mon kindness cun-ning
heark-en man-date landlord cus-tom heart-en man-gle lawyer cur-sed hea-then
justice mankind pros-per tem-ple mankind mar-ry pray-er tem-pest precept
month-ly pre-cept ter-ror morning morn-ing Quar-rel third-ly naked Na-ked
Re-fuse thun-der ready near-er rea-dy trav-el ninety nine-ty rea-son trou-ble
pardon no-thing reap-er tur-nip rudder Of-fer rid-dle tip-ward painful Par-don
rud-der thirs-ty saying pain-ful Sa-cred turn-ed passage pa-rents say-ing
Va-cant sitting pas-sage sin-ful va-lour people pas-sed sit-ting ves-sel
shortly pat-tern shep-herd vir-tue perfect peo-ple short-ly Wed-ding skilful
per-fect sil-ver wea-ther plowing per-form skil-ful wis-dom swallow plea-sure
slen-der wel-come teacher plow-ing swal-low writ-ten vessel pre-pare sub-ject
writ-ing wisdom pro-phet Teach-er Youth-ful written pros-pect tem-per Zeal-ous
Al-low dis-tress op-press abstain a-mongst di-vine Per-haps divine at-tend
En-joy per-tain affect a-way en-tire pre-pare entire Be-came ex-cel pre-vail
allow be-fore ex-hort Rai-ment exhort be-lieve For-bid re-cline attend be-hold
for-give re-duce forgive Com-ply (...)-sake re-late became con-ceive Gen-teel
re-move gallant con-tain Him-self re-pose believe cre-ate Im-pend re-ward
himself De-fame in-cline Se-duce comply de-lay in-firm six-teen hundred de-part
know ledge sub-ject create des-pise mis-lead sur-vey infirm de-test mo-lest
Tra-duce defame dis-may Neg-lect Vir-gin mislead dis-miss O-bey Where-by
despise dis-patch ob-tain with-in neglect dis-pel ob-trude withdraw detest
dis-pense op-pose without obtain

Man was at first made in a state of bliss; but by sin he fell from that good
state into a state of Woe and misery

Christ our blessed Lord came down from heaven, to save man from sin, and to
give life to the soul; a life that will never end.

His birth was mean and low, his life was meek, and humble.

It is by, and through him we hope to live in bliss and joy, when this life ends.

Let us all, by the help of his grace, strive to be like him, to be good as he
was good, meek as he was meek and low in our own eyes.

He taught the right way to heaven, and pointed out the path that leads to
peace.

In return for such great goodness, the Jews, by wicked hands, slew him,
nailing him on a cross.

Thus died the son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, in order to save mankind!

His body was laid in the grave: For our sake, he passed through the valley of
death, that we might live and become heirs of heaven and children of God,

And all this was done, as it had been spoken, of the Lord, by the prophet.

Behold a virgin shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Jesus;
for he shall save his people from their sins.

The Angel of the Lord came unto Mary and said unto her, Fear not Mary, for
thou have found favor with God.

And behold thou shall conceive and bring forth a son, and he shall be great,
and shall be called, The Son of the Highest.

And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end.

And the child Jesus grew, and became strong in spirit; filled with wisdom and
the grace of God was upon him.

And when he was twelve years old, he went up with his parents to the feast,
after the custom of the Jews:

And when the days of the feast were over, the people went home, but the child
Jesus was still in the city, and his parents knew it not.

And when they had gone a day's journey, they found he was not with them; then
they sought him amongst their kinsfolk.

And when they found him not, they turned back again to the city:

And after three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of
the doctors hearing them, and asking them questions

And all that heared him, were amazed at his knowledge and answers.

When his parents saw him they said unto him, Son, why have thou dealt thus
with us? behold we have sought thee with sorrow. And he said unto them;

How is it that ye sought me, knew ye not, that I must perform the work that my
father sent me to do?

Then he went down with Joseph and his mother, Mary, and was subject unto them.

In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the desert, saying, repent
ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the tree, every tree, therefore,
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

And John was clothed with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his
loins, and he did eat locust and wild honey.

And John said unto them all; I indeed baptize you with water; but one greater
than I comes, he shall baptize you with the HolyGhost.

Whose fan is in his hand, and he will gather the wheat into his garner; but
the chaff he will burn with fire.

Now Jesus began to preach, and to do many wonders; healing the sick, the lame
and the blind.

Ac-ti-on glo-ri-fy Alderman al-der-man gra-ci-ous gracious al-pha-bet
gro-ce-ry amazed a-ma-zed Hap-pi-ly harmony a-no-ther har-mo-ny annual an-nu-al
ho-li-ness holiness a-sha-med hos-pi-tal bodily Bo-di-ly Im-pi-ous impious
be-ne-fit in-fa-my benefit bra-ve-ry in-ward-ly infamy Cal-li-co ig-no-rant
capable ca-pa-ble in-he-rit innocent car-ri-ed in-no-cent certify cer-ti-fy
Ja-ve-lin juniper com-pa-ny ju-ni-per dutiful Dig-ni-ty La-za-rus magnify
du-ti-ful Mag-ni-fy exposed E-ter-nal mer-ci-ful formally ex-po-sed mil-li-on
miracles For-mal-ly mi-ra-cles gallery Gal-le-ry mi-se-ry misery ga-ther-ed
mi-nis-ter minister mo-nu-ment Sa-vi-our Savior mor-ti-fy se-pa-rate mortify
mul-ti-ply sen-si-ble sensible mov-a-ble sig-ni-fy mulberry mul-ber-ry
sol-di-er soldier Na-ti-on spec-ta-tor nation nur-se-ry Te-di-ous tedious
Or-der-ly tem-po-ral orderly or-na-ment ter-ri-fy terrify par-a-ble tes-ta-ment
parable pa-ti-ence tes-ti-fy testify pi-e-ty Ti-mo-thy prepared pre-pa-red
to-bac-co tobacco pub-lish-ed Va-li-ant valiant pu-nish-ment va-ni-ty purity
pu-ri-ty ve-he-ment pillory pil-lo-ry ve-ri-ly virtuous Re-deem-er vir-tu-ous
reconcile re-mem-ber vi-si-ted visited re-con-cile un-law-ful vanity
re-pent-ance won-der-ful unlawful righ-te-ous yes-ter-day wonderful Bleach
growth fleeve breach Health sought bought hearth speech breath League sponge
broach length squeak brogue Naught squint brought Phrase strange bruise please
stream Caught plunge stealth chance plague strait church praise strength
clothes preach string cruise priest Taught Dearth Quench thought draught Scarce
thread drought school throat Flaunt search throne fierce sheath thrown fought
shield through friend shrink tongue fringe shrimp Wealth Ground shroud Youth

Matt. 25, 31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory;

And before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one
from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats: And he shall set
the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my
father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world;
for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying Lord, when saw we thee an hungered,
and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? or
when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the king shall answer and say unto them. Verily I say unto you, in as much
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me.

Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand. Depart from me, ye cursed
into everlasting sire prepared for the devil and his angels; for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in;
naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answer him, saying Lord, when saw we thee an hung^red, or
a thirst or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee?

Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye did
it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go
away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal.

The Danger of delaying Repentance.
Why should I say it is yet too soon,
To seek for heaven or think of death?
A flower may fade before it is noon,
And I this day may lose my breath.
If this rebellious heart of mine,
Despise the gracious calls of heaven,
I may be hardn'd in my sin,
And never have repentance given.
What if the Lord grow wroth, and say?
While I refuse to read and pray,
That he will refuse to lend an ear,
To all my groans another day.
What if his dreadful anger burn,
While I refuse his offered grace,
And all his love to anger turn,
And strike me dead upon the place?
Then 'twill for ever be in vain,
To cry for pardon and for grace,
To wish I had my time again,
Or hope to see my maker's face.
There Is not a sin that we commit,
Nor wicked word we say,
But in God's dreadful book it is writ,
Against the judgment day.
And must the crimes that I have done,
Be read and published there;
Be all exposed before the sun,
While men and angels hear?
Lord at thy foot ashamed I lie,
Upward I dare not look,
Pardon my sins before I die,
And blot them from thy book.
Remember all the dying pains,
That my redeemer felt;
And let his blood wash out my stains,
And answer for my guilt.
O may I now for ever sear,
TO indulge a sinful thought;
Since the great God can see and hear,
And writes down every fault.
FINIS

