THE AMERICAN CRISIS. NUMBER V. ADDRESSED TO GENERAL SIR WILLIAM HOW. BY THE
AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE.

LANCASTER: PRINTED by JOHN DUNLAP. M,DCC,LXXVIII.

[Price 2 s. 6 d. single -- 2 s. by the quantity.]

THE AMERICAN CRISIS, NUMBER V.
TO GENERAL SIR WILLIAM HOW.
TO argue with a man who has renounced the use and authority of reason, and
whose philosophy consists in holding humanity in contempt, is like administering
medicine to the dead, or endeavoring to convert an Atheist by scripture.
Enjoy, Sir, your insensibility of feeling and reflecting. It is the prerogative
of animals. And no man will envy you those honors, in which a savage only can
be your rival and a bear your master.

As the generosity of this country rewarded your brother's services last war
with an elegant monument in Westminster Abbey, it is consistent that she should
bestow some mark of distinction upon you. You certainly deserve her notice, and
a conspicuous place in the catalogue of extraordinary persons. Yet it would be
pity to pass you from the world in state, and consign you to magnificent
oblivion among the tombs, without telling the future beholder why. Judas is as
much known as John, yet history ascribes their fame to very different actions.

Sir William has undoubtedly merited a monument: But of what kind, or with
what inscription, where placed or how embellished, is a question that would
puzzle all the Heralds of St James's in the profoundest mood of historical
deliberation. We are at no loss, Sir, to ascertain your real character, but
somewhat perplexed how to perpetuate it is identity, and preserve it uninjured
from the transformations of time or mistake. A statuary may give a false
expression to your bust, or decorate it with some equivocal emblems, by which
you may happen to steal into reputation and impose upon the hereafter
traditionary world. Ill nature or ridicule may conspire, or a variety of
accidents combine, to lessen, enlarge, or change Sir William's fame; and no
doubt but he who has taken so much pains to be singular in his conduct, would
choose to be just as singular in his exit, his monument and his epitaph.

The usual honors of the dead, to be sure, are not sufficiently sublime to
escort a character like you to the republic of dust and ashes; for however men
may differ in their ideas of grandeur or government here, the grave is
nevertheless a perfect republic. Death is not the monarch of the dead, but of
the dying. The moment he obtains a conquest he loses a subject, and, like the
foolish King you serve, will, in the end, war himself out of all dominion.

As a proper preliminary toward the arrangement of your funeral honors, we
readily admit your new rank of Knighthood. The title is perfectly in character,
and is your own, more by merit than creation. There are Knights of various
orders from the Knight of the Windmill to the Knight of the Post. The former is
your patron for exploits, and the latter will assist you in settling your
accounts. No honorary title could be more happily applied! The ingenuity is
sublime! And your royal master has discovered more genius in fitting you
therewith, than in generating the most finished figure for a button, or
discanting on the properties of a button-mould.

But how, Sir, shall we dispose of you? The invention of the Statuary is
exhausted, and Sir William is yet unprovided with a monument. America is
anxious to bestow her funeral favors upon you, and wishes to do it in a manner
that shall distinguish you from all the deceased heroes of the last war. The
Egyptian method of embalming is not known to the present age, and
hieroglyphical pageantry has outlived the science of decyphering it. Some
other method, therefore, must be thought of to immortalize the new Knight of
the Windmill and Post. Sir William, thanks to his stars, is not oppressed with
very delicate ideas. He has no ambition of being wrapped up and handed about in
myrrh, aloes and cassia. Less chargeable odors will suffice; and it fortunately
happen^, that the simple genius of America has discovered the art of
preserving bodies and embellishing them to^, with much greater frugality than
the ancients. In a balmage, Sir, of humble tar, you will be as secure as
Pharaoh, and in a hieroglyphic of feathers rival in finery all the mummies of
Egypt.

As you have already made your exit from the moral world, and by numberless
acts both of passionate and deliberate injustice engraved an "HERE LIES" on
your deceased honor, it must be mere affectation in you to pretend concern at
the humors or opinions of mankind respecting you. What remains* of you may
expire at any time. The sooner the better. For he who survives his reputation,
lives out of spite to himself, like a man listening to his own reproach.

Thus entombed and ornamented I leave you to the inspection of the curious, and
return to the history of your yet surviving actions. -- The character of Sir
William has undergone some extraordinary revolutions since his arrival in
America. It is now fixed and known; and we have nothing to hope from your
candor or to fear from your capacity. Indolence and inability have too large a
share in your composition ever to suffer you to be any thing more than the hero
of little villainies and unfinished adventures. That, which to some persons
appeared moderation in you at first, was not produced by any real virtue of
your own, but by a contrast of passions dividing and holding you in perpetual
irresolution. One vice will frequently expel another without the least merit in
the ma^n, as powers in contrary directions reduce each other to rest.

It became you, to have supported a dignified solemnity of character; to have
shown a superior liberality of soul; to have won respect by an obstinate
perseverance in maintaining order, and to have exhibited, on all occasions,
such an unchangeable graciousness of conduct, that while we beheld in you the
resolution of an enemy we might admire in you the sincerity of a man. You came
to America under the high-sounding titles of Commander and Commissioner; not
only to suppress what you called rebellion by arms, but to shame it out of
countenance by the excellence of your example. Instead of which, you have been
the patron of low and vulgar frauds, the encourager of Indian cruelties; and
have imported a cargo of vices blacker than those you pretended to suppress.

Mankind are not universally agreed in their determination of right and wrong;
but there are certain actions which the consent of all nations and individuals
has branded with the unchangeable name of MEANNESS. In the list of human vices
we find some of such a refined constitution, that they cannot be carried into
practice without seducing some virtue to their assistance; but meanness has
neither alliance nor apology. It is generated in the dust and sweepings of
other vices, and is of such a hateful figure that all the rest conspire to
disown it. Sir William, the Commissioner of George the Third, has at last
vouchsafed to give it rank and pedigree. He has placed the fugitive at the
Council Board, and dubbed it companion of the order of knighthood.

The particular act of meanness which I allude to in this description, is
forgery. You, Sir, have abetted and patronised the forging and uttering
counterfeit continental bills. In the same New York newspapers in which your
own proclamation under your master's authority was published, offering, or
pretending to offer, pardon and protection to the inhabitants of these States,
there were repeated advertisements of counterfeit money for sale, and persons
who have come officially from you and under sanction of your flag, have been
taken up in attempting to put them off.

A conduct so basely mean in a public character is without precedent or
pretense. Every nation on earth, whether friends or enemies, will unite in
despising you. It Is an incendiary war upon society which nothing can excuse or
palliate -- An improvement upon beggarly villainy -- and shows an inbred
wretchedness of heart made up between the venomous malignity of a serpent and
the spiteful imbecility of an inferior reptile.

The laws of any civilized country would condemn you to the gibbet without
regard to your rank or titles, because it is an action foreign to the usage and
custom of war; and should you fall into our hands, which pray God you may, it
will be a doubtful matter whether we are to consider you as a military prisoner
or a prisoner for felony.

Besides, it is exceedingly unwise and impolitic in you, or any persons in the
English service, to promote, or even encourage, or wink at, the crime of
forgery in any case whatever. Because, as the riches of England, as a nation,
is chiefly in paper, and the far greater part of trade among individuals is
carried on by the same medium, that is, by notes and drafts on one another,
they, therefore, of all people in the world ought to endeavor to keep forgery
out of sight, and, if possible, not to revive the idea of it. It is dangerous
to make men familiar with a crime which they may afterward practice to much
greater advantage against those who first taught them. Several officers in the
English army have made their exit at the gallows for forgery on their agents;
for we all know, who know any thing of England, that there is not a more
necessitous body of men, taking them generally, than what the English officers
are. They contrive to make a show at the expense of the tailor, and appear
clean at the charge of the washer-woman.

England has at this time nearly two hundred millions pounds sterling of
public money in paper, for which she has no real property, besides a large
circulation of bank notes, bank post bills, and promissary notes and drafts of
private bankers, merchants and tradesmen. She has the greatest quantity of
paper currency and the least quantity of gold and silver of any nation in
Europe; the real specie, which is about sixteen millions sterling, serve only
as change in large sums, which are always made in paper, or for payment in
small ones. Thus circumstanced, the nation is put to its wit's ends, and
obliged to be severe almost to criminality, to prevent the practice and growth
of forgery. Scarcely a session passes at the Old Bailey, or an execution at
Tyburn, but witnesses this truth. Yet you, Sir, regardless of the policy which
her necessity obliges her to adopt, have made your whole army intimate with the
crime. And as all armies, at the conclusion of a war, are too apt to carry into
practice the vices of the campaign, it will probably happen, that England will
hereafter abound in forgeries, to which Art, the practitioners were first
initiated under your authority in America. You, Sir, have the honor of adding a
new vice to the military catalogue; and the reason, perhaps, why the invention
was reserved for you, is, because no General before was mean enough even to
think of it.

That a man whose soul is absorbed in the low traffic of vulgar vice, is
incapable of moving in any superior region, is clearly shown in you by the
event of every campaign. Your military exploits have been without plan, object
or decision. Can it be possible that you or your employers can suppose the
possession of Philadelphia to be any ways equal to the expense or expectation
of the nation which supports you? What advantages does England derive from any
achievements of yours? To her it is perfectly indifferent what place you are
in, so long as the business of conquest is unperformed and the charge of
maintaining you remains the same.

If the principal events of the three campaigns be attended to, the balance
will appear strongly against you at the close of each; but the last, in point
of importance to us, has exceeded the former two. It is pleasant to look back
on dangers past, and equally as pleasant to meditate on present ones when the
way out begins to appear. That period is now arrived, and the long doubtful
winter of war is changing to the sweeter prospects of victory and joy. At the
close of the campaign in seventy-five, you were obliged to retreat from Boston.
In the summer seventy-six, you appeared with, a numerous fleet and army in the
harbor of New York. By what miracle the Continent was preserved in that season
of danger is a subject of admiration! If instead of wasting your time against
Long Island, you had run up the North River and landed any where above
New York, the consequence must have been, that either you would have compelled
General Washington to fight you with very unequal numbers, or he must have
suddenly evacuated the city with the loss of nearly all the stores of the army,
or have surrendered for want of provisions, the situation of the place
naturally producing one or other of these events.

The preparations made to defend New York were, nevertheless, wise and
military; because your forces were then at sea, their numbers uncertain;
storms, sickness, or a variety of accidents might have disabled their coming,
or so diminished them on their passage, that those which survived would have
been incapable of opening the campaign with any prospect of success; in which
case, the defense would have been sufficient and the place preserved; for
cities that have been raised from nothing with an infinitude of labor and
expense, are not to be thrown away on the bare probability of their being
taken. On these grounds, the preparations made to maintain New York were as
judicious as the retreat afterward. While you, in the interim, let slip the
very opportunity which seemed to put conquest in your power.

Through the whole of that campaign you had nearly double the forces which
General Washington immediately commanded. The principal plan, at that time, on
our part, was to wear away the season with as little loss as possible, and to
raise the army for the next year. Long Island, New York, Ports Washington and
Lee were not defended, after your superior force was known, under any
expectation of their being finally maintained, but as a range of out works, in
the attacking of which, your time might be wasted, your numbers reduced, and
your vanity amused by possessing them on our retreat. It was intended to have
withdrawn the garrison from Fort Washington after it had answered the former of
those purposes, but the fate of that day put a prize into your hands without
much honor to yourselves.

Your progress through the Jerseys was accidental; you had it not even in
contemplation, or you would not have sent so principal a part of your force to
Rhode Island beforehand. The utmost hope of America in the year seventy-six
reached no higher than that she might not then be conquered. She had no
expectation of defeating you in that campaign. Even the most cowardly Tory
allowed, that, could she withstand the shock of that summer her independence
would be past a doubt. You had then greatly the advantage of her. You were
formidable. Your military knowledge was supposed to be complete. Your fleets
and forces arrived without an accident. You had neither experience nor
reinforcements to wait for. You had nothing to do but to begin, and your chance
lay in the first vigorous onset.

America was young and unskilled. She was obliged to trust her defense to time
and practice; and has, by mere dint of perseverance, maintained her cause, and
brought her enemy to a condition, in which, she is now capable of meeting him
on any grounds.

It is remarkable that in the campaign of seventy-six, you gained no more,
notwithstanding your great force, than what was given you by consent or
evacuation, except Fort Washington: While every advantage obtained by us was by
fair and hard fighting. The defeat of Sir Peter Parker was complete. The
conquest of the Hessians at Trenton by the remains of a retreating army, which,
but a few days before, you affected to despise, is an instance of heroic
perseverance very seldom to be met with. And the victory over the British
troops at Princeton, by a harrassed and wearied party, who had been engaged the
day before and marched all night without refreshment, is attended with such a
scene of circumstances and superiority of Generalship, as will ever give it a
place on the first line in the history of great actions.

When I look back on the gloomy days of last winter and see America suspended
by a thread, I feel a triumph of joy at the recollection of her delivery, and a
reverence for the characters which snatched her from destruction. To doubt now
would be a species of infidelity, and to forget the instruments which saved us
then would be ingratitude.

The close of that campaign left us with the spirits of conquerors. The
Northern districts were relieved by the retreat of General Carleton over the
lakes. The army under your command were hunted back and had their bounds
prescribed. The Continent began to feel its military importance, and the winter
passed pleasantly away in preparations for the next campaign.

However confident you might be on your first arrival, the course of the year
seventy-six gave you some idea of the difficulty, if not impossibility, of
conquest. To this reason I ascribe your delay in opening the campaign in
seventy-seven. The face of matters, on the close of the former year, gave you
no encouragement to pursue a discretionary war as soon as the spring admitted
the taking the field; for though conquest, in that case, would have given you a
double portion of same, yet the experiment was too hazardous. The Ministry, had
you failed, would have shifted the whole blame upon you, charged you with
having acted without orders, and condemned at once both your plan and your
execution.

To avoid those misfortunes, which might have involved you and your money
accounts in perplexity and suspicion, you prudently waited the arrival of a
plan of operations from England, which was, that you should proceed for
Philadelphia by the way of Chesapeak, and that Burgoyne, after reducing
Ticonderoga, should take his route by Albany, and, if necessary, join you.

The splendid laurels of the last campaign have flourished in the North. In
that quarter America has surprised the world, and laid the foundation of her
this year's glory. The conquest of Ticonderoga (if it may be called a conquest)
has, like all your other victories, led on to ruin. Even the provisions taken
in that fortress, (which by General Burgoyne's return was sufficient in bread
and flour for nearly 5000 men for ten weeks, and in beef and pork for the same
number of men for one month) served only to hasten his overthrow, by enabling
him to proceed for Saratoga the place of his destruction. A short review of the
operations of the last campaign will show the condition of affairs on both
sides.

You have taken Ticonderoga and marched into Philadelphia. These are all the
events which the year has produced on your part. A trifling campaign indeed,
compared with the expenses of England and the conquest of the Continent. On the
other side, a considerable part of your Northern force has been routed by the
New York militia under General Herkimer. Fort Stanwix has bravely survived a
compounded attack of soldiers and savages, and the besiegers have fled. The
battle of Bennington has put a thousand prisoners into our hands, with all
their arms, stores, artillery and baggage. General Burgoyne in two engagements
has been defeated; himself, his army, and all that were his and theirs are now
ours. Ticonderoga and Independence are retaken, and not the shadow of an enemy
remains in all the Northern districts. At this instant we have upwards of
eleven thousand prisoners, between sixty and seventy pieces of brass ordnance,
besides small arms, tents, stores, etc. etc.

In order to know the real value of those advantages we must reverse the scene,
and suppose General Gates, and the force he commanded, to be at your mercy as
prisoners, and General Burgoyne with his army of soldiers and savages to be
already joined to you in Pennsylvania. So dismal a picture can scarcely be
looked at. It has all the traces and colorings of horror and despair; and
excites the most swelling emotions of gratitude by exhibiting the miseries we
are so graciously preserved from.

I admire this distribution of laurels around the Continent. It is the earnest
of future union. South Carolina has had her day of suffering and of fame; and
the other Southern States have exerted themselves in proportion to the force
that invaded or insulted them. Toward the close of the campaign in
seventy-six, these middle States were called upon and did their duty nobly.
They were witnesses to the almost expiring flame of human freedom. It was the
close struggle of life and death. The line of invisible division; and on which,
the unabated fortitude of a Washington prevailed, and saved the spark, that has
since blazed in the North with unrivalled luster.

Let me ask, Sir, what great exploits have you performed? Through all the
variety of changes and opportunities which this war has produced, I know no
one action of yours that can be styled masterly. You have moved in and out,
backward and forward, round and round, as if valor consisted in a military jig.
The history and figure of your movements would be truly ridiculous could they
be justly delineated. They resemble the labors of a puppy pursuing his tail;
the end is still at the same distance, and all the turnings round must be done
over again.

The first appearance of affairs at Ticonderoga wore such an unpromising
aspect, that it was necessary, in July, to detach a part of the forces to the
support of that quarter, which were otherwise destined or intended to act
against you, and this, perhaps, has been the means of postponing your downfall
to another campaign. The destruction of one army at a time is work enough. We
know, Sir, what we are about, what we have to do, and how to do it.

Your progress from Chesapeak was marked by no capital stroke of policy or
heroism. Your principal aim was to get General Washington between the Delaware
and Schuylkill and between Philadelphia and your army. In that situation, with
a river on each of his flanks, which united about five miles below the city,
and your army above him, you could have intercepted his reinforcements and
supplies, cut off all his communication with the country, and, if necessary,
have dispatched assistance to open a passage for General Burgoyne. This scheme
was too visible to succeed, for had General Washington suffered you to command
the open country above him, I think it a very reasonable conjecture that the
conquest of Burgoyne would not have taken place, because you could, in that
case, have relieved him. It was therefore necessary, while that important
victory was in suspense, to trepan you into a situation, in which you could
only be on the defensive without the power of affording him assistance. The
maneuver had its effect and Burgoyne was conquered.

There has been something unmilitarily passive in you from the time of your
passing the Schuylkill and getting possession of Philadelphia to the close of
the campaign. You mistook a trap for a conquest, the probability of which has
been made known to Europe, and the edge of your triumph taken off by our own
information long before.

Having got you into this situation, a scheme for a general attack upon you at
Germantown was carried into execution on the fourth of October, and though the
success was not equal to the excellence of the plan, yet the attempting it
proved the genius of America to be on the rise and her power approaching to
superiority The obscurity of the morning was your best friend, for a fog is
always favorable to a hunted enemy. Some weeks after this, you, likewise,
planned an attack on General Washington while at Whitemarsh, marched out with
infinite parade, but on finding him preparing to attack you the next morning,
you prudently cut about and retreated to Philadelphia with all the
precipitation of a man conquered in imagination.

Immediately after the battle of Germantown, the probability of Burgonye's
defeat gave a new policy to affairs in Pensylvania, and it was judged most
consistent with the general safety of America to wait the issue of the Northern
campaign. Slow and sure is sound work. The news of that victory arrived in our
camp on the 18th of October, and no sooner did the shout of joy and the report
of the thirteen cannon reach your ears, than you resolved upon a retreat, and
the next day, that is, on the 19th, withdrew your drooping army into
Philadelphia. This movement was evidently dictated by fear; and carried with it
a positive confession that you dreaded a second attack. It was hiding yourself
among women and children, and sleeping away the choicest part of a campaign in
expensive inactivity. An army in a city can never be a conquering army. The
situation admits only of defense. It is mere shelter; and every military power
in Europe will conclude you to be eventually defeated.

The time when you made this retreat was the very time you ought to have fought
a battle, in order to put yourself in a condition of recovering in Pennsylvania
what you had lost at Saratoga. And the reason why you did not, must be either
prudence or cowardice; the former supposes your inability, and the latter needs
no explanation. I draw no conclusions, Sir, but such as are naturally deduced
from known and visible facts, and such as will always have a being while the
facts which produced them remain unaltered.

After this retreat a new difficulty arose which exhibited the power of Britain
in a very contemptible light, which was the attack and defense of Mud-Island.
For several weeks did that little unfinished fortress stand out against all the
attempts of Admiral and General How. It was the fable of Bender realized on
the Delaware. Scheme after scheme and force upon force were tried and defeated.
The garrison, with scarce any thing to cover them but their bravery, survived
in the midst of mud, shot and shells, and were at last obliged to give it up
more to the powers of time and gunpowder than to the military superiority of
the besiegers.

It is my sincere opinion that matters are in a much worse condition with you
than what is generally known. Your master's speech at the opening of Parliament
is like a soliloquy on ill luck. It shows him to be coming a little to his
reason, for sense of pain is the first symptom of recovery in profound
stupefactions. His condition is deplorable. He is obliged to submit to all the
insults of France and Spain without daring to know or resent them, and thankful
for the most trivial evasions to the most humble remonstrances. The time was
when he could not deign an answer to a petition from America, and the time now
is when he dare not give an answer to an affront from France. The capture of
Burgoyne's army will sink his consequence as much in Europe as in America. In
his speech he expresses his suspicions at the warlike preparations of France
and Spain, and as he has only the one army which you command to support his
character in the world with, it remains very uncertain when, or in what
quarter, it will be most wanted or can be best employed, and this will partly
account for the great care you take to keep it from action and attacks, for
should Burgoyne's fate be yours, which it probably will, England may take her
endless farewell not only of all America but of all the West Indies.

Never did a nation invite destruction upon itself with the eagerness and
ignorance with which Britain has done. Bent upon the ruin of a young and
unoffending country, she has drawn the sword that has wounded herself to the
heart, and in the agony of her resentment has applied a poison for a cure. Her
conduct toward America is a compound of rage and lunacy; she aims at the
government of it, yet preserves neither dignity nor character in her methods to
obtain it. Were government a mere manufacture or article of commerce immaterial
by whom it should be made or sold, we might as well employ her as another, but
when we consider it as the fountain from whence the general manners and
morality of a country take their rise, that the persons entrusted with the
execution thereof are by their serious example and authority to support these
principles, how abominably absurd is the idea of being hereafter governed by a
set of men who have been guilty of forgery, perjury, treachery, theft, and
every species of villainy which the lowest wretches on earth could practice or
invent. What greater public curse can befall any country than to be under such
authority, and what greater blessing than to be delivered therefrom. The soul
of any man of sentiment would rise in brave rebellion against them and spurn
them from the earth.

The malignant and venomous tempered Genesis Vaughan has amused his savage fancy
in burning the whole own of Kingston, in York government, and the late Governor
of that State, Mr. Tryon, in his letter to General Parsons, has endeavored to
justify it, and declared his wish to burn the houses of every Committee-man in
the country. Such a confession from one who was once entrusted with the powers
of civil government, is a reproach to the character. But it is the wish and the
declaration of a man whom anguish and disappointment have driven to despair,
and who is daily decaying into the grave with constitutional rottenness.

There is not in the compass of language a sufficiency of words to express the
baseness of your King, his Ministry and his Army. They have refined upon
villainy till it wants a name. To the fiercer vices of former ages they have
added the dregs and scummings of the most finished rascality, and are so
completely sunk in serpentine deceit, that there is not left among them one
generous enemy.

From such men and such masters may the gracious hand of Heaven preserve
America! And though the sufferings she now endures are heavy and severe, they
are like straws in the wind compared to the weight of evils she would feel
under the government of your King, and his pensioned Parliament.

There is something in meanness which excites a species of resentment that
never subsides, and something in cruelty which stirs up the heart to the
highest agony of human hatred; Britain has filled up both these characters
till no addition can be made, and has not reputation left with us to obtain
credit for the slightest promise. The will of God has parted us, and the deed
is registered for eternity. When she shall be a spot scarcely visible among the
nations, America shall flourish the favorite of Heaven and the friend of
mankind.

For the domestic happiness of Britain and the peace of the world I wish she
had not a foot of land but what is circumscribed within her own island. Extent
of dominion has been her ruin, and instead of civilizing others has
brutalized herself. Her late reduction of India under Clive and his successors,
was not so properly a conquest as an extermination of mankind. She is the only
power who could practice the prodigal barbarity of tying men to the mouths of
loaded cannon and blowing them away. It happens that General Burgoyne, who made
the report of that horrid transaction in the House of Commons, is now a
prisoner with us, and though an enemy, I can appeal to him for the truth of it,
being confident that he neither can nor will deny it. Yet Clive received the
approbation of the last Parliament.

When we take a survey of mankind we cannot help cursing the wretch, who, to
the unavoidable misfortunes of nature shall wilfully add the calamities of war.
One would think there were evils enough in the world without studying to
increase them, and that life is sufficiently short without shaking the sand
that measures it. The histories of Alexander, and Charles of Sweden, are the
histories of human devils; a good man cannot think of their actions without
abhorrence nor of their deaths without rejoicing. To see the bounties of Heaven
destroyed, the beautiful face of nature laid waste, and the choicest works of
creation and art tumbled into ruin, would fetch a curse from the soul of piety
itself. But in this country the aggravation is heightened by a new combination
of affecting circumstances. America was young, and, compared with other
counties, was virtuous. None but a Herod of uncommon malice would have made war
upon infancy and innocence, and none but a people of the most finished
fortitude dared, under those circumstances, have resisted the tyranny. The
natives, or their ancestors, had fled from the former oppressions of England,
and with the industry of bees had changed a wilderness into a habitable world.
To Britain they were indebted for nothing. The country was the gift of Heaven,
and God alone is their Lord and Sovereign.

The time, Sir, will come when you, in a melancholy hour, shall reckon up your
miseries by your murders in America. Life, with you, begins to wear a clouded
aspect. The vision of pleasurable delusion is wearing away, and changing to the
barren wild of age and sorrow. The poor reflection of having served your King
will yield you no consolation in your parting moments He will crumble to the
same undistinguished ashes with yourself, and have sins enough of his own to
answer for. It is not the farcical benedictions of a Bishop, nor the cringing
hypocrisy of a court of Chaplains, nor the formality of an act of Parliament,
that can change guilt into innocence, or make the punishment one pang the less.
You may, perhaps, be unwilling to be serious, but this destruction of the goods
of Providence, this havoc of the human (...), and this sowing the world with
mischief, must be accounted for to him who made and governs it. To us they are
only present sufferings, but to him they are deep rebellions.

If there is a sin superior to every other it is that of willful and offensive
war. Most other sins are circumscribed within narrow limits, that is, the power
of one man cannot give them a very general extension, and many kind of sins
have only a mental existence from when no infection arises; but he who is the
author of a war, lets loose the whole contagion of Hell, and opens a vein that
bleeds a nation to death. We leave it to England and Indians to boast of these
honors; we feel no thirst for such savage glory; a nobler flame, a purer spirit
animates America. She has taken up the sword of virtuous defense; she has
bravely put herself between Tyranny and Freedom, between a curse and a
blessing, determined to expel the one, and protect the other.

It is the object only of war that makes it honorable And if there were ever a
just war since the world began, it is this which America is now engaged in. She
invaded no land of yours. She hired no mercenaries to burn your towns, nor
Indians to massacre their inhabitants. She wanted nothing from you and was
indebted for nothing to you; and thus circumstanced, her defense is honorable
and her prosperity certain.

Yet it is not on the justice only, but likewise on the importance of this
cause that I ground my seeming enthusiastical confidence of our success. The
vast extension of America makes her of too much value in the scale of
Providence, to be cast, like a pearl before swine, at the feet of a European
island; and of much less consequence would it be that Britain were sunk in the
sea than that America should miscarry. There has been such a chain of
extraordinary events in the discovery of this country at first, in the peopling
and planting it afterward, in the rearing and (...) it to its present State,
and in the protection of it through the present war, that no man can doubt, but
Providence has some nobler end to accomplish than the gratification of the
petty Elector of Hanover or the ignorant and insignificant King of Britain.

As the blood of the martyrs has been the seed of the Christian Church, so the
political persecutions of England will, and has already enriched America with
industry, experience, union and importance. Before the present era she was a
mere chaos of uncemented Colonies, individually exposed to the ravages of the
Indians and the invasion of any power that Britain should be at war with. She
had nothing she could call her own. Her felicity depended upon accident. The
convulsions of Europe might have thrown her from one conqueror to another, till
she had been the slave of all and ruined by every one; for until she had spirit
enough to become her own master, there was no knowing to which master she
should belong. That period, thank God, is past, and she is no longer the
dependent, disunited Colonies of Britain, but the independent and united States
of America, knowing no master but Heaven and herself. You or your King may call
this "Delusion," "Rebellion," or what name you please. To us it is perfectly
indifferent. The issue will determine the character and Time will give it a
name as lasting as his own.

You have now, Sir, tried the fate of three campaigns, and can fully declare to
England, that nothing is to be got on your part but blows and broken bones, and
nothing on hers but waste of trade and credit and an increase of poverty and
taxes. You are now only where you might have been two years ago without the
loss of a single ship, and yet not a step the forwarder toward the conquest of
the Continent; because, as I have already hinted, "An army in a city can never
be a conquering army." The full amount of your losses since the beginning of
the war exceeds twenty thousand men, besides millions of treasure for which you
have nothing in exchange. Our expenses, though great, are circulated within
ourselves. Yours is a direct sinking of money, and that from both ends at once,
first in hiring troops out of the nation, and in paying them afterward,
because the money in neither case can return again to Britain. We are already
in possession of the prize, you only in suit for it. To us it is a real
treasure, to you it would be only an empty triumph. Our expenses will repay
themselves with ten fold interest, while yours entail upon you everlasting
poverty.

Take a review, Sir, of the ground you have gone over, and let it teach you
policy, if it cannot honesty. You stand but on a very tottering foundation. A
charge of the Ministry in England may probably bring your measures into
question and your head to the block. Clive, with all his successes, had some
difficulty in escaping, and yours being all a war of losses, will afford you
less pretensions and your enemies more grounds for impeachment.

Go home, Sir, and endeavor to save the remains of your ruined country by a
just representation of the madness of her measures. A few moments well applied
may yet preserve her from political destruction. I am not one of those who wish
to see Europe in a flame, because I am persuaded such an event will not shorten
the war. The rupture, at present, is confined between the two powers of America
and England. England finds she cannot conquer America, and America has no wish
to conquer England. You are fighting for what you can never obtain, and we
defending what we mean never to part with. A few words, therefore, settle the
bargain. Let England mind her own business and we will mind ours. Govern
yourselves and we will govern ourselves. You may then trade where you please
unmolested by us, and we will trade where we please unmolested by you; and such
articles as we can purchase of each other better than elsewhere may be mutually
done. If it were possible that you could carry on the war for twenty years you
must still come to this point at last, or worse, and the sooner you think of it
the better it will be for you.

My official situation enables me to know the repeated insults which Britain is
obliged to put up with from foreign powers, and the wretched shifts she is
driven to, to gloss them over. Her reduced strength and exhausted coffers in a
three years war with America have given a powerful superiority to France and
Spain. She is not now a match for them -- But if neither counsels can prevail
on her to think, nor sufferings awaken her to reason, she must even go on, till
the honor of England becomes a proverb of contempt, and Europe dub her the Land
of Fools.

I am, Sir, With every wish for an honorable peace, Your friend, enemy, and
countryman, COMMON SENSE.
YORK-TOWN, March 18, 1778.
TO THE INHABITANTS OF AMERICA.
WITH all the pleasure with which a man exchanges bad company for good, I take
my leave of Sir William and return to you. It is now nearly three years since
the tyranny of Britain received its first repulse by the arms of America. A
period, which has given birth to a new world and erected a monument to the
folly of the old.

I cannot help being sometimes surprised at the complimentary references which
I have seen and heard made to ancient histories and transactions. The wisdom,
civil governments, and sense of honor of the States of Greece and Rome, are
frequently held up as objects of excellence and imitation. Mankind have lived
for very little purpose, if, at this period of the world, they must go two or
three thousand years back for lessons and examples. We do dishonorary injustice
to ourselves by placing them in such a superior line. We have no just authority
for it, neither can we tell why it is that we should suppose ourselves inferior.

Could the mist of antiquity be taken away, and men and things viewed as they
then really were, it is more than probable that they would admire us, rather
than we them. America has surmounted a greater variety and combination of
difficulties than, I believe, ever sell to the share of any one people in the
same space of time, and has replenished the world with more useful knowledge
and founder maxims of civil government than were ever produced in any age
before. Had it not been for America there had been no such thing as freedom
left throughout the whole universe. England has lost hers in a long chain of
right reasoning from wrong principles, and it is from this country now she must
learn the resolution to redress herself, and the wisdom Low.

The Grecians and Romans were strongly possessed of the spirit of liberty but
not the principle, for at the time they were determined not to be slaves
themselves, they employed their power to enslave the rest of mankind. But this
distinguished era is blotted by no one misanthropical vice. In short, if the
principle on which the cause is founded, the universal blessings that are to
arise from it, the difficulties that accompanied it, the wisdom with which it
has been debated, the fortitude by which it has been supported, the strength of
the power we had to oppose, and the condition in which we undertook it, be all
taken in one view, we may justly style it the most virtuous and illustrious
revolution that ever graced the history of mankind.

A good opinion of ourselves is exceedingly necessary in private life, but
absolutely necessary in public life, and of the utmost importance in supporting
natural character. I have no notion of yielding the palm of the United States
to any Grecians or Romans that were ever born. We have equalled the bravest in
times of danger, and excelled the wisest in the construction of civil
governments, no one in America excepted.

From this agreeable eminence let us take a review of present affairs. The
spirit of corruption is so inseparably interwoven with British politics, that
their Ministry suppose all mankind are governed by the same motive. They have
no idea of a people submitting even to temporary inconvenience from an
attachment to rights and privileges. Their plans of business are calculated by
the hour and for the hour, and are uniform in nothing but the corruption which
gives them birth. They never had, neither have they at this time, any regular
plan for the conquest of America by arms. They know not how to go about it,
neither have they power to effect it if they could know. The thing is not
within the compass of human practicability, for America is too extensive either
to be fully conquered or passively defended. But she may be actively defended
by defeating or making prisoners of the army that invades her. And this is the
only system of defense that can be effectual in a large country.

There is something in a war carried on by invasion which makes it differ in
circumstances from any other mode of war, because he who conducts it cannot
tell whether the ground he gains, be for him, or against him, when he first
makes it. In the winter seventy six General How marched with an air of victory
through the Jerseys, the consequence of which was his defeat and General
Burgoyne at Saratega experienced the same fate from the same cause. The
Spaniards about two years ago were defeated by the Algerines in the same
manner, that is, their first triumphs became a trap in which they were totally
routed. And whoever will attend to the circumstances and events of a war
carried on by invasion, will find, that any invader, in order to be finally
conquered must first begin to conquer.

I confess myself one of those who believe the loss of Philadelphia to be
attended with more advantages than injuries. The case stood thus. The enemy
imagined Philadelphia to be of more importance to us than it really was; for we
all know that it had long ceased to be a port, not a cargo of goods had been
brought into it for near a twelve month, nor any fixed manufactories, nor even
ship building carried on in it; yet as the enemy believed the conquest of it to
be practicable, and to that belief added the absurd idea that the soul of all
America was centered there and would be conquered there, it naturally follows,
that their possession of it, by not answering the end proposed, must break up
the plans they had so foolishly gone upon, and either oblige them to form a new
one, for which their present strength is not sufficient, or to give over the
attempt.

We never had so small an army to fight against, nor so fair an opportunity of
final success as now. The death wound is already given. The day is our own if
we follow it up. The enemy by his situation is within our reach, and by his
reduced strength is within our power. The Ministers of Britain may rage as they
please, but our part is to conquer their armies. Let them wrangle and welcome,
but let it not draw our attention from the one thing needful. Here, in this
spot is our business to be accomplished, our felicity secured. What we have now
to do is as clear as light, and the way to do it is as strait as a line. It
needs not to be commented upon, yet, in order to be perfectly understood, I
will put a case that cannot admit of a mistake.

Had the armies under the Generals How and Burgoyne been united and taken post
at Germantown, and had the Northern army under General Gates been joined to
that under General Washington at Whitemarsh, the consequence would have been a
general action; and if in that action we had killed and taken the same number
of officers and men, that is, between nine and ten thousand, with the same
quantity of artillery, arms, stores, etc. as have been taken to the Northward,
and obliged General How with the remains of his army, that is, with the same
number he now commands, to take shelter in Philadelphia, we should certainly
have thought ourselves the greatest heroes in the world; and should, as soon as
the season permitted, have collected together all the force of the Continent
and laid siege to the city, for it requires a much greater force to besiege an
enemy in a town than to defeat them in the field. The case now is just the same
as if it had been produced by the means I have here supposed. Between nine and
ten thousand have been killed and taken, all their stores are in our
possession, and General How, in consequence of that victory, has thrown
himself for shelter into Philadelphia He, or his trifling friend Galloway, may
form what pretenses they please, yet no just reason can be given for their
going into winter quarters so early as the 19th of October, but their
apprehension of a defeat if they continued out, or their conscious inability of
keeping the field with safety. I see no advantage which can arise to America by
hunting the enemy from State to State It is a triumph without a prize, and
wholly unworthy the attention of a people determined to conquer. Neither can
any State promise itself security while the enemy remain in a condition to
transport themselves from one part of the Continent to another. How likewise,
cannot conquer where we have no army to oppose, therefore any such removals in
him are mean and cowardly, and reduces Britain to a common pilserer. If he
retreats from Philadelphia, he will be despised; if he stays, he may be shut up
and starved out, and the country, if he advances into it, may become his
Saratoga. He has his choice of evils and we of opportunities. If he moves
early, it is not only a sign but a proof that he expects no reinforcement, and
his delays will prove that he either waits for the arrival of a plan to go
upon, or force to execute it, or both; in which case, our strength will
increase more than his, therefore in any case we cannot be wrong if we do but
proceed

The particular condition of Pennsylvania deserves the attention of all the
other States. Her military strength must not be estimated by the number of
inhabitants. Here are men of all nations, characters, professions and
interests. Here are the firmest Whigs, surviving like sparks in the ocean*
unquenched and uncooled in the midst of discouragement and disaffection* Here
are men losing their all with cheerfulness, and collecting (...) and fortitude
from the flames of their own estates. Here are others skulking in secret, many
making a market of the times, and numbers who are changing Whig and Tory with
the circumstances or every day.

It is by mere dint of fortitude and perseverance that the Whigs of this State
have been able to maintain so good a countenance, and do even what they have
(...). We want help, and the sooner it can arrive the more effectual it will
be. The invaded State, be it which it may, will always feel and additional
burden upon its back, and be hard set to support its civil power with
sufficient authority: and this difficulty will always rise or fall, in
proportion as the other States throw in their assistance to the common cause.

The enemy will most probably make many maneuvers at the opening of this
campaign, to amuse and draw off the attention of the several States from the
one thing needful. We may expect to hear of alarms and pretended expeditions to
this place and that place, to the Southward, the Eastward and the Northward,
all intended to prevent our forming into one formidable body. The less the
enemy's strength is, the more subtleties of this kind will they make use of.
Their existence depends upon it, because the force of America, when collected,
is sufficient to swallow their present army up. It is therefore our business to
make short work of it, by bending our whole attention to this one principal
point, for the instant that the main body under General How is defeated, all
the inferior alarms throughout the Continent, like so many shadows, will follow
his downfall.

The only way to finish a war with the least possible bloodshed, or perhaps
without any, is to collect an army, against the power of which, the enemy shall
have no chance. By not doing this, we prolong the war, and double both the
calamities and the expenses of it. What a rich and happy country would America
be, were she, by a vigorous exertion, to reduce How as she has reduced
Burgoyne. Her currency would rise to millions beyond its present value. Every
man would be rich, and every man would have it in his power to be happy. And
why not do these things? What is there to hinder? America is her own mistress
and can do what she pleases.

If we had not at this time a man in the field, we could, nevertheless, raise
an army in a few weeks sufficient to overwhelm all the force which General How
at present commands. Vigor and determination will do any thing and every thing.
We began the war with this kind of spirit, why not end it with the same? Here,
Gentlemen, is the enemy. Here is the army. The interest, the happiness, of all
America is centered in this half ruined spot. Come on and help us. Here are
laurels, come and share them. Here are Tories, come and help us to expel them.
Here are Whigs that will make you welcome, and enemies that dread your coming.

The worst of all policy is that of doing things by halves. Penny-wise and
pound foolish has been the ruin of thousands. The present spring, if rightly
improved, will free us from all our troubles, and save us the expense of
millions. We have now only one army to cope with. No opportunity can be fairer;
no prospect more promising. I shall conclude this paper with a few outlines of
a plan either for filling up the battalions with expedition, or for raising an
additional force for any limited time, on any sudden emergency.

That in which every man is interested is every man's duty to support. And any
burden which falls equally on all men, and, from which every man is to receive
an equal benefit, is consistent with the most perfect ideas of liberty. I would
wish to revive something of that virtuous animation which first called America
into the field. Then every man was eager to do his part, and perhaps the
principal reason why we have in any degree fallen therefrom, is, because we did
not set a sufficient value by it at first, but left it to blaze out of itself,
instead of regulating and preserving it by just proportions of rest and service.

Suppose any State whose number of effective inhabitants were 80,000, should be
required to furnish 3200 men toward the defense of the Continent on any very
sudden emergency.

First, Let the whole number of effective inhabitants be divided into hundreds;
then if each of those hundreds turn out four men, the whole number of 3200 will
be had.

2dly, Let the names of each hundred men be entered in a book, and let four
dollars be collected from each man, with as much more as any of the gentlemen
whose abilities can afford it shall please to throw in, which gifts shall
likewise be entered against the donors names.

3dly, Let the sums so collected be offered as a present, over and above the
bounty of twenty dollars, to any four who may be inclined to propose themselves
as volunteers; if more than four offer, the majority of the subscribers present
shall determine which; if none offers, then four out of the hundred shall be
taken by lot, who shall be entitled to the said sums, and shall either go, or
provide others that will, in the space of six days.

4thly, As it will always happen, that in the space of ground on which any
hundred men shall live, there will always be a number of persons who, by age
and infirmity, are incapable of doing personal service, and as such persons are
generally possessed of the greatest part of the property in any (...) their
portion of service, therefore will be to furnish (...) with a blanket, which
will make a regimental coat jacket and breeches, or clothes in lien thereof,
and another for a watch cloak and two pair of shoes -- for however (...) people
may be of these things matters not in cases of this kind -- Those who live a
ways in houses can find many ways to keep them (...) warm, but it is a shame
and a sin to suffer a soldier in the field to want a blanket while there is one
in the country.

Should the clothing not be wanted, the superannuated or infirm persons
possessing property, may, in lieu thereof, throw in their money subscriptions
toward increasing the bounty, for though age will naturally exempt a person
from personal service, it cannot exempt him from his share of the charge,
because the men are raised for the defense of property and liberty jointly.

There never was a scheme against which objections might not be raised. But
this alone is not a sufficient reason for rejection. The only line to judge
truly upon, is, to draw out and admit all the objections which can fairly be
made, and place against them all the contrary qualities, conveniences and
advantages, then by striking a balance you come at the true character of any
scheme, principle or position.

The most material advantages of the plan here (...) ease, expedition, and
cheapne's; yet the men so raised (...) a much larger bounty than is any where
at present given; because all the expenses, extravagance, and consequent
idleness of recruiting are saved or prevented. The country incurs up new debt,
nor interest thereon; the whole matter being all settled at (...) and entirely
done with. It is a subscription answering all the purposes of a tax, without
either the charge or trouble of collecting. The men are ready for the field
with the greatest possible exposition, because it becomes the duty of the
inhabitants themselves, in every part of the country, to find up their
proportion of men, instead of leaving it to a recruiting Sergeant, who, be he
ever so industrious, cannot know always where to apply.

I do not propose this as a regular digested plan, neither will the limits of
this (...) admit of any further remarks upon it. I believe it to (...) capable
of much improvement, and as such submit it to the Public.

COMMON SENSE.
Lancaster, March 21, 1778.

