SONGS, NAVAL AND MILITARY.

But when our Country's Cause provokes to Arms,
How martial Music every Bosom warms.
POPE. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JAMES RIVINGTON. M,DCC,LXXIX.

PREFACE.
THE following collection of songs, idle and trifling as they may seem at first
view, will, it is hoped, have a further use than mere amusement.

The songs are principally Naval and Military, joined to a few others that have
a tendency to excite that love of our King, of our country, and of Liberty,
which, in the breasts of Englishmen, are one and the same thing; and which, of
all the passions, affords the noblest stock, upon which to graft the Military
Virtues. It were to be wished that there was greater choice; however, the man
whose bosom is open to the glow of patriotism and of glory, will hear few of
them without some worthy feelings. -- What is wanting in sentiment and poetry,
may be often supplied by the energy and masculine tones of the music; and when
both combine, the soul is raised to a grateful pitch of gallant enthusiasm, the
emotions of which make lasting impressions, and give the soldier a taste for
those hardships and dangers, which he would otherways undergo with reluctance,
as mere points of duty.

The British troops have for some years, had to do with an enemy that has never
as yet beheld with steady countenance, the glare of a rank of bayonets; and the
navy, skulking pirates alone to contend with, full of trick, but without
bottom. -- Men who, although of English descent, are thus debased by engaging in
pursuits repugnant to all sense of honor, justice and humanity. -- There is
now the prospect of a tougher task for both. The established armies and navies
of the great European powers, (composed of soldiers and seamen, trained to firm
service, and full of officers possessed of a high point of honor and military
ardour,) present a very different field for their ambition, and call for a full
exertion of all their ancient virtue. -- A field, in which superior valor and
discipline will not only command that respect which is ever their own, but
insure complete success; in which, the decision will depend more upon the arms
than the legs, and in which the most strenuous grasp will always reap a full
harvest of glory. There the firm soldier will not be balked of his object by
the illusive shifts of a shrinking enemy, nor obliged to imitate practices
despised, and indeed heretofore unknown to the British troops, in order to
gain, at best, a negative triumph; but will have fair occasions, amidst the
serious but liberal contentions of civilized war, to display all the virtues of
his profession, and contrast the awful qualities that sway the fate of battle,
with that humanity which alone can gild his laurels with true splendour, and
stamp a sacred seal upon his merit.

To those who have any knowledge of the human heart, a knowledge of all others
the most essential to an officer, and who are aware of the powers of music and
poetry over the mind of man, it is unnecessary to say much in favor of this
attempt. -- With others of lighter minds, it may possibly incur ridicule and
excite to laughter, but until such gentlemen are pleased, by giving the reasons
of their merriment, to show whether their censure is more owing to the
accuteness of their wit or the depth of their judgment, it is in vain to
contend with them. In the mean time they will have an opportunity of amusing
them selves occasionally, with a song that they might not so readily procure a
copy of, and so far they will allow there is no harm done.

To readers of taste and sentiment, it is needless to observe, that many of
those odes breathe a pure spirit of liberty, warlike ardor, and patriotism,
adorned with much of the fire, imagination, and melody of genuine poetry: Some
of a more tender nature, throw a mild and pleasing luster upon the military
professions and the duties attending them; while others of a coarser cast, are
peculiarly calculated to engage the people and strengthen their attachment to
their King, country, and its constitution, by combining the interests of their
enjoyments and appetites, as well as their rights, with the duties of good
citizens: Of those, many may appear not to deserve a place, but the popular
taste has stamped a value upon them which ought not to be disputed -- Even the
British Grenadiers, unworthy as the words are of the subject, will reach the
heart of every English soldier.

An officer of service, if possessed of a poetical genius, might certainly, in
compositions of this kind, inculcate the most essential points of military duty
and honor, by adapting the words and music to the various operations of war.

In a light infantry song, for instance, the 1st verse to represent that corpse
turning out upon an alarm, and forming in front of its wigwams -- the music
irregular, bouncing, elevated. The 2d verse, advancing upon the enemy into
cover, the music sprightly, animated, but regular. -- In short, a good
quick-step tune. The 3d verse, firing, gaining ground, and operating to the
flanks -- the music broken, confused, elevated. The 4th verse, a bloody pursuit
-- the music rapid, crowded, harsh. The 5th verse, the action decided and
resistance at an end, the soldiers yielding to the impulse of pity and
humanity, sparing and protecting the vanquished -- the music in melting tones
of tender sympathy, unbending the high wound spirits to the softer, but equally
manly feelings of generous compassion.

In a Song for the heavy foot, the line to be represented as moving on to
battle, steady, firm, and slow. -- The music solemn, regular, decide. Then
engaged in close action and charging. -- The music lofty, strenuous. Lastly,
the enemy routed, the line leaving the pursuit to the light troops, and
employed in regaining its order, preparatory to a second attack. -- The music
more calm and regular, with some swells of triumph.

The Highland March is singularly suited to such a subject. The first part --
the line in march. The second part or chorus -- engaged, and the few last notes
resuming its order.

A Song for the Cavalry might represent that body as availing itself of its
advantages. -- If against horse, the squadrons advancing with velocity to the
charge, avoiding all use of fire arms, and trusting entirely to the momentum of
their horses and the points of their swords, rallying instantly to their
standards, after the disorder necessarily arising from the shock, and carrying
every thing before them by the joint effect of their cohesion and impetuosity.
-- If against infantry, the squadrons taking shelter from the effect of their
fire, by plunging among them, and, once in, remaining there to keep them down
-- If in pursuit, the horse abandoning themselves at all hazards without
hesitation upon the enemy, to retard their flight.

Many other general points of duty, and of interest might be interwoven among
the imagery in these Songs, as equally suitable to all of them; such as silence
-- obedience -- to stand by the colors -- to adhere to their officers and to
their comrades -- to keep up their fire, and rely chiefly on their bayonets or
swords -- the little loss that troops ever suffer in action, compared to the
slaughter in flight -- the triumph and advantages of victory, with the misery
attending captivity, etc. etc.

The above hints may be of use to those gentlemen, who, although not bred to
the profession of arms, may be disposed to assist this design by their poetical
exertions. To Soldiers it is not meant to prescribe rules -- their ideas will
naturally keep the proper bounds, and their genius unconstrained make bolder
efforts.

The Corpse of Artillery well deserve to have a Song apart, but it must come
from themselves.

With regard to the Navy, it would require the knowledge of a thorough bred
Seaman, joined to great powers of imagination, and a warm predilection in
favor of his country and profession, to enable a man to compose any thing
worthy of the subject.

At present when the warlike spirit of the nation is thoroughly roused, this
Book may be looked into by others as well as military men, and therefore the
occasion is proper for taking notice of an unworthy and narrow prejudice, which
in England not only prevails among the lower people, where alone it is
excusable, but is also received by an order of men, who both from their rank in
the community and general education, ought to entertain more liberal and just
opinions.

Many of the country gentlemen indulge in an ungenerous jealousy and dislike of
the British Army that does little honor either to their knowledge of the
constitution or of the history of their country. Those who truly understand the
nature of the government of England, its situation and commercial interests,
perceive the unavoidable necessity of standing forces, not only to support the
power of the nation by protecting its foreign establishments, and to command
the forbearance and respect of its neighbors, by enabling it to act
offencively against those who may adventure to injure or insult it, but also to
secure us from the sudden enterprises of the immense armies kept ever on foot
by the enemies of England and of liberty, within twelve hours sail of our
coast. Brave as the people of Britain are, time is necessary to form and train
them to arms, and it requires a guarded and cautious hand to introduce
gradually the subordination necessary to qualify the militia to act in any
degree in concert for the general purposes of service, and to cherish at the
same time that high and independent spirit which renders Englishmen when
undisciplined the worst, and when disciplined the very best soldiers of the
world. -- For this purpose too the instructions of the officers of the army and
the example of the troops are both essentially necessary; and granting it
practicable by this means to put the militia in a few months in a condition to
cope with men who had passed their lives in arms and had been long inured to
war, it would still require a proportion of thorough bred officers to assist in
conducting and fighting it, as well as a train of regular artillery and a good
cavalry, which, with many other necessary aids, can only be derived from a
permanent military establishment. In fact, the militia and the army are equally
necessary to the power and security of the British Empire, and most justly has
the former been termed the shield, the latter the sword of England: But he who
asserts that a militia is alone sufficient or equal to all the occasions of
war, must either be incapable of counting, or prompted by some bad design.

A brave militia, conducted by officers who knew the extent of its powers, and
exacted no more from it than was to be expected from its discipline and
experience, might certainly in a country so singularly strong as England is
from its enclosures, render every hedge a bloody entrenchment to an invading
enemy, with the cooperation of a certain proportion of veteran foot to steel
the edge of the points of attack, so as to enable the nation to adopt an
offensive mode of defense, (the only one worthy of the spirit of Britons or of
success,) and take the lead in every service which required that coolness and
precision of maneuver in the face of an enemy, that alone can enable troops to
attack and re-attack with confidence and effect, and which is scarce to be
attained without long practice and the habit of danger.

Perhaps there has only been two periods since the restoration in which the
militia of England could be deemed in any degree equal to the internal defense
of the country -- in the war of 56, after two years of great exertion and
diligence, and at present, when a twelvemonth has been heartily employed by the
united consent of all men to prepare it -- at both times they have been formed
under the instruction, and stimulated by the example of very gallant and highly
disciplined standing armies.

It has been a custom to cite the brilliant military successes of the Edwards
and the Henry's as proofs of the inutility of standing forces; but before this
plea is urged, it may not be improper to recollect that France and Spain were
in those ages severally divided within themselves, as well as unconnected with
each other; and their kings, with very little authority, scarce any revenue,
and no army at all; whereas at present these monarchs have entire command of
the properties and persons of their subjects, an immense revenue, 500,000
regular troops at their nod, and are closely united, with the same objects in
view.

With regard to the Navy, no doubt without its support we could neither be
powerful abroad, nor safe at home, and were fighting at sea alone in question,
it is equal to every thing; but it cannot sail against the wind, it cannot be
every where at the same time, nor can it follow an invading enemy on shore.

Without the advantage of a superior marine, as well as of a willing
constitutional militia, an army of 200,000 men, with a number of strong
fortresses, would scarce be sufficient to secure Great Britain against the
House of Bourbon. As it is, 30 or 40,000 made soldiers, under officers who know
how to employ them with economy, and draw from the militia the aids it may be
capable of, will, whilst our navy is in condition to dispute the dominion of
the sea, prove a full match for any force that an enemy may in an unguarded
moment, or in consequence of a favoring wind, or of a successful sea action
find means to land. But the man who from his enthusiasm for liberty, should
desire to see this very small comparative proportion of standing forces further
reduced, must have discovered with the rebel Congress, that the French king is
the best protector of our rights and constitution, and therefore wish to give
him an opportunity of reforming the errors of our government, by introducing
amongst us 60 or 80,000 of those legislators, usually employed by his
predecessors to establish peace, liberty and happiness among their neighbors.

Gentlemen of this cast must indeed be little read in history not to have in
mind, that to the virtue of a standing army we owe a restoration and a
revolution without bloodshed, waste or confusion; and the reduction of two
rebellions, subversive of all liberty and property, at times when the nation
seemed resigned to its fate, or overwhelmed with despondency -- and also that
to the virtue of the army it has been often owing that the promoters of
sedition have been prevented from endangering real liberty by destroying all
order and government.

All circumstances weighed, it cannot but appear to those who are superior to
prejudice, and capable of taking a comprehensive and liberal view, that, in the
present state of the world, a standing army is essential to the security of the
British empire against foreign attacks -- consequently to the existence of the
rights and property of the inhabitants; and that it is of equal importance to
the great objects of liberty, that this army should not be mercenary, but have
an interest in the constitution of its country. Certain restraints are no doubt
necessary to command the obedience and subordination of the military to the
civil power, and to crush in the bud all attempts that might be made by
unprincipled men to turn against the people those arms which it is only
honorable to bear in their defense.

But those who endeavor to undervalue the military character, or to make
unnecessary encroachments upon its professional rights, or by inferior usage
and invidious distinctions try to estrange the troops from all attachment to
their country and interest in the constitution, can only stand acquitted of
treason against the freedom of their fellow subjects, at the expense of their
intellects.

Whilst the army is held in that estimation which its actions heretofore well
claim, and which is the best security for its behavior in future, it will
continue to be full of officers, who from their education, property and rank in
the kingdom, must have an interest in the well-being of the nation, superior to
all views of military command or emolument; seconded by soldiers, whose natural
attachment to their country will be confirmed by the share they are allowed in
its credit and happiness.

But should the profession of arms ever be held in disrespect, and those that
follow it unnecessarily deprived of the common rights of citizens, or exposed
to insult and oppression, then indeed the army may become mercenary, as no man
of honor or property will remain in it, and those who do, will naturally
favor every change, having nothing to lose and every thing to gain.

As the writer of these lines may possibly be guessed at, and those who are
disposed to judge with severity, may among many other faults, censure the
expressions as too strong or hazarded, and the language as not sufficiently
chaste or indeed correct, he begs leave to be allowed in extenuation of his
offenses to observe, that licenses which might be extremely improper in a
Sermon, may perhaps admit of excuse in a preamble to a Book of Songs. In other
respects, if he should succeed in drawing the attention of officers to an
object that appears to him useful, he is little solicitous about the appearance
he himself may make upon this occasion, and with much indifference gives up his
literary character to the wrath of whatever enraged critic may choose to
exercise his gall upon it; recommending it to the gentlemen of that family,
when they shall find their bile overheated by so doing, to quit the Preface and
apply to the Songs, which will probably excite some unusual feelings of candor
and good humor, that, however ill they may suit the temper of a Critic's mind,
will certainly contribute to the health of his body.

SONGS, NAVAL AND MILITARY.
RULE BRITANNIA.
WHEN Britain first at Heaven's command,
Arose from out the azure main,
This was the charter, the charter of the land,
And guardian Angels sung the strain,
Rule, Britannia, Britannia rule the waves,
Britons never will be slaves.
II.
The Nations (not so blessed as thee)
Must in their turns to Tyrants fall;
While thou shall flourish great and free,
The dread and envy of them all.
III.
Still more majestic shall thou rise,
More dreadful from each foreign stroke*
As the loud blast that tears the skies,
Serves but to root thy native oak.
IV.
Thee, haughty Tyrants never shall tame;
All their attempts to bend thee down,
Will but arouze thy generous flame,
But work their woe, and thy renown.
V.
To thee belongs the rural reign,
Thy cities shall with commerce shine;
All shine shall be the subject Main,
And every shore it circles thine.
VI.
The Muses still with freedom found,
Shall to thy happy coasts repair;
Blessed Isle! with matchless beauty crowned,
And manly hearts to guard the Fair.
Rule, Britannia, Britannia rule the waves,
Britons never shall be slaves.
GOD SAVE THE KING
I.
GOD save great GEORGE our King,
Long live our noble King,
God save the King.
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us,
God save the King.
II.
O Lord our God arise,
Scatter his enemies,
And make them fall;
Confound their politics,
Frustrate their knavish tricks,
Or him our hopes we fix;
God save us all.
III.
Thy choicest gifts in store,
On GEORGE be pleased to pour,
Long may he reign;
May he defend our Laws,
And ever give us cause
With heart and voice to sing
God save the King.
I.
WHEN mighty Roast Beef was the Englishman's food,
It enobled our veins, and enriched our blood;
Our soldiers were brave, and our courtiers were good.
O the roast beef of Old England!
And Old English roast beef.
II.
But since we have learnt from all conquering France
To eat their ragouts as well as to dance,
We Are fed up with nothing -- but vain complaisance;
O the roast beef, etc.
III.
Our fathers of old, were robust, stout and strong,
And kept open house with good cheer all day long
Which made their plump tenants rejoice in this song:
O the roast beef, etc.
IV.
But now we are dwindled to -- what shall I name?
A sneaking poor race, half begotten -- and tame,
Who sully those honors that once shone in fame;
O the roast beef, etc.
V.
When good Queen Elizabeth sat on the throne,
Ere coffee, or tea, or such slip-slops were known,
The world was in terror, if ever she did frown;
O the roast beef, etc,
VI.
In those days, if fleets did presume on the main,
They seldom or never returned back again;
As witness the vaunting Armada of Spain.
O the roast beef, etc.
VII.
Oh! then they had stomachs to eat and to fight,
And, when wrongs were a cooking, to do themselves right;
But now we are a pack of -- I could -- but good night.
O the roast beef of Old England!
And Old English roast beef.
I.
SAY, lovely peace, that graced our Isle,
Why you withdraw the indulgent smile?
Is it, you fly the sons of fame,
That they the pride of France may tame?
For Mars is roused by war's alarms,
And calls the Britons forth to arms.
II.
Our chief's, renowned upon the main,
Once more shine forth in arms again,
Whose steady courage dares oppose
And stem the power of Gallic foes,
For Mars, etc,
III.
What state but does its fate deplore,
Where ever the British thunders roar?
All, all must in subjection bow;
And to Britannia's sons it is due.
For Mars, etc.
IV.
As Rome of old her terrors hurled,
And proved the mistress of the world,
The globe itself must subject be
To Albion's sons, who rule the sea;
For Mars, etc.
V.
Arise, arise, to war's great call;
Prepare to meet the audacious Gaul;
And, in return for all your toils,
Return with victory and spoils:
For Mars is roused by war's alarms,
And calls the Britons forth to arms.
I.
BRITANNIA, Queen of Ocean rise,
Perfidious Gallia's threats despise,
Send sorth the fleet; -- each hostile shore,
Shall tremble when thy cannons roar.
II.
Thy sword the hand of justice draws,
And Heaven approves thy righteous cause;
Nor forts nor forces stop thy way,
So Minden so Quebec can say.
III.
Not more affrighted flies the deer,
When he perceives the hunter near,
Than Gallia's fleets when they descry,
The British ensign waving high.
IV.
Then strike again some deadly blow,
And urge thy vengeance on thy foe;
Till vanquished tyranny submit,
To what is just and what is fit.
V.
Nor may kind Heaven the time prolong,
Ever thou shall verify my song;
Shall bid the horrid havoc cease,
And give the nations lasting peace.
VI.
Return sweet peace return once more,
With commence spread the ocean over;
Ah! soon return and spread the sail,
And riches bring with every gale.
I.
FROM those eternal regions bright,
Where Suns that never set in night,
Diffuse the golden day;
Where spring, unfading, pours around,
Over all the dew impearled ground,
Her thousand colors gay,
Her thousand colors gay.
II.
The Messenger of Heaven's high King,
I come, and happy tidings bring,
To cheer this drooping Isle;
Behold! her cruel foes are fled,
Behold! fair freedom lifts the head,
And all her children smile,
And all her children smile.
III.
The dawn that now unveils her skies,
Sees England's future glory rise,
A better age is born;
Then let each voice of sprightly strain
Around, from warbling hill and plain,
Hail this triumphant morn,
Hail this triumphant morn.
RUSSEL's TRIUMPH.
I.
THursday in the morn, the nineteenth of May,
Recorded be forever the famous ninety-two,
Brave Russel did discern by break of day,
The lofty sails of France, advancing too;
All hands aloft they cry,
Let English courage shine,
Let fly a culverine,
The signal of the line,
Let every man supply his gun,
Follow me,
You shall see
That the battle it will soon be won.
II.
Tourville on the main, triumphant rolled,
To meet the gallant Russel, in combat over the deep
He led his noble troop of heroes bold,
To sink the English Admiral and his fleet;
Now every gallant mind,
To victory does aspire,
The bloody fight's begun,
The sea is all on fire,
And mighty fate stood looking on,
Whilst the flood,
All with blood,
Fill the scuppers of the Rising Sun.
III.
Sulphur, smoke, and fire, disturbing the air,
With thunder and wonder affright the Gallic shore,
Their regulated bands stood trembling near,
To see their lofty streamers now no more,
At six o'clock the red
The smiling victors led,
To give the second blow,
The total overthrow.
Now death and horror equal reign.
Now they cry
Run or die,
British colors ride the vanquished main.
IV.
See they fly amazed over rocks and sands,
One danger they grasp to shun a greater fate,
In vain they cry for aid to weeping lands,
The nymphs and sea-gods mourn their lost estate
Forever more adieu,
Thou ever-dazzling sun,
From thy untimely end,
Thy master's fate begun,
Enough thou mighty God of war,
Now we sing,
Bless the King,
Let us drink to every English tar.
BRITISH GRENADIERS
I.
SOME talk of Alexander,
And some of Hercules,
Of Nestor and Lysander,
And some such scrubs as these:
But all the world acknowledges,
That courage true appears
In the tow, row, row, dara dow
Of the British Grenadiers.
II.
Not one of these Commanders
E're saw a canon-ball,
Nor knew the force of powder
To slay their foes withal.
But we, brave boys, do know it well,
And banish all our fears,
With the tow, row, etc.
III.
The Grecians hide was iron,
Except his Worship's heel,
And all those rusty Heroes
Were safely cased in steel,
But we, brave boys, without it
Would make such Heroes stare.
Achilles himself would enter
A British Grenadier
IV.
For when we are commanded
To storm their pallisades,
Our leaders march with fuses,
And we with hand-grenades;
We toss them from the glacis,
About our enemies ears.
With the tow, row, etc.
V.
Nor want we lads of metal
To throw the hand-grenades,
To overset their breast-works,
And storm their pallisades.
Behold the Sons of Thunder,
With their caps of fur appear.
With the tow, row, etc.
VI.
And when the seige is over,
We march into the Town,
The mob they cry huzza, boy,
The Grenadiers are come.
The Ladies in their best attire,
In silk and lace appear,
Contending who shall first be kissed
By a British Grenadier.
VII.
The God of War stood pleased,
And great Bellona smiled,
To see the British Heroes
March over the warlike field;
And all the Gods celestial,
Descending from their spheres,
Beheld with admiration
The British Grenadiers.
VIII.
No fabled God's protection
We ask, nor do we boast.
Great George himself commands us,
It Is he who rules the roast.
Nor dread we ever their tow, row, row,
To thunder in our ears;
Obedience bends the valor
Of the British Grenadiers.
IX.
Then be you Whig or Tory,
Or any lukewarm thing,
Give ear unto my story,
Be true to George your King;
For should you prove rebellious
He Will thunder in your ears,
With the tow, row, row, dara dow*
Of all his Grenadiers.
X.
Then let us fill our bumpers,
And drink a health to those
Who carry caps and pouches,
And wear the looped clothes.
May they and their Commanders
Live happy many years.
With the tow, row, row, dara dow,
Of the British Grenadiers.
BRITAIN's REMEMBRANCER. For the Years 1758 and 1759.
I.
COME listen a while and I Will tickle your ears,
With a few little vict'ries, by which it appears
We have gained from the French in two little years.
Which nobody can deny, which nobody, etc.
II.
We have beat them, my boys; and I Will hold you a pound,
We shall beat them, my boys, upon sea or dry ground,
We shall beat them as long as the world goes round.
Which no body, and.
III.
With Guadaloupe first I embellish my strain;
Then a cluster of sorts crowd into my brain,
Crown-Point, Frontenac, Niagara, Duquesne.
Which nobody, etc.
IV.
Quebec we have taken, and taken Breton;
Though the coast was so steep, that a man might as soon,
As the Frenchmen imagined, have taken the moon.
Which nobody, etc.
V.
Senegal we have taken, and taken Goree,
And thither we trade for our blacks, do you see;
For who should buy slaves, but those that are free?
Which nobody, etc.
VI.
Then at Minden you know, we defeated our foes,
Though our horse stood aloof without coming to blows,
And why no-body's hanged for it, nobody knows.
Which nobody, etc.
VII.
Boscawen at Lagos, and Hawke in the bay,
Your vict'ries had I but room to display,
I Am sure I should not have done singing today*
Which nobody, etc.
VIII.
Oh! what is become of the fleet out of Breast?
Some are burnt, some are taken, and where are the rest?
Why some are fled east, and some are fled west.
Which nobody, etc.
IX.
Some ten fathom deep in the sea may be found,
And some in the river Villain are a-ground,
Where they lie very safe, but not very sound.
Which nobody, etc.
X.
Let France then all title to glory resign,
For these years shall unmatched in our histories shine,
The renowned fifty-eight, and the great fifty-nine.
Which nobody can deny.
Sung in the Opera of Eliza.
WHEN all the Attic fire was fled,
And all the Roman virtue dead,
Poor freedom lost her seat.
Poor freedom lost her seat.
The Gothic mantle spread the night,
That damped fair virtue's fading light.
The muses lost their mate.
The muses lost their mate.
Where should they wander,
Where should they wander.
What new shore
Had yet a laurel left in store.
To this blessed isle they steer,
To this blessed isle they steer.
Soon the Parnassan choir was heard,
Soon Virtue's sacred form appeared,
And freedom soon was here,
And freedom soon was here.
The lazy Monk has lost his cell,
Religion rings her hollow bell,
She calls thee now by me,
She calls thee now by me.
Hark, hark, hark, her voice all plaintive sounds,
See, see, see, she receives a thousand wounds.
If shielded not by thee.
If shielded not by thee.
THE STORM.
CEASE, rude Boreas, blustering railer,
List ye landsmen all to me;
Mess-mates, hear a brother sailor
Sing the dangers of the sea.
From bounding billows first in motion;
When the distant whirlwinds rise,
To the tempest troubled Ocean,
Where the Seas contend with skies.
II.
Hark the Boatswain hoarsely bawling,
By top-sail sheets and haul-yards stand,
Down top-gallants, down be hauling, --
Down your stay-sails, band, boys, hand!
Now it freshens, set the braces, --
Now the top -- sail sheets let go,
Luff, boys luff, don't make wry faces, --
Up your topsails nimbly clew.
III.
Now all you on down beds sporting,
Fondly locked in beauty's arms;
Fresh enjoyments, wanton courting,
Safe from all but love's alarms.
Around us roars the tempest louder,
Think what fears our minds enthrall;
Harder yet, it yet blows harder,
Now again the Boatswain's call.
IV.
The top-sail yards point to the wind boys,
See all clear to reef each course --
Let the fore-sheet go, don't mind boys,
Though the weather should be worse.
Fore and aft the spritsail yard get,
Reef the mizen, see all clear,
Hands up, each preventer-brace set,
Man the fore-yard, cheer lads, cheer.
V.
Now the dreadful thunder roaring,
Peal on peal contending clash,
On our head fierce rain falls pouring,
In our eyes blue lightnings flash.
One wide water all around us,
All above us one black sky;
Different deaths at once surround us,
Hark! what means that dreadful cry.
VI.
The foremast's gone! cries every tongue out,
Over the lee, twelve feet above deck;
A leak beneath the chest-tree's sprung out,
Call all hands to clear the wreck.
Quick, the lanyards cut to pieces;
Come my hearts be stout and bold,
Plumb the well -- the leak increases,
Four feet water's in the hold!
VII.
While over the ship wild waves are beating
We for wives or children mourn;
Alas! from hence there is no retreating,
Alas! to them there is no return.
Still the leak is gaining on us,
Both chain-pumps are choked below;
Heaven have mercy here upon us!
For only that can save us now.
VIII.
Over the lee beam is the land boys,
Let the the guns over beard be thrown,
To the pump come every hand boys,
See our mizen-mast is gone.
The leak we have found, it cannot pour fast,
We Have lightened her a foot or more;
Up and rig a jury foremast,
She rights, she rights, boys we'er off shore.
IX.
Now once more on joys we'ere thinking,
Since kind fortune saved our lives;
Come the cann, boys let us be drinking,
To our Sweet-hearts and our wives.
Fill it up, about ship wheel it,
Close to the lips a brimmer join;
Where Is the tempest, now who feels it,
None -- all our danger's drowned in wine.
The NEW ALBION SONG.
I.
IN strains harmonious sound the lay,
That sings of Albion's noble race;
Wnose freeborn minds will never decay,
Nor time their glorious deeds deface.
Nor time, etc.
II.
In valor matchless, divinely brave,
We nobly conquer, humanely save;
No dangers, fear nor toils we shun,
Honor inspires each Albion son.
Honor inspires, etc.
III.
In cheerful ranks our bands advance,
With heroic ardour dare the foe;
Though haughty Spain and fickle France,
With horror dreads the impending blow.
In valor, etc.
IV.
Our fleets triumphant ride the main,
With Albions manned, unknown to fear;
Whose fame all nations shall proclaim,
By conquest gained each warring year.
In valor, etc.
V.
See liberty's propitious smile,
And plenty's copious horn over flow,
To bless and guard our native isle.
Where artists flourish, science grow.
In valor, etc.
VI.
Illustrious sons of Albion's line,
Who thus in legions firm unite,
Require the all recording nine
To sing your deeds and martial might.
In valor, etc.
THE ORIGIN OF ENGLISH LIBERTY.
I
ONCE the Gods of the Greeks at ambrosial feast,
Large bowls of rich nectar were quaffing,
Merry Momus among them was sat as a guest;
Homer says the Celestials loved laughing,
On each in the synod the humourist droll'd,
So none could his jokes disapprove;
He sung, repartee'd, and some smart stories told,
And at last thus began upon Jove:
II.
Sire Atlas who long has the universe bore,
Grows grieviously tired of late,
He says that mankind are much worse than before,
So he begs to be eased of their weight.
Jove knowing the earth on poor Atlas was hurled
From his shoulders commanded the ball;
Gave his daughter Attraction command of the world,
And she hung it up high in his hall.
III.
Miss pleased with the present reviewed the globe round,
To see what each climate was worth,
Like a diamond the whole with an atmosphere bound,
And she variously planted the earth;
With silver, gold, jewels, she India endowed,
France and Spain she taught vineyards to fear,
What suited each clime on each clime she bestowed,
And freedom she found flourished here.
IV.
Four cardinal virtues she left in this Isle,
As guardians to cherish the root,
The blossoms of liberty gayly 'gan to smile,
And Englishmen fed on the fruit:
Thus fed and thus bred from a bounty so rare,
O preserve it as free as 'twas given,
We will while we have breath, nay, we'll grasp it in death,
Then return it untainted to Heaven.
SEE, see, the conquering hero comes,
Sound the trumpet, beat the drums,
Sports prepare, the laurels bring,
Songs of triumph to him sing:
See the god-like youth advance,
Breathe the flutes and lead the dance.
Written by Dr. Smollet, in the TARS of OLD ENGLAND.
.I
BEHOLD my brave Briton's the fair springing gale,
Fill a bamper and toss off your glasses,
Buss and part with your frolicksome lasses,
Then aboard and unfurl the wide flowing sail.
CHORUS.
While British oak beneath us rolls,
And English courage fires our souls;
To crown our toils, the fates decree,
The wealth and empire of the sea.
II.
Our canvas and cares to the winds we display,
Life and fortune we cheerfully venture;
We laugh and we quaff and we banter,
Nor think of tomorrow, whilst sure of today*
CHORUS.
While British Oak, etc.
III.
The streamers of France at a distance appear,
We must mind other music than catches;
Man your quarters and handle your matches,
Your cannon advance and for battle prepare.
CHORUS.
While British Oak, etc.
IV.
Engendered in smoke and delivered in flame,
British vengeance roars loud as the thunder;
Let the vault of the sky burst asunder,
So victory follows with riches and fame.
CHORUS.
While British Oak, beneath us rolls,
And Irish courage fires our souls;
To crown our toils the fates decree,
The wealth and empire of the sea.
THE TRUE BRITON.
I.
YE true Britons all, whose brave loyalty dares,
To face the French King, and his Popi snares.
Exert all your might in sound liberty's cause,
And stand by true Britons, and stand by their laws.
CHORUS.
Then arm, arm, arm let all true Britons cry,
Let us live free, or Britons let us die.
II.
If France and the Pope, would your senses deceive,
Be cautious to hearken, be slow to believe;
They Will tell us fine stories to tickle our ears,
And gild their designs, to dispel Briton's fears.
Then arm, etc.
III.
Come then brother Britons and join me in hand,
United thus bravely, let us guard our own land.
Mean while let our fleets but reside on the main,
Then Britons most nobly their rights will maintain.
Then arm, etc.
IV.
Then haste to the bottle, and joyously sing,
To glory and health, and long life to our King;
In a bumper drink lasting success to our arms,
That Britons may ever be free from alarms.
CHORUS.
Then arm, arm, arm let all true Britons cry,
Let us live free, or Britons let us die.
FOR SAINT GEORGE's DAY.
I.
WHEN Britain first at Heaven's command
Arose from out the azure main,
This was the charter of the land.
And guardian Angels sung this strain:
Rule Britannia, Britannia rule the waves,
Britons never shall be slaves,
II.
To guard this charter's sacred rights,
St. GEORGE, the British champion rose,
In foreign fields and martial fights.
He still prevailed over England's soes,
Hail great GEORGE, the British champion hail
Thy deathless honors never can fail,
III.
Success still crowned his shining arms,
Where ever the call of freedom led;
His breast the thirst of honor warms,
And smiling beauty blessed his bed.
CHORUS.
Hail, etc.
IV.
Subdued at length, by age and toils,
The hero sought his native sky;
And left his sons the well-earn'd spoils,
Of honor, peace and liberty.
Hail, great GEORGE, triumphant hero hail,
Tay, etc.
V.
From yonder heaven illumined cloud,
He views benign his children here,
While kindred spirits warble loud,
St. GEORGE'S sons deserve his care.
CHORUS.
Hail, etc.
VI.
Sweet vernal (...) bedeck the morn,
Let friendship crown the festive day;
While heaven born plenty pours her hera,
And peace presides with harmony,
CHORUS.
Hail, etc.
I.
ALL in the Downs the fleet was moored,
The streamers waving in the wind,
When black eyed Susan came on board,
Oh! where shall I my true-love find?
Tell me jovial sailors, tell me true,
If my sweet William sails among your crew?
II.
William, who high, upon the yard
Rocked by the billows to and fro,
Soon as her well-known voice he heard,
He sighed and cast his eyes below;
The cord slies swiftly through his glowing hands,
And quick as lightning on the deck he stands.
III.
So the sweet lark, high poised in air,
Shuts close his pinions to his breast,
If chance his mate's shrill voice he hear,
And drops at once into her nest.
The noblest Captain in the British fleet
Might envy William's lips those kisses sweet.
IV.
O Susan! Susan! lovely dear!
My vows shall ever true remain;
Let me wipe off that falling tear;
We only part to meet again.
Change as ye list, ye winds, my heart shall be
The faithful compass that still points to thee.
V.
Believe not what the landmen say,
Who tempt with doubts thy constant mind;
They Will tell the sailors, when away,
In every port a mistress find:
Yes, yes, believe them when they tell thee so,
For thou art present wheresoe'er I go.
VI.
If to fair India's coast we sail,
Thine eyes are seen in di'monds bright;
Thy breath in Africa's spicy gale;
Thy skin is ivory so white;
Thus every beauteous object that I view
Wakes in my soul some charms of lovely Sue
VII.
Though battle calls me from thy arms,
Let not my pretty Susan mourn;
Though cannons roar, yet safe from harm,
William shall to his dear return:
Love turns aside the balls that round me sly,
Lest precious tears should drop from Susan's eye.
VIII.
The Boatswain gave the dreadful word,
The sails their swelling bosoms spread;
No longer must she stay on board;
They kissed, she sighed, he hung his head:
Her lessening boat unwilling rows to land;
Adieu! she cried, and waved her lilly hand.
I.
WHO'd know the sweets of liberty?
It Is to clime the mountain's brow,
Thence to discern much industry
At the harrow of the plow:
It Is where my sons their crops have sown,
Calling the harvest all their own.
II.
It Is where the heart to trurth allied,
Never felt unmanly fear,
It Is where the eye, with milder pride,
Nobly sheds sweet pity's tear.
Such as Britannia yet shall see;
These are the sweets of liberty,
COME CHEER UP MY LADS.
I.
COME cheer up my lads it is to glory we steer,
To add something more to this wonderful year;
To honor we call you, not press you like slaves,
For who lives so free as we sons of the waves:
Hearts of oak are our ships,
Hearts of oak are our men,
We always are ready,
Steady, boys, steady,
We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.
II.
We never see our foes but we wish them to stay,
They never see us but they wish us away;
If they run, we follow, and drive them ashore,
For if they will not fight us what can we do more.
Hearts of oak, etc.
III.
They swear they will invade us, these terrible foes,
They frighten our women our children and beaus;
But should their flat-bottoms in darkness get over,
Still Britons they will find to receive them on shore.
Hearts of oak, etc.
IV.
We'll still make them run and we'll still make 'em sweat,
In spite of the Devil and Brussel's gazette;
Then cheer up my lads, with one voice let us sing,
Our soldiers, our sailors, our Statesmen and King.
Hearts of oak, etc.
The CHAISE MARINE.
I.
MY dearest life, were thou my wife,
how happy should I be,
And all my care in peace or war,
Should be to pleasure thee;
When up and down, from town to town,
We jolly soldiers rove,
Then you my Queen, in chaise marine,
Small move like Queen of love.
II.
Your love I Would prize beyond the skies,
Beyond the spoils of war,
Would thou agree to follow me,
In humble baggage car.
For happiness tho in distress,
In soldiers wives is seen,
And pride in coach has more reproach,
Than love in chaise marine.
III.
Oh! do not hold your love in gold,
Nor set your heart on gain,
Behold the great with all their state,
Their lives are care and pain.
In house or tent, I Will pay no rent,
Nor care nor trouble see,
And every day I Will get my pay,
And spend it merrily.
IV.
Love not those knaves great fortune's slaves,
Who lead ignoble lives,
Nor deign to smile on men so vile,
Who fight none but their wives.
For Britain's right and you we fight,
And every ill defy,
Should but the fair reward our care
With love and constancy.
V.
If sighs nor groans nor tender moans,
Can win your hardened heart,
Let love in arms, with all his charms,
Then take a soldier's part.
With fife and drum, the soldiers come,
And all the pomp of war,
Then don't think mean of Chaise Marine,
It Is Love's triumphal Car
NEPTUNE's RESIGNATION, Written on the Naval Victory obtained by Sir Edward
Hawke, Nov. 20, 1759, off Bellisle.
I.
THE watery God, great Neptune, lay
(...) France (...) and amorous play,
On Amphitrite's breast;
When uproar reared its horrid head,
The Tritons shrunk, the Neriads fled,
And all their fear confessed.
II.
Loud thunder shook the vast domain,
The liquid world was wrapped in flame,
The God amazed spoke!
Ye winds go forth and make it known,
Who dares to shake my coral throne,
And fill my realms with smoke.
III.
The winds obsequious at his word,
Sprung strongly up to obey their lord,
And saw two fleets away;
One victorious Hawke was thine,
The other Conflans wretched line,
In terror and dismay.
IV.
Appalled, they view Britannia's sons
Deal death and slaughter from their guns,
And strike the dreadful blow;
Which caused ill-fated Gallic slaves
To find a tomb in briny waves,
And sink to shades below.
V.
With speed they fly and tell their chief
That France was ruined past relief,
And Hawke triumphant rode;
Hawke! cried the fair, pray who is he,
Who dare usurp this power at sea,
And thus insult a God.
VI.
The Winds reply, in distant lands,
There reigns a King, who Hawke commands,
He scorns all foreign force;
And when his floating castles roll
From sea to sea, from pole to pole,
Geat Hawke directs their course,
VII.
Or when his winged bullets fly
To punish fraud and perfidy,
Or scourge a guilty land;
Then gallant Hawke, serenely great,
Though death and horror round him wait,
Performs his dread command.
VIII.
Neptune with wonder heard the story,
Of George's sway and Britain's glory,
Which time can never subdue;
Boscawen's deeds and Saunders fame,
Joined to great Wolfe's immortal name,
Then cried, can this be true.
IX.
A King! be sure must be a God,
Who has such heroes at his nod,
To govern earth and sea;
I yield my trident and my crown,
A tribute due to such renown,
Great George shall rule for me.
A CANTATA.
RECITATIVE.
ALL in her fair sequestered cell,
Where happiness was wont to dwell,
Contentment sat, with down-cast look,
And these, (or words like these) she spoke.
AIR.
Genius of Albion! wake your Queen,
Lo Gallia clouds the peaceful scene!
AIR changes.
Bid her arise her wrongs to see,
Protect herself and cherish me!
RECITATIVE.
Britannia alarmed, at Contentment's request.
In a voice that confessed her, her people addressed.
AIR.
Cast the olive wreath off,
Arm, ye Britons, advance,
Sound the trumpet, beat the drum,
Point your thunders at France.
Be brave* and convince them, their efforts are vain,
For that GEORGE King of England, is King of the main;
And that like your forefathers, these heroes of old,
As you're born to be free, you have the sense to be bold.
I.
HE comes! he comes! the hero comes!
Sound, sound your trumpets, beat, beat your drums;
From port to port let cannons roar,
His welcome to the British shore:
His welcome, welcome, etc.
II.
Prepare, prepare your songs prepare,
Loud, loudly rend the echoing air;
From pole to pole your joys resound,
For virtue is with glory crowned:
For virtue, virtue, etc.
I.
IN story we are told
How our Monarchs of old
Over France spread their royal domain;
But no annals can show
Their pride laid so low,
As when brave GEORGE the second did reign.
II.
Of Roman and Greek
Let same no more speak
How their arms the old world did subdue:
Through the nations around
Let our trumpets now sound
How Britons have conquered the new.
III.
East, west, north and south,
Our cannon's loud mouth
Shall the right of our Monarch maintain:
On America's strand
Amherst limit the land,
Boscawen give law on the main.
IV.
Each poor and each town
We still make our own,
Cape-Breton, Crown point, Niagar;
Guadaloupe, Senegal,
Quebec's mighty sail
Shall prove we have no equal in war.
V.
Tho Constans did boast
He Would conquer our coast,
Our thunder soon made Monsieur mute,
Brave Hawke winged his way,
Then pounc'd on his prey,
And gave him an English salute.
VI.
At Minden you know,
How we conquered the foe,
While homeward their army now steers;
Though, they cried, British bands
Are too hard for our hands,
Begar we can beat them in heels.
VII.
While our heroes from home
For laurels now roam,
Should the flat-bottom boats but appear,
Our militia shall show
No wooden shoe foe
Can with freemen in battle compare.
VIII.
Our fortune, and lives,
Our children and wives,
To defend, is the time now or never;
Then let each volunteer
To the drum-head repair --
King GEORGE and OLD ENGLAND forever.
HUZZA for the TARS of Old England.
I.
BRITANNIA no longer over injuries dreams,
For France now has suffered for all her fly schemes,
Morblieu! cry the Monsieurs! indeed so it seems,
Oh the brave tars of Old England,
And oh, the Old English brave tars!
II.
Our George like our Henry, lo! makes France to bow!
Our navy's our bulwark, the world shall allow;
As long as we have Boscawen, Lockhart and How.
Oh the brave tars of Old England,
And oh, etc.
III.
Behold our Prince Edward, in glory's bright way,
See conquest attends on his first bold essay,
Then let us for the tars of Old England huzza!
Oh the brave tars of Old England,
And oh, etc.
For the Sons of ST. GEORGE.
Written at PHILADELPHIA.
Tune, -- Black Sloven.
I.
YE SONS of ST, GEORGE, here assembled to day,
So honest and hearty, so cheerful and gay;
Come join in the chorus, and loyally sing
In praise of your patron, your country and King
II.
Though placed at a distance from Britain's bold shore,
From whence either we, or our fathers came over:
And in will, word, and deed, we are Englishmen all,
Still true to her cause, and awake to her call.
III.
Let Cressey, Poitiers, and let Agincourt show,
How our Ancestors acted some years ago;
While Minden's red field, and Quebec shall proclaim,
That their sons are not changed, or in nature or name.
IV.
Should the proud Spanish Dons but appear on the main,
The Island Falkland's.
they pilfer'd, by force to maintain;
The brave sons of thunder our wrongs will redress,
And teach them again what they learnt of Queen Bess.
V.
Though Rome's rapid eagle to Britain was borne;
Both talons and feathers got plaguily torn;
And Caesar himself, both with foot and with horse,
Was glad to sneak off, -- with "It Is well 'twas no worse."
VI.
Though party contentions awhile may run high,
When danger advances, they will vanish and die;
And all with one heart, hand, and spirit unite,
Like Englishmen think, and like Englishmen fight.
VII.
Then here is to our King, -- and O! long may he reign
The Lord of those men, who are Lords of the main;
While all the contention among us shall be,
To make him as happy as we are made free.
VIII.
And here is to the daughters of Britain's fair Isle,
May freedom and they ever crown with a smile
The sons of St. George, our good Knight so renowned,
The sons of St. George, even all the world round.
IN THOMAS AND SALLY.
RECITATIVE.
A VAST, my boy, avast, all hands on shore,
Mess-mate, what cheer? Old England, hey once more,
I Am thinking how the wenches will rejoice;
Out with your presents, boys, and take your choice;
I Have an old Sweetheart -- but look -- there is the town:
Weigh anchor, tack about and let us bear down.
AIR.
From plowing the ocean and thrashing Mounseet,
In Old England we are landed once more;
Your hands, my brave comrades, holloo boys, what cheer?
For a Sailor that is just come ashore:
II.
Those hectoring blades thought to scare us no doubt,
And to cut us and flash us -- Morblieu!
But hold there, avast, they were plaguily out,
We have sliced them and peppered them too.
III.
Then courage my hearts, your own consequence know,
Yon invaders shall soon do you right,
The Lion may rouse when he hears the cock crow,
But should never be put in a fright.
IV.
You Have only to shun your nonsensical jars,
Your damned party and idle contest;
And let all your strife be, like us honest Tars,
Who shall fight for his country best.
V.
A seafaring spark, if the maids can effect,
Bid the simpering Gypsies look to it;
Sound bottoms they will find us in every respect,
And our pockets well laden to boot.
VI.
The landsmen, may hap, in the way of discourse
Have more art to persuade and the like;
But 'ware those false colors; for better for worse
Is the bargain we are willing to strike.
VII.
Now long live the King, may he prosperous reign
Of no power, no faction afraid;
May Britain's proud flag still exult over the main,
At all points of the compass displayed.
VIII.
No quicksands endanger, no storms overwhelm,
Steady, steady and safe may she sail;
No ignorant Pilots ever sit at her helm,
Or her anchor of liberty fail.
The MARQUIS OF GRANBY.
I.
THOUGH Austria and Russia, France, Flanders and Pruffia.
Have heroes who claim truth's attention,
In the roll of fair Fame, as he took down each name,
Some Briton's I said he should mention:
And since we have men, who are worthy his pen,
Who for England act nobly as can be,
When he saw me persist, then he opened his list,
And in front stood the Marquis of Granby.
II.
Old Time shook his Scythe, as he tottering stood by,
His Iron Teeth dreadfully grated;
Yet the sad looking Crone cleared his brow from a frown,
When Fame had my errand related.
The Cheeks of the Churl, with a smile, seemed to curl,
And he answered me cheerful as can be,
Says the single looked Seer, friend, this point's pretty clear,
We all love the Marquis of Granby.
III.
Like curs in the manger, let malcontents rave,
And talk how enfeebled our race is.
That our fathers were manly, were vigorous and brave,
And their hearts we might read in their faces;
What our ancestors were, at present we are,
I can prove it as plainly as can be,
Let them that would see what a Briton should be,
Behold but the Marquis of Granby.
IV.
Had the cynic Diogenes lived to this day,
He Would thrown down his lanthorn to view him:
He Is esteemed by the good and adored by the gay,
And (...) bark away to him;
By his Monarch sent over, to break the French cover,
With bold pack as staunch as staunch can be,
And British true blues to hunt the French queves
When led by the Marquess of Granby.
V.
Bigot Spain has vast wealth, fickle France has rich wines,
The Italians show mavelous banners.
The Indians may boast of their emerald filled mines,
But Lincolnshire boasts of its Manners;
The di'mond when worn, the wearer adorn,
And sparkle as brilliant as can be,
But a flash from such toys is momentary joys,
For the jewel of -- is Granby.
VI.
Now the hazards of war for a season subside,
His country commands not his duty;
Blow winds to his wishes, be safety his guide,
To England, love, friendship and beauty.
From what do ye call Paderborn, may he happy return,
Aye, quickly too, quickly as can be;
What shall we say then? Why their's Granby again,
And again to the Marquis of Granby.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
I.
HOW little do the landmen know,
Of what we Sailors feel,
When waves do mount, and grinds do blow!
But we have hearts of steel.
No danger can affright us;
No enemy shall flout:
We'll make the Monsieurs right us:
So toss the can about.
II.
Stick stout to orders, mess-mates;
We'll plunder, burn and sink:
Then, France, have at your first-rates;
For Britons never shrink.
We rummage all we fancy;
We'll bring them in by scores;
And Moll, and Kate, and Nancy
Shall roll in Louis d' ors,
III.
While here at Deal we are lying
With our noble Commodore,
We'll spend our wages freely, boys,
And then to sea for more.
In peace we'll drink and sing, boys;
In war we'll never fly:
Here Is a health to George our King, boys,
And the Royal Family.
BELLISLE MARCH; On the REVIEW.
I.
ALL hail to the King,
That in youth's early spring,
Such a promise of glory displays.
May his race still extend,
Freedom's cause to defend,
And the fame of Old England to raise.
May our Edwards of old,
And our Harrys so bold,
In his issue again and again be renewed.
That our sons on the main
May their Empires maintain,
And commerce in safety be pursued.
II.
With many a scar
Behold from the war
The brave legions of Britain advance:
From Minden they come;
Swell the fife, beat the drum,
From Minden the terror of France:
See the brave hardy crew
As they pass in review,
How they smile on their King's royal train:
When these, their looks say
Call us forth, we obey,
And we'll fight all our battles again.
III.
From the east to the west,
British valor confessed,
Stands first on the records of fame.
Let Williamsdorf's plain,
And the borders of Spain
British faith, British courage proclaim.
From the dangerous sword
Of oppression restored,
Fair freedom again shall display;
In safety her wings
For protection, while Kings
Grateful homage to Britain shall pay.
IV.
The feats that were done
By Philip's mad son,
Were but trifles to glories like these;
For ambition he fought,
And the lust only sought
Of his blood-thirsty rage to appease.
But Britons more brave,
Draw the sword but to save
From such tyrants, the rights of mankind:
And the weapon again
When their end they obtain,
Is in peace to the scabbard consigned.
V.
A full flowing glass,
Now to Granby we'll pass,
And to each valiant leader beside;
Nor forget the brave crew,
That with hearts firm and true
For their country all danger defied.
Let the drum beat a charge,
And the nation at large
Rend the wide vaulted sky with their song,
Till echo the sound,
From her grotto rebound,
And the loud gratulation prolong.
The CAMP MEDLEY.
THE Lark was up, the morn was gray,
The Drummers beat reveille;
The jolly soldiers on the ground,
In peaceful camp slept safe and sound:
Only one poor soldier who,
Naught but love could ever subdue;
Wandering through the silent grove,
There to vent his plaintive love.
For women are whimsical, changeable things,
Their sweets, like the bees, they are mingled with stings,
They Are not to be got without toil, care and cost,
They Are hard to be got and are easily lost.
For in seeking a fair one, I found to my smart,
I know not the way, but I lost my own heart.
Ah, hapless, hapless day,
When first I saw fair Biddy!
My heart she stole away,
My head she turned quite giddy.
The world may laugh, and say,
It Is wondrous new to see
A lover so sincere,
A swain admire like me.
She Is comely, tall, and slender,
She Is brighter than the sun:
Her looks are kind and tender,
But ah her heart's like stone,
Too lovely still I found her,
And every method tried,
In hopes to win and wound her,
Yet still I was denied.
But now my hopes are over,
What scheme then can I try?
But like a hapless lover,
Now lay me down and die.
As on the ground he lay,
Minerva came that way,
In armor bright and gay,
And thus to him did say:
Rise, soldier, rise,
I Will take you by the hand,
And I Will lead you through the land,
I Will give you the command,
Of a well-chosen band.
Rise, soldier, rise,
Don't be stupid,
Drive away Cupid,
Follow Minerva's wise command.
Soldier, go home,
Go home, never mind your mistress's scorn;
Slight, slight her again,
For slighted love should slight return.
The soldier then raised from his amorous sloth,
Hasted away to his duty,
Swore to Minerva a terrible oath,
He never would think of her beauty.
Bachelor bluff, Bachelor bluff,
Hey for a heart that is tougher than buff.
He that is single can never wear horns,
He that is single is happy;
He that is married lays upon thorns,
And always is ragged and shabby.
Bachelor bluff, etc,
He that is single, he fears not the rout,
Nothing to him can be sweeter;
Having no wife that can whimper and pout,
And cry can you leave me, dear creature.
Bachelor bluff, etc.
Ye belles and flirts, so smart and so fair,
Say, are not soldiers formed for love?
I Am sure you will find them all sincere,
Would you but kind and constant prove.
But if you slight their passion still,
And tyrannize, their wills to prove,
Depend upon it, they will all rebel,
And will not give a thought to love.
Hold your prating, idle tongue.
(Little laughing Cupid said)
Have you never heard it sung,
Constancy must win the maid?
Then ground your arms, ye sons of war,
Who shine through Britain's happy Isle;
Nor ever quarrel with the fair,
But patient try to win their smile.
Rule, ye fair, ye fair of Britain's isle,
We'll patient try to win their smile.
YE HARDY SONS.
I.
YE hardy sons of honor's land,
Where Freedom Magna Charta plan'd.
Ye sov'reigns of the sea:
On every shore where salt tides roll,
From east to west, from pole to pole,
Fair conquests celebrates your name,
Witnessed aloud by wondering fame,
When! when will you be free?
II.
Mistake me not, my hearts of oak,
I scorn with liberty to joke,
Ye sov'reigns of the sea.
No right I blame, I praise no wrong,
But sing an independent song; --
Since Ministers must be withstood,
And Patriots are but flesh and blood,
I dare with both be free.
III.
Whilst strange told tales from scribblers pen.
Disturb the heads of honest men,
Ye sov'reigns of the sea;
The trash of temporizing slaves,
Who earn their daily bread as knaves.
Heedless which side may rise or fall,
The ready money -- that is their all.
Such fellows cannot be free.
IV.
We meet for mirth, we meet to sing,
And jolly join "God save the King,"
Ye sov'reigns of the sea.
As honest instinct points the way,
Our King, our country, we obey;
Yet pay to neither side our court,
But liberty in both support,
As men who should be free.
V.
Assist, uphold your church and state,
See great men good, and good men great
Ye sov'reigns of the sea:
Shun party, that unwelcome guest,
No tenant for a Briton's breast.
Forget, forgive, in Freedom's spite,
Awe all abroad, at home unite,
Then, then my friends you're free.
VI.
Ye sov'reigns of wide ocean's waves,
To heroes long enshrined in graves,
A requiem let us sing:
I Alfred, Henry, Edward name, --
Then William, our deliverer came: --
May future ages Brunswick own,
Perpetual heir to England's throne,
So here is God save the King,
A SOLDIER's SONG.
I.
HOW stands the glass around,
For shame ye take no care, my boys,
Let mirth and wine abound;
The trumpets sound;
The colors they are flying, boys,
To fight, kill, or wound,
May we still be found,
Content with our hard fate, my boys,
On the cold ground.
II.
Why, soldiers, why,
Should we be melancholy, boys?
Why, soldiers, why, --
Whose business it is to die!
What -- sighing, fie!
Damn fear, drink on, be jolly, boys,
It Is he, you or I! --
Cold, hot, wet or dry,
We Are always bound to follow, boys,
And scorn to fly.
III.
It Is but in vain, --
I mean not to upbraid ye, boys,
It Is but in vain
For soldiers to complain;
Should next campaign
Send us to him who made us, boys,
We Are free from pain,
But if we remain,
A bottle and kind landlady
Cure all again.
HOSIER's GHOST,
By Mr. GLOVER.
AS near Porto-Bello lying
On the gently swelling flood,
At midnight, with streamers flying,
Our triumphant navy rode.
There, while Vernon sat all glorious,
From the Spaniards late defeat;
And his Crews with shouts victorious,
Drank success to Britain's fleet.
On a sudden, shrilly sounding,
Hedious yells and shricks were heard;
When, each heart with fear confounding,
A sad troop of ghosts appeared.
All in dreary hammocks shrouded,
Which for winding-sheets they wore,
And their looks by sorrow clouded,
Frowning on that hostile shore.
On them gleam'd the moon's wan luster,
While the shade of Hosier brave,
His pale band was seen to muster,
Rising from their watery grave.
Over the glim'ring wave he hied him,
Where the Burford reared her sail;
With three thousand ghosts beside him,
And in groans did Vernon hail.
"Heed, ah heed our fatal story,
I am Hosier's injured ghost;
You who now have purchased glory,
In the place where I was lost.
Though in Porto-Bello's ruins,
You now triumph free from fears;
Think, ah think, on my undoing,
And you will mix your joy with tears.
See the mournful specter sweeping,
Ghastly over this hated wave;
Whose wan cheeks are stained with weeping;
Those were English Captains brave.
Mark these numbers pale and horrid,
These were once my sailors bold;
Low each hangs his drooping forehead.
While his dismal fate is told.
I, with twenty ships attended,
Did this Spanish town affright;
Nothing then its wealth defended,
Save my orders not to fight.
O! that in the rolling ocean,
I had cast them with disdain;
And obeyed my heart's warm motion,
To reduce the pride of Spain.
Then the bastimentos never,
Had our foul dishonor seen;
Nor the sea, the sad receiver,
Of this gallant train had been.
For resistance, I could fear none,
And with twenty ship had done
What thou brave and happy Vernon,
Have achieved with six alone.
After this proud foe dismaying,
And her galleons leading home;
Though condemned for disobeying,
I had met a traitor's doom.
To have fallen, my country crying,
He has played an English part;
Had been better far, than dying
Of a grieved and broken heart.
Unrepining at thy glory
Thy peaceful arms we hail;
But remember my sad story,
And let Hosier's wrongs prevail,
After this proud foe subduing,
When your patriot friends you see,
Think on vengeance for my ruin,
And for England wronged in me.
ADMIRAL VERNON'S ANSWER TO HOSIER.
HOSIER, with indignant sorrow
I have heard thy mournful tale,
And if Heaven permit, tomorrow
Our victorious fleet shall sail.
Over these hostile billows roaming,
We will urge our bold design;
With the blood of thousands foaming,
For our country's wrongs, and thine.
On that day when each brave fellow,
Who now triumphs here with me,
Stormed and plundered Porto-Bello.
All my thoughts were full of thee.
Thy disastrous fate alarmed me,
Sure thy image glar'd on high,
And with generous ardour warmed me,
To revenge thy fall or die.
From these lofty ships descending,
Through the flood in firm array,
To the destined city bending,
Our loved sailors took their way.
Straight the foe with horror trembling,
Quits in haste his battered walls;
And in accents undissembling,
As he flies for mercy calls,
Carthagena towering wonder,
At the daring deed dismayed,
Shall ere long by Britain's thunder,
Smoking in the dust be laid.
Still remember thy sad story,
To thy injured ghost I swear,
By my hopes of future glory,
War shall be my future care.
And I Will never leave pursuing
Spain's proud sons from sea to sea,
With just vengeance for thy ruin,
And for England wronged in me.
I.
WE HAVE fought, we have conquered, and England once more,
Shall flourish in fame as she flourished before;
Our fears are all fled with our enemy slain,
Could they rise up anew we would slay them again.
II.
His Monarch to serve and to do himself right,
No Englishman ever yet flinch'd from the fight;
For why neighbors all, we are as free as the King,
It Is that makes us brave, and it is that makes us sing.
III.
Our Prince too, for this, may be thankful to fate,
For it is in our freedom he finds himself great;
No force can be wanting, nor meaner court arts,
He is master of all who reigns in our hearts.
IV.
Should rebels within, or should foes from without,
Bring the crown on his head or his honor in doubt;
We are ready, still ready, and boldly foretell,
That conquest shall ever with liberty dwell.
V.
And now bring us forth, as the crown of our labor,
Good wine and good cheer, with the pipe and the tabor;
Let our Nymphs all be kind and our Shepherds all gay,
For England, Old England is happy today.
TOM AND KATE; Or, the SOLDIER's FAREWELL.
HE. I.
THOUGH the fate of battle on tomorrow wait,
Let Us not lose our prattle now my charming Kate;
Till the hour of glory, pleasure should take place;
Never damp the joys before you, with a future case.

SHE. II.
Faithful to my Tommy, it is all in vain
To think that I will leave you, love, the whole campaign;
Or ever forget the filling each morn the bright canteen,
So long as I Have a shilling, Tom, my purse within.

HE. III.
Here Kate, take my tobacco-box, the soldier's all,
Lest ere night some Frenchman's knocks should doom my fall:
That when I am dead and gone, fairly you may prove,
You had my first, my last, my only pledge of love.

SHE. IV.
Tom put up the box my dear, for you are my all;
And ever will I thee be near, if thou shoud'nt fall:
But Heaven preserve my heart, who thus could faithful prove,
I had his first, his last, his only pledge of love.

HE. V.
But if for some bold action, I a halbert bear,
O! think what satisfaction when my rank you share;
O think and cease your mourning, all fine from top to toe;
With rings your ears adorning, a laced cap and shoe.

SHE. VI.
O! if a serjeant's lady I should chance to prove,
Clean linen I Would have always ready for my love.
Nor ever more should Kitty the Captain's laundress be;
For I think myself too pretty, Tom, for all but thee.

HE. VII.
Check that rising sigh, Kate, stop that falling tear,
Come with me, my pretty Kate, and take thy geer,
But hark! the Heavens befriend thee, hark! the drums command;
Honor, I attend thee, love, I kiss thy hand.

SHE. VIII.
I cannot refrain from crying, though tears I disdain:
Yet I own it is trying hard the point to gain.
May guardian Angels shield thee, and conquest on thee wait.
One kiss, and then I yield thee up, alas, poor Kate.

Gallant Sailor,
by Mr. GARRICK.
NAN. I.
GALLANT Sailor often you told me,
That you would never leave your love;
To your vows I now must hold you,
Now Is the time your love to prove.
To your vows, etc.

SAILOR. II.
Is not Britain's flag degraded,
Have not Frenchmen braved our fleet;
How can Sailors live upbraided,
While the Frenchmen dare to meet.
How can Sailors, etc.

NAN. III.
Hear me, gallant Sailor hear me,
While your country has a foe;
He is mine too, never fear me,
I may weep, but you must go.
He is mine too, etc.
IV.
Though this flowery season woos you,
To the peaceful sports of May;
And love sighs so long to leave you,
Love to glory shall give way.
Love to glory, etc.

SAILOR. V.
Can the sons of Britain fail her,
While her daughters are so true;
Your soft courage must avail her,
We love honor loving you.
We love honor, etc.

BOATSWAIN. VI.
War and danger now invite us,
Blow ye winds auspicious blow;
Every gale will most delight us,
That can waft us to the foe.
Every gale, etc.

HAIL ENGLAND.
I
HAIL England, Old England for glory renowned,
In arms as in arts so transcendently crowned;
It Is thine, strict to honor, no treaties to break,
It Is thine to revenge, when that honor's at stake.
Then now rise ye brave, draw the sword, point the lance,
And bid the bold cannon roll thunder to France.
CHORUS. Huzza -- Huzza, Huzza, O ye
Britons, to conquest pursue,
The trumpet of victory's uplifted for you.
The chorus to be repeated.
II.
Hark, truth speaks, already our heroes prevail,
The roused English Lion makes Gallia turn pale;
Thy cunning, O France, its own fate will decree,
Success attends on us by land and sea;
And wide over the main, shall the British flag fly.
To force that submission which pride would deny.
Huzza, Huzza, Huzza, etc.
III.
Britannia rejoices your ardour to see,
My sons, fight she cries, it is for freedom and me;
Tho Gallic ambition, alliance explore,
You Will conquer them now, whom you have conquered before;
And triumph the truths to all nations shall sing,
The ocean is George's and George is our King.
Huzza, Huzza. Huzza, etc.
The SAILOR's FAREWELL.
Written by Capt. Thompson.
I.
THE topsail shivers in the wind,
The ship she casts to sea;
But yet my soul, my heart, my mind,
Are, Mary, moored with the:
For though thy sailor's bound afar,
Still love shall be his leading star.
II.
Should landmen flatter when we'ere sailed,
O doubt their artful tales;
No gallant sailor ever failed,
If Cupid filled his sails:
Thou art the compass of my soul,
Which steers my heart from pole to pole.
III.
Sirens in every port we meet,
More fell than rocks and wares;
But sailors of the British fleet
Are lovers, and not slaves:
No foes our courage shall subdue,
Although we have left our hearts with you.
IV.
These are the cares; but if you're kind,
We'll scorn the dashing main,
The rocks, the billows, and the wind,
The powers of France and Spain,
Now Britain's glory rests upon you,
Our sails are full -- sweet girls, adieu.
The SAILOR's RETURN.
I.
BEhold from many an hostile shore,
And all the dangers of the main,
Where billows mount, and tempests roar,
Your faithful Tom returns again;
Returns, and with him brings a heart
That never from Sally shall depart.
II.
After long toils and troubles past,
How sweet to tread our native soil,
With conquest to return at last,
And deck our sweet-hearts with the spoil!
No one to beauty should pretend,
But such as dare its rights defend.
By Dr. ARNE.
I.
COME, Britannia shake thy lance,
Plume thyself in martial pride;
Haste! thy glorious shield advance,
Take again thy gallant stride.
Think, oh think, on all thy noble story,
Rouse thee to thy ancient glory.
II.
Hasten, hasten, hence away,
All thy martial ardour show;
Clad in terrible array,
Thou shall vanquish every foe.
Think, oh think. etc, etc.
I.
COME all you brave Britons, who love your own land,
Whose Sires were so brave, so victorious and free;
Who always beat France, when they take it in hand;
Come join honest Britons in chorus with me.
CHORUS.
Let Us sing of our treasure, Old England's good cheer,
On the profits and pleasure of stout British beer;
For your wine tippling, dram sipling fellows retreat,
But your beer drinking Britons will never be beat.
II.
The French with their vineyards, are meagre and poor,
For they drink of the squeezings of half ripened fruit;
But we who have hop grounds to mellow our ale
Are rosy and plump and have freedom to boot.
Let Us sing, etc.
III.
Should the French dare invade us, when armed with our poles,
We'll bang their bare ribs, make their lanthorn jaws ring;
For we beef eating, beer drinking Britons are souls,
Who will spend their last drop for their country and King.
Let Us sing, etc.
OLD CHIRON.
I.
OLD Chiron thus preached to his pupil Achilles
I Will tell thee young gentleman, what the fate's will is:
You my boy, must go,
(The Gods will have it so,)
To the seige of troy.
II.
Thence never to return to Greece again,
But before their walls to be slain.
Yet let not your noble courage be cast down,
But all the while you lay before the town
Drink and drive care away, drink and be merry
You Will never go the sooner to the Stygian Ferry
Bonny Lass in a Barrack.
I.
He. OH bonny lass will you lay in a barrack?
Oh bonny lass will you lay in a barrack?
Oh bonny lass will you lay in a barrack?
And marry a soldier, and carry his wallet?
II.
She. O yes I will go, and I Will think no more on it,
I Will marry a soldier and carry his wallet;
I Will neither ask leave of my mother or daddy,
But off, and away with my soldier laddie.
III.
He. But oh bonny lass! can you go a campaining,
And bear the fatigue of a battle and famine?
When weary and fainting, oh! would you be near me?
If sick, or if wounded thy presence would cheer me.
IV.
She. Oh! yes I can bear all the hardships you mention,
And twenty times more of you had but invention.
If weary and fainting I Would ever be near thee;
In pain or in sickness my presence should cheer thee.
Our 'PRENTICE TOM. In the Recruiting Officer.
I.
KITE. OUR 'Prentice Tom, may now refuse
To wipe his scoundrel master's shoes,
For now he is free to sing and play,
Over the hills and far away.
II.
We shall lead more happy lives,
By getting rid of brats and wives,
That scold and brawl both night and day.
Over the hills and far away.
III.
PLUME. Over the hills and over the main,
To Flanders, Portugal or Spain;
The King commands and we'll obey,
Over the hills and far away.
IV.
Courage boys, it is one to ten,
But we'll return all gentlemen;
While conquering colors we display,
Over the hills and far away.
GROG is the LIQUOR of LIFE.
I.
YE jolly true-blues of the main,
Well skilled in heaving the log;
Attend to a Sailor's rough strain,
Who sings of your favorite Grog.
For grog is the liquor of life,
The delight of each bold British tar;
It banishes sorrow and strife,
And it softens the hardships of war.
II
Brave Vernon, to Britons still dear,
O long may thou live, though incog,
'Twas some deity whispered thine ear,
And hinted the health giving grog.
For grog is the etc.
III.
His vineyards the Monsieur may boast,
And delight in the soup of a frog;
But too soon he shall find to his cost,
That claret must yield to good grog.
For grog, etc.
IV.
Each Saturday night that revolves,
My mess-mate gives me a jog;
To the wife or the sweetheart he loves,
He takes off a cann of good grog.
For grog, etc.
V.
If Jove should as whilom descend,
Of some female mortal a gog,
His nectar as surely would mend
By mixing his liquor with grog.
For grog, etc.
VI.
I heard an Hibernian declare,
By St. Patrick, though born in a bog
That while he could see with an ear,
No wine he would drink except grog
For grog, etc.
VII.
No danger our hearts can dismay,
No terror we feel from a flog;
For what is a dozen a day,
To a double allowance of grog?
For grog, etc.
VIII.
Now (...) is declared, let us advance,
(...) flincher be hanged like a dog,
(...) to proud Spain or vain France,
(...) to freedom and grog.
(...) grog, etc.
The jolly Tar's Invitation.
I.
YE flaunting young landmen, a moment give ear,
To a jolly young tarpaulin so plain and sincere:
Though your clothes are all kiver'd with silver and gould;
With your salagee wigs so trim and so bold;
Mayhap a pea jacket is not to be sold
Then what can an honest Tarpaulin say more?
II.
Leave your scraping and bowing, and lubberly noise,
Your outlandish lingo and gingerbread toys.
We seamen are honest, and that is more than polite,
No scholards so great as to read and to write;
But should France dare to invade us, 'od damme we'd fight.
Then what can an honest Tarpaulin say more?
III.
No danger can startle the salt water soul,
It sarves but to relish the jolly brisk bowl:
In spite at all weather we wheel about ship,
Good rumbo and bumbo, wish toddy and flip,
'Till our hearts like our vessel in liquor do skip.
And what can an honest Tarpaulin say more?
IV.
Here Is the Tartar our ship, just come to the nore;
Then pri'thee my lads, adieu to the shore.
Pipe all hands aboard, the willing and able,
Weigh anchor, Eo! and rouse in your cable:
We'll conquer or die, but mounseer we'll disable.
And what can an honest Tarpaulin say more?
On the Reduction of MARTINICO.
I.
WHAT nation shall dare with Old England compare,
Our achievements our courage have shown:
Let us dance, let us sing, and huzza for our King,
Martinico my boys is our own.
Let us dance, let us sing, and huzza for our King,
Martinico my boys is our own.
II.
Bold Monckton, whose soul not a fear can control,
And Rodney of spirit so great;
We Have convinced the proud slaves, that we lords of the waves,
When we please can determine their fate.
We Have convinced, etc.
III.
Every warm British pill was sent sorth with such skill,
As must fame everlasting procure ye.
They kept out a good look, yet in hurry we took
Their Tobago, Cape Vincent, St. Lucia.
They kept out, etc.
IV.
Delatouche was sincere, when he slew to St. Pierre
With design to take care of the pelf;
Though courageous and stout, yet he could not hold out,
All for reasons best known to himself.
Though courageous, etc.
V.
Had you seen our brave Tars, who despise wounds and scars,
Aloft on each eminence soar;
With our cannon, yare ho! you would confess it I know,
That you never saw Lions before.
With our cannon, etc.
VI.
Now to Spain we'll proceed, she shall smart for each deed,
That like France would our ruin endeavor;
Heaven bless our bold train, both on land and the main,
And King George and Queen Charlotte for ever.
Heaven bless, etc
FLAT BOTTOMED BOATS.
I.
OUR glory renowned on the ocean and shore,
To ages for aye shall be told,
Hawke, How and Boscawen, Wolf, Amherst and Moore,
In the list of fair fame be enrolled:
In praise of such leaders then open your throats.
And laugh at the French flat bottomed boats.
II.
While Barrington swept off the tables Basterre,
At Minden we not the odd trick:
Showed Constans a trump or two, made him look queer,
And won all they had at Quebec;
Then sing and be jolly boys, open your throats.
And laugh at the French, etc.
III.
We'er ignorant what may betide us this year,
But certain of this we are all;
Her course how she will, let kind Providence steer,
For freedom we'll fight and we'll fall:
For King George, and Prince George, then open your throats,
And laugh at the French, etc.
IV.
Like gray hounds half starved, they squint at our food,
And fain from our beef would be fed:
You're welcome Monsieurs, if you will wade to it in blood.
I see you are far better bred.
Paltroons! how they run! then open your throats,
And laugh at the French, etc.
I.
BOUND out on a cruize, no Tar would refuse,
I Have stowed in completely my store;
Two hundred bold men, I command once again,
And shall shortly fall down to the Nore, the Nore,
Shall shortly fall down to the Nore.
I Have room for a score or two, enter boys quick,
A pound to a shilling we'll make the dogs sick.
I Have room, etc.
II.
In days of Queen Bess, we now are no less,
Spain's vaunting Armada we beat:
And at it poor France, strait fell into a trance,
That she has'nt recovered of yet.
In puffs only rich, of her treasure she is rid,
We'll deal the same cards to the Dons of Madrid.
III.
Midst fire and smoke, when we give'em a stroke,
The tawny bravado's shall fly*
Nor priest, bell or book, shall (...) 'em good luck,
As sure as they face us they die*
Saints, wafers, and rags shall be blown into air,
When once we have brought but (...) dogs to bear.
IV.
Safe anchored my boys, in port of our joys,
Snug under the guard of our guns:
Their convents we'll strip, and freight the rich ship,
With the plunder of priests and of nuns.
Then speed the new Terrible well, and Huzza.
And send her safe in the proud Panama.
I.
'TWAS when the seas were roaring
With hollow blasts of wind;
A damsel lay deploring,
All on a rock reclined.
Wide over the roaring billows
She cast a wishful look,
Her head was crowned with willows
That trembled over the brook.
II.
Twelve months were gone and over,
And nine long tedious days;
Why did thou, venurous lover,
Why did thou trust the seas?
Cease, cease then cruel ocean,
And let my lover rest:
Ah! what is thy troubled motion,
To that within my breast?
III.
The Merchant robbed of treasure,
Views tempests in despair;
But what is the loss of treasure
To the losing of my dear.
Should you some coast be laid on,
Where gold and diamonds grow,
You Would find a richer maiden,
But none that love you so.
IV.
How can you say that nature
Has nothing made in vain,
Why then, beneath the water
Do hideous rocks remain?
No eyes these rocks discover
That lurk beneath the deep,
To wreck the wandering lover,
And leave the maid to weep.
V.
All melancholy lying,
Thus wail'd she for her dear,
Repaid each blast with sighing.
Each billow with a tear.
When over the white waves stooping
His floating corpse she spied,
Then like a lilly drooping,
She bowed her head and died.
I.
THE ordnance board,
Such Joys does afford,
As no mortal, no mortal, no mortal,
No mortal ever more can desire;
Each member repairs
From the Tower to the stairs,
And by water wush, and by water wush,
By water they all go to fire.
II.
Of each piece that is ashore,
They search from the bore;
And to proving, to proving, to proving,
To proving they go in fair weather;
Their glasses are large,
And whenever they discharge,
There Is a boo huzza, a boo huzza, a boo huzza,
Guns and bumpers go off together.
III.
Old Vulcan for Mars,
(...) tool, for his wars,
To enable him, enable him, enable him,
Enable him to couquer the faster;
But Mars, had he been
On our Woolwich green,
To have heard boo huzza, boo huzza, boo huzza
He Would have owned great Marlborough his master
In THOMAS and SALLY.
I.
AUspicious spirits guard my love,
In time of danger near him bide;
With out-spread wings around him move,
And turn each random ball aside.
And you his foes, though hearts of steel,
Oh! may you then with one accord,
A sympathetic passion feel,
Behold his face and drop the sword.
II.
Ye winds, your blustering fury leave,
Like airs that over the garden sweep:
Breathe soft in sighs, and gently heave
The calm, smooth bosom of the deep.
Till Halcyon peace returned once more
From blasts secure, and hostile harms;
My Sailor views his native shore,
And harbors safe in these fond arms.
A LOYAL SONG.
I.
SEE Royal Edward land,
See him on Cherbourg strand,
Bravely advance!
Third Edward's glorious name,
Bids emulate his fame,
And Britons wrongs proclaim,
Through bleeding France.
II.
Pour wine a copious rill,
Next to bold Amherst fill,
Boswawen -- all!
Swift from America,
Drive, drive the French away,
Sound forth with loud huzza
Cape Breton's fall.
III.
With George we'll close the song,
May Heaven his days prolong,
A mighty store!
Over Britons brave and free,
Who all as one agree,
Flourish his progeny,
Till time's no more.
The New LILLY BULLERO,
to the old Tune.
On the threatened Invasion from France.
By Mr. LOCKMAN.
THE French are a coming, as news-writers say,
Lilly bullero, bullen a la.
Will over our herring-pond force their mad way,
Lilly bullero, bullen a la.
Rodney grasp our naval thunders,
Dart them at the saucy foe;
Their flat-bottom boats batter;
Their ships of war shatter;
Sink them as the center low,
Excited by Perkin some came here to spy,
Lilly Bullero, bullen a la.
Behold our rich products with ravenous eye,
Lilly bullero, bullen a la.
These were not made for invaders;
Slaves who bow to Rome the knee:
But for Britons hearty
Now all of a party,
Hating soup meagre, and tyranny.
Could the Monsieurs prevail, what dire havoc were here.
Lilly bullero, bullen a la.
A strange metamorphosis soon would appear.
Lilly bullero, bullen a la.
Half starved groups in wooden shoes skeating,
Gibbets erected our faith to destroy;
Pale nuns through grates peeping,
Sighing and weeping,
Mad after a man they must never enjoy.
But take it for granted, some Frenchmen might land,
Lilly bullero, bullen a la.
What would their fate be, when on our strand,
Lilly bullero bullen a la.
Hunted down by our new militia
Soon they would sad pecavi cry;
To some wooden Saint mutter,
Curses morblieu! and sputter,
As on their backs they sprawling lie.
When Pharaoh pursued Israel in the red sea,
Lilly bullero bullen a la,
Overwhelmed was his host, and drowned was he,
Lilly bullero bullen a la.
Monsieurs! the like doom may await you,
Should you our British Lion provoke,
Your bouncing armada,
May prove Gasconada,
And your grand project vanish in smoke
The SOGER LADDIE.
I.
MY Soger Laddie is over the seas,
And he will bring gold and money to me;
When he comes home he will make me a lady;
My blessing gang with my Soger Laddie.
II.
My lovely laddie is handsome and brave,
And can as a Soger and Lover behave:
He Is true to his country, to love he is steady,
There Is few to compare to my Soger Laddie.
III.
Shield him, ye Angels, from death in alarms,
Return him with laurels to my longing arms.
Since from all my cares ye'll pleasantly free me.
When back to my wishes, my Soger ye gi' me.
IV.
Oh! soon may his honors bloom fair on his brow,
As quickly they must, if he gets his due;
For in noble actions his courage is ready,
Which makes me delight in my Soger Laddie.
Tune, -- The MARQUIS of GRANBY'S MARCH.
I.
TO arms, to arms, to arms, my jolly grenadiers,
Hark how the drums do roll it along,
To horse, to horse, with valiant good cheer,
We'll face the proud foe be they ever so strong.
Let not your courage fail you, be valiant, stout and bold,
And it shall soon avail you, my valiant hearts of gold.
Huzza, my valiant countrymen, again I say huzza,
It Is bravely done, the day'll be won, huzza! huzza! huzza!
II.
March on, march on, where thundering cannons roar,
The battle is begun my boys, as you may plainly see;
Stand firm, be bold, and it shall soon be over
We soon shall gain the field, my boys, of our enemy.
The squadron appears my boys, if they dare but stand,
Boys, never fear, mind the word of command.
Huzza, etc.
III.
March on, march on, brave Granby amongst the bravest,
They seem for to threaten us, with their looks so keen,
Anon, anon, our valor shall show it,
The proof of the steel shall soon be seen,
Close to their corpse we will charge them, sword in hand,
Boys, never fear, mind the word of command.
Huzza, etc.
IV.
See how, see how they fly before us,
See how they are scattered all over the plain;
Pursue, pursue, our country will adore us,
In triumph and peace boys, when we return again.
Laurels let your glory crown, for your actions, bold,
The hills shall echo all around, my hearts of gold.
Huzza, etc.
The RECRUIT.
I.
NOW the trade is so dull, and the town is so full,
Of lads that already are undone, my brave boys;
Let Us be wise by their ills and over the hills,
Away for bold soldiers be gone my brave boys.
Who lists in his prime is wise in good time,
A regiment he will have very soon my brave boys;
Then come my jolly blades and quit your starving trades,
For a soldier's the best that is a going brave boys.
II.
Who has a scolding wife, the plague of his life,
Or is fearful of Bailiffs or Dunns brave boys,
Let him be of the cloth and a fig for them both;
When he for a soldier is gone brave boys.
Ye menders of soles and patchers up of holes,
Quit your stalls and your shops and come on brave boys;
Let your Landlords be content with their keys to pay their rent,
When you for brave soldiers are gone brave boys
III.
Never fret, grieve or pine, though a mistress prove unkind,
Since your cure is as sure as a gun brave boys;
Only try and you will prove, that a soldier cannot love,
Then away for bold soldiers begone brave boys.
Who would be Grenadiers, come join the Fuzileers,
A regiment inferior to none brave boys,
From care day and night, we fuddle, drink and fight,
Then away for bold soldiers be gone brave boys.
SMILE BRITANNIA.
I.
SMILE, smile, Britannia smile,
Thy genius comes again;
To guard thy fruitful isle,
And thunder over the main.
Thy gallant sons disdain the ease,
Now crown thee mistress of their seas.
Now crown thee, etc.
II.
While dauntless they advance,
And bid the cannons roar;
They Will scourge the pride of France,
And shake the Imperial shore.
Deriding trumpets over the waves,
With courage never known to slaves.
With courage never etc.
III.
The deck all stained with blood,
The bullets winged with fate;
The wide and restless flood,
Cannot the rage abate.
In Anson's and in Warren's wake,
The souls of Russel and of Blake.
The souls etc.
IV.
Britons pursue the blow,
Like sons of Britons fight;
Convince the haughty foe.
That you will maintain your right.
Defiance bid to France and Spain,
Assert your empire over the main.
Assert your Empire etc.
A favorite Song,
set by the immortal PURCELL, for two voices.
Sung at the Knighting of Don Quixote, in the Opera of that name.
I.
SING all ye Muses your lutes strike around,
When a soldier's the story, what tongue can want sound;
Who danger disdains, wounds, bruises and pains,
When the honor of fighting is all that he gains.
II.
Rich profit comes easy in cities of store.
But the gold is earned hard when the cannons do roar;
Yet see how they run at the storming a town,
Through blood and through fire to take the half moon.
III.
They scale the high wall,
Whence they see others fall:
Their hearts precious Darling,
Bright glory pursuing.
Though death underfoot
And the mine is just blowing,
IV.
It springs, up they fly,
Yet more will supply,
As bridegrooms to marry
They hasten to die;
Till fate claps her wings,
And the glad tidings brings,
Of the breach being entered
And then they are all Kings.
V.
Then happy's she whose face
Can win a Soldier's grace;
They range about in state,
Like Gods disposing fate:
No luxury in peace, or pleasure in excess
Can parallel the joys, the martial hero crown,
When flushed with rage, and forced by want,
He storms a wealthy town.
JACK TAR's SONG.
Tune, -- A Begging we will go.
COME bustle, bustle, drink about,
And let us merry be,
Our Cann is full, we'll pump it out,
And then all Hands to Sea.
And a sailing we will go
II.
Fine Miss at Dancing-school is taught,
The Minuet to tread,
But we go better when we have brought
The Fore Tack to Cat Head.
III.
The Jockey's called to Horse, to Horse,
And swiftly rides the Race,
But swifter far we shape our course
When we are giving Chase.
IV.
When horns and shouts the forest rend,
His pack the Huntsman cheers,
As loud we hollow when we send
A Broadside to Mounseers.
V.
The What's-their-names, at Uprores squall.
With music fine and soft,
But better sounds our Boatswain's Call,
All hands, all hands aloft!
VI.
With gold and silver streamers fine
The Ladies Rigging show,
But English ships more grander shine,
When Prizes home we tow.
VII.
What Is got at sea we spend on shore,
With Sweethearts, or our Wives,
And then, my Boys, hoist Sail for more,
Thus passes Sailors lives.
And a sailing we will go.
A CANTATA.
By Mr. WORGAN.
RECITATIVE.
WAKED by the horn,
Like the spring decked in green;
Betimes in the morning the hunters are seen;
With joy on each brow they enliven the place,
And impatiently wait to join in the chase.
AIR.
From his close covert roused, the stag swiftly flies,
As the arrow that is shot from the bow;
Over rivers and mountains, all dangers defies,
And fears nothing but man his worst foe.
And now they chase him through the copse.
Panting, struggling, see he drops!
Hark, rude clamours rend the skies,
While the dappled victim dies.
RECITATIVE.
Thus Briton's sons in Harry's reign,
Pursued the trembling Gaul;
Through streams of blood, over hills of slain,
And triumphed in his fall,
Now hostile foes alarm,
Arm, arm, Britannia arm.
AIR.
Then away to the Field, it is greet George gives the word,
Quit the horn for the trumpet, the whip for the sword;
Like our valiant forefathers, stern death let us face.
Be as glorious in war, as we are in the chase.
HOT STUFF.
Wrote at Amboy, in the Spring 1759, by Major General HALE, then Lieutenant
Colonel of the 47th regiment, commanded by Genesis Lascelles.
Tune, -- "The Lillies of France."
I.
EACH death doing dog, who dare venture his neck,
Come follow the hero who goes to Quebec;
Jump aboard of your transports and loose every sail,
Pay your debts at the tavern by giving leg-bail;
And he that loves fighting shall soon have enough
Wolf commands us, my boys, we will give them hot stuff.
II.
Up (...) St. Lawrence, our troops shall advance,
To the Grenaddiers march we will teach them to dance;
Cape Breton we have taken, and next we will try,
At their capital to give them another black eye;
Vaudreuil it is in vain ye pretend to look gruff,
These are coming who know how to give ye hot stuff.
With powder in his periwig and snuff in his nose,
Monsieur will come down our descent to oppose;
And the Indians will come, but the Light Infantry,
Will soon oblige them to betake to the tree;
From such rascals as these, can we fear a rebuff,
Advance Grenadiers and let fly your hot stuff.
IV.
While the 47th regiment is dashing ashore,
And bullets are whistling and cannons do roar;
Says Montcalm these are Shirley's, Note. Shirley and Pepperell's regiments
being made prisoners at Oswego, and the clothing of Lascelles's regiment taken
by Mons. Chateleaut, the clothing of Shirley's was issued to the 47th regiment.
I know their lappels,
You lie says Ned Botwood, we belong to Lascelles;
Though our clothing is changed, yet we scorn a powder puff,
Then have at ye, ye barbers, here is give ye hot stuff.
V.
With Monckton and Townshend, those brave Brigadiers,
I think we shall soon knock the town 'bout their ears;
And when we have done with our mortars and guns,
If you please mother Abbess a word with your Nuns;
Each soldier shall enter the Convent in buff,
And there never fear us we'll give you hot stuff.
I.
IN the garb of Old Gaul, and fire of Old Rome,
From the heath-cover'd mountains of Scotia we come;
Where the Romans endeavored our country to gain,
But our ancestors fought, and they fought not in vain.
CHORUS.
Such our love of liberty, our country and our cause,
Like our ancestors of old, we'll stand by freedom's laws;
We'll boldly fight like heroes bright for honor and applause,
And defy the French and Spaniards to alter our laws.
II.
No esseminate customs our sinews embrace,
No luxurious tables enervate our race;
Our loud-sounding pipe bears the true martial strain,
So do we the old Scottish valor retain.
Such our love of liberty, etc.
III.
We Are tall as the oak on the mount of the vale,
Are swift as the roe that the hound does assail;
As the full moon in autumn our shields do appear,
Minerva would dread to encounter our spear.
Such our love of liberty, etc.
IV.
As a storm on the ocean when Boreas blows,
So are we enraged when we rush on our foes;
We sons of the mountains, tremendous as rocks,
Dash the force of our foes with cur thundering strokes.
Such our love of liberty, etc.
V.
Quebec and Cape Breton, the pride of Old France,
In their troops fondly boasted till we did advance
But when our claymores they saw us produce,
Their courage did fail, and they su'd for a truce.
Such our love at liberty, etc.
NEW HEARTS of OAK.
I.
WHAT mortals on earth can with Britons compare,
The rivals of both in commerce and war;
Our soldiers and sailors all heroes surpass,
And our castles of wood stand like castles of brass
Hearts of oak are our ships,
Hearts of oak are our men,
We always are ready,
Steady boys steady,
We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.
II.
The fame of our arms both the Indies have known,
And often have been awed by our naval renown;
For glory we have ransacked the globe all around,
To furnish new conquests, new worlds must be found.
Hearts of oak, etc.
III.
But know we are not merely the lords of the seas
In Asia we crowns can dispense as we please;
Proud Nabobs to us owe their title to rule,
And when we have a mind can dethrone the Mogul.
Hearts of oak, etc.
IV.
See proud Pondicherry, the pride of the east,
Where late mighty Lally defiance expressed;
To Britain a conquest now easily falls,
In spite of her boasted impregnable walls.
Hearts of oak, etc.
V.
America's Islands our thunder alarms,
And all its vast continent bows to our arms;
While bravely in Europe our heroes advance,
And Hodgson and Keppel strike terror to France.
Hearts of oak, etc.
VI.
If ever the Monsieurs should attempt to invade,
We'll deem it no more than a martial parade;
At their Quixote invasions we always shall smile
And bid them remember the fate of Bellisle.
Hearts of oak, etc.
BRITONS STRIKE HOME.
I.
To arms! your ensigns straight display,
Now set the battle (...) array;
The oracle for war declares,
Success depends upon your hearts and spears.
II.
Britons strike home,
Revenge your country's wrongs,
Fight and record
Your selves in Druid songs.
Sung by Mrs. Pinto, in Artaxerxes.
THE soldier tired of war's alarms,
Forswears the clang of hostile arms,
And scorns the spear and shield:
But if the brazen trumpet sound,
He burns with conquest to be crowned,
And dares again the field.
Sung in Almena.
THE martial host, and tented plain,
May fright the poor and timid swain,
Who never felt ambitious fire;
But nothing awes, or should control,
The truly great, undaunted soul,
That dares to empire's height aspire.
I.
ARISE, arise, great dead, for arms renowned,
Rise from your urns, and save your dying story;
Your deeds will be in dark oblivian drowned,
For mighty William seizes all your glory.
II.
Again the British trumpet sounds,
Again Britannia bleeds;
To glorious death, or comely wounds,
Her godlike Monarch leads.
III.
Pay us, kind Fate, the debt you owe,
Celestial minds from clay unite;
Let coward spirits dwell below,
And only give the brave to die.
The HEROIC FAIR.
I.
AWAY with soft sighs! our danger alarms!
Our country solicits our smiles to its aid;
Let our beauty inspirit its vot'ries to arms,
And heroes alone win the hearts of the maid.
II.
Last month my dear Colin, with tear-swimming eyes,
Pressed my hand, while he locked a whole volume of woe;
Even then (for my heart never wore a disguise)
If you love me, said I, go and conquer the foe.
III.
Go and rush to the fight, go and conquer the foe;
Securing your country's, secure your own bliss,
Love shall nerve your bold arm, love shall prosper each blow,
And the ruin of France shall procure you a kiss.
IV.
Go, then! He obeyed, resolved not to stay,
But pressed my lips first; how else could we part?
I sighed him success, as the youth went away;
For his worth had secured every wish of my heart
V.
If by my example my sex was inspired,
No nation would dare to provoke British rage,
Our Swains with true courage would always be fired,
And our smiles create Heroes in every age.
OH! what joys does conquest yield,
When, returning from the field,
In triumphant state we see
The god-like hero crowned with victory!
Laurel wreaths his head surrounding,
Banners waving in the wind;
Fame her golden trumpet sounding,
Every voice in chorus joined;
All uniting to proclaim
The immortal honors of his name.
The SOLDIER's FAREWELL.
RECITATIVE.
ROUSED by the drum, the signal to away,
Ready to march, see Soldier WILL obey:
Close to his side his much-loved MOLL appears,
Her hair disheveled, red her eyes with tears:
Her belly prominent, too plainly shows,
Not vain her grief, not vain alas! her woes;
With loving arms she clasped him to her breast,
And thus her wishes, thus her fears expressed.
AIR.
Tune, -- Long had the French Navy.
And must my dear William sail over the main?
I fear, ah! I fear I shall see thee no more;
In my mind I behold the broad ensigns displayed,
The men all in order for battle arrayed;
The trumpet gives notice for fight to prepare,
I die at the thoughts on it, I sink with despair.
CHORUS, The trumpet, etc.
Should heaven assist thee against the proud foe,
And conquest the laurel of victory bestow!
Safe returned to my arms should I see thee again
Escaped from the contest where thousands are slain
How blessed will my fate be, -- while many must mourn,
For those whom grim death will not permit to return;
My spirits revive, safe from war's dread alarms,
My William with glory shall bless these fond arms.
RECITATIVE.
WILL, in whose bread each manly virtue shone,
With sympathizing sorrow heard her moan;
First wiped the tears that started in his eyes,
And then to calm her sorrow thus he tries.
AIR.
Tune, -- What Cheer, my honest Mess-Mate.
Never fear my dearest Molly,
But I shall come again;
Though over the foaming ocean,
I sail against proud Spain:
From death kind Heaven will guard me,
Amid the dire alarms,
And safe again restore me,
Unto thy faithful arms.
Then grieve not, I must leave you,
It Is only for a while;
To England soon I shall return,
With honor and with spoil;
Then banish sorrow from thy heart,
That foe to all thy charms,
For safely I shall come again
Unto thy faithful arms.
A NEW ROAST BEEF.
To the old Tune.
I.
NOW Old England's Flag is Commander in Chief,
With Monsieur our Monarch turned over a new leaf,
Down, down with French dishes, up, up with Roast Beef.
O the Roast Beef, etc.
II.
In Flat-Bottoms, slily, those schemers were coasting,
They threatened Invasion, but spite of their boasting,
No Ribs of Roast Beef had they; but a Rib Roasting.
III.
While good English Beef, and good English brown Beer,
Please our tastes, and each day on our tables appear,
What more can we hope for, or what can we fear.
IV.
The Spaniards once strove, by the strength of their Guns,
To make us keep Lent, and to turn our Girls Nuns,
But we still roast our Beef, for we basted the Dons.
V.
At Minorca indeed, though I speak it with grief,
Our garrison fainted for want of relief,
They grew out of hopes as they grew out of Beef.
VI.
But at Minden, well fed, why we there faced about,
Right and Left, Van and Rear, Foot and Horse put to rout;
They would be in our Beef -- but, avast, they were out.
VII.
To plunder our Cupboards, France sent the Breast Fleet,
We a belly-full gave them without any meat;
They then sold their Plates 'cause they would nothing to eat.
VIII.
We came, saw, and conquered, the French Lilies droop,
Louisbourg, Montreal, Martinique, Guadaloupe,
Their Towns we tossed up, just as they swallow Soup.
IX.
By the strength of our Beef we our Bulkwarks maintain,
As Liberty's firstborn, and Lords of the Main,
And those deeds are witnessed by France and by Spain.
X.
All Knights, by their Titles, in Heraldry shine,
Nay, Writers Romantic have styled some divine,
But what are their Sirs to Old England's Sir-loin.
XI.
Let us honor this Dish, it is in dignity chief,
For garnish will give it the noblest relief:
Here Is LIBERTY, -- LOYALTY, -- aye, and ROAST BEEF.
O the Roast Beef, etc.
Tune, -- God save the King.
I.
FLEET, spread thy canvass wing;
Fly and fresh laurels bring
From hostile shores:
Wide over the western main
Thy wonted rights maintain,
Whilst, in the loudest strain,
Thy thunder roars.
II.
See HOWE's flag waving high,
See victory round him sly,
And say advance!
"O for some sacrifice!"
(That great Commander cries)
"Rise, my brave tars, arise
"And humble France!
III.
"Treason in black array,
"Cannot your hearts dismay,
"Though danger rolls.
"To conquest then aspire!
"Be glory our desire --
"Rebellion must retire
"Before such souls.
IV.
"Maintain Britannia's cause --
"Revenge insulted laws,
"Midst war's alarms.
"For unborn Britons right.
"For GEORGE, and freedom fight;
"And crush, with loyal might,
"Traitors in arms!"
Additions to the original Roast Beef of Old England
By a LADY.
After the fourth Stanza.
V.
BRAVE Edward the third, for his courage renowned,
His son at sixteen, who with laurels was crowned
Eat beef with their armies, so never gave ground.
Oh the Roast Beef, etc.
VI.
The Henry's so famous in story of old,
The fifth conquered France, and the seventh we are told,
Established a band to eat beef and be bold.
Oh the Roast Beef, etc.
VII.
The French and the Dutch, who against Masons combine,
On sallad and butter forever may dine,
Whilst Brothers in England never wants a sirloin.
Oh the Roast Beef. etc.
VIII.
When good Queen Elizabeth, etc.
IX.
In those days if fleets, etc.
X.
King James when he traveled the throne to ascend.
In Yorkshire, was pleased this good dish to commend,
And made it a Knight as historians pretend.
Oh the Roast Beef, etc.
A MEDLEY for the LIGHT-INFANTRY.
By a SOLDIER.
Tune -- "When I drain the rosy bowl."
SOLDIER whilst the flowing bowl
Warms your heart and cheers your soul,
Let me to your mind recall
Scenes familiar to us all,
In the gloomy forest's shade,
Where your weary limbs you have laid,
Or your parched mouth applied
To the cool refreshing tide.
Think you see the nights again,
When, amid the rattling rain,
Some of Britain's light-armed troops
Sit around their fires in groups;
Some, in wigwams seeking rest,
With the toiling march oppressed,
Sleep the stormy night away,
Heedless of the coming day.
Listen to that swelling noise!
It Is the bugle's warlike voice,
Which, in accents loud and clear,
Warns us that the foe is near:
War to noble minds has charms;
See the Light-Bobs spring to arms,
Form and march without delay,
Pleased the summons to obey.
(Away to the cepse.)
Behold with what ardor to action they press,
They dash into cover with glee;
Insulted Britannia they wish to redress,
And set sad America free:
Through thickets and marshes they patiently go,
Till darkness gives way to the morn; --
Assailed by a volley, to close with the foe
They rush -- at the sound of the horn.
The Rebels retire till no sheltering tree
A culprit from vengeance corceals;
It Is then that, unlike to Achilles, they see
Their only defense is their heels:
When over the plain, and across a ravine,
On pinions of fear they are borne,
Though boldest when safest, they hear with chagrine
The death-boding sound of the horn.
The Britons over every obstruction pursue,
And dauntlessly force the ravine;
In turning the flanks of the fanatic crew
Their disciplined courage is seen:
Through sulphur'ous clouds and lead showers they proceed
To charge! -- Now dismayed and forlorn,
The traitors, transfixed by the bayonet, bleed!
Triumphant's the sound of the horn!
(Hosier's Ghost.)
Mark von wretch submissive bending,
In whose features shame and grief
Mixed with terror seem contending;
That was late a Rebel Chief: --
"Give me quarter," hear him crying,
"I beseech you on my knee!
"I am not prepared for dying
"Since my country's wronged by me."
"For your vows and treaties breaking
"Though your forfeit life should pay,
"Rise -- it is not worth my taking,"
(Hear the generous victor say:)
"Give this lesson due attention; --
"If you would be tru'ly free,
"Help to quell this dire contention,
"Take your country's part like me,
(Lumps of Pudding.)
We Have shown them full often of what stuff we are made,
As often unmerited mercy displayed;
But should they persist, we'll our pity restrain,
And probe to the quick the approaching campaign.
Then hence with all theadbare disputes for this night;
To laugh there is a season, as well as to fight;
And one at a time is enough by my soul,
And so brother soldier -- about with the bowl.
The CHORUS of WARRIORS. In the Masque of PRINCE ARTHUR.
The Music by PURCEL.
COME if you dare, our trumpets sound.
Come if you dare our foes rebound;
We come, we come, we come, we come,
Says the double, double, double beat of the thundering drum.
Now they charge on a main, now they rally again,
The gods from above the mad labor behold,
And pity mankind that will perish for gold.
I.
THE heroes preparing to finish the war,
And bid to the camp, to the camp an adieu;
Now sheath up their swords, and rejoice O ye fair,
To think, to think of returning to you.
II.
With smiles then ye lasses embellish your charms,
Your lovers with rapture, with rapture will come;
O! take the brave fellows then close to your arms,
And tenderly, tenderly welcome them home.
OF good English Beer our songs let us raise,
We Have a right by our freedom's charter;
And follow our brave forefathers ways,
Who lived in the days of King Arthur.
Of those gallant days loud fame has told,
Beer gave the stout Britons spirit;
In love they spoke truth, In war they were bold,
And flourished by dint of merit.
CHORUS.
Then like them crown our bowls,
Our plenteous brown bowls,
And take them off clever,
To all true English souls,
And Old England, Old England, for ever,
Huzza! Old England for ever,
Huzza! Old England for ever,
Old England, Old England,
Huzza! Old England for ever.
The glory in love, or war they won.
By battles and sieges, and sallies,
Was the happy effects of their own
Good beer and roast beef in their bellies;
All foreign attempts they did disdain,
So fired with resolution;
For liberty they would bleed every vein,
To keep their own constitution,
Cho. Then like them crown our bowls, etc.
Like them let us fill, and drink, and sing,
To all who our state are aiding;
To commerce, that our wealth does bring,
And every branch of our trading:
By commerce all grandeur we sustain,
That makes a powerful nation:
Then let us agree, and with vigor maintain
Our trade and our navigation.
Cho. Then like them crown our bowls, etc.
The SAILOR's RANT.
I.
HOW pleasant a sailor's life passes,
Who roams over the watery main;
No treasure he ever amasses,
But cheerfully spends all his gain.
We Are strangers to party and faction,
To honor and honesty true;
And would not commit a bad action,
For power or profit in view.
CHORUS.
Then why should we quarrel for riches,
Or any such glittering toy?
A light heart and a thin pair of breeches
Goes thorough the world, my boy.
II.
The world is a beautiful garden,
Enriched with the blessings of life,
The toiler with plenty rewarding,
Which plenty too often breeds strife.
When terrible tempests assail us,
And mountainous billows affright;
No grandeur or wealth can avail us,
But skilful industry steers right.
Then why should, etc.
III.
The courtier's more subject to dangers,
Who rules at the helm of the state,
Then we, to all politics strangers,
Who 'scape the snares laid for the great*
The various blessings of nature,
In various climates we try,
No mortal than us can be greater,
Who merrily live till we die,
Then why should etc.
THOSE best sons of Britain bold open and brave,
Who dare the loud tempest and stem the rough wave,
Theirs is the sound bottom on which to rely,
And theirs the firm heart that will conquer or die.
It Is our country that calls us, her voice we obey,
When she wants our aid shall a sailor say nay;
With the foes of Old England our rulers may cope,
While a sword we can brandish or handle a rope.
Dare the coxcomb in heart dare the capering slave,
Despise us plain fellows whom freedom makes brave,
For Britain shall find us, both body and soul,
As true to her cause as the steel to the pole.
Huzza, huzza gallant hearts let the triflers behold,
Such Englishmen now as they fled from of old;
From the mistress we own from the Monarch we serve,
No distance no danger shall ever make us swerve.
Let land men delight in deceit and grimace,
Attempt at your throat while they laugh in your face;
Too honest for art, and too gallant for guile,
We hate where we frown, as we love where we smile.
SHE. AND can thou leave thy Nancy,
And quit thy native shore?
It comes into my fancy
I never shall see thee more.
HE. Yes I must leave my Nancy,
To humble haughty Spain;
Let fears never fill thy fancy,
For we shall meet again.
SHE. Amidst the foaming billows,
Where thundering cannons roar,
You Will think on these green willows,
And wish yourself on shore.
HE. I fear no land nor water,
I fear no sword or fire,
But sweet revenge and slaughter,
Are all that I desire.
SHE. May guardian Gods protect thee,
From water, fire and steel;
And may no fears affect thee,
Like those which now I feel,
HE. I leave to Heaven's protection,
My life, my only dear!
You have my soul's affection,
So still conclude me here.
ADIEU for a while to the town and its trade
Adieu to the meadows and rake,
Our country my boys calls aloud for our aid,
And shall we that country forsake.
It never was known, that true hearts like our own
From hardships or hazards would flinch,
Let our foes then unite, we will show them in fight,
What Briton's can do at a pinch.
A slave may he be who will not agree,
To join with his neighbor and sing,
That the brave and the free such Britons are we
Live but for their Country and King.
A FORE-CASTLE SONG.
Tune, -- How happy could I be with either.
I.
DO you see, as a Sailor, I Will heave off
A bit of a song in my way,
But, if you don't like it I Will leave off,
I soon can my bawling belay,
Odd Lingos Musicianers write in,
Concerning Flats, Sharps, and all that;
We Seamen are sharp in our fighting,
And as to the Frenchmen they are flat.
II.
Outlandish folks tickle your ears
With Solos, and such sort of stuff,
We Tars have no more than Three Cheers,
Which French folks think music enough.
Through Canada loudly 'twas rung,
Then echoed on Senegal's shore,
At Guadaloupe merrily sung,
And Martinique chorus'd Encore.
III.
At Havre we played well our parts,
Though our Game they pretended to scoff,
For Trumps we turned up English Hearts,
They threw down their Cards and sheer'd off
They have met with their match now they feel;
Their Shuffling and Cutting we check;
They were lurch'd at Crown-Point, and lost Deal,
And faith they got slamm'd at Quebec.
IV.
Our music gave French folks the vapors,
It took an odd turn on Conflans;
We knew they were all fond of Capers,
So set up an old English dance.
'Twas Britons strike home that we sounded,
By the strength of that tune they were trounc'd,
The Tididols looking confounded,
While Hawke says their feather-heads pounc'd.
V.
Our instruments always do wonders,
From Round-tops we give serenades;
Our Organs are twenty-four pounders,
Our Concerts are brisk Cannonades.
For Cooks, tho'f the French folks are neater,
Our messes they never can beat,
Our dishes have so much Saltpeter,
And as to our Balls they are forc'd-meat.
VI.
God bless our King GEORGE with Three Cheers, Sirs,
And God bless his CONSORT, Amen.
In past times we have drubb'd the Mounseers, Sirs,
For pastime we'll drubb them again.
There Is one thing I have more to say, -- Though
Beyond seas, my boys, we'll overcome,
If you will give Old England fair play, though
And keep yourselves quiet at home.
I.
AT length, too soon, dear creature
Receive this fond adieu!
Thy pains, ah love, how bitter!
Thy joys how short -- how few!
No more thine eyes so killing
Shall melting looks repeat,
Nor bosom gently swelling
To love's soft tumults beat.
II.
Two passions strongly pleading
My tortured breast divide;
Lo! here my country bleeding!
And there a weeping bride!
But know thy faithful lover
Can true to either prove --
Fame fires my soul all over,
Yet every pulse beats love.
III.
I go where glory bids me,
And points the dangerous way;
Though coward love upbraids me
Yet honor says, obey;
But honor's boasted story
Too soon these tears reprove,
And whisper "Fame and glory,
"Ah! what are ye to love?"
IV.
Then know where ever I wander,
The sport of seas and wind,
No distance hearts can sunder
Whom mutual love has joined*
Kind Heaven the brave requiting
Thy soldier shall restore;
And raptures crown the meeting
Which love never felt before.
FArewell, my bonny, bonny, witty, pretty Maggy,
And a' the rosy lasses milking on the down:
Adieu the Howery meadows, aft she dear to Jocky,
The sports and merry glee of Edinborrow town;
Since French and Spanish lowns stand at bay,
And valiant lads of Britain hold 'em play,
My reap-hook I maun cast away,
And fight too like a man,
Among 'em for our royal Queen Anne.
Each carle of Irish mettle battles like a dragon:
The Germans waddle, and straddle to the drum;
The Italian and the butter bow^y Hogan Mogan:
Good-faith then, Scottish Jocky mauna ly at hame:
For since they are ganging to hunt renown,
And swear they will quickly ding auld Monsieur down,
I Will follow for a pluck at his crown,
To show that Scotland can
Excel 'em for our royd Queen Anne.
Then welcome from Vigo,
And cudgelling Don Deigo,
With strutting rascallions,
And plundering the Galleons:
Each brisk valiant fellow
Fought at Rondondellow,
And those who did meet
With the Newfoundland fleet;
When for late successes,
Which Europe confesses,
At land by our gallant commanders;
The Dutch with strong beer,
Should be drunk for a year,
With their General's health in Flanders.
The LILLIES of FRANCE.
I.
THE Lillies of France and the fair English rose
Could never agree as old history shows;
But our Edwards and Henry's those lillies have torn,
And in their rich standards those ensigns have borne,
To show that Old England, beneath her strong lance,
Can humble though pride and the glory of France.
II.
What would the Monsieurs? would they know how they ran?
Why look at the annals of glorious Queen Anne!
We beat 'em by sea and we beat them by land,
When Marlborough and Russel enjoyed the command.
We'll beat 'em again, boys! so let them advance;
Old England despises the insults of France.
III.
Why, let the grand Monarch assemble his host,
And threaten invasion on England's fair coast:
We bid them defiance; so let them come on:
Have at them! their business will quickly be done.
Monsieurs, we will teach you a new English dance,
To our grenadier's march, that shall frighten all France.
IV.
Let Us take up our muskets and gird on our swords
And, Monsieurs, you will find us as good as our words:
Beat drums, trumpets sound, and huzza for our King!
Then welcome Bellisle, with what troops thou can bring!
Huzza! for Old England, whose strong-pointed lance
Shall humble the pride and the glory of France.
An ANTIGALLICAN SONG.
I.
YE sons of freedom! hail, the day
When first our order rose;
To chase corruption's cloud away,
And venal arts oppose:
Grant Heaven, that over the nation
Our principles may spring!
The surest preservation
Of country and of King,
II.
Let France our lion's rage provoke;
What Antigaul's afraid?
Lo The Captain of the Antigallican Privateer.
Foster gives the noble stroke,
To crush her India trade:
He comes, the Fates restore him;
Propitious breathe, ye gales!
Fame leads the way before him,
And glory fills the sails.
III.
Great George, for whom our bosoms glow,
Send all thy statesmen here;
Thy ministers more wise shall grow;
All courtiers more sincere.
True honor shall inspire them,
The Gallic race to brand,
And patriot love shall fire them,
To save this martial land.
IV.
Though Spain should Gallia's pride assist,
No honest heart will fail;
Our thunder shall their force resist;
The British cross prevail.
Though some our wrongs would smother,
Yet we'll those wrongs resent.
Here Is a health to every brother,
And to our president.
On THUROT's Expedition.
Tune -- When Britain first at Heaven's command.
I.
OLD Neptune from the surging main,
Thus hailed his loved, his favorite isle;
The sportive sea-nymphs of his train,
This lively chorus sung the while.
Britons your courage now display,
And conquest shall your toil repay.
II.
My sons renowned for deeds of arms,
Now, now, assert your country's right;
The haughty foe with fierce alarms,
Once more provokes you to the fight.
III.
Invidious France one effort more,
Her last resource, by Thurot tries;
Though weak, insults Hibernia's shore,
Diffusing terror and surprise.
IV.
While I from tempests smoothe the seas,
And hid impetuous storms subside;
Go -- the wild rage of war appears,
Go check such bold, such daring pride.
V.
With conquest crowned again return,
Each grateful bard your praise shall sing,
Or rear the trophy over the urn,
Of him who died to save his King.
VI.
Again shall peace and plenty smile,
To crown with joy the industrious swain,
All Europe shall revere your Isle,
And hail you masters of the main.
On the last War with SPAIN.
Tune, -- When Britain first at Heaven's command.
I.
WHen Celtiberia's tawny brood,
Of an augmented navy vain,
Dare injure Britain, on Briton's birthright flood,
Shall tamely we the wrong sustain?
CHORUS.
Rise ye heroes, ye sea-bred heroes rise,
Nor let such foes your power despise.
II.
Our hardy sires in battles fierce,
Never unrevenged lets insults go;
Then whilst our fathers we rehearse,
Let every breast with vengeance glow,
Rise, ye heroes, etc.
III.
It Is Heaven incensed at Spain that stings,
To rage unjust, each giddy brain;
Their crimes to punishment he brings,
And we must scourge them on the main.
Rise, ye heroes, etc.
IV.
To their dominions utmost end,
Let us this haughty foe pursue;
And our wide wasting thunders send,
Quite from Gallicia to Peru.
Rise ye warriors, ye stubborn hearts of steel,
And let your foes your fury feel.
V.
The wachful dragon shall in vain,
Their fruit of gold Hesperian guard,
By your Herculean valor slain,
His charge your toils shall will reward.
Rise ye warriors, etc.
Their treasures shall our triumphs grace,
Their waining navy ours increase;
Till they, like Gallia's crafty race,
Shall trembling sue in vain for peace.
Rise ye warriors, etc.
On the KING's BIRTH DAY.
I.
TRUMPETS awake! begin the lay,
To welcome GEORGE'S natal day!
The day, as now, be ever dear,
To grace and mark the circling year.
II.
Flattery's voice be heard not here,
GEORGE from such would turn his ear;
We pour the grateful honest lay,
To hail our Monarch's natal day.
III.
Hark! they cry through all the plains,
"GEORGE the friend of freedom reigns;
"In mirth, and dance, and roundelay,
"We'll keep the much loved annual day."
IV.
GEORGE to every Briton dear,
Himself a Briton, now must hear,
Must hear the duteous vows we pay,
Upon this blessed revolving day.
V.
GEORGE the praise of every tongue,
May thou reign and rule us long;
Whilst all thy bright example see,
And ardent strive to copy thee!
VI.
When battles shall no more appear,
That crowd the great important year,
May thy fatiguing labors cease,
And thou enjoy, who giv'st us peace.
VII.
Beauty adds her wish and care,
('It Is thine to guard and bless the fair)
That years may roll in smiling train,
And glories brighten all thy reign!
VIII.
To GEORGE the good our notes we raise,
Often be these returning days!
Let us shout, let echo ring,
Long, O! long live GEORGE our King.
To the KING.
I.
WHO can attempt a more exalted theme,
What loftier subject can Apollo choose,
Than thee, O GEORGE? Afar thy virtues gleam,
Awaken glory, and inspire the muse.
II.
Nor shall the muse a nobler Monarch find,
A Monarch worthier of eternal fame;
Endowed with justice and a virtuous mind,
Richer in honor and a glorious name.
III.
In vain exulting foes against thee arm,
Whilst mightier Heaven defeats their dark designs,
The godhead's love preserves thee free from harm,
Smiles on thy reign, and round those islands shine.
The SOLDIER's LAMENTATION for the Death of the brave Marquis of GRANBY. A
BALLAD.
Tune, -- To all ye Ladies now at Land.
I.
SAY soldier wherefore drops that tear?
What sorrow frets your brow?
Once foremost in the ranks of war
Why droops your courage now?
Ah me! I have full cause to mourn,
The great, the gallant Granby's gone.
Fall, lal, etc.
II.
No more that valiant heart shall beat,
Or fired at danger's sight,
With noble frenzy spring to meet
The fury of the fight.
Cold is that heart alas! as stone!
Cold all our hearts now Granby's gone.
Fall. lal, etc.
III.
Where ever wars thunders loudest rolled,
His conquering troops he led;
By him inspired, cowards grew bold,
And for him bravely bled.
Our war's great polar star he shone --
Who Will lead us now our Granby's gone?
Fall, lal, etc.
IV.
Deep rooted in his generous heart,
Each tender passion dwelt;
That eye which cold dismay could dart,
At pity's tale would melt.
Unnumbered widows, orphans, moan!
"Our father, friend, our Granby's gone."
Fall, lal, etc.
V.
Ah Rutland, on this mortal stage,
All comfort may thou have!
May peace and patience sooth thine age,
And 'tend thee to thy grave!
Blessed Angels when life's scene is done
Shall waft thee where your Granby's gone.
Fall, lal, etc.
VI.
And thou, Lord Rous, then at Eton School.
Sweet Charles, whose gentle breast,
With all thy father glows;
With thee our future hopes we rest,
With thee our cares repose.
Take, take us, we are all your own,
We'll live for you, now Granby's gone.
Fall, lal, etc.
VII.
But hark the drum, it calls to arms!
Proud Spain shall feel our rage,
At Granby's name each bosom warms,
And eager pants t'engage.
His awful shade shall lead us on,
And horror blast the haughty Don.
Ode to the GENIUS of IRELAND.
I.
IERNE's Genius deign to smile.
And with thy smiles our bosom cheer;
O still protect this much loved isle,
Propitious grant this pious prayer.
May Hibernia ever be
The seat of arts and Liberty.
II.
Albion reigns, the world's great Queen,
And glory rears her standard there;
She smiles, and all is quite serene,
She frowns and realms are struck with fear.
May Hibernia ever be
The seat of arts and Liberty.
III.
May Ireland to its power increase,
And still in trade and wealth advance,
Be bold in war be blessed in peace,
And rise upon the fall of France.
May Hibernia ever be
The seat of arts and Liberty.
In Honor of the QUEEN'S CORONATION.
I.
WHEN CHARLOTTE plowed the azure Main,
Around each seagreen Triton hung;
Each lovely Neriad joined her train,
And thus prophetic Neptune sung.
Rule Britannia, Britannia rule the waves,
Britons never shall be slaves,
II.
A Monarch blessed by every power,
That guards the brave, the free, the good,
Impatient waits to hail the hour,
That crowns thee mistress of the flood.
III.
You favored Isles whose wide domain,
Spreads far as ocean swells his tide,
Shall boast the glories of thy reign,
And make their sovereign's choice their pride.
IV.
To distant times, the historic page,
Shall George's wondrous acts survey;
How Gallia sunk beneath his rage,
And Britain owned his milder sway.
V.
Nor shall the lasting blessings cease,
When time shall late transfer the crown,
From thee shall spring a numerous race,
To hand ten thousand virtues down.
The MILITIA-MAN.
I.
BY our conduct abroad and our councils at home
We Have so cowed the poor French, and so humbl'd proud Rome,
That they darn't look up: why let us keep 'em still down,
For the honor of Britain, the right of the crown.
They are rascally foes;
Then, O follow them close;
And second the blow,
That lately you know,
Was dealt them by Prussia, that son of renown:
Their dastardly bands,
Shrink under our hands;
To no gallant deeds can their armies be stirred:
Triumphant then sing,
And make the air ring,
With bless, bless the King!
Our guardian! -- our father! -- our friend George the third!
II.
We all are free born, and as such let us behave,
With hearts, hands, and purses, against fool, tool, and knave.
O Pope! O Pretender! O Monarch of France!
Where, where are you now? you are sick of the dance.
In our sovereign's right,
We prepare for the fight,
Ever our liberties fall,
Be militia-men all:
Turn our plough-shares to swords, and to meet them advance.
Sound trumpet! beat drum!
Come Frenchmen! come! come!
Yet hear from a foe the advice of a word;
Starved scoundrels beware;
For your souls have a care;
He dies who first dare
Set a foot on the bounds of King George the third.
YE soldiers and sailors, to both I indite,
As children of one king, be brethren in fight;
Let jealousies die, and no more disagree,
Ye lords of the land, and ye lords of the sea.
For such are the titles each annal bestows,
On the bulwarks of Britain, and scourge of her foes.
I.
YE free born of Britain, rejoice ye, rejoice!
Shout, shout, O ye millions, as 'twere with a voice!
'Till the clamorous crowd
Be so joyfully loud,
That King Lewis the proud,
That monarch of shadows, be scared at our joys --
When at length from his fear
He recovers, and dare
To demand from what quarter the noise;
Then, O say, say, ye slaves,
"From the sons of the waves,
"From the brave, from the brave, from the brave, brave boys."
II.
Then tell to your tyrant, O tell him the cause,
Say our freedom and wealth, our land and our laws,
Have been so preserved
By King George the third.
With zeal we are stirred,
His rights to protect and his honor to raise:
And that therefore we'll roar,
On this happy shore,
'Till we strain all our throats to his praise.
To the Monarch it is due,
To our countryman too,
He Is our first English king, for these many fair days.
I.
WHEN England's free scepter Elizabeth swayed,
Then prosper'd our armies, then flourished our trade;
The Frenchmen then swagger'd, but swagger'd in vain,
Then bang came the thundering Armada of Spain
Oh, how did the mighty invincibles jeer;
But she sent the Don back with a flea in his ear:
And George, our young monarch, the third of that name.
Her equal in spirit, shall equal her fame.
II.
Against Howard and Raleigh, Frobisher and Drake,
York, Anson, Hawke, Tyrrel and Saunders we stake;
For Essex and Cecil we have Granby and Pit;
Then Britain, as usual, triumphant shall sit;
Her soldiers and sailors, commanded aright;
Are able and eager as ever to fight:
That George their young monarch, the third of that name,
As Gallant in spirit, be equal in fame.
III.
The hardy bold Albions are still what they were,
The asserters of right, the contemners of fear.
When country and king, and freedom invoke,
Like their bull-dogs they fight, and they stand like their oak.
Then Gallia your haughty bravadoes have done;
Our annals can show what our princes have won.
Great George our young monarch, the third of that name,
Their equal in spirit, shall equal their fame.
IV.
At Agincourt, Cressy, Anjou and Poictiers,
Our Henry's and Edward's have cowed you with fears;
The force of those leaders, forget if you can,
With Ramilies, Blenheim, brave Marlbro' and Anne:
Late Minden, Quebec, Senegal and Goree;
And say, who shall laugh then? is it you, sirs, or we?
Great George our young monarch, the third of that name,
Shall conquer what is left ye, and fix his fair fame.
The JOLLY TAR.
I.
WHY not to the rendezvous venture?
Rot the gang! -- odsblood, I Will enter;
Not like lazy lubbard roam,
To cheat the king and stalk at home.
Lal, lal, etc.
II.
To gallant Tyrrel, now on shore,
I Will take myself and twenty more.
He, Watson, and Boscawen too,
They know full well what we can do,
III.
What Harry! Jack! -- I Am glad you're come,
Moll bear a hand, and fetch the rum;
You Are almost gone my honest kag --
Here Is to Britannia's flying flag.
IV.
And to each Captain bold and true,
Who stands by us as I by you.
We'll lump them all who bear command,
But pox of cowards, sea and land.
V.
Here Is to the never flinching tar,
And to a smart and glorious war,
And to each kind good natured wench:
O bless the king! and damn the French.
I.
'TWAS August the seventh, at three in the morning,
Our cannon against Cherburgh began for to roar;
Never struck colors, our courage adorning,
Grenadiers hasted away to the shore.
CHO. Such is the sport that we boys delight in,
Lead us well on, and we'll never fear fighting.
II.
Midst fire and smoke stood our bold commodore, The gallant Lord How.

Balls flew around him, yet never did he wince;
Serene were his orders on every score,
And close by my Lord fought bold Edward the prince.
III.
No more the French monarch his Cherburgh can boast,
So hurtful to England for many a year;
The shipping all burnt, the works shattered and tossed,
And drove by explosion into the air.
IV.
Some say that our prince was too gallantly bold,
A fault we must own, but a fault we approve;
It runs in the family as I Have been told,
And that has secured them his country's true love.
V.
Firm in the praise of your worthy commanders,
Soldiers and sailors, O make the air ring;
East or West Indies, French coast or Flanders,
Revenge the brave Dury and honor the King.
I.
COME cheer up my noble hearts of gold,
And let it never be said,
That British sailors once so bold,
Should ever be afraid.
Your king and country on you call
Most valiantly to fight,
And do expect you one and all,
To do your country right.
II.
Fear not, my lads, since it is your lot,
To have Sir Edward Hawke,
Who Will make the monsieur go to pot,
And not his country baulk.
He will be true unto his king,
And to his nation too,
And in the ears of France shall ring,
A peal shall make them rue.
III,
Exert yourselves when danger's nigh,
And ye shall sure prevail,
And make Britannia's foes to fly,
And in their turn, turn tail;
So shall you to yourselves procure
Both glory and renown,
In rendering solid and secure
Your gracious monarch's throne.
IV.
Our English HAWKE shall let them know,
He is the bird of prey,
That will not let the French cock crow,
But make him run away:
Or if he dares maintain the fight,
He Will pluck the coxcomb off,
Or strip him of his feathers quite.
And render him a scoff.
I.
VAT mean you Shon Englishman you make dis great poder,
Wit your beef and your puthen, your dis, dat and dother?
Pray vat do you mean, Sir, hit the Frenchmen In de teef,
Wit your beef and your puthen, your puthen and beef.
Derry down, down, etc.
II.
Vat do' we have no beef nor puthen to eat,
We have de fine frogs dat be very cood meat;
We make de friggasce wit de bon soup and sallet,
Which very well suits wit de grand Frenchman's pallet.
III.
You say dat your beef make wou never fear de gone,
But remember Shon English, we make you to run
After us at Blenheim and Malplaquet battles,
Where de gons they did roar, and de drums they did rattle.
IV.
But now we must tell a you with much complaisance,
We intended to have paid you one visit from France;
And if Monsir HAWKE would have let us come over
In our flat-bottom'd boats, we,d landed just at Dover.
V.
But de de'el pick de HAWKE, he will not fly away,
But in de Breast harbor oblige us to stay,
Come squinting and peeping, and play his mad frolic,
Which gave our poor sailors von fit of the cholick.
VI.
But now me vill tell you vat come bye and bye,
Our Admiral he take out his glass for to spy;
He holloa's, truss up boys, dere's nothing to fear,
Shon English begone, and de coast it be clear.
VII.
Den we sailed out amain, and we thought to do something,
But the dogs come again, and vid balls big as bumpkin,
They pounce us and pelt us, and make such a clatter,
Dat two or three of our ships fell down in the vater.
VIII.
Den Monsir Constans was in a very great passion,
And thought he would do something for the honor of his nation;
He boldly commands without more delay,
You dogs take to your heels, and let us all run away.
HISTORY of the WAR.
Tune: Come here false fair, etc.
ARISE Britannia strike the attentive ear,
With our brave deeds performed in modern war;
Sing how thy sons, warmed with thy grandsires fire,
To conquest, wealth, and glory re-aspire.
The goddess hears and smiles; elate to tell,
How Albion rose to fame, how Gallia fell,
Tune: -- Give ear to a frolicksome ditty.
Come listen awhile to my story,
It Is fit for true Britons to hear,
How England resumed her glory,
And Frenchmen resumed their fear.
Tune: -- The Attic fire.
When gentle peace's olive branch,
Had stilled our jars with faithless France,
Britons their arms lay by;
But France, whose faith is all a joke,
The sacred bond of honor broke,
And every treaty's tie.
Tune: -- The Twitcher.
Then says our good king,
It Is a very hard thing,
Friend Lewis should be so uncivil:
Since all bounds he over leaps,
I will seize all his ships,
And blow all his forts to the devil, brave boys, etc.
Tune -- If you had but listen to what, etc.
Then strait he sent out as brave a train,
As ever courted fame on land or main;
Their mighty acts will dignify my song;
Some I Will repeat, for all would be too long.
Tune -- Watkin's breeches.
Have you not heard how Marlbro' burnt
Their shipping at St. Maloes;
Maloes, Maloes, shipping at St. Maloes;
Stores, provisions, ships and all,
He burned at St. Maloes.
Tune -- Ally-Croaker.
This work when completed, with hearts void of fear, sir,
To Cherburgh their course they directly did steer, sir,
To Cherburgh, whose works, near an age had employed, sir,
But in one Glorious day, was by us, sure, destroyed sir:
But first we sent a trumpeter on seeing their alarm sir,
To tell them our business in order and form sir.
Tune -- Lord Thomas he was a bold forrester.
But when he came to Cherburgh gate
He knocked hard at the ring,
And who was so ready as the Governor,
To let the bold trumpeter in.
What news, what news thou bold trumpeter,
What news do thou bring unto me.
We Are come to destroy both your basin and works
And that is bad news for thee.
Tune -- It Is woman that seduces all mankind.
Confounded at the news, with meagre face,
Thus the poor governor bewailed his case.
Tune -- The charge is prepared.
The English are come, our fate is decreed,
Ah! toutes les saints aie pity de nous!
Such force and such ships sure no strength can impede,
The devil confound all the hellish crew.
Then farewell fair town, noble basin adieu,
Morblieu! I must fly, would you could so too;
Here sets our bright sun, here begins our disgrace
For the British with Irish no Frenchman can face.
Tune -- Our goodly ship she was laden deep.
So the works we burnt and the stores we sunk,
And the governor he did run away;
And the flags we brought unto Old England,
For to show that we had won the day.
Tune -- The Abbot of Canterbury.
'Twas our brave forefathers renowned of yore,
Spread death and destruction on false Gallia's shore;
Thus our Edwards and Henry's, our Bembows and Shovels,
Used to thrash the French rascals within their own hovels.
Derry down, etc.
NO peace with Frenchmen were I to direct,
But bang 'till you have banged them to proper respect.
To the gates of Versailles should our cannon advance,
And the grenadier's march should frighten all France.
This my boys we'd do with glee
For Royal George and liberty,
George the third and liberty.
Come fill your glasses, drink with me,
The words are George and liberty.
Let Us and pray 'em and slay 'em on land and on main,
We have, my lads, often, and why not again?
Their Cressy and Poictiers and Agincourt show,
What we, boys, when pitted with Frenchmen can do.
To action then, my boys, with glee, etc.
How often we have been cheated by art and chicane.
But now we can tell them such efforts are vain:
That feuds are destroyed, and that party's a joke,
And now we are united, we are not to be broke.
But one and all will fight with glee, etc.
Whenever the King pleases to say do it now,
Hawke, Tyrrel and Saunders, brave Granby and How,
Shall burn, sink, and plunder, and lower their notes,
In spite of the devil, and flat-bottom boats.
To deeds like these they would go with glee, etc.
See our rocks that defend us and taunt 'em with scorn,
See our prudent young monarch, to whom a son's born;
See, of traitors regardless, he smiles on his throne,
For he knows that each heart in his kingdom's his own.
And that each arm would strike with glee, etc.
FINIS.

