THE MOTLEY ASSEMBLY, A FARCE.

PUBLISHED For the ENTERTAINMENT Of the CURIOUS.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Nathaniel Coverly, in NEWBURY STREET, M, DCC,
LXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following was wrote at the request, and intended only for the amusement of
two or three particular friends, whose importunity has at length prevailed with
the Author to consent to publish it, even against his own inclination, as
nothing was more remote from his design when he first undertook it: -- With
regard to the characters, the impartial Public will determine as they please;
If applicable to any particular persons the praise or blame is theirs: If they
suit nobody -- The Author would inform the candid Reader that he copied from
such characters as were exhibited by his friends; who were satisfied with the
likeness, and are only answerable to the Public whether they exist or not.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE,
MEN.
Esquire. Runt, A short fat old fellow; fond of gallanting the Ladies. Turncoat,
One of the Managers of the Assembly. Bubble, Capt. Aid. Capt. Careless, -- An
honest young Sea Captain.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Flourish, Mrs. Taxall, Mrs. Bubble Miss P --, Daughter to Turncoat. Miss
B --, Daughter to Turncoat. Miss Flourish, Miss Taxall, Miss Doggrel, Tab,
Betty, Servant to Mrs. Bubble.
SCENE, At the House of Mrs. FLOURISH.
Enter Mrs. FLOURISH and Esquire. RUNT. Runt. IT is a very great mortification to
the gentlemen Madam, -- your not permitting Miss Flourish to go to the Assembly.


Mrs. Flourish. I mean it as such Mr. Runt; -- if your sex are so weak and
undiscerning, as to prefer the fading, short lived, perishable trifle beauty,
to the noble exalted, mental accomplishments, which only are of intrinsic
value, Mr. Runt; -- it is fit they should be mortified. -- O why has Heaven
permitted our passive sex to be so long deceived and misled by the idle and
ground* less opinion of the superior wisdom of the male sex! -- in animal
strength I grant their superiority; -- and I have found some capable of
pleasing; -- but few -- very few indeed capable of informing me. --


Runt. But madam you will be pleased to consider, that few ladies are so
accomplished as you are allowed to be.


Mrs. Flourish. Say no more Mr. Runt; -- I am almost sick at the bare mention
of the word; -- it is so horribly prostituted and misapplied upon almost all
occasions.


Runt. I beg your pardon madam.


Mrs. Flourish. I do not mean in this instance Mr. Runt: -- but pray Mr. Runt
how comes it that you are one of the managers of this motley assembly?


Runt. I was advised madam -- both for my interest and safety.


Mrs. Flourish. By one of your own sex, -- I dare say --


Runt. It was madam* -- Mr. Turncoat advised me.


Mrs. Flourish. To keep him in countenance I suppose; -- well what appearance
do they make, compared to our assemblies in the seige?


Runt. I wish you had been there the last evening madam, only to have seen the
contrast.


Mrs. Flourish. Contrast indeed! I dare swear: -- O Mr. Runt! -- when shall we
see such happy times again? Will they ever return Mr. Runt.?


Runt. Turncoat says he has long been afraid they never would return; -- and
wishes all the friends of government would do as he has done; -- tack about,
and make fair weather with the other side.


Mrs. Flourish, How versatile is man* have you known any one of my sex on the
side of government to change their opinion Mr. Runt? nay more -- have we not
openly, in the face of day, and in defiance of our present mock rulers --
frequently visited our dear, distressed friends in Cambridge. While the men! --
you dastard men! -- meanly stole there under covert of the night; and some of
the highest Whigs, who in some companies have exclaimed against us, have been
glad to make use of our interest for you know what purposes; -- and their wives
who have sometimes accompanied us, have returned more than half converted, by
the gentility, address, politeness, and generosity of the Convention troops. --
O my God! my heart bleeds whenever I think of the poor distressed Convention
troops: -- What will become of them Mr. Runt? It is impossible they can endure
such a horrid match: -- Enough almost to kill our Yankies.


Runt. It is very cruel treatment; and it is a wonder if we don't suffer for it
in the end; I never could learn the cause madam.


Mrs. Flourish. The French! The cursed French! Mr. Runt, are the cause of all
our misery: -- This Rebellion would have been crushed long before this, but for
them -- We could not have held out much longer, when they stepped in; but must
have submitted to such terms as our gracious sovereign would have condescended
to offer; which all who know his goodness Mr. Runt, are convinced would have
been just and merciful


Runt. Your observations are very just madam, and I am entirely of your
opinion: -- And as to the French -- every body says they are a treacherous
crew: -- I know when I was in England it was the general opinion there; and
that they never would fight* and I don't despair but Old England will give them
a drubbing yet. -- But as to us, I think we are in a worse box than ever; --
out of the drying pan, into the fire; and all this for a trifling duty on tea.


Mrs. Flourish. Well we must wait with patience Mr. Runt; I have still hopes,
notwithstanding what Mr. Turncoat says; -- I never thought him much of a
politician. -- It was rather unfortunate for him, that he would not even suffer
his daughters to go to a Whig-Assembly as it was called the winter before last;
and now so warmly to engage in it; because these people are very apt to
remember; and may possibly assign this miraculous change to the true motive. --


Enter Miss Flourish, Miss Flourish. O Mr. Runt, I am exceeding glad to see
you; I wanted to ask you a thousand questions: -- What sort of an assembly had
you? -- Who was there? -- Were the ladies very much dressed? -- How did the
He-Bears (as Miss Doggril calls them) behave? -- How did they handle their
paws? -- Could you keep your countenance?


Mrs. Flourish, Stop! stop! stop! Miss Volubility, -- not quite so fast; who do
you think can answer so many questions at once? -- Now Mr. Runt, can you think
it possible, after all this seeming contempt for the company, that this girl
cried a whole day because I would not let her go to the assembly? -- Assembly!
Good Heavens! It is a burlesque upon the name of an assembly: -- I have no
patience when I think of it: -- Yet there is my sister is fool enough to go;
though she told me she would not dance, because she could not bear to give her
hand to such cattle.


Runt, I observed Mrs. -- refuss'd to dance; but did not know the reason
before: -- Well I think she is quite right. -- But Miss Flourish how comes it
that you are so anxious to go?


Miss Flourish. Because there is a set of us who agreed to go on purpose to
make our remarks on the droll figures, for our diversion and entertainment when
we got home. --


Runt. Ha! ha! ha! -- You are a rogue, Miss Flourish --


Mrs. Flourish. Did you observe Mrs. Bubble's behavior Mr. Runt? It seems to
me that creature tries how ridiculous she can make herself; -- the town rings
with her silly speeches; -- She has not a single advocate in our little polite
circle. And is laughed at by the very creatures whom she affects to despise,
but has not sense enough even to distinguish the ridiculous part of their
character. -- Excuse me a moment Mr. Runt. -- Exit Mrs. Flourish.


Enter Miss Taxall and Miss Doggril. Runt. How do ye do ladies? Give me leave
to take your cloaks: -- What do you hear abroad ladies?


Miss Taxall. We hear nothing talked of now, but the assembly, and Mrs.
Bubble's pretty speeches. -- O Miss Doggril! I wish you had been in town in the
seige; -- then you would have seen assemblies! -- Don't you remember one
evening Miss Flourish? -- Well though they are so impudent sometimes; yet they
are so genteel, so easy, so careless, and so agreeable, that one can hardly be
offended at any thing they say or do: -- If you had been with us then Miss
Doggril, you would not wonder at my turning off my Yankie sp^^k*


Miss Doggril. Kind fortune! bring them back -- or let us drink of Lethe's
fountain, and forget to think.


Re-enter Mrs. Flourish in a Hurry. Mrs. Flourish, Take care girls what you say
now: -- Capt. Aid is coming in; -- remember he is an officer in the reb, I had
like to have spoke treason -- in our army.


Enter Aid -- a little gay. Aid. Ladies your most obedient; -- Mr. Runt. I am
Yours.


Runt. Your humble servant Sir; -- How do you do Mr. Aid? Capt -- I beg your
pardon Sir.


Mrs. Flourish. Take a chair Captain Aid; -- will you drink a glass of wine?


Aid. With all my heart madam. -- Ladies your health; Mr. Runt your health: --
And long life, health, and prosperity, to His Most Christian Majesty; and
Godlike, glorious WASHINGTON.


Mrs. Flourish. Thank'ee Sir. [Speaking very faintly.]


Runt. With all my heart Captain: -- I really take that WASHINGTON to be a very
clever fellow.


Aid. Let us be silent on that subject Mr. Runt: -- We have neither time, nor
talents, to do it justice


Mrs. Flourish. Why? He is no more than man; Captain Aid.


Aid. Then all mankind beside are less; madam.


Mrs. Flourish. You have not seen all mankind Sir, -- I believe Mr. WASHINGTON;
-- or General WASHINGTON if you please, -- is a very honest, good kind of a
man; and has taken infinite pains to keep your army together; and I wish he may
find his account in it: -- But doubtless there are his equals; -- to say no
more.


Aid. If you meant that as a compliment, madam; it is really so cold a one; it
has made me shiver; -- I will therefore with your leave, drop the subject; and
take another glass of wine.


Runt. Ay, ay, that is right Captain* I think there are more fit subjects for a
young gentleman's contemplation in this room.


Aid. Still gallant Mr. Runt: -- But the ladies must pardon me if I cannot
readily assent to the justice of your rebuke; when I assure them, that I think
such charms as theirs, would justify my in attention to every other object, but
what concerns my General, or my country.


Miss Taxall. I beileve we are are all very ready to pardon your inattention to
us at all times.


Aid. Curse your impudence* -- Aside. Knowing my inclination, and particular
attention to please and oblige the ladies; you say what you please without the
hazard of offending: -- And as you seem disposed at this time to be merry at my
expense; I am extremely sorry to deprive you of the opportunity, by being
obliged to leave you. Exit Aid.


Scene changes to the house of Mrs. Taxall.
Enter Mrs. Taxall, Miss Taxall and Tab. Mrs. Taxall. I am afraid Tab we shall
be obliged to do something at last. -- The gentlemen will be tired by and by: I
have found already that some of them do not come so often as formerly; and when
they do come, are not so ready to take a hint, though pretty broad; and I am
really ashamed to speak plainer than I do.


Tab. Why Ma'am! I am sure you have no reason to complain yet: -- You remember
the last time the gentlemen drank tea here, how very generous one of them was
to Miss --, and another very readily took your hint about the --, by what he
sent the next day: And you cannot but acknowledge that they have been exceeding
genteel to Miss Taxall: -- If any one has reason to complain; I think it is
poor Tab.


Mrs. Taxall. I grant Tab they have done very well, considering who they are;
but I begin to fear that it will not last; unless we could depend upon a new
set every now and then, which is so (...) that I wish we had some other
dependence.


Tab. Why you know Ma'am that I have taken in work for some (...) people. --
But before I would stoop to work for our modern (...) gentry; I had rather
starve.


Miss Taxall. I think Mamma that Tab is to be commended for her spirit; I Am
sure I should rather starve than take in work for any body.


Mrs. Taxall. Why, I cannot but say I commend such a spirit; It is very
humiliating to people of taste and fashion, who have brought up a family so
very genteely as I have, to think that any of them must stoop so low. -- I am
therefore determined to wait till necessity drives me, before I submit to it.
-- These times cannot last always. Perhaps we may see (...) again, as we saw in
the siege.


Miss Taxall. O Mamma* I fear we never shall.


Tab. I don't despair yet.


Miss Taxall. Well Tab if you don't despair, I am sure I have no reason.


Enter Miss P -- and Miss B --. Miss P --. Your servant ladies! -- Miss Taxall
when did you see Captain Aid? He passed us just now as if he did not know us.


Miss B --. We heard he was affronted the winter before last, at our not going
to the assembly, -- and now I suppose he is offended because we do go.


Mrs. Taxall. I have heard several gentlemen remark upon that affair, Miss B
--, and the late extraordinary change in your Papa's conduct; not much to his
advantage: -- But I never opened my lips, though I confess to you I think it
looks odd.


Miss B --. Why Ma'am! When my Papa forbid our going to the Assembly, the
winter before last; he thought the British troops would be here again in the
spring following, and retake the town; and was afraid it would hurt his and our
characters, if he kept company with the liberty people: -- But now he thinks
they will not come again:


Mrs. Taxall. That may be a sufficient reason for his allowing you to go now;
but his being a Manager looks as if he was really fond of such company.


Miss B --. Why Ma'am! He was urged to it, and as it was not like taking up
arms; he thought it best to accept. --


Enter Turncoat. Mrs. Taxall. I have been telling Miss B -- * that some
gentlemen have expressed great surprise at the apparent alteration in your
conduct, Mr. Turncoat.


Turncoat. I don't doubt it Madam; -- and readily guess on what account; -- but
if those gentlemen would consider the great change in our affairs; and the
critical situation of (...) family, interest, and connections; they could not
justly blame me; as they know my determination still is, never to take an
active part on either side.


Mrs. Taxall. Well Sir I believe you are right all things considered. Pray Sir
did you hear of the fracas at the concert the other evening, between two
gentlemen? I wish to hear the particulars.


Miss Taxall. La Mamma! it was nothing at all: They went so far as to draw on
each other, to be sure; but no blood Mamma* I wish the ladies would adopt the
same method of deciding their quarrels as it neither wounds the skin or
reputation.


Scene at the house of Mrs. Bubble.
Enter Mrs. Bubble and Betty. Betty. I have brought back the silk Ma'am; the
lady says you have not sent all and refuses to take it again.


Mrs. Bubble. Well I Will see about it: You may go. -- Exit Betty. Bubble has
refused to buy it for me; and I am determined nobody else shall have it.


Enter Bubble. Bubble. Do you go to the Assembly tomorrow evening my dear^


Mrs. Bubble. No! that I shall not, -- Yes I will too, and in my worst gown -- But
I am determined not to dance -- Yes I will dance a minuet on purpose to mortify
you by my dress; why Mr. Bubble! how can you ask me to go to the assembly when
you know I have got nothing fit to wear? And yet you have refused to buy for me
the genteelest, prettiest thing I ever saw -- and every body says it is
exceeding cheap for paper money; -- only a thousand dollars. --


Bubble, Very cheap indeed! Only a thousand dollars!


Mrs. Bubble, And not much the worse for wear neither -- Any body who was to
see it on me would suppose it quite new -- But I have a great mind never to go
among such cattle again; for unless one can eclipse them in dress; there is no
mortifying them any other way -- and that is all the pleasure one can take in
going into such company.


Scene changes to a Coffee-house.
Enter Aid and Careless. Aid, We shall both be in Coventry soon Careless --
Curse on the girls! -- There is no keeping company with them without being a
rascal.


Careless, Why? What Is the matter Aid? ha! ha! ha!


Aid, Hold! hold! Don't you crow: -- There Is a Devil of a storm brewing for you
my lad -- I met Tab just now. She is running about brawling like a bedlamite
against you.


Careless. Poor Tab! What does she say Aid?


Aid, D^m me if I can tell, though I heard her run on for half an hour; I can
only recollect -- "that puppy Careless -- that young coxcomb! Continental
shirts, ha! I Will Continental shirts him -- a little saucy impudent puppy' --
what the Devil does she mean Careless.


Careless, Ha, ha, ha! -- Why I Will tell you Aid -- I was in company the other
evening with that pretty set; though by the way some of them are really pretty:
But Enter nous Aid -- They are a damned set! -- It is unnecessary to repeat the
conversation; suffice it to say it was upon the old topic; which they handled
with so much rancour, and indecency, sparing none of us; and so very lavish of
their encomiums, on the British officers; -- that I confess I felt not a little
vexed; and in revenge* -- as well as to divert the conversation; -- proposed,
their making each two shirts a week, for the continental soldiers.


Aid, Did you by Heaven? Well how was it received?


Careless, As I intended; faith! -- it operated so violently on Tab, that I
expected nothing short of an hysteric fit; her efforts to contain her rage must
have been excessive, if one may judge by her horribly distorted countenance.


Aid, Why I dare swear Careless, it was her natural look, which you took for
such an horrible distortion


Careless. No, no, Aid, -- Though we all agree she is damned ugly at best, yet I
never saw her look quite so much like the devil before. But at last she was
relieved by opening upon me. -- Heavens and Earth what a volley! -- I stood the
shock for some time; at length I pretended to be very sorry, and begged their
pardon. Then addressing Tab -- I had no thought of giving the least offense,
said I, my dear young lady; but was really simple enough to think, that while
the gentlemen were fighting, bleeding and dying for their country; -- that the
ladies could do no less than I proposed: -- Nevertheless, convinced by the
force of your arguments I give up the point. -- I had scarce finished before I
saw symptoms of another explosion from the same quarter: -- and seeing not one
advocate in the room; but on the contrary, every countenance deeply tinged with
the irascible; I thought it best to decamp; which I did leaving them not a
little chagrined.


Aid, I am very glad of it. -- for between you and I Careless, I begin to be
sick of such company; though I think what they say is of very little
consequence.


Careless, It is of so much consequence in my opinion; that I think it the duty
of every whig to discountenance such indecent raillery and abuse, at all times
and upon all occasions.


Aid, If many would join in it -- it would do -- but should two or three only
attempt it -- they would appear ridiculous.


Careless, Ridiculous, or not; was I to continue here for anytime I should not
hesitate to treat them with the neglect and contempt they deserve. Such a
conduct invariably pursued, by those whom they to despise, would soon effect a
great change in their conversation and conduct.


Aid. I believe you are right Careless: I wish to Heaven the experiment was
tried -- O how I should glory in seeing the poor despised, neglected, solitary
devils, looking and longing in vain for a bow or a smile, to cheer their
drooping spirits.


Careless, No man is more happy than I am, in the company of a pretty girl: --
But shall selfish considerations weigh so much with a man of honor, as to take
a little damned paracidical viper to his bosom, because it is pretty: Honor
and patriotism forbid it. -- O Aid! I am ashamed of the conduct of some in this
town, who profess themselves whigs; -- They are not barely doubtful, but in my
(...) the most dangerous characters among you, but I shall leave you soon* and
with less regret on this account: -- Sincerely wishing, that on my return, I
may find a great reformation, or a thoro extirpation.

Blush B --! blush! -- Thy honest sons bewail,
That dance and song over patriot zeal prevail;
That whigs and tories (joined by wayward chance)
Should hand in hand, lead on the sprightly dance,
Or sword to sword as harmlessly oppose*
As all such heroes would their country's foes.
Here lured by fashion, opp'site interests join,
And lull their cares and rage, -- in cards and wine;
Here friends to freedom, vile apostates meet,
And here unblushing can each other greet;
In mixed assembly -- see they crowd the place;
Stain to their country -- To their Sires Disgrace;
Hell in some hearts; but pleasure in each face,
All -- all are qualified to join this tribe;
Who have an hundred dollars to subscribe.

THE END.

