COW-CHACE, IN THREE CANTOS, Published on Occasion of the REBEL General WAYNE's
ATTACK OF THE REFUGEES BLOCK-HOUSE ON HUDSON'S RIVER, On FRIDAY the 21st of
JULY, 1780.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JAMES RIVINGTON, MDCCLXXX.

COW-CHACE.
CANTO I.
ELIZABETH-TOWN, August 1, 1780.
TO drive the kine, one summer's morn,
The TANNER took his way;
The Calf shall rue that is unborn
The jumbling of that day.
And Wayne descending Steers shall know,
And tauntingly deride,
And call to mind in every low
The tanning of his hide.
Yet Bergen Cows still ruminate
Unconscious in the stall,
What mighty means were used to get
And lose them after all.
For many heroes bold and brave
From New-Bridge and Tapaan,
And those that drink Passaick's wave,
And those that eat soupaan,
And sons of distant Delaware,
And still remoter Shannon,
And Major Lee with horses rare,
And Proctor with his cannon.
All wondrous proud in arms they came,
What hero could refuse
To tread the rugged path to fame
Who had a pair of shoes?
At six the host, with sweating buss,
Arrived at Freedom's Pole,
When Wayne, who thought he would time enough,
Thus speechified the whole:
O ye whom glory does unite,
Who freedom's cause espouse,
Whether the wing that is doomed to fight,
Or that to drive the Cows,
Ere yet you tempt your further way,
Or into action come,
Hear, soldiers, what I have to say,
And take a pint of rum;
Intemp'rate valor then will string
Each nervous arm the better,
So all the land shall IO sing,
And read the Gen'ral's letter.
Know that some paltry Refugees,
Whom I Have a mind to fight,
Are playing H-ll among the trees
That grow on yonder height.
Their sort and block-houses we'll level,
And deal a horrid slaughter;
We'll drive the scoundrels to the devil,
And ravish wife and daughter.
I, under cover of the attack,
Whilst you are all at blows,
From English Neighb'rood and (...)
Will drive away the Cows:
For well you know the latter is
The serious operation,
And fighting with the Refugees
Is only demonstration.
His daring words from all the crowd
Such great applause did gain,
That every man declared aloud
For serious work with Wayne.
Then from the cask of rum once more
They took a heady gill,
When one and all they loudly swore
They Would fight upon the hill.
But here -- the Muse has not a strain
Befitting such great deeds, --
Huzza, they cried, Huzza for Wayne,
And shouting -- did their needs.
End of Canto I.
CANTO II.
NEAR his meridian pomp the sun
Had journey'd from the hor'zon,
When fierce the dusky tribe moved on
Of heroes drunk as poison.
The sounds confused of boasting oaths
Re-echoed through the wood,
Some vowed to sleep in dead men's clothes,
And some to swim in blood.
At Irvine's nod 'twas fine to see
The left prepare to fight.
The while the drovers, Wayne and Lee,
Drew off upon the right.
Which Irvine 'twas Fame don't relate,
Nor can the Muse assist her,
Whether 'twas he that cocks a hat,
Or he that gives a clyster.
For greatly one was signalized
That fought at Chesnut-Hill,
And Canada immortalized
The Vender of the Pill.
Yet the attendance upon Proctor
They both might have to boast of;
For there was business for the Doctor,
And hats to be disposed of.
Let none uncandidly infer,
That Stirling wanted spunk,
The self-made Peer had sure been there,
But that the Peer was drunk.
But turn we to the Hudson's banks,
Where stood the modest train,
With purpose firm, though slender ranks,
Nor cared a pin for Wayne.
For them the unrelenting hand
Of Rebel fury drove,
And tore from every genial band,
Of friendship and of love.
And some within a dungeon's gloom,
By mock tribunals laid,
Had waited long a cruel doom,
Impending over their heads.
Here one bewails a brother's fate,
There one a sire demands,
Cut off alas! before their date
By ignominious hands.
And silvered grandsires here appeared,
In deep distress serene,
Of reverend manners that declared
The better days they would seen.
Oh cursed Rebellion, these are thine,
Thine are these tales of woe,
Shall at thy dire insatiate shrine
Blood never cease to flow?
And now the foe began to lead
His forces to th'attack;
Balls whistling unto balls succeed,
And make the block-house crack.
No shot could pass, if you will take
The Gen'ral's word for true;
But it is a d -- ble mistake,
For every shot went through.
The firmer as the Rebels pressed
The loyal heroes stand;
Virtue had nerv'd each honest breast,
And industry each hand.
"In Vide Lee's Trial.
Valor's phrenzy, Hamilton
"Rode like a soldier big,
"And Secretary Harrison,
"With pen stuck in his wig^"
"But least their Chieftain Washington
"Should mourn them in the mumps, A disorder prevalent in the Rebel lines.

The merit of these lines, which is doubtless very great, can only be felt by
true conncisseurs conversant in ancient song.



"The fate of Withrington to shun,
"They fought behind the stumps."
But ah, Thadaeus Posses, why
Should thy poor soul elope,
And why should Titus Hooper die,
Ah die -- without a rope!
Apostate Murphy, thou to, whom
Fair Shela never was cruel,
In death, shall hear her mourn thy doom,
Auch would you die my jewel?
Thee Nathan Pumpkin I lament,
Of melancholy fate,
The Gray Goose stolen as he went.
In his heart's blood was wet.
Now as the fight was further fought,
And balls began to thicken,
The fray assumed the Gen'ral's thought,
The color of a licking.
Yet undismayed the Chiefs command,
And to redeem the day,
Cry, SOLDIERS CHARGE! they hear, they stand,
They turn and run away.
End of Canto II.
CANTO III.
NOT all delights the bloody spear,
Or horrid din of battle,
There are, I Am sure, who'd like to hear
A word about the cattle.
The Chief whom we beheld of late,
Near Schralenberg haranguing,
At Yan Van Poop's unconscious sat
Of Irvine's hearty banging,
Whilst valiant Lee, with courage wild,
Most bravely did oppose
The tears of woman and of child,
Who begged he would leave the cows.
But Wayne, of sympathizing heart,
Required a relief
Not all the blessings could impart
Of battle or of beef*
For now a prey to female charms,
His soul took more delight in
A lovely A Deity of the Woods.
HAMADRYAD's arms,
Than cow-driving or fighting:
A nymph, the REFUGEES had drove
Far from her native tree,
Just happened to he on the move,
When up came Wayne and Lee.
She in mad Anthony's fierce eye
The hero saw portrayed,
And all in tears she took him by
-- The bridle of his jade;
Hear, said the nymph, O great commander!
No human lamentations;
The trees you see them cutting yonder
Are all my near relation's,
And I, forlorn! implore thine aid
To free the sacred grove;
So shall thy prowess be repaid
With an immortal's love.
Now some, to prove she was a goddess,
Said this enchanting Pair
Had late retired from the Bodies, A can^ appellation given amongst the
soldiery to the corpse that has the honor to guard his Majesty's person.

In all the pomp of war;
That drums and merry fifes had played
To honor her retreat,
And Cunningham himself conveyed
The lady through the street.
Great Wayne, by soft compassion swayed,
To no enquiry stoops,
But takes the fair afflicted maid
Right into Yan Van Poop's.
So Roman Anthony, they say,
Disgraced the imperial banner,
And for a gipsy lost a day,
Like Anthony the TANNER.
The HAMADRYAD had but half
Received redress from Wayne,
When drums and colors, cow and calf,
Came down the road amain.
All in a cloud of dust were seen
The sheep, the horse, the goat,
The gentle heifer, ass obscene,
The yearling and the shoat;
And pack-horses with fowls came by,
Befeather'd on each side,
Like PEGASUS, the horse that I
And other poets ride.
Sublime upon his stirrups rose
The mighty Lee behind,
And drove the terror-smitten cows
Like chaff before the wind.
But sudden see the woods above
Pour down another corpse,
All helter skelter in a drove,
Like that I sung before.
Irvine and terror in the van
Came flying all abroad,
And cannon, colors, horse and man*
Ran tumbling to the road.
Still as he fled, 'twas Irvine's cry,
And his example too,
"Run on, my merry men all" -- For why?
Five Refugees ('it is true) were found
Stiff on the block-house floor,
But then it is thought the shot went round,
And in at the back door.

The shot will not go through!
As when two kennels in the street,
Swelled with a recent rain,
In gushing streams together meet,
And seek the neighboring drain,
So met these dung-born tribes in one,
As swift in their career,
And so to Newbridge they ran on, --
But all the cows got clear.
Poor Parson Caldwell, all in wonder,
Saw the returning train,
And mourned to Wayne the lack of plunder,
For them to steal again:
For 'twas his right to seize the spoil and
To share with each commander,
As he had done at Staten-Island,
With frost-bit Alexander. Lord Stirling.

In his dismay the frantic priest
Began to grow prophetic,
You had swore, to see his laboring breast,
He Would taken an emetic.
I view a future day, said he.
Brighter than this day dark is,
And you shall see what you shall see,
Ha! ha! one pretty Marquis;
And he shall come to Paulus-Hook,
And great achievements think on,
And make a bow and take a look,
Like SATAN over Lincoln.
And all the land around shall glory
To see the Frenchman caper,
And pretty Susan Miss Livingston.
tell the story
In the next Chatham paper.
This solemn prophecy, of course,
Gave all much consolation,
Except to Wayne, who lost his horse
Upon the great occasion.
His horse that carried all his prog,
His military speeches,
His corn-stalk whisky for his grog,
Blue stockings and brown breeches.
And now I Have closed my epic strain,
I tremble as I show it,
Lest this same warrio-drover, Wayne,
Should ever catch the poet.
FINIS.
Yankee Doodle's EXPEDITION to RHODE ISLAND, WRITTEN at PHILADELPHIA.
FROM Lewis Monsieur Gerard came
To Congress in this town, Sir,
They bowed to him, and he to them,
And then they all sat down, Sir,
CHORUS. Yankee Doodle, etc.
Begar, said Monsieur, one grand Coup
You shall bientot behold, Sir.
This was believed as Gospel true,
And JONATHAN felt bold, Sir.
So Yankee Doodle did forget
The sound of British drum. Sir,
How often it made him quake and sweat
In spite of Yankee Rum, Sir.
He took his wallet on his back,
His rifle on his shoulder,
And veow'd Rhode Island to attack
Before he was much older.
In dread array their tattered crew
Advanced with colors spread Sir,
Their fifes played Yankee Doodle do,
King Hancock at their head Sir.
What numbers bravely crossed the seas
I cannot well determine,
A swarm of Rebels and of fleas,
And every other vermin.
Their mighty hearts might shrink they though it,
For all flesh only grass is,
A plenteous store they therefore brought
Of Whisky and Molasses.
They swore they would make bold Pigot squeak,
So did their good Ally, Sir,
And take him prisoner in a week,
But that was all my eye, Sir.
As JONATHAN so much desired
To shine in martial story,
D'Estaing with politesse retired,
To leave him all the glory.
He left him what was better yet,
At least it was more use, Sir,
He left him for a quick retreat,
A very good excuse, Sir.
To stay, unless he ruled the sea,
He thought would not be right, Sir,
And continental troops, said he,
On islands should not fight, Sir.
Another cause with these combined
To throw him in the dumps, Sir,
for CLINTON's name alarmed his mind,
And made him stir his stumps, Sir.
Sing Yankee Doodle Doodle do.
ON THE AFFAIR BETWEEN THE REBEL GENERALS HOW AND GADDESDEN, Written at
Charlestown.
IT was on Mr. Peroy's land,
At Squire Rugeley's corner,
Great H and G met, sword in hand,
Upon a point of honor.
Yankee Doodle, doodle do, etc.
G went before with Col'nel E
Together in a carriage,
On horseback followed H and P,
As if to steal a marriage.
On chosen ground they now alight,
For battle duly harnessed,
A shady place, and out of sight,
It showed they were in earnest.
They met, and in the usual way,
With hat in hand saluted,
Which was, no doubt, to show how they
Like Gentlemen disputed.
And then they both together made
This honest declaration,
That they came there -- by honor led,
But -- not by inclination.
That if they fought, 'twas not because
Of rancour, spite or passion,
But only to obey the laws
Of custom and of fashion.
The pistols then, before their eyes,
Were fairly prim'd and loaded!
H wished, and so did G likewise,
The custom was exploded!
But as they now had gone so far
In such a bloody business,
For action straight they both prepare
With -- mutual forgiveness.
But lest their courage should exceed
The bounds of moderation,
Between the seconds 'twas agreed
To fix them each a station.
The distance stepped by Colonel P,
'Twas only eight short paces,
Now, gentlemen, says Colonel P;
Be sure -- to keep your places.
Quoth H to G -- Sir, please to fire,
Quoth G -- no, pray begin, Sir;
And, truly, one must needs admire
The temper they were in, Sir!
Well fire both at once, said he,
And so they both presented;
No answer was returned by G,
But silence, Sir, consented.
They paused awhile, these gallant foes,
By turns politely grinning,
Till after many cons and pros,
H made a brisk beginning.
He missed his mark, but not his aim;
The shot was well directed;
It saved them both from hurt and shame;
What more could be expected!
Then G, to show he meant no harm,
But hated jars and jangles,
His pistol fired, across his arm,
From H -- almost angles.
H now was called upon by G
To fire another shot, Sir,
He smiled, and -- "after this" quoth he,
"No, truly, I cannot, Sir."
Such honor did they both display,
They highly were commended;
And thus, in short, this gallant fray
Without mischance was ended.
No fresh dispute, we may suppose,
Will ever by them be started,
For now the Chiefs, no longer foes,
Shook hands, and -- so they parted.
Yankee doodle, doodle do, etc.
THE AMERICAN TIMES, A SATIRE, IN THREE PARTS. IN WHICH ARE DELINEATED The
Characters of the Leaders of the American Rebellion.

AMONGST THE PRINCIPAL ARE FRANKLIN, LAURENS, ADAMS, HANCOCK, JAY, DUER, DUANE,
WILSON, PULASKI, WITHERSPOON, REED, M'KEAN, WASHINGTON, ROBERDEAU, MORRIS,
CHASE, etc.


BY CAMILLO QUERNO, POET-LAUREAT TO THE CONGRESS.

FACIT INDIGNATIO VERSUM. JUVENAL. ADVERTISEMENT.
THE masters of Reason have decided, that when doctrines and practices have
been fairly examined, and proved to be contrary to Truth, and injurious to
Society, then and not before may Ridicule be lawfully employed in the service
of Virtue.

This is exactly the case of the grand American Rebellion; it has been weighed
in the balance, and found wanting: able writers have exposed its principles,
its conduct, and its final aim. Reason has done her part, and therefore this is
the legitimate moment for Satire.

Accordingly the following Piece is offered to the Public. What it is found to
want of Genius, the Author cannot supply; what it may want of Correction, he
hopes the candor of the Public will excuse on account of the fugitive nature of
the subject: next year the publication would be too late; for in all
probability there will then be no Congress existing.

THE AMERICAN TIMES. PART I.
WHEN Faction, poisonous as the scorpion's sting,
Insects the people and insults the King:
When foul Sedition skulks no more concealed,
But grasps the sword and rushes to the field;
When Justice, Law, and Truth are in disgrace,
And Treason, Fraud, and Murder fill their place;
Smarting beneath accumulated woes,
Shall we not dare the tyrants to expose?
We will, we must -- though mighty Laurens frown,
Or Hancock with his rabble hunt us down;
Champions of virtue, we'll alike disdain
The guards of Washington, the lies of Pain;
And greatly bear, without one anxious throb,
The wrath of Congress, or its lords the mob.
Bad are the Times, almost too bad to paint;
The whole head sickens, the whole heart is faint;
The state is rotten, rotten to the core,
It Is all one bruize, one putrefying sore.
Here Anarchy before the gaping crowd
Proclaims the people's majesty aloud;
There Folly runs with eagerness about,
And prompts the cheated populace to shout;
Here paper-dollars meagre Famine holds,
There votes of Congress Tyranny unfolds;
With doctrines strange in matter and in dress,
Here sounds the pulpit, and there groans the press;
Confusion blows her trump -- and far and wide
The noise is heard -- the plough is thrown aside;
The awl, the needle, and the shuttle drops;
Tools change to swords, and camps suceed to shops;
The doctor's glister-pipe, the lawyer's quill,
Transformed to guns, retain the power to kill;
From garrets, cellars, rushing through the street,
The newborn statesmen in committee meet;
Legions of senators infest the land,
And mushroom generals thick as mushrooms stand.
Ye western climes, where youthful plenty smiled,
Ye plains just rescued from the dreary wild,
Ye cities just emerging into fame,
Ye minds new tinged with learning's sacred flame,
Ye people wondering at your swift increase,
Sons of united liberty and peace,
How are your glories in a moment fled?
See! Pity weeps, and honor hangs his head.
O! for some magic voice, some powerful spell,
To call the Furies from profoundest hell;
Arise, ye Fiends, from dark Cocytus' brink,
Soot all my paper, sulphurize my ink;
So with my theme the colors shall agree,
Brimstone and black the livery of Lee.
They come, they come! -- convulsive heaves the ground,
Earth opens -- Lo! they pour, they swarm around;
About me throng unnumber'd hideous shapes,
Infernal wolves, and bears, and hounds, and apes;
All Pandemonium stands revealed to sight;
Good monsters, give me leave, and let me write:
They will be notic'd -- Memory set them down,
Though reason stand aghast, and order frown.
Whence, and what art thou, execrable form,
Rough as a bear, and roaring as a storm?
Ay, now I know thee -- Late a Lawyer, now the rebel Governor of New Jersey.
Livingston art thou --
Gall in thy heart, and malice on thy brow;
Coward, yet cruel -- zealous, yet profane;
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin are thy gain:
Go, glut like Death thy vast unhide-bound maw,
Remorseless swallow liberty and law;
At one enormous stroke a nation slay,
But thou thyself shall perish with thy prey.
What Fiend is this of countenance acute,
More of the knave who seems, and less of brute;
Whose words are cutting like a shower of hail,
And blasting as the mildew in the vale?
It Is Late a lawyer of New York -- member and President of Congress, etc.
Jay -- to him these characters belong;
Sure sense of right, with fixed pursuit of wrong;
An outside keen, where malice makes abode,
Voice of a lark and venom of a toad;
Semblance of worth, not substance he puts on,
And Satan owns him for his darling son.
Flit not around me thus, pernicious elf,
Whose love of country terminates in self;
Back to the gloomy shades, detested sprite,
Mangler of rhet'ric, enemy of right;
Cursed of thy father, sum of all that is base;
Thy sight is odious, and thy name is A lawyer of Maryland -- member of
Congress.
Chase.
What spectre's that with eyes on earth intent,
Whose god is gold, whose glory cent. per cent;
Whose soul devoted to the love of gain,
Revolts from feelings noble or humane?
Let friends, let family, let country groan,
Despairing widows shriek, and orphans moan;
Turned to the center, where his riches grow,
His eye regards not spectacles of woe;
Morris, look up -- for so thy name we spell --
On earth A merchant of Philadelphia, the credit of whose house gave the first
sanction to the continental currency -- late a member of Congress.
Bob Morris -- Mammon it is in hell.
Wretch, who have meanly sold thy native land,
Tremble, thou wretch, for vengeance is at hand;
Soon shall thy treasures fly on eagle's wings,
And Conscience goad thee with her thousand stings.
Of head erect, and self-sufficient mien,
Another A lawyer of New York, member of Congress.
Morris presses to be seen;
Demons of vanity, you know him sure;
This is your pupil, this is Governor;
Some little knowledge, and some little sense,
More affectation far, and more pretense;
Such is the man -- his tongue he never balks,
On all things talkable he boldly talks;
A specious orator of law he prates,
A pompous nothing mingles in debates;
Consummate impudence, sheer brass of soul,
Crowns every sentence, and completes the whole;
In other times unnotic'd he might drop,
These times can make a statesman of a sop.
Hail, Faction, wayward queen, whose charms retain
Such opposites -- the sordid, and the vain;
Who jar in all things else in thee unite,
Robert the greedy, Governeur the light;
And if another contrast we display.
Still both are thine, the serious and the gay.
There is a man, all spirit, life, and ease,
Whose native humor never fails to please;
There is a man devout, reserved, austere,
Whose grave demeanor other men revere;
These, whom their various turns farbad to meet,
Have met in Congress in communion sweet;
There, mirth put off, and gravity resigned*
The two sworn brothers stand in treason joined;
Io triumph, sing the devilish fiends,
Discordant natures whose seduction blends.
But still the question agitates mankind,
Could Duer and Duane, lawyers of New York -- members of Congress -- amiable in
the former part of their lives, now alas, how changed!
Duer be over-reached, Duane be blind?
Thy spritely genius, Duer, could thou control,
The flow of wit, the fallies of the soul,
Abandon every muse, and every grace,
For eminence amidst a savage race?
Could thou, Duane, give up thy favorite church,
And leave religion weeping in the lurch,
Bid truth and decent piety adieu,
For dire promotion over a godless crew?
In Jotham's famous apologue we read,
Not so the fruit trees wiser far decreed;
Shall we, said they, our oil and wine desert,
Which decorate the face, and cheer the heart,
Quit peace and plenty, elegance and ease,
To reign scrub monarchs over barren trees?
'Twere strange -- but stranger honor to resign,
And govern, legion-like, the herd of swine.
What groupe of Wizards next salutes my eyes,
United comrades, quadruple allies?
Cooper, Hancock, and the two Adams's -- of the first of these only it can be
necessary to say any thing: Dr. Cooper is a congregational minister of Boston,
and the oracle of those few Rebels, who are in the secret of affairs -- If a
human being can take delight in having been the author of misery, this man must
be one of the happiest in the creation.
Bostonian Cooper, with his Hancock joined,
Adams with Adams, one in heart and mind;
Sprung from the soil, where witches swarmed of yore,
They come well skilled in necromantic lore;
Intent on mischief, busily they toil,
The magic cauldron to prepare and boil;
Arrayed in sable vests, and caps of fur,
With wands of ebony the mess they stir;
See! the smoke rises from the cursed drench,
And poisons all the air with horrid stench.
Celestial muse, I fear 'twill make thee hot,
To count the vile ingredients of the pot;
Dire incantations, words of death, they mix,
With noxious plants, and Water from the Styx;
Treason's rank flowers, ambition's swelling fruits,
Hypocrisy in seeds, and fraud in roots,
Bundles of lies fresh gathered in their prime,
And stalks of calumny grown stale with time,
Handfuls of zeal's intoxicating leaves,
Riot in bunches, cruelty in sheaves,
Slices of cunning cut exceeding thin,
Kernels of malice, rotten cores of sin,
Branches of persecution, boughs of thrall,
And sprigs of superstition, dipped in gall,
Opium to lull, or madden all the throng,
And assa-soetida prosusely strong,
Milk from Tisiphone's infernal breast,
Herbs of all venom, drugs of every pest,
With minerals from the center brought by Gnomes,
All seethe together till the furnace foams.
Was this the potion, this the draught designed,
To cheat the crowd, and fascinate mankind?
O void of reason they, who thus were caught;
O lost to virtue, who so cheap were bought;
O folly, which all folly sure transcends,
Such bungling sorc'rers to account as friends.
Yet though the frantic populace applaud,
It Is satire's, part to stigmatize the fraud;
Exult, ye jugglers, in your lucky tricks,
Yet on your same the lasting brand we'll fix;
Cheat male and female, poison age and youth.
Still we'll pursue you with the goad of truth;
Whilst in mid-heav'n shines forth the golden flame,
Hancock and Adams shall be words of shame;
Whilst silver beams the face of night adorn,
Cooper of Boston shall be held in scorn.
Strike up hell's music, roar infernal drums,
Discharge the cannon -- Lo! the warrior comes --
He comes not tame as on Ohio's banks,
But rampant at the head of ragged ranks,
Hunger and itch are with him -- Gates and Wayne, rebel generals -- the former,
one of the most ungrateful Englishmen; the latter, one of the most sanguinary
Americans.
Gates and Wayne,
And all the lice of Egypt in his train;
Sure these are Falstaff's soldiers, poor and bare,
Or else the rotten regiments of Rag-fair;
Bid the French generals to their chief advance,
And grace his suite -- O shame! they are fled to France.
Will thou, great chief of Freedom's lawless sons,
Great captain of the western Goths and Huns,
Will thou for once permit a private man
To parley with thee, and thy conduct scan?
At Reason's bar has Cataline been heard,
At Reason's bar even Cromwell has appeared;
Successless, or successful, all must stand
At her tribunal with uplifted hand;
Severe, but just, the case she fairly states,
And fame or infamy her sentence waits.
Hear thy indictment, Washington, at large;
Attend and listen to the solemn charge:
Thou have supported an atrocious cause
Against thy King, thy country, and the laws;
Committed perjury, encouraged lies,
Forced conscience, broken the most sacred ties;
Myriads of wives and fathers at thy hand
Their slaughtered husbands slaughtered sons demand:
That pastures hear no more the lowing kine,
That towns are desolate all all is thine;
The frequent sacrilege that pained my sight,
The blasphemies my pen abhors to write.
Innumerable crimes on thee must fall,
For thou maintainest thou defendest all.
Will thou pretend that Britain is in fault?
In Reason's court a falsehood goes for naught.
Will it avail, with subterfuge refined
To say, such deeds are foreign to thy mind?
Will thou assert that generous and humane
Thy nature suffers at another's pain?
He who a band of ruffians keeps to kill,
Is he not guilty of the blood they spill?
Who guards M'Kean and Reed; the former rebel chief justice, the latter rebel
President of Pennsylvania, who murdered, under the form of law, Roberts and
Carlisle, both quakers, and virtuous, inoffensive, unresisting citizens.
M'Kean, and Joseph Reed the vile
Helped he not murder Roberts and Carlisle?
So, who protects committees in the chair,
In all their shocking cruelties must share.
What could, when halfway up the hill to fame,
Induce thee to go back, and link with shame?
Was it ambition, vanity, or spite,
That prompted thee with Congress to unite;
Or did all three within thy bosom roll,
"Thou heart of hero with a traitor's soul?"
Go, wretched author of thy country's grief,
Patron of villainy, of villains chief,
Seek with thy cursed crew the central gloom,
Ere Truth's avenging sword begin thy doom;
Or sudden vengeance of celestial dart
Precipitate thee with augmented smart.
O Poet, seated on the lofty throne,
Forgive the bard who makes thy words his own*
Surpised I trace in thy prophetic page,
The crimes, the follies of the present age;
Thy scenery, sayings, admirable man,
Pourtray our struggle with the dark Divan:
What Michael to the first arch-rebel said,
Would well rebuke the rebel army's head;
What Satan to the angelic Prince replied,
Such are the words of Continental pride:
I swear by him, who rules the earth and sky,
The dread event shall equally apply;
That Clinton's warfare is the war of God,
And Washington shall feel the vengeful rod.
THE AMERICAN TIMES. PART II.
WHY have thou soared so high, ambitious Muse?
Descend in prudence, and contract thy views;
Not always generals offer to our aim,
By turns we must advert to meaner game.
Yet hard to rescue from oblivion's grasp,
The worthless beetle, and the noxious asp;
And full as hard to save for aftertimes
The names of men known only by their crimes;
Left to themselves they soon would be forgot,
But yet it is right that rogues should hang and rot.
Still, as we own, and as old saws relate,
Not always thrives the verse that haunts the great;
Of rulers in America, I deem,
Swift is the change, and flight is the esteem;
When The rebel governor of Georgia, driven from his usurped authority by the
British forces.
Houston from Savannah fled of late,
Did any ask, who took his chair of state?
Let Henry and Jefferson, rebel governors of Virginia in succession; the latter
of them so eminently barbarous, as to exceed the conception of a British mind.
Henry quit, and Jefferson succeed,
Let Wharton and Reed, rebel presidents of Pennsylvania in succession.
Wharton's place (who cares, be filled by ^eed;
Who matters what of William Alexander, Esquire, claiming the title of
Stirling; a rebel general.
Stirling may become,
The quintessence of whisky, soul of rum?
Fractious till nine, quite gay at twelve o'clock,
From thence till bedtime stupid as a stock:
These are sad samples -- but we'll cull our store;
Can liberality herself do more?
Turn out, black monsters, let us take our choice;
What devilish figure's this with devilish voice?
Oh! it is Count Pulaski met with his death in storming Savannah, an event which
happened several months after the writing this poem -- the prediction contained
in it has therefore been fulfilled with respect to the deserved fate of this
wretched man.
Pulaski -- it is a foreign chief;
On him we'll comment -- be our comment brief:
What are his merits judges may dispute;
We'll solve the doubt, and praise him for a brute*
No quarter, is his motto -- sweet and short;
Good Britons give him a severe retort:
As yet he escapes the shot deserved so well,
His nobler horse in Carolina fell;
He fears not in the field where heroes bleed,
He starts at nothing but a generous deed,
Escaped from Poland, where his murderous knife,
It Is said, was raised against his sov'reign's life;
Perhaps he scoffs with fashionable mirth
The notion of a God, who rules the earth:
Fool, not to see, that something more than lot,
Conducts the traitor to this destined spot;
Rank with congenial crimes, that call for blood,
Where justice soon must pour the purple flood;
A parricide with parricides to die,
And vindicate the power that reigns on high.
Who is that phantom, silent, pale, and slow,
That looks the picture of dejected woe?
Art thou not James Wilson, Esquire, born in Scotland settled as a lawyer in
Pennsylvania, of eminence in his profession, and amiable in private life --
late a member of Congress.
Wilson? -- ha! do thou lament
Thy poisoned principles, thy days misspent?
Was it thy fatal faith that led thee wrong?
Yet had thou reason, and that reason strong;
Judgment was thine and in no common share,
That judgment cultured with assiduous care:
But all was fruitless; popular applause
Seduced thee to embrace an impious cause:
Now, or my mind deceives me, thou would fain
Thy former duty former truth regain:
Like some rash boy, whom strong desire to lave,
Too daring tempts to trust the briny wave;
But soon borne out to distance from the strand,
He longs with ardour to retrieve the land:
In vain -- the waves his weak endeavors spurn,
And rapid tides forbid him to return.
Room for a spectre of portentous show;
Make room, for triple-headed A merchant of Philadelphia, member of Congress.
Roberdeau:
Churchman, dissenter, methodist appear,
Chairman, and congress man, and brigadier;
Cerberean barker at the Stygian ford;
Where is thy bible, say, and where thy sword?
Thy bible -- that long since was wisely lost,
Because its maxims with thy practice crossed;
Well, but thy weapon -- was it lost in fight?
Hush, I remember -- 'twas to aid thy flight;
Of brass lead, leather, treble is thy shield,
And treble tremblings seize thee in the field;
Treble in office, and in faith thou art,
And nothing double in thee but thy heart.
Ye priests of Baal, from hot Tartarean stoves,
Approach with all the prophets of the groves,
Mess-mates of Jezebel's luxurious mess,
Come in the splendour of pontific dress;
Haste to attend your chief in solemn state,
Haste to attend on Doctor of Divinity -- member of Congress.
Witherspoon the great:
Ye lying spirits too, who brisk and bold
Appeared before the throne divine of old,
For form not use augment his reverend train;
The sire of lies resides within his brain.
Scotland confessed him sensible and shrewd,
Austere and rigid; many thought him good;
But turbulence of temper spoiled the whole,
And showed the movements of his inmost soul:
Disclosed machinery loses of its force;
He felt the fact, and westward bent his course.
Princeton received him bright amidst his flaws,
And saw him labor in the good old cause;
Saw him promote the meritorious work,
The hate of Kings, and glory of the Kirk.
Excuse each reverend Caledonian seer,
Whose worth I own, whose learning I revere;
Your duty to the Prince who fills the throne,
Your liberal sentiments are fully known;
Here in these lands start up a spurious brood,
And boast themselves allied to you in blood;
Think it not hard their faults if I condemn;
It Is not with you I combat, but with them.
Return we to the hero of our song:
Who now but he the darling of the throng*
Known in the pulpit by seditious toils,
Grown into consequence by civil broils;
Three times he tried, and miserably failed,
To overset the laws -- the fourth prevailed:
Whether as tool he acted, or as guide,
Is yet a doubt; his conscience must decide;
Mean while unhappy Jersey mourns her thrall,
Ordained by vilest of the vile to fall;
To fall by Witherspoon -- O name, the curse
Of sound religion, and disgrace of verse.
Member of Congress we must hail him next;
Come out of Babylon was now his text:
Fierce as the fiercest, foremost of the first,
He Would rail at Kings, with venom well-nigh burst*
Not uniformly grand -- for some bye end
To dirtiest acts of treason he would descend;
I Have known him seek the dungeon dark as night,
Imprisoned Tories to convert or fright;
Whilst to myself I Have humm'd in dismal tune,
I Would rather be a dog than Witherspoon.
Be patient, reader -- for the issue trust,
His day will come -- remember Heaven is just.
Yes, Heaven is just -- what then can they expect,
Who not impelled by violence of sect,
Bred up in doctrines eminently pure,
Which loyalty instill, and peace ensure,
Yet idolize Rebellion's bleating calves,
Or meanly split their principles in halves:
Half priest, half presbyter, I mourn thee, Rev. Mr. White, assistant minister
of the churches at Philadelphia, and chaplain of Congress jointly with Mr.
Duffield, a presbyterian.
White;
Half whig, half to y, Smith, can thou be right?
O fools, to worship in forbidden ground,
O worse than rebels, who your mother wound!
What uproar now -- what hideous monsters rush,
Whose recreant looks put honor to the blush;
Mixtures of pallid fear, and bloody rage,
Like Banquo's ghost tremendous on the stage;
These are from Georgia, from the southern sun,
Swift as Achilles, not to fight but run;
Their hides all reeking from the British lash --
Queer generals -- Moultrie, Lincoln, Elbert, Ash -- Rebel generals employed to
the southward -- for their seats of arms consult the London Gazette.
Moultrie, Lincoln, Elbert, Ash,
Bring up yon wretched solitary pair,
Marked with pride, malice, envy, rage, despair;
Why are you banished from your comrades, tell,
Will none endure your company in hell?
That all the Fiends avoid your sight is plain,
Infamous Reed and M'Kean. Vide note in the first part of this poem.
Reed, more infamous M'Kean.
Is this the order of your rank agreed;
Or is it base M'Kean, and baser Reed?
Go, shunned of men, disowned of devils, go,
And traverse desolate the realms of woe.
Ye powers, what noise, what execrable yell,
How now, Nephew and heir of the late Rev'd Dr. Peter's of Philadelphia, and
secretary at war to the Congress.
Dick Peter's, have thou emptied hell;
^^gions and shoals of all prodigious forms,
Loud as the rattling of a thousand storms,
Gorgons in look, and Caffres in address,
Dutch, yankies, yellow-wigs for audience press;
Wretches, whose acts the very French abhor,
Commissioners of loans, and boards of war,
Marine committees, commissaries, scribes,
Assemblies, councils, senatorial tribes,
Vain of their titles all attention claim,
Proud of dishonor, glorying in their shame:
Ask you the names of these egregious wights;
I could as soon recount Glendower's sprites;
Thick as musquitos, venomously keen;
Thicker than locusts, spoilers of the green;
Swarming like maggots, who the carcass scour
Of some poor ox, and as they crawl devour;
They Would mock the labor of a hundred pens:
"Back, owly-headed monsters, to your dens."
At length they are silenced -- Late president of Congress -- The writer of this
piece had an opportunity of narrowly watching his conduct, and the character
here given is the faithful result of observation; nevertheless it must be owned
that some competent judges have thought the portrait too favorable.
Laurens, thou draw near;
What I shall utter thou attentive hear;
I loath all conference with thy boisterous clan;
But now with thee I Will argue as a man.
What could incite thee, Laurens, to rebel?
Thy soul thou would not for a trifle sell;
'Twas not of power the wild insatiate lust;
Mistaken as thou art, I deem thee just;
Saw thou thy King tyrannically rule?
Thou could not think it -- thou art not a fool;
Thou wast no bankrupt, no enthusiast thou;
The clearness of thy fame even foes allow;
For months I watched thee with a jealous eye,
Yet could no turpitude of mind espy;
In private life I hold thee far from base;
Thy public conduct wears another face.
In thee a stern republican I view,
This of thy actions is the only clue:
Admit thy principles -- I then demand,
Could these give right to desolate a land?
Could it be right with arbitrary will,
To fine, imprison, plunder, torture, kill!
Impose new oaths, make stubborn conscience yield,
And force out thousands to the bloody field?
Could it be right to do these monstrous things,
Because thy nature was averse to Kings?
Well, but a stern republican thou art;
Heaven grant thee soon to meet with thy desert:
Thee, Laurens, foe to monarchy we call,
And thou, or legal government must fall:
Who wept for Cato, was not Cato's friend;
Who pitied Brutus, Brutus would offend;
So, Laurens, to conclude my grave harangue,
I would not pity though I saw thee hang.
Bless me! what formidable figure's this,
That interrupts my words with saucy hiss?
She seems at least a woman by her face,
With harlot smiles adorned and winning grace;
A glittering gorget on her breast she wears;
The shining silver two inscriptions bears;
Servant of Servants in a laurel wreath,
But Lord of Lords is written underneath:
A flowing robe that reaches to her heels,
From sight the foulness of her shape conceals;
She holds with poisoned darts a quiver stored,
Circean potions, and a flaming sword.
This is Democracy -- the case is plain;
She comes attended by a motley train;
Addresses to the people some unfold,
Rods, scourges, fetters, axes, others hold;
The sorceress waves her magic wand about,
And models at her will the rabble rout;
Here Violence puts on a close disguise,
And Public Spirit's character belies;
The dress of Policy see Cunning steal,
And Persecution wear the coat of Zeal;
Hypocrisy Religion's garb assume,
Fraud Virtue strip, and figure in her room,
With other changes tedious to relate,
All emblematic of our present state.
She calls the nations -- Lo! in crowds they sup
Intoxication from her golden cap:
Joy to my heart, and pleasure to my eye,
A chosen phalanx her attempts defy;
In rage she rises and her arrows throws;
O all ye saints and angels interpose:
Amazement! -- every shaft is spent in vain;
The sons of Truth inviolate remain;
Invulnerable champions, sacred band,
Behind the shield of Loyalty they stand;
Unhurt, unsullied they maintain their ground,
And all the host of heaven their praises sound.
Yet too, too many feel her baneful spell,
Bleed by her shafts, or by her venom swell;
The cruel plague assaults each vital part;
Arise some sage of Esculapian art;
Thee, Rev'd Dr. Inglis, Rector of New York -- a man whose writings in the
cause of Truth and Loyalty, of the King and the Constitution, deserve the
highest encomiums.
Inglis, wise physician, thee I urge,
Direct the diet thou, prepare the purge*
Thou to the bottom probe the dangerous sore,
And in the wound the friendly balsam pour;
Enough for me the caustic to apply,
Twinge the proud flesh, and draw the face awry;
Thou cure the parts which I have forced to feel;
I make the patient smart, but thou can heal.
THE AMERICAN TIMES. PART III.
WHEN the wise ruler of Glubdubdrib's isle
Had entertained Sir Gulliver awhile,
With various spectacles of ancient days,
Kings crowned with gold, and poets decked with bays,
Sages with pupils, tyrants with their slaves,
Heroes and traitors, senators and knaves;
When each instructive lesson was expressed,
And the rich banquet had sufficed the guest,
Then waved the great controuler of the dead
His magic ensign, and the vision fled.
Have we less power over that infernal crew,
Which lately passed before us in review?
Our invocation summoned up the pack;
Our potent word can headlong drive them back;
Ye coxcomb Congressmen, declaimers keen,
Brisk puppets of the Philadelphian scene;
Ye numerous chiefs, who can or cannot fight,
Ye curious scribes, who can or cannot write,
Ye lawyers, who for law confusion teach,
Ye preachers, who for gospel discord preach,
Statesmen, who rule as none ever ruled before,
Mark, I dismiss you to the Stygian shore;
Away fantastic, visionary throng;
Come, sober Reason, and direct the song.
But what can Reason in a world like this?
For one that plauds her, millions hate and hiss?
She shines it is true with ever-blooming charms,
Peace in her look, and pleasure in her arms,
But not a guinea has she to bestow,
And men avoid her as a mortal foe:
Who without wealth would take her for a bride?
A lawyer and member of Congress -- a principal member of that detestable
convention, which ruined the valuable constitution of Pennsylvania.
James Smith from childhood has her power defied;
A lawyer of the same province, and a colonel in the rebel service.
Hartley and A member of Congress -- the reputed author of The Farmer's Letters.
Dickenson, as best may suit,
With, or without her, by the hour dispute;
It Is said, that once on Burgoyne's strange affair,
She spoke her mind, and made the Congress stare:
Perhaps with Laurens, did not Laurens sell
His virtue for a name, she would love to dwell.
Amidst the war of words, the roar of lungs,
The barbarous outcry of confederate tongues,
Seditious, busy, turbulent, and bold,
Votes to be bought, opinions to be sold,
What chance has Reason? -- her soft voice in vain
May plead, lament, expostulate, complain:
With heaven-born eloquence should angels speak,
Against the crisis Heaven itself were weak;
Howl, all ye fiends, and all ye devils, bawl,
Late a member of Congress; author of many seditious pieces -- since this poem
was written he died at Philadelphia.
Will. Henry Drayton shall outdo you all.
When civil madness first from man to man
In these devoted climes like wildfire ran;
There were who gave the moderating hint,
In conversation some, and some in print:
Wisely they spoke, and what was their reward?
The tar, the rail, the prison* and the cord.
Even now there are, who bright in Reason's dress
Watch the polluted Continental press,
Confront the lies which Congress sends abroad,
Expose the sophistry, detect the fraud,
Truth's genuine maxims forcibly display;
Rev'd Dr. Chandler, long since driven by the rebels from New Jersey, now
resident in England.
Chandler and Member of his Majesty's Council for New Jersey, now residing in
New York.
Coxe are proofs of what I say.
But knights of old, who wandered through the world,
And fell destruction on enchanters hurled,
Slew fiery dragons, giants overcame,
And saved from ruin many a peerless dame,
Played not so deep, so desperate a stake,
As he who draws the pen for Virtue's sake.
For once the monster slain, the spell was broke,
And joy succeeded to the daring stroke;
The ladies blessed their lovers with their charms,
And the knight rested from his feats of arms.
But error may not with such ease be quelled;
She rallies fresh her force though often repelled;
Cut, hacked and mangled, she denies to yield,
And strait returns with vigor to the field:
Champions of truth, our efforts are in vain;
Fast as we slay the foe revives again;
Vainly the enchanted castle we surprise;
New monsters hiss, and new enchantments rise.
Was Of New England, a man famous for every infamy.
Samuel Adams to become a ghost,
Another Adams would assume his post;
Was bustling Hancock numbered with the dead,
Another full as wise might raise his head;
What if the sands of Laurens now were run,
How should we miss him -- has he not a son?
Or, what if Washington should close his scene,
Could none succeed him? -- Is there not a Green?
Knave after knave as easy we could join,
As new emissions of the paper coin.
When it became the high United States
To send their envoys to Versailles' proud gates,
Were not three ministers produced at once,
Delicious group -- fanatic, deist, dunce?
And what if Lee and Silas Deane, Congress Commissioners in France.
Lee, and what if Silas fell,
Or what if Dr. Franklin -- "Know ye not me? said Satan filled with scorn,
"Not to know me, argues yourself unknown,"

Franklin should go down to hell,
Why should we grieve? the land, it is understood,
Can furnish hundreds equally as good.
When like a hill convulsed, whose womb has nursed
Internal fires, the constitution burst,
What strange varieties we daily saw,
What prodigies of policy and law!
See in committees Ignorance preside,
Conventions met, and Folly was their guide;
Plan followed plan, first, second, and the third,
More barbarous who can say, or more absurd;
With full consent poor Reason was dethroned,
The madman governed, and the wise man groaned:
But why blot paper with these idle schemes?
Or why enum'rate undigested dreams?
Expose an opal to the solar ray,
And mark the beams that momentary play;
See the gay stone in mimic robes arrayed,
Glow in the red or in the purple fade,
In swift progression vary to the sight,
And run through all the different modes of light.
Go then, and count the colors as they rise;
Tell if thou can the numbers of the dies;
Each combination of the fluid mass;
Nor let the shifting of a sunbeam pass:
This once accomplished, thy sagacious pen
May note the phrenzies of impatient men,
The bands of faith, and loyalty who break,
And roam the fields of popular mistake.
Truce with these flowers -- the Times are out of joint*
Hence trifling -- come we closer to the point;
Some muse attendant on the eternal King,
Truth's radiant mirror for my guidance bring;
I ask not now the thunder, and the fire;
The still small voice is all that I desire.
Stand forth Taxation -- kindler of the flame;
Inexplicable question, doubtful claim;
Suppose the right in Britain to be clear;
Britain was mad to exercise it here:
Call it unjust, or, if you please, unwise;
The Colonies were mad in arms to rise;
Impolitic, and open to abuse,
How could it answer, what could it produce?
No need for furious demagogues to chase;
America was jealous, and was safe;
Secure she stood in national alarms,
And Madness only would have flown to arms;
Arms could not help the tribute, nor confound,
Self-slain it must have tumbled to the ground;
Impossible the scheme could ever succeed;
Why lift the spear against a brittle reed?
But arm they would, ridiculously brave;
Good laughter spare me, I would fain be grave;
So arm they did -- the knave led on the fool;
Good anger spare me, I would fain be cool:
Mixtures were seen amazing in their kind,
Extravagance with cruelty was joined;
The presbyterian with the convict marched,
The meeting house was thinn'd, the gaol was searched;
Servants were seized, apprentices enrolled;
Youth guarded not the boy, nor age the old;
Tag, rag, and bobtail issued on the foe,
Marshaled by generals -- Ewin, Roberdeau.
This was not Reason -- this was wildest rage,
To make the land one military stage:
The strange resolve obtained the Lord knows how;
Which forced the farmer to forsake the plough;
Bade tradesmen mighty warriors to become,
And lawyers quit the parchment for the drum;
To fight they knew not why, they knew not what,
Was surely Madness -- Reason it was not.
Next independence came, that German charm,
Of power to save from violence and harm;
That curious olio, vile compounded dish,
Like salmagundy, neither flesh nor fish;
That brazen serpent, raised on Freedom's pole,
To render all who look upon it whole;
That half-dress'd idol of the western shore;
All rags behind, all elegance before;
That conj'rer, which conveys away your gold,
And gives you paper in its stead to hold.
Heavens, how my breast has swelled with painful throb,
To view the phrenzy of the cheated mob;
True sons of liberty in flattering thought,
But real slaves to basest bondage brought;
Frantic as Bacchanals in ancient times,
They rushed to perpetrate the worst of crimes;
Chased peace, chased order from each blessed abode;
Whilst Reason stood abashed, and folly crow'd.
Now, now erect the rich triumphal gate;
The French alliance comes in solemn state:
Hail to the masterpiece of madness, hail;
The head of glory with a serpent's tail!
This seals, America, thy wretched doom;
Here, Liberty, survey thy destined tomb;
Behold the temple of tyrannic sway
Is now complete -- ye deep-ton'd organs play;
Proclaim through all the land that Louis rules --
Worship your saint, ye giddy-headed fools.
Illustrious guardians of the laurel hill,
Excuse this warmth, these sallies of the quill;
I would be temperate, but severe disdain
Calls for the lash whenever I check the rein;
I would be patient, but the teazing smart
Of insects makes the fiery courser start;
I wished for Reason in her calmest mood;
In vain -- the cruel subject fires my blood.
When through the land the dogs of havoc roar,
And the torn country bleeds in every pore,
It Is hard to keep the sober line of thought;
The brain turns round with such ideas fraught;
Rage makes a weapon blunt as mine to pierce,
And indignation gathers in the verse.
More yet remains of sense, and honor stained;
Conventions broken, flags of truce detained;
A thousand foolish freaks my wrath provoke,
A thousand culprits ought to feel the stroke;
To treat of villains were exceeding hard,
And not to mention once thy name, Late ambassador from the French king to the
rebel Congress.
Des Rois infortunes la France etait l' azile
Et montait a l'bonneur par des justes degres
A l'heure que je parle elle a change du style,
Et se vante l'ami des traitres du Congres.

Gerard:
But 'twere the work of Hercules to sweep
From the rank stable this enormous heap.
Such are the times -- Cease, useless Satire, cease!
Each moment dire barbarities increase;
Even whilst I write a monster fierce and huge
Has fixed his station in the land of Googe;
Virginian caitiff! Vide note on the second part.
Jefferson by name;
Perhaps from Jefferies sprung of rotten fame:
His savage letter all belief exceeds,
And Congress glories in his brutal deeds:
In the dark dungeon Major-Commandant at Fort Detroit and its dependencies: he
surprised by a party of rebels, and carried prisoner to Williamsburg.
Hamilton is thrown,
The virtuous hero there disdains to groan;
There with his brave companions, faithful friends,
The approaching hour in silence he attends,
When with his council shall the wretch expire,
Or by the British, or celestial fire.
O! may that hour be soon! -- for pity's sake,
Genius of Britain, from thy slumber wake;
Too long has Mercy spoke, but spoke in vain;
Let justice now in awful terror reign.
Am I deceived, or see I in the east
Tenfold the radiance of the day increased?
Britannia's guardian angel greets my eye,
In all th'unclouded luster of the sky:
See his right hand a two-edged weapon wield,
The double cross shines brilliant on his shield:
Hear him, ye just, and in his words rejoice;
Ye hearts of rancour, tremble at his voice.
'Yet, yet a little, and the door of grace
'Must close for ever on an impious race:
'The sun that visits these unhappy climes,
'Is weary to behold incessant crimes:
'Angels appointed from the Throne Divine
'To guard the land their hopeless charge resign:
'No more their gentle pleadings interpose;
'Yet, yet a little, and the door shall close.
'Ungrateful country! by my arms secured,
'In thy behalf what have I not endured?
'When from my grasp the scepter thou would rend,
'From me, thy patron, thy protecting friend,
'Did I not check my thunder in mid-air,
'Far less inclined to punish than to spare?
'Have I not labored ceaseless to reclaim
'Thy frantic sons from misery and shame?
'With bounty carried to excess I strove
'Thy doubts, however causeless, to remove:
'As speaks a father to his only child,
'Amidst repeated provocations mild;
'So have I wished thy errors to forgive,
'And bid thee turn from wickedness and live.
'For this thy malice, swelling like a flood,
'Has overpass'd all bounds, and foamed with blood;
'Outrage has followed outrage, shocking sight!
'And streets have echoed, pulpits teemed with spite:
'The raving calumny, the dirty lie,
'Treach'rous escape, assassination sly,
'All monstrous crimes, which fiends themselves reject,
'Within thy walls claimed honor and respect:
'Whatever honest, peaceable, or pure,
'Dwelt in thy reach to feel thy hate was sure;
'The virtuous man was odious to the cause*
'And he who sinned the most, gained most applause.
'At length the day of vengeance is at hand;
'Th'exterminating Angel takes his stand;
'Hear the last summons, rebels, and relent,
'Yet but a moment is there to repent:
'Lo! the great Searcher ready at the door,
'Who means decisively to purge his floor;
'Yes, the wise Sis^er now prepares the fan
'To separate the meal from useless bran;
'Down to the center from his burning ire,
'Ye foes of goodness and of truth, retire;
'And ye, who now lie humbled in the dust,
'Shall raise your heads, ye loyal, and ye just;
'Th' approving sentence of your Sov'^^^^^ gain,
'And shine refu^gent as the starry train
'Then, when eternal justice is appeased,
'When with due vengeance heaven and earth are pleased,
'America, from dire pollution cleared,
'Shall flourish yet again beloved, revered;
'In duty's lap her growing sons be nursed,
'And her last days be happier than her first.'
THE END.

