A POEM, Addressed to the ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. BY A
GENTLEMAN OF THE ARMY.

Iam fides, et pax, et honor, pudorque
Priscus, and neglecta redire virtus
Audet, apparetque beata pleno
Copia Cornu.
HORACE. Incipiunt magni procedere menses.
VIRG. NEW HAVEN: Printed by T. and S. GREEN. M,DCC,LXXX.

TO All the BRAVE MEN, Whether OFFICERS or SOLDIERS, Who compose The ARMIES of
the United States, This ADDRESS IS Most respectfully inscribed, BY Their
Brother Soldier AND Humble Servant, The AUTHOR.

PERHAPS the following little Poem may be considered with the more indulgence
by the Public, after it is known, that it was actually written, at a period
when the Army was in the field, and the Author so far engaged in the duties of
his profession, as to have but little leisure for subjects of literature or
amusement. And it will not be necessary to demonstrate to those who have the
least knowledge of a military life, how unfavourable such a a state is to
poetical contemplation. This, it is presumed, may pertinently be urged in
excuse for the slighter errors, and inaccuracies of the performance; and the
Design must in some measure atone, for any of a different complexion.

To inspire our Countrymen now in arms, or who may hereafter be called into the
field, with perseverance and fortitude, through every species of difficulty and
danger, to continue their exertions for the defense of their country, and the
preservation of its Liberties, is the object of this Address.

For this purpose, it was imagined, no considerations could be more effectual,
than the recollection of the past, and the anticipation of the future. For
where is the man to be found, who, after all that has been done and suffered;
after such a profusion of blood, and treasure has been expended; and such
important advantages have been obtained; would basely relinquish, and leave
unfinished the illustrious task of rearing an EMPIRE, which from its situation,
and circumstances, must surpass all that ever have existed, in magnitude,
felicity and duration?

Although the Author entertains the most sanguine expectations of the gratitude
and liberality, with which the Continent will reward those who have literally
borne the heat and burden of the day of war; he has not insisted on those
pecuniary or slighter considerations: but has attempted, to turn the attention,
to the future grandeur, happiness, and glory of the Country, for which we are
now contending. -- The lands already granted to the Army, first suggested the
idea of a military settlement on the Ohio, or in some of those Western regions;
whose beauties can never be sufficiently displayed, much less exaggerated by
description. The mild temperature and serenity of the air, the salubrity of the
climate, the fertility of the soil, the luxuriance of its products, the extent
of territory, and the amazing inland navigation, which those boundless lakes,
and immeasurable rivers will open; cannot fail one day, to equal that garden of
the world to the representation given of it, in the conclusion of the Poem. The
possession of such a Country, (rescued from the hand of invasion) in a perfect
state of freedom and security, will be a glorious compensation for all our
toils and sufferings, and a monument of the most unparalleled bravery and
patriotism to the remotest posterity. -- Stimulated with the love of glory,
allured by these delightful prospects, and animated with the pleasing hope of
the speedy fruition of those rapturous scenes; there are thousands who have
drawn the sword, with a resolution never to sheath it, until a happy period is
put to the contest. -- For himself, the Writer declares, that having already
devoted, whatever talents and abilities nature has conferred upon him, to the
service of his Country; no efforts that can be made with his voice, his pen, or
his sword, shall ever be wanting to confirm its LIBERTIES and INDEPENDENCE.

An Address to the Army, etc.
YE martial bands! Columbia's fairest pride!
To toils inured, in dangers often tried;
Ye gallant Youths! whose breasts for glory burn,
Each (...) aim, and meaner passion spurn;
Ye who unmoved, in the dread hour have stood,
And smiled undaunted in the field of blood;
Who greatly dared, at Freedom's rapturous call
With her to triumph, or with her to fall:
Now brighter days in prospect swift ascend;
Ye sons of fame, the hallowed theme attend!
The past review, the future scene explore,
And Heavens high King, with grateful hearts adore.
What time proud Albion, thundering over the waves,
Frowned on her sons, and bade them turn to slaves:
When lost to honor, virtue, glory, shame;
When naught remained of Britain, but the name.
The parent State -- a parent now no more --
Let loose the hirelings of despotic power,
Urged to keen vengeance their relentless ire,
And hoped submission from their sword and fire.
As when dark clouds, from Andes' towering head,
Roll down the skies, and round the horizon spread,
With thunders fraught, the black'ning tempest fails,
And bursts tremendous over Peruvian vales:
So broke the storm, on Concord's fatal plain;
There fell our brothers, by fierce ruffians slain.
Inglorious deed! to wild despair then driven,
We suppliant made our great appeal to Heaven.
Then the shrill trumpet, echoed from afar,
And sudden blazed the wasting flame of war;
From State to State, swift flew the dire alarms,
And ardent Youths impetuous rushed to Arms:
To Arms the matrons and the virgins sung,
To Arms their sires, their husbands, brothers sprung,
No dull delay -- wherever the sound was heard,
Where the red standards in the air appeared,
Or where the brazen cannon swelled the roar,
From bleak Acadia to the Georgian shore.
Now joined the Crowd, from their far-distant farms,
In rustic guise, and unadorned in arms.
Not like their foes, in tinsel trappings gay,
And burnished arms that glittered on the day;
Who now advanced, where Charlestown reared its height,
In martial pomp, and claimed the awful fight;
And proudly deemed, with one decisive blow,
To hurl destruction on the routed foe --
Not so, just Heaven had fixed the great decree,
And bade the sons of freemen still be free;
Bade all their souls with patriot ardor burn,
And taught the finer charms of ease to spurn,
The threats of vengeance, and of death to brave,
To purchase freedom, or a glorious grave.
Long raged the contest on the embattled field;
Nor those would fly, nor these would tamely yield;
'Till Warren fell, in all the boast of arms,
The pride of genius, and unrivaled charms,
His Country's hope! -- full soon the gloom was spread,
Oppressed with numbers, and their leader dead;
Slow from the field the sullen troops retired,
Behind, the hostile flame to Heaven aspired.
The imperious Britons, on the well-sought ground,
No cause for joy, or wanton triumph found;
But saw with grief their dreams of conquest vain,
Felt the deep wounds, and mourned their vet'rans slain.
Nor less our woes -- Now darkness gathered round,
The thunder rumbled, and the tempest frowned;
When lo! to guide us through the storm of war
Beamed the bright splendour of Virginia's Star.
Oh first of hero's! favorite of the skies!
To these dread toils, thy country bade thee rise.
Oh born, beyond the lot of mortals brave!
Thine was the task, a sinking land to save.
For this, from thy loved scenes of rural life
Thou boldly plunged amidst, the unequal strife:
For this, have tried the mountain-weight of care,
The wintry blast, the summer's sultry air;
The autumnal gale, that taints the infectious breath,
The hour of danger, and the field of death. --
Then the foe trembled, at the well known name,
And raptured thousands to his standard came;
His martial skill our rising armies formed;
His patriot zeal their generous bosoms warmed,
His voice inspired, his god-like presence led,
The Britons saw, and from his presence fled.
But what avails to trace the sat of war,
Through iron fields, and point each honored scar;
Why should the strain your former woes recall
The tears that wept, a friend or brother's fall,
When by your side, first in the adventrous strife,
He dauntless rushed, too prodigal of life.
Some future bard shall tempt the untried themes,
Sing how you dared, in fortune's worst extremes;
What cruel wrongs the indignant patriot bore,
What various ills your feeling bosoms tore,
What boding horrors gloom'd the dark'ning hour,
When British Legions armed with death-like power,
Bade desolation mark their crimsoned way,
And lured the savage to his destined prey;
When fierce Germania her barbarians poured,
And rapine's sons with wasting fire and sword,
Spread death around -- wherever your eyes ye turned,
Fled were the peasants -- and the village burned --
How did your hearts for others sufferings melt?
What torturing pangs your bleeding country felt?
What! when you fled before superior force,
Each succor lost, and perished each resource;
When naught was seen around, but prospects drear,
The insulting foe hung dreadful on your rear;
And boastful ween'd that day to close the scene,
And quench your name, as though it never had been.
Why Britain! raged thine insolence and scorn?
Why burst thy vengeance on the wretch forlorn?
The cheerless captive to slow death consigned,
Chilled with keen frost, in prison glooms confined;
Of hope bereft, by thy vile minions cursed,
With hunger famished, and consumed with thirst,
Without one friend, -- when death's last horror stung.
Rolled the wild eye, and gnawed the anguish'd tongue!
Why Britain! in thine arrogance and pride,
Did thou Heavens violated laws deride,
Mock human misery with contemptuous sneers,
And fill thy cup of guilt with orphan's tears!
The widows wailing, and the wretch's groan,
Rise in remembrance to the eternal throne,
While the red flame, through the broad concave driven,
Calls down the vengeance of the insulted Heaven.
And did thou think! by cruelty refined,
To damp the ardor of the heaven-born mind,
With haughty threats, to force the daring train,
To bow unnerv'd in slav'ry's galling chain;
Make countless freemen -- then no longer free --
Shrink at thy frown, and bend the prostrate knee,
And could thou dream! then wake, dissolve thy charms.
Roused by their wrongs, see desperate hosts in arms*
No fear dismays, nor danger's voice appalls,
While kindred blood for sacred vengeance calls;
Their swords shall triumph over thy vaunted force.
And curb the Conq'ror in his headlong course.
What spoils of war thy sons, Columbia! claimed,
What trophies rose! where thy red ensigns flamed,
Where the great Chief, over Del'ware's icy wave,
Led the small band, in danger doubly brave,
On high designs -- and ever the dawning hour,
Germania's vet'rans owned the victor's power --
Or on fait Princeton's plain -- where round thy tomb,
Oh gallant Mercer! deathless laurels bloom. --
Or where anon, in northern fields renowned,
The tide of slaughter stained the sanguine ground;
When the bold freemen gathering from afar
Foiled the proud foe, and crushed the savage war.
Nor less illustrious were those glorious names,
Whose later deeds, the astonished foe proclaims,
Who scaled the bulwarks, 'midst the flying balls,
And plucked the standards from the vanquished walls*
Yet now ye Heroes! see what choice remains,
Ignoble bondage, and inglorious chains,
Or all the joys which liberty can give,
For which you dare to die, or wish to live.
On your own arms, your country's fate depends --
Your wives, your children, parents, brothers, friends,
With all the tender charities of life,
Hang on the issue of the arduous strife.
To bolder deeds, and vict'ry's fierce delights,
Your Country calls, and Heaven itself invites.
Charmed by their potent voice -- let virtue's flame
The sense of honor, and the fear of shame,
The thirst of praise, and freedom's envied cause,
The smiles of heroes, and the world's applause,
Impel each breast, in glory's dread career,
Firm as your rock-rais'd hills to persevere.
Now the fourth year of Independence smiles,
The glorious meed of all our warlike toils;
Auspicious power! with thy broad flag unfurled,
Shed thy stern influence over the western world!
With thy congenial flame, our hearts inspire,
With manly patience, and heroic fire;
The rudest shock of fortune's storm to bear,
Each ill to suffer, every death to dare;
To rush undaunted in the adventrous van,
And meet the Britons, man opposed to man;
With surer aim, repel their barbarous rage,
Shield the poor orphan, and the white-hair'd sage:
Defend the matron, and the virgin's charms,
And vindicate our sacred rights with arms.
This, the great Genius of our land requires,
This, the blessed shades of our illustrious sires;
This, the brave sons of future years demand,
Cheer the faint heart, and nerve the feeble hand;
This, sacred hope, that points beyond the span
Which bounds thus transitory life of man,
Where glory lures us, with her bright renown,
The hero's triumph, and the patriot's crown,
The fair rewards to suffering virtue given,
Pure robes of bliss, and starry thrones in Heaven.
Changed are the scenes -- now fairer prospects rise,
And brighter suns begin to gild our skies. --
The exhausted foe -- his last poor efforts tried,
Sees naught remain, save impotence and pride; --
His golden dreams of fancied conquests over,
And Gallia thundering round his native shore,
Reluctant turns -- and deep involved in woes,
In other climes, prepares for other foes. --
Anon, the horrid sounds of war shall cease,
And all the western world be hushed in peace:
The martial clarion, shall be heard no more,
Or the loud cannon's desolating roar:
No more our heroes pour the purple flood,
No corse be seen, with garments rolled in blood,
No shivering wretch, shall roam without a shed,
No pining orphans raise their cry for bread;
No tender mother shriek, at dreams of woe,
Start from her sleep, and see the midnight foe.
The lovely virgin, and the hoary sire,
No more behold the village flame aspire,
While the base spoiler, from a father's arms
Plucks the fair flower, and riots on its charms.
Even now from half the threatened horrors freed,
See from our shores the lessening sails recede;
See the red flags that to the winds udfurl'd,
Waved in proud triumph round the vanquished world,
Inglorious fly: -- and see their hagard crew
Despair, rage, shame and infamy pursue.
Hail heaven born peace! thy grateful blessings pour
On this glad land, and round the peopled shore;
Thine are the joys that gild the happy scene,
Propitious days, and festive nights serene;
With thee gay pleasure frolic's over the plain,
And smiling plenty leads thy prosperous train.
Then oh my friends! the task of glory done,
The immortal prize by your bold efforts won:
Your country's saviors, by her voice confessed,
While unborn ages rise, and call you blessed:
Then let us go, where happier climes invite,
To midland seas, and regions of delight;
With all that is ours, together let us rise,
Seek brighter plains, and more indulgent skies;
Where fair Ohio, rolls his amber tide,
And nature blossoms in her virgin pride;
Where all that beauty's hand can form to please
Shall crown the toils of war, with rural ease.
The shady coverts and the sunny hills,
The gentle lapse of ever-murm'ring rills;
The soft repose amid the noontide bowers,
The evening walk along the blushing flowers,
The fragrant groves, that yield a sweet perfume,
And vernal glories in perpetual bloom,
Await you there. -- And Heaven shall bless the toil,
Your own the produce, as your own the soil.
No tyrant lord shall grasp a thousand farms,
Curse the mild clime, and spoil its fairest charms,
No blasts severe your ripening fields deform,
No vollied hailstones, and no driving storm,
No raging murrain on your cattle seize,
And nature sicken with the dire disease. --
But golden years, anew, begin their reigns,
And cloudless sunshine gild salubrious plains;
Herbs, fruits and flowers, shall clothe the uncultur'd field;
Nectarious juice, the vine and orchard yield;
Rich dulcet creams the copious goblets fill,
Delicious honey from the trees distill,
The garden smile, spontaneous harvests spring,
The woodlands warble, and the valleys sing.
Along the meads, or near the shady groves,
There sport the flocks, there feed the fat'ning droves*
There strays the steed, through bloomy vales afar,
Who erst moved lofty in the ranks of war.
There free from envy, cank'ring care and strife,
Flow the calm pleasures of domestic life;
There mutual friendship sooths each placid breast,
Blessed in themselves, and in each other blessed:
From house to house, the social glee extends,
For friends in war, in peace are doubly friends:
Their children taught to emulate their sires,
Catch the warm glow, and feel the kindred fires;
'Till by degrees, the migling joys improve,
Grow with their years, and ripen into love:
Nor long the blushing pair in secret sigh,
And drink sweet poison from the lovesick eye.
Blessed be their lot! when in his eager arms,
The enamored youth, folds the fair virgins charms,
On her ripe lip imprints the burning kiss,
And seals with hallowed rights the nuptial bliss.
Then festal sports, the evening hours prolong;
The mazy dance, and the sweet-warbling song:
Then each endearment wakes the ravished sense
To pure delights, and raptures most intense:
And the pleased parent tells his listening son,
What wondrous deeds by him, in youth, were done.
No sights of woe, no torturing fears annoy
The sweet sensations of the heartfelt joy*
Nor shall the savages of murderous soul,
In painted bands, dark to the combat roll,
With midnight orgies, by the gloomy shade,
On the pale wictim point the seeking blade;
Or cause the hamlet, lulled in deep repose,
No more to wake, or wake to ceaseless woes:
For your strong arm the guarded land secures,
And freedom, glory, happine^^ are yours. --
So shall you flourish in (...) prime,
Each age ^ining through the reign of time;
A nobler (...) crown the (...) embrace,
A band of heroes, and a patriot race
Not by soft luxury's too dainty (...)
Their minds contaminated with their blood;
But like the (...) our great forefathers ^red,
By freedom ^^rtur'd, and by temperance ^ed;
Healthful and strong, they turned the virg^^ soil,
The unta^'d forest bowed beneath their ^il:
At early dawn, they sought the mountain chase
Or (...) the Indian, from his lurking place;
Curbed the mad fury, of those barbarous men,
Or dragged the wild beast struggling from his den:
To all the vigor of that pristine race,
New charms are added, and superior grace.
Then cities rise -- and spiry towns increase,
With gilded domes, and every art of peace.
Then cultivation, shall extend his power,
Rear the green blade and nurse the tender flower,
Make the fair villa, in full splendors smile,
And robe with verdure all the genial soil.
Then shall rich commerce, court the favoring gales,
And wondering wilds admire the passing sails.
Where the bold ships, the stormy Huron brave,
Where wild Ontario rolls the whitening wave,
Where fair Ohio, his pure current pours,
And Missisippi laves the extended shores.
Then oh blessed land! with genius unconfined,
With polished manners, and the illumined mind,
Thy future race, on daring wing shall soar,
Each science trace, and all the arts explore;
'Till bright religion, beck'ning from the skies,
Shall bid thy sons to endless glories rise.
As round thy clime, celestial joy extends,
Thy beauties ripen, and thy pomp ascends,
Farther and farther (...), thy blessings roll,
To southern Ocean and the northern Pole
Where now the (...), or tangled thicket grows,
The wilderness all blossom as the rose
Unbounded (...), unknown charms ^ssume,
Like Salem (...), and like Eden (...).
And oh (...) all our toils are past,
Crown (...) such happiness, our (...) at last:
So rise (...) sons, like our great sires of old,
In (...) cause, unconquerably (...);
With (...) faith, and morals pure, their name
Spread through the world, and gain immortal (...). --
And thou Supreme! whose hand sustains the (...)
Before whose nod, the nations rise and fall,
P^opitious smile, and shed diviner charms,
On this blessed land, the queen of arts and arms:
Make the great Empire rise on wisdom's plan,
The seat of bliss, and last retreat of Man.

