THE PROGRESS OF SCIENCE. A POEM Delivered at HARVARD COLLEGE Before a
Committee of Overseers, April 21, 1780.

By a JUNIOR SOPHISTER.

Printed in the Year 1780.

It is humbly presumed that the Youth of the Author will be esteemed by the
Candid a sufficient Apology for any juvenile Errors in the following Poem.

Me vero primum dulces ante omnia Musae,
Quarum sacra fero, ingenti perculs^s amore,
Accipiant.
VIRGIL'S GEORGICS.
THE PROGRESS OF SCIENCE.
LET martial souls, whom wild ambition warms,
The trumpet's clangor, and rude din of arms,
Point out the path victorious heroes trod,
The pest of nations, and the scourge of God:
Mine be the task, in humbler verse to trace
The real greatness of the human race.
Though rude and savage Afric's sons we find,
Yet there first Science dawned upon mankind,
There curbed the passions in perpetual strife,
And there begat the softer arts of life.
Blessed by kind nature with a generous soil,
That yielded herbage, though not dressed with toil,
In philosophic ease they passed their years,
And watched the motions of the rolling Spheres.
Their modest wants plain Nature could redress,
And Science gave them rural happiness.
Egypt beheld her twilight's fainter ray,
And formed fond hopes of her meridian day;
When, lo! tyrannic rage usurped the whole,
And cramped with fetters each high swelling soul.
Disordered fancy superstition bred;
She clapped her wings, and thought her foe was dead;
Yet she but fled, to gain in happy Greece,
What Egypt had denied her, rural peace.
The Grecian souls, formed of the subtlest kind,
In Freedom nurtured, strengthened and refined,
Quick caught the flame; it ran from soul to soul,
And like electric fire, inspired the whole.
Here Poets sang, and Rhetoricians plead,
Here Statesmen sat, and patriot Worthies bled.
Ah blindness to the future! headlong tossed,
They grasped the shadow, but the substance lost.
Greece led her armies Troy's high walls to raze;
The city shook and tottered to its base,
At length it fell -- but from its ruins rose
A vagrant band to subjugate their foes.
Imperial Rome, the mistress of the world,
Towns, cities, kingdoms into ruin hurled,
And reigned supreme alone. Greece felt her force,
Nor stem'd the torrent in its rapid course;
All victims fell to its resistless rage,
The rough Barbarian, and the Grecian Sage.
Ardent the Romans Grecian science viewed,
Nor scorned to learn of those they had subdued;
They reached the same sublimity of thought,
And those, who learned, equaled those, who taught.
There godlike Homer reared his awful head,
Here Virgil sang, and here great Tully plead.
As when some mighty torrent, swol'n with rain,
Falls rushing, dashing, 'till it meets the plain,
Over craggy rocks bends its resistless force,
From clift to clift loud thundering in its course;
So did the Athenian patriotic rave,
And taught his country to be nobly brave.
Not so the Roman. As the ancient Nile
Glides smoothly on within its banks a while,
Slow, gradual, rising, then o'erspeads the plain,
And adds all Egypt to the swelling main;
So siren Tully onward gently rolls,
Enchants, enraptures, and subdues our souls.
Behold far north the gathering tempest rise,
Rushing impetuous, as the whirlwind flies;
Towns, cities, kingdoms from their basis fall,
And one wide ruin overwhelms them all.
Eternal Rome sinks to the common grave,
Bursts, like a bubble dancing on the wave,
Flies off in smoke, and rules the world no more --
Oh! blush then, earthly grandeur! pageant power!
Age after age in one sad tenor ran,
A blank -- a chasm in the page of man.
Men drudg'd their labored dullness to rehearse,
To form an anagram, or egg in verse;
They stifled genius with pedantic rules,
And labored hard to prove that -- they were fools.
No mighty task, though labored in so long,
Each line was proof, was demonstration strong;
And men, Oh dullness to perfection brought!
Blushed to be guilty of a noble thought.
Yet in this gloom did Roger Bacon rise,
Like lightning flashing through the clouded skies,
He burst the barrier of pedantic rules,
And all the labored jargon of the schools.
As forked lightnings, with their hasty light,
Serve but to show the horrors of the night;
So he but showed the dullness of the age,
A stain -- a blot upon historic page.
As when cold Zembla, wrapped in darkest shade,
First sees the Sun erect his radiant head,
In gratitude to the benignant power,
They gather round and Persian-like adore;
He gives them light, not only light, but heat;
Warms with new life, and makes that life complete;
The expanding blossoms smile on every clod,
And laughing valleys own the present God;
Loud hymns of praise the feathered tribes employ,
And savage beasts howl their tremendous joy;
A second Bacon thus divine appeared,
Took hoary dullness by his grisly beard,
Shook the grim tyrant first, then headlong hurled,
And reinstated Science in the world.
Hence brilliant worthies our attention claim,
Who grace the annals of Britannia's fame.
While sun, or moon, or planetary spheres,
Traverse the circle of revolving years;
While nature's laws exist, great Newton's name
Shall stand the foremost on the list of fame.
He saw creation in her mystic dance,
By order governed, not by devious chance;
He traced the planets through their mazy road,
Caught wandering comets in their dark abode,
Explored great nature's universal chain,
Hung earth self-ballanc'd in the vast inane,
Unfolded the philosophy of light,
Taught us why this is black, why that is white,
Taught us why bodies are so prone to fall,
What heaves old ocean, and unravelled all
This riddle of creation. --
To reach his merit I can never hope,
Then take his euge in the words of Pope.
"Superior beings, when of late they faw
"A mortal man unfold all nature's law,
"Admired such wisdom in all earthly shape,
"And showed a Newton as we show an ape."
Thee, tuneful Pope, with equal praise they show,
Whose noble thoughts in strains, harmonious flow.
Hail! Shakespeare, hail! We feel thy force divine,
Feel nature's pathos live in every line.
Through distant climes shall Milton's fame be heard,
Our modern Homer, and sublimest bard.
In Metaphysics too a Lock we find,
Unfolding the recesses of the mind,
Teaching mankind the great Creator's plan;
Yet less admire the author than the man.
Great in himself, he could with pleasure leave
The tinfel'd greatness that a Court can give,
Refuse a place -- a pension, and retire
From glittering pomp, to fan celestial fire.
Nor Britain only can her worthies boast;
They rise in crowds throughout all Europe's coast.
Even this far western world can boast a few;
We Have had a Franklin, and a Winthrop too.
Ah! Winthrop's dead -- Then over his sacred hearse
Pay the sad tribute of elegiac verse
Yet wherefore grieve? To Winthrop now it is given,
Not to survey, but to inhabit Heaven
Eccentric souls, great as himself shall rise,
Spring loose from Earth, and emulate the skies.
For see, in Europe Science reigns no more,
Their souls are fettered with tyrannic power.
Tiptoe she stands on Europe's utmost verge,
With wing high-hovering over the foaming surge;
See her in air her form majestic raise,
See placid ocean motionless to gaze
See clumsy whales in awkward measures play,
And the mild radiance of her gladsom day
Tremble upon the wide extended plain,
And adoration universal reign.
Hail, beauteous Goddess! here erect thy seat,
Let infant Harvard be thy famed retreat.
All hail, ye Worthies, who with generous views
Nurture this Dwelling for the tuneful Muse.
When the Supreme in that tremendous day
Shall from creation wipe this spot of clay;
When the dread mandate shall in Heaven be passed,
And Nature in convulsions groan her last;
When liquid flames in molten columns rise,
And the swift Cherub through our system flies,
Blows out yon taper in his mighty power,
And swears that "time on earth shall be no more;"
Then shall a Hollis, then a Hancock rise,
And spring with rapture to their native skies.

