AN ELEGY ON THE LATE HONORABLE TITUS HOSMER, ESQUIRE ONE OF THE COUNSELORS OF THE
STATE OF CONNECTICUT, A MEMBER OF CONGRESS, And a JUDGE of the MARITIME COURT
OF APPEALS for the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN.

TO MRS. LYDIA HOSMER, RELICT OF THE LATE HONORABLE TITUS HOSMER, ESQUIRE THIS
ELEGY IS INSCRIBED,
AS a Testimony of the Author's Veneration for the many amiable Virtues which
rendered her the Delight and Ornament of so worthy a Consort, and still render
her an Honor to a very numerous and respectable Acquaintance.

AN ELEGY, etc.
COME to my soul, O shade of Hosmer, come,
Though doubting senates ask thy aid in vain;
Attend the drooping virtues round thy tomb,
And hear a while the orphan'd Muse complain.
The Muse which thy indulgence bade aspire,
And dare pursue thy distant steps to fame;
At thy command she first assumed the lyre,
And hoped a future laurel from thy name.
How did thy smiles awake her infant song!
How did thy virtues animate the lay!
Still shall thy fate the dying strain prolong,
And bear her voice with thy lost form away.
Come to my soul thou venerable Sage,
In all the sheeted majesty of night,
Snatch the bold quill, control the noble rage,
And seize the raptured fancy in her slight.
Come in the form that shadowy spirits dress,
When death's dim vail has shrouded all their pride,
While you tall cloud but emulates thy face,
Where the lone moonbeam trembles through its side.
Come on the gale that listening midnight heaves,
When glare eyed phantoms, bending with a bier,
Stalk through the mist, ascend the sounding graves,
And wake wild wonders in the startled ear.
In this dread seen no more the wonted fires
Kindle my breast or open a wish within,
The soul, distracted from herself retires,
And sighs to mingle and to soar with thine.
And where, thou blessed immortal art thou flown*
Can these deep shades detain thy willing ear?
Can thou from loaded breezes hear a groan?
Or stain thy spotless mantle with a tear?
Can ought on earth thy flight has left behind,
Borne in the music of a once loved strain,
Approach the unbodied mansion of the mind*
Or bend one pitying look to earth again?
Can thence no thought to that fair seat descend?
The seat once joyous in thy joys below,
Where robes of sable sadness now depend,
And all the still solemnities of woe.
Can the dear partner of thy tender years,
Sad as the misty fading face of even,
With all the wasted treasure of her tears,
Avert no smile nor bribe a care from heaven?
While that young throng, that dear deserted train,
Where thy loved image softened sweetness wears,
Swell with new tenderness each following pain,
And add unnumber'd, undivided cares.
Around the fair one see their beauties bloom,
(Or will thou not the moving fair one heed?)
How their keen anguish points the distant tomb,
Where all their joys and every hope is fled!
So lonely Cynthia, on her evening throne,
And all her young-ey'd planetary train,
In languid luster seek their sire the sun,
Down the still chambers of the western main.
Yet that broad splendour from his nightly race,
With rising radiance shall the day restore;
Another spring renews fair nature's face,
And years and ages die to waken more.
But thou alas! no more on earth wilt tread,
Nor one short hour thy blessed employments leave,
Though the sad knell, that hailed thee to the dead,
Had doomed thy helpless country to her grave.
Thy country, whose still supplicating moan,
Implores thy counsels with an infant cry;
And loads the same stern Angel with a groan,
Which bore thy kindling spirit to the sky.
Will thou (since nothing here could bribe thy stay,
And nothing here can tempt thee from on high,
Since ^ears of innocence must idly stray,
And grateful millions breathe the fruitless sigh;
Since every tender tie that mortals prize,
And all that fame's immortal children gain,
Yield to the untimely mandate of the skies,
And ask thy kind continuance still in vain;)
Will thou in seats of blessedness above,
Where cares of empire claim the eternal ear,
Among thy country's guardian seraphs prove
The hand to cherish and the heart to hear?
There while the dread sublimity of soul
Over all the star-eye'd heaven exalts thy throne,
While worlds beneath immeasurably roll,
And show the well-known circuit of thine own,
Will thou remark the bluely-bending shore?
Where hills and champaigns stretch abroad their pride,
Where opening streams their lengthiest currents pour,
And heaps of heroes swell the crimson tide.
Will thou recognize that confused uproar?
Towns curled in smoaky columns mounting high,
Mixed with the clarion's desolating roar;
Rending and purpling all the nether sky.
Amid the tumult, will thou see afar
Our laureled heroes striving for the day?
While clouds, unfolding, open the wings of war,
Where the grim legions sweep the foes away.
And while their deeds thy blessed approvance claim,
While crowds of rival chiefs thy guidance share,
Behold that first, that finished heir of fame,
And be the best of heroes still thy care.
That hero whose illuminating sword
Lights death and victory through the darkened field,
Bids realms and ages waken at his word,
Their sire, their soul, their savior and their shield.
Behold that Senate, whose delighted ear
With thy bold eloquence has often rung,
Where trembling realms, for many a doubtful year,
Have learnt their sure salvation from thy tongue.
While cares of empires sit upon their brow,
And all the increasing counsels of an age,
Demand, alike, bold virtue's warmest glow,
And the wide walks of science in the sage;
Let thy own wisdom's ever beaming light
Illume their well-known dignity of soul,
Let thy benevolence their hearts unite,
And every voice, and every wish control.
Lift the deep curtain from the vale of time,
Where unborn years their future circles wind,
Where the broad interests of a growing clim^
Spread to all realms and regulate mankind.
Unfold to their keen penetrating view,
What to the infant empire should be known,
That worlds' and ages' happiness or woe,
Hang on the important issue of their own.
And sure thou will that honored realm revere,
Where first thine early steps began their fame,
Where thy loved memory, ever doubly dear,
Awakes a tenderer tribute to thy name.
Can thou forget, when youthful years began,
Where opening science kindled every grace,
And smiled to see, ascending in the man,
The friend the pride the glory of his race?
Where civil rights, the dignity of men,
And all the extensive privilege of laws,
Rolled from thy voice or brightened from thy pen,
Compelled attention and secured applause.
Where rising worth thine early name enrolled
Among the first famed fathers of the age,
And bade the untarnish'd characters of gold
Flame in the front of glory's deathless page.
Attentive still to virtue's noble aim,
And greatly stren'ous to advance her cause,
Lead thou her counsels animate her flame,
Sire of her sons, and guardian of her laws.
And see! aloft in that sublime retreat,
Where injured rights obtain their last appeal,
How pensive justice over thy vacant seat,
With faltering hand suspends her turning scale*
If chance some Ho^^er, with an even eye,
And skilled like thee to po^^e the trembling weight,
Should cheer the nymph, thine honored place supply
And bless the nations with a longer date.
When from (...) bounds of this extensive land.
Or where wide oceans spread their coasts abroad.
Dark causes rise, demanding from his hand,
The impartial deep discernment of a god.
Then in his breast may all thy virtues rise,
And all thy dignity around him shine,
Then drop thy own blessed mantle from the skies,
And make the person as the place divine.
He will, my friends -- the unbodied life above,
With every virtue brightened and refined,
That glowed below, with patriotic love,
The love of happiness and human kind,
Will burn serener in a purer sky,
Where broader views and bolder thoughts unroll,
Where universal Being sills the eye,
And swells the unbounded wishes of the soul.
No tender thought by heaven's own breath inspired,
Which taught the gentle bosom here to glow,
Which the warm breast with patriot ardor fired,
Or stole the secret tear for silent woe,
No tender thought by heaven's own will approved,
Can ever forsake the mansion first assigned;
But reaches still the object once beloved,
And lives immortal in the immortal mind.
Fixed in a brighter sphere, with surer aim,
Though greater scenes his growing views employ,
Yet Hosmer kindles with an Hosmer's flame,
And his dear country feeds his noblest joy.
He sees our rising, all-involving cause,
Spread like the morn to every distant clime,
Awake the mild magnificence of laws,
And roll down blessings on the stream of time.
Nor think, O hapless fair one, though awhile,
From thy fond arms his happier spirit rove,
That soaring innocence can cease to smile,
Or his Seraphic bosom cease to love.
In Heaven's own breast the self-existent fires,
Ever time began, illum'd the eternal flame,
Lit from the beam, the Archangellic quires
(...) the unchanging ardor still the same.
And shall the heaven-born spirit after death,
^^bb'd of its virtues from its nature sly?
Or lose in climes of bliss the aspiring breath,
Which winged its passage to its kindred sky*
Think, in the chambers of eternal morn,
(...) beauty blooms along the vernal vale,
Where loves and virtues every smile adorn,
And hymns of Angels swell the floating gale;
Think how his well-known sympathy of soul
Views every pain thy tenderness can know;
Counts the full tears in silence as they roll,
And learns the tale of every speaking woe.
Thou know, while here, he joy'd to give relief,
To call dark merit to the eye of day,
To rob the silent orphan of her grief,
And breathe the sigh from innocence away.
How did the trembling visage of the poor,
With grateful glow embolden at his smile,
And learn, well pleased, within his wonted door,
Its joys to cherish, and its cares beguile.
Thou know his early wish began to prize
The bliss that wayward mortals seldom find,
That lifts the frequent suppliant to the skies,
While answering blessings fill the raptured mind.
Know then, fair mourner, from the climes of day,
(While these drear shades of solitude you tread)
His unseen hand companion of thy way,
Through the dark paths thy wandering steps shall lead.
While all thy virtues rise before the throne,
And all thy griefs be numbered in his sight,
Those shall refine and ripen with his own,
And these be hushed in everlasting night.
Thy children too, his images below,
Fair as young plants, and smiling as the morn,
With thy own loveliness shall learn to glow,
And all thy graces brighten and adorn.
Short is the date that virtue from its home,
In these deep shades, can suffer and refine;
And when kind heaven relieves it from the doom,
Ours be the choice to tremble and resign.
Vain were the task, the daring thought were vain,
To check the sun's bold circuit as he flies;
Nor think the cling of fondness can detain
The soaring seraph from his kindred skies.
Then cease, fond partner of his earthly joys,
And leave behind each unavailing care;
Think what a scene his happier flight employs,
And haste to meet him and to mingle there.

