AMERICA: OR, A POEM ON THE SETTLEMENT OF THE BRITISH COLONIES; ADDRESSED To
the Friends of Freedom, and their Country.

By a GENTLEMAN educated at Yale-College.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN.

A POEM.
FROM sylvan shades, ^ool bowers and fragrant gales,
Green hills and murmuring Streams and flowery vales,
My soul ascends of nobler themes to sing;
AMERICA shall wake the sounding string.
Accept, my native Land, these humble lays,
This graceful song, a tribute to thy praise.
When first mankind o'er-spread great ASIA's lands,
And nations rose unnumber'd as the sands,
From eastern shores, where AMOR rolls his streams,
And morning suns display their earliest beams,
TARTARS i^ millions, swarming on the day,
Through the vast western ocean steered their way;
From east to west, from north to south they roll,
And wh^ the fields from DARIE^ to the pole.
Sunk in barbarity, these realms were found,
And Superstition hung her clouds around;
Over all, impenetrable Darkness spread
Her dusky wings, and cast a dreadful shade;
No glimpse of science through the gloom appeared;
No trace of civil life the desert cheered;
No lost endearments, no fond social ties,
Nor filth, nor ju^tice calmed their horrid joys:
But furious Vengeance swelled the (...) mind,
And dark-ey'd Malice all her in (...) joined.
Here spread broad plain^, in blood (...) drowned;
There boundless f^rests nodded o'e^ (...) ground;
Here ceaseless riot and confusion (...);
There savage r^^^ings shake the ^^^^ing grove.
Age after age rolls on in deepening gloom,
Dark as the (...) of the silent tomb.
Thus wasting Discord, like an angry sea,
Swept mighty kings and warring worlds away,
And (ages past) succeeding times beheld
The same dire ruin clothe the dreary field.
At length (COLUMBUS taught by heaven to trace
Far-distant lands, through unknown pathless seas)
AMERICA'S bright realms arose to view,
And the old world rejoiced to (...) the new.
When blessed ELIZA ruled the ATLANTIC main,
And her bold navies humbled ha^h^y SPAIN;
Heaven sent undaunted RALEIGH* ENGLAND'S pride*
To waft her children over the bri^ ^ide,
In fair VIRGINIA'S fields to fix her throne,
And stretch her sway beneath the falling sun.
Then CHARLES and LAUD usurped despotic powers,
And Persecution sadden'd ALBION's shores;
With racks and flames, Religion spread her sway,
BRITONS were learned to torture, laws to obey.
Forced from the pleasures of their native soil,
Where Liberty had lightened ^^ery toil;
Forced from the arms of friends and kindred dear,
With scarce the comfort of one parting tear,
Whilst wives clung round and took a final gaze,
And reverend fires prolonged the last embrace;
To these far-distant climes our fathers come,
Where blessed NEW ENGLAND boasts a parent's name.
With Freedom's fire their generous bosoms glowed,
Warm for the truth, and zealous for their GOD;
With these, the horrors of the desert ceased;
Without them, ALBION less than (...) pleased;
By these inspired, their zeal (...).
And bravely dared each danger -- to be good;
The unfathomed ocean, rolled in mighty storms,
Want and Disease in all their dreadfu^ forms*
The freezing blast that roared through boundless s^^^^s,
And War fierce-threat'ning from surrounding foes.
Yet here Contentment dwelt, and Pleasure smiled.
And rough-brow'd Labor every care beguiled,
Made fruitful garden^ round the forests rise,
And calmed the horrors of the dreary skies.
PENN led a peaceful train to that kind clime*
Where Nature wantons in her liveliest prime,
Where mighty Da^ware rolls his silver tide,
And fertile fields adorn the river's side.
Peace ruled his life; to peace his laws inspired;
In peace the willing savages retired.
The dreary Wilderness, with glad surprise,
Saw spacious towns and golden harvests rise.
Brave OGLITHROPE in GEORGIA fixed his seat,
And deep distress there found a calm retreat;
Learning and life to orphans there were given,
And drew down blessings from approving heaven.
Happy they lived, while Peace maintained her sway,
And taught the furious savage to obey,
Whilst Labor fearless reared the nodding grain,
And Innocence securely trod the plain:
But soon, too soon, were spread the dire alarms,
And thousand painted nations rushed to ar^s,
War's kindled flames blazed dreadful round the shore,
And hills and plains with blo^d were crimsoned over.
Where late the flocks roved harmless on the green,
Where rising towns and cultured fields were seen,
Illimitable deserts met the eye,
And smoking ruins mounted to the sky.
Often when deep silent Night her wings had spread,
And the vast world lay hid in peaceful shade,
In some lone village mirth led on the hours,
And swains secure to sleep resigned their powers;
Sudden the fields resound with war's alarms*
And earth re-^choes (...) arms, to arms, to arms;
Faint through the gloom the murdering bands are seen;
Disploded th^nder shakes the darksome green;
Broad streams of fire from falling structures rise,
And shrieks and groans and shouts in^ade the skies:
Here weeping mothers piercing anguish feel;
There smiles the babe beneath the lifted steel;
Here vigorous youth from bloody vengeance flies;
There white-hair'd age just looks to heaven, and dies.
The sons of GAUL in yonder northern lands
Urged the keen sword and fired the painted bands;
Priests, clothed in Virtue's garb, destruction spread,
And pious fury heaped the fields with dead.
Roused by increasing woes, our sires bade sound
The trump of war, and squadrons gathered round,
Where LOUISBOURG, adorned with towering spires,
Defied the terror of the BRITISH fires;
Bands, who never heard the thundering cannon's roar,
Nor met a foe, nor viewed a wall before,
By Freedom warmed, with native brav'ry crowned,
Bade her proud towers be humbled to the ground.
Even Heaven itself approved a war so i^*
In Heaven let injured nations put their trust.
Yet still destruction spread around the shore,
And the dire savage bathed in BRITISH gore,
'Till WOLF appeared and led his freeborn bands,
Like a dark tempest to yon GALLIC lands:
Then shook Quebec at his exalted name,
And her high walls already seemed to flame.
Lo! where deep forests roar with loud alarms,
The exalted hero shines in blazing arms;
His squadrons, rolling like the billow'd main,
Dart a bright horror over the embattl'd plain;
Whilst from ascending domes and loft^ towers
Pale quivering thousands view the ho^^ile powers.
The BRITISH host, stretched out in dark array,
Rush fearless on and sweep their foes away;
From smoky volumes rapid flames aspire,
And bursting cannon set the fields on fire;
Fate swells the sound; whole trod^^ o^ ^^^oes fall;
And one unbounded ruin buries all.
As over the wester^ dark clouds ^rise*
Involve the sun and black^n all the skies;
The whirlwinds roar; heaven's awful thunders roll,
And streamy lightnings ^la^ ^rou^^ the pole*
Descending floods along the ^dows ^^ow,
And bursting torrents whelm the world below.
Then glorious AMH^^ST ^oi^s his utmost force,
And towered CANADIA'S realms inclines his course;
Immense destruction marks his dreadful way,
And smoking towns spread terror on the day;
Over all the land one boundless waste is seen,
And blazing hills and gloomy streams between.
The voice of Desolation fill^ the gales,
And boding Horror sighs along the vales;
Deep in the woods the savage world retires,
Far from the thunder and the wasting fi^
At length these realms the BRITISH scepter own,
And bow submissive at great GEORGE'S throne.
Almighty GOD of heaven! thy wondrous ways
Demand loud anthems (...) eternal praise.
Through earth, through ^^aven's immeasurable rounds,
Thy Greatness beams* thy being knows no bounds.
Ever Time began, unbounded and alone,
Beyond the vast o^ space thy Glory sho^e;
'Till that great moment when the almighty call
From endless darkness waked this earthly ^all:
Then Being heard his voice, and round the sky
Glowed the bright worlds, which gild the realms on high;
Time then appeared; the Seasons d^ck'd his train,
And Hours and Years da^^'d joyous over the plain;
Millions of morning stars ^EHOVAH sung,
And the whole universe with praises rung.
Yo^ world of fire, that gives a (...) day,
From thy effulgence d^^ts the burning ray.
Thou bid'st yo^ ^^a^ry flames adorn the pole;
Thy word ordains, and circling seasons roll:
At thy co^^and awakes the lovely Spring;
Beauty breaks forth; the hills with music ring:
In Summer's ^^erter blaze thy thunders roar;
Nature attends, and tremb^^^g realms adore:
When Autumn shines, (...) fruits bedeck the plain,
And plenteous harvests joy the humble swain:
On Wintry winds thine aw^ul chariot flies,
When gathering storms envelop^ all the skies;
On Glory throned, with f^ames ab^ut thee rolled;
Light forms thy robes, and clouds thy wheels infold;
Around, ten thousand sparkling angels glow,
Brighten the heavens, and shake the world below.
At thy command, war glitters over the plain;
Thou speak -- and peace revives the fields again,
Vast empires rise, and citi^^ gild the day;
Thou frown'st -- and kings and kingdoms melt away.
BRITANNIA'S happy islands, raised by Thee,
Awe the wide world, and rule the boundless (...);
Led by thine arm, WOLF humbled haughty ^^UL,
And glorious A^^ERST taught her pride to fall.
May this blessed land with grateful praise adore
Such boundless goodness, and such boundless power.
See heaven-born Peace, descending from the sky,
Bids discord vanish, and her horrors fly;
The wearied nations hear her gentle voice*
Own her glad s^^y, and wish for milder joys;
Swift over the land, the blissful ^idings ring,
The valleys brighten and the nations sing.
As when long night has dwelt on Z^^^^LA's ^hore,
Where winter reigns, and storms around him (...),
Soon as the rising sun begins to r^ll,
And gild with ^er beam^ the (...) pole,
The streams dissolve, the fields no longer mourn,
And raptured regions hail his glad retu^^.
Where once dark Superstition fixed her throne;
Where soul-exalting science never shone;
Where every social joy was drowned in bloo^*
Where Hunger ceaseless ranged the groves for food:
Where no gay fruits adorned the dreary plain;
No mountains brightened with the teeming grain;
No flocks nor herds along the hills were seen,
Nor swains nor hamlets ch^ ^he lonely green:
See numerous infant states ^egin to grow;
See every state with peace and plenty flow;
See splendid towns over all the land extend;
The temples glitter and the spires ascend.
The ripening harvest waves along the hills,
The orchard blossoms, and the pasture smiles.
Unnumber'd vessels skim the liquid plain,
Search every realm, that hears the roaring main,
And filled with treasures, bid our shores behold
The eastern spices and the southern gold.
Celestial science, raptured we descry
Refulgent beaming over the western sky;
Bright Liberty extends her b^^^^ful reign,
With all the graces sparkling in her train:
Religion shines with a superior blaze,
And heaven-born virtue beams diviner rays;
Justice enthroned maintains an equal sway,
The poor dwell safely, and the proud obey.
O Land supremely blessed! to thee it is given
To taste the choicest joys of bounteous heaven;
Thy rising Glory shall expand its rays,
And lands and times unknown rehearse thine endless praise.
As in a lonely vale, with glooms overspread,
Retired I roved, where guiding fancy led,
Deep silence reigned; a sudden stream of light
Flamed through the darksome grove and cheered the night;
An awful form advanced along the ground,
And circling glories cast a radiance round:
Her face divine with sparkling brightness shone
Like the clear splendor of the midday sun;
Robes o^ pure white her heavenly limbs infold,
And on her scepter FREEDOM blazed in gold.
"Mortal! attend" (she said and smiled sublime)
Borne down the strea^ of ever rolling time,
View the bright scenes which wait this happy shore,
Her virtue, wisdom, arts and glorious power."
"I see, where Discord thundering from afar,
Sounds her shrill trump and wakes the flames of war;
Roused by her voice, vast hosts together driven*
Shake the wide earth, rend air, and darken heaven:
The cannons roar, the fields are heaped with ^lain*
And storms of fire are blown along the plain."
"Behold! my Heroes lead the glorious way,
Where warring millions roll in dread array,
Awful as Angels, throned on streams of fire,
When trembling nations feel the thund'rer's ire:
Before them, Terror wings the rapid ^^ight,
And Death behind them shrouds whole realms in night,"
"Then, white-rob'd Peace begins her milder reign,
And all the virtues crowd her lovely train.
Lo! heaven-born Science every bosom warms,
And the fair Arts unveil their lovely charms."
"See! blessed Philosophy inspires the soul*
To roam from land to land, from pole to pole;
To soar beyond the sun, to worlds on high*
Which roll in millions round the unmeasured sky;
To mark the comet through his pathless ma^^.
Whilst his bright glories set the heavens on blaze."
"Her nobler Sister too shall charm the mind
With moral raptures and with truths refined;
Religion lead whole realms to worlds of joy,
Undying peace and bliss without alloy."
"See History all the scenes of time unveil
And bid my sons attend her wondrous tale!
Led by her voice, behold them mount the throne
And stretch their sway to regions yet unknown!"
"See all the powers of Poetry unite
To paint Religion's charms divinely bright;
To sing his name, who made you orbs of fire,
Spread out the sky and formed the angelic choir:
Seraphs themselves inspire the sacred lays,
And stoop from heaven to hear their Maker's praise!"
"See Sculpture mould the rude unpolished stone,
Give it new forms and beauties not its own;
Bid the gay marble leap to life and breath,
And call up heroes from the realms of Death!"
"Behold the canvas glow with living dies,
Tall groves shoot up, streams wind and mountains rise!
Again the fair unfolds a heaven of charms,
And the bold leader frowns in dreadful arms."
"Then Eloquence soft pity shall inspire,
Smooth the rough breast, or set the soul on fire;
Teach guilt to tremble at the Almighty name,
Unsheath his sword and make his lightnings flame;
Or reach out grace more mild than falling dews,
While pale Despair the affrighted soul pursues."
"Hail Land of light and joy! thy power shall grow
Far as the seas, which round thy regions flow;
Through earth's wide realms thy glory shall extend,
And savage nations at thy scepter bend.
Around the frozen shores thy sons shall sail,
Or stretch their canvas to the ASIAN gale,
Or, like COLUMBUS, steer their course unknown,
Beyond the regions of the flaming zone,
To worlds unfound beneath the southern pole,
Whose native hears Antarctic oceans roll;
Where artless Nature rules with peaceful sway,
And where no ship ^'er stemmed the untried way."
For thee, proud INDIA'S spicy isles shall blow,
Bright silks be wrought, and sparkling diamonds glow;
Earth's richest realms their treasures shall unfold,
And opening mountains yield the flaming gold;
Round thy broad fields more glorious ROMES arise,
With pomp and splendor bright'ning all the skies;
EUROPE and ASIA with surprise behold
Thy temples starr'd with gems and roof'd with gold.
From realm to realm broad APPIAN ways shall wind,
And distant shores by long canals be joined,
The ocean hear thy voice, the waves obey,
And through green valleys trace their watery way.
No more shall War her fearful horrors sound,
Nor strew her thousands on the embattled ground;
No more on earth shall Rage and Discord dwell,
But sink with Envy to their native hell."
"Then, then an heavenly kingdom shall descend,
And Light and Glory through the world extend;
The Almighty Savior his great power display
From rising morning to the setting day;
Love reign triumphant, Fraud and Malice cease,
And every region smile in endless peace:
Till the last trump the slumbering dead inspire,
Shake the wide heavens, and set the world on fire;
Throned on a flaming cloud, with brightness crowned,
The Judge descend, and angels shine around,
The mountains melt, the moon and stars decay,
The sun grow dim, and Nature roll away;
GOD's happy children mount to worlds above,
Drink streams of purest joy and taste immortal love."

