An ACT To incorporate and establish a Society for the Cultivation and
Promotion of Arts and Sciences.
AS the Arts and Sciences are the Foundation and Support of Agriculture,
Manufactures, and Commerce; as they are necessary to the Wealth, Peace
Independence and Happiness of a People; as they essentially promote the Honor
and Dignity of the Government which Patronises them; and as they are most
effectually cultivated, and diffused through a State, by the forming and
incorporating of Men of Genius and Learning into Public Societies: For these
beneficial Purposes;

Be it therefore enacted by the Council and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Honorable Samuel
Adams, Esquire Hon. John Adams, Esquire John Bacon Esquire Hon. James Bowdoin, Esquire Rev.
Charles Chauncy, D D. Rev. John Clark David Cobb Esquire. Rev Samuel Cooper, D. D.
Hon. Thomas Cushing, Esquire Hon. Nathan Cushing, Esquire Hon. William Cushing, Esquire
Tristram Dalton, Esquire Hon. Francis Dana, Esquire Rev. Samuel Deane, Rev. Perez
Fobes, Rev. Caleb Gannett, Hon. Henry Gardner, Esquire Mr. Benjamin Guild Hon. John
Hancock Esquire Hon. Joseph Hawley Esquire Edward Augustus Holyoke, Esquire Doctor Ebenezer
Hunt, Jonathan Jackson, Esquire Doctor Charles Jarvis, Rev. Samuel Langdon, D. D.
Hon. Levi Lincoln, Esquire Rev. Daniel Little, Rev. Elijah Lothrop, John Lowell,
Esquire Rev. Samuel Mather, D.D. Samuel Moody, Esquire Hon. Andrew Oliver, Esquire Doctor
Joseph Orne, Dr. Theodore Parsons, Hon. George Partridge, Esquire Hon. Robert Treat
Pain, Esquire Rev. Phillips Payson, Samuel Phillips, jun. Esquire Hon. John Pickering,
Esquire Hon. Oliver Prescot, Esquire Rev. Zedekiab Sanger, Hon. Nathaniel Peaslee
Sergeant, Esquire Micajah Sawyer, Esquire Theodore Sedgwick Esquire Hon. William Sever, Esquire
Stephen Sewall, Esquire Hon. David Sewall, Esquire John Sprague, Esquire Ebenezer Storer,
Esquire Caleb Strong, Esquire Hon James Sullivan, Esquire Dr. John Bernard Sweat Mr.
Nathaniel Tracy, Cotton Tufts, Esquire Hon. James Warren, Esquire Rev. Samuel West,
Rev. Edward Wigglesworth, Rev. Joseph Willard, Rev. Samuel Williams Rev.
Abraham Williams, Rev. Nehemiah Williams, and Mr. James Winthrop, be, and they
hereby are formed into, constituted and made a Body Politic and Corporate by
the Name of The American Academy of Arts and Sciences; and that they and their
Successors, and such other Persons as shall be elected in the Manner hereafter
mentioned, shall be, and continue a Body Politic and Corporate, by the same
Name forever.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of the
said Academy may from Time to Time elect a President, one or more Vice
Presidents, one or more Secretaries, and such other Officers of the said
Academy, as they shall judge necessary or convenient; and they shall have full
Power and Authority from Time to Time to determine and establish the Names,
Number and Duties of their several Officers, and the Tenure or Estate they
shall respectively have in their Offices; and also to authorize and empower
their President, or some other Fellow of the Academy, at their Pleasure, to
administer such Oaths to such Officers as they shall appoint and determine for
the well ordering and good Government of the said Academy; provided the same be
not repugnant to the Laws of this State.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of the
said Academy shall have one common Seal, which they may make Use of in
whatsoever Cause or Business shall concern the Academy, or be relative to the
End and Design of its Institution; and shall have Power and Authority from Time
to Time to break, change, and renew the Common Seal, at their Pleasure; and
that they may Sue and be Sued in all Actions, real, personal and mixed, and
prosecute and defend the same unto final Judgment and Execution, by the Name
of, The President and Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of the
said Academy may from Time to Time elect such Persons to be Fellows thereof, as
they shall judge proper; and that they shall have full Power and Authority from
Time to Time to suspend, expel or disfranchise, any Fellow of the said Academy,
who shall by his Conduct render himself unworthy of a Place in that Body, in
the Judgment of the Academy; and also to settle and establish the Rules, Forms
and Conditions of Election, Suspension, Expulsion and Disfranchisement.
Provided, That the Number of the said Academy, who are Inhabitants of this
State, shall not, at any one Time, be more than Two Hundred, nor less than
Forty.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of the
said Academy shall have full Power and Authority from Time to Time, to make and
enact such reasonable Rules, Orders and Bye-Laws, not repugnant to the Laws of
this State, as shall be necessary or convenient for the well Ordering and good
Government of the said Academy; and to annex reasonable pecuniary Fines and
Penalties to the Breach of them, not exceeding the Sum of twenty Pounds, to be
Sued for and recovered in any Court of Record within this State, in the Name
and for the Use of the President and Fellows of the said Academy; and the same
Rules, Orders and Bye-Laws to repeal at their Pleasure: And also to settle and
establish the Times, Places, and Manner of convening the Fellows of the said
Academy: And also to determine the Number of Fellows which shall be present, to
constitute a Meeting of the said Academy. Provided, That the Fellows of the
said Academy shall meet Twice in a Year at the least; and that the Place of
their Meeting shall never be more than Thirty Miles distant from the Town of
Boston

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of the
said Academy may, and shall forever hereafter be deemed capable in the Law of
having holding, and taking in Fee-simple or any less Estate, by gift, grant,
devise or otherwise, any Lands, Tenements, or other Estate, Real and Personal:
Provided, That the Annual Income of the said Real Estate, shall not exceed the
Sum of Five Hundred Pounds, and the Annual Income or Interest of the said
Personal Estate shall not exceed the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds. All the Sums
aforementioned in this Act to be valued in Silver, at the Rate of Six Shillings
and eight Pence by the Ounce. And the Annual Interest and Income of the said
Real and Personal Estate, together with the Fines and Penalties aforesaid,
shall be appropriated for Premiums to encourage Improvements and Discoveries in
Agriculture, Arts and Manufactures, or for other Purposes, consistent with the
End and Design of the Institution of the said Academy, as the Fellows thereof
shall determine.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the End and Design
of the Institution of the said Academy is, to promote and encourage the
Knowledge of the Antiquities of America, and of the Natural History of the
Country, and to determine the Uses to which the various Natural Productions of
the Country may be applied; to promote and encourage Medical Discoveries,
Mathematical Disquisitions, Philosophical Enquiries and Experiments;
Astronomical Meteorological and Geographical Observations; and Improvements in
Agriculture, Arts, Manufactures and Commerce; and, in fine, to cultivate every
Art and Science which may tend to advance the Interest, Honor, Dignity and
Happiness of a free, independent and virtuous People.

And it is further enacted, That the Place where the first Meeting of the
Fellows of the said Academy shall be held, shall be the Philosophy Chamber in
the University of Cambridge; and that the Honorable James Bowdoin, Esquire be, and
he hereby is authorized and empowered to fix the Time for holding the said
Meeting, and to notify the same to the Fellows of the Academy.

[ This Act passed May 4, 1780.]

BOSTON: Printed by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS.


