AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 6, 1780.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 6, 1780. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH, 1770.

By Mr. JONATHAN MASON, Jun.

"Devotion to the public. Glorious flame!
"Celestial ardor! in what unknown worlds,
"Have thou been blessing myriads, since in Rome,
"Old virtuous Rome, so many deathless names
"From thee their luster drew? since taught by thee
"Their poverty put splendour to the blush,
"Pain grew luxurious, and even death delight?
THOMPSON, vol. 1 p. 336. "Unblest by VIRTUE, government and league
"Becomes a (...) junto of the great
"To rob by law. --
"What are without IT Senates, save a face
"Of consultation deep and (...),
"While the determined voice and heart are sold?
"What boasted freedom ^ave a (...) name?
"And what election, but a market vile
"Of slaves self bartered?
I^. p. ^^^. BOSTON: PRINTED BY JOHN GILL, IN COURT-STREET. MDCCLXXX.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting assembled, at
Faneuil-Hall, on Monday the sixth Day of March, 1780.
ON a Motion made and seconded, VOTED, That the Hon. John Hancock, Esquire William
Cooper, Esquire Ezekiel Price, Esquire Mr. Bartholomew Kneeland William Tudor, Esquire John
Lowell, Esquire Ellis Gray, Esquire
Be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon Mr. JONATHAN MASON, Jun.
and in the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited and elegant ORATION
delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid Massacre
perpetrated on the Evening of the fifth of March, 1770, by a Party of Soldiers
of the XXIXth Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston, and to
request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
THE Candor and Generosity of my Fellow-Citizens, which I have already
experienced, leads me with Cheerfulness to submit this Performance to their
Perusal, in full Confidence that the Efforts of him who means well, will from
them receive the mildest Correction possible.

I am, with the utmost Respect, Gentlemen, Your most obliged, and Most obedient
humble Servant, JONATHAN MASON, Jun.
BOSTON, March 6, 1780.
AN ORATION.
MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THAT the greatness and prosperity of a people depend upon the proportion of
public spirit and the love of virtue, which is found to exist among them, seems
to be a maxim established by the universal consent and I may say experience of
all ages.

MAN is formed with a constitution wonderfully adapted for social converse and
connection. Scarcely ushered into the world, but his wants teach him his
inability, of himself, to provide for them. Wrapped in astonishment, with an
anxiety inexpressible, the solitary existant looks around for the aid of some
friendly neighbor, and should he perchance meet the desired object; should he
find one, endowed with intellectual faculties, beset with the same wants and
weaknesses, and in all respects the very image of himself; should he find him
with a heart open to mutual kind offices, and a hand stretched out to bestow a
proportion of his labor, with a bosom glowing with gratitude, his soul is on
the wing to express the sense he entertains of the generous obligation.

A CONFIDENCE is established between him and his benefactor, they swear
perpetual friendship, and a compact for mutual protection and assistance
becomes imperceptably consented to. Thus doubly armed, together they pursue
their morning rout to satisfy those demands only which nature reminds them of,
and while the ingenuity of the one is exercised to ensnare, the strength of the
other is perhaps employed to subdue their vigorous opponent.

THEIR little family soon increases, and as their social ring becomes gradully
enlarged, their obligations to each other are equally circular. Honest industry
early teaches them that a part only is sufficient to provide for the whole, and
that a portion of their time may be spared to cull the conveniences as well as
appease the wants of nature. Property and personal security appear to be among
the first objects of their attention, and acknowledged merit receives the
unanimous suffrage to preside guardian over the rights and priveledges of their
infant society. The advantages derived are in a moment experienced. Their
little policy, erected upon the broad basis of equality, they know of no
superiorty but that which virtue and the love of the whole demands; and while
with cheerfulness they entrust to his care a certain part of their natural
rights, to secure the remainder, the agreement is mutual, and the obligation
upon his part equally solemn and binding to resign them back, either at the
instance and request of their sovereign pleasure, or whenever the end should
be perverted for which he received them.

INTEGRITY of heart, benevolence of disposition, the love of freedom and public
spirit, are conspicuous excellencies in this select neighborhood. Lawless
ambition is without a friend, and the insinuating professional pleas of
tyrants, ever accompanied by the magnificence and splendour A mods of living
above a man's annual income, weakens the State, by reducing to poverty not only
the squanderers themselves, but many innocent and industrious persons connected
with them. Luxary is above all pernicious in a commercial State. Small profits
satisfy the frugal and industrious, but the luxurious despise almost every
branch of trade but what returns great profits.

Home's hist. of man, p. 113, vol. 2. In the savage State man is almost all
body with a very small proportion of mind. In the maturity of civil society, he
is complete both in mind and body. In a state of degeneracy by luxury and
voluptuousness, he has neither mind nor body. Id. 114.


of luxury, are unheard of among them, but simple in their manners and honest
in their intentions, their regulations are but few and those expressive, and
without the aid of extreme refinement, There are very few laws which are not
good while the State retains it is principles.

Montesq. 6.8. c. 1^.
by a universal adherance to the spirit of their constitution, and to those
glorious principles from which that spirit originated, we find them attaining
real glory; we find them crowned with every blessing that human nature has
ever known of; we find them in the possession of that summit of solid happiness
that universal depravity will admit of.

PATRIOTISM is essential to the preservation and well being of every free
government. To The amor patriae or patriotism stands at the head of social
affections, and so high in our esteem, that no actions but what preceed from
it, are termed grand or heroic. It triumphs over every selfish motive, is a
firm support to every virtue, and wherever it prevails the morals of the people
are found to be pure and correct.

Elements of Criticism.
love one's country has ever been esteemed honorable, and under the influence
of this noble passion every social virtue is cultivated, freedom prevails
through the whole, and the public good is the object of every one's concern. A
Constitution built upon such principles, and put in execution by men possessed
with the love of virtue and their fellow men, must always ensure happiness to
it is members. The industry of the citizen will receive encouragement and
magnanimity; heroism and benevolence will be esteemed the admired
qualifications of the age. Every the least invasion on the public liberty, is
considered as an infringement on that of the subject; and feeling himself
roused at the appearance of oppression, with a divine enthusiasm he flies to
obey the summons of his country, and does she but request with zeal he resigns
the life of the individual for the preservation of the whole.

WITHOUT some portion of this generous principle, anarchy and confusion would
immediately ensue, the jarring interests of individuals regarding themselves
only, and indifferent to the welfare of others, would still further heighten
the distressing scene, and with the assistance of the selfish passions, it
would end in the ruin and subversion of the State. But where patriotism is the
leading principle, unanimity is conspicuous in public and private councils. The
Constitution receives for it stability the united efforts of every individual,
and revered for it is justice, admired for it is principle, and formidable for
it is strength, it is same reaches to the skies.

SHOULD we look into the history of the ancient republics, we shall find them a
striking example of what I have asserted, and in no part of their progress to
greatness, producing so many illustrious actions, and advancing so rapidly in
the road to glory, as when actuated by public spirit and the love of their
country. The Greeks in particular ever held such sentiments as these in the
highest veneration, and with such sentiments as these alone they established
their freedom, and finally conquered the innumerable armies of the East.

WHEN Xerxes, Herod. C. 7. c. ^6-99. and Rollin An His.
the ambitious prince of Persia, vainly thinking that nature and the very
elements were subject to his control, inflamed with the thoughts of conquest,
threatening the seas should they resist with his displeasure, and the mountains
should they oppose his progress: When after having collected the armies of the
then known world under his banners, he entered the bowels of of Greece, leading
forth his millions, resolutely bent upon the destruction and extirpation of
this small but free people; what do we perceive to be their conduct upon so
alarming an occasion? Do they tamely submit without a struggle? Do they abandon
their property, their liberties and their country, to the fury of these
merciless invaders? Do they meanly supplicate the favor, or entreat the
humanity of this haughty prince? No! Sensible of the justice of their cause,
and that valor is oftentimes superior to numbers; undaunted by the appearance
of this innumerable host, and fired with the glorious zeal, they with one voice
resolve to establish their liberties or perish in the attempt.

VIEW them at the moment when the armies of their enemies, like an inundation,
overspread their whole Grecian territory; when oppression seemed as though
collecting it is mighty force, and liberty lay fettered at the shrine of
ambition, then shone forth the heavenly principle, then flamed the spirit of
the patriot, and laying aside all sentiments of jealously, as though favored with
the prophetic wisdom of Heaven, with bravery unexampled, they charge their foe,
and fighting in defense of their country, success crowns the virtuous attempt.
With three hundred Lacedimonians, These brave Lacedimonians thought it became
them who were the choicest soldiers of the chief people of Greece, to devote
themselves to certain death, in order to make the Persians sensible how
difficult it is to reduce freemen to slavery, and to teach the rest of Greece,
by their example, either to vanquish or to perish. A monument was afterward
erected to the memory of Leonidas and those who fell with him at Thermopylae;
upon which was this inscription: Dic, hospes, Spartae nos te hic vidisse
jacentes
Dum, sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur.
Rollin.
one only of whom was left to tell the fate of these intrepid men to their
weeping country, they conquered the combined force of the whole Eastern world.

THE privileges and immunities of the Temple's Obser^^.
States of Holland, after a contest of forty years, in which they withstood the
exertions of their powerful neighbors, being established by the force of this
single principle, which appears to prevail both in the Senate and the field,
might also be adduced in support of what I have advanced, but, my
fellow-countrymen, we cannot want additional proofs* the living history of our
own times, will carry conviction to the latest posterity, that no State, that
no community, I may say that no family, nay even that no individual can
possibly flourish and be happy, without some portion of this sacred fire. It
was this that raised America from being the haunt of the savage, and the
dewlling place of the beast, to her present state of civilization and opulence:
It was this that has supported her under the severest trials: It was this that
taught her sons to fight, to conquer and to die in support of freedom and it is
blessings; and what is it, but this ardent love of liberty, that has induced
you, my fellow-citizens, to attend on this solemn occasion, again to encourage
the streams of sensibility and to listen with so much attention and candor to
one of the youngest of your fellow-citizens, whose youth and inability plead
powerfully against him, while the annual tribute is paid to the memory of those
departed citizens, who fell the first sacrifices to arbitrary power. Check not
such generous feelings. They are the fruits of virtue and humanity, and while
the obligations you remain under to those unhappy men, lead you to shed the
sympathetic tear, to dwell with pleasure upon their memories, and execrate the
causes of their death, remember that you can never repay them. Ever bear it in
your minds, that so implicit was the confidence you willingly placed in that
country, that owed to you her affection, that notwithstanding the introduction
of that inhuman weapon of tyrants into the very heart of your peaceful
villages, you still would feign rely upon their deceitful assertions, and paint
the deformed monster to your imaginations as the minister of peace and
protection. Men born in the bosom of liberty, living in the exercise of the
social affections in their full vigor, having once fixed them upon particular
objects, they are not hastily eradicated. Unaccustomed to sport with, and
wantonly sacrifice these sensible overflowings of the heart, to run the career
of passion and blinded lust, to be familiar with vice and sneer at virtue, to
surprise innocence by deceitful cunning, and assume the shade of friendship to
conceal the greater enmity, you could not at once realize, the fixed, the
deliberate intention of those from whom you expected freedom, to load you with
slavery and chains, and not till insult repeated upon insult: Not till
oppression stalked at noonday through every avenue in your cities: Nay not
till the blood of your peaceful brethren flowed through your streets, was the
invenomed serpent to be discovered in the bushes: Not till a general trespass
had been made upon the keenest feelings of human nature, and the widowed mother
was summoned to entomb the cold remains of her affectionate son; the virtuous
bosom to resign its tender partner, and social circles their nearest friends;
could you possibly convince yourselves that you and Britain were to be friends
no more. Thrice happy day! The consequences of which have taught the SONS of
AMERICA that a proper exercise of public spirit and the love of virtue has
been able to surprise and baffle the most formidable and most powerful tyranny
on earth.

PATRIOTISM is a virtue which will ever be universally admired, even by those
incapable of possessing it. Its happy effects are equally visible in
individuals as in States, and if we bestow a moments reflection upon the heroes
of antiquity, who have been deservedly celebrated by succeeding generations,
both for their abilities and conduct, we shall find that the true source of
their greatness was this spirit of freedom, and their inviolable attachment to
the interest of their country.

WITH an attentive silence we listen to the historian while he relates to us
the integrity of conduct, the invincible courage, the earnest glow of soul, and
the ardent love of liberty which was exhibited in the lives of those
illustrious men, and so great were their virtues that we are scarce able to
credit them, but as the dreams of fancy, or the fictions of the ingenious.

IT is recorded of the celebrated Rollin.
Timoleon, general of Corinth, that notwithstanding he was blessed with a temper
singularly humane, and with feelings that were ever roused at the miseries of
his fellowmen, he loved his country so passionately, that after making use of
every argument in his power to convince an older brother of his error, for
attempting to become the tyrant of it, be devoted him to death; a brother on
whom he had previously placed his affection, and whose life being exposed to
the fire of an enemy in a severe battle, be had before saved at the great
risque of his own. Even in old age, after a period of rigid retirement for
twenty years, we are attracted by the disinterested conduct of this exalted
patriot.

WHEN the Syracusians, groaning under every species of cruelty, which lust,
avarice and ambition could inflict, supplicated their generous neighbors for
assistance, to alleviate those miseries they themselves had been exposed to.
Timoleon, urged to accept the command of the Corinthian Auxiliaries, at first
hesitated, his age, his manners, his private happiness and the endearments of
his family forbid it; but sensible that he was but a member of the community,
and stung by the cries of innocence, his inclinations were but of trivial
moment in competition with his duty. --

VIEW him at the head of his chosen army, assembled to plead the cause of
suffering virtue. In possession of arms and of power if inclined to pervert
them, are his principles changed with his station? Are his thoughts bent on
conquest or on death? Or does he entertain a secret wish to seize the moment of
confidence, and build his greatness upon the ruin of the distressed, to remove
one tyrant to reinstate another? No, but fired with a generous glow of soul,
fired with the manly sentiments of freedom, with an implacable hatred to
oppression of all kinds, he marches his troops to the deliverance of this
afflicted people, and with a firmness becoming soldiers, fighting under the
standard of liberty, after a series of fatigue and toil, harrassing marches and
fierce conflicts, he dethrones the tyrant, and is proclaimed the deliverer of
Syracuse. -- Having restored tranquillity to this unhappy country, repeopled
their cities, revived their laws, and dispensed justice to all ranks and
classes, he resigned his command, and retreated once again to the private walks
of life, accompanied with the greatful acknowledgments of millions as the
patron of their liberty and the savior of their coun'ry. -- Happy man! endowed
with such a noble soul, prone to feel for the misfortunes, and rejoice in the
happiness of his fellow creatures.

BUT why need we resort to distant ages to furnish us with instances of the
effects of patriotism upon individuals? Will not the present day afford at
least one illustrious example to our purpose? Yes, my fellow-countrymen,
AMERICA, young AMERICA too, can boast her patriots and heroes, men who have
saved their country by their virtues, whose characters posterity will admire,
and with a pleased attention, listen on tiptoe to the story of their glorious
exertions. Let us pause a moment only upon the select catalogue, and take the
first upon the lift. --

VIEW him in his private station, and here, as though Providence for his
excellencies had selected him for her own; from the extensive circle of
humanity, we perceive him enjoying her richest dispensations. By an affluent
fortune placed beyond the reach of poverty or dependence, blessed with the
social circle of friends, and happily connected by yet more endearing ties;
peaceful reflections are his companions through the day, and the soothing
slumbers of innocence hover over his couch: Charity presides steward of his
household, and the distressed are ever sure to receive from his bosom that sigh
which never fails to console, and from his cheek the alleviating tear of
sympathy. Having reached the summit of human felicity beyond even the picture
of his most sanguine expectations, it is indifferent to him as an individual,
whether prince or people rule the State, but nurtured in the bosom of freedom,
endowed with a greatness of soul, swallowed up with public spirit and the love
of mankind, does oppression scatter her baleful prejudices, does ambition rear
its guilty crest, friends, Cari sum parents, cari liberi, propinqui,
familiares, sed omnes omnium caritates patria una complexa est, pro quis bonus
dubitet mortem oppetere? C^^^.
relations and fortune are like the dust of the balance. The pleas of nature
give way to those of his country, and urged on by heavenly motives, he flies
instantly to her relief. See him while grief distracts his bosom, at the
effusion of human blood, grasp the sword of justice and buckle on the harness
of the warrior. See him with fortitude unparrallel'd, with perseverance
indefatigable, deaf to pleasure and despising corruption, cheerfully
encountering the severest tasks of duty, and the hardiest toils of a military
life. Modest in prosperity, and shining like a meteor in adversity, we behold
this patriotic hero, with a small army of determined freemen, attacking,
fighting and conquering an army composed of the bravest veteran troops of
Britain.

AND shall we, my countrymen. stop the current of gratitude? And can we forbear
testifying our joy upon the success of such singular exertions? Shall we seal
his death before we thank him for his services? By no means. -- Our
acknowledgments will irresistably flow from us to this deserved object of
admiration, and his very actions will sting the soul of the ungrateful wretch,
until he is forced to admire their luster, and confess his inability to equal
them

SOME there are, who, Roman like, would banish him for his good conduct; but
while we copy the spirit of this great people, let us not be as diligent to
catch their vices. Such conduct is inconsistent with the sentiments of freemen,
and surely we cannot forget that he has saved our country.

REWARDS One method of preventing crimes is to reward virtue. If the rewards
for the discovery of useful truths have increased our knowledge, and multiplied
good bocks, is it not probable that rewards, distributed by the beneficent hand
of a sovereign, would also multiply virtuous actions. The coin of honor is
inexhaustible, and is abundantly fruitful in the hands of a prince who
distributes it wisely. Marq. of Becea.
and punishments are in the hands of the public, and it is equally consistent
with generosity and humanity, to bestow the one, as inflict the other. We
cannot be too cautious in the objects of our gratitude, let merit, conspicuous
merit be the standard to which our praises shall resort, and it will excite a
noble emulation in others, and let us rather forbear that respect, which is too
often found attendant upon the rich, though their wealth has been amassed with
the ruin of their country.

BUT the praises of us are not the patriot's only reward; with an approving
conscience, sweetning the declivity of life, his invitation is to the skies,
there to receive a far more precious reward, for the establishment of that
principle to which since the origin of mankind, heaven has paid an immediate
attention.

"WHERE the brave youth with love of glory fired,
"Who greatly in his country's cause expired,
"Shall know he conquered. The firm patriot there,
"Who made the welfare of mankind his care,
"Though still by faction, vice, and fortune crossed
"Shall find his generous labor was not lost." Cato.

SUCH is the progress of public spirit and the love of virtue, and it is the
only pillar, upon which can safely be erected the happiness of mankind. Without
some play of the social affections in every society, without some barrier to
oppose the stormy passions of individuals, without some general attachment to
the public welfare, a door is open to ambition and political corruption, The
Assyrian, the Persian and Grecian, the three first universal monarchies,
finally sunk under luxury and corruption; and it is well known that the Romans
did not preserve their liberties for half a century after being debanched by
the luxury of Asia, but fell a prey to its vices, and was at length divided by
the Goth's and Vandals.
luxury and selfishness become fashionable vices, and the spirit of the
government is perverted; the public good is neglected, the riches of the State
insecure, the liberty of the subject slighted, and the attempts of the tyrant
made successful by the follies of the people.

WHAT but the want of patriotism that has buried in ruins the mighty empires
of Greece and Rome; that standing armies, the scourge of the innocent prevail
throughout all Europe; that the pages of history present to our view so
melancholy a picture of the human species, and that America and Britain are
not at this day, running the road to greatness and glory in concert; and what
is it but the want of patriotism that could induce this haughty nation,
divested of every public virtue, of every bosom seeling, of every pretension to
humanity, without apology or pretext to usher a standing army, composed of
vagrants, criminals and mercenaries into our peaceful country.

O MY countrymen, it is the want of patriotism, that we are at this time called
to weep over the wanton massacre of innocent men; that this is not the only
house of mourning; that the fields of America have become devoted to war, and
scenes of slaughter familiar to her sons; that our oppressors yet persist in
their destructive system of tyranny, and if their power was equal to their
thrist of blood, with the spirit of ambition by which they are now directed,
would lead them to destroy and extirpate the whole human race. But thanks be to
Heaven, that by the force of those virtues which they have discarded, we have
nobly resisted the attempts of these cruel men, and the miseries they have so
profusely dealt out to us, are returning with additional vengeance upon their
own heads. The danger of the issue is now past, and if we but retain the same
patriotick ardor, with which we first defended our rights from the grasp of our
enemies, they are every day in our power. We have every thing to hope; they on
the other hand have every thing to sear. Youth, vigor and the invincible arm of
justice are on our side: -- The genius of liberty also is our advocate, who
though persecuted, has never been conquered.

IN our day we are called to see a happy country laid waste at the shrine of
ambition; to experience those scenes of distress which history is filled with,
but experience rivetts it is lessons upon the mind, and if we resolve with
deliberation, and execute with vigor, we may yet be a free and flourishing
people. Repine not too much at the ravages of war, nor murmur at the
dispensations of Providence. We oftentimes rate our blessings in proportion to
the difficulty of attaining them, and if without a struggle we had secured our
liberties, perhaps we should have been less sensible of their valor.
Chastisements in youth are not without their advantages. Blessings most
commonly spring from them in old age. They lead us to reflect seriously in the
hour of retirement, and to cherish those qualifications, which are frequently
lost in the glare of prosperity.

THE important prophecy is nearly accomplished. The rising glory of this
western hemisphere is already announced, and she is summoned to her seat among
the nations. We have publicly declared ourselves convinced of the destructive
tendency of standing armies: We have acknowledged the necessity of public
spirit and the love of virtue, to the happiness of any people, and we profess
to be sensible of the great blessings that flow from them. Let us not then act
unworthy of the reputable character we now sustain* Like the nation we have
abandoned, be content with freedom in form and tyranny in substance, profess
virtue and practice vice, and convince an attentive world that in this glorious
struggle for our lives and properties, the only men capable of prizing such
exalted privileges, were an illustrious set of heroes, who have sealed their
principles with their blood. Dwell, my fellow-citizens, upon the present
situation of your country? Remember that though our enemies have dispensed with
the hopes of conquering, our land is not entirely freed of them, and should our
resistance prove unsuccessful by our own inattention and inactivity, death will
be far preferable to the yoke of bondage.

LET us therefore be still vigilant over our enemies. -- Instill into our
armies the righteous cause they protect and support, and let not the soldier
and citizen be distinct characters among us. By our conduct let us convince
them, It has ever been thought inconsistent with good policy and even common
sense to commit the defense of a country to men who have no interest in it is
preservation.

Diod. Lib. 1. p. 67.
that it is for the preservation of themselves and their country, they are now
fighting; that they equally with us are interested in the event, and abandon
them not to the insatiable rapacity of the greedy extortioner.

As a reward for our exertions in the great cause of freedom, we are now in the
possession of those rights and privileges attendant upon the original state of
nature, with the opportunity of establishing a government The true definition
of a free State is where the legislative adhires strictly to the laws of
nature, and calculates every one of it is regulations for improving society and
for promoting industry and honesty among the people.

Home's His. vol. 2. p. 132.
for ourselves, independent upon any nation or people upon earth. We have the
experience of ages to copy from, advantages that have been denied to any who
have gone before us. Let us then, my fellow-citizens, learn to value the
blessing. Let integrity of heart, the spirit of freedom and rigid virtue, be
seen to actuate every member of the commonwealth. Let not party rage, private
animosities, or self interested motives, succeed that religious attachment to
the public weal which has brought us successfully thus far; for vain are all
the boasted charms of liberty if her greatest votaries are guided by such base
passions. The trial of our patriotism is yet before us, and we have reason to
thank Heaven, that it is principles are so well known and defused. Exercise
toward each other the benevolent feelings of friendship, and let that unity of
sentiment which has shone in the field, be equally animating in our councils.

REMEMBER that prosperity is dangerous; that though successful we are not
infallible; that like the rest of mankind we are capable of erring. The line of
our happiness may be traced with exactness, and still there may be a difficulty
in persuing it. Let us not forget that our enemies have other arts in store for
our destruction; that they are tempting us into those snares, which after
successful struggles, proved the ruin of the empires of the East, and let this
sacred maxim receive the deepest impression upon our minds, that if avarice, if
extortion, if luxury and political corruption, are suffered to become popular
among us, civil discord and the ruin of our country will be the speedy
consequence of such fatal vices, but while patriotism is the leading principle,
and our laws are contrived with wisdom and executed with vigor, while industry,
frugality and temperance are held in estimation, and we depend upon public
spirit and the love of virtue for our social happiness, peace and affluence
will throw their smiles upon the brow of the individual, our commonwealth will
flourish, our land become the land of liberty, and AMERICA an asylum for the
oppressed.

ERRATA. Page 16. in the marg. note, for perentes read parents; and in the
same section insert qua before quis.


