PROCEEDINGS OF A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL OF THE LINE, HELD AT RARITAN, IN THE
STATE OF NEW JERSEY, BY ORDER OF HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire General
and Commander in Chief OF THE ARMY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, FOR THE
TRIAL OF MAJOR GENERAL ARNOLD, JUNE 1, 1779.

Major General HOW, President.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF CONGRESS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, IN MARKET-STREET. M.DCC.LXXX.

PROCEEDINGS OF A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL, etc.
Major general HOW, PRESIDENT.
MEMBERS. Brigadiers general SMALLWOOD, KNOX, WOODFORD, IRVINE;
Colonels MOYLAN, WOOD, HARRISON, HALL, GUNBY, BUTLER;
Lieutenant colonels HARMAR, SIMMS, POPKINS. JOHN LAURANCE, JUDGE ADVOCATE.

THE court having met, the judge advocate produced his excellency the commander
in chief's order, dated May 29, 1779; which being read, is as follows:

Headquarters, Middletown, May 29, 1779.
A GENERAL court martial of the line is to be held on Tuesday next, the first
of June, at the usual place, for the trial of major general Arnold, as directed
by a resolution of the honorable the congress, passed the third of April, 1779.

Major general HOW, PRESIDENT.

Brigadiers general Smallwood, Knox, Woodford and Irvine, colonels Wood,
Harrison, Hall, Gunby, Moylan and Butler; lieutenant colonels Popkins, Simms
and Harmar, members.

Before the court was sworn, major general Arnold peremptorily objected to
brigadier general Irvine, colonel Butler and lieutenant colonel Harmar, which
objection was allowed by the court The president and members then adjourned the
court until tomorrow ten o'clock.

DECEMBER 23, 1779.
The court met at Morristown, in the state of New Jersey, composed of the
following officers Major general HOW, PRESIDENT.
MEMBERS. Brigadiers general MAXWELL, KNOX, GIST;
Colonels DAYTON, BRADLEY, CORTLANDT, HALL, SHERBURNE, JACKSON, SPENCER, GUNBY;
Lt. col. comm. WEISENFELDT. JOHN LAURANCE, JUDGE ADVOCATE.



The judge advocate produced his excellency the commander in chief's orders
respecting the court: which being read, are as follows

Headquarters, Middlebrook, June 2, 1779.
THE meeting of the court for the trial of major general Arnold, is deferred
until further orders, the exigency of the public service not permitting it to
sit at this time.

Headquarters, Morristown, December 19, 1779.
THE general court martial appointed the 29th of May, for the trial of major
general Arnold, whereof major general How is president, is directed to meet at
this town the 20th instant, to resume the trial. The court will consist of
major general How, president; brigadiers general Maxwell, vice Woodford,
absent; Smallwood, Knox and Stark, vice Irvine, challenged; colonel Bradley,
vice Ward, absent; Humpton, vice Harrison, absent; Hall, Gunby, Cortlandt, vice
Moylan, absent; Hazen, vice R. Butler, challenged; Dayton, vice Popkins,
absent; Sherburne, vice Harmar, challenged.

Headquarters, Morristown, December 21, 1779.
THE general court martial, whereof major general How is president, will
assemble tomorrow, at Norris's tavern, in Morristown. Brigadier general Gist
is appointed a member of the court, vice brigadier general Smallwood, who is
obliged to be absent. General Stark being indisposed, colonel Spencer is added
as a member.

AFTER ORDERS.
Headquarters, Morristown, December 22, 1779.
THE general court martial, whereof major general How is president, to sit
tomorrow morning ten o'clock, at Norris's tavern. Colonel Jackson is appointed
a member, vice colonel Hazen; and lieutenant colonel commandant Weisenfeldts,
vice colonel Humpton, on command.

The president, members and judge advocate being sworn, agreeable to the rules
and articles of war, the judge advocate produced the proceedings of the council
of the state of Pennsylvania, relative to major general Arnold, dated February
3, 1779, and a resolution of the honorable the congress, dated April 3, 1779;
which being read, are as follow:

In COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, February 3, 1779.
PRESENT,
His excellency JOSEPH REED, esquire PRESIDENT, The honorable GEORGE BRYAN, esquire
VICE PRESIDENT.
Esquires. Col. JOSEPH HEART, JOHN MACKY, JAMES M'LENE, JAMES READ, JOHN
HAMBRIGHT and THOMAS SCOTT,

THIS board having maturely considered the general tenor and course of the
military command exercised by major general Arnold in this city and state, and
diverse transactions which have appeared to this board during his command, do
resolve unanimously,

First, That the same has been in many respects oppressive to the faithful
subjects of the state, unworthy of his rank and station, highly discouraging to
those who have manifested their attachment to the liberties and interests of
America, and disrespectful to the supreme executive authority of the state.

Wherefore, resolved unanimously,

Second, That nothing but the most urgent and pressing necessity can justify or
induce this board to call forth any wagons or militia, or otherwise subject
the good people of this state to the power and command of the said general
Arnold within the state, should he resume it upon his return.

Third, Ordered, That the attorney general do prosecute the said general
Arnold, for such illegal and oppressive conduct as is cognizable in the courts
of law.

And, that this board may not be supposed capable of passing the above resolves
upon mere general grounds, and more especially in the case of one who has
formerly distinguished himself in public service, they think proper to declare,
that the consideration last mentioned has hitherto restrained them from taking
proper notice of general Arnold, hoping that every unworthy transaction would
be the last, or that a becoming sense of such improprieties would effect an
alteration of conduct. But finding that tenderness has only led to insult and
farther oppression, duty to the state, regard to the interest and happiness of
the good people thereof, who must be affected by all abuses of power, oblige us
thus to take notice thereof; and farther declare, that the said resolves are
founded upon the following articles, in which they have sufficient ground to
esteem general Arnold culpable.

First, That while in the camp of general Washington at Valley Forge, last
spring, he gave permission to a vessel belonging to persons then voluntarily
residing in this city with the enemy, and of disaffected character, to come
into a port of the united states, without the knowledge of the authority of the
state, or of the commander in chief, though then present.

Second, In having shut up the shops and stores on his arrival in the city, so
as even to prevent officers of the army from purchasing, while he privately
made considerable purchases for his own benefit, as is alleged and believed.

Third, In imposing menial offices upon the sons of freeman of this state, when
called forth by the defire of congress to perform militia duty; and when
remonstrated to hereupon, justifying himself in writing, upon the ground of
having power so to do; for that, when a citizen assumed the character of a
soldier, the former was entirely lost in the latter; and that it was the duty
of the militia to obey every order of his aids (not a breach of the laws and
constitution) as his (the general's) without judging of the propriety of them.

Fourth, For that, when a prize was brought into this port by the Convention
brig, of this state, whereon a dispute arose respecting the capture, which
would otherwise in great probability have been amicably adjusted between the
claimants, general Arnold interposed by an illegal and unworthy purchase of the
suit, at a low and inadequate price, as has been publicly charged by a
reputable citizen; to which may in some degree be ascribed the delay of justice
in the courts of appeal, and the dispute in which the state may probably be
involved with congress hereupon.

Fifth, The appropriating the wagons of this state, when called forth upon a
special emergency last autumn, to the transportation of private property, and
that of persons who voluntarily remained with the enemy last winter, and were
deemed disaffected to the interest; and independence of America.

Sixth, In that, congress by a resolve of the twenty first of August last,
having given to the executive powers of every state, an exclusive power to
recommend persons desirous of going within the enemy's lines, to the office:
there commanding, general Arnold, in order, as may reasonably be inferred, to
elude the said resolve, wrote a letter, as appears by comparison of hands and
the 'declaration of the intended bearer, recommendatory for the above purpose,
and caused his aid de camp, major Clarkson, to sign the same. But the said
device not taking effect, through the vigilance of the officers at
Elizabethtown, general Arnold, without disclosing any of the above
circumstances, applied to council for their permission, which was instantly
refused, the connection, character and situation of the party being well known
and deemed utterly improper to be indulged with such permission, thereby
violating the resolve of congress, and usurping the authority of this board.

Seventh, This board having, upon the complaint of several inhabitants of
Chester county, through the late wagon master general, requested of the said
general Arnold to state the said transaction respecting the wagons, in order
that they might satisfy the complainants, or explain the same without farther
trouble, received in return an indecent and disrespectful refusal of any
satisfaction whatsoever.

Eighth, The discouragement and neglect manifested by general Arnold, during
his command, to civil, military and other characters, who have adhered to the
cause of their country -- with an entire different conduct toward those of
another character are too notorious to need proof or illustration. And if this
command has been, as is generally believed, supported at an expense of four or
five thousand pounds per annum to the united states, we freely declare we shall
very unwillingly pay any share of expenses thus incurred.

Extract from the minutes, T. MATLACK, Secretary.

In CONGRESS. 3 April, 1779.
Resolved, THAT his excellency Joseph Reed's letter to congress, of the 25th
January, 1779, and general Arnold's letter of 8th and 12th February, and the
resolves therein contained of the executive council of Pennsylvania, be, with
the evidence which has been collected and reported by the committee on those
letters, transmitted to the commander in chief; and that he be directed to
appoint a court martial on the first, second, third and fifth articles
contained in the said resolves of the said executive council, the said articles
only being cognizable by a court martial; and that the reference be notified to
the supreme executive council, and they be requested to furnish the evidence to
the court martial.

Extract from the minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

Major general Arnold requested that the proceedings of the council of the
state of Pennsylvania, dated January 18 and 21, 1779, and his excellency
president Reed's letter to the honorable the congress, dated January 25, 1779,
might be produced. The judge advocate, at the desire of the court, produced
them; which being read, are as follow:

In COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, January 18, 1779.
A REPRESENTATION having been made by colonel Andrew Boyd, wagon master of the
county of Chester, through James Young, esquire wagon master general, to this
board, That Jesse Jordan, a deputy wagon master, was sent by colonel Boyd,
with a brigade of twelve wagons, to Philadelphia, under the wagon law of this
state, to convey provisions from thence to New-Windsor, in consequence of
orders from him (the wagon master general) of the 27th September last; and
that, when the said Jordan returned home, he informed colonel Boyd, that when
he arrived in Philadelphia with his brigade, he applied to John Mitchell, esquire
deputy quarter master general, for loading, who sent him with his brigade to
Eggharbour without loading, with orders to load merchandise there, of private
property, and return with it to Philadelphia, which he did; that the loading
was delivered there into private flores -- On consideration,

Ordered, That mr. Mitchell be requested to state to council, in writing, the
transaction relating to Jordan's brigade of wagons, sent by him to Eggharbour,
ascertaining the property, or to whom the the same was delivered.

Extract from the minutes, T. MATLACK, Secretary.

Quarter master general's office, Philadelphia, January 19, 1779. Sir,
I THIS day received an order, signed by the secretary of the honorable council
of this state, requesting I would give them information respecting a brigade of
wagons under the conduct of Jesse Jordan, a wagon master from Chester county,
the council having been informed that I sent them to Eggharbour, to convey
private property to this city. I shall at all times be ready to give your
excellency and the honorable council every information you think necessary for
the good of the public, or this state in particular, which relates to my
office, or the business of the department, as I have no desire to conceal any
part of my conduct as a public officer, having conducted the business under my
direction with integrity, and justice to the public. The following are the
state of the facts required, viz.

In the month of October last, at the time the enemy had landed some troops at
Eggharbour, general Arnold desired I would furnish him with a brigade of teams,
which he wanted to send to the Jersies, and that he would pay the hire of them,
they being wanted to remove property which was in imminent danger of falling
into the hands of the enemy. I informed him, he should have the wagon master
of the fast brigade which could be spared from public service, sent to him,
when he would give such orders as he pleased. Accordingly, about the 22d of
October mr. Jordan was sent to the general, to receive his directions, having
at that time sent forward a large supply for the army, etc. When Jordan
returned, he was desired to make out his account to general Arnold, to be paid.
I do not know where the loading was stored, nor whose property it was, further
than what is before mentioned. A greater number of continental teams coming in
than I expected, enabled me to comply with general Arnold's request, without
any inconvenience to the service. If there is any thing further, in which I can
satisfy your excellency and the council, I will wait on you at any time with
pleasure.

I have the honor to be, with great rejpect Your excelleary's mast obedient and
mast humble servant, JOHN MITCHELL, D.Q.M.G.

His excellency Joseph Reed, esquire President of the state of Pennsylvania. Copy.
T. MATLACK, Secretary.
In COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, January 21, 1779.
COUNCIL having received from John Mitchell, esquire, deputy quarter master
general, a state of the transaction, in pursuance of the resolve of council of
the 18th instant, by which it appears he acted therein in consequence of orders
from major general Arnold.

Ordered, That the secretary make out a copy of said minute, with mr.
Mitchell's state, and transmit them to major general Arnold, requesting him to
inform this board, whether the property for which the said wagons were
ordered, was public or private: If the latter, to whom the same belonged; and
farther to inform this board, by virtue of what resolve or congress, or other
authority, public waggout of this state were sent into another state, to do
business merely of a private nature.

Ordered. also, That the quarter master general be desired to order Jesse
Jordan, a wagon master in his employ, to attend this board, to satisfy them
with respect to the employ of the public wagons of this state, in September
last.

Extract from the minutes, T. MATLACK, Secretary.

Philadelphia, January 25, 1779. Gentlemen,
I received a letter from mr. Timothy Matluck, your secretary, of the 22d
instant, enclosing an order of council of the 18th, colonel Mitchell's answer
of the 19th, and a subsequent order of council of the 21st instant.

I think it very extraordinary, that after colonel Mitchell had, by his letter
of the 19th, so fully and clearly answered the requisition of council in their
order of the 18th, they should have patled the order of the 21st. In answer I
shall only say, that I am at all times ready to answer my public conduct to
congress or general Washington, to whom alone I am accountable.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, H. ARNOLD.

To the president and council of the state of Pennsylvania. Copy. T. MATLACK,
Secretary
In COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, January 25, 1779. Sir,
THIS board, which by its' duty and flation is hound to protect the rights and
Interests of the good people of this state, having received a complaint from
mr. Andrew Boyd, in behalf and others, that the public wagons of the state,
when called forth under the wagon law, have been employed in the
transportation of private property, requested of John Mitchell, esquire d q. m. g.
the reasons of such conduct. Mr. Mitchell, admitting the fact, alleged in
justification, that the wagons had been so employed by the direction of
general Arnold, then the military commanding officer of this state. This board
having thereupon transmitted to general Arnold a copy of their proceedings,
with mr. Mitchell's answer, and requested general Arnold to give us a state of
the transaction, he this day returned for answer, that he was at all times
ready to answer for his public conduct to congress or general Washington, to
whom alone he was accountable.

The indignity offered to us upon this occasion, as well as a due regard to the
violated rights of the freemen of this state, calls upon us to resent such
treatment, and in their names we shall call upon the delegates of the united
states for justice, and reparation of our authority, thus wounded by one of
their officers: But as we learn that genesis Arnold is about to depart this city
for some time, and may thereby elude enquiry into this transaction, as well as
some others under our consideration, we request he may be detained till the
whole proceedings can be laid before you in form, and that he forbear
exercising any further command in this city, until the changes against him are
examined.

I am, Sir, Your obedient humble servant, JOS. REED, President.

Honorable John Jay, esquire president of congress.
After these papers were read, the judge advocate exhibited as charges against
major general Arnold, the first, second, third, and fifth articles contained in
the proceedings of the council of the state of Pennsylvania, to which the
general pleaded NOT GUILTY.

In support of the first charge, the judge advocate produced a protection given
by major general Arnold, to captain Robert Shewell, jun. and others, for the
schooner Charming Nancy, dated, camp, Valley Forge, June 4, 1778, which being
read, is as follows:

WHEREAS capt. Robert Shewell, jun. merchant of the city of Philadelphia, in
behalf of himself and company, has this day made information to me, that
himself and company have a certain schooner called the Charming Nancy,
New England built, about seventy five tons burden, now lying before the city
of Philadelphia, which schooner William Moore is master, loaded with salt,
linens, woollens, glass, loaf sugar, and bohea tea, nails, etc. consigned to
William Shirtliff, supercargo on board; which property, they were of opinion,
was not safe at Philadelphia, and as friends to their country, wished to have a
protection for said vessel and cargo, that the same might be brought into some
port in the united states of America.

In full confidence of their upright intentions, I do hereby grant said Robert
Shewell, jun. and company, protection for said vessel and cargo. And said
schooner is hereby permitted to sail into any of the ports of the united states
of America, and all officers and soldiers of the continental army, and other
persons, are hereby forbid to give any umbrage or molestation to the said
captain Moore, or the said vessel and cargo.

Given under my hand, camp. Valley-Forge, 4 June 1778. B. ARNOLD, M. Genesis

To whom concerned.
Major general Arnold admitted that he gave the protection while in the camp of
his excellency general Washington at Valley Forge, without the knowledge of the
authority of the state of Pennsylvania, or the commander in chief, though then
present.

To prove the character and residence of the persons to whom the protection was
given, the judge advocate produced Timothy Matlock, esquire who, on his
affirmation, says,

Q. Do you know the character of the person to whom general Arnold gave the
permission?

A. Generally, I do.

Q. What was his character at the time?

A. Captain Robert Shewell, junior, was, at the time of that pass being given,
generally reputed not to be well affected to the united states of America, as I
understand. Captain Robert Shewell, junior, informed me, that he was ordered to
leave general Washington's camp, in consequence of the character that had been
given of him; and upon his appearing on parade afterward, he was ordered to
leave general Washington's camp on pain of imprisonment.

Q. Did captain Robert Shewell, junior, reside in Philadeiphia at that time?

A. He informed me he did voluntarily reside there at the time.

Q. court. Do you know whether general Arnold knew captain Robert Shewell,
junior's, general character at the time he gave the permission?

A. I do not.

Q. court. Do you know whether general Arnold knew of captain Shewell's being
ordered to leave the camp of general Washington, previous to his having given
him the permit?

A. I had no opportunity of being acquainted with the circumstances of the case.

Q. Do you know the persons who were concerned in the vessel with captain
Shewell at that time?

A. It was supposed mr. Shirtliff was concerned, and several others, whose
characters I know nothing of and cannot give; and it was supposed that general
Arnold was concerned in the vessel or cargo.

Q. Do you know mr. Shirtliff's character?

A. So little as not to be able to give his character generally.

General Arnold's question. What conversation introduced captain Shewell's
mentioning to you, his being ordered from the camp of general Washington? and
did he tell you the reason of it?

A. I believe the conversation took its rise from mr. Shewell's mentioning to
me, that he was likely to be treated ill, upon a charge of his having ill
treated mr. Paul Fooks at the coffee house in Philadelphia, while the enemy had
possession of the city. The reason he assigned to me, for his being ordered to
leave general Washington's camp, was, he supposed he had been represented to
general Washington as being untriendly to America.

General Arnold's question. Have you understood, that upon several alarms
captain Shewell turned out with the militia, and did duty with them?

A. I know nothing of that matter.

Q. Did you consider captain Robert Shewell, junior, at the time the protection
was given, to be unfriendly to the united states of America?

A. I did.

The court adjourned until tomorrow eleven o'clock.

DECEMBBER 24.
The court met, according to adjournment.

Timothy Matlack, esquire on his affirmation, says, That some time during the
enemy's having possession of the city of Philadelphia, information was given to
the board of war, that property belonging to captain Robert Shewell, junior,
was arrived in Virginia, part of a vessel and cargo in which the Wykoffs, one
or more of that family, was concerned. Upon the representation being made, an
order was issued for their being seized, as belonging to captain Robert
Shewell, junior, who was deemed unfriendly to the united states of America.
They were seized on that order, and were detained: the length of time the
cannot ascertain; neither does he know of their being delivered up to this day.
This information he received from mr. Shewell and from mr. lsaac Wykoff.

Q. court. Was this order issued by the board of war before captain Robert
Shewell, junior, obtained the permission of general Arnold?

A. Most probably several months.

Q. Do you know whether general Arnold knew of the board of war having issued
the order respecting the seizure of captain Shewell's property?

A. I know of no circumstance that should afford me an opportunity to judge
concerning that.

Q. court. Where did the board of war sit at the time?

A. I suppose at Yorktown.

Q. court. Do you know where general Arnold was at that time?

A. I do not, further than it was a general knowledge that he was with the army
at the northward.

In support of the second charge, the judge advocate produced his excellency
general Washington's instructions to major general Arnold, dated June 18, 1778,
a resolution of the honorable the congress, dated June 5, 1778, and a copy of a
proclamation issued by major general Arnold, dated June 19, 1778; which being
read, are as follow:

To major general ARNOLD.
Sir,
YOU are immediately to proceed to Philadelphia, and take the command of the
troops there. You will find the objects of your command specified in the
enclosed copy of a resolution of congress of the 5th instant. The means of
executing the powers vested in you, I leave to your own judgment, not doubting
that you will exercise them in the manner which shall be found most effectual,
and at the same time, most consistent with the rights of the citizens.

I have directed the quarter master general, commissary general and clothier
general to send proper persons in their respective departments into the city,
to take possession, for the use of the army, of all public stores lest in the
city by the enemy, which may not properly fall under the description of the
enclosed resolve. In the execution of this duty, they will act under your
directions and with your assistance.

Given at bead-quarter, this 18th day of June, 1778. G. WASHINGTON

In CONGRESS. June 5, 1778.
RESOLVED, That, should the city of Philadelphia be evacuated by the enemy, it
will be expedient and proper for the commander in chief to take effectual care
that no insult, plunder or injury of kind may be offered to the inhabitants of
the said city; -- That, in order to prevent public or private injury, from the
operations of ill disposed persons, the general be directed to take early and
proper care to prevent the removal, transfer or sale of any goods, wares of
merchandise in possession of the inhabitants of the said city, until the
property of the same shall be ascertained by a joint committee, consisting of
persons appointed by congress, and of persons appointed by the supreme
executive council of the state of Pennsylvania; to wit, so far as to determine
whether any, or what part thereof, may belong to the king of Great Britain, or
to any of his subjects.

Extract from the minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

By the honorable major general ARNOLD, commander in chief of the forces of the
united states of America, in the city of Philadelphia, etc. A PROCLAMATION.
IN order to protect the persons and property of the inhabitants of this city
from insult and injury, to secure the public and private stores which the enemy
may have left in the city, and to prevent the disorder and confusion naturally
arising from want of government,

His excellency general Washington, in compliance with the following resolution
of congress, has thought proper to establish military law in this city and
suburbs, until the civil authority of the state can resume the government
thereof.

In CONGRESS. June 5, 1778.
[Here the above resolution was recited.]

IN order the more effectually to carry into execution the above resolve, all
persons having European, East or West India goods, iron, leather, shoes, wines
and provisions of every kind, beyond the necessary use of a private family, are
ordered to make return of the same to the town major, by twelve o'clock
tomorrow, specifying the quantity, and, as nearly as they can judge, the
amount of the same, in order that the quarter master, commissary and clothier
generals may contract for such goods as are wanted for the use of the army, and
until permission is given by the general, there be no removal, transfer or sale
of any goods, as it will be deemed a breach of the above resolution of
congress, and such goods will be seized and confiscated for the publc use.

All persons having in their hands public stores or effects the property of the
subjects of the king of Great Britain or their adherents, who have departed
with them, are to make a like report by Monday noon next, under penalty of the
confiscation of their own effects; and any persons discovering such concealed
stores or effects, will be suitably rewarded.

Any persons harboring or concealing any officer, soldier or other person
belonging to the enemy, or any deserter from the continental army, will be
severely punished, unless they make immediate discovery to some officer of the
said army.

Given at headquarters, in the city Philadelphia, June 19, 1778. B. ARNOLD,
Major Genesis
By his honor's command, DAVID S. FRANKS, Secretary.

Major general Arnold admitted, that on his arrival in Philadelphia, the shops
were shut by his orders, and the officers of the army in consequence of them,
prevented from purchasing.

The judge advocate then produced the deposition of colonel John Fitzgerald,
dated May 7. 1779. which being read, is as follows:

ON the seventh day of May, A.D. 1779, before me, Plunket Fleeson, esquire one of
the justices, etc. for the city of Philadelphia, comes colonel John Fitzgerald,
late aid de camp to his excellency general Washington, and being duly sworn
according to law, deposes and says, That on the evening of the day on which
the British forces lest Philadelphia, he and major David S. Franks, aid de camp
to major general Arnold, went to the house of miss Brackenberry, and lodged
there that night; that the next morning, major Franks having gone down stairs,
the deponent going into the front room of the said house, to view colonel
Jackson's regiment then marching into the city, saw lying in the window two
open papers; that on casting his eye on one of them, he was surprised to find
it contained instructions to the said major Franks to purchase European and
East India goods in the city of Philadelphia, to any amount, for the payment of
which the writer would furnish major Franks with the money, and the same paper
contained also a strict charge to the said Franks not to make known to his most
intimate acquaintance, that the writer was concerned in the proposed purchase;
that these instructions were not signed, but appeared to the deponent to be in
the hand writing of major general Arnold, whether or not there was a date to it
the deponent does not recollect; that the other paper contained instructions
signed by major general Arnold, directing major Franks to purchase for the said
general Arnold, some necessaries for the use of his table; that the deponent
compared the writing of the two papers, and verily believes they were both
written by major general Arnold's own hand; that soon afterward major Franks
came into the room and took the papers away, as the deponent supposes. And
further the deponent says not.

JOHN FITZGERALD.
Sworn before me the date aforesaid, PLUN. FLEESON.

Question by general Arnold to Timothy Matlack, esquire Is the deposition of
colonel Fitzgerald, in your hand writing?

A. Yes; it was dictated to me by colonel John Fitzgerald, and while in the
rough by him altered and amended, and afterward copied fair. The next day he
called at my house, and informed me he had seen you, in consequence of your
request; that there was one or two alterations he wished to make, in
consequence of the conversation with you, which alterations are interlined, and
written precisely in the words he dictated, having I believe written them on a
piece of paper, before me. Colonel Fitzgerald was a perfect stranger to me,
having to the best of my knowledge never seen him before to know him.

The judge advocate produced major Franks, aid de camp to major general Arnold,
who was sworn.

Q. On general Arnold's arrival in Philadelphia, do you know whether himself or
any person on his account, made any considerable purchases of goods?

A. I do not.

Q. At or before general Arnold's arrival in Philadelphia, did you receive
orders from general Arnold to purchase goods, or do you know of general
Arnold's having given orders to any other person to make purchases of goods?

A. I did receive from general Arnold, that paper which colonel Fitzgerald has
mentioned in his deposition. There are circumstances leading to it which I must
explain. I had, by being in the army, injured my private affairs very
considerably, and meant to leave it, if a proper opportunity of entering into
business should happen. I had several conversations on the subject with general
Arnold, who promised me all the assistance in his power; he was to participate
in the profits of the business I was to enter into. At that time, previous to
our going into Philadelphia, I had several particular conversations with him,
and thought that the period, in which I might leave the army with honor, and
enter into business, I received at that time, or about that time, I think
several days before the enemy evacuated the city, the paper mentioned in
colonel Fitgerald's deposition that was not signed, as well as the other. Upon
our coming into town we had variety of military business to do. I did not
purchase any goods, neither did I leave the army. The paper was entirely
neglected, neither did I think any thing concerning it, until I heard of
colonel Fitgerald's deposition. General Arnold has told me since, which is
since I came from Carolina sometime in August last, on speaking about the
paper, that the reason for his not supporting me in business was, supposing
that I had left the army, it was incompatible with his excellency's
instructions and the resolution of congress.

Q. court. Did general Arnold ask you upon his coming into Phiadelphia, or at
any time after, why you had not executed the contents of the paper?

A. He did not.

Q. court. What day did you arrive in Philadelphia?

A. The 18th day of June, in the evening, the day the enemy left Philadelphia.

Q. court. Are you certain that the order for purchasing the goods was given to
you several days before you went into Philadelphia?

A. I cannot be particular as to the time; it might have been three, four,
five, or twenty days; but it was some time before.

Q. Previous to the enemy evacuating the city of Philadelphia, did you
understand from general Arnold that be was to have the command in the city, on
the evacuation taking place?

A. I did; but it was a short time before, I believe a day or two. The general,
on his return from headquarters, mentioned it was hinted to him at general
Washington's, that he should, when the enemy evacuated Philadelphia, have the
command, and desired me not to mention it.

Q. Were the instructions to purchase goods given to you before the general
mentioned this matter to you?

A. I believe they were, though I am not certain.

General Arnold's question. Were not my minute and invoice books always open to
your inspection?

A. They were.

Q. by do. Had you any reason to suppose that any purchases were made directly
or indirectly by my orders or on my account, previous to the opening of the
stores?

A. No.

Q. by do. Did you not suppose my showing you the instructions from general
Washington to me, previous to your going into the city, a sufficient
countermand of the order I had given you to purchase goods?

A. I did not form any supposition on the subject.

Q. by do. For what purpose were you sent into the city before me?

A. To procure quarters, and to provide necessaries for the family.

In support of the third charge the judge advocate produced Timothy Matlack,
esquire's letter to major general Arnold, dated October 5.; the general's
answer, dated October 6.; Mr. Matlack's letter dated October 10.; and the
general's answer of the 12th of October 1778; which were read, and are as
follows:

Philadelphia, October 5. 1778. Sir,
THE militia sergeant who attended at your quarters on Sunday, complains that
major Franks, one of your aids, had given him orders to call his barber, which
order was obeyed; that on the barber not appearing the order was repeated, and
the sergeant, though hurt both by the order itself, and the manner of it, again
obeyed; he also informs me, that he has, this morning, made you acquainted with
this complaint, and that you had been pleased to say, that every order given by
you or your aids, is to be obeyed. This, I suppose, must intend every proper
order.

The militia of the several states have, occasionally, rendered the great cause
in which we are engaged such services, as must convince every man that it is of
very great importance to treat those who are necessarily called out, in such
manner as to make the duty as agreeable to them as is consistent with the
service to which they are called: For it is upon their will, more than upon the
force of any law, that we are to depend for their assistance in the time of
need. The severity of military discipline in such a case as that above
mentioned, where no important end is to be answered by it, must make every
freeman feel. At a time when you were one of the militia of the state of which
you are a citizen, what would have been your feelings, had an aid of your
commanding officer ordered you to call his barber? From your feelings in such a
case, it will be easy to judge of that of other men. Freemen will be hardly
brought to submit to such indignities; and if it is intended to have any of the
respectable citizens of a state, in service in the militia, military discipline
in such instances must be relaxed; but if it is an object to render the militia
in the several states contemptible and useless, the continuance of such
treatment will probably effect it. Military duty of every kind is rather
disagreeable; and perhaps, to freemen, garrison duty more disagreeable than any
other. The sergeant above mentioned entered the service to discharge his duty,
and as an example to other young men of the city, and not from necessity, in
any sense of the word.

It appears to me a duty which I owe to the public, to represent this matter to
you in a respectful manner, in expectation that, from attachment to the public
interest, you will give such orders as will prevent any farther complaints of
this kind, which is all the satisfaction sought after, either by the sergeant,
who is my son, or,

Sir, your most obedient humble servant, T. MATLACK.

Major general Arnold.
Philadelphia, Oct. 6. 1778. Sir,
I AM to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday, respecting the
militia sergeant who complains of being ill treated. No man has a higher sense
of the rights of a citizen and freeman than myself: they are dear to me, as I
have sought and bled for them, and as it is my highest ambition and most ardent
wish to resume the character of a free citizen, whenever the service of my
country will permit. At the same time I beg leave to observe, that whenever
necessity obliges the citizen to assume the character of a soldier, the former
is entirely lost in the latter, and the respect due to a citizen is by no means
to be paid to the soldier, any farther than his rank intitles him to it. This
is evident from the necessity of military discipline, the basis of which is
implicit obedience, and however the feelings of a citizen may be hurt, he has
this consolation, that it is a sacrifice he pays to the safety of his country.

You are pleased to ask, "What my feelings would have been on a similar
occasion." They have been tried; I have served a whole campaign under the
command of a gentleman, who was not known as a soldier until after I had been
some time a brigadier: My feelings were hurt not only as a citizen, but more so
as a soldier; they were however sacrificed to the interest of my country. The
event proved unfortunate to me; but I have the satisfaction to think I rendered
some service to my country.

I wish to make the duty as agreeable to the militia as is consistent with the
good of the service, for which purpose military discipline has been greatly
relaxed; was it executed with strictness, most of the militia, from their
inattention, would feel the effects of it.

I cannot think (as you seem to imagine) any indignity is offered to the
citizen, when he is called upon to do the duty of a soldier in the station he
is in, which was the case of the sergeant; who though he may be a more
respectable character as a citizen, yet, as an orderly sergeant, it is his duty
to obey every order of my aids, not a breach of the laws or principles of the
constitution, as mine, without judging of the propriety of them; neither can I
have any idea from the militia's being put on the same footing as the standing
army, they will refuse their assistance, as self preservation is the first
principle of human nature, theirs will ever induce them to turn out and defend
their property.

These, Sir, are the sentiments of a soldier, a citizen, and of, Sir,

Your obedient humble servant, B. ARNOLD.

Sir,
I RECEIVED your letter of the 6th instant; and it gives me real and great
pleasure to be informed of your patriotic behavior in the case you mention.
Such conduct is the effect of genuine spirit and true greatness of mind; but it
is very different from the case I stated. You obeyed, because the effential
interest of your country was concerned, and a regard to your own same required
it; but the same principles, which induced this conduct, would have induced you
to spurn at commands dictated by pride and insolence.

I cannot bring myself to believe, that the respect due to the citizen is
entirely lost when he takes upon himself the character of a soldier: I
entertain a higher sense of the rights of citizens and freemen.

If, on the one hand, soldiers are bound implicitly to obey military orders,
so, on the other hand, are officers accountable for the orders which they give;
and their propriety or impropriety often depend entirely on time and
circumstance. Occasions may occur in which an officer may justify command which
expose a citizen to certain death; but I know of none which would justify a
command to a citizen serving in the militla to clean his officers shoes. The
necessity of implicit obedience on the part of the citizen, when in military
service, is so far from being ground, on which to justify every command which
may be given, that it is the strongest possible reason, why an officer should
be very cautious and circumspect in his orders; and it also lays the citizen
under a necessity of calling officers to a strict account for the orders which
they give. I will venture to say, that, in a free government, implicit
obedience will not be submitted to much longer than commanders use their
authority with great prudence and discretion, and, if it be really necessary,
commanders, who destroy it, by degrading and unnecessary orders, they will be
accountable for the consequences, You say it is the duty of an orderly sergeant
to obey every order of your aids (not a breach of the laws or principles of the
constitution) as yours, without judging of the propriety of them. This
sentiment must have dropped from your pen in a moment of haste; as it appears to
me to be a sentiment improper to be entertained either by the citizen or
soldier: For even common soldiers retain some right to judge of the propriety
of the orders which they have obeyed; and to demand satisfaction in cases where
improper or unnecessary orders have been given: And freemen will judge for
themselves and speak for themselves with decency and firmness when the occasion
requires it. The calling of major Franks's barber to dress his hair, was the
office of a menial servant, not the duty of a soldier; and I still think it an
indignity to a free citizen to be ordered to go on such an errand. Such
commands cannot be mistaken for and obeyed as the orders of a wise and prudent
general.

My letter to you was written for the single purpose of preventing orders being
madvertently given, which would offend a militia who have suffered greatly many
ways; and I had a hope, that you would have thought it proper to have given
some assurance that attention would have been paid to this, as it appears to
me, necessary precaution; but I am not a little mortified to find the order, of
which I complained, so fully justified and supported by you. If it is your
intention, as commanding officer, to countenance orders of this kind, it is my
duty, as a father, to withdraw my son from a service in which commands are to
be given him which to obey would lessen him in the esteem of the world; and I
shall consider it as a duty which I owe to myself to acquaint my fellow
citizens of my reason for so doing.

I am, with sentiments of great respect, Sir, Your most obedient and very
humble servant, T. MATLACK.
Philadelphia, October 10, 1778.
Major general Arnold.
Sir,
BY your letter of the 10th, I perceive that my sentiments are not clearly
understood; but it is needless to discuss a subject which will perhaps be
determined more by the feelings than the reason of men. If the declaration,
that you will withdraw your son from the service, and publish the reasons, is
intended as a threat, you have mistaken your object. I am not to be intimidated
by a newspaper. To vindicate the rights of citizens, I became a soldier, and
bear the marks upon me. I hope your candor will acquit me of the inconsistency
of invading what I have fought and bled to defend. As I am earnestly desirous
of closing this correspondence. I shall confine myself to what occasioned it.
"An improper order," as you conceive, given by major Franks, my aid de camp, to
the orderly sergeant, your son. Without examining into the propriety or
impropriety of the order, about which we may differ, I perfectly agree with
you, that the delivering of it in a haughty, imperious or insolent manner, is
blameable; and if the sergeant had so represented it to me at the time, he
would have had justice. The affair is now out of my hands, and lies between the
sergeant and the major. If the latter has behaved amiss, it is his duty to
make reparation. I trust I never shall countenance pride or insolence to
inferiors in him, or any other officer under my command. Let me add, that
disputes, as to the rights of citizens and soldiers, in conjunctures like the
present, may be fatal to both.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, B. ARNOLD.
Philadelphia, October 12, 1779.
Timothy Matlack, esquire
After the reading of these letters, the judge advocate produced Mr. William
Matlack, who, having affirmed, says,

Q. Did you attend at general Arnold's quarters in Philadelphia as an orderly
sergeant from the militia?

A. I did.

Q. Did you receive an order from major Franks, aid de camp to major general
Arnold, while you attended in that station, to fetch a barber?

A. I received my first order from a servant girl, who came and asked me if I
was an orderly sergeant? I told her I was. She said major Franks' orders were,
that I should fetch his barber; which order I obeyed, as supposing it to come
from him. Soon after my return, major Franks came to where I was stationed, and
asked me if I had been for his barber? I told him I had, but he was not at
home, and that I had left the orders that were necessary for his coming up, as
soon as he should come home. Major Franks then said, he did not believe he
would come, and then went away. Some considerable time after, he came again,
and said he did not believe he would come, and he believed I had better go
again; to which I made no reply, but walking back in the entry, after a few
minutes, I asked a Negro man if it was customary to give such orders to the
orderly sergeants? He said it was. I then replied, that major Franks ought to
consider, that the militia could not be expected to do such duty, or words to
that purport. Major Franks then came out of a back room, and said, sergeant, I
thought I had ordered you to go for my barber. I told him I had received no
such order. He then asked me why I did not go? I told him I waited his orders.
He then told me to go, and I told him, with his orders I would go, and did go.
Major Franks, on my return, asked me if I had been? I told him I had, and left
the same orders as before. In the morning I made a complaint to the general,
nearly in them words; and he informed me it was customary for sergeants to do
such duty; and gave to me understand, not in an abrupt manner, that if I did
not like such duty. I should not have come there. The general said, at the
time, that if major Franks had insulted me at the time be gave me the order, it
was wrong, and he did not approve of that.

General Arnold's question. Was any menial office imposed upon you, or upon any
orderly sergeant, to your knowledge?

A. I conceived the office that was imposed on me as menial; and the orderly
sergeant who stood at the same time with me, belonging to the continental
troops, complained of major Franks giving him a small bundle of paper in his
hand, bidding him follow him, which he did; and upon his coming to a house a
small distance off, bid him give him the bundle of papers and return; which the
man complained of to me, when he returned, as an insult.

The court adjourned till Monday, eleven o'clock.

DECEMBBER 27.
The court met, according to adjournment, and adjourned till tomorrow eleven
o'clock.

DECEMBER 28.
The court met, according to adjournment.

In support of the last charge, the judge advocate produced letters from
Messrs. Chaloner and White, and John Mitchell, esquire to the wagon master of the
state of Pennsylvania, dated September 25, 26, and October 1st, 1778, which
being read, are as follow:

(COPY.)
Sir, Philadelphia, September 25, 1779.
WE have received orders from headquarters, to lay in at New-Windsor a
magazine of 10,000 barrels of flour. It is of the utmost importance to the
support of our army and the French fleet, that this order be immediately
executed. We have requested of the quarter master general to call on you for
200 wagons. For this purpose, permit us to suggest to you the propriety of
their being called from the counties adjacent to York, as they are all to be
loaded by Mr. John McCallister, at York-town, to whom we beg you would direct
your deputies to order the wagon master to apply. We wish not to urge more on
your department than it can comply with; but the many difficulties that will
occur by delay in executing this order, oblige us to request of you to inform
us how soon you can answer our drafts for the necessary wagons to complete it,
and what number at a draft will be most convenient.

We are, with respect, Your humble servants, CHALONER and WHITE, A. C. of P.

To James Young, esquire wagon master general of the state of Pennsylvania. Copy
examined, T. MATLACK, Secretary.
(COPY.)
Philadelphia, Sept. 25, 1778. Sir,
WE are called on by his excellency and also by the commissary general for two
hundred wagons immediately, to transport flour from York town and Carlisle to
New Windsor -- must therefore request and desire you will order two hundred
good wagons to be furnished by the western counties, to transport the flour,
etc. cross the country. As it is of the utmost consequence to have this
requisition complied without delay, hope you will exert all your influence and
authority to procure the above number. A considerable number will also be
wanted to forward provisions from Lancaster county and this city to the North
river, at least four hundred.

I am, Sir, Your most humble servant, JOHN MITCHELL, D. Q. M. G.

To James Young, esquire wagon master general, Philadelphia. Copy examined, T.
MATLACK, Secretary.
(COPY.)
Sir, Philadelphia, 26 September, 1778.
YOUR favor of this day I have duly received, and have sent your letters to
Lancaster, York and Carlisle by express. I am doubtful all the teams in York
and Carlisle will be wanted to go to Pittsburgh; therefore Lancaster must send
the number to those places. Two hundred teams will be immediately wanted to
convey the provisions from Lancaster, Lebanon and Rhemes-town, and four hundred
to convey the provisions from this city to New Windsor. It is absolutely
necessary they should be furnished without the least delay, as the consequences
may be of the worst kind; the fleet and army depend on it, as the provisions
provided for the army have been sent to the fleet.

If you cannot procure the teams immediately, please to inform us, that other
steps may be taken.

I am, Sir, Your most humble servant, JOHN MITCHELL, D. Q. M. G.

To James Young, esquire wagon master general, Philadelphia. Copy examined T.
MATLACK, Secretary.
(COPY.)
Sir, Philadelphia, October 1, 1778.
THERE is the most pressing necessity for flour at camp. We assert, and from
undoubted authority, that there is plenty at Trenton and Morristown. We
therefore call on you for teams to transport the same. One hundred and fifty
teams may be immediately loaded at each place, and as many may be constantly
kept in employ from those places to camp, loading per week.

We are, Sir, Your humble servants, CHALONER and WHITE, A. C. of P.
N. B. Apply at Morristown, to Joseph Lewis; at Trenton, to Alexander Fleeb.



(COPY.)
Sir,
THE above is a copy of a letter received this day: We are therefore obliged to
call on you for a further supply of teams. The number required will be 300,
exclusive of those already ordered. Must request you will furnish them as quick
as possible. You will please to let us have you answer in writing.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant. JOHN MITCHELL, D. Q. M. G.

To James Young, esquire W. M. G. P. Present. Copy examined. T. MATLACK, Secretary.
The judge advocate also produced a remonstrance from the state of
Pennsylvania, against the enormous wagon service, dated October 1. 1778.;
which being read, is as follows:

In COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, October 1. 1778.
THE council resumed the consideration of the demand made by the quarter master
general of eight hundred wagons, besides what are now employed for the united
states, and observed with astonishment, that is but a few weeks since a like
demand was made for eight hundred wagons, which were impressed with great
severity and irregularity, and the whole wagon service to the westward falls
on this state, at a time when the country is drained of horses, and our wagons
very generally disabled, destroyed, or carried off by the enemy, and
considering also, that the wagons of this state are taken into other states at
a great distance; thereupon,

Ordered, That the delegates of Pennsylvania be instructed to remonstrate to
congress against the drawing out so great a number of our wagons and horses,
and thereby throwing so great an over-proportion of this heavy and distressing
service on Pennsylvania.

Extract from the minutes, T. MATLACK, Secretary.

The judge produced an order from David S. Franks, aid de camp to major general
Arnold, to Jesse Jordan, wagon master; depositions of Jesse Jordan, David
Cochran, John Boyd and Stephen Collins; which being read, are as follow:

(COPY.)
YOU will proceed immediately with your teams to Eggharbour or the Forks, take
the orders and directions of captain Moore, whom you will obey in every
particular.

By order of general Arnold, DAVID S. FRANKS, Aid de Camp.

To Jesse Jordan, wagon master. Copy. T. MATLACK, Secretary.
(COPY.)
City of Philadelphia, ss.
BEFORE Plunket Fleeson, esquire, one of the justices of the peace in and for
the same city, comes Jesse Jordan; who, being duly sworn, deposes and says,
That he, the deponent, on the sixteenth of October last, and for some time
before and after, was one of the wagon masters for Chester county, in this
state; that upon that day he received orders from Andrew Boyd, wagon master
general for Chester county, to proceed to Philadelphia with a brigade of
wagons, twelve in number, and there take orders from the quarter master in
Philadelphia, and proceed in pursuance of such orders as he should further
direct, on the public service; that the brigade was called out to perform their
tour of duty, under the wagon law of this state; that he accordingly proceeded
with the brigade to Philadelphia, drawing forage and rations on the way, on the
written order of Andrew Boyd for that purpose; that in Philadelphia, this
deponent applied to colonel John Mitchell, deputy quarter master general, for
orders; that colonel John Mitchell ordered him to proceed to Mr. Reesburgh's
office in Market-street, for orders to get a loading; that mr. Reesburgh's
orders were to go down to one Coleman's to get a load of flour and bread, and
proceed toward camp; that deponent proceeded to Coleman's, and bad him prepare
the loading, and deponent returned to his brigade and got it in readiness to
receive the loading; that soon after one mr. Rusk or Lusk told the brigade they
must go to Eggharbour, and deponent came down Chesnut-street, and stopped the
wagons before colonel Mitchell's door, and deponent enquired of him where they
must go, whether toward camp or to Eggharbour. Colonel Mitchell told them they
might go to Eggharbour, and to go to general Arnold and receive orders from
him; that he went accordingly to general Arnold, and soon after received the
orders from his aid de camp in writing, signed David S. Franks, aid de camp;
that in obedience to those orders, he proceeded with the brigade of wagons
empty to the forks of Eggharbour; that until they arrived within about twenty
or twenty five miles of the forks, the deponent was confident they were
employed in the public service of the continent, and expected they were to take
in a loading of public stores, and the first cause of his doubting it was, that
they were denied provisions by the commissary of issues there, who took copies
of general Arnold's and mr. Boyd's orders, and said he was sure it was private
property they were going for; that if deponent had known they were going for
private property, he would not willingly have gone, for that he was offered L
4, a day, and to be found, or L 6: 5, and find himself, before he left home, to
go to Indian river, but chose rather to go his tour of duty in the public
employ; that he proceeded with the brigade to the forks of Eggharbour, drawing
provisions and forage as before, after copies had been taken of the two orders
before mentioned; that they loaded there with sugar, tea, coffee, six swivel
guns, casks of nails, broad cloths, linens, chests, sail cloth, and some other
articles, and brought them up to Philadelphia; that they crossed the river
loaded, and delivered part of their loading on this side the ferry, and the
remainder at Stephen Collins's in Second-street, by order of captain Moore, at
the forks, to whom he was referred by the written orders of general Arnold, and
who accompanied them up; that deponent gave no receipt for goods, nor took any
on their delivery, captain Moore superintending the delivery in person; for
that he refused a receipt because he was not informed of any public store at
which to deliver them, and because the goods were so mixed and jumbled
together; that he has received no pay, but that on Saturday last he applied to
colonel Mitchell with his pay roll, in the usual form signed by Mr. Boyd, who
gave him the order; that colonel Mitchell told him he would have nothing to do
with it, deponent must apply to general Arnold, that he accordingly went to
general Arnold, and gave him his pay roll, in which was charged 55 s. a day,
being the usual charge in public service; that general Arnold looked at it, and
told him to call again in the evening, and then either he would pay it, or
colonel Mitchel would; that deponent returned to colonel Mitchell and informed
him of this; colonel Mitchell asked him how much forage he had drawn, that he
(Mitchell) had got an account of his drawing one days forage from Mr. Smith the
forage master, deponent told him to the best of his knowledge he had drawn from
Smith for eight days; that colonel Mitchel sent up and got the account of eight
days forage, and then bad deponent go and get his pay roll again from general
Arnold, and alter it; that deponent told him he had drawn forage for the whole
fourteen days he was out from home; that colonel Mitchel told him then, there
must be a new pay roll made out; that deponent thereupon went to general
Arnold's, and brought back the first pay roll, and made out a new pay roll, and
was ordered by colonel Mitchell to charge 75 s. a day, and go to general Arnold
and receive it, and then go to the forage master colonel Biddle, (he would show
him where when he returned) and pay him 20 s. a day for the forage; that
deponent carried the new pay roll to general Arnold's, but he was gone out;
that deponent returned to colonel Mitchell's, who was also gone out, and told
his clerk of this; that in making out his pay roll at colonel Mitchell's,
before he went this time to general Arnold's, colonel Mitchell said he should
not charge or have pay for more than twelve days, (omitting two days of the
fourteen) for that they were too slow in coming from Chester, although in fact
deponents brigade were in town the day before others, who set off a day before
them; that hereupon deponent took up his papers and was going away, and said he
would not settle then; colonel Mitchell said he should make it out and settle
it before he went away, or he (colonel Mitchell) would make a prisoner of him,
whereupon deponent complied through terror; that since the notice above
mentioned to colonel Mitchell's clerk, deponent has made no farther application
for his money; that when deponent returned the second time from general
Arnold's he brought back the first pay roll to colonel Mitchell, with a note
wrapped round it, importing that general Arnold thought he ought only to pay
from the day that the wagons left Philadelphia, till they returned thither,
and that colonel Mitchel might pay the remainder, and colonel Mitchel wrote a
note which he sent by his boy to general Arnold (as he said) informing him that
he (general Arnold) must pay the whole; that the teams of deponents brigade
were appraised before they left home, and some of the horses got lamed in the
journey; that deponent came to town this time, not being sent for, in order to
settle his account, expecting to be paid, as usual, by the public, for that he
never heard from any person, before last Saturday, that he was to be paid any
other way; that some time since he received a letter from mr. Boyd that justice
Young, the wagon master general wanted to see him about this affair, and
desiring him to come to Philadelphia; but that when he left home he set off for
the head of Elk, not intending or thinking to come to Philadelphia, and after
he was at the head of Elk, determined to come here for the sake of getting his
money; that colonel Mitchell told him the executive council wanted to see him;
that he had no other reason to think the public were to pay him, but that he
was ordered out in his tour of duty by mr. Boyd.

JESSE JORDAN.
Sworn 1st Feb. 1779, before me, PLUN. FLEESON
copy examined, T. MATLACK, Secretary.

Philadelphia, ss.
DAVID COCHRAN, being duly sworn, makes oath, That his team was one of those
belonging to Jesse Jordan's brigade, abovementioned; that he drove it himself;
that they were twelve teams in number; that they came out in consequence of
orders from colonel Andrew Boyed, under the wagon law of this state, to
perform their tour of duty; that the deponent ever thought they were in the
public employ, until they were near Egg-harbour, when the circumstance of their
being denied provisions was told to them by Jesse Jordan; that deponent would
not have come out willingly, if he had known that he was to be employed about
private business; that deponent's wagon was loaded with fails and furniture of
a vessel, and chessts, at the forks of Egg-harbour, by order of captain Moore,
and that he unloaded by order also o captain Moor at Stephen Collins's in
Second-street; that after returning home, his team was ordered out again in
about eight days, to finish his tour of duty, and proceeded as far as Pompton
plains, toward the North river; that he has hitherto received no pay for his
journey to Egg-harbour, or for any part of the time he was first out; that he
was present and heard colonel Mitchell tell Jesse Jordan to go to general
Arnold, and he would get his orders, the day they set off for Eggharbour; that
he was ordered out the second time to finish his tour of duty, having been from
home the time they went to Eggharbour only fourteen days, and was out to
Pompton twenty-nine days, or thereabouts, being upon a journey; that he has
applied to nobody for pay, excepting to their wagon master Jesse Jordan; that
deponent drew forage and provisions all the time from leaving home, till he
returned the first time of his being out under Jesse Jordan, when they went to
Eggharbour.

DAVID COCHRAN.
Sworn the first February, 1779, before me, PLUN. FLEESON.
Copy examined, T. MATLACK, Sec'ry.

Philadelphia, ss.
JOHN BOYD, being sworn, says, That he was out with his team, in the brigade
of Jesse Jordan above mentioned, in consequence of orders from colonel Thomas
Boyd, to perform his tour of duty; that he thought they were in public employ
till the time of taking in his load at one Saltar's, near Egg-harbour, when
Jesse Jordan told him, he apprehended they were bringing private property; that
he would not willingly have gone if he had known this in time; that he was
loaded with loaf sugar and tea, by order of one Clark (he thinks his name was)
who accompanied them along with captain Moore from Philadelphia, and unloaded
by the orders of the same in Second-street, where the rest did; has seen the
house this morning, and they call it Stephen Collins's; that deponent was
present, and heard colonel Mitchell order Jesse Jordan to go to general Arnold
for orders, the day they set off for Eggharbour; that he drew provisions and
forage from the time he left home till he returned; that he has received no
pay, nor has applied for any, depending on the waggon-master to do that
business; that one of deponent's horses was lamed in the journey, which he
thinks prevented his going again to finish his tour when David Cochran did, and
that otherwise he should have gone; that he was not ordered out by colonel Boyd
this second time, he having been with Jesse Jordan at colonel Boyd's, and
informed the colonel of his horse's being lame, and the brigade was filled
without him.

JOHN BOYD.
Sworn the 1st February, 1779, before me, PLUN. FLEESON.
Copy examined, T. MATLACK, Sec'ry.

Philadelphia, ss.
THIS 29th May, 1779, before Plunket Fleeson, esquire personally appeared STEPHEN
COLLINS, of the city aforesaid, and being duly affirmed according to law, does
say and declare, That some time about the latter end of October, during the
time of the enemy's being at Eggharbour, or thereabouts, several wagons came
to this affirmant's house, in Second-street, under the charge and care of a man
of the name of Clark, he thinks his christian name was Thomas; that the wagons
contained several casks, (he thinks five or six) with loaf sugar, three chests,
and three others somewhat broken, of tea, seventeen pieces of coarse woollens,
fifty or sixty pieces of coarse linen, five or six boxes of glass, four or five
casks of nails, the sails of a schooner, about half a dozen swivel guns; that
these are all the articles he at present recollects; that this affirmant sold
all these articles upon commission, at the request of -- Seagrove; that he was
sporken to at different times about the goods by Robert Shewell, -- Constable,
and that after the sales, he paid the money agreeable to the directions of the
three last mentioned persons, about one half to general Arnold, and the
remainder among the same three persons; that this affirmant understood, that
the above goods were the property of general Arnold, and the others
abovementioned, from the above circumstances, and also, for that general
Arnold spoke to this affirmant about paying him, (general Arnold) his part of
the money.

STEPH. COLLINS.
Affirmed before me, PLUN. FLEESON.

The judge advocate produced colonel John Mitchell's minute book, to show that
the original entry, the 22d of October, 1778, of Jesse Jordan's wagons, was
altered, and the entry of their return from Eggharbour, the 30th of October,
1778, was totally obliterated, and called on Timothy Matlack, esquire to give
evidence respecting these matters.

Q. To mr. Matlack, Do you know any thing respecting the erazures and
obliteration made in colonel Mitchell's minute-book?

A. Having had some business with mr. Mitchell, which remained unfinished, he
called to me when I passed by his door, while this matter was altercation,
informed me, that the business that was depending between us, was now settled
in such a manner, that he could pay the money, and that his clerk would pay it;
and requested me to step into a back room, as he wanted to say something to me
upon the subject of the certificate of the entry of the wagons, said to be
employed by general Arnold, for transporting private goods; he endeavored to
induce me to believe, that the council of Pennsylvania had, without a
foundation, suspected that he had detained some certificates they had requested
of him respecting these wagons: he declared, that there was no entry of the
discharge of Jesse Jordan contained in his books, nor no other entry, but the
entry that he had furnished them with. The only entry that he had furnished to
the council was in these words: "1778, Oct. 22, Jesse Jordan w.m. 12 teams,
Chester county, went to Egg-harbour, by the direction of general Arnold." This
declaration surprised me, as I knew it otherwise, by such kind of evidence as I
could not doubt. The evidence that I mean to allude to, is a conversation with
Jesse Jordan, who could have no knowledge of any use that could be made of it
at that time, who declared, that he saw and read in mr. Mitchell's
memorandum-book, an entry of his discharge from the public service, which was
after he returned from Egghabour; and as Jordan was a man of reputation, I
could not doubt the fact. I told mr. Mitchell, that I had some reason to
suspect, that the copy he sent to the council was not a genuine one. He
declared it was. The acquaintance I had with the fact, induced some surprise at
the declaration, and I hesitated some time before I made him any reply. I told
him, I should take it as a favor, if he would show me the book, in order that
it might remove the suspicions that were in my mind with respect to the fact.
He expressed some difficulty, on account of his not being able to lay his hand
on the book at that time, and some reasons of that kind, which appeared to me
to be trifling; and I so told him. He ordered his clerk upon that to bring that
book, and looked over the book in such a manner, as if he sound some difficulty
in recurring to the entry. I mentioned, it was made the twenty-second of
October, and he would find it, if he turned to that date. He opened the book at
the date, and read the entry. We were sitting close together at the time, face
to face, when he read the entry. I knew it contained the words of the
certificate he had given; and he then laid the book upon the further end of the
table, about four feet from us. Upon his laying down the book, I observed the
alteration, and asked him to hand me the book, that I might look at it. With
some hesitation, he handed it. Upon looking at it, I told him, the alteration
had been made precisely in the manner I was informed it was made. He then
declared that the alteration was nothing material, and it was made by his
order. As the book lay open, the obliteration struck my eye; and such a one as
I had never seen in a book before, according to my recollection: It struck me,
that that obliteration was on the thirtieth of October, the last entry made
that day, the day the wagons arrived from Egg-habour, which had crossed after
sunset. After considering the matter some time, I determined to mention what I
had seen to the council of Pennsylvania, and mentioned it accordingly. Mr.
Mitchell was sent for, and requested to bring the book of entries. He appeared
and produced the book, and after he was examined, and much having been said on
the subject, he acknowledged, that the entry on the twenty-second of October
had been altered by his direction; that the note on the margin originally
stood, Gone to Egg-harbour, by order. The word gone being altered to the word
went, and the word order, to the word direction, abbreviated. Whether he
acknowledged, that the words, of general Arnold, were added or not, I cannot
ascertain. And he acknowledged, that the obliteration of the thirtieth of
October, in his book, was ordered to be made by him, and intended to conceal
and destroy an entry of the discharge of Jesse Jordan, and his brigade, from
public service.

Q Did mr. Mitchell acknowledge, that the words, of general Arnold, stood in
the entry, previous to the alteration being made?

A. I cannot recollect. At that day there appeared to be some difference in the
ink, and I thought the words, of general Arnold, appeared to be added.

Q. court. Did mr. Mitchell say, or intimate, that the alteration of the entry
of the twenty-second of October, or the obliteration of the thirtieth of
October, was made by the knowledge or advice of general Arnold.

A. I know of no circumstance that should induce a suspicion, that he had made
the alteration either with the advice or knowledge of general Arnold.

Q. court. Did you enquire of mr. Mitchell what his motives were for making the
alterations and obliteration!

A. Much was said upon the subject, and he put it off in this manner, that he
wished not to have it known that such an entry had been made, as he thought the
entry was an improper one.

Q. Did he assign any reason why he thought the entry an improper one?

A. I do not recollect that he ever assigned any clear, explicit reason on that
subject. It appeared to me, that he was fearful, that if the wagons should be
considered as being in public service, he should be blamed for the manner they
were employed.

Q. by general Arnold. What were the reasons mr. Mitchell assigned to council
for his making the alterations and obliteration in the book?

A. After the acknowledgment of the alterations and obliteration, I believe
there were not many questions put to him on that head; to those that were, he
answered evasively. The answers, precisely, I cannot recollect.

Q. by ditto. Did mr. Mitchell inform the president and council, that the
reason of the alterations being made, was, that the first entry was an improper
one, and made by one of his clerks without his knowledge?

A. I am uncertain, whether he gave that as a reason to the council, but I am
certain he gave that to me as a reason, and added, that it was a
memorandum-book that lay in his office, and the entries were made in it by his
clerk, without his knowledge, business being done in his office, as in other
offices, by his clerks.

Q. court. Who were to pay for these wagons, and at what price?

A. The pay-rolls were made out at the common pay allowed for wagons in the
public service, and the payrolls were sent to general Arnold, by order of mr.
Mitchell, as I understood.

Q. by general Arnold. Did the president and council send for mr. Jordan, with
respect to the pay of the wagons?

A. Not that I know of or recollect. I believe the fact was, they desired mr.
John Mitchell to send for him to give evidence before the committee of congress.

Q. by do. Did Jesse Jordan complain to the president and council that he was
refused payment, previous to their desiring colonel Mitchell to send for him,
to give evidence before the committee of congress?

A. The general complaint respecting the employment of the wagons was made to
council by Andrew Boyd wagon master of Chester county, through James Young
wagon master of the state. The council expected that Jesse Jordan would be in
the city in consequence of their request to John Mitchell to send for him, and
did not send for him that I know of or recollect. When Mr. Jordan came to the
city, information was given to the council of his being in the city, and a
reference being had to the deposition of Jordan, it will appear the manner of
his coming to the city. After the deposition was taken, application was made by
him to council, to know how he was to receive his money? and he complained of
the ill treatment he had received by a threat from mr. Mitchell of being
confined. The council conceiving themselves bound to take care that the
waggoners had their money, advanced to Jesse Jordan a sum to pay those who were
in the greatest necessity, conceiving that general Arnold was bound to pay, and
that a price would be received of him equal to the price of private hire, and
the money so advanced stands charged accordingly.

Q. by general Arnold. Did Jesse Jordan at any time complain to the president
and council that I had refused him payment of his account which he had
presented to me for the hire of his wagons?

A. No otherwise that I knew of, but by his deposition which is before the
court, and his application, which I have mentioned already, how he should get
it?

Q. by do. Was not the complaint respecting the wagons instituted by the
desire of the president and council, or some one of them.

A. It was not, to the best of my knowledge.

Q. by do. Do you know nearly the amount which Jesse Jordan charged at first
for the hire of his brigade of wagons?

A. No otherwise than what appears by the original pay rolls, which were lodged
in my office by Andrew Boyd, and which I now deliver to the court.

A Pay Roll of my brigade of wagons in the service, ordered from Philadelphia
to Eggharbour by general Arnold, October 16, 1778.
John Boyd entered Oct. 18, and were 12 days in service, with his wagon and
four horses, 75 s. L. 45 David Cochran entered Oct. 18. and were 12 days in
service, with his wagon and four horses, do. 45 Thomas Gibson entered 18 Oct.
and were 12 days in service, with his wagon and four horses, do. 45 Andrew
Gibson entered Oct. and were 12 days in service, with his wagon and four
horses, do. 45 Samuel Gibson entered Oct. and were 12 days in service, with his
wagon and four horses, do. 45 Joseph Boogs entered Oct. and were 12 days in
service, with his wagon and four horses, do. 45 Jacob Weldon entered Oct. and
were 12 days in service, with his wagon and four horses, do. 45 Joseph Kile
entered Oct. and were twelve days in service, with his wagon and four horses,
do. 45 Samuel Park entered Oct. and were 12 days in service, with his wagon
and four horses, do. 45 Carried over 405 Brought over 445 Eleazer Hamet entered
Oct. and were 12 days in service, with his wagon and four horses, do. 45 James
Steen entered October, and were 12 days in service, with his wagon and four
horses, do. 45 Jesse Jordan entered Oct. 18. and were 12 days in service, with
his wagon and four horses, do. 45 Jesse Jordan, a wagon master, at 12 s6 per
day, 7 10 To the hire of my horse, 5 s. per day, and 3 Forage for my horse at 5
s. per day, 3 L 553 10

The above is copy of an original delivered into my office by Jesse Jordan.

T. MATLACK, Secretary.

A Pay Roll of my brigade of wagons in the continental service, the united
states October 16, 1778. ending the 29th of the same, both days included. Dr.
D. 14 at L2 15 per day. John Boyd entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in
the service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10 David Cochran entered
November 16, and were fourteen days in the service, with his wagon and four
horses, 38 10 Thomas Gibson entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in the
service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10 Andrew Gibson entered Nov. 16,
and were fourteen days in the service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10
Samuel Gibson entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in the service, with his
wagon and four horses, 38 10 Joseph Boogs, entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen
days in the service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10 Jacob Wildon
entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in the service, with his wagon and
four horses, 38 10 Joseph Kite entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in the
service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10 Samuel Park entered Nov. 16,
and were fourteen days in the service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10
Eliezer Hamet entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in the service, with his
wagon and four horses, 38 10 James Steen entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen
days in the service, with his wagon and four horses, 38 10 Jesse Jordan
entered Nov. 16, and were fourteen days in the service, with his wagon and
four horses, 38 10 Jesse Jordan attending and sede wagon, fourteen days, and
finding my (...) horse, at L 1: 0: 0 per day, 14

17th November 1778. The above account is just and right. ANDREW BOYD, W. M. G.
C. C.
The above is copy of an original pay roll delivered into my office by Jesse
Jordan; the word "October" having been written in the third line over an
erasure, which appears to have been the word November. T. MATLACK, Secretary.

Q. by ditto. Did not the president and council advise mr. Jordan to charge
eighty pounds for the hire of each wagon, and to send the account to the
attorney general to prosecute?

A. To answer the question generally, I say, not that I know; but, in
particular, I believe they advised him to commence an action for the recovery
of the pay, which was allowed for wagons in private service, and I myself told
him, that ten pounds a day was the price paid in New Jersey for that kind of
service.

Q. by ditto. Did the president and council write an official letter to mr.
Jesse Jordan, with these words: We make no doubt but you will be allowed eighty
pounds for the hire of each wagon; and ordering, or advising him to send the
account to the attorney general to prosecute?

A. As I had no expectation of being questioned concerning a matter of that
nature, and having none of the papers present, it is impossible I should give a
precise answer with respect to the words of a letter written so long ago; but
it was very probable something of that kind was written, as I recollect to have
heard sentiments of that kind expressed by members of the council of
Pennsylvania.

The court adjourned until tomorrow, eleven o'clock.

DECEMBER 29.
THE court met according to adjournment.

Major general Arnold acknowledged, that captain Moore, to whom Jesse Jordan
was ordered to apply for orders at Eggharbour, is the same captain Moore, who
is named in the protection, as commanding the schooner Charming Nancy.

The judge advocate having produced his evidence with respect to the several
charges exhibited against general Arnold, the general was desired to proceed in
his defense; who called on Timothy Matlack. esquire and asked the three following
questions:

Q. Did not captain Shewell take the oath of allegiance to the state of
Pennsylvania, agreeable to law, by the first day of June, 1778?

A. I do not know.

Q. Did he not inform you that he had?

A. Not that I recollect.

Q. Did captain Shewell produce to the president and council of the state of
Pennsylvania, a certificate of his having taken the oath of allegiance to the
state, as required by law?

A. Not that I know of or recollect.

Major general Arnold produced the depositions of col. Thomas Proctor, David
Beveridge, and Mr. Stephen Collins, which were read, and are as follows:

Col. THOMAS PROCTOR, makes oath, That in January last, col. North received a
letter from Mr. Robert Shewell, in which he requested col. North and col.
Proctor would procure him a pass to go to Virginia to settle with Stacey
Hepburn; that in March, after mr. Shewell had returned from Virginia, where he
had gone by permission of general Scott, he informed deponent of his intentions
of coming with his family from the city to live, and that he had taken a house
in Maryland to live in; that the reason of mr. Shewell's not leaving the city
sooner, was, because of the indisposition of mrs. Shewell; that in May he
received a letter from mr. Shewell, informing him, that he was loading a vessel
for the use of the American army, and desiring him to procure a passport for
that purpose, and for himself and family, for which col. Proctor did not apply
for. On the 3d of June, mr. Shewell came to headquarters, and informed
deponent, he had come for a protection for his vessel, that he had loaded her
with a cargo suitable the army, and procured a captain to serve him, and
afterward procured a pass from general Arnold, as he understood; that he does
not know of any application being made to general Washington for a pass; that
the major general of the day, and not the commander in chief, is the proper
officer to make application to for passports.

THOMAS PROCTOR, Col. Artillery.
Sworn to, August 6th, 1778, coram, JOHN IMLAY.

Samuel Ingersoll, commander of the private schooner of war Xantippe, against
The schooner Charming Nancy.
DAVID BEVERIDGE, of the city of Philadelphia, merchant, does solemnly affirm
in the above cause, that mr. Robert Shewell applied to the affirmant, on the
supposition of the British army being about to leave Philadelphia, and some
short time before they left that city, and asked him if he would be concerned
in a voyage, to send a quantity of salt into some American port; that he this
deponent said, he had no objection, and actually agreed to be concerned in the
said schooner, and to pay two hundred pounds toward purchasing a third of the
vessel to load with salt, sugar, and rum, and that he this deponent proposed to
clear her out for Newfoundland, for such a cargo, as the most unsuspected port;
that William Shirtliff, one of the partners, some time after told deponent,
that he could procure a clearance for New York, for the said schooner, and no
where else, upon which affirmant told him, it would do very well; that this
deponent some time after, (having heard in the interim, that mr. Shirtliff had
divulged the scheme of the voyage to several persons, and spoken too publicly
of it) told him he could not be concerned in the matter, and absolutely
declined it, having just before this got out of jail, where he had been kept
for some time, by order of general How; that deponent, when he engaged to be
part owner of said schooner, called on governor Mc Kinley, who was lately from
Wilmington, then a prisoner in Philadelphia, and asked him, what he thought of
sending into Wilmington a cargo of salt, and that the governor said, it would
be very acceptable, but in his situation, being a prisoner, on parole, he did
not choose to say any thing on the subject; that deponent asked the governor,
if he could not give them something like a passport, certifying the intention
of the voyage, in case of accident, which the governor, for the aforesaid
reason, declined; that affirmant advised the said company to load her so deep
with salt, as to prevent her taking in goods on freight, the refusal of which
might cause a suspicion of their intention, in case of her not being fully
loaded; that the company accordingly purchased a large quantity of salt, and
put it on board; that affirmant understood salt was of so little value at
New York, that no body would carry it there for nothing; that at the time of
the enemy's leaving said city, very high prices were given for carrying of
goods upon freight, and great numbers of vessels, or the owners thereof, were
very desirous of having their vessels employed in that way; that he is
perfectly satisfied, it would have been much to the advantage of the said
company, if they had intended going to New York, to have thrown the said salt
oyerboard, and carried goods upon freight, as he has no doubt at all, but the
money they might have received for freight, would have been of much greater
value than the salt when arrived at New York, and he thinks of equal value with
the said vessel; that Robert Shewell and William Shirtliff, of the state of
Pennsylvania, were the persons who consulted him on the abovementioned scheme;
that they appeared to be owners of the said schooner, as they acted upon all
occasions as such, both as to planning the voyage, loading her with their
goods, and fitting her out; that at the time of purchasing the said salt, it
sold for about three shllings and nine-pence per bushel, but at New York it was
of no value, and store-room would not be given for it, and much had been given
away there as he understood, and that no vessels at all carried salt to
New York when the fleet went; that he has no reason at all to suppose it was
their intention to go into any port in possession of the enemy; that he went on
board the said vessel and viewed her, but saw no guns on board her.

DAVID BEVERIDGE.
Affirmed, August 6th, 1778, little, JOHN IMLAY.

In the court of admiralty for the state of New Jersey. Samuel Ingersoll,
commander of privateer Xantippe, against Schooner Charming Nancy.
STEPHEN COLLINS of the city of Philadelphia merchant, a witness produced and
examined in this cause on the part of the claimants, on his solemn affirmation
says, that he well knows the schooner Charming Nancy libelled in this cause;
that she now is, or lately belonged to, and was the property of William
Shirtliff, and co. of the state of Pennsylvania; that some time in last spring
the said Shirtliff, and co. applied to this deponent for advice and assistance
respecting a plan they were forming at the time the intentions of the enemy
became generally known of evacuating the city of Philadelphia, to escape with
their property from the enemy; that it was at first proofed to watch a
favorable opportunity with a flood tide to escape with the said schooner from
the enemy up the river Delaware, but this being thought too hazardous, it was
finally concluded upon by the advice of this deponent, as the safest and most
eligible mode of effecting the designs of the said company, as well as to serve
their country, to load the said vessel with their property, consisting of such
articles as were most necessary for their country, and which could not
immediately occasion a suspicion of their designs, to clear out for the port of
New York, to sail in company with the British fleet from the city of
Philadelphia, under pretense of going to New York, and to watch a favorable
opportunity of escaping into some of the creeks emptying into the river
Delaware, or into such other port or inlet in the possession of the united
states, as they might be able; that in order to prevent suspicion taking place
with the enemy, this deponent advised the said company to entrust the knowledge
of their designs with but few persons, and to contrive matters so as to have
their vessel fully loaded with their own effects, least they might be applied
to by other persons to carry goods upon freight to New York, and if they should
decline so to do, they would increase the suspicion which had already taken
place with the enemy, of their intentions to escape to some port of the united
states; that upon the recommendation of this deponent, said schooner was laden
accordingly; that a large quantity of salt was purchased by the said company,
and laden on board the said vessel, for the purpose aforesaid, that he cannot
precisely ascertain the number of bushels thereof, but believes it to have been
about 1500; that from the knowledge this deponent had of the price of salt at
Philadelphia, and all accounts public and private of the price of salt at New
York, at the time of purchasing the said salt by the said company, he is
satisfied the said salt, if it had safe arrived at New York, would not have
sold for more than one half the sum it cost at Philadelphia; that about the
time of the enemy's evacuating the said city, it was a very common practice to
unload salt out of vessels, for the purpose of taking other articles upon
freight, that being much more profitable; that this deponent is fully
satisfied, that had it been the intention of the said Shirtliff and co. to go
to New York, it would, after they had bought the salt, and put it on board,
been really to their advantage to have thrown the said salt into the river, and
carried goods upon freight for the people, inasmuch as the said salt would not
have sold for near so much money there, as the freight of a cargo of
merchandise for other people would have come to; that this deponent well knows
that the said Shirtliff and co. loaded and fitted out another vessel nearly
obout the time abovementioned, and upon the like plan; that she sailed as he
thinks with the first division of the fleet, and it afterward became a matter
of public notoriety in the said city, that the said other vessel made her
escape from the enemy into Wilmington creek; that the suspicion of the enemy
had been very strong against the said Shirtliff and co. by reason of such large
quantities of salt being taken on board, which suspicion increased to such a
degree after it was known in the city of the said other vessel's making her
escape, that it was strongly talked of by the enemy of confining in irons the
said Shirtliff who was on board the said schooner; that this deponent verily
believes that the real and absolute owners of the said two vessels with their
cargoes are William Shirtliff, William Constable, Robert Shewell, James
Seagrove, and David Shoemaker, he having been consulted by several of them upon
the above mentioned plan, having generally understood that they were the
owners, and having seen them exercise every act of ownership therein; that the
said vessel could not have sailed before the fleet, if it had been the desire
of the owners, unless in company with other British vessels; that he is totally
clear, and has no kind of doubt, but that from the whole tenor of the said
company's conduct, it was their intention to run into some port in the united
states not in the possession of the enemy; that he advised them to let some of
their goods pass under the name of other persons, to prevent suspicions in case
they appeared to be the sole owners; that mr. Shewell left the city of
Philadelphia about three or four weeks before the evacuation, with the view of
mentioning his plan to some person in authority, and to receive their
countenance and assistance, and did not return till after the enemy left it;
that the Charming Nancy came into Philadelphia in the month of December, and
was then the property of Coffin and Anderson; that she had no guns on board of
her to (...) knowledge; that said Coffin and Anderson were followers of the
British army.

STEPHEN COLLINS.
Affirmed, 6 August, 1778. coram. JOHN IMLAY.

STEPHEN COLLINS a witness produced in the cause upon his solemn affirmation
says, that he well knows Robert Shewell, William Constable, James Seagrove,
and William Shirtliff, the claimants in this cause; that the said Robert
Shewell now is, and for many years was, an inhabitant of Pennsylvania; that
William Shirtliff now is, and for seven years past and upwards was, an
inhabitant of Pennsylvania; that James Seagrove was formerly an inhabitant of
New York, and for about eight months past has resided in Philadelphia; that
William Constable lived in the city of Philadelphia for eight or ten months
past; that one or two weeks before the evacuation of the city enemy, the said
Constable left the city and went into the country, and did not return till
after the enemy left it; that to the best of his knowledge the said Shewell was
in the said city at the time the enemy entered it.

STEPH. COLLINS.
Affirmed before me, 6 August 1778. JOHN IMLAY.

Pennsylvania, ss.
I ANDREW ROBESON, register of the acts, matters, causes, and business done and
transacted in the honorable the court of commissioners of appeal for the
united states of America, do hereby certify the aforegoing to be true and exact
copies of the depositions of colonel Thomas Proctor, David Beveridge, and
Stephen Collins taken in the court of admiralty in the state of New Jersey, in
the same cause, Samuel Ingersoll, qui tam, etc. libellers against the schooner
or vessel called the Charming Nancy, her cargo, etc. I having carefully
compared the same with the respective originals thereof, contained in and
transmitted with the proceedings of the said court of admiralty, to the said
court of appeal, and now remaining in my office at Philadelphia.

IN TESTIMONY whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal at Philadelphia
aforesaid, the twenty sixth day of September, Anno Domini 1779.

(L. S.) ANDREW ROBESON, Cur. Ap. Reg.

Major general Arnold not having all his evidence with respect to the first
charge, moved the court that he might go into his proofs relative to the second
charge, and be at liberty to revert to the first charge when his evidence
arrived, which was granted.

With respect to the second charge against him the general produced major
Franks' and major Clarkson's deposition, which was read, and is as follows:

WE do certify, That when the shops in this city were shut in June last, by
order of major general Arnold, in consequence of a resolution of congress of
the 4th June. We do not know of general Arnold's making any purchases of goods
of any kind, directly or indirectly; and we have every reason to believe that
no such purchases were made either by general Arnold or his agents, except a
few trifling articles to furnish his table, and for his family's use, most of
which were supplied him by the quarter master or commissary. General Arnold's
invoices, minute and account books being always open to our inspection,
confirms us in our belief as mentioned above.

M. CLARKSON, Aid de Camp, DAVID S. FRANKS, Aid de Camp.
ON the third of March, 1779, personally appeared before me, the subscriber,
one of the justices of the peace of the city and county of Philadelphia, M.
Clarkson and David S. Franks; and being both duly sworn, do declare the above
to be true, to the best of their knowledge.

BENJAMIN PASCHALL.



Q. to major Franks. Were you present at justice Paschall's when major Clarkson
made oath to the contents of the paper you have heard read?

A. I was; and that is the paper which major Clarkson signed, it having been
written by him.

Q. by general Arnold to major Franks. What do you know about she shutting up
the shops and stores in Philadelpia?

A. The day after I came into town, which was the day general Arnold came,
general Joseph Reed, who is now president of the state of Pennsylvania, and
myself met. He told me that they were selling goods in town, and advised me to
send a crier round to prohibit the sale of goods. I at first agreed to it, but
afterward thought it was doing more than I had a right to. I met him again,
and told him that I would put it off until general Arnold came. When general
Arnold came to town, general Reed came to his quarters, and upon consulting
with him, wrote a proclamation, which I think was the same that was published,
with some alterations.

Q. court. Were the alterations made in it, material?

A. I believe not.

Q. Are you positive that general Reed drew up the proclamation?

A. I saw general Reed at the table drawing it up; general Arnold and mr.
Boudinott were in the room at the time.

Q. by general Arnold. Do you know of my having given licenses to purchase
goods, though applications were made by my intimate friends for them?

A. I do not know of your intimate friends having asked for licenses to
purchase goods; but I know that many applications were refused, and I know of
no licenses being granted to any person to purchase goods.

Q. by do. Do you know at what time the shops and stores were opened, and every
body permitted to purchase?

A. I do not know the particular time?

Q. by do. Do you know whether general Arnold, or any person by his orders,
directed any goods to be laid by for his use?

A. No; except some trifling articles from the commissary and quarter master.

Q. by general Arnold. Do you know of any articles being laid by, except some
trifling articles for my own use, the use of my family, for general Washington,
and for one or two other officers?

A. No; except two pipes of wine, which were afterward drank in the family!

Q. by general Arnold. Do you know whether the two pipes of wine were purchased
or laid by previous to the shops being opened?

A. I don't recollect that they were purchased before the shops were opened.

Q. court. Do you know whether any of the articles that were laid by, were
taken from the shops previous to the legal opening of them?

A. I do not.

Q. by general Arnold. Were not all the articles of clothing of consequence
that were supplied me, which are mentioned to have been for general Washington
and several other officers, as well as myself, supplied by the clothier general
or his agent?

A. I believe they were.

Q. by do. Do you know what time Congress arrived in Philadelphia?

A. I do not. They were there the fourth of July.

Q. by do. Were not the shops open at that time?

A. They were.

Q. by the court. Do you know whether general Arnold purchased any part of the
Charming Nancy or her cargo?

A. I do not of my own knowledge; but I have heard general Arnold say he did,
and I have also heard Mr. Seagrove say he did.

Q. court. Was it previous or subsequent to general Arnold's granting the pass?

A. It was subsequent.

The court adjourned until to morrow eleven o'clock.

DECEMBER 30.
The court met according to adjournment.

Major general Arnold adverted to the first charge, and proceeded to produce
evidence respecting it.

Q. by general Arnold to Timothy Matlack, esquire Do you know whether the owners of
the Charming Nancy voluntarily remained with the enemy?

A. Mr. Shewell did as I understand. I understood it from him.

Q. by do. Did Mr. Shewel assign his reason for remaining with the ememy?

A. If he assigned any reasons I do not recollect what they were?

Lieutenant colonel Hamilton being sworn,

Q. by general Arnold. Do you know Mr. Seagrove's general political character?

A. I have heard it frequently discussed, and very different opinions
entertained of it. Many were of opinion that he was warmly attached to the
American cause, and others that he was not. He had a commercial connection of a
very delicate nature with a mr. Mc Evers, reputedly a disaffected person, which
was supposed by those acquainted with him to have restrained his political
conduct, and made him less active in favor of America than he otherwise would
have been; others considered him as a man of address, who wished to stand fair
with both parties, though in reality more friendly to the opposite party than
to us. I have heard several liberal men speak of his situation with a degree of
compassion, as producing an opposition between his principles and his private
connections. My own opinion of him was favorable, from a general idea of his
integrity, and from a particular circumstance which happened as our troops were
evacuating New York. I was among the last of our army that left the city; the
enemy was then on our right flank, between us and the main body of our army. At
about three miles from town, on our march out, mr. Seagrove was at a house, the
name of which I forget, in company with several ladies and gentlemen, he left
them, and came up to me with strong appearances of anxiety in his looks,
informed me that the enemy had landed at Harlaam, and were pushing across the
island, advised us to keep as much to the left as possible, to avoid being
intercepted; the information he gave us, I believe, was not true, as to the
place where he said the enemy had landed, they having in fact landed in a
different place, but he could not have framed it for any bad purpose, because
the advice he gave us must have been good and proper in any event, as it was
known that the enemy had not landed any troops in the north river on our left,
by inclining to which course we stood the best chance of avoiding that body
which had landed on our right. The favorable impressions I before had of mr.
Seagrove were confirmed by this incident, not so much from the nature of the
transaction, as from an appearance of sincerity and concern strongly pictured
in his countenance; which had the more weight as he remained in the city, and
might have run some risque from what he did. At an early period of the war he
entered into an independent company, but the company afterward came to nothing.

Q. by do. Has not the political conduct of Mr. Seagrove since confirmed the
favorable impressions you had before of him?

A. It has, so far as it has come to my knowledge.

Q. by ditto to major Franks. Do you know Mr. Seagrove's general political
character?

A. I knew nothing of his political general character of my own knowledge,
previous to your giving the protection for the Charming Nancy; but I have
understood that he was considered as a whig. Since that period I have been in
actual service with him.

Q. by do. Do you know the political general character of the persons who were
owners of the Charming Nancy, previous to my giving the protection for her?

A. I never knew either mr. Shirtliff or mr. Constable before I went to
Philadelphia, or saw them in my life before, that I remember. I knew mr.
Shewell before the protection was granted, and always supposed him to be well
affected to America. He was in one of the militia companies in Philadelphia,
some time before the enemy got possession of it.

Q. court. Did he tell you his reasons for staying in Philadelphia?

A. He did.

Q. court. What were they?

A. The impracticability of removing at the time; his wife having been brought
to bed and dangerously ill. He told me frequently that his intentions were to
remove out of town.

Q. by general Arnold. Did captain Shewell inform you that he had taken the
oath of allegiance to the state of Pennsylvania, previous to my granting him
the pass?

A. I think he did, and said previous to the time directed by the state of
Pennsylvania; and I understood from him that he had taken it out of town, and
had a certificate of it.

Q. by the court. Did he inform you at what place and before whom he took the
oath of allegiance?

A. He did not that I remember.

Q. by general Arnold. Did you understand, at the time captain Shewell applied
to me for the protection, that he produced to me a certificate of his having
taken the oath of allegiance to the state of Pennsylvania, agreeable to law?

A. I don't know what passed at the time, but I understood from him at that
time, that he had a certificate of that nature.

Q. court. Did you understand how long mr. Shewell had been out of Philadelphia
before he obtained the protection from general Arnold?

A. He was time enough out to take the oath of allegiance to the state of
Pennsylvania, as I understood from him, which was ordered to be taken, I think,
by the first of June. I know that mr. Shewell gave his vote at an election in
Philadelphia, which he would not have been permitted to give, had he not
produced a certificate of his having taken the oath of allegiance by the first
of June.

With respect to the fifth charge, major Franks produced in behalf of the
general says, That he went to colonel Mitchell's by desire of general Arnold,
to know whether he could spare him some wagons to transport some goods that
were in danger of falling into the enemy's hands at Eggharbour. He was told,
either by colonel Mitchell or his clerk, that wagons could not be spared at
that time, but that soon it might happen, as they expected a number of wagons
in town; he brought that answer to general Arnold, and some days after general
Arnold told him to go to the quarter master's, to enquire and see if possible
the wagon master who was to conduct a brigade of wagons for him, and to order
them to go to Eggharbour, or the forks, and there to take a captain Moore's
directions, respecting what he was to do. When he got to the office he wrote a
letter ordering the wagon master so to do, and signed it officially; after
which the wagon master went.

Q. by general Arnold. Were not frequent applications made for the wagons
before I procured them?

A. I went once myself, as I have said before, and I believe major Clarkson
went once or twice, and I believe you went yourself. It appeared to me several
applications had been made for them.

Q. by do. Did you not view the request made for the wagons of a private
nature, and not officially?

A. I understood you were to pay for the wagons for the transportation of the
goods, and that it was a matter of favor in colonel Mitchell to let you have
them.

Q. de. How happened it that you signed the order to Jesse Jordan officially?

A. I had no particular directions from you so to do; that from custom I always
signed aid de camp at the end of my name; I myself might have probably thought
at that time, that it might have been the means of his executing the order with
more alacrity, as dispatch was necessary.

Q. by genesis Arnold. Do you know of my sending to colonel Mitchell for the
account of the hire of the wagons, previous to any charge or publication made
against me?

A. I do; I went once or twice myself, and I believe you sent major Clarkson.

Q. by do. When I went to camp in February 1779, was not money left with major
Clarkson for the purpose of paying for the wagons, and orders given to him
accordingly?

A. I think, before we set out to go to camp, the wagon master brought an
account against you for the hire of the wagons. You told the man to get it
certified by colonel Mitchell, to come in the afternoon with the certificate,
and you would pay him. Whether he came in the afternoon or not, I cannot say;
but we set out for camp, and you informed me that you had left money with major
Clarkson to discharge that account. Clarkson told you when you returned, that
he had not paid the money, as the man had not called, or that he could not find
him.

Q. court. How long was the account presented for the hire of the wagons,
before you set out for camp?

A. I believe two or three days.

Q. by court. Was that the first time the account had been presented to general
Arnold?

A. I think it was, as there had been frequent applications made for the
account, and it could not be procured.

Q. by ditto. Did you at any time, through the course of the transaction,
understand that general Arnold officially employed these wagons?

A. I understood that general Arnold was to pay for the wagons; that he got
them as a favor, and that they were not to transport public stores, but
private property for himself and friends, and that he did not order them
officially.

Q. by ditto. When you went to colonel Mitchell for the wagons, did you inform
him that they were wanted to transport private property?

A. I did. I told him that the goods were in imminent danger, and told him,
that the loss of so many goods would be a loss to the continent, as we wanted
goods.

With respect to the last charge against the general, Mr. John Hall was
produced, who was sworn.

Q. Did you make the alterations in colonel Mitchell's minute book, of the
twenty-second of October, and the obliteration in the same book, of the
thirtieth of October, respecting Jesse Jordan's wagon?

A. I did.

Q. Did you make the original entry yourself with or without orders?

A. I made it myself without orders.

Q. Did you make the entry in the margin respecting the wagon?

A. I did.

Q. With or without orders?

A. Without any orders.

Q. What was the original entry?

A. As far as I can recollect, it was, Gone to Eggharbour, by order; or went, I
am not certain which.

Q. Were the words, of general Arnold mentioned in the first entry in the
margin?

A. They were not.

Q. When was the addition of the words, of general Arnold made, and what was
the reason of it?

A. It was made in the course of one day, or two days, and it was made to
assist my memory.

Q. Did you make the alteration with or without orders?

A. I made it without orders.

Q. What was the reason of your making the alteration?

A. The first reason was, I thought it was not good English, and when I came to
reflect on it, I made the alteration, thinking I worded the entry improper.

Q. What was the reason of your changing the word order to direction?

A. I can give no reason for it.

Q. To whom did general Arnold make application for wagons to go to Eggharbour?

A. Major Franks or major Clarkson came to colonel Mitchell's office, where I
was, and made the application to me, in colonel Mitchell's absence.

Q. In what manner was the application made?

A. The application was, that he, general Arnold, wanted a brigade of wagons,
and to send the wagon master to him for directions: It was not made in writing.

Q. Did either major Franks or major Clarkson mention for what purpose the
wagons were wanted?

A. Not that I remember.

Q. court. Did colonel Mitchell speak to you respecting the wagons, previous
to the application?

A. He did not.

Q. court. Did he converse with you on the subject afterward?

A. Not until some time a January.

Q. court. What passed between you then?

A. When Jordan came to town, sometime in January, and had his pay roll made
out, colonel Mitchell told him, he must go to general Arnold, and get his pay.
I then turned to the book, and saw he had been from the twenty second to the
thirtieth of October. Colonel Mitchell told me, that it should not be there at
all, and had no business in the book, as general Arnold was to pay the hire of
the wagons, and he was angry with me on account of it, upon which I took up my
pen and obliterated the entry of the thirtieth of October, determining in my
own mind, that col. Mitchell should never give me a frown for it again, and
that it should not appear in the book.

Q. court. Did you understand why the hire of the wagons should become a
private charge to general Arnold?

A. I then understood by colonel Mitchell's mentioning what I have said to me,
that they had been sent to transport property that was not the public's.

Q. Had you at any time any conversation with Jesse Jordan, or any of the
waggoners employed in that affair, on the subject?

A. Not until after Jordan returned from Eggharbour: When he returned, I went
and made a mark of his return, and told him to make his pay roll out: He said,
he had not time to do it then, but would when he came to town again.

Q. court. What conversation passed between you and Jordan when he returned
again?

A. Col. Mitchell was in the office when he produced his pay roll; he handed
the pay roll to colonel Mitchell, who looked at it. Colonel Mitchell turned to
me, and asked, whether Jordan had received any orders for forage? I answered,
No; and he asked Jordan himself whether he had received any forage? he said, he
had got an order for forage, and on being asked by colonel Mitchell from whom,
he said, from colonel Hilzeimer at the stables. The colonel sent up to mr.
Hilzeimer, to know what number of days he had got. I don't recollect the number
of days that he got an order for from mr. Hilzeimer, but colonel Mitchell
mentioned, that he must make out his pay roll at the price, as if he had got no
forage, and was angry at his having got forage, and that general Arnold was to
pay him, and desired him to go and repay mr. Hilzeimer the amount of what
forage he had received from him. Jordan, as far as I recollect, made out
another pay roll.

Q. court. Had you ever any conversation with general Arnold, about the wagons?

A. No.

Q. Did general Arnold know of any of these entries being made, or the
alteration of them, previous to your doing it?

A. Not to my knowledge.

Q. court. Did general Arnold ever see the book, to your knowledge?

A. Not to my knowledge; it was a book that lay on the desk in common, to make
memorandums.

Q. court. Did Jesse Jordan, or any of the waggoners employed at that time,
tell you whether they considered themselves in public or private employ?

A. I don't recollect that he or any of them did.

Q. court. Was the original entry in the margin the usual mode of entry?

A. I do not recollect.

Q. by general Arnold. Did I not make several applications for the wagons
before they were sent?

A. I do not recollect that you did.

Q. When was the obliteration made?

A. About the latter end of January.

Q. Do you know of the council of Pennsylvania making application for a
transcript of the entries?

A. I did hear colonel Mitchel say something about it, but not previous to the
obliteration being made.

Q. Did colonel Mitchell or any other person direct you to make the alterations
or obliterations?

A. He did not, nor any other person.

The court, for want of evidence, adjourned until Tuesday next eleven o'clock.

JANUARY 4. 1780.
The court met according to adjournment, and adjourned for want of evidence
until Friday next, eleven o'clock.

JANUARY 19.
The court did not meet agreeable to the lest adjournment, but met this day
agreeable to his excellency the commander in chief's order, which is as follows:

Headquarters, Jan. 18, 1780.
THE court martial, whereof major general How is president, is to meet to
morrow morning, eleven o'clock.

Major general Arnold proceeded in his defense, and with respect to the first
change against him, produced an exemplification of the decree of the court of
admiralty for the state of New Jersey, respecting the schooner Charming Nancy,
which being read, is as follows:

In the court of admiralty of New Jersey. Samuel Ingersoll, qui team, etc. v.
Schooner Charming Nancy, etc.
IT appearing unto me, from the verdict of the jury impannelled, sworn and
affirmed in this cause, upon the evidence produced to them, That the facts set
forth in the claim of Robert Shewell, William Shirtliff, James Seagrove and
William Constable, are true: I do thereupon adjudge and decree, That the
schooner Charming Nancy, with her tackle, apparel, furniture and cargo, be
acquitted, released and discharged from the capture made by the said Samuel
Ingersoll and Joseph Cook.

JOHN IMLAY.
September 22, 1779.
Pennsylvania, ss.
I ANDREW ROBESON, register of the acts, matters, causes and business done and
transacted in the court of commissioners of appeal for the united states of
America, do hereby certify the above to be a true copy of the decree passed and
published in the above cause, by the honorable John Imlay, esquire, judge of
the admiralty of New Jersey, and transmitted by the said court, in the record
of the said cause, to the said court of appeal, and now remaining in my office
at Philadelphia.

In testimony whereof I have hereto set my hand and seal, at Philadelphia, the
thirty-first day of December, Anne Domini 1779.

ANDREW ROBESON, Reg. R.

The general, with respect to the second charge, produced a deposition of Elias
Boudinot, which being read, in as follows:

Mr. Boudinot's state of facts, relative to general Arnold's shutting up the
shops in Philadelphia, in 1778, as far as he can recollect, given at general
Arnold's request.

IT will be necessary to premise, that the transactions referred to happened
eighteen months ago; since which I have been afflicted with a severe
indisposition for ten months: therefore cannot but speak with great dissidence
as to particular circumstances.

Being at Philadelphia when general Arnold took possession of the city, I
called on him several times, and found him in a state of health, which I
thought rendered him unequal to the fatigue of his then station. He was much
crowded with business, and I ventured to warn him of the ill consequences of so
much attention to it, and advised to several regulations I thought necessary.
He showed me certain resolutions of congress relative to the goods, that should
be found in the city, until the arrival of joint committees of congress and the
executive council, and the public officers who were to purchase for the army,
or something to this effect.

I advised the general to the issuing of public orders, to prevent the selling
of goods until the arrival of the committees aforesaid, and also to nominate a
number of the citizens of established character, to superintend and regulate
the little affairs of the citizens in the mean while, so as to prevent his
being perplexed with the civil as well as military department; and I mentioned
several gentlemen, whose political characters I thought he might depend on.
While we were talking, mr. Joseph Reed, (now his excellency the president of
the state) then also a member of congress, came in and told the general he had
been making a few memorandums of some little matters which he (mr. Reed)
thought necessary for his attention, and which otherwise might escape the
general's notice. Mr. Reed then read them from a paper he produced, and I
immediately told him they were very similar to what I had just been
recommending to the general, and repeated to him what I had been saying. He
replied, that he had the substance of it down, except one or two points, which
one of us immediately added to the paper he had. The general then begged, that
we would draw up what we thought necessary, and he would have it printed. Mr.
Reed then sat down and drew up a draught of what he thought proper, and I
believe I corrected it, but am not certain. I cannot with certainty ascertain
the particulars of this draught, but and clear in my own mind, that it
contained the amount of what we both advised the general to, and particularly
to the prevention of the sale of goods, until the orders of congress were
complied with. And my reason for this is, that I well remember to have advised
several friends to be careful not to sell the next day, as such a public
prohibition had gone to the press.

ELIAS BOUDINOT.
Bostenridge, January 3, 1780. Sworn in the presence of general Arnold, and at
his request, the 8th day of January, 1780. Before JOHN LAURENCE, Judge advocate.

With respect to the last charge, the general produced colonel Mitchel, d. q.
m. g. who being sworn, says, About the middle of October last, general Arnold
sent for me; on my waiting on him, he informed me he wanted ten or twelve
wagons to go to Eggharbour to bring some goods, which were in danger of
falling into the enemy's hands, and that he would pay the expense. I informed
him, I had none at that time could be spared from public service; but when
there was, I would send the wagon master to him. He asked me, if there was not
wagons sent to Eggharbour with forage and provisions, and if they could not
bring a load back for him. I answered, yes, there were several sent, but I
believed they were now returning, that if I had occasion to send any more with
either provision or forage, and there was no public storm to bring up, they
might load for him, and it would save the public half the expense, as he must
pay the hire back; this he seemed pleased with, but not having occasion to send
any of the articles abovementioned, the general sent to me several times to
know, if I could let him have the wagons; my answer was, he should have the
first could be spared without injury to the public service. On the 22d of
October, Jesse Jordan, a wagon master from Chaster county, came to town with
twelve towns; a memorandum (...) which was part in the memorandum book. A
considerable quantity of stores being forwarded to (...) river, and some
continental terms coming in, which were not expected, and the general being
desirous to have the wagons sent, to save the property at Eggharbour from
falling into the hands of the enemy, I desired mr. Jordan to go to general
Arnold, who wanted him to go to Eggharbour, and that he would pay him, and give
him his directions. Mr. Jordan accordingly want from me, and, I believe, called
on the general. From that time I heard nothing farther on the subject, till mr.
Jordan had returned, when he was told to call on general Arnold for his pay; in
answer to which he said he would not stay at that time to make out a pay roll,
but would return and get his pay, or words to that effect. And after he was
gone home some time, I asked one of the clerks if he heard whether Jordan was
paid by general Arnold. I think he said he did not know. I afterward saw the
general, who told me the wagon master had not called on him for his pay, and
desired when I saw him I would let him know, or words to that purpose. I
desired my clerk to be careful that mr. Jordan's hire was not paid in my
office, and to pay no rolls without my approbation. From this time, about the
beginning of November, I heard nothing of the matter that I can recollect, till
the secretary of the executive council wrotes me for what information I could
give them respecting the wagons sent by general Arnold to Eggharbour, to which
request I gave the following answer, dated the 19th January.

Philadelphia, 19th January, 1779. Sir,
I THIS day received an order signed by the secretary of the honorable council
of this state, requesting I would give them information respecting a brigade of
wagons under the conduct of Jesse Jordan, wagon master from Chester county;
the council having been informed that I sent them to Eggharbour to convey
private property to this city. I shall at all times be ready to give your
excellency and the honorable council every information you think necessary for
the good of the public, or this state in particular, which relates to my
office, or the business of the department; as I have no desire to conceal any
part of my conduct as a public officer, having conducted the business under my
direction with integrity and justice to the public. The following are the state
of the facts required, viz. In the month of October last, at the time the enemy
had landed some troops at Eggharbour, general Arnold desired I would furnish
him with a brigade of (...) which he wanted to send to the Jerseys, and that he
would pay the hire of them, they being wanted to remove property, which was in
imminent danger of falling into the enemy's hands. I informed him he should
have the wagon master of the first brigade, which could be spared from the
public service, sent to him, when he would give him such orders as he pleased.
Accordingly, about the 22d of October mr. Jordan was sent to the general to
receive his directions, having at that time sent forward a large supply for the
army, etc. When Jordan returned, he was desired to make out his account to
general Arnold, to be paid. I do not know where the loading was stored, nor
whose property it was, further than what is before mentioned. A greater number
of continental teams corning in than I expected, enabled me to comply with
general Arnold's request without any inconvenience to the service. If there is
any thing further in which I can satisfy your excellency and the council, I
will wait on you at any time with pleasure.

I have the honor to be, etc. J. M.

His excellency Joseph Reed, esquire

Which I afterward learned they sent a copy of to general Arnold. His
excellency the president and council requested general Green to direct that
mr. Jordan, a wagon master in his service might be sent for; on which I sent
two expresses to enquire if he was in the quarter master's department, and if
so, to send him up to wait on the president and council; but they returned with
information that he was not in the service. This I informed his excellency of,
who, if I can recollect, and to the best of my memory and recollection, said
the council had laid the matter before congress, and therefore it was not
necessary to send again for him. I offered to send any orders of his, by
express or otherwise, as he thought proper. The next I heard of this affair was
on the 30th of January, when mr. Jordan came to town, and called at my office.
I told him to go to general Arnold for his pay, that I had nothing to do with
it, and asked him why he did not call for it long before that time. He answered
he had been sick, and could not come to town, and I think said he was sick when
he returned from Eggharbour. I told him he must wait on the president and
council before he left town; that they had sent for him, and it was necessary
he should call on them. I also asked him if he had made any complaints to
colonel Boyd, and for what reason he did make such complaints. He said, he had
made none, nor had he seen colonel Boyd since his return from Eggharbour; but
he believed some of the waggoners had made some complaints which he had never
seen. On this he went from me, as I believe, to general Arnold, and returned
with a note from him to me, as follows, viz.

THE wagons were sent to me the 22d, and discharged the 29th, and were
employed eight days each, is 96 days, at

N. B. If colonel Mitchell will make out the account, I will pay it, as the
wagons were not sent in on purpose for me, I think it will be right to pay
only for the time they were employed.

(Signed) B. ARNOLD.
Saturday.

To which I answered immediately,

SIR,
MR. Jordan is entitled to pay from the day he left home, and as he was not
employed in public service, but sent to you on his arrival, it is but just he
should be paid by the person who employed him; but if you order I should pay
him any part of the time due him for hire of his teams, I will obey your order.

I have the honor to be, with respect, Sir, your most obedient, humble
servant, J. MITCHELL.
January 30, 1779.
Hon. major general Arnold.

This answer was sent directly to the general. Whether mr. Jordan went to him
then or not, I do not recollect; but on producing his pay roll, I found he had
charged as if he received forage, which surprised me much, not having been
informed or known he had drawn any forage for more than one day; on which I
sent to the forage master to know the truth of it, who returned me an account
that he had drawn forage. I then desired he would make out his pay roll as if
he had not forage, and to pay the amount of the forage to Owen Biddle, Esquire
agent for the com. genesis of forage. Mr. Jordan had made an account out for two
days more than he was entitled to. I told him of it, and the mode established
for payment of teams, and that it was agreeable to the wagon law, and the
opinion of the late wagon master general, James Young, esquire He seemed not
contented with this deduction of two days at first, but on my assuring him it
was the usual and customary time, and offering to show him several pay rolls
settled agreeable to the law, and what I then said, and that I insisted on the
matter being settled before he left town, as I wished to be clear of any
further trouble with it, and desiring him not to neglect to call on the
president of this state, and informing him where he lived, he asked for paper,
pen, and ink, and liberty to make out his pay roll in the office, all which
were granted him, he seemed to me perfectly satisfied, contented, and in good
humor. I assisted him in bringing out the amount, and I believe the clerk cast
it up for him. He left me in this disposition, and went to general Arnold to
receive his money, but soon returned and said, the general was out. I told him
to call on him again, and let me know if he refused to pay him. From that time
I never saw mr. Jordan, but once at some distance. General Arnold called on me
on the Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday following, I cannot recollect which, and
asked me if I heard anything of mr. Jordan; that he wanted to pay him; that he
was going out of town; that he would leave the money with major Clarkson, and
requested I would send mr. Jordan to him to receive his money; but if he would
not come, begged I would send for major Clarkson, who would bring the money. I
have omitted to mention in the proper place, that on mr. Jordan's return, he
was told to call on general Arnold for his pay; in answer to which he said, he
would not stay at that time to make out his pay roll, but would return and get
his pay, or words to that purpose. On looking at a memorandum book in the
office, kept to assist my memory and my clerks only, I saw the words, "Gone to
Eggharbour, by order of general Arnold," opposite to the word Jesse Jordan, w.
m. 12 teams, Chester county, as here put down. I told the clerk, general Arnold
did not give me orders to send him, and therefore it should be, "Went to
Eggharbour by directions of general Arnold," which he immediately altered; and
on observing on the other side, 30th, Jesse Jordan returned from Eggharbour, I
told the clerk, as I did not think I had any concern with the wagons after
they had been sent to general Arnold, that those words were unnecessary, and
desired he would strike it out, which he did immediately. This happened the
week after Jordan was at my office last. On general Arnold's return, he sent to
let me know, he wanted a certificate of what passed respecting the wagons and
the payment. As I wished to avoid any further concern in this matter, I did not
go to wait on him, till he sent several times. When I waited on him, He was in
his chamber; he told me what he sent for me was, to give him a certificate of
what I knew respecting the wagons he sent to Eggharbour, and what I knew
respecting his desire to pay them, as the council had charged him with refusing
to pay them. I answered, I was very desirous to have no further concern in the
affair; that I had informed the president and council what I knew of it, a copy
of which I believed he had, and that I had also given a committee of congress
what information I could; that I would freely go before any authority that had
right to enquire into it, and give my testimony, but I could not give any
certificate, or have my name in the public papers, which might subject me to
disagreeable answers, as the papers were full of vindictive and abuse on many
respectable characters. He said, it was very cruel and hard to be refused a
true state of the matter, and showed me a paper he had wrote, I believe read
it, I also read it, when he asked me, if it was the true state of the matter. I
answered, it might be near it, but if I signed any I would write it myself;
that the words were not expressed as I would do, if I gave any, but still
requested he would not insist on it, and wished he would excuse me; and also
said, I would relate the matter, if he would not publish it; but his answer
was, that would not do, as he wanted the facts to publish. I endeavored to
excuse myself, but he earnestly requested, as a gentleman, I would give him a
state of the matter, and requested I would take the paper home, and send him a
certificate. I told him, I would consider of it, and let him know. On full
consideration, I was still desirous of avoiding any thing that was to be
published with my name; but on his sending to me several times for a
certificate, I wrote one, which, on consulting a friend, whose opinion I
esteemed, he thought an improper one, on which I was determined to give a copy
of my letter to his excellency, of the 19th January, which is before recited;
but from the words, on Saturday, the 30th January, as recited in the former
part of this narrative, was added as what passed respecting the payments. This
I sent to the general, who returned it the next morning, desiring I would send
him a certificate. I told the gentleman who brought it, I could give no other
than that. He said he believed it would not do. I answered I would do no more.
Afterward the paper he gave me, was sent for, (as I kept no copy, do not
recollect the contents) which I returned. The general afterward called on me,
and requested I would give him a certificate. I assured him I could give no
other, and wished he would excuse me. He seemed displeased at my answer, and
said another gentleman's influence, naming him, was greater than his. I assured
him I was not influenced by any one, and only wanted to avoid any publication,
but that he might have the letter I wrote him. He took it, and left me, as I
thought displeased. And thus this matter ended, having had no conversation with
the general on the subject since.

On the 18th of February, I received a letter from colonel Pettit, a. q. m.
genesis enclosing a letter from the secretary of council, desiring a certificate
of the entry of the wagons sent to Eggharbour, of the ferries they crossed,
and of their return; to which gave the following answer:

Philadelphia, 18th February, 1779. Dear Sir,
IN answer to yours of this morning, I have to inform you, that I have no
other entry of Jesse Jordan, w. m. than a memorandum of his coming to my
office, on the 22d October last, when he was desired to call on general Arnold,
who wanted him to go to Eggharbour, that he would pay him, and give him
directions. From that time I conceived mr. Jordan's wagons to be totally
discharged from being under my directions. I therefore neither gave him orders
to go to any ferry, or any kind of instructions, but what is mentioned above. I
do not know at what ferry he passed, either going or returning. I shall at all
times most cheerfully give the president and council every information and
satisfaction, on this or any other transaction in my department, which they may
require. All that I know of the matter, I have communicated to them.

I am with sincere esteem, dear sir, yours, etc. J. M.


On the 23d or 24th of February, colonel Pettit called on me for a certificate
of the entry; as it was esteemed by the council to be one, I gave him one
immediately. The 22d I received another letter from colonel Pettit, requesting
I would give a certificate of an entry of discharge of the wagons, or that
there was none. To this I gave the following answer, vis.

Dear Sir,
I RECEIVED your note of this morning. Am sorry to find the honorable
president and council should think any information was withheld from them by
me, or any gentleman in the department. I am conscious, I have never refused or
delayed giving them any information that was required. My letter to you of the
18th, was as full, and conveyed every intelligence I could give you. There is
no entry of discharge, or of mr. Jordan's teams, or any other entry whatever,
save the one I gave you the 20th instant, which was fully contained in mine of
the 18th. The reason was there fully explained.

I am, dear sir, yours, etc. J. M.

Colonel Charles Pettit, a. q. m. genesis

On the 23d of February, colonel Pettit called on me to ask me for the
memorandum book, to show to the council. I told, he should have any book I had,
with pleasure, from this time to the 25th, when I was directed to appear before
council, by their order of the 24th.

Q. by general Arnold. After the wagons had been employed, and previous to any
charge made against me for the same, did I not several times send to you for
the account, or to direct the wagon master to call on me, that I might pay him?

A. You did.

Q. by ditto. Did mr. Jordan ever inform you that I had refused payment?

A. Jordan did not tell me that you had refused to pay him, but had refused to
pay the pay roll, as it was made out, and I understood from you, that you
wanted to know what you had to pay him.

Q. by ditto. Do you know whether Jesse Jordan saw me, after his pay roll was
properly made out?

A. I do not; but he told me he called, and you were not at home.

Q. by ditto. Do you know the reason why he did not see me after his pay roll
was made out, to get his money?

A. I do not know, having no conversation with him after the answer before
given.

Q. by ditto. When you gave Jesse Jordan orders to call on me for instructions,
did you think he understood that he was discharged from the public service?

A. I am not certain that he understood it so, but that was my meaning, as I
was busy at the time, and did not explain myself more particularly. I had
usually given written instructions, but did not give Jordan any, and for this
reason I thought he understood he was discharged from the public service.

Q. Were these wagons drawn from the state of Pennsylvania for the public
service?

A. Yes.

Q. Was not a great demand made on the state of Pennsylvania by you, about that
time, or a short time previous to it, for wagons for the public service?

A. Yes, for a considerable number, but the number I do not recollect, in
consequence of applications made from different departments to me for that
purpose.

Q. Were these wagons part of the number that were demanded?

A. I believe they were.

Q. Did general Arnold know of there having been a great demand made on the
state for wagons, when he applied to you for a number of them?

A. I believe he did.

Q. Did you consider general Arnold's application to you for wagons as a
request, or an official order?

A. General Arnold being commanding officer in the state, he made that request
to me, and I conceived it as my duty to oblige him as my superior officer in
every thing in my power, which I would not have done to any others officer in
the united states, who was then present. General Arnold having made that
request to me, and telling me the reason, that it was to remove property that
was likely to fall into the hands of the enemy, I complied with it, thinking it
was my duty to do so, he paying all the expense.

Q. Were not general Arnold's orders during his command in Philadelphia
generally couched in terms of request or desire?

A. They were generally polite, and such as one gentleman would write to
another.

Q. Did you conceive that you would have been accountable officially to general
Arnold for your conduct, had you refused a compliance with his request for the
wagons?

A. I did not consider that matter at the time the request was made.

Q. Did you conceive yourself at liberty either to comply with the request or
refuse it?

A. From the request being frequently repeated, I conceived that I would not
refuse it without incurring his displeasure, as commanding officer.

Q. Had you thought the request official, would you not have complied with it
without a repetition?

A. Had it been communicated to me in writing, I should have complied with it
immediately.

Q. court. Did you think the refusal of the request would or could have been
treated as a disobedience of orders?

A. I did not think of it in that point of view at all. General Arnold having
requested of me wagons to bring off property them in danger of falling into
the hands of the enemy, I conceived it my duty to let him have them, as soon as
it could be done without injury to the public service, be paying the whole
expense.

Q. Did you put these wagons into general Arnold's hands in the usual course
of your official business?

A. General Arnold having requested of me wagons to bring off property then in
danger of falling into the hands of the enemy, I conceived it my duty to let
him have them, as soon as it could be done, without injury to the public
service, he paying the whole expense.

Q. Did not the wagon master of the state of Pennsylvania, in his letters,
tell you, the wagons could not go out of the state, and remonstrate against
the great call?

A. There was a hundred and fifty wagons called for from the quarter master of
the state of Jersey; the time I do not recollect, but believe it to be some
weeks before Jordan's wagons were sent to Eggharbour. Upon that request being
made to furnish them the wagon master general of the state of Pennsylvania
remonstrated against the great call for wagons, and gave as a reason that no
wagons were to be sent to the state of Jersey, to carry stores from thence to
the army, in consequence of which, none were sent to my knowledge.

Q. Do you know whether general Arnold knew of this remonstrance?

A. I believe he did, but cannot be certain of it.

Q. What reasons had you to suppose the general knew of the remonstrance?

A. No other than that the general was usually acquainted with every
transaction I was, in the department, of that nature, and this matter was much
talked of, not in his presence that I recollect; and I believe some of the
delegates of the state of Pennsylvania had a meeting with the wagon master
general on that subject.

Q. by general Arnold. Don't you recollect when I applied for the wagons, that
I requested the favor of you, if they could not be spared from the public
service, to let your people hire me private wagons?

A. At one time when you spoke to me upon the subject, you mentioned the words
than you have now mentioned, and I told you it was impossible it could be done,
or I would do it with pleasure. You then said, as soon as they could be spared
from public service, you would be glad to have them.

Q. When you sent the wagon master Jordan to general Arnold, did you inform
general Arnold that he was in public service with the wagons?

A. I sent no notice to general Arnold at all; only told the wagon master to
call on him for his instructions, and that he would send him to the Jerseys and
pay him.

Q. Had Jordan refused a compliance with your orders to go to general Arnold,
would you have esteemed him accountable to you for his refusal?

A. I would not.

Q. court. Did you on reading general Arnold's note of the 30th of January,
conceive that it was general Arnold's intention that the public should pay any
part of the hire of Jordan's wagons?

A. I conceived from general Arnold's note, that he thought he only ought to
pay for the time the waggoners were sent to him until the day they returned;
but my opinion was, that he should pay from the time the wagons were called
out into public service until they returned home. But I did not conceive that
general Arnold meant by that, that the public should pay any part, but that it
was a mistake in the manner of calculating the pay.

Q. If you conceived that general Arnold did not expect that the public should
pay for any part of the hire of Jordan's teams, what was the reason of your
mentioning in yours of the 30th of January, 1779, that if he ordered you
should pay any part of the time due Jordan for the hire of his teams, you would
obey be order?

A. Because, as commander in chief, I should have considered his written order
for that purpose, as a sufficient voucher to produce to the public.

Q. court. Did general Arnold know any thing of the entries made in your
memorandum book, or of the alterations or obliteration made afterward?

A. Not to my knowledge.

Q. court. Were these alterations or obliterations mode in the book previous to
an inquiry being made into the general's conduct, or subsequent?

A. The alterations was made immediately after the entry; the obliteration
within a few days after the 30th of January, but the particular day I cannot
recollect.

Q. Do you know the political general characters of mr. James Seagrove, or
captain Robert Shewell, junior?

A. I know very little of either of them, but I have heard and thought before
we got into Philadelphia that they were disaffected persons. Captain Robert
Shewell, junior, was always thought to be a disaffected person. Mr. Seagrove,
at New York, paid particular respect to general Washington, and I considered
him at that time as a good whig, but his coming into Philadelphia, while the
enemy were there induced me to alter my opinion of him.

The court adjourned until to morrow eleven o'clock.

JANUARY 20.
The court met agreeable to adjournment.

Q. to colonel Mitchell. What time was Jordan's brigade of wagons to continue
in the public service, whom they were ordered out?

A. I think the law of the state, to the best of my remembrance, says thirty
days.

Q. Did Jordan's brigade of wagons or any part of them continue in the public
service, after their return from Eggharbour?

Not one of them, to my knowledge. I was afterward told, some of them came out
in another brigade, but I did not know them as such.

Q. Was the time they were employed by general Arnold considered by you, or the
wagon master of the state, as part of their tour of duty?

A. It was not considered by me, otherwise I should have detained them until it
was over; but as they were sent to general Arnold, I did not consider I had any
charge of them, not considering them to be in public service. I do not know how
the wagon master considered the time they were employed, having had no
conversation with him upon the subject, to the best of my recollection.

Q. In what manner were wagons usually discharged from the public service,
after they had completed their tour of duty?

A. By paying them for the time they served, and letting them go home. No
written discharge being given.

Q. How long had mr. Jordan been in town with the wagons under his care,
before he was ordered by you to go to general Arnold for instructions?

A. To the best of my recollection, he was ordered to go to general Arnold for
instructions the morning I knew of his arrival, but the hour of the day I do
not recollect.

Q. Did you not order Jordan to proceed with his wagons to one of the public
stores, on his arrival in town, to take a load of stores for camp?

A. To the best of my recollection or knowledge, I did not.

Q. by general Arnold. When I applied for the wagons, did not you tell me,
that there were frequently public wagons lying idle in town, when provisions
did not arrive to load them, as expected, in which case, they could be spared
and it would be a saving to the public, as they were obliged to pay for the
hire of the wagons when called out, whether they were employed or not?

A. I do not recollect my telling you so, but the circumstances have happened.
At that time there were no more wagons called for from the state, but what
could be employed; but a number of continental teams coming in, which I did not
expect, enabled me to let you have the wagons at that time.

With respect to the last charge, dr. Gardener was produced by the judge
advocate, and sworn, upon his being desired to give the court what information
he was possessed of concerning it: he said as follows;

That upon the return of Jordan's brigade of wagons from Eggharbour to
Philadelphia, he then being in the city, upon public business, was called upon
by some persons belonging to the brigade, to visit a sick waggoner; be went
with them to the continental yard, where the wagons were standing, and finding
the man very ill, in the first stage of a nervous fever, he proposed giving him
some medicines, and at the same time advised them to send him home, as he, the
deponent, supposed his disorder would be tedious. Some difficulties arising
with respect to the method of sending him, they at length agreed to try, if the
whole brigade could obtain a temporary discharge, upon their promising to
return again in a short time, and perform the remainder of their tour. They
told him, they did apply, and were accordingly discharged or permitted to
return, upon the aforesaid condition. Sometime afterward, a complaint was made
by col. Young, wagon master general of the state of Pennsylvania, to some
members of the general assembly, then sitting, with respect to some abuses of
the wagons, called out under the law for public service, being employed in
private service, and particularly with respect to the misapplication of
Jordan's brigade, in removing private property from Eggharbour, and at the same
time drawing forage and rations from the public magazines. The members seemed
disposed to have taken up the matter, but being about to rise in a short time,
and thinking that the matter might be taken up in another channel, some of the
members advised colonel Young to lay the case before the executive authority of
the state, which he, the deponent, afterward heard he did. He then heard but
little more of the matter, 'till, he thinks, in the latter end of January, or
the beginning of February, when Jordan called at his house in Philadelphia, and
told him, that he had considerable delays in receiving pay for the service of
his brigade last fall, and requesting his advice as a friend, what steps would
be most advisable for him to take, to have the matter settled. He, the
deponent, asked him for his papers; he showed him two pay rolls, or one altered
pay roll; one charged to the united states, and the other charged to general
Arnold. The latter, or the alteration, Jordan told him he made in consequence
of colonel Mitchell's directions. He likewise showed him, (the deponent) his
orders from general Arnold, signed by a mr. Franks as one of his aides. He
asked Jordan what reason general Arnold gave for not discharging the debt. He
answered, that general Arnold was not willing to pay for more than six or seven
days service, which was the time he was performing his journey from
Philadelphia to Eggharbour and back again. He advised Jordan to apply to the
executive authority of the state, and accordingly went with him to mr. Bryan's,
who was then vice president of the state. He likewise accompanied the vice
president, and mr. Clingan, one of the delegates of the state of Pennsylvania,
and Jordan, to the president's.

Q. Had you any other information that Jordan's brigade of wagons was
discharged from the public service, or permitted to return, upon their
promising to return again in a short time and perform their tour of duty, but
what you had from the waggoners?

A. None.

Q. court. Do you know to whom they applied for permission to return home?

A. I do not; but I was present when they made the agreement to apply, and they
agreed to apply to colonel Mitchell.

Q. court. Do you know whether Jordan's brigade returned to complete their tour
of duty?

A. Not as Jordan's brigade. One of the waggoners being sick, and Jordan's
quitting the service at that time, several of the waggoners came out under
another wagon master; but I cannot say whether they came out to complete their
former tour of duty or not.

Q. by general Arnold. Did Jesse Jordan inform you that I had refused him
payment for the hire of his wagons?

A. Jesse Jordan informed me that he went to colonel Mitchell to get his pay,
having his pay roll drawn in its usual form; that colonel Mitchell informed him
that the pay roll was wrong, that the united states were charged, but you ought
only to be charged; that agreeable to colonel Mitchell's orders he altered the
pay roll or drew a new one, I cannot tell which, in which he charged you
instead of the united states; that after the pay roll was made out in that
manner, colonel Mitchell gave him a note to you, and desired him to call on
you, which he said he delivered to you, and when be called, you refused paying
him for the number of days charged in the pay roll, which were twelve or
thirteen, and made some difficulties as to paying him for six or seven days;
that he then returned to colonel Mitchell with a note or message from you, with
respect to the number of days he was in service; that when he came to colonel
Mitchell he again sent him back to you; not finding you at home, he returned to
colonel Mitchell's, and after telling him of it, Jordan said he would give over
any attempts to get the money in that manner; that he was employed by Mr. Boyd,
and would apply to him about it; upon which colonel Mitchell told him he must
not attempt to go away without settling it, or he would put him in the guard
house; he further told me, he put his papers quietly in his pocket and slipped
off, being fearful that he should be put in the guard house, and he told me he
did not make any other attempt to get payment at that time.

Q. by general Arnold. Did you not understand that there was some intimation
given by some of the council to colonel Boyd, colonel Young, or Jordan, or some
other person, to make a complaint respecting the wagons; or was the complaint
made without the knowledge or desire of the council or some member of it?

A. No member of the council, to my knowledge, influenced any person to make
the complaint.

Q. by do. Do you know whether Jesse Jordan called on the president and council
voluntarily, or was sent for when he was paid a sum of money for the hire of
his wagons?

A. I believe he came voluntarily.

Q. by do. Do you know whether the president or any member of the council
advised or wrote a letter to Jordan desiring him to make out his account, and
charge eighty pounds for each wagon, and to apply to the attorney general to
commence an action for the money?

A. I do not.

The judge advocate, in addition to the other evidence before the court,
desired permission to produce a certificate of the speaker of the house of
assembly of the state of Pennsylvania, to show how the complaint by the
executive council of the state of Pennsylvania against major general Arnold,
for employing Jesse Jordan's brigade of wagons, originated, which was granted.
The certificate was produced, and authenticated by dr. Gardner. On being read,
it is as follows:

THIS is to certify, that some time in the fall of the year 1778, during the
sitting of the house of assembly, and near the close thereof, James Young, esquire
wagon master general of the state, applied to me as speaker of the house,
informing, that he had proof of a brigade of wagons, called out under the law
of the state, being employed for private purposes; at the same time requesting
that a supplement might be made to the law, to prevent like abuses in future.
But as the house was greatly hurried with other important business, and were
anxious to rise, I mentioned the matter to his excellency the president, and
some other members of the council, who thought it would be best for the wagon
master to lay the affair before council in writing; in consequence of which,
some weeks after, information was given to council.

JOHN BAYARD.
Philadelphia, Jan. 11, 1780.
The court adjourned until to morrow eleven o'clock.

JANUARY 21.
The court met agreeable to adjournment.

Mr. Nicholson was produced by the judge advocate relative to the second charge
against the general and sworn. After he was examined, the judge advocate moved
that the matters he mentioned be not inserted in the proceedings of the court,
as not applying to the charge against the general. The court having considered
them were of opinion, that they did not apply to the charge against the
general, and should not be inserted in the proceedings.

The evidence being closed, major general Arnold addressed the court, as
follows:

Mr. president, and gentlemen of this honorable court,
I APPEAR before you, to answer charges brought against me by the late supreme
executive council of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It is disagreeable to be
accused; but when an accusation is made, I feel it a great source of
consolation, to have an opportunity of being tried by gentlemen, whose delicate
and refined sensations of honor, will lead them to entertain similar
sentiments concerning those who accuse unjustly, and those who are justly
accused. In the former case, your feelings revolt against the conduct of the
prosecutors; in the latter, against those who are deserved objects of a
prosecution. Whether those feelings will be directed against me, or against
those, whose charges have brought me before you, will be known by your just and
impartial determination of this cause.

When the present necessary war against Great Britain commenced, I was in easy
circumstances, and enjoyed a fair prospect of improving them. I was happy in
domestic connections, and blessed with a rising family, who claimed my care and
attention. The liberties of my country were in danger. The voice of my country
called upon all her faithful sons to join in her defense. With cheerfulness I
obeyed the call. I sacrificed domestic case and happiness to the service of my
country, and in her service have I sacrificed a great part of a handsome
fortune. I was one of the first that appeared in the field; and from that time,
to the present hour, have not abandoned her service.

When one is charged with practices, which his soul abhors, and which conscious
innocence tells him, he has never committed, an honest indignation will draw
from him expressions in his own favor, which on other occasions, might be
ascribed to an ostentatious turn of mind. The part which I have acted in the
American cause, has been acknowledged by our friends, and by our enemies, to
have been far from an indifferent one. My time, my fortune, and my person have
been devoted to my country, in this war; and, if the sentiments of those who
are supreme in the united states, in civil and military affairs, are allowed to
have any weight, my time, my fortune, and my person have not been devoted in
vain. You will indulge me, gentlemen, while I lay before you some honorable
testimonies, which congress, and the commander in chief of the armies of the
united states, have been pleased to give of my conduct. The place where I now
stand justifies me in producing them.

Valley Forge, 7th May, 1778. Dear sir,
A GENTLEMAN of France having very obligingly sent me three sets of epaulets
and sword knots, two of which, professedly, to be disposed of to any friend I
should choose; I take the liberty of presenting them to you and general
Lincoln, as a testimony of my sincere regard and approbation of your conduct.

I have been informed by a brigade major of general Huntington, of your
intention of repairing to camp shortly; but notwithstanding my wish to see you,
I must beg that you will run no hazard by coming out too soon.

I am sincerely and affectionately, Your obedient, G. WASHINGTON.

Head quarters, Morris Town, May 8th, 1777. Dear sir,
I AM happy to find, that a late resolve of congress, of the 2d instant, has
restored you to the continental army.

The importance of the post at Peek's Kill, and its apendages, has become so
great, that it is now necessary to have a major general appointed to the
command of it.

You will therefore immediately repair to that post, and take charge of it,
'till a general arrangement of the army can be affected, and the proper
province of every officer assigned.

I am, sir, Your most obedient servant, G. WASHINGTON.

In CONGRESS, 11th July, 1777.
Ordered,

THAT an extract of general Washington's letter of the 10th, so far as it
relates to general Arnold, be sent to him; and that he be directed to repair
immediately to head quarters, and follow the orders of general Washington.

Extract from the minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, secretary.

Extract of a letter from general Washington to congress, dated Morris Town,
July 10th, 1777.
"IF the event mentioned by general Schuyler should not have happened, we
cannot doubt, but general Burgoyne has come up the lake, determined, if
possible, to carry his point, I mean, to possess himself of our posts in that
quarter, and to push his arms further. Supposing this not to have happened, as
our continental levies are so deficient in their number, our security and
safety will require, that aids from the militia should be called forth, in
cases of emergency. If it has, there is now as absolute necessity for their
turning out to check general Burgoyne's progress, or the most disagreeable
consequences may be apprehended. Upon this occasion, I would take the liberty
to suggest to congress, the propriety of sending an active, spirited officer to
conduct and lead them on. If general Arnold has settled his affairs, and can be
spared from Philadelphia, I would recommend him for this business, and that he
should immediately set out for the northern department. He is active, judicious
and brave, and an officer in whom the militia will repose great confidence.
Besides this, he is well acquainted with that country, and with the routs and
most important passes and defiles in it. I do not think he can render more
signal services, or be more usefully employed at this time, than in this way. I
am persuaded his presence and activity will animate the militia greatly, and
spur them on to a becoming conduct. I could wish him to be engaged in a more
agreeable service, to be with better troops; but circumstances call for his
exertions in this way, and I have no doubt of his adding much to the honor he
has already acquired."

Examined with the original.

GEO. BOND, dep. sec. of congress.

In CONGRESS, May 20, 1777.
Resolved, That the quarter master general, be directed to procure a horse, and
present the same properly caparisoned, to major general Arnold, in the name of
this congress, as a token of their approbation of his gallant conduct, in the
action against the enemy, in their late enterprise to Danbury, in which general
Arnold had one horse killed under him, and another wounded.

In CONGRESS, November 4th, 1777.
Resolved, That the thanks of congress, in their own name, and in behalf of the
inhabitants of the thirteen united states be presented to major general Gates,
commander in chief of the northern department, and to majors general Lincoln
and Arnold, and the rest of the officers and troops under his command, for
their brave and successful efforts, in support of the independence of their
country, whereby an army of the enemy of ten thousand men, have been totally
defeated; one large detachment of it, strongly posted and entrenched, having
been conquered at Bennington; another repulsed with loss and disgrace from sort
Schuyler; and the main army of six thousand men, under lieutenant general
Burgoyne, after being beaten in different actions, and driven from a formidable
post and strong entrenchments, reduced to the necessity of surrendering
themselves upon terms honorable and advantageous to these states, on the 17th
day of October last, to major general Gates.

If these testimonies have any foundation in truth (and I believe the authority
of those who gave them will be thought at least equal to that of those who have
spoke, and wrote, and published concerning me in a very different manner) is it
probable that after having acquired some little reputation, and after having
gained the favorable opinion of those, whose favorable opinion it is an
honor to gain, I should all at once sink into a course of conduct equally
unworthy of the patriot and soldier? No pains have been spared, no artifice has
been left untried to persuade the public that this has been the case. Uncommon
assiduity has been employed in propagating suspicions, invectives, and slanders
to the prejudice of my character. The presses of Philadelphia have groaned
under libels against me, charges have been published, and officially
transmitted to the different states, (and to many parts of Europe, as I am
informed) before they were regularly exhibited, and long before I could have an
opportunity of refuting them; and indeed every method that men ingeniously
wicked could invent, has been practiced to blast and destroy my character. Such
a vile prostitution of power, and such instances of glaring tyranny and
injustice, I believe are unprecedented in the annals of any free people. I have
long and impatiently wished for an opportunity of vindicating my reputation,
and have frequently applied for it; but the situation of affairs at the
beginning and during the continuance of the campaign, necessarily, and against
the general's inclination, prevented it, until now. But now it is happily
arrived, and I have the most sanguine hopes of being able to avail myself of
it, by satisfying you, and, through your sentence, by satisfying the world,
that my conduct and character have been most unwarrantably traduced, and that
the charges brought against me are, false, malicious, and scandalous.

The first charge is, Granting a protection, etc. etc.

In answer, The permission was given on the fourth day of June 1778, when,
though I had no formal instructions from the general to take the command in
Philadelphia, I had intimations given me that I should be found upon for that
appointment. The gentleman who applied for the protection in behalf of himself
and company, was not them residing in the city with the enemy; he had taken the
oath of allegiance to the state of Pennsylvania, required by its laws, as
appeared by a certificate which he produced to me. What his political
character, and those of the others, in whose behalf he applied to me, were, I
pretend not to ascertain; nor do I mean to become their advocate, any further
than the justice due to an injured character requires. I think it has been
clearly proved by the testimony of several gentlemen (not parties in this
matter) that the general character of those gentlemen was unexceptionable, some
of them had taken an active part in favor of these states; and the tenor of
their conduct since, will I presume justify a favorable opinion of them. It is
enough for me to show that their intentions with regard to this vessel and
cargo seemed to be upright, and that the design of saving them for the use of
the citizens of the united states, appeared to be laudable, instead of being
reprehensible. This appears evident from the depositions of mr. Collins, mr.
Beveridge, and colonel Proctor.

Why the protection is viewed as an indignity to the authority of the state of
Pennsylvania, I own I cannot discover. This president and council of that state
were then in Lancaster; the pass to the vessel was to "sail into any of the
ports of the united states of America." To sail into the port of Philadelphia
was not the object, the vessel was there already. If there was an encroachment
upon the authority of any state, it must have been some other than the state of
Pennsylvania. The vessel sailed into one of the ports of New Jersey; the
government of that state, though far from being insensible to its honor, has
never complained of the indignity offered to it by my protection; a jury of
that state acquitted the vessel by their verdict; and the judge of admiralty of
that states confirmed the verdict by his decree, which is in evidence before
this honorable court.

It is part of this charge that the permission was granted without the
knowledge of the commander in chief, though then present. I think it peculiarly
unfortunate that the armies of the united states have a gentleman at their
hand, who knows so little about his own honor, or regards it so little, as to
say the president and council of Pennsylvania under the necessity of stepping
forth in its defense, perhaps it may be of use to hint,

Non tali auxili^ aget, n^c defenseribus istis.

The general is invested with power, and he possesses spirit to check and to
punish every instance of disrespect shown to his authority; but he will not
prostitute his power by exerting it upon a trifling occasion; far less will be
pervert it when no occasion is given at all.

His excellency knew, and you, gentlemen, well know, it has been customary for
general officers of the army to grant passes, protections for persons and
property, to the inhabitants of the united states, who appeared friendly to the
same. The utility of the measure, which was evident in the present case,
without any precedent, I conceive to be a sufficient justification. The
protection was designed only to prevent the soldiery from plundering the vessel
and cargo, coming from the enemy, that proper authority might take cognizance
of the matter. I must beg leave to mention a resolution of congress in point. I
do not recollect the date. It was, however, previous to the pass. That
honorable body therein promise, to all persons in the enemy's service, for
their encouragement and reward, all vessels and cargoes that they shall seize
upon, in possession of the enemy, and bring into any of the united states. If
such reward is given to our enemies, can it be esteemed criminal to protect the
property of the citizens of these united states, when coming from the enemy.
Certainly not. At the time the protection was given, I had no doubt of the
right or propriety of giving it. I am now confirmed in my opinion, and that the
resolution of congress I have mentioned, warrants the measure. But, it strictly
considering the matter, it shall be thought that I exceeded my power, by
granting the protection, I hope his excellency geneneral Washington, and this
honorable court, will do me the justice to believe, that it was not out of any
disrespect to his authority, but an error in judgment, as I was convinced at
the time I had a right to grant the pass; and had I refused I should have
thought myself culpable.

The second-charge consists in having shut up the shops and stores on my
arrival in the city, so as even to prevent officers of the army from
purchasing, while I privately made considerable purchases for my own use, as is
alleged and believed.

The resolution of congress, directs me to take early and proper care to
prevent the removal, transfer, or sale of any goods, wares, or merchandise, in
the possession of the inhabitants of the city, until the property of the same
shall be ascertained by a joint committee, consisting of persons appointed by
congress, and of persons appointed by the supreme executive council of the
state of Pennsylvania. My instructions from the general mention, that I will
find the objects of my command specified in the resolution of congress, and
that the means of executing the powers vested in me were left to my own
judgment. How could I better prevent the removal, transfer, or sale of any
goods, wares and merchandise, in the possession of the inhabitants of the city,
"than by shutting up the shops and stores?"

If "the officers of the army were prevented from purchasing," it was because
the sale of any goods was directed by congress to be prevented, in which the
sale of goods to officers was necessarily included; and it was in order (as is
stated in the proclamation prohibiting the removal, sale, or transfer of goods)
that the quarter master, commissary and clothier generals, might contract for
such goods, as were wanted for the use of the army.

What I have already mentioned, renders it surprising that the shutting up the
shops and stores should be made a charge against me by any man, or body of men:
what I am going to mention, renders it peculiarly surprising that this charge
should he made against me by the gentleman, who is now president of the state
of Pennsylvania. It is in evidence before this honorable court, that this very
gentleman proposed to one of my aids, that he, even before my arrival in town,
should publish an order to prevent the selling any goods or merchandise; that
this very gentleman was urgent to have this done; that this very gentleman,
after my arrival in town, drew up a proclamation for that purpose, which was
presented to me. The same gentleman now exhibits the same measure as an article
of accusation against me.

The last part of this charge is of a serious nature instead: it is that, while
I prohibited others from purchasing, I privately made considerable purchases
for my own benefit, "as is alleged and believed:" if this part of the charge
is true, I stand confessed, in the presence of this honorable court, his
vilest of men; I stand stigmatized with indelible disgrace, the disgrace of
having abused an appointment of high trust and importance, to accomplish the
meanest and most unworthy purposes: the blood I have spent in defense of my
country, will be insufficient to obliterate the stain.

But if this part of the charge is void of truth; if it has not even the
semblance of truth, what shall I say of my accusers? what epithets will
characterize their conduct, the sentence of this honorable court will soon
determine.

It is "ALLEGED and BELIEVED," that I privately made considerable purchases
for my own benefit. I am not conversant in the study of jurisprudence; but I
have always understood, that public charges ought to have some other foundation
to rest upon, than mere unsupported allegation and belief. Who " allege and
believe" this accusations? None, I trust, but the president and council of
Pennsylvania; because, I trust, none else would allege and believe any thing
tending to ruin a character, without sufficient evidence. Where is the evidence
of this accusation? I call upon any accusers to produce it: I call upon them to
produce it, under the pain of being held forth to the world, and to posterity,
upon the proceedings of this court, as public defamers and murderers of
reputation.

They have indeed produced the evidence of a certain colonel Fitzgerald, to
prove that he saw an anonimous paper in the hands of major Franks, one of my
adds. I shall take no notice of the paper he alludes to, as it cannot be deemed
a proof, or admitted as evidence; but the manner of his procuring a sight of
the paper, I cannot help taking notice of: lodging in the same house with major
Franks, in his absence, colonel Fitzgerald's curiosity prompted him to examine
major Franks's papers, when he stumbled upon a secret too big for him to keep.
Was not this a gross violation of the confidence subsisting between gentlemen?
but what shall I say of the use this gentleman made of his secret? I will not
say it was a disgrace to the character of a soldier and gentleman. I will leave
it to the gentleman's own feeling, which (if he in not callous) will say more
to him than I can possibly do on the subject. In the nature of things, it is
impossible for me to prove, by positive and direct evidence, the negative side
of a charge: but I have done all that in the nature of things is possible.

On the honor of a gentleman and soldier, I declare to gentlemen and soldiers,
that the charge is false.

My aids de camp were acquainted with my transactions, and had access to my
papers: My invoice, my minute and account books, were always open to their
inspection. Could I have made considerable purchases, without their knowledge?
and yet they did not know of my making any purchases of goods of any kind,
directly or indirectly; and they had every reason to think, that no such
purchases were made, either by me or my agents, except a few trifling articles
to furnish my table, and for my family's use; most of which were supplied me by
the quarter master, commissary and clothier generals.

If I made considerable purchases, considerable sales must have been made to me
by some person in Philadelphia. Why are not these persons produced? Have my
prosecutors so little power and influence in that city, as to be unable to
furnish evidence of the truth?

With respect to the third charge of the supreme executive council of the state
of Pennsylvania, I think it necessary to make some observations on it, because
it is evidently calculated, by a false coloring of a trifling and innocent
transaction, to subject me to the prejudice of the freemen of these states, and
particularly of the militia of the state of Pennsylvania.

I am charged with imposing menial offices upon the sons of freemen of this
state, when called forth by desire of congress to perform militia duty; and
when remonstrated to thereupon, justifying myself in writing, upon the ground
of having power so to do. The letters which are in evidence before this
honorable court, which passed between mr. secretary Matlack and myself, will
explain the sole transaction, upon which this general accusation is founded.

By what strained construction the sentiments which I have expressed, "that
when a citizen assumes the character of a soldier, the former was entirely lost
in the latter," should be extended to a justification of myself, on the mere
principal of power, is somewhat extraordinary. My opinion in this matter is
confirmed, not only by the sentiments of many of the most enlightened patrons
of liberty in this and other countries, but sanctified by the militia law of
several free states, both in Europe and America, particularly Switzerland and
the state of New York, where (if I am not mistaken) the militia of the latter,
when called forth into continental service, are subjected to the same rules of
discipline, with the troops of the united states; the character and conduct of
that militia prove the policy of this principle. My ambition is to deserve the
good opinion of the militia of these states, not only because I respect their
character and their exertions, but because their confidence in me may (as I
flatter myself it has hitherto been) prove beneficial to the general cause of
America: but having no local politics to bias my voice or my conduct, I leave
it to others to wriggle themselves into a temporary popularity, by
assassinating the reputation of innocent persons, and endeavoring to render
odious a principle, the maintenance of which is essential to the good
discipline of the militia, and consequently to the safety of these states. I
flatter myself the time is not far off, when, by the glorious establishment of
our independence, I shall again return into the mass of citizens: it is a period
I look forward to with anxiety; I shall then cheerfully submit as a citizen, to
be governed by the same principle of subordination, which has been tortured
into a wanton exertion of arbitrary power.

This insinuation comes, in my opinion, with an ill grace from the state of
Pennsylvania, in whose more immediate defense I sacrificed my feelings as a
soldier, when I conceived them incompatible with the duties of a citizen, and
the welfare of that state.

By a resolution of congress, I found myself superseded (in consequence of a
new mode of appointment of general officers) by several who were my juniors in
service; those who know the feelings of an officer, (whose utmost ambition is
the good opinion of his country) must judge what my sensations were at this
apparent mark of neglect. I repaired to the city of Philadelphia in the month
of May, 1777, in order either to attain a restoration of my rank, or a
permission to resign my commission; during this interval, the van of general
Howe's army advanced, by a rapid march, to Somerset court house, with a view
(as was then generally supposed) to penetrate to the city of Philadelphia.

Notwithstanding I had been superseded, and my feelings as an officer wounded,
yet, on finding the state was in imminent danger from the designs of the enemy.
I sacrificed those feelings, and with alacrity put myself at the head of the
militia, who were collected to oppose the enemy, determined to exert myself for
the benefit of the public, although I conceived myself injured by their
representatives. How far the good countenance of the militia under my command
operated, in deterring general How from marching to the city of Philadelphia,
I will not pretend to say; certain it is, he altered his route.

What returns I have met with from the state of Pennsylvania, I leave to
themselves to judge, in the cool hour of reflection, which (notwithstanding the
phrenzy of party, and the pains so industriously taken to support a clamor
against me) must sooner or later arise.

I will conclude this subject, by reading a letter from mr. Matlack, received
subsequent to the letters which have been already read, which I consider as an
insult and indignity. The letter will speak for itself; the spirit and tendency
of it are very obvious.

Philadelphia, March 17th 1779. Sir,
IT appears to me proper to communicate to you, that I shall, on Saturday
evening next, lay before a respectable number of citizens, the several letters
which have passed between you and myself, relating to the orders delivered by
one of your aids to my son. My intention is, to consult with them on the
measures necessary to prevent effectually, a like insult being offered by you,
to any other citizen of this state. I say, by you, because it is intimated in
your letter, of the 12th of October, that the matter lies between your major
and my son; whereas the order being your order, and my son several years under
age, I conceive it to lie between yourself and me. And am, sir,

Your very humble servant, T. MATLACK.

To major general Arnold.

The fourth charge is evidently triable only in a court of common law, I should
not therefore notice it at present, did it not add to the torrent of aspersion
which has been poured forth against me, and which, if not checked, may leave
upon the minds of fellow soldiers and citizens, disagreable impressions, even
though I should be acquitted of the charges which are cognizable by the law
martial. I therefore beg leave to lay before the court, a certified copy of an
indictment preferred against me for this supposed offense, in behalf of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with the jurors return.

I EDWARD BURD, prothonotary of the supreme court, and of the courts of oyer
and terminer, and general gaol delivery, in and of the common wealth of
Pennsylvania, do hereby certify, That at a court of oyer and terminer, and
general gaol delivery, held at Philadelphia, for the city and county of
Philadelphia, the fifth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and seventy nine, before the honorable Thomas Mc Kean, William
Augustus Atlee, and John Evans, esquires, justices of the said several courts,
a bill was preferred to the grand inquest (who were then and there duly
summoned, impanelled, returned, sworn, and affirmed, to inquire for the said
commonwealth, and for the said city and county of Philadelphia) in the
following words and figures, to wit,

Philadelphia, oyer and terminer, April sessions, 1779.
Philadelphia county, ss.
The jurors for the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, upon their oaths and
affirmations, do present, That Benedict Arnold, esquire late of the city of
Philadelphia, in the county aforesaid, on the first day of December, in the
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy eight, with force and
arms, at the city aforesaid, in the county aforesaid, did unjustly and
unlawfully maintain and uphold a certain suit, which was then depending in the
court of admiralty of this state, before the honorable George Ross, esquire judge
of the same court, and in which captain Thomas Houston, commander of the
brigantine of war, the Convention, in behalf of himself, and all other persons
interested or concerned in the said brigantine, was libeliant against the sloop
or vessel called the Active, her tackle, apparel, furniture, and cargo, and
Gideon Olmsted, Artemas White, Aquila Rumsdale, and David Clark, for
themselves, and also captain James Josiah, commander of the private sloop of
war, the Le Gerard, in behalf of himself, and all others concerned in the said
private sloop of war, or interested therein, were severally claimants, on the
behalf of them, the said Gideon Olmsted, Artemas White, Aquila Rumsdale, and
David Clark, against the said Thomas Houston and James Josiah, to the manifest
hindrance and disturbance of justice, in contempt of this commonwealth, to the
great damage of the said Thomas Houston and James Josiah, and against the peace
and dignity of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

JONA. D. SERGEANT, at. genesis

Which said bill was then and there returned by the said grand inquest
ignoramus; whereupon all and singular the premises being seen, and by the said
justices here fully understood, it is ordered by the said justices, that the
said Benedict Arnold, esquire be discharged; and he was discharged accordingly.

In testimony whereof, I have hereto set my hand, and the seal of the said
supreme court, the twenty second day of November, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and seventy nine.

(L. S.) EDW. BURD, pro. sup. court.

Notwithstanding all the influence of the ruling powers of Pennsylvania, which
must be well known by several of this honorable court; the unexampled method
adopted by the council to prejudice the minds of the citizens against me,
previous to a trial, and the daily calumnies invented and industriously
circulated to prevent the popular heat from subsiding; the impartiality and
good sense of a body of freemen of the city of Philadelphia, were impregnable
to all the arts made use of to poison the fountain of justice. And here I
cannot but congratulate my countrymen upon the glorious effects of the
exertions we have made, to establish the liberties of ourselves, and posterity,
upon the firm basis of equal laws. Had it not been for the grand bulwark
against the tyranny of rulers, the trial by peers, it is easy to forsee, from
the spirit of those who have been my accusers, what must have been my fate.
When I reflect on this circumstance, I contemplate, with a grateful pleasure,
the scars I have received in defense of a system of government, the excellence
of which, though frequently before the subject of my speculation, is now
brought home to my feelings.

It is difficult to account for the extraordinary mode pursued by the state of
Pennsylvania, to damn my reputation, and for the asperity with which I was
persecuted, on any other principle, than one, by which states, as well as
individuals, are too often tempted to commit the most flagrant acts of
injustice, I mean interest. The sloop Active, which was the object of the suit,
which I was accused of unlawfully maintaining, was taken by part of the crew of
the vessel, who were Americans, who rose upon the rest, and after having
confined the captain and others, were bringing her into port. In this situation
she was boarded by a vessel belonging to the state of Pennsylvania, and brought
in, and afterward libelled as a prize taken by themselves. The original
captors, who were (some of them) born in Connecticut, my native country, with
whose connections I was acquainted, applied to me for my assistance in
obtaining them justice. I assisted them both with my advice, my time, and my
purse; and though three fourths of the vessel and cargo were, by the lower
court of admiralty for the state of Pennsylvania, adjudged to the state
captors, this sentence was, by an unanimous opinion of a court of appeals,
reversed and adjudged to those whom I patronized, as appears by their decree,
which I beg leave to read, with their report to congress, and the resolutions
of congress thereupon.

In the court of commissioners of appeal for the united states of America.
Thomas Houston, esquire etc. app. adv. Gideon Olmsted, etc. appts.
AT a court held at the state house, in the city of Philadelphia, on the
twelfth day of December, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy eight, before the honorable William Henry Drayton, William Ellery,
John Henry the younger, and Oliver Ellsworth, esqrs. commissioners appointed by
the honorable congress, to hear, try, and determine all appeals from the
courts of Admiralty of the several American states to congress, came the
parties, as well appellants as appellees, in the above cause, by their
respective advocates; and after solemn argument, and full hearing of the said
parties, by their said advocates, the said court took time to consider thereof,
and held the same under advisement, until the fifteenth day of December
aforesaid.

At which day, the said court being again met, proceeded to the publication of
their definitive sentence or decree, upon the said appeal; which being read and
filed, is in the words following, to wit,

Appeal from the court of admiralty of the state of Pennsylvania. Thomas
Houston, esquire etc. app. adv. Gideon Olmsted, etc. appts. and claimants of the
sloop Active, her cargo, etc.
WE the commissioners appointed by the honorable congress of the united states
of America, to hear, try, and determine all appeals from the courts of
admiralty of the several states aforesaid, to congress, having heard and fully
considered, as well all and singular the matters and things set forth and
contained in the record or minute of the proceedings of the court aforesaid, in
the above cause, as the arguments of the advocates of the respective parties in
the above appeal, do thereupon adjudge and decree, That the judgment or
sentence of the court of admiralty aforesaid, be in all its parts revoked,
reversed and annulled. And we do further decree and adjudge, That the sloop or
vessel called the Active, with the tackle, apparel and furniture, and the
goods, wares and merchandises laden and found on board her at the time of her
capture, as mentioned in the claim of Gideon Olmsted, Artemas White, Aquila
Rumsdale and David Clark, the appellants, be condemned as lawful prize to and
for the use and behoof of them, the said appellants; and that process issue out
of the court of admiralty aforesaid, commanding the marshal of the said court
to sell the said sloop Active, and her cargo, at public vendue, for the highest
price that can be gotten for the same; and after deducting the costs and
charges of the trial in the said court of admiralty, and the expenses attending
the sale of the said sloop, etc. that he pay the residue of the moneys arising
from the said sale unto the appellants aforesaid, their agent or attorney; and
we do further adjudge and decree, that the appellees pay unto the appellants in
this cause, the sum of two hundred and eighty dollars for their costs and
charges by them expended, in sustaining and supporting their said appeal.

December 15, 1778. WM. H. DRAYTON, JOHN HENRY, WILLIAM ELLERY, O. ELLSWORTH.
(Copy)


Examined with the original, GEO. BOND, dep. sec. of congress.

In CONGRESS, March, 6 1779.
THE committee to whom was referred the report of the committee on appeals of
January 19th, 1779, having, in pursuance of the instructions to them given,
examined into the causes of the refusal of the judge of the court of admiralty
for the state of Pennsylvania, to carry into execution the decree of the court
or committee of appeals, report,

That on a libel in the court of admiralty for the state of Pennsylvania, in
the case of the sloop Active, the jury found a verdict in the following words,
viz. "one fourth of the net proceeds of the sloop Active and her cargo to the
first claimants, three fourths of the net proceeds of the said sloop and her
cargo to the libellant and the second claimant, as per agreement between them;"
which verdict was confirmed by the judge of the court, and sentence passed
thereon. From this sentence or judgment and verdict, an appeal was lodged with
the secretary of congress and referred to the committee appointed by congress,
"to bear and determine finally upon all appeals brought to congress," from the
courts of admiralty of the several states:

That the said committee, after solemn argument and full hearing of the parties
by their advocates, and taking time to consider thereof, proceeded to the
publication of their definitive sentence or decree, thereby reversing the
sentence of the court of admiralty, making a new decree, and ordering process
to issue out of the court of admiralty for the state of Pennsylvania, to carry
this their decree into execution:

That the judge of the court of admiralty refused to carry into execution the
decree of the said committee on appeals, and has assigned as the reason of his
refusal, that an act of the legislature of the said state, had declared that
the finding of a jury shall establish the facts in all trials of the courts of
admiralty, without re-examination or appeal, and that an appeal is permitted
only from the decree of the judge:

That having examined the said act, which is entitled "an act for establishing
a court of admiralty," passed at a session which commenced the 4th of August,
1778, the committee find the following words, viz. "the finding of a jury shall
establish the facts, without re-examination or appeal," and in the seventh
section of the same act the following words, viz. "in all cases of captures an
appeal from the decree of the judge of admiralty of this state, shall be
allowed to the continental congress or such person or persons as they may from
time to time appoint for hearing and trying appeals."

That although congress, by their resolution of November 25th, 1775,
recommended it to the several legislatures to erect courts for the purposes of
determining concerning captures, and to provide that all trials in such cases
be had by a jury, yet it is provided that in all cases an appeal shall be
allowed to congress or to such person or persons as they shall appoint for the
trial of appeals:" whereupon

Resolved, That congress, or such person or persons as they appoint to hear and
determine appeals from from the courts of admiralty, have necessarily the power
to examine as well into decisions on facts as decisions on the law, and to
decree finally thereon, and that no finding of a jury in any court of admiralty
or court for determining the legality of captures on the high seas, can or
ought to destroy the right of appeals and the re-examination of the facts
reserved to congress:

That no act of any one state can or ought to destroy the right of appeals to
congress in the sense above declared:

That congress is by these united states vested with the supreme sovereign
power of war and peace:

That the power of executing the law of nations is essential to the sovereign
supreme power of war and peace:

That the legality of all captures on the high seas must be determined by the
law of nations:

That the authority ultimately and finally to decide on all matters and
questions touching the law of nations, does reside, and is vested in the
supreme sovereign power of war and peace:

That a control by appeal is necessary, in order to compel a just and uniform
execution of the law of nations:

That the said control must extend as well over the decisions of juries as
judges in courts for determining the legality of captures on the sea; otherwise
the juries would be possessed of the ultimate supreme power of executing the
law of nations in all cases of captures, and might at any time exercise the
same in such manner as to prevent a possibility of being controuled; a
construction which involves many inconveniences and absurdities, destroys an
essential part of the power of war and peace entrusted to congress, and would
disable the congress of the united states from giving satisfaction to foreign
nations complaining of a violation of neutralities, of treaties or other
breaches of the law of nations, and would enable a jury in any one state to
involve the united states in hostilities; a construction which for these and
many other reasons is inadmissible:

That this power of controuling by appeal the several admiralty jurisdictions
of the states has hitherto been exercised by congress, by the medium of a
committee of their own members.

Resolved, That the committee before whom was determined the appeal from the
court of admiralty for the state of Pennsylvania, in the case of the sloop
Active, was duly constituted and authorized to determine the same:

On passing this resolution, the yeas and nays being required by mr. Searle,
New Hampshire, mr. Frost, ay, ay. Massachusetts Bay, mr. S. Adams, ay, ay. mr.
Lovell, ay, ay. mr. Holten, ay, ay. Rhode Island, mr. Collins, ay, ay.
Connecticut, mr. Dyer, ay, ay. mr. Root, ay, ay. New York, mr. Jay, ay, ay. mr.
Floyd, ay, ay. New Jersey, mr. Witherspoon, no. * Pennsylvania, mr. Armstrong,
no, no. mr. Shippen, no, no. mr. Atlee, no, no. mr. Searle, no, no. mr. Mc
Clean, no, no. Maryland, mr. Plater, ay, ay. mr. Carmichael, ay, ay. mr. Henry,
ay, ay. Virginia, mr. T. Adams, ay, ay. mr. M. Smith, ay, ay. mr. R. H. Lee,
ay, ay. North Carolina, mr. Penn, ay, ay. mr. Hill, ay, ay. mr. Burke, ay, ay.
South Carolina, mr. Laurens, ay, ay. mr. Drayton, ay, ay. Georgia, mr.
Langworthy, ay, ay.

So it was resolved in the affirmative.

Resolved, That the said committee had competent jurisdiction to make thereon a
final decree, and therefore their decree ought to be carried into execution:

On this the yeas and nays being required by mr. Searle, New Hampshire, mr.
Frost, ay, ay. Massachusetts Bay, mr. S. Adams, ay, ay. mr. Lovell, ay, ay. mr.
Holten, ay, ay. Rhode Island, mr. Collins, ay, ay. Connecticut, mr. Dyer, ay,
ay. mr. Root, ay, ay. New York, mr. Jay, ay, ay. mr. Floyd, ay, ay. New Jersey,
mr. Witherspoon, ay. * Pennsylvania, mr. Armstrong, no, no. mr. Atlee, no, no.
mr. Shippen, no, no. mr. Searle, no, no. mr. Mc Clean, no, no. Maryland, mr.
Plater, ay, ay. mr. Paca, ay, ay. mr. Carmichael, ay, ay. mr. Henry, ay, ay.
Virginia, mr. T. Adams, ay, ay. mr. M. Smith, ay, ay. mr. R. H. Lee, ay, ay.
North Carolina, mr. Penn, ay, ay. mr. Hill, ay, ay. mr. Burke, ay, ay.
South Carolina, mr. Laurens, ay, ay. mr. Drayton, ay, ay. Georgia, mr.
Langworthy, ay, ay.

So it was resolved in the affirmative.

Resolved, That the general assembly of the state of Pennsylvania be requested
to appoint a committee to confer with a committee of congress on the subject of
the proceedings relative to the sloop Active, and the objections made to the
execution of the decree of the committee on appeals, to the end that proper
measures may be adopted for removing the said obstacles; and that a committee
of three be appointed to hold the said conference with the committee of the
general assembly of Pennsylvania;

The members chosen, mr. Paca, mr. Burke and mr. R. H. Lee.

This, gentlemen, is my cardinal guilt; hence proceeds the vengeance of an
interested government against me; hence the pain and anxiety I have suffered,
in seeing the fair fabric of reputation, which I have been with so much danger
and toil raising since the present war, undermined by those, whose posterity
(as well as themselves) will feel the blessed effects of my efforts, in
conjunction with you and others, in rescuing them from a tyranny of the most
cruel and debasing nature.

With respect to the fifth charge, of appropriating the wagons of the state of
Pennsylvania, when called forth upon a special emergency, last autumn, to the
transportation of private property, etc. etc.

The evidence relative to that transaction, before the court, will, I doubt
not, justify my conduct in their opinion. It has been clearly proved by the
testimony of colonel Mitchell and major Franks, that the wagons were supplied
by the deputy quarter master general upon a private request, and not considered
as in the public service, when employed. Suppose application had been made to
me, for wagons, during my command in the city of Philadelphia, for removing
property belonging to private persons, which was in danger of falling into the
hands of the enemy, and I found the same could be done without injury to the
public, should I be justified in refusing the public assistance? Certainly not.
Does then the criminality consist in removing the property, because I was
interested in it? Had the supplies for the continental army been obstructed by
this transaction, or had I endeavored to make it a public charge, my conduct
would certainly have been blame worthy; but as it evidently appears, that
neither the one or the other was the case, I flatter myself, that my conduct,
instead of being condemned by this honorable court, will be approved, and that
an honorable acquittal will follow from the facts I have proved.

What shall I say of the conduct of the president and council of Pennsylvania,
respecting the wagons? They first charge me with employing public wagons to
remove private property, insinuating, that the wagon master was refused
payment for the hire of his wagons, and that I intended to defraud the public.
It would have been but candid, had they informed the public, that Jesse Jordan
the wagon master had not been refused payment for the hire of his wagons, but
that by their influence and advice, he had been prevented calling on me for his
pay, that they might have some pretense for instituting an action and this
charge against me.

In the next instance, they wrote, or caused to be wrote, a letter to Jesse
Jordan, directing him to make out the account of the hire of his wagons,
assuring him, that if he charged eighty pounds for the hire of each wagon,
(more than double the first account which he had presented to me) they did not
doubt of his recovering the whole sum, and directed him to send his account to
the attorney general, who had orders to commence an action against me for the
same, which he accordingly did; and there is now an action against me,
depending in one of the courts of Pennsylvania, for upwards of eleven hundred
pounds, for the hire of those wagons.

Is it not very extraordinary, that I should be accused and tried before this
honorable court, for employing public wagons, and at the same time, and by
the same persons, be prosecuted in a civil court of Pennsylvania, for employing
the same wagons as private property.

As to the sixth charge, purporting, that by my recommendatory letter to
general Maxwell, to grant a pass to miss Levy to go to New York, I had violated
the resolve of congress, and usurped the authority of the state of
Pennsylvania. To attempt a serious refutation, would be as ridiculous as the
charge itself. Let the letter wrote on this occasion speak for itself. I kept
no copy of it, but well remember the purport, which was nearly as follows:

Sir,
THE bearer, miss Levy, is a young woman of a good character, who has an aged
parent that is blind, depending on her for support; she has money due to her
from people in New York, and wishes for a permission to go there for the
purpose of collecting it, for the relief and support of her mother, who will be
greatly distressed without it. I believe she will not make an ill use of a
pass, if granted to her.

I am sir, Your humble servant, M. CLARKSON.

General Maxwell.

As to the seventh charge, of an indecent and disrespectful behavior to the
council of Pennsylvania.

True it is, I refused to obey an arbitrary mandate, (to render to them an
account of my conduct) calculated to criminate myself. They complain, that by
my refusal their dignity is wounded. Had I obeyed, soldiers and citizens might
justly have said, that I had betrayed their rights, and wounded their dignity.
The very demand was an insult to common sense. I beg leave to observe, that no
one has a greater respect than myself for the civil authority, and no one is
more convinced of the necessity of supporting it. But when public bodies of men
show themselves actuated by the passions of anger, or envy, and apply their
effects to sap the character of an individual, and to render his situation
miserable, they must not think it extraordinary, if they are not treated with
all the deference which they may think their due.

It is the dignity with which an office is executed, much more than the name,
that can ever secure respect and obedience from a free people, and true dignity
consists in exercising power with wisdom, justice and moderation. Had I
experienced this, and had any unguarded expressions escaped my pen in my
letters to the president and council of Pennsylvania, I would cheerfully, in a
cooler hour of reflection, have made an acknowledgment; but they have thought
proper to take vengeance for themselves: I shall therefore leave it to the
impartial public of America to judge betwixt us.

The anathema of the supreme executive council, closes with observing, "That
the discouragement and neglect manifested by general Arnold to civil, military
and other characters, who have adhered to the cause of their country, with an
entire different conduct to those of another character, are too notorious to
need proof or illustration," etc.

I am not sensible, mr. President, of having neglected any gentlemen, either in
the civil or military line, who have adhered to the cause of their country, and
who have put it into my power to take notice of them; with respect to gentlemen
in the civil line and army, I can appeal to the candor of congress and to the
army, as scarcely a day passed but many of both were entertained by me; they
are the best judges of my company and conduct.

With respect to attention to those of an opposite character, I have paid none
but such, as in my situation, was justifiable on the principles of common
humanity and politeness. The president and council of Pennsylvania will pardon
me, if I cannot divest myself of humanity, merely out of complaisance to them.

It is enough for me, mr. president, to contend with men in the field; I have
not yet learned to carry on a warfare against women, or to consider every man
as disaffected to our glorious cause, who, from an opposition in sentiment to
those in power in the state of Pennsylvania, may, by the clamor of party, be
styled a tory: it is well known, that this odious appellation has, in that
state, been applied by some, (...), to several of illustrious character, both
in the civil and military line.

On this occasion I think I may be allowed to say, without vanity, that my
conduct, from the earliest period of the war to the present time, has been
steady and uniform. I have ever obeyed the calls of my country, and stepped
forth in her denfence, in every hour of danger, when many were deserting her
cause, which appeared desperate: I have often bled in it; the marks that I
bear, are sufficient evidence of my conduct. The impartial public will judge of
my services, and whether the returns that I have met with are not tinctured
with the basest ingratitude. Conscious of my own innocence, and the unworthy
methods taken to injure me, I can with boldness say to my persecutors in
general, and to the chief of them in particular, that in the hour of danger,
when the affairs of America were a gloomy aspect, when our illustrious general
was retreating through New Jersey, with a handful of men, I did not propose to
my associates, basely to quit the general, and sacrifice the cause of my
country to my personal safety, by going over to the enemy, and making my peace.
I can say I never basked in the sunshine of my general's favor, and courted
him to his face, when I was at the same time treating him with the greatest
disrespect, and villifying his character when absent. This is more than a
ruling member of the council of the state of Pennsylvania can say. "as is
alleged and believed."

Before I conclude, I beg leave to read before this honorable court a report
of a committee of enquiry of congress, on the charges published against me by
the council of Pennsylvania, with several letters I did myself the honor to
write to congress, and a letter from their committee in answer: I do not
presume to offer these as evidence, but as they show the anxiety I had to have
my conduct investigated, and the reluctance of my accusers to bring matters to
an issue, I think it incumbent on me as an officer, to lay them before you.

REPORT of the committee of congress on the charges exhibited against general
Arnold by the president and council of Pennsylvania.
The first, second, third and fifth charges, are offenses, triable only in a
court martial; that the fourth charge is an offense only of a civil nature, and
triable only in a court of common law; that the sixth, seventh, and eighth
charges are offenses, not triable by a court martial, or common law court, or
subject to any other punishment than the displeasure of congress and the
consequences of it; that the committee are furnished with evidence, by the
supreme executive council on the fifth and seventh charges, to which they beg
leave to refer; that the committee of the said executive council, though
repeatedly applied to, declined to give any evidence on the rest of the
charges, after fruitless application for three weeks, during which time several
letters passed between the said executive council and committee, in which
letters, the supreme executive council even threaten the committee, and charge
them with partiality.

Resolved, That as to the first and second charges, no evidence appears tending
to prove the same; that the said charges are fully explained, and the
appearances they carry of criminality, fully obviated by clear, unquestionable
evidence. The third charge, admitted by general Arnold in one instance, to be
transmitted to the commander in chief. The fourth charge, there appears no
evidence to prove the same, and that it is triable only in a common law court.
The fifth charge be transmitted to the commander in chief.

Resolved, That the recommendatory letter in the sixth charge, is not within
the spirit of the resolve of congress, or an usurpation of authority.

Resolved, That the letter in the seventh charge, though not in terms of
perfect civility, yet it is not expressed in terms of indignity; and that after
the conduct of the said supreme executive council toward the said general
Arnold, and the unexampled measures they took to obtain satisfaction, totally
and absolutely preclude all right to concessions or acknowledment.

Resolved, on the eighth charge, that there is no evidence to prove the same.

Mr. President Reed's letter to Mr. W. Paca.
In COUNCIL.
Gentlemen, Philadelphia, 29 January, 1779.
AFTER the conference between your honorable committee and this board on
Wednesday last, the propriety of our farther appearing to congress on that part
of the subject, which related to the employ of our public wagons, was
considered; and it now becomes my duty to acquaint you, that this council
preferring the public good to all other considerations, and more especially to
those in which a sense of indignity offered us, may be supposed to mingle, have
concluded to give you all the information that is now in our power. In addition
therefore to the papers enclosed, I would mention, that if mr. Mitchell's state
of that business should appear to be defective, one Jesse Jordan, late a wagon
master in the quarter master's department, can give testimony in the matter. We
had sent to the quarter master to order him up, before mr. Mitchell's state was
given us, but we find he has quitted the service, and we supposing that state
of the matter to afford sufficient ground of complaint, have taken no measures
since to bring him up for examination.

But while we thus act upon motives superior to the gratification of our own
feelings, we think we should be wanting in public duty and spirit, if we
concealed; and while we are deliberating upon the measures to which we are
competent, for the vindication of our own honor, we must freely, 'though
respectfully, declare, that, if in the execution of public duty and the
resolves of congress, your officers may frustrate our good intentions, and
affront us without feeling any marks of your displeasure, it will greatly
discourage our prosecuting any enquiries into public abuses, and executing your
resolves farther than the special exigencies and conveniences of our state
should require: for we cannot but feel great reluctance to commit the authority
and honor of the state, and our own personal feelings, in disputes with
persons who, in many cases, may, by that means, be elevated into undeserved
consequence.

I am, gentlemen, with great respect, Your most obedient humble servant,
(Signed) JOS. REED, president.

Philadelphia, March 17, 1779. Sir,
I DID myself the honor of writing to you on the 12th ult. to which ask leave
to refer. I am gratefully sensible of the attention, which congress paid to my
request, in appointing a committee of their honorable body to enquire into the
charges published against me by the president and council of Pennsylvania; and
having been informed, that the committee have finished their enquiry, and
delivered in their report. I pray you, sir, to recommend to congress, to
examine, and decide thereon as soon as possible. I am sensible of the
multiplicity of business before congress, yet I flatter myself, that they will
consider the cruel situation in which I am placed by the persecution of my
enemies, and relieve me by a speedy decision.

As an individual, I trust I shall ever have spirit to be the guardian of my
own honor; but as the servant of congress, when attacked by a public body, I
consider myself bound to make my appeal to that honorable body, in whose
service I have the honor to be; and whilst my conduct and the charges against
me are under their consideration, I think it my duty to wait the issue, without
noticing the many abusive misrepresentations and calumnies, which are daily
circulated by a set of wretches, beneath the notice of a gentleman and man of
honor; yet permit me to say, that these calumniators, employed and supported
by persons in power and reputable stations, whilst my cause remains
undetermined before congress, consider themselves secure, and industriously
spread their insinuations and false assertions through these united states, to
poison the minds of my virtuous countrymen and fellow citizens, and to
prejudice them against a man whose life has ever been devoted to their service,
and who looks on their good opinion and esteem, as the greatest reward and
honor he can receive. Thus circumstanced, I cannot be charged with undue
impatience for soliciting an immediate decision on the charges brought against
me; and I flatter myself, that every member of that honorable body must have
some idea of what I have suffered on this occasion, and that they will relieve
me from a situation, the cruelty of which is beyond my power to express.

I have the honor to be with great respect and esteem, sir, Your most obdient
humble servant, B. ARNOLD.

His excellency John Jay, esquire
Philadelphia, April 14th, 1779. Sir,
I FIND by a resolution of congress of the 3d instant, that they have directed
his excellency general Washington to call a court martial on the 1st, 2d, 3d
and 5th charges contained in the resolves of the executive council of the state
of Pennsylvania, of the 3d of February, the said charges being only cognizable
by a court martial.

I cannot but testify my surprise, that a court martial should be ordered to
try me for offenses, some of which the committee of congress in their report,
say, there appears no evidence tending to prove the same, that the said charges
are fully explained, and the appearances they carry of criminality fully
obviated by clear unquestionable evidence. If congress have been induced to
take this measure for the public good, and to avoid a breach with this state,
however hard my case may be, and however I am injured as an individual, I will
suffer with pleasure, until a court martial can have an opportunity of doing me
justice by acquitting me of these charges a second time.

As congress have not decided on the 6th, 7th and 8th charges, 'though their
committee have acquitted me, I must now beg the favor of their decision on
those charges: I ask it as a piece of justice due to a faithful and honest
servant, and make no doubt of their immediately complying with my request.

I have the honor to be, sir, Your very humble servant, B. ARNOLD.

His excellency John Jay, esquire
Philadelphia, April 26th, 1779. Sir,
I DID myself the honor of writing to you on the 8th and 12th of February, and
again on the 14th instant, respecting the most cruel and unjust attempt made by
the president and council of this state, to injure my character, to which
letters I beg leave to refer. In consequence of the two former, congress were
pleased to appoint a committee to investigate the charges against me, to the
end, that I might be, on their report, either acquitted or tried; and though
the committee, after three weeks fruitless application to the president and
council of this state, were not able to obtain any evidence in support of the
two first charges, and in their report to congress, say, "That there is no
evidence tending to prove the same; that the said charges are fully explained,
and the appearances they carry of criminality, fully obviated, by clear,
unquestionable evidence."

Yet, I find, by a resolution of congress, of the 3d instant, they have ordered
a court martial to try me for those charges, of which their committee have
fully exculpated me, and have refused to decide on the report of the committee
on the three last charges, which are not cognizable either in a civil law
court, or court martial, and of which I still suffer under the imputation,
although this committee have fully acquitted me. I must once more beg congress
will do me the justice to decide on those charges. I ask for no favor, but
justice, and my right; and I flatter myself, when congress consider my past
services and suffering in the cause of my country, they will no longer withhold
the justice from me I am entitled to, however disagreeable it may be to my
cruel and implacable enemies, who, without cause, have avowed their intentions
to ruin me, and who, if justice is not denied me, will be held up to the public
in their true clours.

Upon application to the secretary of congress, for copies of all the papers
relative to the charges against me, I have been informed, that I cannot have
the report of the committee of congress, or the letters which passed between
them and the supreme executive council, without an order of congress, which I
now request, as those papers are absolutely necessary to lay before the court
martial, that the affair may appear in a proper point of light. A court martial
can never, I presume, suppose congress would have ordered me tried for charges,
of which their committee had acquitted me. If therefore the report of the
committee, or any other papers, tending to elucidate the affair, is withheld
from the court martial, it will, doubtless, operate on their minds to my
disadvantage, and a fair trial can by no means be obtained. As the committee of
congress have acted as a court of enquiry, I have an undoubted right (agreeable
to the customs of all such courts) to the whole proceedings, and every paper
relative to the matter. This, I presume, congress will not deny me. I therefore
request, that they will be pleased to order copies of those letters, report,
etc. delivered me as soon as possible, as the court martial is ordered to sit
for my trial on the first of May.

I have the honor to be very respectfully, sir, Your most obedient servant, B.
ARNOLD.

His excellency J. Jay, esquire president of congress.
Philadelphia, May 14th 1779. Dear sir,
AS you are chairman of the committee on my letter to congress, respecting the
report of the committee and letters of the president and council of this state,
I must request the favor of your endeavoring to have your report made to
congress as soon as possible, and of knowing when that will probably be, as my
trial is positively fixed to the first day of June. If the report is not made
in a few days, I shall be deprived of the benefit of those papers, which I
conceive to be my right, and absolutely necessary to obtain justice of the
court martial.

I am, with great esteem, dear sir, Your most obedient servant, B. ARNOLD.

Honorable William Paca, esquire
Dear Sir,
AS congress cannot possibly comply with your request, the committee can make
no report, that will be of any service to you. You cannot have a copy of the
report you refer to, nor of the letters which passed between the committees,
because, on the late conference and accommodation between congress and the
state of Pennsylvania, those proceedings are to cease, and not to be brought
again into view or discussion. The whole of the evidence, which relates to the
charges on which you are to be tried, is transmitted to general Washington,
with the charges, and there is nothing kept back, which you could avail
yourself of in your defense. As to the resolutions of the report acquitting you
of particular charges, they were founded, you know, on ex part hearing. The
committee were obliged to finish the report, and as the executive council, from
some difference between their committee and the committee of congress, would
not produce the evidence in support of those charges, the committee took up the
evidence offered on your part, and passed the resolutions of acquittal; but the
executive council and congress having settled the misunderstandings between the
committees, and congress not having decided on the report, and the said
executive council having offered to produce the evidence before a court
martial, the resolutions of the committee can have no operation whatever: when
we therefore come to report on your late application, we must report, that your
application cannot be complied with.

I am, sir, Your obedient humble servant, W. PACA.
May 15, 1779.
This report was never acted upon by congress, the council of Pennsylvania
having had sufficient influence and address to quash any proceedings upon it:
my reputation thus became for some time longer a sacrifice to what I charitably
suppose was deemed by congress a necessary state policy, to which individuals,
however inconvenient, must sometimes, without repining, submit.

I have now gone through all the charges exhibited against me; and have given
to each such an answer as I thought it deserved. Are they all, or are any of
them supported by truth and evidence? or rather, does not each of them appear
to this honorable court to be totally destitute of every semblance of a
foundation in fact? and yet baseless as they themselves are, they were intended
to support a fabric; with the weight of which, attempts were made to crush my
reputation and fortunes: I allude to the preliminary resolution of the council,
containing severe but general strictures upon my character and conduct;
strictures of such a serious and important nature, that they themselves were
sensible the public would not think them justified in making them, unless upon
the most unquestionable grounds. Let them now be measured by their own
standard. Had they unquestionable grounds to go upon? Why then, in opposition
to every principle of candor and justice, in opposition to their own ideas of
candor and justice, did they make and publish resolutions, containing censures
of such a high import against me?

An artful appearance of tenderness, and regard for my services, by which the
council are pleased to say, I formerly distinguished myself, is held forth in
the introduction to their charges. Did they mean by this to pour balsam, or to
pour poison into my wounds? I leave it to this court, and to the world to
judge, whether they intended it to balance the demerits, they then urged
against me, by my former good conduct, as far as it would go; or whether they
designed it as a sting to their charges, by persuading the public, that my
demerits were so enormous, that even the greatest and most unaffected
tenderness for my character, would not excuse them in continuing silent any
longer.

If, in the course of my defense, I have taken up the time of the court longer
than they expected, they will, I trust, impute it to the nature of the
accusations against me; many of which, though not immediately before you as
charges, were alleged as facts, and were of such a complexion as to render it
necessary to make some observations upon them; because they were evidently
calculated to raise a prejudice against me, not only among the people at large,
but in the minds of those who were to be judges.

I have looked forward with pleasing anxiety to the present day, when, by the
judgment of my fellow soldiers, I shall (I doubt not) stand honorably
acquitted of all the charges brought against me, and again share with them the
glory and danger of this just war.

JANUARY 22.
The court met agreeable to adjournment. The judge advocate having stated the
evidence relative to the several charges exhibited against the general, the
court adjourned until Wednesday eleven o'clock.

JANUARY 26.
The court met agreeable to adjournment, and having considered the several
charges exhibited against general Arnold, the evidence produced on the trial,
and his defense, are of opinion, with respect to the first charge, that he gave
permission for a vessel to leave a port in possession of the enemy, to enter
into a port in the united states, which permission, circumstanced as he was,
they are clearly of opinion he had no right to give, being a breach of article
5th, section 18th of the rules and articles of war. Respecting the second
charge, that although it has been fully proved, that the shops and stores were
shut by general Arnold's orders on his arrival in Philadelphia, they are of
opinion, that he was justifiable in the order by the resolution of congress of
the 5th of June, 1778, and his excellency the commander in chief's instructions
of the 18th of June, 1778: and with respect to the latter part of the same
charge, the making considerable purchases while the shops and stores were shut,
they (...) clearly of opinion, that it is entirely unsupported, and they do
fully acquit general Arnold of it. They do acquit general Arnold of the third
charge, Respecting the fourth charge, it appears to the court, that General
Arnold made application to the deputy quarter master general, to supply him
with wagons to receive property then in imminent danger from the enemy; that
wagons were supplied him by the deputy quarter master general on this
application, which had been drawn from the state of Pennsylvania for the public
service; and it also appears, that general Arnold intended this application as
a private request, and that he had no design of employing the wagons otherwise
than at his private expense, nor of defrauding the public, nor injuring or
imp^^^ing the public service; but considering the delicacy attending the high
station in which the general acted, and that requests from him might operate as
commands, they are of opinion, the request was imprudent and improper, and
that, therefore, it ought not to have been made. The court, in consequence of
their determinations respecting the first and last charges exhibited against
major general Arnold, do sentence him to (...) a reprimand from his excellency
the commander in chief.

ROBERT HOW, major general, president.
JOHN LAURANCE, judge advocate.
The court adjourned without day.




