A POEM, SPOKEN AT THE PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT AT YALE COLLEGE, IN NEW HAVEN;
SEPTEMBER 12, 1781.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN.

IT may not be amiss to inform the subscribers for the following performance,
that a copy was not given at the time it was requested, on account of its
containing several passages taken from a larger work which the author has by
him, unfinished. Upon farther consideration however, it is thought not improper
to present to the Public a specimen of that work, in this incorrect manner,
that a conjecture may be formed what success it may meet, when the whole shall
make its appearance. The passages are those that respect the affairs of America
at large, and the future progress of Society. As to the other parts of the Poem
which are consined to the state of education in Connecticut, although the
subject may be thought too particular to be relished beyond the limits of a
Commencement Auditory, yet if they should serve to turn the attention of any
part of the Public to the real situation of Yale College, it may justify the
publication.

A POEM, etc.
ONCE more, thou sacred Seat, the changing year
Has circled heaven and bid the day appear,
That opes thy portals, gilds thy spiry dome,
And calls thy children from their joyous home.
Through seven long years has war's terrific power
Ranged every town and crimsoned every shore,
Pursued fair Science from each happy seat,
Raved in her domes and forced her last retreat,
And often, Yalensia, doomed thy final fall,
While thy sad Genius trembled for thy wall.
Now see, at last, the venerable train,
Thine elder sons ascend thy courts again!
We joy the reverend, happy throng to see,
We wake thy own blessed Muse, and bid her sing to thee.
Long have we lived beneath thy nurturing care,
And joy and friendship crowned our labors there;
No more within those blissful haunts we dwell,
To all thy train we bid a long farewell;
One gentle grasp, one silent, sorrowing tear,
And joys and friends forever disappear;
Fate calls us hence the world's broad stage to tread,
Act a short part, and mingle with the dead.
We go -- but may thy glory still ascend,
Thy fame, thy virtues through the world extend;
Thy future sons, a calm, delightful throng,
As following years shall lead their steps along,
To peace, to happiness, to glory rise,
Shine through the earth and brighten in the skies.
No russian force that treads the distant shore,
Shall dare invade thy peaceful labors more;
While the proud foes beneath our standards yield,
And our brave brethren claim the crimson field,
Within thy courts shall pride and slaughter cease,
And genius dignify the walks of peace.
And oh! may some blessed hand regard thy cries,
Some great, some liberal benefactor rise,
Whose soul awakes at thy inspiring call,
To lift thy spires, enlarge thy scanty wall,
Who joys to aid the Muse's feeble voice,
And bid bright learning in her sons rejoice,
Bid wealth and dignity thy steps attend,
And rival arts and rival virtues blend,
Over all the happy land thy beauties shine,
And every joy, and every wish be thine.
Ye patriot worthies, whom these strains assail,
Ye Reverend Sires, and all ye sons of Yale,
Behold our seat, by former bounty given,
Pride of our land and favorite child of heaven,
Whence liberal arts and liberal thoughts ye drew,
When few her children and her wants were few;
Now see, the narrow bounds can scarce contain
Half the thronged numbers of her joyous train,
While every friend averts the unconscious eye,
And power, and interest pass unheeding by.
As late, when war's grim terrors sought repose,
And evening mists and distant fires arose,
Far in a gloomy grove I pensive strayed,
Where death's pale phantoms walked the midnight shade,
Thin clouds of sickening damps, over either driven,
Obscured the stars and shut the eye from heaven;
Unwonted sighs within my bosom rose,
Cities o'erturn'd and all my country's woes
Poured on my heart; but chief thy feeble cries,
Neglected Science, bade my griefs arise.
I saw, from Briton's Isle, thy genius flown,
In these fair climes to fix a nobler throne,
While here thy sons the peaceful myrtle yield,
To pluck the crimson laurel of the field.
I saw thy seats to scenes of slaughter turned,
Thy walls defaced, thy fairest labors burned;
Even Yale, thy loveliest handmaid, now no more,
Knew the gay smiles of youth she knew before,
Her funds decreased, her strength, her interest fled,
Her friends neglectful, and her Hosmer dead.
Now a calm splendour burst the saddening gloom,
And gales etherial breathed a glad perfume,
Mild in the midst a form celestial shone,
Robbed in the vestments of the rising sun;
Tall rose his stature, dignity and grace
Moved in his limbs and wantoned in his face,
His folding mantle slow'd in easy pride,
His harp divine lay useless by his side,
His locks in curls from myrtle chaplets hung
And sounds melodious melted from his tongue.
"Mortal, attend, behold before thee stand
Learning's bright Genius, guardian of the land;
Let grief no more awake the piteous strain,
Nor think fair Science left her heaven in vain.
A while my skill must guide the wild affray,
Range the red field and sweep thy foes away,
Soon shall this arm a milder scepter bear,
And blessed Yalensia prove my favorite care.
Mean time her friends her glory shall attend,
Enlarge her stores and bid her walls ascend;
Bid every art from that pure fountain flow,
All that the Muse can sing or man can know;
The various branches various teachers claim,
And universal knowledge lift her fame.
And see! ever long in that delightful seat,
Her sons and friends, a numerous concourse, meet;
Once more to view her, greet her youthful train,
And hear her feeble, saddening voice complain.
Go thou, in pride of youth, attend them there,
And these commands in strains melodious bear.
Say it is for them to stretch the liberal hand,
While war's dread tumults yet involve the land,
Sustain her drooping, rear her radiant eyes,
And bid her future fame begin to rise.
Tell them the wild commotions soon shall cease,
And blessed Columbia hail the charms of peace,
Where rest the future deeds on earth designed
To raise, to dignify and bless mankind.
While Europe's numerous courts my cause attend,
And mutual interest fix the mutual friend,
Behold, from each far realm, what glories shine!
Their power, their commerce and their science mine.
And here, what roving views before them spread!
Where this new empire lifts her daring head!
What wide extent her waving ensigns claim!
Lands yet unknown and streams without a name.
Where the deep gulf unfolds Floridia's shore,
To where Ontario bids hoarse Laurence roar;
Where Missisippi's waves their sources boast,
Where groves and floods and realms and climes are lost,
To where the mild Atlantic's lengthening tide,
Laves numerous towns, and swells their naval pride.
And see! by nature's hand over all bestowed,
The last pure polish of the forming God.
What various grandeur strikes the gladdening eyes!
Bays stretch their arms and mountains lift the skies;
The lakes, unfolding, point the streams their way,
The plains, the hills their lengthening skirts display,
The vales draw forth, fair wave the glimmering wilds,
And all the majesty of nature smiles.
On this broad theater, unbounded spread,
In different scenes, what countless throngs must tread!
Soon as the new formed empire, rising fair,
Calms her brave sons now breathing from the war.
Unfolds her harbors, spreads the genial soil,
And welcomes freemen to the cheerful toil,
What numerous sages must exalt her name!
What numerous bards must tell the world her fame!
What numerous chiefs beneath my forming care,
Must blaze in arms and ward the waste of war!
While every art and all the graces meet,
To form her thousands to the cares of State,
To heal pale sickness, bid diseases cease,
And sound the tidings of eternal peace.
Those must arise the present age to lead,
And following millions hail the paths they tread.
Such gladdening views will open the bounteous store
The grasp of interest and the pride of power,
Yalensia's friends shall thus attend her call,
And youths unnumber'd bless the favorite wall.
And though thou see the rage of slaughter roll,
And different views thy wayward race control,
Though still opposed their interest, and their laws,
And every scepter leads a different cause,
Yet through the whole the same progressive plan,
Which draws, for mutual succor, man to man,
From men to tribes, from tribes to nations spreads,
And private ties to public compact leads,
Shall rise by slow degrees, and still extend,
Their power their interest and their passions blend,
Their wars grow milder, policies enlarge,
Increasing nations feel the general charge,
Form broad alliances for mutual aid,
Mingle their manners and extend their trade,
Till each remotest realm, by friendship joined,
Link in the chain and harmonize mankind,
The union'd banner be at last unfurled,
And wave triumphant round the accordant world.
Already now commencing glories rise,
The work begins beneath you northern skies;
The Russian forests to the deep advance,
The ports unfold, the glimmering navies dance,
For commerce armed, the different powers combine,
And heaven approving aids the blessed design.
Though rival regions still the combat wage,
And hold in bickering strife the unsettled age,
Yet no rude war, that sweeps the crimson plain,
Shall dare disturb the labors of the main;
For heaven, impartial to the earth born race,
Bade one broad circling deep their shores embrace,
Spread to all realms the same wide, watery way
Liberal as air and unconfined as day,
That every distant land the wealth might share,
Exchange their wants and fill their treasures there,
Their speech assimilate, their empires blend,
And laws and mildness through the world extend.
Raise now thine eye, the hastening years shall roll,
And these glad scenes delight thy rising soul."
We then beheld, 'till where in lonely pride,
The far, blue Baltic pours his laboring tide;
At once in gathering squadrons, from the north,
The mingling streamers lead the nations forth;
From different shores unnumber'd masts arise,
And wave their peaceful curtains to the skies;
Broader and broader still the wings unfold,
All Europe's coasts the streaming pomp behold,
From Gallia's ports, from Albion's hoary height,
United flags are pointed into sight;
Where broad Hispania's strand two oceans lave,
And the rich Tagus mingles with the wave,
The countless navies lift their banners wide,
And stream their glories over the foamy tide;
While through the glimmering Strait, in long array;
Poured from the fleets that crowd the midland sea,
The sails look forth and swell their beauteous pride,
With wider waves and bolder barks to glide;
While far, far distant, where the watery way
Spreads the blue borders of descending day,
The misty sails advance in lengthening sweep,
Pride of the western world and daughters of the deep.
From all the bounds that meet the Atlantic wave,
While (...) our view the crowded squadrons heave,
In sign of union, each advancing line,
Leads a calm nation, bids their banners join,
Till far as pole from pole, the cloudlike train
Skirts the dim heavens and shades the whitening main.
We saw, in other seas and other skies,
With equal pomp unnumber'd streamers rise;
Where Asia's isles and utmost shores extend,
Like rising suns the sheeted masts ascend,
Sweep from all ports that cleave the orient strand,
Load every ocean compass every land,
For peaceful commerce join the friendly train,
No more to combat on the watery plain.
We saw new barks to new discoveries roll,
Where unknown waves salute each distant pole;
Far in the north, where seas Pacific pour,
And open Columbia from the Asian shore,
The daring sails the unmeasured flight pursue,
And isles and countless nations rise to view.
While some bold Sage, Columbus like, designed
By other stars and waves to lead mankind,
With conscious pride and philosophic eye,
Treads the lone borders of the southern sky,
With persevering toil the deeps explores,
Till there a new found world extends her lengthening shores
We saw, from each new realm, new arts ascend,
New manners rise, new wealth and power extend,
Allure the hero, feed the enquiring sage,
Enlarge the genius, dignify the age,
Till laws and empires swell their rising reign,
And their own navies whiten on the main.
Such views around us spread, when thus the guide,
"These are my works that load the sweeping tide;
Nor less my power the walks of science claim,
In this fair land to raise her noblest name,
No more shall war disturb her peaceful reign,
And call to fields of death her youthful train,
No more her views by wealth and power immured,
To rage alone and scenes of blood inured,
To teach the lance to thirst for human gore,
To teach pale avarice to swell the store,
To teach the milder arts the prize to yield,
Teach her own muse the clangor of the field,
From ruined regions fill the voice of fame,
And call celestial fire to blaze a tyrant's name.
No more in bolder breasts, to dwell confined
And hold her seat in half the human mind,
Over gentler passions spread a harsh control,
And light the glare of grandeur in the soul;
But softer virtues now demand her care,
And her own laurels grace the rising fair.
Each rival sex to rival arts aspires,
Each aids alike the universal quires;
This bids bold commerce load the laboring main,
Or rear the peaceful harvest of the plain;
That leads the hours of calm domestic toil,
And cheers the household with an evening smile,
To each fond heart an equal task assigned,
And equal virtues raise the mutual mind.
While daring thoughts and deeper tracts of truth
Through Philosophic mazes lead the youth,
The softer arts demand a softer care,
And loves and graces dignify the fair*
While states and empires, policies and laws
Lure the firm patriot in the bolder cause,
To stem the tide of power or ward the war,
Like me to suffer and like me to dare,
Behold, with equal dignity and grace,
The matron virtues guide her peaceful race
A pleasing task her tender bosom warms,
The infant care now smiling in her arms,
Now ripening features, as the form improves,
Speak the dear image of the man she loves;
She lures the rising wish to thoughts refined,
And her own virtues swell the opening mind,
The prattling throng to lisping reason grown,
To ape her loveliness improve their own;
The sire beholds the living beauties bloom,
Pride of his life and hope of years to come,
Aids every virtue taught by her to rise,
Joins the delightful task, and trains them for the skies.
Thus different arts their kindred cares employ,
In fields of action or domestic joy,
Then, rising from the useful to the fine,
Their mingling souls with rival glory shine.
From each pure taste consenting graces blend,
When the tall pillars of the dome ascend,
The walls heave stately, arches bend on high,
And full proportion meets the roving eye.
Or when the garden to the impassioned heart,
Unfinished lies and asks the rural art,
With just design their equal fancies play,
From each alike the rambling beauties stray,
Till through the whole the different scenes prevail,
Here flows the fountain and there draws the dale,
The laughing lawn, the frowning footless grove,
And all the seats of innocence and love.
Nor less their power the living canvas warms,
And breaths the pencil'd passion into charms;
Heroes and beauties hear the wakening call,
And distant ages fill the storied wall.
Two kindred arts the swelling statue heave,
Wake the dead wax and teach the stone to live;
The daring chissel claims the bolder strife,
To rouse the sceptred marble into life,
While fairer hands the livelier sire control,
And into softer figures shed the soul.
In hearts attun'd the voice of music dwells,
Steals over the lip and into passion swells,
Swept by the alternate hand the living lyre,
To mutual rapture wakes the floating sire,
Till all the magic melody of sound,
Pours in delightful harmony around.
And when the breath of heaven from Angel quires,
With life divine the joyous Muse inspires,
In rival bosoms, see the Goddess glow!
And bind her bays on each consenting brow.
The soaring bard awakes the trembling string,
Virtues and loves and heavenly themes to sing;
No more of vengeful chiefs and bickering Gods,
Where ocean crimsons and Olympus ^^ods,
Or heavens, convulsing rend the dark profound,
To chain fierce Titans to the groaning ground,
But, fired by milder themes, and charms refined,
Beamed from the beauties of the fair one's mind,
His soul awakes the peace inspiring song,
And life and happiness the strain prolong.
To moral beauties bids the world attend,
And jarring realms in social compact blend;
Bids laws extend and commerce stretch the wing,
Far distant shores their bartered tributes bring;
He sees the nations join, their bliss increase,
(Leagued in his lays) and sings them into peace.
While pleased, the Muse divides her equal care,
And the same ardor warms the listening fair;
From his pure breath she lights a bolder flame,
The same her genius and her flight the same,
In mutual smiles the borrowed graces play,
In mutual sweetness slide the hours away,
In mutual aid the borrowed numbers roll,
And swelled to rapture breathes the mutual soul.
From their own loves, thus softened and refined,
The general wish extends to all mankind,
The neighbor's cares, the family, the friend
Pour on the heart, and in the bosom blend;
The poor, the stranger find a welcome home,
The vagrant foot is pointed where to roam,
The eye of anguish, when no help is near,
Looks the fond w^^h and finds the mingling tear.
Even to their foe^ their equal goodness bends,
And hostile minds are softened into friends.
And when their lays have poured the bounteous mind,
In warm benevolence, to all their kind,
They lift the bolder note, the raptures glow,
To loves pure source whence all her streamlets flow.
Rapt into vision of the bright abode,
From angel harps they catch the inspiring God;
Through heavens, o'er-canopy'd by heavens, they soar,
Where floods of light in boundless beauty pour,
Seraphs and system'd worlds innumerous move,
Linked in the chain of harmonizing love;
Thence following down, the effulgent glory trace,
Which brought salvation to their kindred race.
Thus, on the stream of life, with gentle sweep,
They roll delightful to the welcome deep,
Where, unconfined, their spirits gently sail,
View happier climes and taste a purer gale;
Through ether's boundless realms together rise,
And claim their kindred mansions in the skies;
There fill the rapture of the adoring throng,
Whose lays on earth prelude the heavenly song."

