AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th 1781.

AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th 1781 AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH 1770.

By THOMAS DAWES, Junr.

"Patria cara -- carior Libertas!" BOSTON: PRINTED by THOMAS AND JOHN FLEET.
M,DCC,LXXXI.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, on Monday the Fifth Day of March, A. D. 1781.
VOTED, That John Brown, Esquire John Scollay, Esquire Mr Nathan Frazier, Samuel
Barret, Esquire Ezekiel Price, Esquire Ebenezer Hancock, Esquire Mr. Tuthil Hubbard,
Be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon Mr. THOMAS DAWES, Jun.
and in the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited and elegant ORATION
delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid Massacre
perpetrated on the Evening of the Fifth of March 1770, by a Party of Soldiers
of the XXIXth British Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston, and
to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN!
I Obey the Request with which you have this Day honored me -- hoping that
such Benevolence will now receive, as attended the hearing this imperfect
Production.

I am, Gentlemen, With all possible Repect, Your obedient Servant, THOMAS
DAWES, Junior.
BOSTON, March 5, 1781.
AN ORATION.
FATHERS, FRIENDS AND CITIZENS!
AVOIDING apology, even at a time when uncommon propriety might justify it; and
trusting rather to a continuance of the same liberality which has ever noted my
countrymen, I attempt the duties of this solemn anniversary.

AND it is conceived that we shall in some measure perform those duties, if we
sketch out some general traits of Liberty and mark the lines of her progress in
particular nations; if we paint the wounds She has suffered from corruption and
despotick force, and from the whole educe such sentiments as become? brave and
free, though injured people.

NUMEROUS as the descriptions are of primeval man, the reflective eye is not
yet weary. We still feel an interest in that Arcadian state which so well
imitated the world we are looking for. And we shall continue to feel it so long
as Nature is pleasing and the heart retains a feature of innocence. Like the
gods, It was represented of Marcus Aurelius, that in imitating the gods his
study was to have as few wants as possible. Vid. Spectator No. 634.
our first fathers had but few desires and those to be satisfied by the works
of virtue. Their passions were as the gales of their own Eden -- enough to give
a spring to good actions -- to keep the waters of life in motion without
inducing storm and whirlwind. The passions of every kind, under proper
restraints, are the gentle breezes which keep life from stagnation; but, let
loose, they are the storms and whirlwinds which tear up all before them. Mrs.
Brook.
Conversing with divinities, Liberty, sent from above, was their peculiar
inmate: that Liberty, whose spirit, mingling with the nature of man at his
formation, taught him, unlike the other animals, to look upward and hope for a
throne above the stars: Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit.
Ovid. Met.
that Liberty who taught him to pluck with confidence the fruits of Nature; to
pursue the direction of reason upon his heart and, under that direction, to
acquire, secure and enjoy all possible happiness, not impeding but assisting
others in the same privilege. No man's social liberty is lessened by another's
enjoying the same. Bollan.
When families and consequently human wants were afterward multiplied, it was
this same Liberty who, joined with Justice, led the patriarchs to some aged
oak. There in the copious shade misunderstandings were explained and charity
and peace kissed each other. Such was the morning of man.

BUT misunderstandings are quarrels in embrio. Satisfaction of one want
originated another. Depravity grew enraptured with strife. The wind was up.
Passion raged. Brother's blood then smoked from the ground and cried for
vengeance. Nimrod commenced his prelude to tyranny, and Fame was clamorous with
the deeds of death. Liberty heared and trembled -- considered herself an
outcast and has on many times since traveled up and down the world, forlorn,
forsaken, majesty in rags. Nor will She, perhaps, until the millenium comes, if
America does not now retain her, ever command that complete and permanent
homage which is suitable to her nature. The old republics may have been the
most perfect seats of her residence while they lasted, and are often mustered
up from the tomb of empire to witness the adoration which they paid her. But
even there she received so frequent violence that the continuance of her reign
was for the most part precarious; and when even at the summit of her glory, she
was only elevated that her fall might be more astonishing. Having passed all
the degrees of fortune, thank GOD She has found her way to these remote shores:
and, if from effects we may judge, She is well pleased with her new abode. O
cherish the divine inhabitant! O let her not return to the courts above with a
story that shall fire the heavens against us -- that She had blessings for us;
but that we were not prepared to receive them -- that She could find among us
no lasting habitation; but that, like the dove after the deluge, She was scarce
favored with the top of some friendly mountain for a melancholy moment.

LIBERTY, my friends! is a palladium to the place of her dwelling, a rock and a
sure defense. Wherever She is, every man has something to protect. He knows
what are his riches, and that while he lives himself shall gather them. He
views with conscious joy his circumstance. His social affections shoot out and
flourish. Even his prejudices are a source of satisfaction, and among them
local attachment, a fault which leans to the side of patriotism. And even his
failings leaned to virtue's side. Goldsmith.


SUPPORTED by and tenacious of these fruits of Liberty, some little free
states, which the geographer in his map had otherways never noticed, have long
stood uninjured by change and some of them inaccessible by the greatest efforts
of Power. There is now in a distant quarter of the globe a living illustration
of this remark. Situate upon a venerable pile of rocks in Italy stands the
Commonwealth of St. Matino. It was founded by a holy man whose name it bears,
and who fled to this romantic fairy-land to enjoy religion and free air,
unpursued by power and the restless spirit of the world. His example was
followed by the pious, the humane and the lovers of freedom. And these, a
favorite few, who were before scattered up and down through other parts of Italy;
who had lived all their days under arbitrary rule and whom Nature had secretly
taught that there was somewhere a happier institution for man -- these hurried
away to the snowy top of St. Marino: And having there first tasted those rights
which come down from GOD, made it their life's labor to support and hand them
down in purity. There every man finds his prosperity in submitting to those
laws which diffuse equality. There every man feels himself happily liable to be
called to the senate or the field: every man divides his day between alternate
labor and the use of arms -- on tip-toe, ready to start for the prize, the mark
of universal emulation -- the Commonweal; officious to promote that interest
which is at once the publick's and his own. So stands a constitution informed
with the very essence of Liberty. It has so stood, while other neighboring
states have been blackened and defaced with frequent revolution. And we
prophesy that 'till the approach of some unforeseen vice -- 'till some
degeneracy unknown to the sires creep upon the sons, St. Marino must stand
admired: as, in its present circumstance, no prince or potentate, after sitting
down and counting the cost, will ever attempt the impenetrable union of so much
prudence and virtue. Many of the facts here mentioned of St. Marino may be seen
in Addison's more complete account of that republic.


THE name of Venice now occurs to memory as another modern example of genuine
greatness. The ascendency gained by that single city over the whole Ottoman
power -- the universal panic that struck and pervaded all orders of the Turks
when routed at the Dardanelles, and the reasonable fear of approaching
dissolution that reached even to the throne and blasted the heart and withered
the nerves of a despot: These, amazing at first, nevertheless appear, when
their springs are laid open, the natural issues of a contest between free
agents and slaves. This alludes only to a particular era in the Venetian
history.


A more ancient and perhaps still more brilliant proof of the proportionate
powers of different degrees of Liberty may be gathered from the annals of the
city of Tire. The Lybian madman And the horned head belied the Lybian god. Pope.
who thought he had conquered all and wept that he had no more to conquer
Alexander after all his conquests complained that he had no more worlds to
subdue.

Seneca of a happy life.
-- the invincible son of Jove, before whom principalities and powers had bowed
down their heads as a bulrush -- behold him with his phalanx puzzled and
confounded at the walls of Tire. To overrun Asia cost him less labor,
enterprise and valor than the reduction of this one favorite haunt of Liberty.
For an illustration of this see Ancient Universal History, Vol. II. page 75 and
on; also -- that part of Newton on the Prophesies which relates to Tire, Vol. I.
And perhaps he had never reduced her but for her own falling off from her
pristine wisdom. Her liberty was not in first full vigor, but had received a
shock from corruption introduced with riches. Bribery, pride and oppression
followed close behind. She was then cast out as profane from the mountain of
GOD. Ezekiel XXVIII. 16.
Tire is become like the top of a rock -- a place to spread nets upon.

LET us consider the story of Tire as a monument which upon one side shows the
force of excellence, and upon the other the baneful influence of vice; a
memento that every state below the sun has, like Achilles of old, some
vulnerable part. As not a nation is exempted; and lest in a fond prejudice we
might exclude our own America and so induce a fatal security, even America has
received a caveat from Heaven, and in her youthful purity has been tempted by
her enemies. With what sort of success tempted we need but remember the
machinations and flight of the most infamous Arnold, and the affecting, though
just separation of the unfortunate Andre.

HAPPY the nation that, apprized of the whole truth, impartially weighs it is
own alloy and bars with tenfold adamant it is gate of danger. But to return,

I had cherished some aversion to names grown trite by repetition, and had, on
that account, evaded the ancient republics. But I find the observation just
that "half our learning is their epitaph." I conceive that the "moss-grown"
columns and broken arches of those once renowned empires are full with
instruction as were the groves of Lyceum or the school of Plato. Let Greece
then be the subject of a moment's reflection. When Liberty fled from the gloom
of Egypt, she sought out and settled at infant Greece -- there disseminated the
seeds of greatness; there laid the groundwork of Republican glory. Simplicity
of manners, piety to the gods, generosity and courage were her earliest
character. "Human nature shot wild and free." From Dr. Blair's dissertation
upon the works of Ossian.
Penetrated with a spirit of industry, her sons scarcely knew of relaxation:
even their sports were heroic. Hence that elevated, independent soul, that
contempt of danger, that laudable bias to their country and its manners. Upon
the banks of Eurota flourished her principal state. Frugality of living and an
avarice of time were of the riches of Lacedaemon. Her maxims were drawn from
Nature, and one was "that nothing which bore the name of Greek was born for
slavery." From this idea flowed an assistance to her sister states. From a like
idea in her sister states that friendship was returned in grateful measure.
This, had it continued, would have formed the link of empire, the charm that
would have united and made Greece invulnerable. While it lasted, the joint
efforts of her states rendered her a name and a praise through the whole earth.
And here, was it not for the sake of a lesson to my country, I would not only
drop my elogium of Greece, but draw an impervious veil over her remaining
history. Her tenfold luster might at this day have blazed to heaven, had the
union Accuracy has been offended that this example is employed for the American
States -- which resemble each other in constitution and are united in their
last resort; whereas the Grecian were unlike among themselves and professedly
separate. But attention to the history of Greece will discover in the causes of
her fall a lesson sufficiently apposite to our purpose. The anonimous
translator of Tourreil writes as follows -- "When Persia, so often vanquished
by the Grecians, despaired of subduing them, her last shift was to divide 'em;
to which their prosperity opened her a means. Spirits naturally quick and too
licentious, blown up with their frequent victories, could not cantain
themselves or govern their good fortune; they abandoned themselves to
Jealousies and Ambition.**** These divisions ended at last in a general
slavery. -- "

Thomson most beautifully speaks the truth upon the same occasion.

-- When Greece with Greece
Embroiled with foul contention, fought no more
For common glory and for common weal:
But, false to freedom, sought to quell the free;
Broke the firm band of Peace, and sacred Love,
That lent the whole irrefragable force;
And, as around the partial trophy blushed,
Prepared the way for total overthrow!

of her states been held more sacred. But that union of her states, that cement
of her existence once impaired -- hear the consequence! The fury of civil-war
blows her accursed clarion. The banners late of conquering Freedom now adorn
the triumphs of Oppression. Those states which lately stood in mighty concert,
invincible, now breath mutual jealousy and fall piece meal a prey to the common
enemy. Attic wisdom, Theban hardihood, Spartan valor, would not combine to save
her. That very army, which Greece had bred and nourished to reduce the Oriental
pride, is turned vulture upon her own vitals -- a damnable parricide, the
sanction of a Tyrant. Behold the great and godlike Greece, with all her
battlements and towers about her -- borne headlong from her giddy height -- the
shame, the pity of the world.

HAVING attempted some general sketches of Liberty from the dawn of social
life, to the fall of national glory; I would be somewhat more particular upon
those qualities to which her triumphs are chiefly indebted.

IN the vile economy of depraved man there appears an inclination to bestow
upon one part power and affluence, and to impose upon the other debility and
woe. When that inclination is gratified, the majority being slaves, the remains
of freedom are shared among the great; like the triumphal bridge at the
Archipelago, so strangely dignified that, by a decree of senate, none of the
vulgar were suffered to enjoy it. When that inclination is counterbalanced by
the laws; when the true interests of both those parts are reconciled; when
society is considered as "a public combination for private protection" Earl of
Abingdon.
-- and the governed find their happiness in their submission -- there is the
essence of all-powerful Liberty. Not to wire-draw a sentiment already graven
upon the hearts of this audience, it is such a Liberty, as that every man who
has once tasted it, becomes a temporary soldier as soon as it is invaded and
resents any violence offered it, as an attack upon his life -- Hence it is that
in free states as such there is no such thing as a perpetual standing army. For
the whole body of the people, ever ready, flock to the general standard upon
emergency, and so preclude the use of that infernal engine. I say infernal
engine, for the tongue " labors, and is at a loss to express," the hideous and
frightful consequences that flow wherever the powers of hell have procured its
introduction. Turkey and Algiers are the delight of its vengeance. Denmark,
once over-swarmed with the brave inhabitants of the North, has suffered
depopulation poverty and the heaviest bondage, from the quartering troops
amongst their peasants in time of peace: if it can be called peace, when
robbery, conflagration and murder are let loose upon the sons of men. Indeed,
it is said that no nation ever kept up an army in time of peace that did not
loose its liberties. I believe it. Athens, Corinth, Syracuse and Greece in
general were all overturned by that tremendous power: and the same power has
been long operating with other causes to humble the crest of Britain. Let us
hear a passage from Davenant! "If (says he, speaking of standing armies) if
they who believed this eagle in the air frighted all motions toward Liberty;
if they who heretofore though it armies in time of peace and our freedom
inconsistent; if the same men should throw off a whig principle so fundamental,
and thus come to clothe themselves with the detested garments of the tories,
and if all that has been here discoursed on should happen, then will the
constitution of this Country be utterly subverted." For the whole passage,
which was too lengthy for our purpose, vide The works of Dr. Davenant,
corrected by Whitworth, Vol. II. p. 333. Edition 1771.
It would exceed the limits of the present occasion to expatiate upon all the
instances wherein the liberties of Britain have in fact suffered according to
the views of Davenant. Suffice it to say that a standing army has been, long
since, virtually engrafted a limb upon her constitution, has frequently
overawed her parliaments, sometimes her elections, The Election of the Scotch
Peers in the year 1735, and the misconduct of Blackerby and others at the
election of the Westminster members in the year 1741, are instances well known.
Vide Burgh's politic disq 2d Vol p. 444 and 473.
and has carried distraction and massacre The affair of Capt. Porteus at
Edinburgh (vide London Magazine for 1737, in a variety of pages) and of Capt.
Preston at Boston, are of themselves sufficient examples.
into different parts of her Empire.

THAT standing mercenary troops must sooner or later entail servitude and
misery upon their employers is an eternal truth that appears from the nature of
things. On the one hand behold an inspired yeomanry, all sinew and soul, having
stepped out and defended their ancient altars, their wives and children,
returning in peace to till those fields which their own arms have rescued. Such
are the troops of every free people. "That the yeomanry are the bulwark of a
free people" -- was, if memory serves, in a celebrated extempore speech of the
honorable Samuel Adams, made in the year 1773. The steadiness of that great
Republican to his political creed, evinces that sentiments grounded upon just
data will not easily bend to a partical interest, or accommodate to the changes
of popular opinion.
Such were the troops who, led on by the patriot Warren, gave the first
home-blow to our oppressors. Such were the troops who, fired by Gates in the
northern woods, almost decided the fate of Nations. Such were the troops who,
under the great and amiable Lincoln, sustained a siege in circumstances that
rank him and them with the captains and soldiers of antiquity. Such, we trust,
are the troops, who, inferior number, though headed indeed by the gallant and
judicious Morgan, lately vanquished a chosen veteran band long dedicated to
Mars and disciplined in blood. And such, we doubt not, are the troops who beat
the British Legions from the Jersies and have ever since preserved their
country, under the conduct of that superior man who combines in quality the
unshaken constancy of Cato, the triumphant delay of Fabius, and, upon proper
occasions, the enterprizing spirit of Hannibal.

MAY the name of WASHINGTON continue steeled, as it ever has been, to the dark
slandrous arrow that flies in secret. As it ever has been! For who have offered
to eclipse his glory, but have afterward sunk away diminished, and "shorn of
their own beams." --

JUSTICE to other characters forbids our stopping to gaze at this Constellation
of Heroes, and would fain draw forth an elogium upon all who have gathered true
laurels from the fields of America.

"Thousands, -- the tribute of our praise
"Demand; but who can count the stars of heaven?
"Who speak their influence on this lower world?" Thomson.

WHITHER has our gratitude borne us? Let us behold a contrast -- the army of an
absolute prince -- a profession distinct from the citizen and in a different
interest -- a haughty phalanx, whose object of warfare is pay, and who, the
battle over, and if perchance they conquer, return to slaughter the sons of
peace. This is a hard saying. But does not all history press forward to assert
it is justice? Do not the praetorian bands of tottering Rome now crowd upon the
affrighted memory? Do not the embodied guards from Petersburgh and
Constantinople stalk horrid, the tools of revolution and murder? To come nearer
home for an example -- do we not see the darkened spring of 1770, like the moon
in a thick atmosphere, rising in blood and ushered in by the figure of Britain
plunging her poniard in the young bosom of America? Oh our bleeding country!
Was it for this our hoary sires sought thee through all the elements, --
elementa per omnia quaerunt. Juv.
and having found thee sheltering away from the western wave, disconsolate,
cheered thy sad face and decked Thee out like the garden of GOD? Time was when
we could all affirm to this gloomy question -- when we were ready to cry out
that our fathers had done a vain thing. I mean upon that unnatural night which
we now commemorate; when the fire of Brutus was on many a heart -- when the
strain of Gracchus was on many a tongue. "Wretch that I am, whither shall I
retreat? Whither shall I turn me? To the Capitol? The Capitol swims in my
brother's blood. To my family? There must I see a wretched, a mournful and
afflicted mother?" -- Guthrie's Cicero de Oratore.
Misery loves to brood over its own woes: and so peculiar were the woes of that
night, so expressive the pictures of despair, so various the face of death,
"Plurima Mortis Imago."
that not all the grand tragedies, which have been since acted, can crowd from
our minds that era of the human passions, that preface to the general conflict
that now rages. May we never forget to offer a sacrifice to the manes of our
brethren who bled so early at the foot of Liberty. Hitherto we have nobly
avenged their fall: but as ages cannot expunge the debt, their melancholy
ghosts still rise at a stated season, and will forever wander in the night of
this noted anniversary. Let us then be frequent pilgrims at their tombs --
there let us profit of all our feelings; and while the senses are "struck deep
with woe," give wing to the imagination. Hark! Even now in the hollow wind I
hear the voice of the departed. O ye, who listen to wisdom and aspire to
immortality, as ye have avenged our blood, thrice blessed! As ye still war
against the mighty hunters of the earth, your names are recorded in heaven!

Such are the suggestions of fancy: And having given them their due scope;
having described the memorable 5th of March as a season of disaster; it would
be an impiety not to consider it in its other relation. For the rising honors
of these States are distant issues, as it were, from the intricate "The ways of
Heaven are dark and intricate." Addison's Cato.
though all-wise Divinity which presided upon that night. Strike that night out
of Time, and we quench the first ardor of a resentment which has been ever
since increasing and now accelerates the fall of Tyranny. The provocations of
that night must be numbered among the master-springs which gave the first
motion to a vast machinery, a noble and comprehensive system of national
Independence. "The Independence of America, says the writer under the signature
of Common Sense, should have been considered as dating it is Era from the first
musket that was fired against her." Be it so! But Massachusetts may certainly
date many of it is blessings from the Boston Massacre -- a dark hour in itself,
but from which a mavelous light has arisen. From that night Revolution became
inevitable and the occasion commenced of the present most beautiful form of
Government. We often read of the original Contract, and of mankind, in the
early ages, passing from a state of Nature to immediate Civililization. But
what eye could penetrate through gothic night and barbarous fable to that
remote period. Such an eye, perhaps, was present, when the Deity conceived the
Universe and fixed his compass upon the great deep. Not that we can believe,
with some theoretical writers, that individuals met together in a large plain,
entered into an original Contract, etc. --

But though Society had not its formal beginning from any convention of
individuals, etc --

And this is what we mean by the original Contract of Society; which, though
perhaps in no instance it has been formally expressed, at the first institution
of a State, yet, etc. -- 1st Blackstone's Com. p. 47 vid. the whole passage.




AND yet the people of Massachusetts have reduced to practice the wonderful
theory. A numerous people have convened in a state of Nature, and, like our
ideas of the patriarchs, have deputed a few fathers of the land to draw up for
them a glorious covenant. It has been drawn. The people have signed it with
rapture, and have thereby bartered among themselves an easy degree of obedience
for the highest possible civil happiness. To render that covenant eternal,
patriotism and political virtue must forever blaze -- must blaze at the present
day with superlative luster; being watched, from different motives, by the eyes
of all mankind. Nor must that patriotism be contracted to a single
Commonwealth. A combination of the States is requisite to support them
individually. "Unite or die" is our indispensable motto. Every step from it is
a step nearer to the region of Death. This idea was never more occasional than
at the present crisis -- a crisis pregnant with Fate and ready to burst with
calamity. I aliude to that languor which, like a low hung cloud, overshadows a
great part of the thirteen States. That the young, enterprizing America, who
stepped out in the cause of humankind and, no other arm daring, lop'd the
branches of wide despotic Empire -- that the same America should now suffer a
few insolent bands to ravage her borders with impunity -- that her now tardy
hand should suspend the finishing stroke of resentment, and leave to her
generous allies a labor which her own vigor ought to effect -- this must
disturb those, illustrious, who fell in her infant exertions -- this must stab
the peace of the dead, however it may affect the hearts of the living. Oh could
I bear a part among the means of awakening virtue -- Oh could I call strength
to these feeble lungs and borrow that note which shook the throne of Julius!
Vain wish! If the silent suggestions of truth -- if the secret whispers of
reason are not sufficient -- the efforts of human eloquence might be futile,
her loudest bolt might roll unheeded!

THIS is not intended to inspire gloom; but only to persuade to those exertions
which are necessary to life and independence. Let justice then be done to our
country -- Let justice be done to our great leader; and, the only means under
heaven of our salvation, let his army be replenished. That grand duty over, we
will once more adopt an enthusiasm sublime in (...), but still more so as
coming from the lips of a first patriot -- the chief magistrate of this
Commonwealth. "I have, said he, a most animating confidence that the present
noble struggle for Liberty will terminate gloriously for America." Aspiring to
such a confidence,

I see the expressive leaves of Fate thrown wide;
Of future times I see the mighty tide,
And, borne triumphant on its buoyant wave,
A god-like number of the great and brave.
The bright, wide ranks of martyrs -- here they rise --
Heroes and patriots move before my eyes:
These crowned with olive, those with laurel come,
Like the first fathers of immortal Rome.
Fly Time! Oh lash thy fiery steeds away --
Roll rapid wheels and bring the smiling day, Sun, gallop down the westlin
skies,
Gang soon to bed and quickly rise;
O lash your steeds, post Time away,
And haste about the bleezing day.
Allan Ramsay.

When these blessed States, another promised land,
Chosen out and fostered by the almighty hand,
Supreme shall rise -- their crowded shores shall be
The fixed abodes of Empire and of Liberty.
END.

