A SERMON, PREACHED AT NORTHAMPTON, ON THE TWENTY-EIGHTH of NOVEMBER, 1781:
OCCASIONED BY THE CAPTURE OF THE BRITISH ARMY, UNDER THE COMMAND OF EARL
CORNWALLIS. DEDICATED TO THE SUBSCRIBERS.

HARTFORD: Printed by NATHANIEL PATTEN, a little North of the Courthouse.

A SERMON.
ISAIAH LIX. 18, 19. According to their Deeds, accordingly he will repay: Fury
to his Adversaries, Recompense to his Enemies: To the ISLANDS he will repay
Recompense. So shall they fear the Name of the LORD from the WEST, and his
Glory from the RISING OF THE SUN. When the ENEMY shall come in like a Flood,
the SPIRIT of the LORD shall lift up a Standard against him.
THIS Chapter is a prophecy of the events, which will immediately precede the
glorious state of Christ's kingdom, in the latter days. It commences with an
account of that apostasy, which is described by St. Paul, in various chapters
of his epistles to the Thessalonians, and to Timothy; and by St. Peter, in the
second chapter of his second epistle. A general prevalence of wickedness is, by
all these divine writers, asserted to be the character of Christian nations,
during this period. This wickedness is mentioned as of a very peculiar nature;
as wickedness methodised, and justified in attempt, and appearance. It is
deceit reduced to system, and wrought into maxims, or established rules of
practice. These ideas are finely imagined, and this conduct forcibly
reprobated, in various parts of the chapter. Your lips, says he, have spoken
lies, and your tongue uttered perverseness. None (...) for truth, they weave
the spiders web to hide their own malignity, and entangle others in their
snares; but their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works. Their schemes of deceit shall answer no valuable
purpose for them, in the all-searching view of their Maker, before whom far
other robes are required to conceal the nakedness of the children of Adam. They
have made them crooked paths, exceedingly distant from the straight and narrow
way, that leads to peace and glory: whosoever goes therein shall not know
peace. Pleasures, delusive and ruinous pleasures, often strew with, flowers the
broad and crooked road of falsehood; but it is a constant, eternal stranger to
that peace within, that serene approbation of conscience, which is a kind
companion, a faithful friend to him, who passes through the journey of life, in
the secure way of truth and religion. In schemes of worldly wisdom, men will
wait long for sight, but will behold obscurity: for brightness, but will walk
in darkness they will grope for the wall of safety, as the blind: and stumble
at noon day, as in the night.

The sins of those nations, at the time to which the prophet alludes, are
summed up in these words of the 13th verse. In transgressing, and lying against
the Lord, and departing away from God, speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood. Hence are derived
the sins and distresses, mentioned in the 14th and 15th verses. Systems of
error and sophistry, formed in this period, are the sources of those iniquities
and attendant miseries, which characterise and punish mankind, during its
continuance.

The same events are described by St. Peter, and St. Paul, in terms still more
explicit and humiliating. Of the entire coincidence of sentiment in these three
eminent prophetical writers, with respect to the subject under consideration,
any one may be easily convinced by a slight perusal of the prophecies I have
mentioned.

In the succeeding part of the context, the prophet represents these iniquities
as provoking the anger of God to such a degree, that they draw down on mankind
that misery, which is their proper retribution. The nature and extent of this
misery had already been described at large, in several parts of his writings;
he therefore passes over it here in a summary manner, and hastens to a subject
of a more agreeable nature. In consequence of this display of the divine hatred
to ^n, a general reformation commences, in the 19th, 20th and 21st verses: A
reformation coextended with the duration of time. My Spirit, which is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's
seed, from henceforth and for ever.

That Isaiah, in the different parts of this chapter, really refers to the
Millennium, and the times immediately preceding, is evident from the 20th and
21st verses. There God makes a covenant with the Jews, after their return from
the great apostasy, that his word and spirit shall no more depart from them for
ever. It is also evident, from the connection of this with the succeeding
chapter; where, in one of the most noble poetical performances in the universe,
the future prosperity of the church is exhibited in images divinely beautiful,
animated, and sublime.

A slight survey of the affairs of Europe, the principal part of the globe for
two centuries past, will convince us, that the prophets above mentioned saw
with intrusive certainty the general state of events among the Christian
nations, during that period. Whilst the Most High supported his cause in the
world by miraculous interpositions, the Devil supported his own cause also, and
opposed that of the Deity, by false miracles, necromantic delusions, and other
abuses of human credulity. For these impositions the ignorance of mankind gave
him the fairest opportunity. This ignorance subsisted many centuries after real
miracles ceased; and he was careful not to lose so considerable an advantage
for the continuance of his deceits. -- The revival of learning gave a fatal
blow to this branch of the Satanical system. A number of unheeded incidents
roused in the mind a consciousness of power, before unexerted and unknown; and
produced correspondent, and mighty changes in the human conduct. As a
bewildered traveller, long benighted in the mists and darkness of an extensive
marsh, guided by Providence through a labyrinth of thickets, finds an eminence
at its border, from whence, ascending through the gloom, he casts an eye of
astonishment and rapture over a spacious country, covered with beautiful
fields, groves, rivers, and mountains, and adorned with intermingled villages,
towns, and cities: So the mind, at this period, rose above the darkness of
Monkish barbarism, and beheld with surprise and transport, extensive regions of
natural and moral science, truth and beauty, of which it had before scarcely
entertained the most distant idea. Throughout a large part of Europe and
especially in Protestant countries, pretended miracles, specter, witches, and
all that long train of dreadful nothings, which, for so many ages, had chained
mankind in bonds of terror and distress, were regarded with indignation,
contempt and ridicule.

The revival of learning was therefore, in appearance, an essential advantage,
gained by the friends of truth over the friends of evil. As this event was soon
followed by an eminent reformation of the principles and manners of those
nations, who dissented from the church of Rome; good men began to entertain the
most cheerful hopes of a completion of that conquest, which Christ had begun
over his enemies. But although it was in reality an essential benefit to
religion, as it largely contributed to this reformation, and as it was an
important link in that progress of earthly things toward perfection, which
will one day finish the preparation for the commencement of the Millennium
glory and happiness; yet the fair expectations then formed, were, in many
instances frustrated, and the propitious influence of learning was made
subservient to far other purposes than had at first been imagined. It is the
natural, the unhappy tendency of the human temper, to divert all the means of
doing good or evil, into the channel of evil. Power, science and influence have
almost ever been the means, and religion and freedom the pretexts, of invading
human happiness, and enlarging the kingdom of Satan. Nor is this to be imputed
to the nature of either of these articles, as it commonly has been; but solely
to that bias of temper, which gives them their bent and direction. Thus it
happened at the time I have mentioned. The first efforts of learning and
reasoning were made in the cause of truth; the second in that of error. Evil
beings found themselves necessitated to adopt a new method in their controversy
with the Most High, and urged by policy, as well as necessity, began to change
their former weapons, power, pretended miracles, and extraordinary
interpositions, for schemes of sophistry and literary deceit.

The face of moral things was now altered. Instead of the exertions of tyranny,
instead of religious delusions, by which the Devil had supported his own
kingdom, and disturbed that of his Maker, for many centuries, he introduced a
milder, but not less destructive method of contention. Ridicule and sophistry
now became his principal engines. By the first he endeavored to exhibit virtue
as a contemptible baseness of soul, that he might engage the pride of all, and
especially of the youth, to regard it with dread, or reject it with disdain;
and represented the necessary mysteriousness of an infinite Providence, as the
clearest proof of the nonexistence of any Divine government in the moral
world. By this unhappy method multitudes, which exceed the utmost power of
conception, have been swept away into the regions of eternal ruin. This single
weapon has, in all probability, made greater havoc of the best interests of
man, than the sword, the famine, and the pestilence united.

By the second of these engines, Sophistry, the moral system was branched into
innumerable schemes of error; many of which, that the deceit might be less
easily suspected, in their first doctrines varied but a small degree from the
truth; yet in their consequences were found to be of a nature totally
repugnant: Like certain paths, which, diverging at first but a little, will be
naturally mistaken for the right road; but winding farther and farther about,
pursue a point of compass directly opposite to that, which would bring the
traveller to his desired home. These have been commonly supposed to be distinct
systems by themselves; but are in reality no more than braches of a few
principal ones. To exhibit the truth of this observation, in a just light, it
may be advantageous to observe, that the scriptures of the Old and New
Testament communicate to mankind the great doctrine of redemption, from a state
of total depravity and consequent punishment, by the sovereign, unmerited grace
of God, through the righteousness of his Son imputed to all those, who are made
the subjects of evangelical faith. This doctrine is, beyond all others,
humiliating and painful to the natural disposition of man. To remove this pain,
and bury every reflection on so disagreeable a subject, has been the labor of
mankind, in every age of the Christian era. Limited minds, who cannot discern
the relations and consequences of important truths, and who have the pain, the
labor, and the attention necessary to think in a methodical and comprehensive
manner, have contented themselves with renouncing the most disagreeable parts
of this scriptural plan, while they have still retained others, which
necessarily imply the whole. This sentiment applies to all the schemes of
doctrine, which lie between his plan and skepticism. Hence great and ingenious
men, who have made theology an object of their peculiar attention, when they
have forsaken the doctrines of free grace, have commonly ended with universal
doubt. There is in truth no intermediate stage, where a clear and inquisitive
mind can find a resting place. -- Perhaps it may be asserted with truth, that
all the interjacent systems of religious doctrine, consistently pursued and
thoroughly investigated, would end in one or the other of these two. As those
systems are now received, they afford not to a comprehensive view the evidence,
or consistency, necessary to full satisfaction and quiet belief. Yet as mankind
in general pay little attention to connections between moral truths, these
sentiments injure the cause of truth as extensively, as if the respective parts
of them had a perfect coincidence. Thus Westhy's dreams of universal
redemption, and the crude incoherences of Voltaire, have made, beyond
comparison, more converts than the subtle, refined sophistry of Hume. For a
thorough investigation of this sophistry requires the same attention, which
happily divested, would irresistibly convince of the truth and divine origin of
the Bible.

May I not be indulged in digressing, a moment to observe, that those, who
assert the doctrines of free grace, with sincerity and understanding, while
they essentially differ from the moral tenets of all others, are also, of
necessity, essentially united among themselves. The reason of this observation
may be easily conjectured. Unhappy, and as I conceive, unnessary differences
have lately arisen among persons of this denomination, which, through the
influence of a zeal, neither according to knowledge or benevolence, have
induced them to regard each other as assertors of principles, essentially
unlike, and espousers of interests directly repugnant.

If the above observations are just, it is obvious that they are all engaged in
the same cause, and, in their peculiar, essential doctrines, connected by an
union in its very nature inseparable. How painful is it to remark, that those,
who are distinguished from the rest of their species, by an attachment to moral
rectitude, and an acquaintance with moral truths, either unknown or through
prejudice rejected by others, should nevertheless afford their numerous enemies
the utmost reason for triumph, in their illjudged contentions, and the
indecent, unchristian, ungentlemanly heat, with which they are maintained. But
to return to the subject.

By the abovementioned religious systems, or branches of systems, has the
belief of mankind, for near two centuries, been distracted and overthrown. The
present especially forms a period of eminent delusion. It is a period differing
in the degree and multiplicity of deceits from any other; and this
characteristic is visibly and rapidly increasing. Whilst therefore probability
marks the present time, as the time designed by these prophets in the parts of
their writings I have mentioned, on all other accounts: It has also this
striking proof of an evident designation, that it corresponds in the most
important articles with the burden of their predictions.

The consequence of this state of moral things, the prophet informs us, shall
be an effusion of vengeance upon the nations, who thus prostitute their reason,
and abuse the distinguishing goodness of God. In the 15th and 16th verses the
Most High surveys the affairs of men, and finds among them an universal
desertion of truth and righteousness. Yea, says the prophet, truth fails,
and he that departs from evil, by that very conduct makes himself a pray.
Roused to wrath by so general a desertion, God is exhibited as putting on
garments of vengeance for clothing, and investing himself with zeal as a cloak.
Immediately follows the distributior of his anger, expressed in the forcible
language of the text -- According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay:
Fury to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies, to the islands he will
repay recompense.

The term Islands appears manifestly explanatory of the terms adversaries and
enemies in the earlier parts of the verse, and may therefore be conceived as
denoting those enemies, to whom fury and recompense were to be rendered.

Islands, in the language of the Old Testament, usually designates the European
world; it may be justly presumed that it has the same designation in the text.
Europe is the great scene of the deceit abovementioned, the origin of the
various schemes of delusion, stigmatized by these prophets, and the theater of
of their most extensive, as well as most fatal consequences. The nations of
that quarter of the globe have enjoyed incomparably greater light than others,
and prostituted it to incomparably worse purposes. Those observations apply to
all the European nations, whether popish or protestant. They may all therefore,
expect a distinguished share of Almighty vengeance, proportioned to the
advantages they have respecttively enjoyed, and the abuse of advantages of
which they have respectively been guilty.

Of all the pretestant countries in Europe, Britain has enjoyed the most
singular blessings; and, as she has abused them in the highest degree, must be
viewed as a peculiar object of the Divine indignation. To her also the
discriptions and threatenings in the text are peculiarly applicable.

No one of my audience needs to be informed that the seat of the British empire
is an island; or that it is surrounded by near two hundred others, connected
together by the strong bonds of interest and dominion. As the term islands
therefore was very properly chosen by the prophets of the Old Testament to
denote Europe, because of the many European islands, which lie in the
neighborhood of Palestine; so the same term is still more properly expressive
of the empire of Great Britain.

Nor does this term more perfectly describe that kingdom and its dependencies,
than the character of God's enemies in the context describes the nations who
are its inhabitants. To exhibit this truth in a just light, it may be
advantageous to observe, that no nation beside that of the Jews, ever received
so singular blessings from the hand of the Most High.

Their temporal blessings have been of the first magnitude. Of this number is
their natural situation. Surrounded by the ocean, they experience, in that
element, a more effectual defense than all the walls and bulwarks of human
invention. Nor is this circumstance more favorable to security than to trade,
and its necessary consequence, wealth. Led by necessity to a sense of their
true interest, in the mild method of commerce they have taxed all nations, for
a supply of every want, real and imaginary. Gold, with them has became as
brass and silver as iron. To what use, let me ask, have these treasures been
applied?

Their learning has if possible exceeded their wealth. No nation has produced
so many, or so great proficients, in almost every art and science. Even Greece
and Rome, exalted as their names are, must acknowledge them at least their
equals in the glory of genius, and far their superiors in useful and desirable
knowledge. This knowledge has been peculiarly extensive in that most noble and
important field the sacred scriptures. Various classes of Christians have
furnished theology with preachers and writers of the most elevated capacities,
the most profound erudition, the most amiable life, and the most fervent,
laborious zeal for the immortal interests of mankind.

On the ministrations of these truly wise, because truly good men, the spirit
of God has been pleased to smile in a very wonderful manner. Perhaps divine
love was never more extensively shed abroad, within the same limits of time,
than in the island of Great Britain. During two centuries past, especially the
earlier part of them, although so eminent a season of deceit, very great
multitudes in the judgment of rational charity, have ascended from thence to
that kingdom, where the righteous shall shine forth as the sun, for ever and
ever.

But what has been the end of these things? The pastors have became brutish,
and have not sought the Lord; therefore they do not prosper; and all their
stocks are scattered. The people are foolish, they have none understanding;
they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. A voice of
wailing is heard out of Zion! How are we spoiled; how are we confounded? How is
the gold become dim, and the most fine gold changed? The stones of the
sanctuary are poured out in every street. The precious sons of Zion, comparable
to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthern pitchers, the work of the hands
of the potter?

The sins of Great Britain are in degree enormous, and in multitude
innumerable. It will be impossible, as well as unnecessary, at the present time
even to name them. I shall therefore take notice of one article only, which
appears to be less regarded than its importance demands.

Within a few years past, many principal persons of that island have
laboriously employed themselves in reducing wickedness to a system.
Selfishness, the fountain of wicked actions, with the utmost pains, and the
most subtle sophistry, has been analized, and asserted to be, not only a just
spring of moral action, but the only possible spring, from whence the actions
of intelligent beings can proceed. Benevolence is of course (...) as a
fairy-land chimera, which never had any existence, but in the crazed
imagination of some dreaming candidate for bedlam. -- To establish these
assertions, inconceivable labor has been used, multitudes of volumes have
been written, and multitudes of years consumed. Thus has the human mind
leagued with the devil to overthrow the kingdom of its Creator, and pervert its
own eternal felicity.

The mischiefs of this system are infinite; and its operations on public and
private conduct are equally baneful.

Private life teems with innumerable evils, which are its immediate
consequences. It is obvious to all persons, that actions are wholly
characterised by their motives. If therefore the gratification of self is the
only motive, from which moral actions can spring, it is evident that they are
all of the same character. If the gratification of self be a just ruling
motive, the same consequence will necessarily follow. On this principle, to
enquire concerning right and wrong, in the conduct of intelligent beings, is
consummate absurdity. As all actions, on this plan, are produced by the same
governing motive, they are of course of the same moral nature, and the
distinction between right and wrong has no foundation in the universe.

These consequences are not only natural, obvious, and necessary; but are
actually drawn, and introduced as rules of practice, by a large part of the
British nation. The court, the nobility, the clergy, the gentry, the army, the
navy, and the men of science have very generally embraced them. Hence crimes,
which were before committed in the heat of provocation, and the tumult of
passion, are now (...) with cool deliberation, remorseless indifference, and
complacent self-justification. Hence pride has changed its name to honor;
fraud is termed skill in business; slander is styled plainness of speech: and
the most injurious quarrels are esteemed expressions of becoming resentment.
Hence, in a word, the man of honor, an epitome of lewdness, dishonesty, pride,
abuse, revenge, and fashionable murder, is veiled, though I confess with a
spider's-web, under the exalted title of gentlemen. But the evils of this
system are far too extensive to be described here. They pervade every rank of
life, and blacken every action. They spread a cloud over the human
understanding, hide from its view the true nature of moral conduct, confine the
mind to the pursuit of evil, pervent every wish for virtue and glory, blot out
every hope of endless happiness, and rivet the influence of Satan almost beyond
the restitutive power of the Spirit of Grace.

A more striking specimen of these unhappy truths cannot be exhibited, than the
malignant effects of Lord Chesterfield's scheme of education; in which the
great doctrine, I have mentioned, is made the basis of the most winning, most
deceitful, and most ruinous system of evil, hitherto devised by the great
adversary of men. Here the pleasing images of a lively imagination, and the
graces of an easy, agreeable manner, are added to the authority of a learned,
courtly nobleman, and joined, in a most dangerous connection, with opinions
both just and ingenious concerning things of an indifferent nature, to teach
mankind the most finished rules of hypocrisy. Had this system been confined to
its original design of accomplishing the character of a negotiator, its evils
would not have been very extensive: But since it has been unfortunately
received as a valuable mode of education for youth in general, the danger
deserves to be marked by all men, who wish well to truth and virtue. Yet I
cannot but observe, that the success of this artful system must in the end
prove its destruction. For when the deceit recommended becomes universal, a
jealousy in all men toward all men must be the inevitable consequence. This
jealousy will prevent the imposition intended, and limit deceit within narrower
bounds than before.

These sentiments concerning a person of so great reputation, as Lord
Chesterfield, will seem to our youth, especially those of fashion more like
that rigid moroseness, which, they commonly and unhappily imagine, resides in
the mind of a preacher, than like the cool dictates of dispassionate truth. The
pleasing, influential articles abovementioned, the too agreeable indulgence,
furnished by that nobleman to their vicious inclinations, and that most
convenient, most gentle method, in which he teaches them how to avert the
reproofs of a monitor as much more friendly, as more honest, than himself --
Conscience has bound their hearts by so strong an attachment to these
doctrines, as will probably prevent them from realizing any part of the danger.
I have mentioned. They are yet to learn, that this very attachment constitutes
that danger.

Were their minds uninfluenced and unengaged these favorite letters might glide
smoothly onward to the ocean of (...), without a strickture from me. But why,
let me ask them, is hypocrisy which they so strongly reprobate in a Christian,
so becoming to a gentleman? Is that which blackens one character with an
infernal stain, a striking beauty, a lively ornament to another?

Were this most odious vice awkwardly recommended (...) clumsily enforced,
their minds had not been exported to this (...) of ruin, nor their ears
molested with these admonitions. The apple of the Manchineel, would never have
destroyed such a multitude of lives, had it been left by its Creator with an
odious outside, unadorned with fragrance and beauty.

But the evil effects of this great doctrine, the rectitude of selfishness, are
equally evident, and dreadful, in public as in private life. In coincidence
with this doctrine, was established the famous political dogma, of Sir Robert
Walpole -- that every man has his price -- or in terms more explicit, that
every man living, however just, however excellent, if his personal interest be
suitably addressed, will, like Ahab, sell himself to work wickedness.

To enforce this dogma, and justify a practice corresponding with it,
inconceivable pains have been used; and used with such success, that the great,
who easily break through the cobwebs of ignorance, honesty, and conscience, which
entangle the small, sell their faith and soul, without remorse; and the prince,
without a blush, acknowledges the purchase. To such a height has bribery (that
seven-sold Nilas of moral debauchery) arisen in consequence of this doctrine,
that it has long since ceased to be a matter of scandal or admiration, for the
minister to buy such a number of persons, in every new body of the legislature,
as will ensure him a vote for every purpose.

To the malignant operation of this doctrine is it to be ascribed, that the
first minister of that nation, with a cool, intrepid, unblushing countenance,
within a few years past, asserted, in open parliament, the rectitude of
prevarication. From this very principle did he professedly originate the
arguments he advanced, to induce a compliance with his design. The interest of
the nation, he observed, might be greatly promoted, if the legislature would
then, as they frequently had done, betake themselves to this contemptible
subterfuge: As if every nation had not a far higher interest in acting the
glorious part of integrity, than it possibly could have, in descending to the
meanness of falsehood, and infamous equivocation. How strikingly has the Divine
denounciation been verified in this instance! -- Hail shall sweep away the
refuge of lies.

To the public operation of this principle also, was it owing, that our rights
were invaded by the British parliament. To ease themselves of their burdens,
they determined to increase ours. If selfishness be right, this conduct, in a
moral sense, certainly was not wrong. Their oppression we resisted. Selfishness
then operated in resentment, as well as avarice, and added burden to burden,
and oppression to oppression.

The events, which have distinguished the various parts of its progress, in
this instance, are too recent to need repetition. It is enough to remember the
waste of our fields, the devastation of our towns, and the long series of fear,
perplexity, and anguish, we have all experienced, to produce in our minds, full
conviction of the infernal nature of this spring of action.

Nor is the West the only scene of its pernicious effects. Gold, the chief
offering sacrificed at the shrine of selfishness, has led many European
nations to the regions of the East, or to the rising of the sun. In the unhappy
climes of the hither India, have the British, whose exertions in that region
have been far greater, and whose territories far more extensive, than those of
any other European people, laid waste fields and cities, provinces and
kingdoms, to which they had not, and still have not a single pretense of claim.
It is remarkable, that the two persons, the most eminent in this work of
destruction, and who literally plundered and murdered whole nations, have been
allowed a seat in the British legistature; where, we may imagine they have
given their suffrages on other matters of importance, with the like spirit of
justice and humanity.

The consequence of this evil conduct, we are informed in the first verse of
the text, shall be a recompense from the hands of the Most High; a recompense
exactly suited to the nature of the crimes, and exactly proportioned to the
degree of their enormity. According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay.
-- Let us enquire how far facts correspond with the prediction.

Europe, and particularly Great Britain, exhibits strong symptoms of Divine
reprobation, the judgment, of all others, most peculiarly suited to the crime
of unbelief: Little pains are necessary to make it appear probable, that God
has sent them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie.

Immense labor has been consumed, to hide the true nature of moral conduct; to
lessen the distinction between virtue and vice; to prove selfishness to be
rectitude, and benevolence a dream; to annihilate the purity, holiness, and
justice of God; and to reduce his character, in all moral respects, to a level
with the herd of the Heathen deities.

Perhaps the rectitude of selfishness is the very lie, which those nations
should be given up to believe, according to the apostle's declaration, in the
second of the second epistle to the Thessalonians. As a reason for this
sentiment, I would offer the prediction of St. Paul, concerning this period, in
the third of the second epistle to Timothy -- This know also, that in the last
days, perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves.
etc. In this prediction several things are obvious.

Firstly, That selfishness is that, which will make the times spoken of
perilous; since it is expressly given, as the reason, why they shall be so.

Secondly, The apostle does not intend that Selfishness should then be the
common nature of mankind. Selfishness was ever the true nature of the human
heart, and therefore could not be applied, in this sense, to any age, as a mark
of distinction.

Thirdly, Neither could he intend, that men should be extortioners or highly
ambitious; since this was ever the character of mankind in every age, and
therefore could not be the mark of distinction of the age designed. But,

Fourthly, He must intend that selfishness, under some new appearance, in some
new manner, should characterise the last days.

We find the state of facts exactly corresponding with this prediction.
Selfishness has made its appearance, under a new form; and is received, through
the principal part of Christendom, as a justifiable spring of action. It has
dropped its ancient name, Sin, and assumed the new one of Virtue; like Satan
whose whole moral character is composed of nothing else, transforming itself
into an angel of light. Its operations are therefore of a most dangerous and
alarming nature. For when men have once believed that sinful motives are
virtuous, the reproofs of conscience are wholly prevented, the fears of
punishment lulled asleep, and the door, which leads to the perpetration of
every crime, finally thrown from its hinges.

Of all judgments, reprobation is the most dreadful; for it is nothing less
than an anticipation of the decisive sentence of banishment from the kingdom
and favor of the Deity. But this is by no means the only judgment they have
suffered. Their oppression, pride, and rapacity, have begun to receive a
recompense, equally suited to their nature and guilt*Revolt is often the
consequence and punishment of oppression, and fore mortification a most
becoming reward of pride. Loss of property also is a very frequent effect, and
most suitable retribution of avaricious rapacity.

In all these respects, according to the deeds of Britain, accordingly, has
God repaid: To the islands, in a striking manner, has he repaid recompense.

The revolt of thirteen colonies was an immediate, and to Britain, a fatal
consequence of her oppression of those colonies. To reduce them, we have seen
her undertake a long, expensive and bloody war. Great multitudes of her
inhabitants have been swept away in the field, and great multitudes by the
diseases incident to a military life. Many millions of treasure have been
expended by that nation, without accomplishing any considerable purpose; unless
that name may be given to the distress, they have occasioned themselves and us.
Innumerable valuable officers have been sacrificed, innumerable youths have
fallen, whose talents, happily directed, might have evidenced human happiness;
but have now answered no end, beside appeasing the rage of sanguinary ambition.
Where are now the names of Pitcairn, Abercrombie, Agnew, Campbell, Phillips,
and Andre; to whom glory paid the highest tribute, and for whose fate enemies
shed a tear?

Nor are these their only mortifications. They have experienced that peculiar
anguish, which the proud feel, when their haughtiness is laid low. -- Of all
the wars, undertaken by the British nation, perhaps this is the most
humiliating. Many, very many victories have been won from them by a people of
yesterday, stigmatized by them with the opprobious epithet of Rebels, and
accounted before them as nothing. From such a people every triumph comes armed
with a double sting. One of the most complete and glorious of these victories
is the event, which has assembled this audience. The wisdom with which this
enterprise was planned; the secresy, expedition, courage and conduct, with
which it was executed; the success and glory, with which it was crowned; and
the benevolent manner in which it was used; cast the brightest luster on our
great Commander, and the army immediately under him. It must be a most pleasing
circumstance to every humane mind, that this event was accomplished with so
little loss of blood, either to ourselves, or our enemies. Perhaps, in this
respect, as well as others, history can scarcely furnish its parallel.

On the general and army, which thus surrendered to us, our enemies placed
their chief hopes of prosperity. They had entered upon a field, where fond,
overruling fancy painted before them innumerable flowery scenes of pleasure,
and a long succession of golden days of triumph. Their general, endowed in
their imaginations with Caesarean genius, activity, and perseverance, ensured
conquest wherever he moved, and was regarded by them as a bright and dreadful
meteor, whose terrible glories announced hasty ruin to all who dared to stand
before him in the path of opposition.

His army were considered as the chosen companions of his victories, whose
intrepid resolution, matchless patience, and innate zeal for glory, with a kind
of prophetic influence, annihilated every vain dream of resistance, and like
the dreadful hand which wrote Belshazar's doom, inscribed Perez, on the
American empire. -- Thus delusive hope tinged before their eyes the gay clouds
of the morning, which, far beyond their expectations, hovering around the (...)
obscured his dawning radiance, extinguished the sapphire glory of the skies, and
shrouded the world in a dark and distressing day.

As this war has humbled the pride of Britain more than any other, so they
have received the deepest wounds, during the present campaign. -- In India, the
victorious Hyder Ally has triumphed over all their efforts, in several very
important engagements; recovered from them an extensive tract of territory;
retorted on their own heads the cruelties, they have so long practiced toward
his countrymen; and taught them to tremble for the very being of their empire
in the East. A band of russians, who have unhappily evaded the hands of
justice, and who would have ornamented the jail, the pillory, and the gallows,
have been poured by Britain into that region of misery, to plunder wealth from
its poor, wretched natives, whose only crime against them was in ability to
resist. But the instructive hand of retributive justice, has taught them, by
the pains themselves have begun to experience, the tremendous nature of those
agonies, they have so long multiplied upon others.

On the Ocean, their own element, as they are pleased to term it, their fleets
have been repeatedly and deeply humbled, by the gallant efforts of France and
Holland. This humiliation has been the more painful, because received in that
field, where they have been accustomed so often to triumph; where their flag
with towering insolence has so long claimed the dominion of the winds and
waves, and trampled with impunity on the rights of surrounding nations.

In America, their disgrace has been equally conspicuous. -- The prosperous
arms of Spain have clipped the wings of their pride in the southern regions,
and reduced them to the pain of seeing the little remainder of their American
territories grown still less by the loss of the Western Florida. -- In
Carolina, the wise and brave exertions of the illustrious Green, have reduced
their acquisitions to little more than a name. But the crown, the glory of the
campaign is the event, we are now commemorating. Here they have seen one great
and prosperous effort overcast all their shining prospects, and dissolve the
gay air castle they have been so long employed in building, and which they so
seriously expected to inhabit. Conquest, their beloved object, although long
viewed by us, and by other nations, as a dream, with which none but a sleeping
country could amuse itself, will now probably awake them also; when they will
perceive, that all the alluring scenes it presented, all the golden mountains
it promised, are by the very arm which awakened them, removed forever beyond
the power of recovery.

In all these instances their loss of property exceeds the power of
calculation. The colonies they have severed from them, were the fairest and
most flourishing on earth. The country, in which they are situated, is the
probable scene of an extensive, permanent, and glorious empire. Its soil is
exceedingly fertile; its climate salubrious and delightful; its productions of
the highest value and of endless variety; its extent immense; and its
commercial and political advantages the noblest prospect ever exhibited in the
circle of human things. -- With a more than Neronian extravagance, has Britain,
in the course of a few years, squandered, not only the present value of these
colonies, but their rising value for ages.

Thus to the islands has God repaid recompense. Oh, that the happy consequence
of it might be, that we might fear his name from the West; and that the
Heathen, from the rising of the sun, might behold and reverence his glory! --
Is it possible, my friends, that a mind capable of gratitude, or even of
reason, should be forgetful and thankless, under the receipt of such signal
mercies? Could stupid Heathens, or hardened Jews, sit silent and unmoved, under
such mighty interpositions as those, by which Providence has distinguished
this land? Who, but must remember, with hymns of the most fervent praise, how
God judged our enemies, when we had no might against the great company that
came against us; neither knew we what to do: but our eyes were upon him? Who,
but must give glory to the infinite Name, when he calls to mind, that our most
important successes, in almost every instance, have happened when we were
peculiarly weak and distressed? While we mark the Divine hand in the
illustrious event, we are now contemplating, can we fail to cry out, Praise the
Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endures for ever? Can we fail to think, or
to adore, while we think, who ruled, with so benignant a hand, the ocean and
the air, that wafted to our coasts, at so timely a period, the fleet of our
illustrious ally? Who preserved the Rhode Island squadron from the hands of the
foe, and bade them join their friends at so happy a crisis? Who led our enemies
to such a distance from succor, and prompted in them such feelings of
security, as ensured them to us for a prey? Who induced the officers and
soldiers of the different nations, which composed our army, like brethern, to
dwell together in unity? Who gave such success to our operations, and such
protection to our soldiers, as that the end was accomplished with so great
expedition, and with so little loss. And who let me add, as every benevolent
mind will add, so mercifully preserved the lives of our enemies, as that so
glorious a triumph was achieved, with so little pain to the feelings of a
Christian?

In the mean time, my friends, let us be cautioned not to attribute these
effusions of the Divine goodness to any excellence of ours. Our national
character, in the strongest manner, proves the folly and wickedness of such
vainglorious sentiments. I should be happy, unspeakably happy, if the moral
countenance of our land gave me a fairer opportunity of commendation. But it
becomes a preacher of truth and righteousness to spare no vice, and hide no
virtue, in friends or enemies. Sins of the deepest dye, and of an inconceivable
multitude, blacken our character also, and provoke the vengeance of Heaven. The
same systematical wickedness, which I marked, the same destructive doctrines
have spread through our land, and given birth to error, infidelity and guilt,
which exceed the power of description. This very war, a judgment which ought to
awaken repentance and humiliation, has produced a dissipation of thought, a
prostitution of reason, a contempt of religion, a disdain of virtue, a
deliberation in vice, and an universal levity and corruption of soul, before
unseen and unimagined. The same sins produce in all countries equal judgments,
from the hand of him, who is no respecter of persons. Let us not, therefore,
endeavor to hide our sins from the face of God; but confess and forsake them,
that we may find mercy.

While therefore we rejoice in the Divine beneficence, let us remember, that
for his own sake, even for his own sake, he has done this. -- These events,
wonderful as they may seem, are to be viewed only as a preparation for others
of higher importance; as necessary means of introducing those things, which God
principally respects in the system of his providence. They were not
accomplished that we might enjoy the exultation of victory, or a deliverance
from the rapacity of Britain; that we might triumph in the illustrious
exertions of our armies, or in the pride of independence and empire; but that
the work of Divine providence might be carried on, and a way opened for the
arrival of scenes, which shall respect happier ages, and influence in their
consequences the events of eternity.

The great period of a thousand years, in which the church shall enjoy
unexampled peace and felicity, is yet to begin. Its commencment is expected by
the most judicious commentators, at a time; near the year 2000. It begins, in
the Revelation of St. John, with the destruction of Antichrist, under the
seventh vial. The present time, denoted in the same book by the sixth Vial, is
discribed as a time, in which all things shall be preparing the way for that
destruction. The whole face of human things clearly exhibits to us that God is
now diligently prosecuting this design.

The character of Antichrist is unfolded to us by St. Paul, in the second
chapter of his second epistle to the Thessalonians, in the following terms --
Who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. This description, the clergy, especially the Popes, of the
Romish church, have, for many ages, literally verified. They have seated
themselves in the church, or temple of God, and showed that they were God, by
assuming powers, which belong only to God: The powers, for instance, of making
laws to bind the consciences of men; of pardoning sin; of forming religious
establishments; of introducing new laws for the conduct and government of the
church; or, in one word, the mighty powers, denoted by that comprehensive
title; The supreme Head of the Church; which belongs only to the Lord Jesus
Christ. They have even gone farther, and claimed a power, to which God himself
never pretended, the power of indulging in sin. Thus have they exalted
themselves above all that is called God, or is worshipped. Nor has this conduct
been confined to them. The various princes of Europe, have claimed and exerted
powers of a similar nature; and usually arrogated to themselves the same
blasphemous title, The supreme Head of the Church.

This scheme of policy has formed the most fatal opposition ever made to the
kingdom of Christ. To accomplish its destruction, and make an entire separation
between civil and ecclesiastical things, is the great business of Providence,
during the continuance of the sixth vial.

This is denoted by the last member of the text: When the enemy shall come in
like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. The
sentiment, contained in this passage, is visibly this -- When the great enemy
of God and man, in conjunction with his emissaries, shall make unusual and
violent exertions against the kingdom and people of Christ, the Spirit of the
Lord (as it is in the margin) shall put him to flight. The same sentiment, in
very similar expressions, is found in various passages of scripture, and is
particularly applied by St. Paul to the same event, in the abovementioned
chapter of the second epistle to the Thessalonians; Then shall that wicked be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and destroy
with the brightness of his coming. The brightness of God's coming, in this
passage, undoubtedly designates the evident and illustrious manner, in which he
will come to accomplish the ruin of the enemy. It is not to be conceived as a
material splendour or brightness; but a brightness of a moral or spiritual kind.
The breath of his mouth, probably intends the Divine word, like that parallel
passage of Hosea, I have slain by the words of my mouth.

From this passage of St. Paul, therefore, and the concluding part of the text,
it is evident that when the chief enemy of God, or his enemies in general,
shall shall come in like a flood, He will come in an illustrious manner, with
his Word and Spirit, and accomplish their destruction.

From these observations, I think it may be fairly deduced, that the brightness
abovementioned is to be applied to the Word and Spirit of God, and that it
refers to the glorious manner, in which they shall appear, at the time intended
by these prophets: That a conspicuous prevalence of truth, the word or breath
of God, and an extensive diffusion of holiness, the work of his Spirit, shall
put to flight the errors, iniquities, machinations, sophistry, power, and
opposition of the enemies of both: That the kingdom of the Devil, in the hearts
and heads of the children of disobedience, shall be overthrown by the infusion
of the divinely glorious principle of benevolence, and the consequent necessary
enlargement, and rectification of the understanding. In this way, shall the
infernal principle of selfishness be vanquished and its effects, error and
ignorance, vanish away.

The accomplishment of these great purposes, and a preparation for the fall of
Antichrist, is the visible aim of the present series of events. Within a few
years past, the Romish church has lost the chief support of the Popes power,
in the destruction of the Jesuits. This order was founded in the most
consummate policy, consisted of men of the first talents, was entirely devoted
to the interest of the papacy, and rendered it far more essential services than
all the rest of the Romish clergy united. Its ruin is therefore the most fatal
wound, popery has received, since the Reformation. Within a few years, the
doctrine of persecution seems to be nearly abolished in many countries of
Europe, and to be fading out of the complexion of human things. A more generous
policy has been adopted, especially in France, where the king, by annulling
the revocation of the edict of Nantz, has restored to the protestants the
privileges of their fellow subjects.

For this purpose, also, God appears to be diverting the errors of mankind into
the channel of skepticism; which throughout all the European countries,
Protestant* Popish and Mohammedan, has become the general character of the
learned. It is the tendency of skepticism to benefit the present religious
state of things, in several respects. Of all the systems or pretended systems
of religion, few of them are right, in essential articles; and even those that
are, have favorite errors annexed to them; to defend which, their professors
have ever made the most vigorous exertions. But it is impossible that error
should be sufficiently defended by argument, the only human support of true
religion. Conscious of the difficulty of maintaining their tenets by this
method of defense, the retainers of erroneous opinons have called in various
other kinds of assistance. The most eminent of these are civil establishments
of their particular schemes of religion and an inhibition of freedom of
enquiry. The skeptics, who are enemies of all religion whether true or false,
have, like other enemies, with keen discernment and great labor, searched out
the defects of their antagonists. With a happiness of ridicule, and a
convincing force of argument, they have exposed the absurdity of attempting to
enforce moral truth by the civil arm, and of restricting the mind in its
researches after truth of every kind, however bold and unlimited. They have
also, with great success, attacked that blind, selfish attachment to false
opinions, termed bigotry. This, like all other branches of selfishness has, in
all its designs, been a most bitter enemy to the truth. But it is the glorious
attribute of the Most High to bring good out of evil, and to induce selfishness
to those actions, which fulfill the wishes of a nobler principle. Thus, in the
instance before us, as bigotry is the parent of persecution to the skeptics, as
well as to others, they have been led, merely by motives of self-defence, to
attempt its overthrow. This attempt has been in a considerable measure
successful; and the skeptics have thus accidentally or in better language,
providentially become the instruments of building up that kingdom, which they
designed to destroy. For it is to be remembered as a most important truth, that
each of the abovementioned articles, religious bigotry, civil establishments of
religion, and restriction of moral enquiry, is a much more destructive enemy to
the religion of the Bible, than open infidelity.

The general state of human things is also evidently advancing this great
design. It is the tendency of human affairs, unless interrupted by
extraordinary incidents, to be constantly progressive toward what may be
termed natural perfection. In this progress, they are preparing the way for the
commencment of that moral perfection, which is the immediate effect of the
Spirit of God.

This sentiment is conspicuous in the progress of knowledge. The present
century is the most enlightened the world ever saw. As the views of the mind
enlarge its prejudices of many kinds deminish. The increase of knowledge has
unfolded the ridiculous nature of the popish ceremonial; the absurdity of the
pecular tenets of that church; their inconsistency in adopting the Bible in
pretense, and not in reality; the ridiculous nature of religious
establishments; the injustice of prescribing creeds and making acts of
conformity; the vain glorious folly of adding new forms of worship to the
Bible; with innumerable other articles, of the same ruinous tendency. Nor is
this the only way in which the increase of knowledge in general benefits
religion. It opens various avenues to pleasure, preferment, and glory, and thus
leads ambition into new channels, peaceful and harmless. Kings may perhaps, one
day in the course of this progress, esteem it more desirable to tread the
pleasing, beneficial walks of science and justice, than to sacrifice thousands
of lives, and millions of treasure, to secure the possession of islands or
deserts, designed by Providence as an inheritance for serpents and owls. So
many paths to peaceful reputation may in this way be presented to the mind,
that the glory of conquest and bloodshed may cease to delight ambition.

In this way, many illustrious geniuses have been called into action, and many
more may with reason be expected, who shall extend the limits of human
knowledge and happiness. If Montesquieu and Beccaria have already adorned human
nature in the gloomy regions of slavery and superstition, what may not be hoped
in happier climes and more enlightened ages.

The increase of commercial intercourse, is another beneficial part of the
progress abovementioned. From this source is derived that expansion of mind,
peculiar to those who visit and converse with different nations; and who learn,
by an acquaintance with the customs of others, to think with less prejudice and
pride concerning their own. Hence springs a reciprocation of benefits; a
general knowledge of wants, and the means of supplying them; an experimental
acquaintance with the necessity, and amiableness of hospitality; and an
universal enlargement of the habits of thinking, which effectually extirpates
the homebred surliness of solitude. Hence naturally arise more rational ideas
of civil policy; a milder administration of government; knowledge to discern
and desires to enjoy, the usurped rights of men; and a general spirit of
humanity; an universal civility of deportment, which, although due to man as
man, have, in most instances, been shamefully sacrificed at the shrine of
superiority.

To this great event refers, in an immediate manner, the present convulsion in
America. By this convulsion the world has seen, for the first time, an
extensive empire founded on the only just basis, the free and general choice of
its inhabitants. All others were founded in conquest and blood. Here, within a
few years, the rights of human nature have been far more clearly unfolded, than
in any other age, or country. Here constitutions of civil government have, for
the first time, been formed, without an invasion of God's prerogative to govern
his church, and without any civil establishments of religion. Here, at the
present time, is opened an extensive and most interesting, field of
improvement, by which the mind, in a stage of society most friendly to genius,
and with all human advantages at the commencment of its progress, is invited,
is charmed, to venture far in every path of science and refinement. At this
time also, and by means of this convulsion, is awaking a disposition to freedom
of enquiry, and to independance of decision, in the highest degree favorable to
the establishment of truth. From this disposition we may not only hope for the
greatest advances in natural and political science, but for the most noble and
extensive progress in the infinitude of theology. To this disposition we may
perhaps soon be indebted for arts hitherto without a name; and, by means of it,
behold other sciences, beside Electricity, deriving their birth from American
genius. To this disposition we may possibly soon owe new, improving, and
enrapturing ideas of the human nature and duty, the Divine providence and
perfections. From this source may we not hope for a speedy, final, and
universal agreement concerning the infinite distance between vice and virtue,
selfishness and benevolence? May we not, in a word expect, from this
disposition, a depth of research, a candor of debate, and a friendliness to
truth, which shall exhibit a contrast to former prejudices, begin a new era in
the progress of science, and attemper the mind to the easiest reception of the
grace of the gospel.

With these glorious, these infinite blessings in view, shall we not, my
friends, beg in now to fear the name of the Lord from the West, and set the
nations near the rising of the sun, an example of the most sincere gratitude to
our Maker; not only for delivering of us from the power and oppression of our
enemies, but for using us as instruments of advancing his immortal kingdom of
truth and righteousness? Called upon by so important and illustrious an
occasion as the present, can we fail to exhibit our praises, not in word only
but in deed and in truth, by adorning the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things? Let us break off our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by
repentance. Let us abstain this day, and all other days, from levity and sin;
and by a humble, devout, and cheerful acknowledgment of God's goodness, utter,
in the language of life, the noble exclamation of the psalmist. Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory!


