The British Prison-Ship: A POEM, IN FOUR CANTOES. --

VIZ. CANTO 1. The Capture, 2. The Prison-Ship, 3. The Prison-Ship, continued,
4. The Hospital-Prison-Ship.


To which is added, A POEM on the Death of Capt. N. BIDDLE, who was blown up,
in an Engagement with the Yarmouth, near Barbados.

-- Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark
A Lazar house it seemed, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased: all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heart sick agony; all feverous kinds
Convulsions --
Demoniac phrenzy, moping melancholy
And moonstruck madness --
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans; despair
Tended the sick, busied from couch to couch
And over them triumphant death his dart
Shook, nor delayed to strike.. --
Mliton. Par. lost. Lib. XI. 477. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY F. BAILEY, IN
MARKET-STREET. M.DCC.LXXXI.

The BRITISH Prison-Ship: A POEM, IN FOUR CANTOS.
CANTO I. The Capture.
OUR vessel now in all her pomp and pride,
AURORA named, departing out the tide*
'Twas thy deep stream, O Delaware* that bore
This pile intended for Eustatia's shore;
Bound to those isles where endless summer reigns,
Fair fruits, gay blossoms, and enameled plains;
Where sloping lawns the roving swain delight,
And the cool morn succeeds the breezy night;
Where each glad day a heaven unclouded brings,
And fragrant mountains teem with golden springs.
From Cape-Henlopen, with soft southern gales,
When morn emerg'd we spread our flowing sails; May 26, 1780.

Then East-south-east we plough'd the briny way,
Close to the wind, departing from the bay.
Hermes and Mars stood pensive on the strand,
And Jove with pity saw us leave the land;
To think what ills we wrethed mortals bear,
How vain our labors and how vain our care.
The gale increases as we plough the deep,
Now scarce we see the distant mountains peep;
At last they sink beneath the rolling wave,
That seems their summits as they sink to lave.
Gay Phoebus now the sacred source of light,
Had passed the line of his meridian height;
And westward hung, -- absconded from our view,
The shores were fled and every hill withdrew;
When ever cautious of some neighboring foe,
Aloft the captain bade a sailor go,
To mark if from the mast's aspiring height,
Through all the round, a vessel came in sight.
Soon did the seaman's quick discerning eye,
Far distant in the east a ship espy;
Her lofty masts stood bending to the gale,
Close to the wind was braced each shivering sail;
Next from the deck we saw the approaching foe,
Her spangled bottom seemed in flames to glow;
When to the winds she bowed in dreadful haste,
And her lee guns lay deluged in the waste;
At her top gallant that proud flag we saw,
Which once aspired to give the nations law;
But humbled now -- with grief, regret and pain, --
No longer holds the empire of the main.
The frigate now had every sail unfurled,
And rushed tremendous over the watery world;
Fixed and resolved our ship to overtake,
With toil immense she strove to gain our wake;
Nor strove in vain, -- the master gave command,
We tacked about and tried to gain the land;
As from the south the fresh'ning breezes rise,
Swift from her foe alarmed Aurora flies;
With all her sails expanded to the wind,
She fled the unequal force that chased behind;
Along her decks disposed in close array,
Each at its port, the grim artillery lay;
Soon on the foe with brazen throat to roar,
But small their size and narrow was their bore;
Yet faithful they their destined stations keep,
To guard the barque that bears them over the deep;
Who now must bend to steer a wary course,
And trust her swiftness rather than her force*
Still over the wave with foaming prow she flies,
And steady winds from equinoctial skies;
High in the air the starry streamer plays,
And every sail its various tribute pays;
To gain the land she bore the mighty blast,
And now the wished for Cape appeared at last;
But the vexed foe pursued us on our way,
Like a starved lion, hungry for his prey;
A frigate she and not unknown to fame,
For soon we learnt her nation and her name;
Iris it was -- but Hancock once she bore,
Framed and completed on new Albion's shore;
By Manly lost -- the swiftest of the train,
That fly with wings of canvas over the main.
Toward the land by favoring breezes led,
As Iris followed still Aurora fled;
(So fierce Pelides, eager to destroy,
Chased the proud trojan round the walls of Troy;)
Swift over the waves indignant they pursue,
As swiftly from their sangs Aurora flew;
At last the cape with joy we gained once more,
And here we strove to run the ship on shore.
But sat denied the barren shore to gain,
Denial sad and source of future pain! --
For then the inspiring breezes ceased to blow,
Lost were they all and calm the seas below;
(The cape dispelled the breezes from our sails,
Though farther off a lively breeze prevails;)
Our ship unable to pursue her way,
Tumbling about, at her own guidance lay;
But Iris still kept farther off to sea,
And lay with dreadful aspect on our lee;
Then up she luff'd and blazed her entrails dire,
Bearing destruction, terror, death, and sire.
Vexed at our doom we prim'd a piece, and then
Returned the shot to show them we were men.
Dull night had now her dusky pinions spread,
And every hope to 'scape the foe was fled;
Close to thy cape, Henlopen, though we pressed,
We could not gain thy desert dreary breast;
Though ruined pines beshroud thy barren shore,
With mounds of sand half hid or covered over;
Though howling winds disturb thy summit bare,
Yet every hope and every wish was there. --
In vain we sought to gain the joyless strand,
Fate stood between and barred us from the land.
All dead becalmed and lifeless as we lay,
The ebbing current forced us off to sea;
While vengeful Iris thirsting for our blood,
Flashed her red lightnings over the trembling flood;
At every flash a storm of ruin came,
'Till now Aurora shook through all her frame:
Mad for revenge our breasts with fury glow,
To wreak returns of vengeance on the foe*
Full at his hull our pointed guns we raised,
His hull resounded as the cannon blazed;
Through his fortopsail one a passage tore,
His sides re-echo'd to the dreadful roar;
Alternate sires dispelled the shades of night --
But how unequal was this daring fight!
Our stoutest guns threw but a six-pound ball, --
Twelve-pounders from the foe our sides did maul;
And while no power to save him, intervenes
A bullet struck our captain of marines;
Fierce, though he bid defiance to the foe,
He felt his death and ruin in the blow;
Headlong he fell distracted with the wound,
The deck bestain'd with heart-blood streaming round.
Now frequent cries throughout the ship resound,
And every bullet brought a different wound;
'Twixt wind and water one assailed the side, --
Through this aperture rushed the briny tide:
'Twas then Aurora trembled for her crew,
And bade thy shores O Delaware, adieu! --
And must she yield to yon' destructive ball,
And must our colors to these ruffians fall?
They fall -- not waiting for another blow,
We strike at once to the relentless foe;
Conveyed to York, the Britons lodged us there,
Safe in their dens of hunger and despair; June 1, 1780.

There, ships are prisons, void of masts or sails,
In which describing, even description fails. --
CANTO II. The PRISON-SHIP.
THE various horrors of these hulks to tell,
These Prison-Ships where pain and sorrow dwell;
Where death in tenfold vengeance holds his reign,
And injured ghosts, in reason's ear complain;
This be my task -- ungenerous Britons you,
Conspire to murder those you cannot subdue;
Why else no art of cruelty untried, --
Such heavy vengeance and such hellish pride? --
Death has no charms -- his empires barren ly, --
A desert country and a clouded sky; --
Death has no charms except in British eyes, --
See how they court the bleeding sacrifice!
See, how they pant to stain the world with gore,
And millions murdered, still would murder more;
This selfish race from all the world disjoined,
Eternal discord sow among mankind;
Aim to extend their empire over the ball,
Subject, destroy, absorb and conquer all;
As if the power that formed us did condemn
All other nations to be slaves to them; --
"A generous nation" -- is their endless cry,
But truth revolts against the daring lie;
Compassion shuns them, an unwelcome guest,
They to humanity are foes professed;
In their dark bosoms pity claims no share,
For God in anger never placed it there:
A brutal courage is their ruling pride,
For one short hour of fame have thousands died;
All nations they abhor, detest, decry,
But their dear race emblazon to the sky;
As if the sun for Britain only shone,
And all mankind were made for her alone.
Weak as I am, I Will try my strength to day,
And my best arrows at these hell hounds play;
To future years their bloody deeds prolong,
And hang them up to infamy in song.
So much I suffered, from the race I hate,
So near they should me to the brink of fate;
When seven long weeks in these damned hulks I lay In June and July 1780.

Barred down by night and fainting through the day;
In the fierce fervours of the solar beam,
Cooled by no breeze on Hudson's mountain stream;
That not unsung these horrid deeds shall fall,
To black oblivion that would cover all;
Not unrevenged shall all the woes we bore,
Be swallowed up inglorious as before:
The dreadful secrets of these prison caves,
Half sunk, half floating on my Hudson's waves;
The muse shall tell nor shall her voice be vain,
Mankind must shrink with horror at the strain;
To such a race the rights of men deny,
And blame the tardy vengeance of the sky.
See with what pangs yon' wasted victim dies,
With not a friend to close his languid eyes! --
He late, perhaps too eager for the fray,
Chased the vile Briton over the watery way;
Or close arrayed -- a stranger to all fear, --
Hurled the loud thunder from his privateer.
Thus do our warriors, thus our heroes fall,
Imprisoned here quick ruin meets them all;
Or sent afar to Britain's barbarous shore,
There die neglected and return no more. --
Ah, when shall quiet to my soul return,
And anguish in this bosom cease to burn; --
What frequent deaths in midnight vision rise!
(Once real) now all ghastly to my eyes,
Youths there expiring for their country lay,
And burnt by fevers breathed their souls away;
Where, now so cruel to deny a grave,
They plunged them downward in the parting wave*
The parting wave received them to its breast;
And Hudson's sandy bed is now their place of rest*
In slumbers deep I hear the farewell sigh,
Pale, plaintive ghosts with feeble accent cry;
At distance far with sickly aspect move,
And beg for vengeance at the throne of Jove.
End of Canto II.
CANTO III. The Prison-Ship, continued.
NO masts nor sails these sickly hulks adorn,
Dismal to view! neglected and forlorn; --
Here mighty ills oppress the imprisoned throng,
Dull were our slumbers and our nights were long;
From morn to night throughout the decks we lay,
Scorcht into fevers by the solar ray;
Wretched and poor, insulted and distressed,
The eye dejected, and the heart depressed;
Stripped of our all -- affronted and derided,
For cruel Iris had our clothes divided --.
No friendly awning cast a welcome shade,
Once was it promised but was never made;
No favors could these sons of death bestow, --
'Twas endless cursing -- ever-during woe; --
Immortal hatred does their breasts engage,
And this lost empire arms their souls with rage.
Two hulks on Hudson's rugged bosom ly;
Two, farther south, affright the gazing eye.
There the black Scorpion at her mooring rides,
There swings Strombolo, yielding to the tides;
Here bulky Jersey fills a larger space,
And Hunter to all hospitals disgrace.
Thou Scorpion fatal to thy crowded throng,
Dire theme of horror and Plutonian song;
Requir'st my lay -- thy sult'ry decks I know,
And all the evils of thy holds below;
Must nature shudder at this scene of fears,
And must I tell what must provoke thy tears;
American! -- inactive rest no more,
But drive those murderous Britons from your shore;
And ye that over the troubled ocean go,
Strike not your standards to this cruel foe;
Better the greedy wave should swallow all,
Better to meet the death-conducting ball;
Better to sleep on ocean's Oozy bed,
At once destroyed and numbered with the dead;
Than thus to perish in this dismal den,
Starved and insulted by the worst of men.
Some cruel ruffian over these hulks presides,
Clinton to such the imprisoned host confides;
Some wretch who banished from the navy crew,
Grown old in blood would here his trade renew;
Whose 'venom'd tongue when on his charge let loose;
Utters reproaches, scandal and abuse;
Gives all to hell who dare his king disown,
And swears the world was made for George alone.
Such are the men who rule the captives there, --
A menial tribe their brutal feelings share;
Stewards and Mates whom famed Britannia bore,
Cut from the gallows on their native shore;
Heavens! may I never feel the poignant pain,
To live subjected to such brutes again;
Their ghastly looks and vengeance-bearing eyes,
Still to my view in all their horrors rise;
O may I never review these dire abodes,
These piles for slaughter floating on the floods;
Nature recoils in agonies of woe,
And truth astonished, asks, Can this be so? --
American, on thy own plains expire,
A glorious victim to the hostile fire;
In thy own ship expect the deadly blow,
But be no captive to this tyrant foe;
Yield not alive to glut their greedy jaws,
First faint, first perish in thy country's cause;
Prefer to meet the winged, wasteful ball,
And cut to atoms for loved freedom fall.
Such scenes are acted in these gloomy cells,
Such horror in these doleful mansions dwells;
So many ills these loathsome hulks defame,
That to be here and suffer is the same;
Death has its woes and sickness claims its share,
But both are trifles if you die not there;
When to the ocean dives the parting sun,
And the scorcht tories fire their evening gun; The evening gun was commonly
fired from a little fortification called the Refugee fort, north of King's
College -- at the discharge we were constantly driven below decks; our
tormentors crying out, Down Yankies. --

A scene of horror rises to the view,
Such as the boldest painter never drew;
Three hundred prisoners banished from the light,
Below the decks in torment, spend the night;
Some for a bed their tattered clothing join,
And some on chests and some on floors recline;
Shut from the blessings of the cooling air,
Pensive they ly, all anguish and despair;
Meagre and sad and scorched with heat below,
They look like ghosts 'ere death had made them so:
How should they bloom where heat and hunger join,
Thus to debase the human form divine;
Where cruel thirst the parching throat invades,
Dries up the man, and fits him for the shades.
No waters laded from the bubbling spring,
To these dire ships the generous Britons bring;
Often through the night in vain their captives ask,
One drop of water, from the stinking cask;
No drop is granted to the earnest prayer,
To Dives in the regions of despair;
The loathsome cask, a fatal dose contains,
Its poison bearing through the altered veins;
Hence fevers rage where health was seen before,
And the lank veins abound with blood no more:
O how they long to taste the woodland streams,
For these they pine in frantic feverish dreams;
To springs and brooks with weary steps they go,
And seem to hear the gushing waters flow;
Along the purling wave they think they ly,
Quaff the sweet stream and all contented die; --
Then start from dreams that fright the restless mind,
And still new torments in their prison find.
Dull flow the hours till from the sky displayed,
Sweet morn dispels the horrors of the shade;
But what to them is morn's delightful ray,
Sad and distressful as the close of day;
At distance far appears the dewy green,
And leafy trees on mountain tops are seen;
But they no groves nor grassy mountains tread,
Marked for a longer journey to the dead.
At every hatch a group of centries stands,
Culled form the Scottish or the English bands;
As tigers fierce for human blood they thirst,
Rejoice in slaughter, as in slaughter nursed;
Of restless, cruel, angry, iron soul,
Take these my friend as samples of the whole;
Black as the clouds that shade St. Kilda's A barren, rocky and mountainous
island on the west of Scotland.
shore,
Wild as the winds that round her mountains roar;
Their hearts with malice to our country swell,
Because in former days we used them well!
Ingratitude! no curse like thee is found,
Throughout this jarring world's expanded round;
But such a host of various ills are found,
So many evils in these hulks abound;
That on them all a poem to prolong,
Would endless make the horrors of my song:
To what shall I their ruined bread compare,
Baked for old Cesar's armies you would swear;
So great its age, that hard and flinty grown,
You asked for bread, and they present a stone;
Why should I tell what putrid oil they deal,
Why the dread horrors of a scanty meal?
The rotten pork, the lumpy damaged flour,
Soaked in salt water, and with age grown sour;
Say, must I tell how famished messes The prisoners were divided into messes,
each mess consisting of six men.
join,
And on these offals of creation dine; --
For once a day, we touched the royal meat,
Once and but once at the king's charges eat;
(Such hosts he feeds upon our ravaged shore,
How could the heartless, mean soul'd wretch do more;)
If from your purse the gold has run to waste,
At morn nor evening look for no repast;
Then 'ere you sail your purse with gold supply,
For on the royal bounty you would die.
The vigorous spirit Rum.
that the islands West Indies.
yield,
Was by these petty tyrants here withheld;
While yet they deigned that healthy juce to lade,
The putrid water felt its powerful aid;
But when denied -- to aggravate our pains, --
Then fevers raged and revel'd through our veins; --
Throughout my frame I felt its deadly heat,
I felt my pulse with quicker motions beat;
A ghastly paleness over my face was spread,
Unusual pains attack my fainting head; --
No physic here -- no doctor to assist, --
My name was entered on the sick man's list; --
Twelve wretches more the-self same symptoms took,
And these were entered on the doctor's book;
The loathsome Hunter was our destined place,
The Hunter to all hospitals disgrace;
With soldiers sent to guard us on our road,
Joyful we left the Scorpion's dire abode;
Some tears we shed for the remaining crew,
Then cursed the hulk, and from her sides withdrew.
End of Canto III.
CANTO IV. The HOSPITAL-PRISON SHIP.
NOW towered the Hunter's black abode we came,
A slaughter house, yet hospital in name;
For none came there (to pass through all degrees)
Till half consumed and dying with disease; --
But when too near with laboring oars we plied,
The mate with curses drove us from the side;
Ten thousand times to irritate our woe,
He wished us foundered in the gulf below;
Ten thousand times he brandished high his stick,
And swore as often that we* were not sick; --
-- And yet so pale -- that we were thought by some*
A freight of ghosts from death's dominions come; --
But calmed at length, for who can always rage,
Or the fierce war of endless passion wage;
He pointed to the stairs that led below,
To damps, disease and varied shapes of woe; --
Down to the gloom we took our pensive way,
Along the deck the dying captives lay;
Some struck with madness, some with scurvy pained,
But still of putrid fevers most complained;
On the hard floors these wasted objects laid,
There tossed and tumbled in the dismal shade;
Of leaky decks I heard them much complain,
Drowned as they were in deluges of rain;
Denied the comforts of a dying bed,
And not a pillow to support the head;
How could they else but pine and grieve and sigh,
Detest a wretched life and wish to die!
Soon as I came to this detested place,
A wasted phantom star'd me in the face;
"And art thou come (death heavy on his eyes)
And art thou come to these abodes, he cries;
Why did thou leave the Scorpion's dark retreat,
And hither come, a surer death to meet;
Why did thou leave thy damp infected cell,
If that was purgatory, this is hell;
Here wastes away Autolycus the brave,
Here young Orestes finds an early grave;
Here gay Alexander* gay, alas, no more,
Dies, far sequestered from his native shore;
Ah, rest in peace, poor injured parted shade,
By cruel hands too soon in death arrayed;
But happier climes where orbs unclouded shine,
Light undisturbed and endless peace are thine;" --
He said and struggling in the pangs of death,
Gave his last groan and yielded his last breath*
A Hessian Doctor from Long Island came,
Not great his skill nor greater much his fame;
Fair science never called the wretch her son,
And art disdained the stupid man to own: --
Can you admire why science was so coy,
Or art refused his genius to employ? --
On rocky hills can Eden's blossoms blow?
Do Trees of God in barren deserts grow,
Are loaded vines to Aetna's summit known;
Or swells the peach beneath the frozen Zone? --
Yet still he puts his genius to the rack,
And as you may suppose, became a quack.
He on his charge the healing work begun,
With antimonial mixtures by the tun;
Ten minutes was the time he deigned to stay,
The time of grace allotted once a day;
He drencht us well with bitter draughts I know,
Peruvian Barks and Cremor-Tartar too;
On those refusing he bestowed a kick,
Or menaced vengeance with his walking stick; --
Hence came our deaths: by his defective skill,
By sending, one, another's purge or pill;
By frequent blows we from his cane endured,
He killed at least as many as he cured:
Some did not seem obedient to his will,
And swore he mingled poison with his pill; --
But I acquit him by a fair confession,
He was no Englishman, he was a Hessian; --
Although a dunce he had some sense of sin,
Or else the Lord knows where we now had been;
Doubtless in that far country sent to range,
Where never prisoner meets with an exchange; --
Then had we all been banished out of time,
Nor I returned to plague the world with rhyme!
Our doctor had a master, chief physician,
To all the hospitals in their possession;
Once and but once by some strange fortune led,
He came to see the dying and the dead;
He came -- but anger so deformed his eye,
And such a faulchion glittered on his thigh;
And such a gloom his visage darkened over,
And two such pistols in his hands he bore; --
That by the Gods -- with such a load of steel,
He came, we thought to murder, not to heal;
Had he so dared -- but fate withheld his hand, --
He came -- blasphemed -- and turned again to land.
From this poor vessel and her sickly crew,
An English ruffian all his titles drew;
Captain, esquire, commander too in chief,
And hence he gained his bread and hence his beef; --
But, sir, you might have searched creation round,
'Ere such another devil could be found;
Though unprovoked, an angry face he bore,
We stood astonished at the oaths he swore;
He swore -- till every mortal stood aghast,
And thought him Satan in a brimstone blast;
He wished us banished from the public light,
He wished us buried in eternal night;
That were he king, no mercy would he show,
But drive all rebels to the world below;
That if we scoundrels did not scrub the decks,
His staff should break our damned rebellious necks;
He swore besides, not waiting for his turn,
That if the ship took fire, we too should burn;
And meant it so -- this monster I engage,
Had lost his post to gratify his rage. --
If where he stood a loathsome carcass lay,
Not altered was the language of the day; --
He called us dogs -- and would have used us so,
But vengeance checked the meditated blow;
The vengeance from our injured country due,
To him and all the base unmanly crew.
Each Day at least three carcases we bore,
And scratched them graves along the sandy shore; After the deaths became more
frequent the corpses were thrown overboard.

By feeble hands the shallow tombs were made,
No stone memorial over the corpses laid;
In barren sands and far from home they ly,
No friend to shed a tear when passing by:
Over the slight graves insulting Britons tread,
Spurn at the sand and curse the rebel dead.
When to your arms these fatal islands fall,
(For first or last, they must be conquered all;)
Americans, to rites sepulchral just,
With gentle footstep press this kindred dust;
And over the tombs, if tombs can then be found,
Place the green turf, and plant the myrtle round.
These all in freedom's sacred cause allied,
For freedom ventured and for freedom died;
To base subjection they were never broke,
They could not bend beneath a tyrant's yoke;
Had these survived, perhaps in thraldom held,
To serve proud Britain they had been compelled;
Ungenerous deed -- can she the charge deny? --
In such a case to triumph was to die.
Americans, a just resentment show,
And let your minds with indignation glow;
While the warm blood shall swell each glowing vein,
Let fierce resentment in your bosoms reign;
Can you forget the vengeful Briton's ire,
Your fields in ruin and your domes on fire;
No age no sex from lust and murder free,
And black as night the hell-born refugee;
Must York forever see your sons expire,
In ships, in prisons and in dungeons dire;
How long shall foes that trading city keep,
Built, like old Tire for commerce, or the deep?
Rouse from your sleep and crush the thievish band,
Defeat, destroy and sweep them from the land;
Allied like you what madness to despair,
Destroy the ruffians while they linger there;
There Tryon sits, a monster all complete,
See Clinton there with vile Knyphausen meet;
And every wretch whom virtue should detest,
There finds a home -- and Arnold with the rest; --
Ah! monsters, lost to every sense of shame,
Unjust supporters of a tyrant's claim;
Foes to the rights of freedom and of men,
Stained with the blood of thousands you have slain*
To the just doom the righteous skies decree,
We leave you toiling still in cruelty;
The years approach that shall to ruin bring,
Your lords, your chiefs, your monster of a king;
Whose boldest deeds but crown his arms with shame,
And vice itself shall execrate his name.
THE END.
On the Death of Captain NICHOLAS BIDDLE, -- who was blown up in the RANDOLPH
Frigate. 1776.
By the Author of the preceding POEM.
I.
WHAT distant thunders rend the skies,
What clouds of smoke in volumes rise,
What means this dreadful roar!
Is Aetna from her basis torn,
Is sky-topt Atlas over-thrown;
Or is the Earth no more!
II.
Shock after shock torments my ear,
And lo, two hostile ships appear,
Red lightnings round them glow;
The Yarmouth boasts of sixty-four,
The Randolph thirty-two -- no more, --
And will she fight this foe!
III.
O, who commands that dismal blaze,
Where yonder starry streamer plays,
Does Mars with Jove engage! --
It Is Biddle wings those angry fires,
Biddle, whose bosom Jove inspires,
With more than mortal rage.
IV.
Tremendous flash -- and hark, the ball
Drives through old Yarmouth, flames and all
Her bravest sons expire;
Had Mars himself approached so nigh,
Even Mars without disgrace might fly,
From Biddle's fiercer fire.
V.
The Briton eyes his mangled crew,
And shall we strike to thirty-two,
Said Hector stained with gore;
Shall Britain's flag to these descend, --
Rise, and the glorious conflict end,
Britons, I ask no more.
VI.
He spoke -- they charged their cannon round, --
Again the vaulted heavens resound,
The Randolph bore it all; --
Then fixed her pointed cannon true, --
Away the winged vengeance flew, --
Britain, thy warriors fall!
VII.
The Yarmouth saw with dire dismay,
Her wounded hull -- shrouds shot away, --
Her boldest heroes dead; --
She saw amidst her floating slain,
Biddle triumphant stem the main,
She saw -- she turned and fled. --
VIII.
That hour, great, chief had she been thine,
Dear Biddle had the powers divine,
Been kind as thou were brave;
But Jove surmis'd that such a deed,
Would mortals from this temple lead,
And Biddle all his honors have. --
IX.
When thus to Mars said Heaven's great fire,
"Receive this arrow tipped with fire,
And haste -- make haste away;
To yonder conquering ship depart,
And midst her entrails shoot this dart; --
Shall she with lightnings play? --
X.
But when she bursts with horrid roar,
And the famed Randolph swims no more,
Observe my sworn decree;
Let her brave lads demand thy care,
To Heaven's best seats bid them repair, --
But Biddle bring to me. --
XI.
Of all the chiefs that stem the main,
Who war against proud Britain's reign,
He best deserves my love;
Apollo shall his praise rehearse,
And Clio style him in her verse,
Companion to the son of Jove.
XII.
The Randolph soon on Stygian streams,
Shall coast along the land of dreams,
The islands of the dead;
While I -- who part them on the deep,
Preserve the Briton still to weep,
His ancient honors fled." --
XIII.
He spoke -- and Mars with tears obeyed,
The Randolph her last volley played,
The Yarmouth owned the contest over;
But Mars his flaming arrow threw, --
To heaven triumphant Biddle flew, --
The Randolph swam no more.
FINIS.

