AN ORATION Delivered at BROOKFIELD, Nov. 14, 1781.

IN Celebration of the Capture OF Lord CORNWALLIS and his whole Army At
York-Town and Gloucester, in Virginia, BY The combined Army under the Command
OF His Excellency General WASHINGTON, On the 19th of October, 1781.

By NATHAN FISKE, A. M.

Alleluia, for the LORD GOD omnipotent reigns.

APOCALYPSE. BOSTON: Printed by THOMAS and JOHN FLEET.

AN ORATION, etc.
I SINCERELY congratulate you, my honored Auditors, on the confirmation of
happy tidings, and the certainty of that auspicious event, which has already
diffused joy through the breast of every true American; which gives such an
unusual flow to our spirits at this time, and has induced such numbers to
consecrate this day to festivity and mirth.

Could I, my respectable fellow citizens, on this happy occasion, answer my own
wishes, I might, with the greater probability of success, hope to answer yours:
Or could I feel that gratitude and devotion to the supreme dispenser of all
good, which the late instance of his unmerited favor demands; or utter the
genuine, the exhilerated emotions of my heart in language and eloquence the
most expressive of my feelings, I might with the greater reason flatter myself
that you would not go away altogether disappointed and unsatisfied. But being
unpractised in oratorial exercises, and unfurnished with oratorial talents; the
shortness of the notice, and my being unacquainted with many of the
entertaining circumstances of the glorious event in which we are now rejoicing,
render me unable to do justice to the occasion; -- to do justice to our brave
countrymen and allies, who have been the happy instruments of procuring for us
this glory and joy; and most of all, to do justice to the merciful
Superintendency of that Being, "whose is the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, and the victory."

But as the heart, when overflowing with joy, is the most disposed to
benevolence and candor, I take courage to proceed in my appointed task.

And in the first place, we ought, with the warmest emotions of gratitude, and
the sincerest resolutions of answerable returns, to ascribe that praise and
glory to the GOD of Heaven which is due to his name. "O sing unto the Lord a
new song, for he has triumphed gloriously, he has done mavelous things; his
right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory."

The joyous event which the hand of Providence has produced, and which we are
this day triumphantly celebrating, is no less than the Capture of the whole
British Army under the command of Lord CORNWALLIS, together with several
vessels of force, a number of transports and seamen, a considerable quantity of
military stores, etc. by the combined army of French and Americans, under the
command of his Excellency General WASHINGTON, in conjunction with the fleet
commanded by Count de GRASS.

As his Lordship was an active and enterprizing General, resolute and intrepid,
the Ministry and their friends placed much dependence upon him; and he was soon
to have taken the command of all the British troops in America. He is therefore
to be esteemed the more valuable prize; and his surrender is a more fortunate
acquisition to us, and a greater loss and disappointment to them. -- His army,
consisting of between 7 and 8000, most of them veteran troops, being all made
prisoners of war, not only relieves Virginia and the rest of the Southern
States (as the capture of BURGOYNE and his army, four Years ago, relieved us in
the North) but is such a diminution of the force of the enemy, that it seems as
if, instead of giving much disturbance to us, they must now tremble for
themselves.

This event must be considered, not only as important and glorious in itself,
but as big with the most happy consequences. Not to mention the tendency it
will have to cement the union between the three already allied nations of
France, Spain and America; and to make Americans set a yet higher value on the
friendship and assistance of their Allies, it must, unless the British ministry
and nation have drunken the very dregs of the cup of infatuation, change their
counsels and measures -- accelerate an honorable peace, and establish our
Liberties and Independence; as this, in conjunction with other instances of
success on our side, must convince them of their utter inability to "bring
America to their feet." And when the report of this capture reaches the
Congress of the United Powers of Europe, it must exalt their opinion of the
importance of America, and of the resolute and independent spirit of Americans,
and influence their determinations in our favor. This will heighten the esteem
of all other nations, and add warmth to their courtship of our alliance,
commerce and protection. And may we not hope, that the ill success of Britain
will be universally considered as the frown of Heaven, and a just punishment
for her cruel and unrighteous attempts upon America; -- serve as a check to the
exorbitance of ambition and despotism* and deter other powers from lifting a
rebellious hand against the sacred rights of mankind? And on my part, I cannot
forbear being gratified, not only at the humiliating subjugation of a person of
Lord Cornwallis's insolence and pride, to American Rebels, as he scornfully
stigmatized us; but also at the mortification and astonishment of the haughty
nation of Britain, of the Ministry, and of their tyrannical Prince, when the
fatal news comes like a sudden thunderclap to their ears.

This glorious event, on the 19th of October 1781, pregnant with such happy
consequences (which I must leave to your imaginations further to enumerate, and
to Providence to realize and bring forward in their season) revives the joyful
remembrance of the similar surrender of General Burgoyne and his army, on the
17th of October 1777, when Heaven, in a manner equally propitious and
remarkable, smiled upon our northern army, under the command of General GATES.

These exploits will shine with a distinguished brilliancy in the Annals of
Fame. What a radiance will this struggle for Liberty, which has produced such
exertions of genius and prowess, throw around America! It Is enough to make us
proud of our country, and to glory in the name of Americans; yea, even to make
it criminal to be destitute of this pride. -- Many nations have in their turn
been celebrated for noble achievements -- for battles won -- for cities taken,
and for countries gradually subdued. But the glory of capturing whole armies
together, one after another, with experienced commanders at their head, by
superior generalship, and with little loss of time or of blood, is reserved for
America.

Happy Country! the scene of such wonders, the nurse of such heroes, the
defender of Liberty, and the care of JEHOVAH! How natural is it to look forward
to distant posterity, and figure to ourselves their increase, their
tranquillity, their freedom, their prosperity! Soon, we trust, will 'commence
the era of our quiet enjoyment of those liberties which our fathers purchased
with the toil of their whole lives, with their treasure, with their blood. Safe
from the enemy of the wilderness; safe from the griping hand of arbitrary sway,
here shall be the late founded seat of peace and of freedom. Here shall arts
and sciences, the companions of tranquillity, flourish. Here shall dwell
uncorrupted faith, the pure worship of God in it is primitive simplicity,
unawed, unrestrained, uninterrupted. Here shall religion and liberty extend
their benign influences to savage, enslaved and benighted nations.' -- How can
we forbear rejoicing in such happy prospects, as well as in the events which
open such prospects to our view? How can we help testifying the gladness of our
hearts in every decent way, in which joy can be expressed, communicated and
heightened, and the event which gave rise to this joy be fixed deep in the
memories of all, and transmitted to future generations? But our care should be,
that 'Religion may preside over the joy of this day, and that gratitude to
Heaven may exalt it. There are some civil and military demonstrations of
gladness that so great an occasion demands. But the blessing is too divine, the
joy is too great, too sacred, to be affronted by profaneness, or polluted and
debased by sensuality.'

'May our gracious Benefactor perfect the work of mercy in which we are
rejoicing, and grant that neither we, nor those that come after us, may
wantonly forfeit these blessings and these hopes! May the cause of Liberty and
of pure Religion still advance by the favor of the Almighty, 'till every
nation shall be happy under the government of the Prince of Peace; and truth,
freedom and righteousness universally prevail!'

"Till pride shall cease its neighbors to invade,
"And swains at ease enjoy their humble shade:
"Till guilty spears shall cease to blush with gore,
"And swords be drunk with christian blood no more:
"Till harmless those in pruning hooks are found,
"And these in plough-shares mark the furrowed ground:
"Till exiled peace, returning from above,
"To human-kind propitious, heavenly dove!
"Shall olive to each clime, each country bring,
"And spread over nations wide her fostering wing:
"Till wrath and hate are banished in their turn,
"And every breast with purer flame shall burn!
"Till then, O Heaven!" AMERICA befriend,
Her Rights maintain, her Liberties defend.

