DR. HALL'S HALF CENTURY SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT SUTTON, (COUNTY OF WORCESTER) BY DAVID HALL, D. D.
OCTOBER 24th, 1779. BEING FIFTY YEARS AFTER HIS ORDINATION THERE.

BLESSINGS divine on the Pious attend,
Happy their Life, yet more happy their end.
WORCESTER, (MASSACHUSETTS) Printed by ISAIAH THOMAS, at his Office near the
COURTHOUSE. MDCCLXXXI.

A SERMON, etc.
ACTS, Chap. xx. 24th Ver. But none of these Things move me, neither count I my
life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my Course with joy, and the
Ministry which I have received of the LORD JESUS, to testify the Gospel of the
Grace of GOD.
MY DEAR CHARGE,
THIS Sabbath compleats a HALF CENTURY since I was ordained a Pastor, and upon
the laying on the hands of the Presbytery, solemnly vested and charged with the
care of souls in this place.

WHOEVER has just views of eternal things must be sensible, that in the name of
Christ to minister to immortals, who are so interested in those things, is the
most important employ in the world. Accordingly the Apostle Paul, a minister of
the Lord, makes frequent mention of the matter of his charge, as lying with the
greatest weight on his mind. And however imperfect and unprofitable I have been
in the discharge of my office, I think I can heartily join him therein. He had
his peculiar trials, but they moved him not; for he counted not his life dear
unto himself, in the discharge of his arduous trust, if so be he might finish
his course with joy. These last words abstractly, contain matter equally
concerning to all christians; which viewed in its solemn importance, is enough
to silence every amusement, and command the most entire attention of man. But
connected with the following clause, they redouble their energy upon that order
of men, here personated by the venerable Apostle. -- He received commission to
minister in matters relative to precious souls and things eternal -- things
weighty enough to crush the shoulders of Angels, and affect their minds with
the deepest solicitude; as the honor of GOD, and the salvation of men, were
jointly and so greatly concerned therein. An affecting sense of this (as the
time drew nigh in which he must give an account to the Lord Jesus Christ)
constrains him, as in my text to say, Neither count I my life dear unto myself,
so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of GOD.

OH how ponderous; how weighty the care of souls, on the hearts of faithful
ministers! St. Paul had such lively apprehensions of this, that death, in
whatever form it threaten him, moves him not, if these two things may but
happily conspire in his favor, viz. that his course might end with joy, and
the Lord Jesus account him faithful in the ministry which he had received of
him. The summary of which is, to testify the gospel of the grace of GOD. To do
this, is evangelically and faithfully to preach the divine word, not shunning
to declare the whole counsel of GOD. Conscious of having so done, the Apostle
is emboldened to make his appeal to the elders of the churches in the words
succeeding the text. As a dying man, whose face he expected they would see no
more, he calls them to record, that he was pure from the blood of all men; not
having shunned to declare unto them the whole counsel of GOD. Thus he appeals
to their consciences for witness, that without reservation, in its fullness --
he had set forth the glorious gospel of GOD's free grace, as he had been
directed by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

HAD he failed of this -- had he legalized the gospel -- had he shifted it off
from the proper basis, well might his confidence desert him: But he had
accomplished his errand; -- had sincerely testified the gospel of the grace of
GOD. Hence we behold the blessed Apostle possessed of that settled prospect of
finishing his course with joy; which indeed is the highest attainment of a
Saint this side Heaven.

IF we take a look at this world, and the course of ungodly men, lo! all that
is therein is putrid and passing, and what shall their end be! But we behold
the coursers to Zion upon their high places; and how justly do they esteem all
things on earth as dung and dross, if they may attain to please GOD, and be
accepted of a glorious Christ, in the great day of his appearing.

IN further meditation on the sacred passage before us, I would lead the minds
of the audience to consider;

THAT every man here in this life has his course.

THAT this his course will certainly be finished, in a short time, either with
joy or sorrow.

THAT it is of infinite importance to all, so to conduct in life, as that they
may finish their course with joy.

AND especially ministers of the gospel, whose great and main business it is,
to testify the gospel of the grace of GOD.

THAT every man here in this life has his course, will not be doubted; but
briefly to attend to it.

THE word course intimates that series of actions which pertains to any person.
Every Agent then has his course. A man's calling is his course; whether
secular, civil or sacred; and he that has no good calling, or employment,
necessarily has a bad one. That which a man mainly busieth himself about, is
eminently his course. He that is engaged for Heaven, employs his thoughts --
fixes his mind, and bends his studies to know how he may please GOD, and answer
the great intent of his being. Jerem. xxx. 21.
Who is this that engages his heart to approach unto me? says the Lord.

THIS is the grand object of every good man's care and study. I Cor. ix. 24.
So run that ye may obtain, i. e. use diligence, care and constancy in the
christian course, that you may obtain the prize of glory.

HE that is engaged for the world bends his course that way -- mediates,
converses and labors to obtain the enjoyments of it -- makes that his ultimate
end. Directly opposed to this, is that caution of our blessed Savior; John.
vi. 27.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you.

MAN is a busy creature, formed for action: And as there is here no continuing
city, so his life is called a race, and the manner in which he practices his
course, whether it be good or evil. Which of these is ours, is determined by
the temper of our hearts. Thus are we taught by our Lord, Matt. xii. 35.
A good man out of the good treasure of the heart brings forth good things;
and an evil man out of the evil treasure brings forth evil things.

THE great author of the world at first placed man in a very happy situation --
with his face toward Heaven, and his heart ingeniously disposed to holiness in
life and all manner of conversation: But his high handed rebellion has turned
his face from GOD, and plunged him into a labyrinth of wretchedness. Hence that
divine order from the Lord of all, Matt. xii. 33.
Make the tree good. This neglected, men will inevitably walk in the way of
their wicked minds, until they are filled with their own devices.

BUT I proceed to observe, that whatever be our course, it will be finished in
a short time, either with joy or sorrow.

THIS demands our serious thoughtfulness. Death is irresistibly ravaging
through the four quarters of the world: And Adam's sons, countless, are daily
droping off the globe: -- Yea, the earth itself must soon come to a terrible
dissolution. -- All things here below are temporary and transient -- every
courser must soon arrive at his term -- his days are as a shadow -- he
continues for a little while and then vanishes away.

VAST and infinite things do nearly and most intimately concern us all; for we
stand hard by the shore, and as at the very doors of eternity. -- Were man's
days an hundred years on the earth; -- still he has here no abiding place: --
The end is by and by: -- Time wings its way with speed, and the extremity of
our course is just at hand. Job. xvi. 22.
When a few years are come I shall go the way whence I shall not return.

OUR days on earth must indeed be finished soon, because our natures are so
very feeble and subject to decay, that upon the least touch they totter to a
fall: Our sinews are not as brass, nor our bones as iron: We continually feel
our natures mortal. -- Every pain and every ach in our bones or flesh, is none
other than death knocking at the door -- Heralds proclaiming the approach of
the king of terrors: -- Our days are few -- our race is short. -- 'As an eagle
hastes to her prey, so we swiftly to our end.'

O WITH what solemnity should our thoughts meditate the grand remove from this
inch of time, to endless eternity!

IF, passing from this world of inconsistencies and sorrows, we make
proportionate advance toward the mansions in our father's house, the prospect
is delightfully animating and joyful. -- But otherwise, every scene beyond time
must open with amazing terror: For if GOD's word may be credited, as our course
is, so will be our end.

IT is most evident, and yet surprising, that multitudes of men, posting to
eternity, are altogether careless and unconcerned about the course they steer.
Many, alas! very many run a mad career -- the danger of endless ruin hangs on
every moment. -- But a happy number there are, who being influenced by the
spirit of GOD, to faith and love, hope and confidence, upon a good foundation,
shall be safe in the arms of immutability -- Remove in peace to partake of the
fruit of their hope -- the salvation of their souls -- an immortal fullness of
joy.

THE Holy Ghost is the mover of their course -- God's word their compass, and
their haven, realms of bliss; where mortality shall be swallowed up of life
Rev. ii. 10.
. -- Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Such
are they who follow the lamb of GOD -- they have hope in their death -- well
may they triumph in their desolution. They behold the mark for the prize --
rich prize, just at hand.

O Christian, that movest thy course aright, though briars and thorns were with
thee on every side; yet thou may be joyful in passing the rugged -- gloomy
vales, for that thy sorrows shall soon have an end, and thine expectations
shall not be cut off. And will it not joy thee, when arrived to thy father's
house, to review thy labors in watchings and warrings, the sufferings of
Christ mystical, which were yet behind, having in part been filled up in thy
pains? Now when thy tears, kept in his bottle, shall be poured out for a
testimony in thy favor; Oh then! How exquisite the joy! When the Redeemer
shall bid thee welcome, and wipe away all tears from thine eyes forever! This,
to the disciples of the Lamb, as well as the commencement of wretchedness and
despair to the wicked, is near -- very near and certain.

THEREFORE, with the strictest propriety is it asserted -- that so to conduct
in this life, as to finish their course with joy, is of infinite importance to
all.

INDEED, my brethren, it should be the great concern and business of life, to
study and learn how to die in peace. No man is possessed of complete felicity
on earth.

IT was the saying of an ancient Philosopher, Solont
that he could not pronounce a man happy, until he knew how he died. And by
divine revelation, we are more abundantly certified of this truth; that he only
is happy, who is found ready to depart and die, when his Lord shall call for
him.

'HE that secures the good part, and reaches the true evidence of his heavenly
father's love; a ponderous crown of life is his sure and everlasting portion --
He knows his Redeemer lives, and as he lives in Christ, so death appears
without a sting; and his soul is full of longings to depart and be with him.'

OH! thrice happy man, whose lamp burns bright at the midnight of death.

IT is without dispute, that the prize of our high calling in Jesus Christ, is
infinitely worthy of the intense care and strenuous pursuit of every man.
Surprizingly strange therefore, that the generality of mankind should be so
indifferent to, and so negligent of, the invaluable part! -- Passing swiftly to
worlds of joy or woe, that they should be so entirely thoughtless to which they
go! Oh that the spirit of the living GOD might effectually move upon their
hearts; that, while time continues, they might awake from their delusive
slumbers -- arise from the dead, and become living, active instruments of GOD's
glory, and finally partakers of the happiness which flows from his presence and
approbation.

Is it possible, that any one (realizing his immortality) should not desire to
Numb. xxiii. 10.
Die the death of the righteous, and shat his last and might be like his?

BUT what are the necessary prerequisites to a joyful exit? In brief, they are
such as sanctification by the divine spirit -- or a renewal and change of the
temper of our hearts -- or a being born again. As we all have partook of the
corruption of nature by the first Adam, which exposes to complete wretchedness;
so every man, to become an heir of eternal glory, must partake of a renovation
of mind, according to the image of the second Adam.

THE blissful Heaven of GOD's presence, can be no place for the unsanctified
and unholy. -- The carnal mind is enmity to GOD. Hence the absolute necessity
of that sanctification by the spirit of GOD; which conforms us to his divine
likeness, and influences to the exercises of those graces, and the performance
of those duties, essential to the Christian character, that we may finish our
course with joy. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. We shall therefore
find the necessity of repentence toward GOD, and faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ; love to the divine character, perfections, laws and government; and
benevolence to creatures; accompanied, with increasing affection to things
spiritual, which are above; and proportionate indifference to, and
disengagedness from the less important, trifling and comparatively small
objects and enjoyments of the present world.

ACCOMPANIED, with prayerfulness, watchfulness, activity, diligence and
perseverance in the discharge of the duties of life -- duties which respect
GOD, our neighbor and ourselves. We must do justice, love mercy, and walk
humbly before GOD, etc. in order to enter into the kingdom of Heaven; which
seat of exalted happiness will not be indulged us, on account of any deeds in
us, meriting GOD's favor, but solely for the prevailing merits of Jesus
Christ, who is the purchaser, grand medium, and end of our salvation.

ALTHOUGH none will obtain eternal life for, or on account of, the exercise and
performance of Christian graces and duties; yet all, who from right principles
obey, shall through the infinite mediator, finish their course with joy, and
obtain a happy admission to glory: When, those of a contrary character, who
practice iniquity, shall be miserably excluded the realms of blissful
immortality. Rev. xxi. 7, 8.
He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his GOD and he
shall be my son. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and socerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Whoever, therefore, would wish to have his sun serene and bright,
(when the dark curtains of death are gathering about him) and his eternity
blessed, let him be holy in heart, in life, and in all manner of conversation.
This, without a labored proof, appears to be of infinite importance to every
man: But particularly and very especially.

TO Ministers of the Gospel, whose great and main business it is, to testify
the gospel of the grace of GOD, i. e. the gospel wherein the grace of GOD is
published to a fallen, perishing world.

As the doctrines of this gospel are infinitely concerning to men, so the
genuine and faithful preaching them is here considered by St. Paul as a matter
of the highest importance to himself, and others in the ministry; a number of
which, he now had an interview with. He intimates to them, that to bear a due
testimony to the doctrines of GOD's free grace (for which he was aware, the
legalizing Jews would furiously persecute him) was much dearer to him than
life. Therefore, he was determined to publish the grace of GOD, bear witness to
the truth of it, and prosecute his important errand, although it should prove
to the peril of his life.

THE grace of GOD here mentioned, intimates the free and eternal love of GOD
exhibited in the way of the new covenant.

ACCORDING to the tenor of the first covenant, fallen man must necessarily
relinquish all claim to the favor of GOD: The plan of the new covenant, on
which alone, man can become a partaker of forfeited happiness, is wholly
founded in grace. The gift of GOD's dear son to a ruined world, is entirely the
result of pure, free, rich and sovereign grace. Herein are displayed the
astonishing wonders of the father's love; giving the immaculate son, to become
a sacrifice to divine justice, that rebels might be redeemed to GOD.

As the purchase was free, so is the bestowment of that grace which brings
salvation -- the grace of GOD. 2 Timothy i. 9.
Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began.

FURTHER, the grace of GOD intends the free imputation of Christ's
righteousness; on account of which believers are reputed righteous in the sight
of GOD. Romans iii. 26.
To declare I say at this time his righteousness; that he might be just, and
the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

AGAIN, by the grace of GOD is designed the work of the spirit in believers.

ALL the righteousness that is wrought in them, or by them, is the fruit of
grace. From first to last, from the foundation to the topstone of our
salvation, it becomes us to cry, grace -- grace unto it. Yet the asserters of
the free grace of GOD wherein we stand, frequently meet with unreasonable
treatment. The pride of the depraved heart can by no means relish those soul
humbling doctrines of the gospel, which place the sinner at GOD's foot, as
helpless and miserable in himself: Which bind him to the methods of sovereign
grace, and shut him up to the faith of the gospel for salvation: Which deny to
the creature the honor of procuring his happiness, and attribute the whole
glory to Jehovah: Which bespeak the whole economy of redemption, the wondrous
work of GOD. Hence, at the present day, such as testify the free grace of GOD,
are by many, deemed stupid and irrational -- treated with scorn and contempt,
as though babblers and fools.

BUT, as all religion which is evangelical and genuine, stands upon this basis
(the grace of GOD) so it must be insisted on and testified. This is the gospel
which must be preached to every creature, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear. Blessed be GOD, it is well attested, and therefore may be
boldly testified.

THE gospel makes full proof, that being justified freely by his grace, we have
peace with GOD, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

THEIR'S is another gospel than that of GOD our savior, which is not founded
on the free grace of GOD. This is the only way in which our restoration to
holiness and happiness can possibly be accomplished. Wherefore, for a minister
of Jesus Christ, to believe, preach, practice and testify this gospel of the
grace of GOD, is the only way to fulful his ministry, to save himself and them
that hear him.

MINISTERS of the gospel are styled Stewards; and as they are by Jesus
entrusted with the charge of his oracles, ordinances, and the souls of men; to
him they must give an account of their stewardship; and how aggravatedly
terrible their doom, if they corrupt the word of GOD! conceal divine truth!
daub with untempered mortar! few pillows under arm-holes! disorder the peace of
the church! waste their time! abuse talents! -- or misimprove opportunities, to
sinful or insignificant purposes!

On the other hand, should they faithfully keep the trust committed to them:
Should they sincerely serve the Lord Jesus, in a busy, careful, pleasing
attention to the matters of his family -- the great affairs of his church and
kingdom; how joyfully may they expect to finish their course, and the ministry
which they have received of the Lord! How rich will be the rewards of divine
grace upon them, who have faithfully testified the gospel of the grace of GOD!
They shall be graciously owned of their Lord, in the great day of his
appearing; and with consummate glory enter into their master's joy. All
important then is it to them, that they so conduct in life -- in their
ministry, as that approbation and joy may attend the completion of both.

TO CLOSE THE SUBJECT --

My dear Friends,

IS it not suitable, while reflecting on what has been offered, and may it not
be very advantageous, in an impartial, critical, solemn manner, to examine
ourselves, and prove whether we be in the faith? of that happy number, who are
not greatly moved at any of the trying scenes of time, but prepared to finish
their course with joy?

IT can not be otherwise, than a most concerning, important, interesting
affair, to know how we have entertained the gracious offers and tenders of the
gospel of the grace of GOD -- whether in vain. Recollect that particular
declaration of GOD our savior; John iii. 19, 20, 21.
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that
does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in GOD.

THE gospel of GOD's free grace has been preached and testified to us: To
reflect then, that we have slighted, contemned, or neglected it, may well
strike us with fear and trembling.

LET us all call ourselves to account, and put the solemn query, how we have
believed and practiced; -- impartially enquire what effect the gospel of divine
grace has had on our hearts and lives; what we have been doing in the world;
and whether, we are now bending our course.

IT will soon terminate in joy or sorrow -- What are the paths in which we
walk? What is the main study and business of life? He that believes, and
endures to the end, the same shall be saved: He that believes not, but
practices iniquity, shall be damned -- must finish his course in misery.

LET every one, critically search his heart, and try his own ways; knowing that
in a very short time, his stewardship will be ended, and his present state of
trial be resolved into a state of eternal retribution.

WHEREFORE, let us behave as men, who are truly concerned for the honor of GOD
and the welfare of our immortal souls; and who have received the grace of GOD
not in vain, but to holiness of life. And by all means be careful, that we make
full proof of the reality of our high calling in Christ Jesus, by all gospel
obedience.

IF this wisdom have a residence in our hearts; if this understanding be
pleasant to our souls, it shall preserve and keep us.

NOW is the time, if we would work the work of GOD: Now is the accepted time,
behold, now is the day of salvation; and on the wise improvement of it, much
depends, even our happiness in death, and forever.

LET us look well to this, that we believingly, humbly and thankfully entertain
the testimony of GOD's free grace, as manifestly exhibited, in the gospel of
his dear son; wherein rich and full provision is made for the happiness and
glory of the most unworthy and helpless of the human race. Blessed are they who
hunger and thirst after righteousness: Who rely on the influence and grace of
GOD's spirit, to direct, strengthen and conform them to the image of his son:
That growing up into his likeness, they might be to the praise of him who has
called them: The happy trophies of redeeming love.

LET it be the solemn concern of every soul -- to deny themselves -- take up
the cross and follow after Jesus Christ. -- To deny, all ungodliness and every
worldly lust -- to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present evil
world: -- that they may evidence the virtues of him who invites them to his
kingdom and glory. As a means of incitement to this, let us keep in view the
end of our course -- the solemn account we are to give, to the Judge of quick
and dead, of every thought and word, and all the actions done here in the body
-- The fearful situation of a Christless sinner, at the verge of life, having
rejected the counsel of GOD against his own soul. Had he not refused the
gracious tenders of reconciliation, pardon and peace, he might have been a
saint in Heaven: But he would not come to Christ that he might have life: And
what can he now expect, but to suffer the just rewards of his folly and
madness! O wretched his state!

ON the other hand how unspeakable the joy, of a child of GOD, with clear and
ravishing views of the better world -- sensible that he is returning to his
father's house -- the mansions of bliss made ready by the divine Jesus for all
his followers!

O THRICE happy! -- eternally happy man! -- passing the dark valley of the
shadow of death, he fears no evil -- he clasps, in the affections of his heart,
the true savior of men; who has become his strength, light, life and salvation.

AND now, as the gospel ministry is the most solemn, important and interesting
employment; with what unspeakable weight must it ly upon the hearts of those
who are faithfully engaged therein, that they may be pure from the blood of all
men, not shunning to declare the whole counsel of GOD!

THEIR special business (as has been observed) is to publish salvation -- to
testify the gospel of the grace of GOD -- to put away false confidences from
the proud hearts of man -- to open blind eyes, and turn men (if possible) from
their courses of ungodliness -- to paint and present virtue and piety, in the
most amiable colors to the mind, as grounded in the love of GOD, and the
divine constraints of free and sovereign grace.

HAVING performed so arduous an employ -- so important for advancing the divine
glory, and so conducive to human happiness -- Having obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful; with what composure, cheerfulness and joy, may such an one
finish his course? Saint Paul speaking his sense of this says, 2 Timothy iv. 6,
7, 8.
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: And not to me only, but unto all
them also who love his appearing.

SUFFER me to add here, that it should be often thought of, and may well serve
to animate the zeal of a Minister, and excite the close, affectionate attention
of a people, to consider that they must shortly part; see the faces, and hear
the voices of each other, no more, for ever. Ministers are successively
finishing their course. Zech. i. 5.
Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?
Sensible of this; with what solicitude should Ministers exert themselves to
fulfill their trust?

VOCAL utterance, must soon exchange for silence in death.

MY dear people, as this sabbath closes a half century, since I have had the
care of souls in this place, and been speaking to you in the name of the Lord;
so neither you nor I can expect, but that (as this is the 76th year of my life)
the day of my departure draws nigh, when I shall have finished my testimony,
and, as an Ambassador of the Savior, speak to you no more.

REALIZING myself on the edge of time, I have this comfortable review of my
ministerial course (whether successful or unsuccessful) that I have not shunned
to declare unto you the whole counsel of GOD. That I have sincerely endeavored
to serve the glorious cause of my dear Lord and Master Jesus Christ: And if
possible to gain every soul to the knowledge and love of the truth: I have
labored to testify the gospel of the grace of GOD; and have been urging upon
you the assurances of the fullness of grace in Christ Jesus, for every one,
willing to accept the offered salvation.

IT is true I have been with you in much weakness and fear: I gratefully
remember your kindnesses: I feel the warmest desires for your salvation. But
alas! how little attention is paid to the all-important concerns of religion:
It affects me with bitter grief to observe the apparent decay of it -- That so
few are truly converting to GOD.

IT would give me surprising joy, to behold the symptoms of the grace of GOD
taking place in all your hearts; and true piety reviving amongst you, once more
before I die.

I CAN never forget my vehement struggles at the throne of grace, just before I
was here ordained a Pastor, lest I should fail of success among this people;
when GOD was pleased to afford some comfortable prospects: And to my particular
satisfaction, within five years 81 members were added to this church (at that
time 49 in number) although the people here were then but comparatively few.
The people of Sutton embodied and acted as a civil society on December 3d,
1718, for the first time; although a few families had inhabited it some time
before. November 27th, 1720, the Rev. John McKinstry was ordained their Pastor,
and September 2d, 1728, was dismissed from his pastoral relation to them.
After this, we had family meetings; praying societies in several parts of the
town: And within ten years after, an hundred and eighty members more were added
to the Church of Christ in this place. -- For thirty-five years last past,
there have joined in full communion with us, but 156. Of which number, In the
whole 417, and 49 before of the Church.
some have been dismissed and commended to the fellowship of other churches,
About an hundred and sixty have been dismissed and commended, chiefly to
Grafton, Sutton parish, Douglass, Royalston and Cornish.
and many are deceased and gone to their long home.

IN the course of my ministry, I have baptized a considerable number Adults 40
-- Infants 1210.
-- and oh, that they may all be found at Christ's right hand, in the great day
of his appearing.

MAY the number of them who fear GOD, and work righteousness who profess and
practice godliness, be greatly increased, and the glory of the Lord be manifest
in the midst of his people.

MY soul longs for the first ripe fruits -- Once more to see old and young
engaged in working out their salvation, and joining themselves to the Lord in
an everlasting covenant.

AT present, it is a very dark day with the Church of GOD; even as if the end
of all things was near at hand. For Luke xviii. 8.
when the son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?

MY dear hearers, as I have often told you, of late; so I am now constrained to
say, without a speedy revival of religion -- attention to sacred things --
reformation of the minds and manners of men; we have reason, the greatest
reason to expect ruin. If this declining age will not more diligently hearken
to the gospel of the grace of God -- he will remove their candlestick out of
its place.

WHO then? O who of you are on the Lord's side, and determined, in prayer, to
seek the face of the mighty GOD of Jacob? The gates of Zion tremble. --
New England never saw such a day as this -- The glory is departed.

THE United, American States, this moment are in a critical situation. Have we
not (...) relied on an arm of flesh? Have we not put too great confidence in
men and means? None has an arm like GOD. Why therefore do we restrain prayer
before him? O ye who fear the Lord, let us unite, and socially, and often
supplicate favor of the GOD of Heaven. And will not the Lord hearken and
reform his people? For when Zion travailed, she brought forth children. Be the
bones ever so dry, the quickening spirit of the Almighty can animate and raise
them up: And then shall Heaven and earth exalt his praise.

THE day is gloomy -- troubles, distresses and trials are on every side. We
(...) in fear -- in jeopardy -- in war -- a war pregnant with the fate of
thousands -- on the event of which much depends -- the rights and liberties of
America. But could I discern the clear tokens of piety, and of a revival of
religion, my joy would be great.

WITH respect to external changes, I think I can truly say -- none of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might
finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of GOD.

AMEN.

