MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.

BY MISS SEWARD. (AUTHOR OF THE ELEGY ON CAPT. COOK)

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, LETTERS ADDRESSED TO HER BY MAJOR ANDRE, IN THE YEAR 1769.

NEW YORK, PRINTED BY JAMES RIVINGTON. M.DCC.LXXXI.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, SIR HENRY CLINTON, KNIGHT OF THE BATH.
SIR,
WITH the zeal of a religious Enthusiast to his murdered Saint, the Author of
this mournful Eulogium consecrates it to the memory of Major Andre, who fell a
Martyr in the Cause of his King and Country, with the firm intrepidity of a
Roman, and the amiable resignation of a Christian Hero.

Distant Awe and Reverence prevent her offering these Effusions of Gratitude to
the beneficent and Royal Patron of the Andre Family. May Mr. Andre's
illustrious General, the Guardian of his injured Honor, his conspicuous and
personal Friend, deign to accept them from One, who was once happy in the
Friendship of the GLORIOUS SUFFERER.

Your EXCELLENCY'S most obedient humble Servant, ANNA SEWARD.

MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.
LOUD howls the storm! the vo^'d Atlantic roars!
Thy Genius, Britain, wanders on its shores!
Hears cries of horror wafted from afar*
And groans of Anguish, mid the shrieks of War*
Hears the deep curses of the Great and Brave,
Sigh in the wind, and murmur on the wave*
Over his damp brow the sable crape he binds,
And throws his Victor garland. -- Alluding to the conquest by Lord Cornwallis.
victor garland to the winds;
Bids haggard Winter, in the drear sojourn,
Tear the dim foliage from her drizzling urn;
With sickly yew unfragrant cypress twine
And hang the dusky wreath round Honor's shrine.
Bids steel-clad Valor chase that dove-like Bride.
Enfeebling Mercy, from his awful side;
Where long she sat and checked the ardent rein,
As whirled his chariot over the embattled plain;
Gilded with sunny smile her April tear,
Raised her white arm, and stayed the uplifted spear;
Then, in her place, bids Vengeance mount the car,
And glut with gore the insatiate Dogs of War! --
With one pale hand the Bloody Scroll -- The court martial decree, signed at
Tappan, for Major Andre's execution.
bloody scroll he rears,
And bids his Nations blot it with their tears;
And one, extended over the Atlantic wave,
Points to his Andres ignominious grave!
And shall the Muse, that marks the solemn scene,
" As busy Fancy lifts the veil between,"
Refuse to mingle in the awful train,
Nor breathe, with glowing zeal, the votive strain?
From public fame shall admiration fire
The boldest numbers of her raptured lyre
To hymn a Stranger? -- and with ardent lay
Lead the wild mourner round her Cook's morai;
While Andre fades upon his dreary bier
And Julia. -- The name by which Mr. Andre addressed the Author in his
correspondence with her.
Julia's only tribute is her tear?
Dear, lovely Youth! whose gentle virtues stole
Through Friendship's softning medium on her soul!
Ah no! -- with every strong resistless plea,
Rise the recorded days she passed with thee,
While each dim shadow of o'er-whelming Years,
With Eagle-glance reverted memory clears.
Beloved Companion of the fairest hours
That rose for her in Joy's resplendent bowers,
How gaily shone on thy bright morn of Youth
The Star of Pleasure, and the Sun of Truth!
Full from their source descended on thy mind
Each generous virtue, and each taste refined;
Young Genius led thee to his varied fane,
Bade thee ask All his gifts. -- Mr. Andre had conspicuous talents for Poetry,
Music, and Painting. The news papers mentioned Cow Chase, a satiric poem of his
upon the Americans, which was supposed to have stimulated their barbarity
toward him. Of his wit and vivacity, the letters subjoined to this work afford
ample proof. They were addressed to the Author by Mr. Andre when he was a youth
of eighteen.
all his gifts, nor ask in vain;
Hence novel thoughts, in every luster dressed
Of pointed Wit, that diamond of the breast;
Hence glowed thy fancy with poetic ray,
Hence music warbled in thy sprightly lay;
And hence thy pencil, with his colors warm,
Caught every grace, and copied every charm
Whose transient glories beam on Beauty's cheek,
And bid thy glowing Ivory breathe and speak.
Blessed pencil! by kind Fate ordained to save
Honora's semblance from her Early grave. -- Miss Honora S -- to whom Mr.
Andre's attachment was of such singular constancy, died in a consumption a few
months before he suffered death at Tappan. She had married another gentleman
four years after her engagement with Mr. Andre had been dissolved by parental
authority.
early grave.
Oh! while on Julia's arm. -- Mr. Andre drew two miniature pictures of Miss
Honora S -- on his first acquaintance with her at Buxton, in the year 1769, the
one for himself, the other for the Author of this poem.
Julia's arm it sweetly smiles,
And each lorn thought, each long regret beguiles,
Fondly she weeps the hand which formed the spell,
Now shroudless mouldering in its earthy cell!
But sure the Youth, whose ill-starr'd passion strove
With all the pangs of inauspicious Love,
Full often deplored the fatal art, that stole
The jocund freedom of its Master's soul!
While with nice hand he marked the living grace
And matchless sweetness of Honora's face,
The enamored Youth the faithful traces blessed;
That barb'd the dart of Beauty in his breast;
Around his neck the enchanting Portrait hung,
While a warm vow burst ardent from his tongue,
That from his bosom no succeeding day,
No chance should bear that talisman away.
'Twas thus 'Twas thus Apelles. -- Prior is very elegant upon this circumstance
in an ode to his friend Mr. Howard the painter.
Apelles bask'd in Beauty's blaze,
And felt the mischief of the steadfast gaze;
Traced with disordered hand Campaspe's charms,
And as their beams the Kindling Canvas warms,
Triumphant Love, with still superior art,
Engraves their wonders on the Painter's heart.
Dear lost Companion! ever constant Youth!
That Fate had smiled on thy unequaled truth!
Nor bound the ensanguin'd laurel on that brow
Where Love ordained his brightest wreathe to glow!
Then Peace had led thee to her softest bowers,
And Hymon strewn thy path with all his flowers;
Drawn to thy roof, by Friendship's silver cord,
Each social Joy had brightened at thy board;
Science, and soft affection's blended rays
Had shone unclouded on thy lengthened days;
From hour, to hour, thy taste with conscious pride,
Had marked new talents in thy lovely Bride;
Till thou had owned the magic of her face
Thy fair Honora's least engaging grace.
Dear lost Honora! over thy early bier
The Muse still sheds her ever sacred*tear! --
The blushing rose-bud in its vernal bed,
By Ze^hyrs san'd, and murmuring fountains fed,
In June's gay morn that scents the ambient air,
Was not more sweet, more in ocent, or fair.
Oh! When such Pairs their kindred Spirit find,
When Sense and Virtue deck each spotless Mind,
Hard is the doom that shall the union break,
And Fate's dark pinion hovers over the wreck.
Now Prudence, in her cold and thrifty care,
Frowned on the Maid, and bade the Youth despair;
For Power Parental sternly saw, and strove
To tear the lilly-bands of plighted Love;
Nor strove in vain; -- but while the Fair One's sighs
Disperse, like April-storms in sunny skies,
The firmer Lover, with unswerving truth,
To his first passion consecrates his Youth;
Though four long years a night of absence prove,
Yet Hope's soft Star shone trembling on his Love;
Till Busy rumor. -- The tidings of Honora's marriage. Upon that event Mr.
Andre quittes his profession as a merchant, and joined our army in America.
busy Rumor chased each pleasing dream
And quenched the radiance of the silver beam.
" Honora lost! -- my happy Rival's Bride!
" Swell ye full Sails! and roll thou mighty Tide!
" Over the dark waves forsaken Andre bear
" Amid the vollying thunders of the War!
" To win bright Glory from my Country's Foes,
" Even in this ice of Love, my bosom glows.
" Voluptuous LONDON! where thy turrets blaze,
" Their hundred thrones the frolic Pleasures raise;
" Bid proud Expense Sabean odours bring,
" Nor ask her roses of the tardy Spring;
" Where Music floats the glittering roofs among,
" And with meand'ring cadence swells the Song;
" Where Painting burns the Grecian Meed to claim,
" From the high temple of immortal Fame,
" Bears to the radiant Goal, with ardent pace,
" Her Kauffman's beauty, and her Reynold's grace;
" Where Sun-clad Poetry the strain inspires,
" And foils the Grecian Harps, the Latian Lyres.
" Ye softening Luxuries! ye polished Arts!
" Bend your enfeebling rays on tranquil hearts!
" I quit the Song, the Pencil, and the Lyre,
" White robes of Peace, and Pleasure's soft attire,
" To seize the Sword, to mount the rapid Car,
" In all the proud habiliments of War. --
" Honora lost! I woo a sterner Bride,
" The armed Bellona calls me to her side;
" Harsh is the music of our marriage strain!
" It breathes in thunder from the western plain!
" Wide over the watery world its echos roll,
" And rouse each latent ardor of my Soul.
" And though unlike the soft melodious lay,
" That gaily waked Honora's nuptial day,
" Its deeper tones shall whisper, ever they cease,
" More genuine transport, and more lasting peace!
" Resolved I go! -- nor from that fatal bourn
" To these gay scenes shall Andres step return!
" Set is the star of Love, that ought to guide
" His reffluent Bark across the mighty Tide! --
" But while my Country's Foes, with impious hand
" Hurl over the subject plains the livid brand
" Of dire Sedition! -- Oh! let Heaven ordain
" While Andre lives, he may not live in vain!
" Yet without one kind farewell, could I roam
" Far from my weeping Friends, my peaceful home,
" The best affections of my heart must cease,
" And gratitude be lost, with hope, and peace!
" My lovely Sisters! who were wont to twine
" Your Souls soft feelings with each wish of mine
" Shall, when this breast beats high at Glory's call,
" From your mild eyes the showers of sorrow fall?
" The light of excellence, that round you glows,
" Decks with reflected beams your brother's brows,
" Oh! may his fame, in some distinguished day,
" Pour on that excellence the brighter ray!
" Dim clouds of Woe! ye veil each sprightly grace
" That used to sparkle in Maria's face.
" My Tuneful Anna. -- Miss Anna Andre has a poetical talent.
tuneful Anna to her lute complains,
" But Griefs fond throbs arrest the parting strains.
" Fair, as the silver blossom on the thorn,
" Soft as the spirit of the vernal morn,
" Louisa, chase those trembling fears, that
" prove
" The ungoverned terrors of a Sister's love.
" They bend thy sweet head, like yon lucid
" flower,
" That shrinks and fades beneath the summer's
" shower.
" Oh! smile, my Sisters, on this destined day,
" And with the radiant omen gild my way!
" And thou, my Brother, gentle as the gale,
" Whose breath perfumes anew the blossomed
" vale,
" Yet quick of Spirit, as the electric beam,
" When from the clouds its darting lightnings
" stream,
" Soothe with incessant care our mother's woes,
" And hush her anxious sighs to soft repose.
" And be ye sure, when distant far I stray
" To share the dangers of the arduous day,
" Your tender faithful amity shall rest
" The Last dear record. -- I have a mother and three sisters, to whom the
value of my commission would be an object, as the loss of Grenada has much
affected their income. It is needless to be more explicit on this subject. I
know your Excellency's goodness. -- See Major Andre's last letter to General
Clinton, published in the Gazette.
last dear record of my grateful breast
" Oh! graceful Priestess at the fane of truth,
" Friend of my Soul! and guardian of my
" Youth!
" Skilled to convert the duty to the choice,
" My gentle Mother! -- in whose melting voice
" The virtuous precept, that perpetual flowed,
" With music warbled, and with Beauty glowed,
" Thy tears! -- Ah Heaven! -- not drops of
" molten lead,
" Poured on thy hapless Son's devoted head,
" With keener smart had each sensation torn! --
" They wake the nerve where agonies are born!
" But Oh! restrain me not! -- thy tender strife,
" What would it save? -- alas! thy Andre's life,
" Oh! what a weary pilgrimage 'twill prove
" Strewed with the thorns of disappointed Love!
" Never can he break the charm, whose fond
" control,
" By habit rooted, lords it over his soul,
" If here he languish in inglorious ease,
" Where Science palls, and Pleasures cease to
" please.
" It Is Glory only, with her potent ray,
" Can chase the clouds that darken all his way.
" Then dry those pearly drops, that wildly flow,
" Nor snatch the laurel from my youthful
" brow,
" The Rebel Standard blazes to the noon!
" And Glory's path is bright before thy Son!
" Then join thy voice! and thou with Heaven
" ordain
" While Andre lives, he may not live in vain!
He says! -- and sighing seeks the busy strand
Where anchored Navies wait the wished command
To the full gale the nearer billows roar,
And proudly lash the circumscribing shore;
While furious on the craggy coast they rave,
All calm and lovely rolls the distant wave;
For onward, as the unbounded waters spread,
Deep sink the rocks in their capacious bed,
And all their pointed terrors utmost force,
But gently interrupts the billows course.
So on his present hour rude passion preys!
So smooth the prospect of his future days!
Unconscious of the storm, that grimly sleeps,
To wreck it is fury on the unshelter'd Deeps!
Now yielding waves divide before the prow,
The white sails bend, the streaming pendants glow;
And swiftly waft him to the western plain,
Where fierce Bellona rages over the slain.
Firm in their strength opposing Legions stand,
Prepared to drench with blood the thirsty Land.
Now Carnage hurls her flaming bolts afar,
And Desolation groans amid the War.
As bleed the Valiant, and the Mighty yield,
Death stalks, the only Victor over the field.
Foremost in all the horrors of the day,
Impetuous Impetuous Andre. -- It is in this passage only that fiction has been
employed through the narrative of the poem. Mr. Andre was a prisoner in America,
soon after his arrival there, but the Author is unacquainted with the
circumstances of the action in which he was taken.
Andre leads the glorious way;
Till, rashly bold, by numbers forced to yield,
They drag him captive from the long-fought field. --
Around the Hero crowd the exulting Bands,
And seize the spoils of war with bloody hands;
Snatch the dark plumage from his awful crest,
And tear the golden crescent from his breast;
The sword, the tube, that wings the death from far,
And all the fatal implements of War!
Silent, unmoved the gallant Youth surveyed
The lavish spoils triumphant Ruffians made.
The idle ornament, the useless spear
He little recks, but oh! there is a fear
Pants with quick throb, while yearning sorrows dart
Through all his senses to his trembling heart.
" What though Honora's voice no more shall
" charm!
" No more her beamy smile my bosom warm!
" Yet from these eyes shall Force for ever tear
" The sacred Image of that Form so dear? --
" Shade Shade of my Love. -- The miniature of Honora. A letter from Major
Andre to one of his Friends, written a few years ago, contained the following
sentence. I have been taken prisoner by the Americans and stripped of every thing
except the picture of Honora, which I concealed in my mouth. -- Preserving that
I yet think myself fortunate.
of my love! -- though more and cold
" thy charms,
"Never have thou blessed my happy Rival's arms!
" To my sad heart each dawn has seen thee
" pressed!
" Each Night has laid thee pillow'd on my
" breast!
" Force shall not tear thee from thy faithful
" shrine;
" Thou never were his, and shall be ever mine!
" It Is fixed! -- these lips shall resolute enclose
" The precious Soother of my ceaseless woes.
" And should relentless violence invade
" This last retreat, by frantic Fondness made,
" One way remains! -- ate whispers to my Soul
" Intrepid Intrepid Portia. --

BRUTUS.] Impatient of my absence,
And grieved that young Octavius with Mark Anthony
Had made themselves so strong, she grew distracted,
And, her Attendants absent, swallowed fire.

CASSIUS] And died so?


BRUTUS.] Even so!


See Shakespeare's Play of Julius Coesar, Act IV, Scene IV.


Portia and her burning coal!
" So shall the throbbing Inmate of my breast
" From Love's sole gift meet everlasting rest!"
While these sad thoughts in swift succession fire
The smothered embers of each fond desire,
Quick to his mouth his eager hand removes
The beauteous semblance of the Form he loves!
That darling treasure safe, resigned he wears
The sordid robe, the scanty viand shares;
With cheerful fortitude content to wait
The bartered ransom of a kinder fate.
Now many a moon in her pale course had shed,
The pensive beam on Andre's captive head.
At length the Sun rose jocund, to adorn
With all his splendour the enfranchised Morn.
Again the Hero joins the ardent Train
That pours its thousands on the tented plain;
And shines distinguished in the long Array,
Bright as the silver star that leads the Day!
His modest temperance, his wakeful heed,
His silent diligence, his ardent speed,
Each warrior duty to the Veteran taught,
Shaming the vain experience Time had brought.
Dependence scarcely feels his gentle sway,
He shares each want, and smiles each grief away;
And to the virtues of a noble Heart
Unites the talents of inventive Art.
Thus from his swift and faithful pencil flow
The Lines, the Camp, the Fortress of the Foe;
Serene to counteract each deep design,
Points the dark Ambush, and the springing Mine;
Till, as a breathing incense, Andre's name
Pervades the Host, and swells the loud acclaim.
The Chief no virtue views with cold regard,
Skilled to discern, and generous to reward;
Each towering hope his honored smiles impart,
As near his Person, and more near his heart
The graceful Youth he draws, -- and round his brow
Bids Rank and Power their mingled brilliance threw.
Oh! have thou seen a blooming Morn of May
In crystal beauty shed the modest ray?
And with its balmy dews refreshing shower
Swell the young grain, and open the purple flower?
In bright'ning luster reach its radiant Noon,
Robbed in the gayest mantle of the Sun?
Then 'mid the splendors of its azure skies,
Oh! have thou seen the cruel Storm arise?
In sable horror shroud each dazzling charm,
And dash their glories back with icy arm!
Thus lowered the deathful cloud amid the blaze
Of Andre's destiny, -- and quenched its rays! --
Ah fatal Embassy! -- thy hazard's dire
His kindling Soul with every ardor fire;
Great Clinton gives it to the courage proved,
And the known wisdom of the Friend he loved
As fair Euryalus to meet his Fate,
With Nysus rushes from the Dardan gate,
Relentless Fate! whose fury scorns to spare
The snowy breast, red lip, and shining hair,
So polished Andre launches on the waves,
Where Hudson's tide. -- Major Andre came up the Hudson River to meet General
Arnold. On his return by Land he fell into the (...) of the Enemy.
Hudson's tide its dreary confine laves,
With firm intrepid foot the Youth explores
Each dangerous pathway of the hostile shores;
But on the Veteran Chief his step attends,
As silent round the gloomy Wood he wends;
Alone he meets the brave repentant Foe,
Sustains his late resolve, receives his vow,
With ardent skill directs the doubtful course,
Seals the firm bond and ratifies its force.
It Is thus AMERICA, thy Generals fly,
And wave new banners in their native sky!
Sick of the mischief artful Gallia pours,
In friendly semblance on thy ravaged shores.
Unnatural compact! -- Shall a Race of Slaves
Sustain the ponderous standard Freedom waves?
No! while their feigned Protection spreads the toils,
The Vultures hover over the destined spoils!
How fade Provincial glories, while You run
To court far deeper Bondage than you shun!
Is this the generous active rising Flame,
That boasted Liberty's immortal name!
Blazed for its rights infringed, its trophies torn,
And taught the Wise the dire mistake to mourn,
When haughty Britain, in a luckless hour,
With rage inebriate, and the lust of power,
To fruitless conquest, and to countless graves
Led her gay Legions over the western waves!
The Fiend of Discord, cow'ring at the prow,
Sat darkly smiling at the impending woe.
Long did my Soul the wretched strife survey,
And wept the horrors of the deathful day;
Through rolling Years saw undecisive War
Drag bleeding Wisdom at his iron Car;
Exhaust my country's treasure, pour her gore
In fruitless conflicts on the distant shore;
Saw the firm Congress all her might oppose,
And while I mourned her fate, revered her foes.
But when, repentant of her prouder aim,
She gently waves the long disputed claim;
Extends the charter with your rights restored,
And hide in olive wreaths the blood stained sword.
Then to reject her peaceful wreaths, and throw
Your Country's freedom to our mutual foe!
Infatuate Land! -- from that detested day
Distracted Councils, and the thirst of Sway,
Rapacious Avarice, Superstition vile,
And all the Frenchman dictates in his guile
Disgrace your Congress! Justice drops her scale!
And radiant Liberty averts her sail!
They fly indignant the polluted plain,
Where Truth is scorned and Mercy pleads in vain.
That she does plead in vain, thy witness bear,
Accursed Hour! Oh! darkest of the Year!
That with Misfortune's deadliest venom fraught
To Tappan's Wall the gallant Andre brought,
Snared in her fatal Maze, and borne away
Of fell Revenge, in all its guilt the Prey!
Oh Washington! I though it thee great and good,
Nor Knew thy Nero-thirst of guiltless blood!
Severe to use the power that fortune gave,
Thou cool determined Murderer of the Brave!
Lost to each fairer Virtue that inspires
The genuine fervor of the Patriot fires!
And You, the base Abettors of the doom,
That sunk his blooming honors in the tomb,
The opprobious tomb your hardened hearts decreed,
While all he asked was as the Brave to bleed!
Nor other boon the glorious Youth implored
Save the cold Mercy of the Warrior-Sword!
O dark, and pitiless! your impious hate
O'er-whelm'd the Hero in the Russian's fate!
Stopped with the Felon Cord. -- As I suffer in the defense of my Country, I must
consider this hour as the most glorious of my life. Remember that I die as
becomes a British Officer, while the manner of my death must reflect disgrace
on your Commander.

See Major Andre's last Words, inserted in the General Evening Post, for
Tuesday, November the 14th, 1780.


Felon-cord the rosy breath!
And venomed with disgrace the darts of Death!
Remorseless Washington! the day shall come
Of deep repentance for this barbarous doom!
When injured Andre's memory shall inspire
A kindling Army with resistless fire;
Each falchion sharpen that the Britons wield,
And lead their fiercest Lion to the field!
Then, when each hope of thine shall set in night,
When dubious dread, and unavailing flight
Impel your Host, thy guilt-upbraided Soul
Shall wish untouched the sacred Life you stole!
And when thy Heart appalled and vanquished Pride
Shall vainly ask the Mercy they denied,
With horror shall thou meet the fate they gave,
Nor Pity gild the darkness of thy grave!
For Infamy with livid hand shall shed
Eternal mildew on thy ruthless head.
Less cruel far than thou, on Illium's plain
Achilles, raging for Patroclus slain!
When hapless Priam bends the aged knee
To deprecate the Victor's dire decree,
The Nobler Greek, in melting pity spares
The lifeless Hector to his Father's prayers,
Fierce as he was; -- it is Cowards only know
Persisting vengeance over a fallen Foe.
But no entreaty wakes the soft remorse
Oh murdered Andre! for thy sacred Corse;
Vain were an Army's, vain its Leader's sighs!
Damp in the Earth on Hudson's shore it lies!
Unshrouded welters in the wint'ry storm,
And glues the riot of the Tappan. -- The place where Major Andre was executed.
Tappan Worm!
But Oh! its dust, like Abel's blood shall rise,
And call for justice from the angry skies!
What though the Tyrants with malignant pride,
To thy pale Corse each decent rite denied!
Thy graceful limbs in no kind covert laid,
Nor with the Christian-Requiem soothed thy shade!
Yet on thy grass-green Bier soft April showers,
Shall earliest wake the sweet spontaneous flowers!
Bid the blue Hare-bell, and the Snow drop there
Hang their cold cup, and drop the pearly tear!
And often, at pensive Eve's ambiguous gloom,
Imperial Honor, bending over thy tomb,
With solemn strains shall lull thy deep repose,
And with his deathless Laurels shade thy brows!
Lamented Youth! while with inverted spear
The British Legions pour the indignant tear!
Round the dropped arm the Funeral-scarf. -- Our whole army in America went into
mourning for Major Andre, a distinguished tribute to his merit.
funeral-scarf entwine,
And in their hearts deep core thy worth enshrine;
While my weak Muse, in fond attempt and vain
But feebly pours a perishable strain,
Oh! ye distinguished Few! whose glowing lays
Bright Phoebus kindles with his purest rays,
Snatch from its radiant source the living fire,
And light with Vestal Flame. -- The Vestal fire was kept perpetually burning,
and originally kindled from the rays of the Sun.
Vestal flame your ANDRE's HALLOWED PYRE!
LETTERS
Addressed to the AUTHOR of the foregoing POEM, by MAJOR ANDRE, when he was a
Youth of EIGHTEEN,
CLAPTON, October 3, 1769.
FROM their agreeable excursion to Shrewsbury my dearest Friends are by this
time returned to their thrice beloved Lichfield -- Once again have they beheld
those fortunate spires, the constant witnesses of all their pains and
pleasures. I can well conceive the emotions of joy which their first
appearance, from the neighboring hills, excites after absence; -- they seem to
welcome you home, and invite you to reiterate those hours of happiness, of
which they are a species of monument. I shall have an eternal love and
reverence for them. Never shall I forget the joy that danced in Honora's eyes,
when she first showed them to me from Needwood Forest on our return with you
from Baxton to Lichfield. I remember she called them the Ladies of the Valley
-- their lightness and elegance deserve the title. Oh! how I loved them from
that instant! My enthusiasm concerning them is carried further even than yours
and Honora's, for every object that has a pyramidal form, recalls them to my
recollection, with a sensation, that brings the tear of pleasure into my eyes.

How happy must you have been at Shrewsbury! only that you tell me, alas! that
dear Honora was not so well as you wished during your stay there. -- I always
hope the best. My impatient spirit rejects every obtruding idea, which I have
not fortitude to support -- Doctor Darwin's skill, and your tender care will
remove that sad pain in her side, which makes writing troublesome and injurious
to her; which robs her poor Cher Jean A name of kindness, by which Mr. Andre
was often called by his Mother and Sisters, and generally adopted by the
persons mentioned in these letters.
of those precious pages, with which, he flatters himself, she would otherwise
have indulged him.

So your happiness at Shrewsbury scorned to be indebted to public amusements --
Five Virgins -- united in the soft bonds of friendship! -- How I should have
liked to have made the sixth! -- But you surprise me by such an absolute
exclusion of the Beaux -- I certainly thought that when five wise Virgins were
watching at midnight, it must have been in expectation of the Bridegroom's
coming. We are at this instant five Virgins, writing round the same table -- My
three Sisters, Mr. Ewer, and myself. I beg no reflecting injurious to the
honor of poor Cher Jean My Mother is gone to pay a visit, and has left us in
possession of the old Coach; but as for nags, we can boast of only two
long-tails, and my Sisters say they are sorry cattle, being no other than my
friend Ewer and myself, who, to say truth, have enormous pig-tails.

My dear Boissier is come to town; -- he has brought a little of the soldier
with him, but he is the same honest, warm, intelligent friend I always found
him. He sacrifices the town diversions, since I will not partake of them.

We are jealous of your correspondents, who are so numerous -- Yet, write to
the Andres often, my dear Julia, for who are they that will value your letters
quite so much as we value them? -- The least scrap of a letter will be received
with the greatest joy -- write therefore, though it were only to give us the
comfort of having a piece of paper which has recently passed through your hands:
-- Honora will put in a little postcript, were it only to tell me that she is
my very sincere Friend, who will neither give me love nor comfort -- very short
indeed, Honora, was thy last postcript -- But I am too presumptuous; -- I will
not scratch out, but I unsay -- From the little there was I received more joy
than I deserve. -- This Cher Jean is an impertinent fellow, but he will grow
discreet in time -- you must consider him as a poor novice of eighteen, who,
for all the sins he may commit, is sufficiently punished in the single evil of
being 120 miles from Lichfield.

My Mother and Sisters will go to Putney in a few days to stay some time -- We
none of us like Clapton -- I need not care, for I am all day long in town; but
it is avoiding Scylla to fall into Charybdis. -- You paint to me the pleasant
vale of Stow in the richest autumnal coloring. -- In return I must tell you,
that my zephyrs are wafted through cracks in the wainscot; for murmuring
streams I have dirty kennels; for bleating flocks, grunting pigs; and squalling
cats for birds that incessantly warble -- I have said something of this sort in
my letter to Miss Spearman, and am twing'd with the idea of these epistles
being confronted, and that I shall recall to your memory the fat Knight's love
letters to Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Page.

Julia, perhaps thou fanciest I am merry -- Alas! -- But I do not wish to make
you as doleful as myself; and besides, when I would express the tender feelings
of my soul, I have no language which does them any justice; if I had, I should
regret that you could not have it fresher, and that whatever one communicates
by letter must go such a round-about way, before it reaches one's
correspondent; from the writer's heart, through his head, arm, hand, pen, ink,
paper, over many a weary hill and dale, to the eye, head, and heart of the
reader. -- I have often regretted our not possessing a sort of faculty which
should enable our sensations, remarks, etc. to arise from their source in a
sort of exhalation, and fall upon our paper in words and phrases properly
adapted to express them, without passing through an imagination whose
operations so often fail to second those of the heart. Then what a metamorphose
should we see in the people's style! How eloquent those who are truly attached!
How stupid they who falsely profess affection! Perhaps the former had never
been able to express half their regard; while the latter, by their flowers of
rhetoric, has made us believe a thousand times more than they ever felt -- But
this is whimsical moralizing.

My Sisters Penserosos were dispersed on their arrival in town, by the joy of
seeing Louisa and their dear little Brother Billy again, our kind Uncle
Girardot, and Uncle Lewis Andre. -- I was glad to see them, but they
complained, not without reason, of the gloom upon my countenance -- Billy wept
for joy that we were returned, whole poor Cher Jean was ready to weep for
sorrow. Louisa is grown still handsomer since we left her. Our Sisters, Mary
and Anne, knowing your partiality to beauty, are afraid when they shall
introduce her to you, she will put their noses out of joint. Billy is not old
enough for me to be afraid of in the rival way, else I should keep him aloof,
for his heart is formed of these affectionate materials, so dear to the
ingenuous taste of Julia and her Honora.

I sympathize in your resentment against the Canonical Dons, who stumpify the
heads of those good green The trees in the Cathedral walk in Lichfeld.
people, beneath whose friendly shade so many of your happiest hours have
glided away -- but they defy them; let them stumpify as much as they please,
time will repair the mischief -- their verdant arms will again extend, and
invite You to their shelter.

The evenings grow long -- I hope your conversations round the fire will
sometimes fall on the Andres; it will be a great comfort that they are
remembered. We chink our glasses to your healths at every meal -- Here Is to our
Lichfieldian friends, says Nanny; -- Oh -- h, says Mary; -- with all my soul,
say I; -- Alons, cries my mother; -- and the draught seems nectar. The libation
made, we begin our uncloying theme, and so beguile the gloomy evening.

Mr. and Mrs. Seward will accept my most affectionate respects -- My Male
friend at Litchfield will join in your conversation on the Andres. Among the
numerous good qualities he is possessed of, he certainly has gratitude, and
then he cannot forget those who so sincerely love and esteem him -- I, in
particular shall always recall with pleasure the happy hours I have passed in
his company -- My friendship for him, and for your family, has diffused itself,
like the precious ointment from Aaron's beard, on every thing which surrounds
you, therefore I beg you will give my amities, to the whole town. -- Persuade
Honora to forgive the length and ardor of the enclosed, and believe me truly

Your affectionate and faithful friend, J. ANDRE.

LETTER II.
LONDON, October 19, 1769.
FROM the midst of books, papers, bills, and other implements of gain, let me
lift up my drowsy head a while to converse with dear Julia. -- And first, as I
know she has a fervent wish to see me a Quill-driver, I must tell her, that I
begin, as people are wont to do, to look upon my future profession with great
partiality. I no longer see it in so disadvantageous a light* Instead of
figuring a Merchant as a middle-aged man, with a bob-wig, a rough beard, in
snuff colored clothes, grasping a guinea in his red hand; I conceive a comely
young man, with a tolerable pig-tail, wielding a pen with all the noble
fierceness of the Duke of Marlborough brandishing a truncheon upon a sign-post,
surrounded with types and emblems, and canopied with cornucopiaes that
disembogue their stores upon his head; Mercuries reclined upon bales of goods;
Genii playing with pens, ink and paper; -- while in perspective, his gorgeous
Vessels "launched on the bosom of the silver Thames," are wafting to distant
lands the produce of this commercial Nation -- Thus all the mercantile glories
crowd on my fancy, emblazon'd in the most refulgent coloring of an ardent
imagination -- Borne on her soaring pinions I wing my flight to the time when
Heaven shall have crowned my labors with success and opulence. I see sumptuous
palaces rising to receive me -- I see Orphans, and Widows, and Painters, and
Fiddlers, and Poets, and Builders, protected and encouraged; and when the
fabric is pretty nearly finished by my shattered Pericranium, I cast my eyes
around, and find John Andre, by a small coal fire, in a gloomy Compting-house
in Warnford Court, nothing so little as what he has been making himself, and in
all probability never to be much more than he is at present. -- But oh! my dear
Honora! -- it is for thy sake only I wish for wealth. -- You say she was
somewhat better at the time you wrote last. I must flatter myself that she will
soon be without any remains of this threatening disease.

It is seven o'clock -- You and Honora, with two or three more select friends,
are now probably encircling your dressing room fireplace. What would I not
give to enlarge that circle! The idea of a clean hearth, and a snug circle
round it, formed by a few sincere friends, transports me. You seem combined
together against the inclemency of the weather, the hurry, bustle, ceremony,
censoriousness, and envy of the World. The purity, the warmth, the kindly
influence of fire, to all for whom it is kindled, is a good emblem of the
friendship of such amiable minds as Julia's and her Honora's -- Since I cannot
be there in reality, pray imagine me with you; admit me to your conversationes
think how I wish for the blessing of joining them! -- and be persuaded that I
take part in all your pleasures, in the dear hope, that ever it be very long,
your blazing hearth will burn again for me. Pray Keep me a place; -- let the
poker, tongs, or shovel, represent me; -- But you have Dutch-tiles, which are
infinitely better; -- So let Moses, or Aaron, or Balaam's Ass be my
representative.

But time calls me to Clapton. -- I quit you abruptly till tomorrow: when, if
I do not tear the nonsense I have been writing, I may perhaps increase its
quantity. Signora Cynthia is in clouded Majesty. -- Silvered with her beams I
am about to jog to Clapton upon my own stumps; -- Musing as I homeward plod my
way -- Ah! need I name the subject of my contemplations!

Thursday.

I had a sweet walk home last night, no found the Claptonians, with their fair
guest a Miss Mourgue, very well -- My Sisters send their amities and will write
you in a few days.

This morning I returned to town -- It has been the finest day imaginable -- A
solemn mildness was diffused throughout the blue horizon* -- Its light was
clear and distinct rather than dazzling; the serene beams of the autumnal fun!
-- Gilded hills, -- variegated woods, -- glittering spires, -- ruminating
herds, -- bounding flocks, -- all combined to inchant the eyes, expand the
heart, and "chase all sorrow but despair." -- In the midst of such a scene, no
lesser grief can prevent our sympathy with nature -- A calmness, a benevolent
disposition seizes us with sweet insinuating power. -- The very brute creation
seem sensible of these beauties; -- There is a species of mild cheerfulness in
the face of a Lamb, which I have but in differently expressed in a corner of my
paper, and a demure contented look in an Ox, which, in the fear of expressing
still worse, I leave unattempted.

Business calls me away -- I must dispatch my letter. Yet what does it contain?
-- No matter, you like any thing better than news, -- Indeed you never told me
so, but I have an intuitive knowledge upon the subject, from the sympathy which
I have constantly perceived in the taste of Julia and Cher Jean. -- What is it
to you or me

If here in the city we have nothing but riot,
If the Spital-field Weavers cannot be kept quiet,
If the weather is fine, or the streets should be dirty,
Or if Mr. Dick Wilson died aged of thirty?
-- But if I was to hearken to the versifying grumbling I feel within me, I
should fill my paper, and not have room to entreat that you would plead my
cause to Honora more eloquently than the enclosed letter has the power of
doing. Apropos, of verses, you desire me to recollect my random description of
the engaging appearance of the charming Mrs. -- Here it is at your service --

Then rustling and bustling the Lady comes down,
With a flaming red face, and abroad yellow gown,
And a hobbling out-of-breath gait, and a frown.
This little French cousin of ours, Delarise, was my sister Mary's play-fellow
at Paris. His sprightliness engages my Sisters extremely. Doubtless they talk
much of him to you in their letters.

How sorry I am to bid you adieu! Oh let me not be forgot by the friends most
dear to you at Lichfield! -- Lichfield! Ah! of what magic letters is that
little word composed! -- How graceful it looks when it is written! -- Let
nobody talk to me of its original meaning " Field of Blood -- Here is a (...)
mistake. Lichfield is not the field of blood, but "the field of ^^^^bodies,"
alluding to a battle fought between the Romans and the British Christians ^n
the (...) persecution, when the latter were massacred. (...) Three slain Kings,
with their burying place, now Barrowcop Hill, and the Cathedral in miniature,
form the City-Arms. Lich is still a word in use. The Church yard Gates, through
which Funerals pass, are often called Lich Gates.
The field of blood!" Oh! no such thing! -- It is the field of joy! "The
beautiful city, that lifts her fair head in the valley and says, I am, and
there is none beside me!" -- Who says she is vain? -- Julia will not say so --
nor yet Honora -- and least of all their devoted

J. ANDRE

LETTER III.
CLAPTON, November 1, 1769.
MY ears still ring with the sounds of Oh Jack! Oh Jack! How do the dear
Lichfieldians? -- What do they say? -- What are they about? -- What did you do
while you were with them? -- Have patience, said I, good people! -- and began
my story, which they devoured with as much joyful avidity as Adam did Gabriel's
tidings of heaven -- My Mother and Sisters are all very well, and delighted
with their little Frenchman, who is a very agreeable Lad.

Surely you applaud the fortitude with which I left you! -- Did I not come off
with flying colors? -- It was a great effort, for, alas! this recreant heart
did not second the smiling courage of the countenance, nor is it yet as it
ought to be, from the hopes it may reasonably entertain of seeing you all again
ever the winter's dreary hours are past. -- Julia, my dear Julia, gild them
with tidings of our beloved Honora! Oh that you may be enabled to tell me that
she regains her health, and her charming vivacity! -- Your sympathising heart
partakes all the joys and pains of your friends. -- Never can I forget (...)
kind offices, which were of such moment to my peace! -- Mine is formed for
friendship, and I am blessed in being able to place so well the purest passion of
an ingenuous mind! -- How am I honored in Mr. and Mrs. Seward's attachment to
me? -- Charming were the anticipations which beguiled the long tracks of hill,
and dale, and plain that divide London from Lichfield! -- With what delight my
eager eyes drank their first view of the dear Spires.! -- What raptures did I
not feel on entering your gates! -- In flying up the hall steps! -- in rushing
into the dining room! -- In meeting the gladen'd eyes of dear Julia and her
enchanting Friend! -- That instant convinced me of the truth of Rousseau's
observation, "that there are moments worth ages." -- Shall not those moments
return? Ah Julia! the cold hand of absence is heavy upon the heart of your poor
Cher Jean -- He is forced to hammer into it perpetually every consoling
argument that the magic wand of Hope can conjure up; viz. that every moment of
industrious absence advances his journey, you know whither. -- I may some (...)
make excursions to Lichfield, and bask in (...) light of my Honora's eyes! --
Sustain me (...)! -- nothing on my part shall be wanting which may induce thee
to fulfill thy blossoming promises.

The happy social circle, Julia, Honora, Miss S -- Miss B -- n, her brother*
Mr. S -- e, Mr. R -- n, etc;. etc;. are now, perhaps, enlivening your
dressing room, the dear blue Region, as Honora calls it, with the sensible
observation, the tasteful criticism, or the elegant (...); (...) dressing (...)
iron-tongue of the Nine (...) bell, which disperses the Beings, whom friendship
and kindred virtues had drawn together*My imagination at aches itself to all,
even the inanimate objects which surround Honora and her Julia; -- that have
beheld their graces and virtues expand and ripen; -- my dear Honora's, from
their infant bud.

The sleepy Claptonian train are gone to bed, somewhat wearied with their
excursion to Enfield, whither they have this day carried their favorite little
Frenchman; -- so great a favorite, the parting was quite tragical. I walked
hither from town, as usual, to night -- no hour of the twenty-four is so
precious to me as that devoted to this solitary walk. -- Oh, my Friend! I am
far from possessing the patient frame of mind which I so continually invoke! --
Why is Lichfield an hundred and twenty miles from me? There is no moderation in
the distance! -- Fifty or sixty miles had been a great deal too much, but then,
there would have been less opposition from authority to my frequent visits -- I
conjure you, supply the want of these blessings by frequent letters -- I must
not, will not ask them of Honora, since the use of the pen is forbid to her
declining health; -- I will content myself, as usual, with a postcript from her
in your epistles. -- My Sisters are charmed with the packet which arrived
yesterday, and which they will answer soon.

As yet I have said nothing of our journey. We met an entertaining Irish
Gentlemen at Dunchurch, and, being fellow sufferers in cold and hunger, joined
interests, ordered four horses, and stuffed three into a chaise. -- It is not
you, I need apologize for talking in raptures of an Higler, whom we met in our
road. His cart had passed us, and was at a considerable distance, when looking
back, he perceived that our chaise had stopped, and that the Driver seemed
mending something. He ran up to him, and with a face full of honest anxiety,
pity, good nature, and every sweet affection under heaven, asked him if he
wanted any thing; that he had plenty of nails, ropes, etc. in his cart. That
wretch of a Postillion made no other reply than, "We want nothing Master." From
the same impulse the good Irishman, Mr. Till, and myself thrust our heads
instantly out of the Chaise, and tried to recompense to the honest Creature
this surly reply, by every kind and grateful acknowledgment, and by forcing
upon him a little pecuniary tribute. My benevolence will be the warmer, while I
live, for the treasured remembrance of this Higler's countenance.

I know you interest yourself in my destiny -- I have now completely subdued my
aversion to the profession of a Merchant, and hope in time to acquire an
inclination for it -- Yet, God forbid I should ever love what I am to make the
object of my attention! -- that vile trash, which I care not for, but only as
it may be the future means of procuring the blessing of my Soul -- thus all my
Mercantile calculations go to the tune of dear Honora. -- When an impertinent
consciousness whispers in my ear, that I am not of the right stuff for a
Merchant, I draw my Honora's picture from my bosom, and the sight of that dear
Talisman so inspirits my industry, that no toil appears oppressive.

The poetic task you set me is in a sad method -- My head and heart are too
full of other matters to be engrossed by a draggle-tail'd Wench of the
Heliconian puddle.

I am going to try my interest in Parliament -- How you stare! -- It is to
procure a frank. -- Be so good to give the enclosed to Honora; -- it will speak
to her -- And do you say every thing that is kind for me to every other
distinguished Friend in the Dressing Room circle -- encourage them in their
obliging desire of scribbling in your letters, but don't let them take Honora's
corner of the sheet.

Adieu! -- May you all possess that cheerfulness denied to your Cher Jean. I
fear it hurts my mother to see my musing moods; -- but I can neither help nor
overcome them. -- The near hopes of another excursion to Lichfield, could alone
disperse every gloomy vapor, of my imagination. Again, and yet again Adieu!

J. ANDRE.

FINIS.

