DON'T TREAD ON ME
GEORGE WASHINGTON Comander in Chief of ye Armies of ye UNITED STATES of
AMERICA.



A POETICAL EPISTLE TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

FROM An INHABITANT of the STATE of MARYLAND.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A SHORT SKETCH OF General WASHINGTON'S LIFE and CHARACTER.

-- On his aspect shines
Sublimest virtue, and desire of fame,
Where justice gives the laurel; in his eye
The unextinguishable spark, which fires
The souls of Patriots; while his brow supports
Undaunted valor, and contempt of death.
LEONIDAS. Ille Deum vitam accipiet, divisque videbit
Per mistos heroas, et ipse videbitur illis.
VIRG. LONDON, PRINTED: PROVIDENCE (Rhode Island) Reprinted and Sold by
BENNETT WHEELER, at his Office on the West Side of the Great Bridge.
M,DCC,LXXXI.

ADVERTISEMENT to the London EDITION.
THE Reader may depend upon the following Poem being the genuine production of
a native of America: The Author is not vain enough to flatter himself, that it
will throw any fresh luster on the character of General WASHINGTON, or entitle
his unskilful muse to the smallest degree of poetical same. His sole view in
penning this epistle was to express, in the best manner he was able, the warm
feelings of a grateful individual toward that distinguished and best of men;
to whom he, and every American, will in all likelihood be indebted for the
independence and commercial prosperity of his country. The sole motive for
publishing this Poem, and adding thereto a sketch of the Life and Character of
General Washington (which the Editor now gives to the Reader in the plain
unaltered narrative of the Author, who is connected and intimate in the family
of that great man) is for the charitable purpose of raising a few guineas to
relieve, in a small measure, the distresses of some hundreds of American
prisoners, now suffering confinement in the gaols of England. The profits
arising from the sale of this book will be faithfully appropriated to that
purpose; and this the Editor rests assured will be a much stronger incitement
for the benevolent and humane to become purchasers of it, than any intrinsic
value the performance may demand.

Very large and liberal sums were given for this charitable purpose in January
1778. The Committee appointed for its distribution, to prevent an overflow of
public generosity, closed the subscription, thinking it was very ample; and
hoped that after some short period no prisoners, in this ever to be lamented
war, would on either side remain. That hope having vanished, the progress of
calamity not being stopped, and no prospect of its conclusion, the Committee
again opened the subscription; and with a degree of success that places the
character of the nation and of individuals in the most honorable light, by
proving that their humanity is not the capricious or fashionable exertion of
the moment, but a constant impulse, and the deliberate result of their reason.
This additional subscription, though disbursed with economy, is now expended,
and the wants of these unhappy sufferers nearly as extensive as ever. The pains
of captivity cannot be much lightened by this small mite of an obscure
individual; but such munificent donations as have been made by Englishmen
toward their relief, must stamp a lession on the minds of those unfortunate
captives, and our American brethren in general, that they should not withdraw
all national affection from a country, the bulk of whose inhabitants have not
withdrawn all national affection from them.




N. B. If there are any of the Generous and Humane who have not yet subscribed
to the relief of the American Prisoners, this publication gives them a fair
opportunity to exercise their benevolence, by sending their donations for this
book to the publishers; which they may be assured will be faithfully applied,
as it will be paid into the Committee for American Prisoners by the Editor.

* Fifteen Thousand Copies of this POEM were Sold in the City of London, in
about Three Weeks, at Two Shillings and Sixpence Sterling, each, and the Money
appropriated to the Benefit of the American Prisoners.

J -- T --.

A POETICAL EPISTLE TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire, etc. etc. etc.
-- Honest praise
Often nobly sways
Ingenuous youth:
But from the coward and the lying mouth
Praise is reproach. Eternal God alone
For mortals fixes that sublime award.
He, from the faithful records of his throne
Bids the historian and the bard
Dispose of honor and of scorn:
Discern the patriot from the slave;
And write the good, the wise, the brave,
For lessons to the multitude unborn.
AKENSIDE'S Ode.
WHILE many a servile Muse her succor lends
To flatter tyrants, or a tyrant's friends;
While thousands slaughtered at Ambition's shrine
Are made a plea to court the tuneful Nine:
Whilst laureats lift their heroes to the sky,
Foretell their conquests twice a year, and lie,
Damn half starved rebels to eternal shame,
Or paint them trembling at Britannia's name:
Permit an humble bard, Great Chief, to raise
One truth-erected trophy to thy praise:
No flattering colors shall these numbers seek,
To tinge with blushes Virtue's modest cheek:
Call forth to view no great or generous deed,
But foes must own and Washington may read.
Say, where along yon venerable wood,
My native stream The river Wiecomico, which empties itself into the great
river Potomack.
swells thy Potomack's flood,
Shall my untutored Muse begin the song,
Which future bards in rapture shall prolong;
Or there my little bark presume to fail,
Fanned by fair Liberty's inspiring gale?
Fair Liberty, of man the noblest claim,
Great source of bliss, kind nurse of arts and fame;
She, wronged and exiled from yon eastern climes,
Perhaps may deign to listen to these rhymes:
And in these regions pleased to find relief,
May bear them smiling to her favorite chief:
Illustrious Chief! whom with one common voice
An injured people chose, and Heaven approved the choice.
Forth from the bosom of thy calm retreat,
At once the hero's and the sage's seat,
Where bounteous Nature spreads her choicest gifts
Of woods and lawns along thy native cliffs Cliffs of Virginia formed by the
banks of the Potomack.
,
Where, with the Graces, Wisdom chose to roam,
Where sweet Simplicity had fixed her home;
Where wedded Love displayed his mildest ray,
To gild each rising and each setting day,
And with a smile could smooth the brow of Care,
Save when thy country's cries alarmed thy ear.
Great Freedom called Thee to the glorious strife,
The tranquil scenes of sweet domestic life
Delight no more: to arms! to arms! she cries;
To arms! to arms! each sister-state replies.
Be Thou great guardian of thy country's cause,
She said, and hosts of heroes shout applause.
Thus, when of old, from his paternal farm
Rome bade her rigid Cincinnatus arm;
The illustrious peasant rushes to the field,
Soon are the haughty Volsii taught to yield:
His country saved, the solemn triumph over,
He tills his native acres as before.
Or, when Timoleon's god-like bosom glowed
To court true fame, and Virtue marked the road;
Joyful she led him to Trinacria's Sicily.
shore,
And kings and kinglings quickly were no more:
Soon was the tyrant Dionysius the Tyrant.
taught that power to own,
That hurled him headlong from his guilty throne:
Yet, tyrant-like, ambitious still to rule,
He frowned the petty monarch of a school;
Whilst Thee, illustrious Chief, no titles grace,
Save friend and guardian to the human race.
Hail, happy man! crowned with immortal bays,
Before whose glory shrinks the dwindled rays
Of royal pageantry! thy generous heart
To Freedom's sons shall still its warmth impart,
Teach them their native dignity to scan,
And scorn the wretch who spurns his fellow-man:
And when in eastern climes, 'midst lawless sway,
Thy same shall sink, and Freedom's wreaths decay,
These infants states shall catch the god-like flame,
And tyrants still shall shudder at thy name;
Then nobly dare Columbia America.
to be free,
And what Timoleon was, thy Washington shall be.
What though proud Britain yet undrench'd with blood,
Pour her destructive thousands over the flood,
With hellish rage the extremes of war pursue,
Not conquest now, but mean revenge her view;
What though to glut her unrelenting ire,
Of German tyrants German slaves she hire,
Teach them to riot in the lawless spoil.
Which erst had made her own proud sons recoil,
Rouse the grim savage to relentless war,
And faintly tell his scalping arm to spare:
What though fresh wreaths great victory still must twine,
To grace thy temples, Gates, or Lincoln thine:
What though Herculean labors still remain,
And all our battles must be fought again;
Yet, if the embattled field thy Genius guide,
Or in the senate Wisdom still preside;
Sooner shall you blue-mist-clad mountain A lofty mountain on the confines of
Maryland and Virginia, called The Blue Ridge.
dread
The rattling storms that war around his head,
Sooner shall night usurp the beam of day,
Than Freedom crouch beneath Oppression's sway:
Calm and serene she views the gathering storm,
Sees her brave youth around thy standard swarm,
Each bosom panting for the glorious wreath,
Or, should they fall, each grasping it in death.
Come then, ye minions of tyrannic sway,
Strive who shall best its dire commands obey:
Let other Falmouth's tell each future age,
Of British fleets the unprecedented rage,
And from their ashes this great truth proclaim,
"Destruction only is the tyrant's aim:"
Once more, fierce Vaughan, lead forth thy savage band,
And scatter desolation through the land;
Once more let Hudson The Hudson's, or North River, which runs through the
province of New York, and falls into the Atlantic Ocean at that city.
mourn his rifled plains,
His ravished daughters and his murdered swains:
Or, if in Britons still such souls should dwell
As to thy lot, inhuman Dunmore, fell:
Even thy Virginia, Washington, may view
Her infants bleed, her Norfolks blaze anew;
Besmeared with gore fresh Butlers may arise,
And with their scalp-clad brows insult the skies.
All this may be; the blood already spilt
Fills not, alas! Britannia's cup of guilt;
Fell disappointment still her arm may brace
To wreak her vengeance by some fresh disgrace:
Or, may not heaven, yet eager to disclose
The unconquered soul that in thy bosom glows,
Dangers on dangers heap, new labors raise,
Till in full luster all thy virtues blaze;
Till led by thee, the brave untutored band
Chase hardy vet'rans from this injured land;
Till haughty Clinton to thy standard bow,
Or sink unnotic'd as a Gage or How,
Till Britain, hapless Britain! curse the hour,
When urged by pride and insolence of power
She, sternly deaf to every just petition,
Thought with a frown to "look us to submission?"
Alas, poor Britain! thus thy Sandwich spoke,
And eager senates caught the fatal joke;
Each pension'd scribbler draws his servile pen,
And proves Americans are hardly men;
Of knaves and dastards the contemptuous names
Amuse the fawning circles at St. James,
And with this prayer each courtly pulpit rings,
"Heaven spare not rebels to the best of Kings!"
Such was thy folly, Britain! such thy fate!
Thus sunk the proud and insolently great,
Of heavenly vengeance doomed to feel the rod,
Who dare deride great Nature and her God.
Far other thoughts, Columbia, be thy pride,
Far other springs thy public councils guide:
Thine be the god-like task, the glory thine,
To kindle first, and spread the flames divine
Of true benevolence; her gentle star
Shall light the rescued millions from afar,
Invite them sweetly on these plains to find
The great asylum of oppressed mankind;
Then to their wondering eyes disclose the plan
Where the poor slave shall read that he is man;
Taste Freedom's charms more pure than Rome could boast,
Or Albion, once her favorite isle, has lost.
Great without pomp, without ambition brave,
Proud, not to conquer fellow-men, but save:
Friend to the weak, a foe to none, but those
Who plan their greatness on their brethren's woes;
Awed by no titles, undefiled by lust;
Free without faction, obstinately just;
Too wise to learn from Machiavel's false school,
That truth and perfidy by turns should rule;
Too rough for flattery, dreading even as death
The baneful influence of Corruption's breath;
Warmed by Religion's sacred genuine ray,
That points to future bliss the unerring way;
Yet never controlled by Superstition's laws,
That worst of tyrants in the noblest cause;
The world's great mart, yet not by gold defiled,
To mercy prone, in justice ever mild;
Save to the man who strikes at Freedom's roots,
And never cursed with Mansf -- ds, N -- ths, or B -- tes.
Such be my country; what her sons should be,
O! may they learn, great Washington, from thee!
Thy private virtues be their public rule,
Thy public conduct be the Patriot's school!
That living law, from whence her rising youth
May gather wisdom, constancy, and truth,
Of Independence catch the generous flame,
And learn to shudder at Oppression's name!
And when retiring late from earthly cares,
Thy better part shall mount her native spheres,
'Midst Patriot chiefs to taste the pure delight
Of ever having thought and acted right;
Still, Phoenix-like, renewed from age to age,
Thy spotless same shall grace the historic page,
Or flow expanded down the stream of time,
The darling subject of immortal rhyme;
Such as rehearsed Pelides' fatal ire,
Such as, great Milton, tuned thy sacred lyre,
Or that sweet bard's, who sung the man that bore
"His course to Latium from the Trojan shore!"
Then Commerce here shall fix his chief abode,
And thy Potomack heave beneath the load
Of crowding fleets; each crew in grateful lays
Through their rough throats shall pour their deathless praise;
And, pointing to Mount Vernon, shall relate,
"There once lived Washington the good, the great,
"Whose arm preserved, whose wisdom guides the state.
"Yon temple rising 'midst the encirclihg grove
"To Fame and Him, a grateful people's love
"Raised in full jubilee: yon structure fair
"Where Nature's God receives Religion's prayer,
"He reared a lasting monument to be
"Of Heaven's best favors to the Good and Free.
"There, on Columbia's future bliss and power,
"Often would he muse away the noontide hour;
"Alone, in public, this his constant aim,
"That her great cause and Nature's be the same:
"That Wisdom triumph through her wide domain,
"And Freedom fix her everlasting fane."
A SKETCH OF General WASHINGTON'S LIFE and CHARACTER.
Maryland, May 3, 1779.
IN compliance with the request you made me in your last obliging letter, I set
down to inform you of every interesting particular that has come to my
knowledge concerning the life and character of General Washington; and I do
this with the greater cheerfulness, as I flatter myself I shall be able to
communicate a more accurate and circumstantial account of this illustrious
personage than has ever hitherto been laid before the public. If, from what I
shall say, the knowledge you already have of this excellent man can be any-way
improved, or any luster can be added to that brilliancy of character, which you
give me to understand he possesses in the eyes of Europe, I shall deem the
pains I have been at, in procuring the following intelligence, as highly
compensated.

General Washington is the third son of Mr. Augustine Washington, a man of
large property and distinguished reputation in the state of Virginia: an
ancestor of this gentleman, about the period of the Revolution, sold his
property, near Cave, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and came over to
Virginia, where he purchased lands in King George's County; and it was here
that our hero was born on the 22d of February in the year 1733. In this county
he has at this time three brothers, Samuel, John, and Charles, all gentlemen of
considerable landed property, and a sister who is married to colonel Fielding
Lewis. His elder brother Lawrence, who went out a captain of the American
troops, raised for the Carthagena expedition, married the daughter of the
honorable William Fairfax, of Belvoir, in Virginia, by whom he left one
daughter, who dying young, and his second brother also dying without issue, the
general succeeded to the family-seat, which, in compliment to the gallant
admiral of that name, is called Mount Vernon, and is delightfully situated on
the Potomack River, a few miles below Alexandria. General Washington is the
eldest son by a second marriage; and, having never been out of America, was
educated (as youths of fortune in this country generally are) under the eye of
his father by private tutorage: a slight tincture of the Latin language, a
grammatical knowledge of his mother tongue, and the elements of mathematics,
were the chief objects he was taught to pursue. For a few years after he
quitted his tutor, he applied himself to the practical part of surveying (a
knowledge of which is essentially requisite to men of landed property in this
country) and was appointed surveyor to a certain district in Virginia; an
employment rather creditable than lucrative; though it afforded him an
opportunity of choosing some valuable tracts of land, and made him thoroughly
acquainted with the frontier country.

On the governor and council of Virginia receiving orders from England, in
October 1753, to repel by force the encroachments of the French on the western
frontiers, along the rivers Ohio and de Boeuf, Mr. Washington, then a major in
the provincial service, and an adjutant-general of their forces, was dispatched
by general Dinwiddie, with a letter to the commander in chief of the French on
the Ohio, complaining of the inroads they were making in direct violation of
the treaties then subsisting between the two crowns; he had also instructions
to treat with the six nations and other western tribes of Indians, and to
engage them to continue firm in their attachment to England. He set out on this
perilous embassy, with about fifteen attendants, late in October 1753; and so
far succeeded, that on his return with monsieur de St. Pierre's answer, and his
good success in the Indian negociations, he was complimented with the thanks
and approbation of his country. His journal of the whole transaction was
published in Virginia, and does great credit to his industry, attention, and
judgment; and it has since proved of infinite service to those who have been
doomed to traverse the same inhospitable tracts.

Soon after this, the designs of the French becoming more manifest, and their
movements and conduct more daring, orders were issued out by administration for
the colonies to arm and unite in one confederacy. The assembly of Virginia took
the lead by voting a sum of money for the public service, and raising a
regiment of four hundred men for the protection of the frontiers of the colony.
Major Washington, then about twenty-three years of age, was appointed to the
command of this regiment, and before the end of May, in the ensuing year, came
up with a strong party of the French and Indians, at a place called Red-stone,
which he effectually routed, after having taken and killed fifty men. Among the
prisoners were the celebrated woods-man monsieur De La Force and two other
officers, from whom colonel Washington had undoubted intelligence, that the
French force on the Ohio consisted of upwards of one thousand regulars, and
some hundreds of Indians. Upon this intelligence, although his little army was
somewhat reduced, and entirely insufficient to act offensively against the
French and Indians, yet he pushed on toward his enemy to a good post; where,
in order to wait the arrival of some expected succor from New York and
Pennsylvania, he entrenched himself, and built a small fort, called Fort
Necessity. At this post he remained unmolested, and without any succor until
the July following; when his small force, reduced now to less than three
hundred men, was attacked by an army of French and Indians of eleven hundred
and upwards, under the command of the Sieur de Villiers. The Virginians
sustained the attack of the enemy's whole force for several hours, and laid
near two hundred of them dead in the field, when the French commander,
discouraged by such determined resolution, proposed the less dangerous method
of dislodging his enemy by a parley, which ended in an honorable capitulation.
It was stipulated that colonel Washington should march away with all the
honors of war, and be allowed to carry off all his military stores, effects,
and baggage. This capitulation was violated from the ungovernable disposition
of the savages, whom the French commander could not restrain from plundering
the provincials on the onset of their march, and from making a considerable
slaughter of men, cattle, and horses. This breach of the capitulation was
strongly remonstrated against by the British ambassador at the Court of
Versailles, and may be looked upon as the era when the French court began to
unmask, and to avow (though in a clandestine manner) the conduct of their
governors and officers in America: they redoubled their activity and diligence
on the Ohio, and in other places during the winter 1754 and the following
spring. Virginia had determined to send out a larger force; the forts
Cumberland and Louden were built, and a camp was formed at Wills Creek, from
thence to annoy the enemy on the Ohio. In these several services (particularly
in the construction of the forts) colonel Washington was principally employed,
when he was summoned to attend general Braddock, who with his army arrived at
Alexandria, in Virginia, in May, 1755. The design of sending out that army, was
to penetrate through the country to Fort du Quesne (now Fort Pit) by the route
of Wills Creek; and as no person was better acquainted with the frontier
country than colonel Washington, and no one in the colony enjoyed so well
established a military character, he was judged highly serviceable to general
Braddock, and cheerfully quitted his command to act as a volunteer and aid de
camp under that unfortunate general. The particulars of the defeat, and almost
total ruin of Braddock's army, consisting of two thousand regular British
forces, and near eight hundred provincials, are too well known to need a
repetition: it is allowed on all sides, that the haughty positive behavior of
the general, his high contempt of the provincial officers and soldiers, and his
disdainful obstinacy in rejecting their advice, were the genuine causes of this
fatal disaster. With what resolution and steadiness the provincials and their
gallant commander behaved on this trying occasion, and in covering the confused
retreat of the army See captain Orme's letter to Governor Dinwiddie, and also
the other accounts of that day.
, let every British officer and soldier confess, who were rescued from
slaughter on that calamitous day by their valor and conduct.

After general Braddock's disaster, the colony of Virginia found it necessary
to establish her militia, raise more men, strengthen her forts, undertake
expeditions to check the inroads of the enemy, etc. etc. etc. In all which
important services colonel Washington bore a principal share, and acquitted
himself to the utmost satisfaction of his country, by displaying on every
occasion, the most persevering industry, personal courage, and military
abilities. He was again appointed to the command of the Virginia troops, and
held it with singular credit till his resignation in 1759, when he married the
young widow of Mr. Custis, his present lady; with whom he had a fortune of
twenty thousand pounds sterling in her own right, besides her dower in one of
the principal estates in Virginia. From this period he became as assiduous to
serve the state as a senator, as he had hitherto been active to defend it as a
soldier. For several years he represented Frederick County, and had a seat for
Fairfax County, at the time he was appointed by the assembly, in conformity
with the universal wish of the people, to be one of their four delegates at the
first general congress. It was with no small reluctance that he engaged again
in the active scenes of life; and I sincerely believe that no motives but such
as spring from a most disinterested patriotism could have ever prevailed upon
him to relinquish the most refined domestic pleasures, which it was ever in his
power to command, and the great delight he took in farming and the improvement
of his estate. You well know that general Washington is, perhaps, the greatest
landholder in America (the proprietors of Pennsylvania, Maryland* and the
Northern Neck excepted;) for besides his lady's fortune, and ten thousand
pounds falling to him by the death of her only daughter, he has large tracts of
land taken up by himself early in life, some considerable purchases made from
officers who had lands allotted them for their services; and has, moreover,
made great additions to his estate at Mount Vernon. It is impossible in this
country, as in England, to rate the value of estates by their annual rent or
income, because they are universally tilled by negroes, and in the hands of
landholders. There are many estates in the middle colonies, which never
produced a clear income to their owners of five hundred a year, that may be
easily sold for forty thousand pounds. General Washington's, however, will not
be over-rated, if set down at a good four thousand pounds English per annum,
and his whole property could not be bought for forty years purchase.

When it was determined at length in Congress, after every step toward an
accommodation had failed, and every petition from America had been scornfully
rejected, to repel by force the invasion from Great Britain, the eyes of the
whole continent were immediately turned upon Mr. Washington. With one common
voice he was called forth to the defense of his country; and it is, perhaps,
his peculiar glory, that there was not a single inhabitant of these states,
except himself, who did not approve the choice, and place the firmest
confidence in his integrity and abilities It is somewhat singular, that even in
England not one reflection was ever cast, or the least disrespectful word
uttered against him.
. He arrived at Cambridge in New England, in July 1775, and there took the
supreme command of the armies of America. He was receiveed at the camp with
that heartfelt exultation which superior merit can alone inspire, after having
in his progress through the several states received every mark of affection and
esteem, which they conceived were due to the man, whom the whole continent
looked up to for safety and freedom.

As he always refused to accept of any pecuniary appointment for his public
services, no salary has been annexed by Congress to his important command, and
he only draws weekly for the expenses of his public table and other necessary
demands. General Washington having never been in Europe, could not possibly
have seen much military service when the armies of Britain were sent to subdue
us; yet still, for a variety of reasons, he was by much the most proper man on
this continent, and probably any where else, to be placed at the head of an
American army. The very high estimation he stood in for integrity and honor,
his engaging in the cause of his country from sentiment and a conviction of her
wrongs, his moderation in politics, his extensive property, and his approved
abilities as a commander, were motives which necessarily obliged the choice of
America to fall upon him. That nature has given him extraordinary military
talents will hardly be controverted by his most bitter enemies; and having been
early actuated with a warm passion to serve his country in the military line,
he has greatly improved them by unwearied industry, and a close application to
the best writers upon tactics, and by a more than common method and exactness:
and, in reality, when it comes to be considered that at first he only headed a
body of men entirely unacquainted with military discipline or operations,
somewhat ungovernable in temper, and who at best could only be styled an alert
and good militia, acting under very short enlistments, uncloathed, unaccoutred,
and at all times very ill supplied with ammunition and artillery; and that with
such an army he withstood the ravages and progress of near forty thousand
veteran troops, plentifully provided with every necessary article, commanded by
the bravest officers in Europe, and supported by a very powerful navy, which
effectually prevented all movements by water; when, I say, all this comes to be
impartially considered, I think I may venture to pronounce, that general
Washington will be regarded by mankind as one of the greatest military
ornaments of the present age, and that his name will command the veneration of
the latest posterity.

I would not mention to you the person of this excellent man, were I not
convinced that it bears great analogy to the qualifications of his mind.
General Washington is now in the forty-seventh year of his age; he is a tall
well-made man, rather large boned, and has a tolerably genteel address: his
features are manly and bold, his eyes of a blueish cast and very lively; his
hair a deep brown, his face rather long and marked with the small pox, his
complexion sunburned and without much color, and his countenance sensible,
composed, and thoughtful; there is a remarkable air of dignity about him, with
a striking degree of gracefulness: he has an excellent understanding without
much quickness; is strictly just, vigilant, and generous; an affectionate
husband, a faithful friend, a father to the deserving soldier; gentle in his
manners, in temper rather reserved; a total stranger to religious prejudices,
which have so often excited Christians of one denomination to cut the throats
of those of another; in his morals irreproachable; he was never known to exceed
the bounds of the most rigid temperance: In a word, all his friends and
acquaintance universally allow, that no man ever united in his own person a
more perfect alliance of the virtues of a philosopher with the talents of a
general. Candor, sincerity, affability and simplicity, seem to be the striking
features of his character, till an occasion offers of displaying the most
determined bravery and independence of spirit.

Such, my good friend, is the man, to whom America has entrusted her important
cause. Hitherto she has had every reason to be satisfied with her choice; and
most ungrateful would she be to the great Disposer of human events, were she
not to render him unremitting thanks for having provided her with such a
citizen at such a crisis. Most nations have been favored with some patriotic
deliverer: the Israelites had their Moses; Rome had her Camillus; Greece her
Leonidas; Sweden her Gustavus; and England her Hambdens, her Russels, and her
Sydneys; but these illustrious heroes, though successful in preserving and
defending, did not, like Washington, form or establish empires, which will be
the refuge or asylum of Liberty banished from Europe by luxury and corruption.
Must not therefore, your heart beat with conscious pride at the prospect of
your friend's being ranked among (if not above) those illustrious patriots? at
the enchanting thought, that He, whom you know and love, shall be acknowledged
by present and future generations as their great deliverer, and the chief
instrument in the hands of the Almighty for laying the foundation of that
freedom and happiness, which, I trust, await the future myriads of this vast
continent?

FINIS.

