A DIALOGUE, BETWEEN THE DEVIL AND GEORGE III. TYRANT OF BRITAIN, etc. etc.
etc. etc.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, at their Office in
State-Street. M,DCC.LXXXII.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
1760.
DEVIL. GEORGE, hearken to my counsel.


George. Thy servant attends.


D. My trusty servants Bute and Mansfield, have educated thee for my service,
and taught thee the way wherein thou should go, obey them and I will make
thee a king indeed; make yourself absolute, or die in the attempt: a king
dependent on the people, is no monarch; he is a mere puppy.


G. Your words I have a heart to obey; it is the beat of my soul, and the world
shall soon know that I am a king in reality, and my people shall feel that my
wrath is like the roaring of a lion.


D. I doubt not you will equal my ancient servants Nero, Caligula, B^rgia,
Charles, and others; but you must use great art lest a spirit of liberty should
rise among the people and blast your great designs, as happened to my faithful
servant Charles.


G. I will begin with my colonies; the idea of enslaving them to the power of
parliament, and making them tributary to the old dominion, suits the pride and
avarice of Britons: when this is done ^he way will be open and easy to complete
the work in Britain* with places, pensions, titles and bribes* I can soon make
myself as absolute as any tyrant that ever stepped.


D. Go on my beloved servant, and cut the work short; thou art the darling of
my heart: I hope you will yet shed a sea of human blood sufficient for the
British navy to ride in.


1774.
G. See how things ripen. -- I Will soon kindle rebellion in America, and then
with a few troops subdue the rebels, confiscate the country, and establish my
will as law.


D. Pox take ye, what have you been about these fourteen years? -- The work
ought to have been done; 'ere now you should have been as terrible to your
people as the lion to the tame beast of the field; but you are yet a beggar to
parliaments.


1775.
G. See the fields of Lexington and Bunker Hill. -- Now the wheels begin to
move -- the torrent of blood is rapid: I trust you will never again have cause
to lash my delays. In time past my counsels have been divided; and that timid
goose of a Gage h^s been dilatory: -- but I have sent How, Burgoyne and
Clinton to assist him, and push things: -- How is a true blood-hound; Burgoyne
is ambitious as Lucifer, and would kill his father for promotion; and Clinton
is obedient to his master as a shepherd's dog.


1776.
D. You now begin to do something: -- But you in your speeches and your
generals in their proclamations, tell too many lies, and commit too many horrid
acts of barbarity, for the success of your cause; in these you run too fast; --
they strike mankind with horror, and unite them against you -- there is not a
character in Tophet stinks (above ground) worse than yours.


G. You told me to make short work, and I said I had a heart for it: --
accordingly by perjury and lies, fire and sword, by the gallows and dungeons,
freezing and starving, I have been subduing the rebels, and hope to finish the
work in America soon; for I want to begin with my subjects at home.


1777.
D. Where is Burgoyne? -- How has taken Philadelphia, and is shut up in it. --
Clinton has, with great loss, taken a small fort and burnt a town up Hudson's
river, and run back to New York. -- Damned work, you will stink in hell George!


G. We are all in tears, but what can I do more; I sent fleets and armies,
which all my ministers swore were more than sufficient to lay America prostrate
at my feet.


D. Instead of showing the spirit of a lion, you have the head of a goat and
the heart of a sheep; and if you don't pursue your plan until the w^rk is
complete, by the ghost of Nero, I hope the English will play Charles with you.
If you fail, what a deformed mo^grel puppy you will appear to all the world;
neither generosity and benevolence to gratify your people, nor art and spirit
enough to make yourself a tyrant. -- Poor d^^! you will be the scorn of the
world, and the de^ision of hell.


G. I wish I had not begun, but there is no retreat. I Will move every wheel to
increase my force by sea and land; I will send commissioners with great
promises (which I can easily break when the business is done) and large bribes,
and partly by art and partly by force, I may yet succeed. I know my crown will
sit uneasy and my life be wretched after this, unless I gain my point.


D. Do you see what the French are doing?


G. Yes, my liege; do help me curse them; O for a flood of anathemes that would
sweep them to the center.


D. Words are but wind, a million oaths will not sink a French ship, nor will ten
thousand curses kill one rebel. -- You stupid dog* if you would reign you must
fight. It is now or never with you, not only the French but all the nations in
Europe secretly aid America, and wish her success. You ought to have done the
work at once, and not have allowed ^ime for the rebels to form alliances.


G My liege, don't use me ill, you never had a servant more d^evoted to thy
service, and very few have ever done so much to promote thy kingdom. In my
early youth I debauched the fair qu^ker, and had three bastards by her, besides
innumerable other instances of wickedness, of which you are witness. I have
deceived my people with a show of religion; (this proves that I am no fool in
hypocrisy) and at the same time have practiced every iniquity, have employed
such men in public offices as were thy faithful servants -- and my head to full
of schemes and my heart full of malice for every evil work. -- And --


D. You have a good heart, George, and I Will make something of you yet.


G. I have the heart of a tyrant. I never felt one tender emotion for all the
sufferings of mankind, and I hope to prove that my head is equal to my heart.
Permit me, my liege, to say that I have some merit for past services, and for
my future designs. I have, at a moderate computation, by my attempts ^o enslave
America, destroyed at least fifty thousand people -- and have destroyed the
happiness of fifty thousand more -- And should I succeed, I Will surpass in
barbarity any tyrant that ever lived. I mean to be a demidevil. I have in my
imagination new tortures for mankind; I mean that my furnace of torture should
be seventy seven times hotter than Nebuchadnezzar's; for a novelty, and to show
my genius, I will have a saw-mill carried by a stream of virgin blood to saw
off rebels heads! -- think of this my liege, and allow me the credit of it* --
Did ever Nero, or Caligula, perform any thing equal to this?


D. Your heart is good, George, and you may yet make a figure if you persevere.


G. As to perseverance, never fear my falling in that, I am of the blood hound
breed, never leave the track, and my best friends have for this reason called
me obstinate. I have said, and I swear to it, and stand to it, that I Will lose
my crown before I Will give up America.


D. In case America should prove unconquerable, what then?


G. Why, even in that desperate extremity, I shall still have great designs
left; I mean to perfect my tyranny in Britain if I fail in America; this I can
easily do by bribing parliaments; and the immense increase of public burdens
will facilitate my design; the spirits of the people are more and more
depressed and broken, and the avarice of the great is likewise increased; the
work is easy, and I had rather be a little tyrant than a great king. To be a
despot over the rest of my dominions, would be a compensation even for the loss
of America: tyranny has been the plan and pursuit of my life, it is sweet to my
soul, and a tyrant I will be, or be nothing.


1778.
D. Things don't go well in America George, the rebels gain ground, and they
exult in the most insulting style since your General Clinton and his army got a
fl^gging at Monm^u^h and performed their moon light retreat.


G. I am vexed to the foul and with burning indignation I curse all around me
-- let fire brands, arrows and death seiz^ all that oppose my will. I will be a
tyrant, and a tyrant I will be; I Will set the world on fire and spill the blo^d
of all Adam's race but I Will have my will -- my wrath kindles, my blood bo^^^,
and vengeance burns; North and German where are you, ye scoundrels! I am
m^^k^d and deceived by you, -- ye swore by Hercules that I should hear of
nothing but vict^^y and triumph, and now what a tale do I hear of the ro^t and
retreat of my army. -- North, you are a purblind puppy, and that Minden bastard
is no better, -- curse all your politics, if the devil had taken you two, with
old Bute and Mansfield, to himself, twenty years ago, I might have spent all my
days as I spent my youth, in debauching fair quakers without interruption, --
curse ye.


1779.
D. You must use other weapons besides curses, or you will never c^rrect the
blunders of your wooden headed ministers. You seem fond of swea^ing, but you
blunder cut your oaths wrong end foremost; your tongue is too big to swear off
hand; and like many other boobies, by your awkward curses you scandalize
swearing, had injure the Satannic cause. My servant, Charles a^l* did eminent
service by swearing; his example made a whole nation of swearers* and greatly
advanced my kingdom; but you, George, are formed for a hypocrite; your solemn
phiz and sullen air, serve as a mask to cover your vices and devices, from the
view of the people. -- Under this clo^k, you have practiced debauchery, and
numerous vices, and still had a tolerable character: -- your Bishops and their
underlings puffed you off for a saint in folio -- it is necessary to avoid some
vices, in order to practice others with more success.


G. I want sometimes to give vent to my wrath by royal execrations -- and I
hate restraint in any vice: however, if your Highness forbids, I Will try to hold
in for the present.


D. When your tyranny is completed, you will need no disguise; then the more
you swear, the better for my cause. And remember. that swearing is a genuine
criterion by which you may know my children -- for although all my children don't
swear yet all swearers are my sons and daughters -- and morally your brethren
and sisters -- If you swear it ought to be done with royal digni^y, and not
lisp and mutter out your oaths like thousands, who ought to have their throats
cut for the disgrace they bring on this sin, by sl^bbering out "curse damn ye"
-- li^e damned b^^bies.


G. Will your royal highness please to give me a rule by which I may swear in a
style becoming my royal dignity?


D. Observe the following. First begin with faith this is the a^b in swearing;
when you can make this run off your tongue glib, then proceed to curse it and
damn it, and so on until you can reel off as the saying is fifteen double damns
in a second, and make St J^mes's ^ing with royal swearing. But mind what I say
George, be sure you never swear in company* until you can damn with an al^ of
^oyal grandeur. The best place for you to learn in is a^ h^^se stable, shut out
all company, excepting a few of w^nt ^^nial lords, [and they p^^ take 'em* your
lords I mean, have yet to learn, although some of them have swore fixed yours they
yet murder their oaths: but* p^or fellows the excuse is made for them, that
their tongues are half eat off ^^^h the p^x] and exercise your lu^gs in the
following m^nner -- Take a horse by the t^i^, c^u^t the h^irs, ^^d d^^n each
hair as you count it; ^hus proceed until you have gone through a stable of
forty-nine horses; and if you c^m^nt then swear fit for company you must swear
through h^^st b^e again; and conclude by damning each horse his n^e who begat
him, his dam who bore him, his g^and si^^ and grand dam, and trace his
genealogy to his (...): d^mn every generation up hill and down -- and ^hen if
you cannot swear fit for company, set yourself down for a puppy -- and try no
more.


G. I bow with reverence to your sublimity, and will observe your directions.


D At present your attention should be more fixed on the rebels, and the means
to subdue them.


G. I have now a grand plan in agitation, that will do the business soon, I Will
warrant: I began at the wrong end of America.


D. You have generally been at the wrong end of every thing* and when will you
be at the right end?


G I am now forming a plan to subdue the southern provinces, and out of them
I Will gather wealth and strength to conquer the northern rebels: I am now on the
right track, and ever two years run round, I Will have all America prostrate at
my sovereign royal feet! and then nothing but blood and royal thunder, and
George the Third, shall be heard through the ^^gions of rebellion.


D. Evil tidings from America: the rebels have taken a strong fort by storm,
and six hundred men! -- May the curse of Scotland catch you George, if you
don't look out better. -- You blind whoresbird, why don't you send officers who
know how to command?


G. My liege, I have done every thing a king can do. I cannot stand sentinel
over my Generals: I did not think Harry Clinton, after knighting the scoundrel,
would have let my wheels run backward -- I cannot depend on no body: curse dam'n
'em in these Scotch days.


1780.
O now, my royal master, now, now! see how my arms triumph! Georgia taken! --
Charlestown humbled to the dust! -- Tories increasing -- rebellion dying -- the
rebel army starving -- muti^ying -- huzz^! -- I Will complete my glorious plan,
and have the necks of five hundred rebel chiefs in my noose ever the sun has
measured nine months on the reel of time.

1781.
D. Rebellion breaks out with new kindled rage in the southern provinces like
the flames of Ae^na. -- French and rebels, combined by links of adamant against
you, and inspired by all the lion passions; bestir yourself, George, o^
perdition will catch you!


G. The rebels have no forces to make any figure in the field this year: Lord
Cornwallis will sweep all before him, and the southern provinces will fall like
leaves in autumn. And then for a trip and twitch at Old Massachusetts, that
ancient seat of rebellion. -- I have fire and brimstone, and wrath and
vengeance, laid up for those venomous cockatrice sons of rebellion. -- I Will
make the smoke of their torment rise seven hundred and seventy cubits high. My
soul burns to be at 'em. Adamses and Hancocks will be sweet fuel for my
furnace! I Will fill the Old South in Boston full of the chief rebels, with five
hundred barrels of tar and brimstone: this conflagration will serve to
illuminate the town on the glorious restoration of my royal government; and all
the tories will say amen. -- Old Time make haste and bring the blazing day.


D. You have a Satannic heart; I wish your head was equal to it. I warn you
again to lo^k out for the French and rebels, or they will give you an Irish hoist
e're long.


G. As to the French fleet, my lions of the ocean will erack their bones: I
expect this campaign will nearly swallow up rebellion; for all my ministers
have sworn by the Stuart race, that I Have nothing more to fear from the Gallic
and rebel forces, than from a snow storm in the center of Vesuvius.


D. What avail your puffs; the French fleet is now triumphant, and has shut up
Cornwallis with the flower of your army, as a prey for the rebels! Volcanoes
and whirlwinds blast them! George, ye whoremonger, where are you? your kingdom
totters while you are wenching.


G. May it please your majesty of the air, I am, as at all other times, at thy
service; and I am firm and composed as mount Atlas. When an east wind shall
drive Albion upon the American shore, then will I believe a French fleet may
drive the British, and not 'till then.


German to George. I am sorry to inform your majesty, that --


G. Curse your buttons, German, are you come with bad news; but yesterday you
swore by Minden, the first tidings you brought me would produce another
discharge of the Park guns, Well, what would you say?


German. To the astonishment of every body, and every thing, Greaves has
suffered the French-fleet to beat him, and --


G. I will not hear any more; thunder and lightning blast him to the center, and
burn him to a cinder at the bottom of the ocean. What was you going to add to
your Scotch "and" if I would hear it?


German. I wa^ going to inform your majesty, that Greaves has returned to
New York with the loss of one ship of the line, and the rest in a ragged
plight. -- And --


G. No more of your Scotch "ands", I will not hear it nor bear it -- what! a
British fleet turn tail to Frenchmen and run: If Greaves has run, I hope he
will not stop 'till he gets to Tophet -- I Will Bing the dog. If I would suffer you
to speak, what more would you subjoin to your last "and"? (pox take you*)


German. It makes my heart bleed and tremble, but duty and loyalty to the
best of kings, obliges me to acquaint your majesty, that in consequence of
Greaves's returning to New York, my Lord Cornwallis is --


G. Stop, stop, stop, ye Minden scoundrel, I see it now, I see what is to
follow, but I will not hear it from your coward lips -- Lord Cornwallis is left to
defend both land and ocean; and he will do it! his noble blood, his titled name,
his martial fame, will conspire to kindle the British peer into heroic fire:
he will fight and conquer until his laurels reach the skies: and that son of
Neptune, Digby, has spread his canvass wings to join him -- then Gallic ships
and rebel troops will fly before the British thunder like feathers in a
whirlwind!


D. All Europe bends a willing ear to this rebellion: Behold the rebel
Plenipoes received with royal smiles in every court! To them your realms, your
trade and wealth, are become a prey. -- Behold the rebel ADAMS, he lifts his
head above the clouds, turns Europe pale, and governs kings with a nod; -- with
more than sovereign voice he tells the monarchs. (with whom he deigns to
speak,) "he represents the NEW WORLD, and came to give them commerce round the
globe -- and to establish eternal peace." -- And he lets astonished nations
know he came from CONGRESS, (compared with whom the assembled Greek and Roman
gods, sink in human view) who claim kindred with the stars, and call the sun
their elder brother; -- and whose puissant arm makes the CAESAR'S tremble;
hushes the warring realms to peace, and binds the omnipotence of Britain -- he
even aims a stroke at my domains; not confined to earth, he talks that
providence divine has pointed out to every land to form an UNION WITH HIS
WORLD -- and that HEAVEN has set its seal to INDEPENDENCE -- and said, AMEN!

Did sun, or moon, or stars, or earth, or sky, from creation's early dawn, ever
behold an equal to this REBEL -- But remember George, such is human kind* men
will gaze at, wonder, and adore the man, who adores himself -- and this rebel
will shake Europe.


G If I had gone through one lessen in the horse stable -- I Would damn him --

Cannot we, my royal master, with our united powers of earth and hell, overset
such a being as this Adams, who says he came from the NEW WORLD -- I fear he will
drive bad spokes in my wheel of fortune, unless we demolish him soon; cannot I
hire a fellow for a few guineas, to po^son him? I have just thought of an easy
and expeditious way to extirpate rebellion, by poisoning all the leaders; --
and I Will give LOUIS a dose, if he has any more to do with my rebel subjects --
This will do it quick. -- What a curse ailed my Scotch ministers, that they
could not see this short cure for rebellion in the beginning.


D. You are a Scotch damned goat -- who begat ye, or bore ye -- you have no more
political eye sight than a blind cursed puppy, three days old -- A Dutch bull
frog would learn navigation, sooner than you will learn the first lesson in
politics. -- For you to talk of poison, why you mongrel booby, the subtle
French and hawk eyed rebels penetrate all your counsels and designs; and before
you could form such a plan, they would fill your maw with arsenic! You and all your
ministers would be as dead as Nim^ed in th^^e days! --


G. It will not do men; but I must take off Adams, for he appears in such a
pompous style, that all Europe is fascinated with his fine stories about the
NEW WORLD; he has a serpentine head and heart -- he is all treason -- and
nothing of the dove in him, except the wings, to fly from one mischief to
another -- his soul contains the quintessence of all rebellion -- O master,
double your curses upon him -- I have tried to buy some of the rebel chiefs,
but I can purchase none* excepting a few scoundrels, who are only a curse to
me. That perjured thief of an Arnold cost me upwards of five thousand sterling
-- (with a less sum I can purchase nineteen Lords and sixty Commoners) and I Have
only a piece of the scoundrel, for he lost one leg before I bought him -- A
dear bargain, you will say, dear indeed; for I would sell him for ten yards of
Scotch played. -- I Have poor bargains of all the tories, these slaves don't pay
for the salt they eat; take them one with another and all together, they are
not worth a curse; they are of no more use to me, than a wooden leg to a man
that has no body.


D. In fact, the tories are a nuisance in creation, every one curses 'em that
has 'em; but I must take them. --


G If you must take 'em, pray take 'em soon, for I want to be quit of all such
lumber -- I Have been cursed with them long enough, They pretend great loyalty,
but I find 'em hollow hearted fellows, who sawn round me, for the same reason a
dog does his master, to get a crust. Beside, their fulsome adulation is enough
to turn my guts inside out -- They perfectly stink in my nostrils, and scent
the world.


D. Your best way, George, will be to sell the tories at vendue; they are
formed for slaves, and although the meanest, yet the Dutch will buy them for the
Guinea trade.


G. I Will sell them, knock them off for something or nothing, any how, so that I
am rid of them. But I must not waste time about these rascals, I must attend
to the war, for I will prosecute it with vigor, until I obtain an honorable
peace. I Will humble the Dons, until they will acknowledge my sovereignty, whereby
I Will add to my royal titles, "King of Spain," etc, this will be a new jewel to
my crown


D. It will be well if you can at the next peace, retain your former titles --
The French will contend, that you shall relinquish your empty title, "King of
France*" -- And, indeed, you may with equal propriety, call yourself king of
Jupiter. -- You must exert every nerve, or your dominions will become a prey to
the hawks and ravens of Europe; they are all gaping like so many vultures to
devour you. They mean not only to get the new world, but to knock you out of
the old.


G. When I Have subdued America, I Will "knock" the dogs till they will lick the dust
under my royal feet. -- Although the French king is not to be compared with any
king like us for royal greatness; yet I cannot but wonder that he could
disgrace royalty by a connection with the rebels. I Would be cursed through
Billingsgate, by all the whores in Drury Lane, before I Would stoop so low.


D. George, you lie like hell, for you have employed Indians, Negroes, Tories,
Thieves, Robbers, Counterfeiters of Money, and the Off scouring, Scum, and
Sweepings of the W^^ld; -- formed treaties with the little Nabobs of ^^ss^ ^^d
Brunswick, who, compared with America, are no more than a hen roost to a
kingdom. George, w^^^^ you address me, do it in the language of truth; I allow
you to lie to every one else; but don't tell foolish lies that no body will
believe, as you and your ministers often do. George, I tell you, between me and
you, this rebellion is alarming to my dominions, and threatens yours with ruin.
The vast continent of America, pregnant with the richest stores of nature,
inhabited with a brave and enterprising people; enthusiastic in religion and
liberty; and have laid foundations to perpetuate both; penetrating and daring
in all their views; inflamed by your attempts to enslave them, have written
your crimes in marble, with a "cursed be he that forgets or forgives the
tyrant," -- "and blessed be their memory, and only theirs who preserve
Independence." With whom magnanimity and virtue recommend to office (and rulers
stamp the manners of the people) in whose creed I and you, are equally opposed
and execrated. This people, I say, have excited and will command the admiration
and imitation of mankind. In their public writings* speeches and transactions,
they stamp glory on RELIGION and LIBERTY, and aim to make them both eternal: --
and if they succeed, I and you are eternally excluded from their favor; and
that they will succeed we have every reason to fear; for all the old world is
now gazing with admiration on the new. Kings hope to derive glory from an early
friendship with this rising nation; and their subjects expect to gain infinite
wealth by this union. Every Dutchman has his golden dreams about the NEW WORLD;
they would not have listened with half the attention to the prophet Daniel they
did to Adams; and this frenzy spreads like a pestilence through the nations and
fascinates the world. If America is independent, universal ruin follows;
therefore, George, hold out to the last, and be as obstinate as hell.


G. Let me alone for obstinacy, I Have an heart of adamant, there is no turn to
me; my will never was broke, nor ever can be, there is no break nor bend to it
if once I say no, -- neither soothing nor praying, nor freezing nor burning,
will ever move me; there is no move to me, I tell you, I Will be cursed if there
is. They tell of Nero's firmness, in fiddling while the city of Rome was
burning; damn his buttons, why I could fiddle and wench too, if half the world
was in flames. As to the terrors of the new world they tell so much about, I
fear not any world, new or old, -- let the worlds go which way they will, I Will
go to mine; and may all the scoundrels in the universe buffet me through
creation, if ever I submit to independence; may annihilation catch me, and I
never more darken any point of space if I do.


D. Well said my son, I admire your royal spirit, I wish for a diffusion of it,
it is this alone can save ye now.


G. I have many cards yet to play: the world does'nt know me; they have not
measured the length and breadth, and height and depth of my genius: the time
of calamity is the hour for genius to shine. -- I Have had no trials sever^
enough to rouse my energy, and to turn the bright side of my abilities to the
day. -- Genius, like the richest mines, lies deep.


D. True, George, but I should have thought your genius had been called for
some years ago. -- How can you bear the insolence and pomposity of the rebels
-- hear their titles of "Excellency," which royalty alone has a right to give.


G. It kindles my ire, and goes cross my soul like an iron teeth harrow; but
I Will soon bring down their Excellency's, and turn them to axletrees for my
wagons, with a cursation after them, to transport chains for rebels. Let
Hancock, Trumbull, Clinton, Livingston, and other rebel Governors look not for
me, I Will pulverize them in the jaws of my vengeance. -- As for the rebel
General, I Will pause and study to fix him in the focus of my burning wrath -- in
the crucible of my royal indignation -- I Will warrant the sky of my reign will
never be clouded with another rebellion.


D. Should you reduce the rebels, it will be necessary to extirpate great part
of the breed, otherwise they may future revolt again.


G. I know them root and branch; they are the old cursed Oliverian breed of
king-killers, whose ancestors fled from the axe and halter of my good
progenitors the Stuarts (of blessed memory), but I Will never leave one on this
side the Stygian lake, I Will leave none of this cursation white weed to seed the
land again. -- My weapons of death shall drink the last drop of their rebel
blood -- and then I Will plant the provinces with loyal Scotchmen, and a due
mixture of my royal breed among them for rulers. I shall have enough of my own
for every office of consequence; my German rib (^^own by the name of Pug) has
brought me upwards of a dozen. -- I Have five by a Quaker girl -- three by a
Drury Lane Bunter -- four by Billingsgate Dab -- several by Blue Moll, etc.
etc. etc. -- I Have enough I Will swear, and more coming.


D. There Is a report that Cornwallis is a prisoner!


G. It Is nothing but one of the rebel cursed lies: they are eternally blowing
about their victories, which ever turn out a royal triumph, -- Cornwallis
surrender to the rebel Washington, no! he would fight through the Stygi^^ (...)
first, and then he would'nt. -- Mars and Jupiter would sooner surrender to the
Moon, and bow to a foot ball. -- Curse damn the rebels, to think my heroes will
ever yield to them! no damn curse 'em -- earthquakes, inundations and
whirlwinds swallow 'em up, and blast 'em for their Stygian imp^dence, and
tumble 'em headlong through creation to ^^^^entre.


D George, you swear poorly, not fit for company, you will disgrace swearing; you
hav'nt observed my rules for learning the art.


G. I beg your pardon, my liege, but I have, I Have swore through the liable, and
damned every hair upon the tail of every horse, and cursed every generation, up
to the horse Caligula made one of his council; and faith I thought I swore with
an air.


D Then you're a numskul booby, and fit only to be a king of ^^^ses; and many
of your counse^^ors ^re no better than Caligula's horse -- he was much such
another horse-king as yourself But let me never hear you attempt to swear
again; you will cause swearing to go out of ^ashion; no gentleman will swear
after you This is one of the great supports of my kingdom, and it costs me
nothing: swearers are all volunteers in my service, and go to hell without for
or reward.


G. That Is poor wages.


D. What news from America, George?


G I have none; but expect every hour to hear something glorious from the brave
Cornwallis -- O t^^r^'s North and German coming upon the trot, they have (...)
I know by their speed -- Well, North, what (...)


North. I have nothing authentic; but the^^ are evil reports respecting Lord
Cornwallis --


G. I am not to be hum bugg'd by the rebel li^^ -- its only the forerunner of
victory. -- Well, German, what news have you?


German. I have this moment received a packet from Sir Henry Clinton, which
confirms all the melancholy reports from America --


G. What! is it possible that Lord Cornwallis, with the flower of all my
veterans, is f^ll^n a prey to rebels!


Mansfield. I come to condole with your Majesty, upon one of the most
melancholy events that ever wrung tears from royal eyes -- And I could mingle
my hearts blood with my tears if it might lessen the affl^ction which now fills
your royal bosom with anguish --


Sandwich. No one can feel more on this occasion than myself; but I have done
every thing for the go^d of the service; and I feel every thing which loyalty
to the best of king's can inspire.


Bute. I beg leave with duty and gratitude, to mingle my tears with your
majesty's, on this dir^ful occ^sion.


North to German, aside. The king is sullen as the devil -- look at his eyes,
they roll like tw^ fire balls; he will break out like thunder presently; he
grates his teeth like the devil biting steel bars to let tories ^ut of prison.
G. Oh -- Oh -- Oh -- Vengeance! Vengeance!


D. George, and be damned to ye, where are ye? Cornwallis is a prisoner -- his
whole army -- an immensity of stores, and ships, are all in the hands of the
French and rebels. -- O ye mongrel bastard, George, you will turn out another
bullheaded our like Charles the First. I have been tryi^g one hundred and fifty
years to raise a tyrant out of the breed, but ye are a sap headed generation,
fit only for backlogs in Tophet, and for mud-boats in the Stygian lake.


G. May curses in whirlwinds blast my ministers and commanders. -- Attend here,
North and German, What! Is the nation all going to the devil in a French
wheelbarrow, and the rebels to reign triumphant?


North. It is not in human wisdom always to foresee or guard against
misfortunes. Every thing has been done by your m^j^sty and by your ministers,
that wisdom could dictate; and your commanders must answer for their conduct.


G. Aye, you will all excuse yourselves; but I Will be cursed if I don't make a
button of some of your heads* and scaffold the rest of ye, unless ye retrieve
my aff^irs. -- Summon a privy council instantly; c^ll all the lord: and bishops
who have advised to prosecure the war against America.


Bute. I beg leave to inform your majesty the privy council is assembled, and
waits your royal pleasure.


G. Let them attend me immediately. I am betrayed by your counsel; by your
counsel I am now suffering the greatest c^lamity that can wound the heart of a
king.


Bute. Your majesty will remember that the plan for enslaving America, was ever
dear to your royal breast, and the offspring of your own heart.


G. Remember it is one of the wise maxims in English politics, "a king can do
no wrong" -- The plan was good but ye have murdered it by your blunders in the
execution -- the fault lies with ye, and ye shall bear it -- and I Will give ye
all up a sacrifice to appease the rage of the people.


Mansfield I hope your Majesty will recollect my long and faithful services; I
have twisted the law into all shapes and forms to answer royal purposes. And --


G. Tell me no more of your services. I have been deceived and ruined by the
advice of my ministers and council -- p^x take them all -- It makes my blood
curdle in my veins to think of it! America is lost forever! and all owing to my
scoundrel ministers -- if I had raked hell, and skinned the devil, I could not
have f^und a worse set.


D. Sirrah! sirrah! -- I don't allow you to use my name by way of reproach to
your r^scally ministers.


G Your highness will ^x^use what is said in the height of passion, I am all
rage and vengeance -- I could spit fire -- my very vitals burn like t^nder -- I
could swear fall enough to carry a wind mill -- Attend me this moment all my
ministers and council: -- Now what do you say to the American war, ye wrong
headed Scotch bastards. -- --


D. Hold! hold! George, come I Will be moderator, and see that every one has fair
play; -- ye are all my servants, and every one shall speak freely in his own
cause. --


Bute. I thank your highness for this liberty, as we have much to offer in our
justification -- our king has never been entirely governed by our advice; his
mulish temper was such while a boy, that I had rather borne the misfortunes of
Job, than to have been his tutor; and as he grew in years he grew in obstinacy;
and --


G. You lie! ye old plaid-stocking'd whoresbird -- I Will


D. Silence! George, don't you interrupt my old servant.


Bute -- And when we gave him the best counsel, he would often follow the worst; I
often told him --


G. I will not bear an insult from that Highlander, I Will --


D. Silence! Tom Firetongs, take George by the nose and give the scoundrel a
twist.


Bute. -- I told him his measures were inadequate to the purpose: but when once
he gets wrong, no one can right him.


German. I can witness to the truth of what my Lord Bute has declared. Had
our counsel been always duly regarded --


G. What! dares the Minden coward to rise?


D. Here! Triphammer, make a tongue cuff for George instantly; rivet it on red
hot: I Will see if we cannot keep that fellow's tongue still.


North. I beg leave to speak one word; it is notorious where the fault lies;
but it is vain to waste time in criminations, we must now consult our safety. I
beg the ministers of the crown would withdraw with me a few minutes.

[Aside. North. Ye all know the maxim. "a king can do no wrong;" and although
it is the quintessence of nonsense, yet the wise people of Britain hold it as
sacred; and whenever the king will give up his ministers to the rage of the
people, they will absolve the criminal, and cry him up for the best of kings;
therefore we must take him off before he makes a sacrifice of us. Let us give
the mule a dose of arsenic, and let him go off with the dry belly ache, and be
pox'd to him.


Sandwich. This plan will do, and nothing else, for the sullen dog can never be
brought to good humor, and if he lives he will play fury with us.


Bishop. It Is the only plan, and I Will read the funeral service, and give thanks
heartily that he is taken out of this evil world.


German. I like it much: for the joy which a new king will diffuse, will
allay the present tumult about America; every one will be paying his addresses
to the new king, and no one will care who has got the old one: we will retire
from the helm and live in domestic peace. I beg that this motion may be put to
vote -- all hands are up, it passes ^^m. con. Let one of the family physicians
prepare the dose]


North. Ever animated with the most ardent affection to the best of kings, I
feel the sighs of loyalty whenever his majesty meets with any misfortune. I
wish not to criminate any one: but, as I said before, it is notorious where the
fault lies: his majesty's commanders, by sea and land, have trifled away the
opportunities that offered for defeating the French, and subduing the rebels. I
should be happy to hear his majesty express his royal sentiments on this great
occasion.


G. North, you are an honest fellow, and your remarks are just; -- but in our
internal situation, how can we make peace? -- A peace we must have, for
destruction gapes to receive us!


North to German, aside I Will flatter the king 'till the poison is ready, and
then we'll jirk him out of the world. North. If your majesty will be graciously
pleased to signify the terms on which you would treat for peace, your majesty's
ministers will lose no time in pursuing your royal wishes.


G. What is the first step we ought to take, North, in your opinion, to obtain
an honorable peace?


North. May it please your majesty, I conceive that we must now endeavor to
gain the favor of America; and as there is an American Plenipotentiary not far
distant, I humbly conceive it might be proper to consult him, and feel his
pulse.


G Invite the American to meet us in council tomorrow.


The Dialogue concluded by the Speech of an American. A. "By the providence of
the Almighty* the time is come which compels the reluctant wish for peace. --
Since your sword can no longer devour, and is ready to be plunged in the guilty
bosom that kindled the war, you think of peace. -- Peace is the desire of
humanity, the constant object of the wise and good; it has ever been the
ardent wish of America, and all her views have centered in this; but your
hostile heart has hitherto shut the door against it. I will express the views
of America, in a few words. She means not only to be independent, sovereign and
free, but to communicate as far as may be in her power, the superlative
blessings herself enjoys to all mankind As she means that all the treaties she
forms should be lasting as time, and thereby to establish perpetual peace, in
her treaty with Britain she will not measure her terms by the i^ju^^ies she
has received, but looking forward to distant ages, and me^suring things on the
great scale of the world, with benevolent views to humanity, she will give to
Britain such terms of peace and commerce, as shall be for the general good of
mankind: and leave it to providence, to punish the enormities of the present
rulers of Britain and their abettors, who have shed the innocent blood of
Americans. -- In a word, America will be in every view as completely an
independent, sovereign nation, as any power that now exists in the world; and
she will give to every nation with whom she forms a treaty, the same privileges
she receives, and nothing more.

By the favor and protection of GOD, who has given her the best quarter of the
world, and exalted her to the rank of empire, she means by sacred honor, and
justice, and humanity, to hold the balance of the nations, and to be a friend
to the oppressed, and an enemy to none but the enemies of peace. -- From these
general principles, the concessions you must make, in order to obtain peace,
are obvious, and I need not name them. But before I conclude, let me remind you
"there is no peace to the wicked" -- and your crimes are numberless, and their
enormity is equal to their number. You were exalted to reign over a grateful
people, who loved you with parental tenderness and brotherly affection; they
expected a return of love, and in the careless confidence which love inspires,
exposed their liberties to the grasp of a tyrant. -- You conceived their
security aff^rded the wish^d for moment to enslave them, and equally regardless
of your duty to GOD and to man, you formed the horrid design, and have pursued
it by means too inf^rnal to be named; you have violated all the sacred laws of
Heaven and earth, and sported with human misery. When America asked only for
liberty, peace and sa^ety -- only for the enjoyment of what GOD had given, you
sent ^^^e and sword; and while they begged for mercy, you added torture and
(...) in the most horrid forms. -- Thousands who once sent (...) ardent prayers
for you, changed them into petitions that GOD would stay your murdering hands.
-- For many long years every breeze has wafted the groans of dying prisoners
to Heaven against you, while every hour has witnessed the big tears and
swelling bosoms of their surviving friends! What myriad^ have you sent down to
the chambers of death; and in the bosom of surviving thousands, you have
planted the sharp them of affliction! The aged parents cry with anguish. "O my
son! my son! my only son! is murdered by the tyrant George." The bereaved widow
and weeping children, wi^h bleeding hearts, cry out, "O my husband! my father!
we shall never, never see him again! he is murdered by the tyrant." The virgin,
whose dearer second self, was gloriously contending in the field to save his
country, became a captive, and suffered complicated death by cold and hunger;
she cannot speak for grief -- in silent sorrow sinks down, and in her languid
eye, she looks a prayer to heaven! Her anguish is too great to find a voice,
but heaven can hear her wishes, and will avenge her wrongs! Well may you turn
pale at your picture, and fain^ at the prospect of wrath divine, and triple
vengeance ar^^^d with almighty thunder! You have sl^ghted the commands of your
GOD and SAVIOR, and despised the precepts of the Prince of Peace; therefore
you may justly fear that He will "laugh at your calamity, and m^^k when your
fear comes;" that as you refused mercy it shall be refused to you, and when
"destruction and desolation comes upon you like a whirlwind," no arm shall
relieve you* no eye shall pity you; but rapt in final ruin, si^k down, down,
down to the regions of horror and death eternal!

The Physicians in waiting, observing the king to swoon, apply strong drops,
and prepare to let him blood. "And you, his guilty ministers, who have shared
in his crimes, shall be partakers of his plagues -- -- your infidel hearts have
laughed at the judgment to come, and said, "to whom shall we give account?" but
the time is near, when, like the "father of lies." ye shall "believe and
tremble." -- While your master faints with conscious guilt, can ye lift an eye
to the sun, or look on the face of man, while nature, scarred with your
cruelties, and weeping, cries for vengeance, and the slighted mercy of heaven
is just signing your doom."

The physicians cry out, "the king is dead, and all their lordships are
fainting, and have the symptoms of death!" The American then turned from them,
as the Angel from Satan, and went his way.


[P. S. The reader will observe that the profane language in the dialogue, is
only between the vilest Being in the other world, and the worst in this, -- and
is inserted with a view to render the odious practice of swearing perfectly
infamous. -- Surely no one will imitate the Devil, or the Tyrant, unless he is
dead to virtue, and lost to all the noble sentiments and feelings of the soul.
--

Tories may perhaps think the Tyrant is ill-used: but his crimes are so black
and numerous, that it is perhaps impossible to represent him worse, on the
whole, than he rea^ly is, or even so bad: -- and the Tories may as well
undertake to vindicate the conduct of the Devil, as that of the Tyrant. --


