MR. ADAMS's SERMON, PREACHED AT WESTFORD, JANUARY 2d, 1782.

A SERMON, ON THE DUTY AND IMPORTANCE OF MINISTERS MAKING THE SACRED SCRIPTURES
the RULE and STANDARD Of their PREACHING, DELIVERED AT WESTFORD, JANUARY 2d,
1782. In presence of the PASTORS and DEACONS of several of the neighboring
CHURCHES, who were convened, in order to confer with the Reverend Mr. SCRIBNER,
relative to certain DOCTRINES he had been charged with preaching.

By ZABDIEL ADAMS, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in LUNENBURGH.

BOSTON: Printed by NATHANIEL COVERLY and ROBERT HODGE, at their Office in
Newbury-Street. M.DCC.LXXXII.

ISAIAH viii. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according
to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.


HAPPY are the people who live where divine revelation shines. This is not the
portion of all the nations of the earth; Israel of old was thus favored. "GOD
showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: He has
not dealt so with any nations, and as for his judgments they have not known
them( a)". Since the Psalmist thus expressed himself, GOD has been pleased to
make a clearer and more explicit revelation or his will; contained in what is
called the New Testament, this revelation we enjoy together with that which was
anciently given to the Jews. But whilst this is our happy state, a great part
of the world still lies in darkness, they have nothing but the light of nature
to direct them, they "set in the region and shadow of death (b)," they grope in
the dark, they "seek the LORD, by the dim taper of reason, if happily they might
feel after him and find him (c)". Whilst this is the sad condition of many of
the nations around us, we have the blessedness of "the people that know the
joyful sound (d)". The sovereignty of GOD is to be adored in the discrimination
that he has made among the nations of the earth; and greatly is he to be
praised that he has so highly favored us above many people, who by nature were
equal, and perhaps on other accounts superior to ourselves. Well may we adopt
the words of our blessed Savior and say, "we thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them to us babes. Even so Father, for so it has seemed good
in thy sight Mat. xi. 25.
." This revelation thus granted to us, is transmitted down in writing. Now all
writing is in a greater or less degree uncertain. This is especially true of
all ancient compositions. Obscurity is produced by length of time. An
additional happiness, therefore, do we enjoy in having an order of men,
divinely appointed, to explain, as well as to inculcate and enforce, this word
and will of GOD. The ignorance of a very considerable part of mankind, and the
ambiguity of all kinds of writing being properly considered, it must appear a
mighty privilege to have a set of men, whose leisure and education shall enable
them, in some degree, to unfold the doctrinal truths of this written revelation.
Were multitudes upon reading the scriptures, to be asked, as Phillip of old
asked the Eunuch, "understandest thou what thou read?" they like him must
answer, "how can I except some man guide me Acts viii. 30.
!" Though the Old and New Testament be, in the most important parts thereof,
sufficiently intelligible, yet there are not only in St. Paul's epistles, but
in other books of scripture, "some things hard to be understood, which the
ignorant and unstable are liable to wrest to their own destruction 2. Pet. iii.
16.
." The wisdom and goodness of GOD, therefore, are most devoutly to be
acknowledged in the institution of the gospel ministry. But alas! the best
appointments are liable to be corrupted. Ministers, whose sole business it is
to explain and enforce the doctrines of scripture, sometimes grossly
misrepresent them. When this is the case, lamentable is the condition of those
people who set under them. If the "leaders of the people cause them to err,
those that are led of them will be destroyed Isaiah ix. 16.
." If "they whose lips should preserve knowledge, and at whose mouths the
people should seek the law, are ignorant or erroneous," then the "blind lead
the blind and both will fall into the ditch." The light should be in the head,
"but if the light that is therein be darkness, how great is that darkness Math.
vi. 23.
?" The prophet Isaiah, conscious of these things, calls upon all that pretended
to speak in the name of the LORD to have recourse not to familiar spirits and
wizards that peep and mutter, but to the law and the testimony, and declared
that if they speak not according to that word, it was because there was no
light in them. From the words thus introduced I shall attempt the following
things.

I. That it is the duty of the ministers of religion to preach and speak both
publicly and privately agreeably to the scriptures of truth.

II. Show that sometimes they depart therefrom, and particularly point out when
they may be said to do so.

III. Mention some of the reasons why ministers do not always speak agreeably
to the divine law and testimony. And then conclude with a suitable application.

As to the first of these particulars, a few words will suffice. We all agree
that "ministers are in some peculiar sense put in trust with the people, and
are stewards of the mysteries of GOD." It is acknowledged very generally, that
as the canon of scripture is completed; so visions, inspirations, prophecies
and miracles have ceased. Ministers have at this day no such extraordinary
powers as they were vested with, in the days of the Apostles; so that if there
were need of a new revelation, or an addition to the old one, there are no
persons capacitated to undertake the mighty task. But there is no such
necessity. The scripture is full and complete. When the revelation of John the
divine on the island of PATMOS ended, the canon of scripture was closed, and a
curse denounced against the presumptuous wretch "that should dare to add to or
diminish therefrom; his part should be taken away from the book of life." Since
therefore no addition is to be made to divine revelation, the stewards of the
mysteries of GOD have nothing else to do, than explain and inculcate that which
we now enjoy. They are not to make a new, but rationally to interpret the bible
we at present possess. They are to come to their people, with a "thus says the
LORD;" and no further are they to be regarded, then as they speak according to
the Law and Testimony. These should not only be the foundation of their
preaching, but frequent recurrence should be made thereto; and all their
discourses, on topics dubious and disputable should ever be vindicated and
supported by passages of revelation, consistently interpreted. As the
scriptures are a complete rule of faith and practice, so no knowledge more than
what is contained in them, is necessary to salvation. Other knowledge indeed is
convenient and ornamental, and studiously to be sought after; but it is no
further useful to the gospel ministers than as it is a handmaid to divinity,
and serves to illucidate the dark and intricate parts of revelation. It is
highly necessary for this purpose; and the most learned divine is qualified,
and (other things being equal) will be, the best minister. But if his extensive
knowledge leads him astray (as it must be confessed it sometimes does) by
indulging to speculations of his own, and hearkening to the vagaries of a
conceited mind, then in all important points, it may be said that there is no
light in him; none that conduces to the salvation of his hearers, none that
will be profitable to himself, in the great day of the LORD. These
observations, showing it to be the duty of public teachers, to make the
scriptures the rule and measure of their preaching, we find confirmed not only
by my text, but also by the express and direct assertion of St. Peter, who
says, "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of GOD 1. Pet. iv. 11.
", since in the sacred scriptures we have "a sure word of prophecy, and are
persuaded that we have not followed cunningly devised fables, certainly we
should do well to take heed thereunto," not only make them the men of our
counsel, but the rule of our preaching. But though from scripture, and the
reason of the thing, it is sufficiently evident that ministers are obligated to
represent to their hearers only the truths and doctrines of divine revelation;
yet some persons fail of this design, and that in so great a degree as to
render them unsafe and dangerous to be believed or followed. Of this I proposed
to speak in the second head of my discourse. And here to prevent mistakes, let
it be observed, that among all the teachers of religion, none are to be found,
who without error or mistake, are capable perfectly to expound the law and will
of GOD; neither are any two ever to be met with, who always, in all points
agree in the explanation of it. This is not to be expected. The lot of humanity
will not permit it: There are some things, even in scripture, of which we must
be contentedly ignorant, till we drop this mortal flesh, and arrive at the
world of perfect vision. This ignorance and imperfection of ministers does not
destroy the utility of their office. Neither are we to throw away any man, who
as a public teacher, does not explain and interpret every passage or doctrine
of scripture, according to our own sentiments. A man is not to be made an
offender for a word. Allowances are to be made for the frailties of human
nature. Freedom of enquiry is to be indulged; and great candor is to be
exercised, by the people, toward their ministers. We are not hastily to
conclude, that a preacher is dangerously erroneous, because all his sentiments
do not co-incide with our pre-conceived opinion.

Though the exact knowledge of all parts of scripture would be highly pleasing
to the inquisitive mind; yet mistakes in many parts thereof, are consistent
with a state of salvation. The future happiness of our souls will not be
prevented thereby. If an exact knowledge of divine revelation, in all its
parts, were necessary to salvation, who then could be saved? All the important
doctrines of scripture are so plainly revealed, that good men are generally
agreed in them. Differences among ministers are oftentimes merely verbal; and
(if they are otherwise) their difference is mostly about the more intricate and
less important matters of revelation. But then, sometimes it so happens that
they widely and essentially differ; differ in matters highly important, by
which the salvation of their own, and their hearers souls may be greatly
endangered; if not finally lost.

Few ministers are ever to be found, so corrupt and erroneous, but will
sometimes entertain their hearers, with the true and genuine doctrines of the
gospel. The difficulty and the danger with unsound teachers is, that they
intermix falsehood with truth; and too much neglect plain, scriptural doctrines,
for the sake of preaching up the fancies and figments of their own distempered
brains. The church of Rome is doubtless the most corrupt christian church now
in the world; yet it is well known that a part of their creed is agreeable to
the belief of sound protestants, and to the standard of scripture. Their error
and danger lie principally in the human mixtures they have introduced, and the
corrupt additions they have made, to the sacred doctrines; as appears
particularly from Pope Pius's creed. That church holds to Christ as the head;
they lay him in the foundation; but they have built on this foundation a most
erroneous structure of error and folly. On this foundation, they have built not
only what the apostle calls "gold, silver, precious stones, but wood, hay, and
stubble 1 Cor. iii. 12, 13.
. Their doctrines of transubstantiation, invocation of saints, prayers to the
virgin Mary; indulgences, prayers for the dead, penance, pilgrimages, auricular
confession, and a hundred other absurdities, have so eaten out the vitals of
christianity, or at least, have so corrupted the simplicity, obscured the
glory, and veiled the beauty of the gospel, as to make that communion an
extremely dangerous one; and such as we ought never to enter, even though we
have no right to say that salvation cannot be had therein. This last
superstructure, being composed of combustible materials, as wood, hay, stubble,
will be burnt up; and the builders will suffer loss, but themselves may be
saved; yet so, as by fire, that is with difficulty and narrowly, as goods are
saved out of an house all in flames over our heads. The church of the Jews in
the days of our Savior, acted much the same part: They departed from the law
and testimony. They transgressed the commandments of GOD, and in many instances
made them of no effect by their traditions, as our blessed LORD said, and made
evident. Their partial representations, corrupt comments and glosses, enervated
the scriptures, and tended to mislead their hearers, and cause them to expect
salvation in a way in which it was not to be found. Leaving the simplicity of
the law, "they taught for doctrines the commandments of men Mat. xv. 9.
". And as "the leaders of GOD's people anciently caused them to err," so it is
no breach of charity to assert that this is sometimes the case at the present
day. There are those among us who pervert the gospel of CHRIST, who corrupt the
word of GOD, and, even, in some instances, represent things so differently from
the truth as it is in JESUS, that they may be said to preach another gospel."
If sometimes they entertain their hearers with the doctrines of grace clearly,
and strickingly represented, it nobly prepares their minds for the reception of
their poisonous errors, and greatly facilitates the entrance of pernicious
falsehoods into them. In such a case as this, the preacher, (if allowed to be
erroneous at all) is supposed by many to err on the right side; that it is only
an excess of orthodoxy, that he has a good design, means to exalt the divine
sovereignty; and if he speaks wickedly, does it for GOD." But however the
errors of such kind of teachers may be palliated and excused by a particular
kind of hearers, yet it is much to be doubted whether they will be excused so
easily at the bar of GOD. It is the duty of teachers to preach the truth, and
nothing but the truth; to deliver the whole counsel of of GOD and keep back
nothing that is profitable." What then shall we think of the man who
occasionally only preaches the genuine doctrines of the gospel, whilst the most
of his time and zeal are expended in bringing into view a sort of theology
produced by the conjunctions of pride and metaphisic; as, one expresses it, a
kind of Divinity "spun, as the spider does his web, out of his own bowels."
These things being observed in general, I would now particularly say, that a
teacher of religion goes counter to the directions of my text, when he preaches
things concerning which the bible is totally silent. This at once will exclude
from the pulpit all discourses of philosophy, astronomy, metaphisics, etc. For
the scriptures were never designed to teach us any of the above sciences.

Again, the text is contradicted when a minister confines his time in the
pulpit in endeavors to explain matters that are too wonderful for him;
mysteries that are high and sublime; to which he cannot attain; and on which it
is impossible for him to throw any degree of light. The introducing the fine
spun distinctions and curious explications of the schools into discourses of
divinity, has darkened rather then illustrated the doctrines of scripture.
Revelation has been adultrated, and it is benevolent purpose in some degree,
obstructed by this method of procedure. How vain are all attempts to explain
the manner of CHRIST's conception in the womb of the Virgin Mary, by the
overshadowing of the Holy Ghost. How idle and futile are all pretended
explanations concerning the modes of the union between the two natures of
Christ, commonly called the hypostatic union? Who is able to declare CHRIST's
eternal generation; who can clearly and intelligibly show how he was the Son of
GOD, and how the son of man? how the spirit operates upon the hearts of men,
and how he originally proceeded from the Father and the Son? and what is the
unity of the divine persons, and what their difference? Those doctrines cannot
be enlightened by any disquisitions of human reason. We believe them upon the
authority of divine revelation and know no more about them, then that reveals.
Nay, if the spirit of GOD had descended to a particular explanation of these
mysterious matters, we could not have comprehended his meaning, or gained any
light, unless our minds had been enlarged. But this we know, that it was not
the manner of our Savior and his apostles to enter into any explanation of
these incomprehensible things, the scripture passes them over in profound
silence; and so ought they who undertake to be the public dispensers of it.
That this is extending our enquiries to a latitude beyond what the bible will
justify, might be illustrated by a multitude of instances; but to prevent being
tedious, I shall select only a few. And to go on; what avail all the
distinctions divines have sometimes made concerning the nature of grace,
whether it differs in kind or degree, be special or common, influence the mind
in one way or another? So long as we know that GOD will assist us, if we
endeavor to serve him; and never wants means to effect his designs? Of what
advantage are heated controversies concerning the abilities of unregenerate
men? so long as we may rest assured that they are commanded to love and obey
GOD, and that GOD does not command imposibilities, but his command makes it our
duty to do what we can, and his grace will be perfect in our weakness.

That GOD is omniscient, all agree; that all future events, even such as are
called contingent* are known by him, long before they take place, is not
disputed. The preacher, who, not content with a^^^^^ming that this perfection
belongs to GOD, undertakes to explain how the prescience of the Deity does, or
does not consist with the liberty of man is wise above what is written, and
oftentimes "darkens counsel by words without knowledge." And if the result of
his speculations on this head, should be, that man is not a free agent in the
common acceptance of the words, that his will is fast bound in fate; that he
has not a principle of efficiency, by which to determine his own volitions and
actions, but like a machine is operated upon; that all his liberty consists
merely in voluntariness and is by no means to be opposed to necessity, I say if
the result of his reasonings on the divine omniscience, should be such as is
represented above (nearly as has been in fact the case) then he departs from
the law and testimony in a still higher and more important sense. In this case
he not only speaks where the scripture is silent; but really contradicts it in
a point that is highly essential. He advances an antiscriptural doctrine,
repugnant to the common sense, reason and perception of mankind; and
consequently highly improper to be preached. For though several people, and
some very wicked ones too, have taught the doctrine of fate and necessity; and
some of them evidently with a design to subvert all religion, and even the
being of GOD; yet nothing can be plainer than that the reverlation of GOD to
man, uniformly considers him as free, and addresses him from the beginning of
Genesis to the end of the Apocalypse, accordingly Though it is somewhat
contrary to my present design to enter into any reasoning on this point, yet as
it is a matter that has employed the thoughts and pens of many writers, I will
beg leave just to give the sentiments of the great and learned Dr. SAMUEL
CLARKE, on it, speaking of God's knowledge extending to the most contingent
futurities, even the actions of free agents, he says, "There is in this matter
one difficulty which has in all ages employed the speculations of considering
men; namely, how foreknowledge in God, can be consistent with liberty of action
in men." In answer to which, he says, "1st. That our finite understanding may
reasonably be allowed, not to be able to comprehend all the ways of infinite
knowledge; Job xi. 7. "Can thou by scarching find out God? Can thou find
out the Almighty unto perfection? etc. This acknowledgement of the
incomprehensibleness of the ways of God must always be understood with relation
to such things only as do not imply any express contradiction. -- Also, it must
be observed, that this acknowledgement ought to be understood only of things,
expressly revealed, not of any human doctrines. 2dly, It is furher necessary to
promise that in the matter before us, the question is not, whether men's
actions be free; but whether or no, and how, that freedom of action which makes
men to be men, can be consistent with the foreknowledge of such actions: for if
these two things were really inconsistent, and could by no means be reconciled;
it would follow, not that men's actions were not free; (for that would destroy
all religion, and take away all the moral attributes of God at once;) but on
the other side, it would follow, that such free actions as men's are, and
without which rational creatures could not be rational creatures, were not the
objects of the divine foreknowledge. And in such case, it would be no more a
dimunition of God's omniscience, not to know things impossible and
contradictory to be known; than it is a dimunition of his omnipotence, not to
be able to do things impossible and contradictory to be done: But this is not
the case: For these two things being premised we may now answer directly to the
difficulty itself, namely, how foreknowledge in God can be consistent with
liberty of action in men; and they are therefore consistent, because
foreknowledge has no influence at-all upon the things foreknown; and it has
therefore no influence upon them, because things would be just as they are, and
not otherwise, if there was no foreknowledge. Foreknowledge does not cause
things to be; but things that are to be hereafter, whether necessarily or
freely, are the cause of it is being foreknown that they should so be, whether
necessarily or freely. The futurity of free actions is exactly the same, and in
the nature of things themselves, as the like certainty in event, whether they
can or could not be foreknown. As our knowing a thing to be, when we see it is,
does not hinder an action from being free, notwithstanding it is then certain,
and cannot but be, when it is: So God's foreknowing that any action will freely
be done, does not at all hinder its being free, though he knows it certainly;
because his foreseeing things to come, does no more influence, or alter the
nature of things, than our seeing them when they are. -- The manner of God's
knowing future free actions, must not indeed be, like his foreknowledge of
things necessary. I say, it must not be by foreseeing a continued chain of
causes: For that would indeed destroy their freedom. But it must be a power,
quite of another kind: a power, whereof we can only have an obsure glimpse in
some such manner as the following. What one man will freely do, upon any
particular occasion, another man, by observation and attention, may in some
measure judge; and the wiser the person is, who makes the observation, the more
probable will his judgment be, and the seldomer will he be deceived. An angel,
in the like case, would make a judgment of the future event, as much nearer to
certainty, than that of the wisest man, as the angelic nature and faculties are
superior to the human. In God himself, whose powers are all in every respect
infinitely transcending those of the highest creatures; this judgment of future
free actions, must needs be infallible, that is, as truly certain (though
entirely of a different kind) as that foreknowledge which he has of necessary
events, by seeing their necessary chain of causes: Nor ought it to appear
strange, that this divine foreknowledge of future free actions, should be
entirely of a different nature, from his foreknowledge of necessary events. For
there is a not unlike distinction in some other of the divine attributes. --
The omnipresence of GOD, is an attribute necessarily belonging to him, and
altogether independent of his will. The goodness of GOD is likewise a necessary
attribute, yet not in the same manner as his omnipresence, by a mere absolute
necessity of nature, but by the unalterable rectitude of his will. This is the
true reason why we return him thanks for being good, but not for being
omnipresent. Thus both are necessary, but by a necessity of a totally different
sort or kind. In like manner, the foreknowledge of GOD, both that of necessary,
and that of free events, is in the issue of things equally certain; yet in the
one case, this certainty is entirely of a different nature from that in the
other. It arises in the case of necessary events from GOD's own fore-appointing
a necessary chain of causes to produce these events; but in the case of free
events it arises from and depends upon the mere futurity of the things
themselves. To illustrate this matter by an example. That CHRIST, should die
for the sins of men, GOD not only fore-knew but fore-appointed it also, and
sent him into the world on purpose for that end. That Judas should betray our
Savior, GOD foreknew, but did not fore-appoint it; only he chose on purpose,
into the number of his disciples, one such person, the wickedness of whose own
heart, he saw would prompt him to accomplish that event. That Ahab should fall
at Ramath-Gilead, GOD foresaw, and forewarned him of it; yet GOD's
foreknowledge did not make it necessary for him, to go up and perish there;
but the mere wickedness of his own will, despising the divine admonition, as it
was the only cause of the event, so was it likewise the only ground of the
foreknowledge. And had Ahab been disposed to repent at the advice of the
Prophet, it was in his own power to have prevented his destruction; and the
foreknowledge of God, would then have been accordingly the foreknowledge of a
contrary event." The reader will pardon the length of the extract, when he
considers that it could not have been shortened without doing injustice to the
reasoning of the Author.
.

Upon the contrary supposition, the commands and exhortations of scripture are
perfectly nugatory, or insulting. Again, that GOD, when he placed Adam on trial
in the garden of Eden, and interdicted him the fruit of the tree of knowledge,
knew that he would fall, and had power sufficient to prevent it, no man
disputes; but to reason from thence as some have done, that GOD chose he should
eat of that tree, or transgress; that it was a part of GOD's general scheme of
Providence that he should do so, that sin was necessary for the good of the
system; and that this accounts for the introduction of it into the world, to
reason, I say, in this manner, and to advance such sentiments; is not only a
departure from, but a gross contradiction to Scripture. By such assertions,
though made to be thought wiser than other people, they darken and debase the
divine character; make GOD to say one thing and at the same time, to mean
another, to choose what he forbids; and in some respects, to be pleased with
what he tells us is, "the abominable thing which his soul hates." It makes the
perceptive and decretive, or the secret and revealed will of GOD opposite to
each other. That the fall of Adam, has been so overruled by the Great Supreme
(whose wonderful prerogative it is to educe good from ill) as to benefit the
rational system, and illustrate his own perfections, no rational man will deny.
But to assert, that he fell in consequence of a divine appointment or
efficiency, is what no mortal has a right to do! How much better is it to think
with the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and say, "man being left to the
freedom of his own will, fell from the estate wherein he was created, by
sinning against GOD." How a contrary sentiment, such as I just now represented,
which seems to tarnish the glory of the divine truth and justice; which so
glaringly contradicts the express words of Scripture, can be thought a
reasonable and safe one, it is impossible for me to say. Can it be thought
reasonable to fix on the great Judge of heaven and earth, a character, that
would be disgraceful to any of our fellow men. Is it decent to set aside plain
and repeated declarations of scripture, to make room for our fallacious and
precarious reasoning? Vain man would be wise, and he be born like the wild
asses colt". Who can readily believe with such kind of teachers, that GOD from
all eternity determined to damn the greater part of mankind, or at least, a
very considerable number of them, to promote his own glory, and to exalt or
increase the happiness of the remainder, when he remembers that the scripture
repeatedly and plainly declares, "that GOD will have all men to be saved and
come to the knowledge of the truth 1 Timothy ii. 4.
". "that he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance Peter iii. 9.
". Again, "as I live says the LORD, I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die Ezekiel xxxiii. 11.
". "O that there were such an heart in them that they would fear me, and keep
all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and their children
after them Deuteronomy v. 29.
". "O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end Deuteronomy. v. 29.
". "How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How
shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zebium? Mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together Hosea xi. 8.
". "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that stonest them that are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thee, as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but ye would not Mat. xxiii. 37.
". What can be the meaning of these numerous texts, if GOD originally and
unconditionally determined the final destruction of multitudes of mankind? In
short, for ministers to pretend to dive into the secret counsels of GOD, as
though they had of old been his counselors, to the detriment of his
revelation, which tells us that, "secret things belong unto the LORD our GOD,
but things only that are revealed to us and to our children, that we might do
all the words of his law Deuteronomy. xxix. 29.
", for them to attempt to explain mysteries, which the scripture chose to pass
over in eternal silence, to substitute their scholastic niceties, in the room
of the plain and weighty matters of the law, is to contradict the direction of
my text, and is a practice at once too notorious to be dissembled, and too
dangerous to be excused! To sum up the whole under this head, let us hear what
the great apostle of the gentiles thought of such kind of preaching. He
resolves for himself, that he would "preach Jesus Christ and him crucified, not
in the words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power;
that the faith of his hearers might not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of GOD Cor. ii. 2, 4, 5.
". Accordingly, he cautions the christian Colosians, against the dangerous
practice of those who corrupted the simplicity of GOD's word, by their
sophistical reasonings: "Beware, says he, least any man spoil you, through
philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of
the world, and not after CHRIST Col. ii. 8.
". Finally, he directs Timothy, and Titus, to guard with care against so
dangerous a method of preaching. To Timothy he says, "refuse profane and old
wives fables, and exercise thyself rather unto godliness 1. Tim. iv. 7.
".

Again, "shun profane and vain babblings, for they will increase unto more
ungodliness 2. Tim. ii. 16.
". Foolishness and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender
strifes 2. Tim. ii. 23.
". Lastly, "if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the doctrine that is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes
of words, whereof comes strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disqueiting of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; from such
withdraw thyself 1. Tim. vi. 3, 4, 5.
". I shall now in the third place enquire into the reasons why ministers
sometimes do not preach according to the law and testimony. It might be
answered in general, that ignorance, inattention, and the corrupt principles of
the human heart lead them astray. But I shall be more particular, and answer
first, some persons misrepresent the doctrines of revelation, through design,
in order to accommodate themselves to the corrupt humors of their hearers.
Such is the abandoned temper of some teachers, that they will knowingly pervert
the gospel, that they may answer some wicked design, or secure to themselves
some worldly emolument. Persons that will thus conduct, are heretics in the
strictest sense of the word. They are highly criminal in the sight of GOD. To
reason with such men is vain; though it may be proper to administer to them, an
wholesome admonition or two. Hence says St. Paul, "an heretic after the first
and second admonition reject, knowing that he that is such, is subverted and
sins, being condemned of himself Tit. iii. 10.
". Charity obliges us to think there are but few such ministers at this day.
Secondly, another reason why public teachers misrepresent the truth, is their
negligence in studying the scriptures. As the husbandman cannot cultivate his
farm without proper utensils; so neither is the preacher properly furnished for
his work, unless much acquainted which the sacred code, which is the foundation
of the whole of his instructions from the pulpit. In order to his having this
acquaintance, much study is necessary. But as "study is a weariness to the
flesh Eccl. xii. 12.
," some teachers content themselves with a careless and cursory reading the
scriptures, which is by no means sufficient to give us a clear and
comprehensive knowledge of them. Assiduous application is requisite for this
purpose. Different passages should be compared with each other; the analogy of
faith must be preserved, a harmony maintained through the whole, and dark texts
explained by those that are more clear and intelligible. But alas! for want of
this attention, how horribly are the scriptures sometimes perverted. The
preacher is carried away by mere sounds; and strains texts to such unnatural
senses, as are not only contrary to the general scope of revelation, but strike
at the foundation of all religion. Through neglect of comparing one passage
with another; by reason of not attending to the general design of the writer,
the connection of his discourse, and the thread of his reasoning, we raise
doctrines upon incidental loose portions of scripture, which contradict it is
general tenor, and countenance immorality. The mistake occasioned hereby, might
be made evident by a variety of instances: I will mention a few. "Whatsoever is
not of faith is sin Romans xiv. 23.
". How often has this text been quoted to prove that whatever an unregenerate
man does in religion, is altogether sin, because he is destitute of true saving
faith in CHRIST? But if we carefully consult the context, will it not clearly
appear, that it has no kind of reference to this matter? On the contrary, from
such an examination, will it not be abundantly evident, that the reasoning of
St. Paul was only this, that with respect to a controversy that subsisted
between the judaizing and gentile christians, concerning the lawfulness of
observing, or not observing certain days, or of eating or not eating certain
meats, they ought to be fully persuaded in their own minds, and not go contrary
to the belief of them; for though it was lawful under the gospel, to eat all
kinds of wholesome meats; yet if any man thought otherwise, or even doubted the
lawfulness of particular kinds of meat, and yet eat of them, he acted a sinful
part, in going contrary to the light of his own mind. He that doubts is
damned, that is, condemned in his own mind, if he eat, because he eats not of
faith; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Again, "whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose
his life for my sake, shall find it Mat. xvi. 25.
." Has not this passage also been greatly misrepresented; either to serve a
particular favorite scheme, or through neglect to consult the drift of our
Savior, in the chapter where he uses it. Multitudes are sensible, that it has
been often used in support of this singular opinion, viz. that if a man has any
desire to secure his own salvation by any acts of obedience he performs; nay,
if he is not willing to forego his final happiness, for the glory of GOD, and
of CHRIST, he certainly shall be damned! And yet, is it not sufficiently
evident from the connection in which it stands, that it means neither more nor
less then this, that if a man through fear of temporal death, would renounce
CHRIST and his gospel, though by this means he might save his temporal, he
should certainly lose his eternal life? I might easily point out the perversion
of many other passages of sacred writ, that have been misconstrued, either
through inattention, or to serve a particular turn; but the time would fail me.
I shall only observe, that it cannot give us a very favorable opinion of
sentiments, or doctrines, that have no other support in the bible than such
texts, thus grossly misapplied. Thirdly, Another reason why we do not speak as
the oracles of GOD, is that we come to the study of them with prejudiced minds.
This is a disadvantage we all, in a greater or less degree, labor under. A man
totally free from prejudice, is no where to be found. There are certain
principles in the human heart, which imperceptibly lead us astray. We are
always liable to be unduly biassed; but when young, prepossessions are most apt
to take place. The company we keep, the books we read in our juvenile years
make a strong impression, and sometimes shackle the mind in such a manner, that
it is with difficulty we get rid of the bias so long as we live. We are formed
for imitation; and whilst incapable of judging for ourselves, we take our
sentiments from those, whom from their stations, and characters we are led to
reverence. With sentiments thus previously imbibed, we come to the study of the
scriptures. Therefore instead of enquiring impartially into the true meaning of
them, with an upright desire to be acquainted with it, our business is rather
to make them an echo to our own voice, and accommodate them in the best manner
we can to our pre-conceived sentiments. Passages of revelation are hence
tortured, wrested from their original design, and made to speak a language
foreign from the intention of the writer.

Under this head of prejudice and the evil influence it has upon us, I shall
mention two particulars. First, Some men from this cause are unduly fond of the
sentiments of the ancients, and will not be induced to believe any thing, on
which they had not put the stamp of orthodoxy. These people have an undue
reverence for antiquity. "They believe that the former times were better than
these Ecc. vii. 10.
; and particularly that our forefathers were the best and most perfect models;
that their examples were a transcript of the precepts, and their belief of the
doctrines of the gospel. Though I have no disposition to disparage them in
either of these respects; yet without offense I may be allowed to say, they
were not perfect; and he that shall implicitly follow them either in their
faith or practice, is in danger of being misled. We ought to see with our own
eyes, and search for truth not in their fallible writings, but in the unerring
pages of divine inspiration. "We should call no man master, or father on earth;
since one is our master even CHRIST Mat. xxiii. 8.
". Happy indeed are we in having the opinions of our fathers delivered down to
us in creeds and formularies, provided we make a discreet use of them; but if
they are subscribed, and rigidly adhered to, as the standard of right opinion,
they are then an insuperable bar to any improvement in divine knowledge. We do
well to avail ourselves of the writings and discoveries of former times; but
ought not to rest contended with any seize to which they had arrived.
Modern improvements have been made in philosophy, jurisprudence, etc. why not
in divinity? There was a contrariety of sentiments even among the ancients; we
ought to read both sides of the controversy; and from their interferings, as
from the collision of the flint and steel, should labor to strike out new
light. In short, a blind attachment to mere human creeds, hangs a dead weight
upon the mind, fetters the native freedom of the soul, prevents our impartial
enquiries, and oftentimes greatly misleads. But, Secondly, Prejudice, in some
persons has a quite contrary effect, and leads on the other hand, as far from
the truth of scripture. This is the case of those who would be thought more
penetrating and sagacious than other people. Such persons take no satisfaction
in preaching that which others have preached before them. Their pride can
content itself with nothing but what is new and singular. Thread bare truth
they hate. New and untrodden paths only can they brook to walk in. They love to
set the world a staring by the novelty and strangeness of their assertions.
They love to be talked of, as men above vulgar prejudices, who act an
independent part, and who think for themselves. To be transmitted down to
posterity, as the heads of a new sect in religion, is an object so tempting to
their vanity that they cannot resist it. Now to answer these purposes, to
gratify their vanity, and to be thought wiser than others, it is necessary to
strike out new walks of science, to broach new doctrines, and contradict the
opinions of those who have gone before them. If they think and preach like
those who went before them, what glory is it? But if they are the authors of
new discoveries; if they can unravel the Gordian knot; if they can account for
the introduction of sin into the world, and explain that which has puzzled the
brightest geniusses in former ages, then they answer their design, they glory
in their new invented divinity; and pertinaciously adhere to that which shocks
the common sense of mankind in general. To show that mankind have been in an
error, even in the smallest matter, and to point out their mistake, is some
gratification to their vanity; but to prove that they have been in a mistake in
religion, which is a matter of universal concern, for eighteen hundred years
past, affords to them matter of exultation and triumph! From such a source as
this, some persons of vain and empty minds, deviate from the scripture, and
teach for doctrines not the truths of revelation, but the dictates of their own
vanity and pride. -- Fourthly, and lastly. The last reason I shall mention, why
ministers depart from the law and the testimony is, their not settling
beforehand just sentiments of the Deity. Did we conceive of him, as we ought,
as a being of truth and justice, of holiness and infinite benevolence, we could
not possibly believe that a revelation from him, could contain such doctrines,
as are sometimes preached. Under the notion of exalting his sovereignty, we
should by no means represent him as cruel and tyrannical, merciless and
capricious. Whether this has not been done by some, I leave others to judge.

I shall apply the whole that has been said, to the ministers now present, and
to the people who hear them. First, to the ministers. You will permit me, my
reverend Fathers and Brethren, to observe that it becomes us to be very careful
how we study the holy scriptures: with what tempers we come to the study of
them. There are many principles in the human heart that may lead us insensibly
to wrest and pervert the sacred oracles. We should, therefore, watch over our
own hearts, mortify our pride, our vanity, and every other passion that makes
us averse to the truth, as it is in JESUS. The prevailing temper of the heart
has an amazing influence on the sentiments of the head. Thus the pride of the
heart is brought with difficulty to submit to some of the humbling doctrines of
the gospel. How hard is it to consent to receive salvation as the free gift of
GOD? Again, a man of a selfish temper greatly devoid of benevolence, after
having placed himself in the number of the elect, readily adopts the groundless
doctrine of personal, unconditional reprobation; and contemplates with pleasure
the inevitable damnation of millions of his fellow men; and so in an hundred
other instances. It becomes us therefore, as public teachers of religion to
exercise a godly jealousy over ourselves, and labor to bring with us to the
study of the scriptures, an open, candid, meek and teachable temper. "The meek
GOD will guide in judgment, the meek he will teach his way Psalm. xxv. 9.
". A disposition to do the will of GOD is the best preparative for the right
understanding the doctrines of christianity. CHRIST says, if any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of GOD, or whether I
speak of myself John vii. 17.
. Accordingly says Daniel, "none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise
shall understand Dan. xxii. 10.
". The pre-dominancy of lust and passion shuts up the avenues of the soul, and
bars the entrance of divine truth; it warps and distorts the mind, and leads to
gross misconceptions. As we cannot but be sensible of this, it should be our
constant endeavor to mortify the evil propensities of our hearts, and with
meekness receive and dispense the ingrafted word, which is able to save our
souls". It should, moreover, be our great concern to divest our minds of all
prejudicate opinions, not first settle our sentiments and then examine, as is
too often the case; but examine with impartiality and care, in order to our
being grounded and established in the faith. And in this examination let us
make the Bible the standard, receiving that more than the most respectable
human authority; being persuaded that the first is unerring; the last fallible
and precarious. Finally, we should add our fervent addresses to the GOD of all
grace for the illumination and guidance of his Holy Spirit, that we may be
preserved from all dangerous errors, may know the truth ourselves, and be
faithful dispensors of it to others; for truly dreadful is it to mislead,
either through ignorance or passion, those who seek the law at our mouths.
Against the errors of teachers there is one security, and that is, the right
understanding of their hearers in divine things. An intelligent people are
rarely imposed upon by false and erroneous preachers. But be this as it will,
certainly people are not obliged implicitly to believe all that is delivered to
them from the desk. They have the Bible in their hands, written in a language
which they understand, and by this they are to judge, whether what they hear be
true or not. To you therefore who hear, I shall in the Second place, apply
myself. Suffer me, my brethren to say, that ministers "have no dominion over
your faith, but are only helpers of your joy 2. Cor. i. 24.
". You have not only a right, but it is your duty to judge for yourselves.
"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." "Believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits whether they are of GOD; because many false prophets are
gone out into the world." It was the commendation of the Bereans, that they
searched the scriptures daily, to see whether the things spoken by the
apostles, were so or not. It must be equally to the praise of any other people,
if they see with their own eyes, and compare the doctrines that are delivered
to them from time to time, with the Bible, the only unerring standard. Implicit
faith is degrading to the human mind. It argues a base and servile temper.
Hence, searching the scriptures, to put us into a capacity to judge of the
sentiments that are advanced to us by our teachers, is a mark of a noble and
ingenuous soul, that will not be hood-winked or shackled by authority. I say
not this to excite a carping, captious spirit in hearers, of which there is
full enough at present; but only to influence to a rational, diligent and manly
examination of the word of GOD; and to enable them to see when the spirit of
the gospel is preached, or contradicted by their ministers. To enable you to
make this examination to any valuable purpose, several things are necessary.
First, a good and an honest heart, disposed to keep the divine commands, will
give you great insight into the will of GOD. David could say, I "have more
understanding than all my teachers; for thy testimonies are my meditation; I
understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts Psalm. cxix. 99,
100.
". Secondly, It will be a mighty help to you in the understanding of scripture
in the dark and mysterious parts thereof, to settle and entertain in your minds
right conceptions of the divine character. Thirdly, Remember that revelation
was given not to introduce speculative and curious opinions into the world, but
to rectify the disorders, and better the temper of the human heart. Fouthly,
Lay it down as a maxim, that no doctrines can come from GOD, a being of
infinite purity and holiness, which in the least degree tolerate or tend to
encourage vice and immorality. Fifthly, That revelation is founded in reason
and common sense, and therefore that none of its doctrines can contradict
either the one or the other; however, some of them may be above our
comprehension. That people who shall attentively study the scripture agreeably
to the rules and directions laid down in this discourse, will be out of all
danger of being carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men,
and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive Ephesians. vi. 14.
". I am constrained to add, that a people well acquainted with the revealed
will of GOD, will not easily digest, or be reconciled to certain doctrines that
have been propagated late in some of our Parishes. The Pastors and Deacons, who
have in this place taken much pains to become acquainted with the religious
sentiments of the Rev. Mr. SCRIBNER; are, in general fully persuaded that he
has either publicly or privately advanced some sentiments, not only
unsupported by scripture, but also of a dangerous nature, and tendency. In
particular, they conceive that he is dangerously erroneous in the two following
points. First, in what he has said concerning sin's being the object of GOD's
choice, and agreeable to his will. And Secondly, in saying that the
unregenerate have no right to attend the means of grace: Notwithstanding Mr.
SCRIBNER'S explanations or softenings of these heads, yet it finally did
appear, that the sentiments he advanced, relative to the above particulars,
were such, as not only could not be defended, but were really contrary to the
very spirit and genius of christianity. -- It must be thought a matter of the
highest importance, to entertain right conceptions of the deity. We are taught
to conceive of him as a being of infinite purity and holiness; but if sin, in
any view of it be agreeable to him; if it was introduced into the world, by his
influence, efficiency or creation, how can we reconcile this with his justice,
purity and holiness? How can we reconcile it with his justice to punish that in
his creatures, which they did through his efficiency, and in the execution of
his own will? How, with his holiness to create, or effect, to will or choose
that which is directly contrary to holiness? The distinctions that have been
made in relation to this subject, appear to be altogether futile; such as that,
the sinfulness of sin, and sin in its own nature, are displeasing to GOD. Do
not these expressions imply that there is a kind of holiness, or goodness in
sin; and that sin out of it is own nature, is the object of GOD's choice? To
introduce such uncouth phraseology into popular sermons; to desturb the natural
ideas that mankind have of GOD, to distinguish and subtilize beyond the limits
of common sense, must certainly be a very unprofitable way, a very dangerous
method of preaching. But it will be said, that the scripture represents GOD as
encouraging and promoting sin. I must confess there are many passages which
seem to countenance the very sentiment I am now exploding. Thus we read that
GOD. "hardened Pharaoh's heart Exodus viii. 13.
," that he moved "David to number the people 2. Sam. xxiv. 1.
," that the LORD put a lying spirit, in the mouths of all Ahab's prophets 2.
Cron. xviii. 22.
", "that he turned the hearts of the Egyptians to hate his people, and to deal
subtly with his servants Psalm. cv. 22.
; that he bid Shimei curse David etc 2 Samuel xvi. 11.
. Now, how are these texts to be explained, on any other supposition, than that
of GOD's being the author or efficient cause of sin? I answer; that as GOD's
providence overrules, and superintends all things; as from him we derived all
our powers and faculties both natural and moral; and in him, live, move, and
have our being; and finally, as without these powers, we could do neither good
nor evil actions; hence in a figurative, and less proper sense, he is said to
be the author or cause of the sinful actions and violitions of men even when
nothing more is intended, then that he permitted them so to do; that he upheld
their lives and faculties by which they were enabled to commit sin; that he put
them into such circumstances, as falling in with their corrupt tempers, made
them transgress; withdrew his grace from them, left them for their former
provocations, to their own obstinacy and blindness; and gave them up to satan,
to be tempted by him. That this is the meaning of the above quoted scriptures,
and that they do not intend that GOD makes men wicked by his own positive
influence, must be evident from what is said in other parts of the bible. Thus,
what is figuratively said to be done by GOD, 2. Samuel xxiv. 1st. is, with
greater accuracy of expression, attributed to satan, 1st. Chronicles xxi. And
satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.
Accordingly, St. Peter says to Ananias, why has satan (not why has GOD)
filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost Acts v. 3.
." But what puts this matter beyond all doubt, is the declaration of St. James,
on this very head. "Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of GOD;
for GOD cannot be tempted of evil; neither tempts he any man: But every man
is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed Jam i. 13 -- 14.
". Secondly, The other article condemned by the conference is this, "it is not
the duty, nay; the unregenerate have no right to assemble with GOD's people, or
to attend the means of grace." The greater part of mankind, is shocked at such
a sentiment as this. Can such an opinion be possibly inferred from scripture?
Nay, does it not contradict the general tenor of the Bible? were not the means
of grace instituted for the purpose of bringing men home to CHRIST? Does not
our adorable Savior say, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance Mat. ix. 13.
". "And St. Paul, that it is the duty of ministers to beseech sinners in
CHRIST's stead to be reconciled to GOD 2. Cor. v. 20.
". What then can those men mean, who say that sinners have no right to assemble
with GOD's people, to read, pray, etc?

Is not this laying the ax at the root of the tree of virtue? Is it not to
encourage sin and licentiousness with a witness? What? shall they forbid the
greater part of mankind the hearing the preached gospel? If they thus turn men
out of the synagogue, we may expect soon to hear that they have no right to
breathe, and that some fanatics will kill them, under a notion of, "doing GOD
service John xvi. 2.
". Sinners, it is true, are to be exhorted to believe and repent. But as
persons do not commonly step out of a state of unregeneracy into a state of
conversion by one mighty stride, they therefore should be exhorted to wait on
GOD in his appointed way, for the obtainment both of faith and repentance. They
should watch at wisdoms gates, and wait at the posts of her doors Prove. viii.
34.
", should cry after knowledge, and lift up their voice for understanding; seek
her as silver, and search for her, as for hid treasures, if they would
understand the fear of the LORD, and find the knowledge of GOD Prove. ii. 3, 4,
5.
". It is reasonable to encourage the unregenerate to attend the word preached,
as we are told by St. Paul, "that faith comes by hearing Romans x. 12.
", and to direct them to pray, especially, as, when GOD promises to the
Israelites to give them a new heart, etc. he says, "for this will I be enquired
of by the house of Israel to do it for them Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37.
". Can any man, on the contrary, believe it more rational to direct them not to
ask for faith till they have received it, not to seek till they have found; not
to knock till it is opened to them. This, methinks, is absurd, contrary to the
sense of mankind in general, as well as to the true meaning of scripture. -- To
be sure, CHRIST did not treat sinners under conviction in this manner, "He did
not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax," but encouraged the
smallest beginnings of goodness, till he sent forth judgment unto victory, or,
till conviction ended in conversion. How dreadful is a contrary sentiment,
which discourages endeavors, and is promotive of vice! Attending the means of
grace, if it does not terminate in conversion, has a mighty tendency to keep
the conscience tender, and restrain from a multitude of sins unto which
otherwise, we should be apt to rush Pertinent is the account that was lately
transmitted to me by the Rev. Mr. MACCARTY of Worcester, and the Rev. Mr.
WHITNEY of Northborough, under their hands. These gentlemen went to visit young
ROSS, who was in prison, under sentence of death, for being confederate with
others, in the murder of Mr. SPOONER, of Brook-field. After giving him some
advice and directions what to do in his situaation, and particularly urging him
to the duty of prayer, he says, "I like your advice and thank you for it, but
it brings to my mind something very different, which I heard not long ago from
the pulpit. A young gentleman, preaching for the minister, where I used to
attend public worship, said, in the course of his sermon, that it was not a
duty, or rather, it was a sin for an unregenerate man to pray. Before this I
was stirred up to secret prayer at times; and thought it my duty; but hearing
that sentence from the desk, caused me to lay aside secret prayer, and I have
reason to think my neglect of that duty, a great cause of my failing into those
sins which have brought me into this place, and situation, and for which I must
soon suffer death." He said the preachers name was LITCHFIELD.
.

To conclude. Brethren and Friends of this Church and Town, we heartly lament
your unhappy divisions, together with the occasion of them. We sincerely wish
both minister and people well. May GOD enlighten you into the knowledge of all
necessary truth; and divest your minds of all undue prejudices. May those
doctrines which we think have a malignant influence upon the temporal and
spirtual interest of mankind, and which have been, in part, the occasion of
your present divided state, be no more advanced, either publicly or privately,
among you; and in this case, may a union and harmony once more be restored to
this formerly flourishing Town: May you walk hand in hand, through the tiresome
road of life, and finally meet and rejoice together in that glorious place,
where an unity of sentiment and affection constantly prevail*

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page 13. Line 29. for Apocatype, read Apocalypse.


