A WINTER PIECE: BEING A SERIOUS EXHORTATION, WITH A CALL TO THE UNCONVERTED:
AND A SHORT CONTEMPLATION ON THE DEATH OF JESUS CHRIST.

WRITTEN BY JUPITER HAMMON, A NEGRO MAN belonging to Mr. JOHN LLOYD, of Queen's
Village, on Long Island, now in Hartford.

Published by the AUTHOR with the Assistance of his Friends.

HARTFORD: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR. M. DCC. LXXXII.

A SERIOUS EXHORTATION, etc.
As I have been desired to write something more than Poetry, I shall endeavor
to write from these words, Matthew xi, 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden.

My Brethren, I shall endeavor by divine assistance, to show what is meant by
coming to the Lord Jesus Christ laboring and heavy laden, and to conclude, I
shall contemplate on the death of Jesus Christ.

My Brethren, in the first place, I am to show what is meant by coming to
Christ laboring and heavy laden. We are to come with a sense of our own
unworthiness, and to confess our sins before the most high God, and to come by
prayer and meditation, and we are to confess Christ to be our Savior and
mighty Redeemer. Matthew x, 33. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will
I confess before my heavenly father. Here, my brethren, we have great
encouragement to come to the Lord, and ask for the influence of his holy
spirit, and that he would give us the water of eternal life, John iv. 14.
Whosoever shall drink of this water as the woman of Samaria did, shall never
thirst; but it shall be in them a well of water springing up to eternal life,
then we shall believe in the merits of Christ, for our eternal salvation, and
come laboring and heavy laden with a sense of our lost and undone state
without an interest in the merits of Christ. It should be our greatest care to
trust in the Lord, as David did, Psalm xxxi, 1. In thee O Lord put I my trust.

My Brethren, we must come to the divine fountain to turn us from sin to
holiness, and to give us grace to repent of all our sins; this none can do but
God. We must come laboring and heavy laden not trusting to our own
righteousness, but we are to be clothed with the righteousness of Christ. Then
may we apply this text, Psalm xxxiii, 7. Blessed is he whose transgressions is
forgiven, whose sins is covered. This we must seek for by prayer and
meditation, and we are to pray without ceasing, and the word is set forth by
David in Psalm lxi, 1. Have mercy on me O God, according to thy loving
kindness, according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions. My Brethren we are to come poor in spirit.

In the second place in order to come to the divine fountain laboring and
heavy laden, we are to avoid all bad company, to keep ourselves pure in heart.

Matthew v. 8. Blessed are the poor in heart for they shall see God. Now, in
order to see God we must have a saving change wrought in our hearts, which is
the work of God's holy spirit which we are to ask for, Matthew vii, 7. Ask and
it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find. It may be asked what shall we
find? Ye will find the mercies of God to allure you, the influence of his holy
spirit to guide you in the right way to eternal life, Matt. vii, 8. For every
one that asks receives, but then my brethren we are to ask in a right
manner, with faith and repentance, for except we repent we shall surely die,
that is, we must suffer the wrath of the most high God, who will turn you away
with this pronunciation depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Matt. vii, 23.
Therefore you see how dangerous a thing it is to live in any known sin, either
of commission or omission, for if we commit any wilful sin, we become the
servants of sin John viii, 34. Whosoever commiteth sin is the servant of sin.
My dear brethren, have we not rendered ourselves too much the servants of sin,
by a breach of God's holy commandments, by breaking his holy Sabbath, when we
should have been fitting for our great and last change? Have we not been
amusing ourselves with the pleasures of this life, or, if we have attended
divine service, have we been sincere? For God will not be mocked, for he knows
our thoughts. John iv, 24, God is a spirit, and they that worship him must
worship him in spirit and in truth. Therefore my Brethren, we see how necessary
it is that we should be sincere when we attempt to come to the Lord whether in
public service or private devotion, for it is not the outward appearance but
sincerity of the heart. This we must manifest by a holy life; for it is not
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven; but he
that does the will of my heavenly Father, Matt. vii, 21.

Therefore, we ought to come laboring and heavy laden to the throne of grace,
and pray that God may be pleased to transform us anew in Christ Jesus. But it
may be objected by those who have had the advantage of studying, every one is
not calculated for teaching of others. To those I answer, Sirs, I do not
attempt to teach those who I know are able to teach me, but I shall endeavor
by divine assistance to enlighten the minds of my brethren; for we are a poor
despised nation, whom God in his wise providence has permitted to be brought
from their native place to a christian land, and many thousands born in what
are called christian families, and brought up to years of understanding. In
answer to the objectors, Sirs, pray give me leave to enquire into the state of
those children that are born in those christian families, have they been
baptized, taught to read, and learnt their catechism? Surely this is a duty
incumbent on masters or heads of families. Sirs, if you had a sick child, would
you not send for a doctor? If your house was on fire would you not strive to
put it out to save your interest? Surely then you ought to use the means
appointed to save the souls which God has committed to your charge, and not
forget the words of Joshua, as for me and my house we will serve the Lord.
Children should be taught the fear of God: See what Solomon says, Prove. viii,
18. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil; chapter ix, 10. The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom; chapter xiv, 17. The fear of the Lord is a fountain
of life. Here we see that children should fear the Lord.

But I turn to my Brethren for whom this discourse is designed. My Brethren, if
ye are desirous to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ, ye must forsake all
your sins, and come to the Lord by prayer and repentance of all your former
sins, come laboring and heavy laden; for we are invited to come and rely on
the blessed Jesus for eternal salvation. Matthew x, 32. Whosoever shall confess
me before men, him will I confess before my heavenly father. Here we have our
Savior's words for our encouragement. See to it my brethren, that ye live a
holy life, and that ye walk more circumspect or holy than ye have done
heretofore. I now assure you that God is a spirit, and they that worship him
must worship him in spirit and in truth; therefore if ye would come unto him,
come as the poor publican did, and say God be merciful to me a sinners; Luke
xv, 11. And the publican standing afar off would not lift up so much as his
eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast saying, God be merciful to me a
sinner. For if we hope to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ, we cast off
all self-dependence, as to our own righteousness; for by grace ye are saved
through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God.

Here we see that the imperfections of human nature is such, that we cannot be
saved by any other way but the name of Jesus Christ, and that there must be a
principle of love and fear of God implanted in our hearts, if we desire to come
to the divine fountain laboring and heavy laden with our sins. But the
enquirer may enquire how do you prove this doctrine, are you not imposing on
your brethren, as you know many of them cannot read. To this I answer, Sir, I
do not mean to impose on my brethren, but to show them there must be a
principle of fear and love to God, and now I am to prove this doctrine that we
ought to fear God, Psalm ciii, 11. For as the heavens is high above the earth,
so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. Verse 13. Like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Psalm xxxiv, 9 O
fear the Lord ye his saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. Verse
11. Come ye children hearken unto me. I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
This may suffice to prove the doctrine that we ought to fear the Lord, here my
brethren we see how much our salvation depends on our being transformed anew in
Christ Jesus, for we are sinners by nature and are adding thereunto every day
of our life, for man is prone to evil as the sparks to fly upward, this thought
should put us on our guard against all manner of evil, especially of bad
company. This leads me to say, we should endeavor to glorify God in all our
actions whether spiritual or temporal, for the apostle has told us whatever we
do, do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. x. 30.

Let us now labor for that food which tends unto eternal life, this none can
give but God only: My Brethren, it is your duty to strive to make your calling
and election sure by a holy life, working out your salvation with fear and
trembling, for we are invited to come without money and without price.

Isaiah lv 1 Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters; and he that
has no money, come ye buy and eat; yea come and buy wine and milk without
money and without price. This leads me to say if we suffer as sinners, under
the light of the gospel as sinners, the fault is in us, for our Savior has
told us if he had not come we should not had sin, but now they have no cloak
for their sins. Let us now improve our talents by coming laboring and
burdened with a sense of our sins. This certainly is a necessary duty of all
mankind, to come to the divine fountain for mercy and for the influence of
God's holy spirit to guide us through this wilderness to the mansions of
eternal glory.

My Brethren, have we not great encouragement to come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, Matthew vii. 7. Ask and it shall be given you, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. Therefore if ye desire to be saved by the merits of Christ, ye
must come as the prodigal son did, Luke xv. 21. And the son said unto him
father I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to
be called thy son. This is the language of the true penetent, for he is made
sensible that there is no other name given by which he can be saved, but by the
name of Jesus. Therefore we should put our trust in him and strive to make our
calling and election sure, by prayer and meditation. Psalm lv, 1. Give ear to
my prayer O God, and hide not thyself from my supplication.

But, my Brethren, are we not too apt to put off the thoughts of death till we
are sick, or some misfortune happens to us, forgetting that bountiful hand who
gives us every good gift: Does not the tokens of mortality call aloud to us all
to prepare for death our great and last change, not flattering ourselves with
the hopes of a long life, for we know not what a day may bring forth, therefore
my Brethren let it be your greatest care to prepare for death, that great and
irresistible king of terrors. Are we many of us advanced in years and we know
not how soon God may be pleased to call us out of this life to an endless
eternity, for this is the lot of all men, once to die, and after that the
judgment. Let us now come to the Lord Jesus Christ, with a sense of our own
impotency to do any good thing of ourselves, and with a thankful remembrance of
the death of Christ who died to save lost man, and has invited us to come to
him laboring and heavy laden. My ancient Brethren, let us examine ourselves
now whither we have had a saving change wrought in our hearts, and have
repented of our sins, have we made it our greatest care to honor God's holy
word and to keep his holy Sabbath's, and to obey his commandments.

Exodus xx. 6. And showing mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments, have we been brought to how to the divine sovereignty of the Most
High God and to fly to the arms of the crucified Jesus, at whose crucifiction
the mountains trembled, and the rocks rent, and the graves were opened and many
bodies of saints that slept arose. Come my dear fellow servants and brothers,
Africans by nation, we are all invited to come, Acts x. 34. Then Peter opened
his mouth and said, of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons,
verse 35, But in every nation he that fears him is accepted of him. My
Brethren, many of us are seeking a temporal freedom, and I wish you may obtain
it; remember that all power in heaven and on earth belongs to God; if we are
slaves it is by the permission of God, if we are free it must be by the power
of the most high God. Stand still and see the salvation of God, cannot that
same power that divided the waters from the waters for the children of Israel
to pass through, make way for your freedom, and I pray that God would grant
your desire, and that he may give you grace to seek that freedom which tends
to eternal life, John viii, 32, And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall
make you free. Verse 36, If the Son shall make you free you shall be free
indeed.

This we know my brethren, that all things work together for good to them that
love God. Let us manifest this love to God by a holy life.

My dear Brethren, as it has been reported that I had petitioned to the court
of Hartford against freedom, I now solemnly declare that I never have said, nor
done any thing, neither directly nor indirectly, to promote or to prevent
freedom; but my answer has always been I am a stranger here and I do not care
to be concerned or to meddle with public affairs, and by this declaration I
hope my friends will be satisfied, and all prejudice removed. Let us all strive
to be united together in love, and to become new creatures, for if any man be
in Christ Jesus he is a new creature, 2 Cor. v. 17. Therefore if any man be in
Christ he is a new creature Old things are passed away behold all things are
become new, now to be a new creature is to have our minds turned from darkness
to light, from sin to holiness and to have a desire to serve God with our whole
hearts, and to follow his precepts. Psalm xix, 10. More to be desired than
gold, yea than much fine gold, sweeter than honey and the honey comb. Verse 11.
Moreover by them is thy servant warned, and by keeping them there is great
reward.

Let me now, my brethren, persuade you to prepare for death by prayer and
meditation, that is the way Matt. vi. But when thou prayest enter into thy
closet, and, when thou have shut the door, pray to thy father in secret, and
thy father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

My Brethren, while we continue in sin we are enemies to Christ, ruining
ourselves, and a hurt to the commonwealth.

Let us now, my brethren, come laboring and heavy laden with a sense of our
sins, and let us pray that God may in his mercy be pleased to lift up the gates
of our hearts, and open the doors of our souls, that the King of Glory may come
in, and set these things home on our hearts. Psalm xxiv. 7. Lift up your heads
O ye gates, and be ye listed up ye everlasting doors, amd the King of Glory
shall come in; then may we rely on the merits of Christ, and say, as David did,
In the Lord put I my trust, Psalm xi. 4. And again, whom have I in heaven but
thee, and there is none on earth I desire besides thee.

And now, my brethren, I shall endeavor to prove that we are not only ruining
ourselves by sin, but many others. If the generality of men were more humble
and more holy, we should not hear the little children in the street taking
God's holy name in vain. Surely our conversation should be yea, yea, and nay,
nay, or to that purpose. Matt. v. 7. But let your communication be yea, yea,
nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. Therefore my
Brethren, we should endeavor to walk humble and holy, to avoid the appearance
of evil; to live a life void of offense toward God and toward man. Hear what
David says, Psalm i, 1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of
ungodly nor stands in the way of sinners. Here we see how much it becomes us
to live as christians, not in rioting and drunkenness, uncleanness, Sabbath
breaking, swearing, taking God's holy name in vain; but our delight should be
in the law of the Lord.

The righteous man is compared to a tree that brings forth fruit in season.
Psalm i, 3. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
brings forth fruit in his season: His leaf also shall not wither, and
whatsoever he does shall prosper. Let us not forget the words of holy David,
man is but dust like the flower of the field. Psalm ciii, 15.

Let us remember the uncertainty of human life, and that we are many of us
within a step of the grave, hanging only by the single thread of life, and we
know not how soon God may send the cold hand of death and cut the thread of
life: Then will our souls either ascend up to the eternal mansions of glory or
descend down to eternal misery, our bodies lodged in the cold and silent grave,
numbered with the dead, then shall the scripture be fulfilled, Genesis iii, 19. In
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the ground, for
out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art and unto dust thou shall return.

Now I am to call to the unconverted, my brethren, if we desire to become true
converts we must be born again, we must have a spititual regeneration. John
iii, 3. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again he cannot
see the kingdom of God.

My brethren, are we not, many of us, ignorant of this spiritual regeneration?
Have we seen our lost and undone condition without an interest in the merits of
Jesus Christ; have we come weary and heavy laden with out sins, and to say with
holy David, Psalm vi. 10. Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me
in thy hot displeasure. Has it been our great care to prepare for death our
great and last change, by prayer and meditation.

My dear brethren, though we are servants and have not so much time as we could
wish for, yet we must improve the little time we have.

Mr. Burket, a great divine of our church, says, a man's hand may be on his
plow and his heart in heaven, by putting up such prayers and ejaculations as
these, Psalm lxi. 1. Hear my cry O God, attend to my prayer, and again, Whom
have I in heaven but thee, and there is none on earth I desire besides thee.

We should pray that God would give us his holy spirit, that we may not be lead
into temptation, and that we may be delivered from evil, especially the evil of
sin. Romans vi. 22, 23. But now, being made free from sin, and become servants of
God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. For the
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

My brethren, seeing I am desired by my friends to write something more than
poetry, give me leave to speak plainly to you. Except you repent and forsake
your sins ye must surely die. Now we see how much it becomes us to break our
alliance with sin and Satan, and to fly to a crucified Savior, and to enlist
under Christ's banner, and that he may give us grace to become his faithful
subjects, should be our constant prayers. We should guard against every sin,
especially against bad language.

Therefore, my Brethren, we should always be guarding against every evil word,
for we are told that the tongue is an evil member, for with the tongue we bless
God, and with the tongue we curse men. 1 Peter iii. 10. For he that loves life,
and would see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil and his lips from
speaking guile. But the thoughtless and unconverted sinner is going on in open
rebellion, against that divine power which can in one minute cut the thread of
life, and cast them away with this pronunciation, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. Matt. xxv. 41. Then shall be say also unto them on the left hand,
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels.

And now, my brethren, shall we abuse the divine sovereignty of a holy God, who
has created us rational creatures, capable of serving him under the light of
the Gospel, for he has told us if he had not come unto us we had not had sin,
but now we have no cloak for our sin.

Come now my dear brethren, accept of Jesus Christ on the terms of the gospel,
which is by faith and repentance. Come laboring and heavy laden with your
sins, and a sense of your unworthiness.

My Brethren, it is not we servants only that are unworthy, but all mankind by
the fall of Adam, became guilty in the sight of God. Genesis ii. 17. Surely then
we are sinners by nature, and are daily adding thereto by evil practices, and
it is only by the merits of Jesus Christ we can be saved, we are told that he
is a Jew that is a Jew in his heart, so he is a Christian that is a Christian
in his heart, and it is not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of God, but he that does the will of God. Let our superiors act as
they shall think it best, we must resolve to walk in the steps our Savior has
set before us, which was a holy life, a humble submission to the will of God.
Luke xxii. 41, 42. And he was withdrawn from them about a stones cast, and he
kneeled down and prayed saying, father if thou be willing remove this cup from
me, nevertheless not my will but thine be done.

Here we have the example of our Savior who came down from heaven to save
mankind, lost and undone without an interest in the merits of Jesus Christ, the
blessed Jesus then gave his life a ransom for all that come unto him by faith
and repentance; and shall not he that spared not his own son, but delivered him
up for us all, with him freely give all things.

Come let us seek first, Christ, the kingdom of God; and his righteousness, all
other things shall be added unto you. Matt. vi. 33. Here we have great
encouragement to come to the divine fountain.

Bishop Beverage says, in his third resolution, the eyes of the Lord is intent
upon us, he sees our actions; if our sins are not washed out with our tears,
and croft with the blood of Christ, we cannot be saved. Come my brethren, O
taste and see that the Lord is good, and blessed is the man that trusts in
him. Psalm xxxiv. 8. Let us not stand as Felix did, and say, almost thou
persuadest me to be a christian, but, let us strive to be altogether so. If ye
desire to become converts you must have a saving change wrought in your hearts
that shall bring forth good works meet for repentance: Acts iii. 19. Repent ye
therefore, be converted: We are not to trust in our own strength but to trust
in the Lord; Proverbs iii, 4. "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean
not unto thine own understanding."

My brethren, are we not incircled with many temptations, the flesh, the world
and the devil; these must be resisted at all times. We must see to it that we
do not grieve the holy spirit of God. Come let us my dear brethren, draw near
to the Lord by faith and repentance, for faith without works is dead. James ii.
20. and Romans x, 10. For with the heart man believes, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. Here we see there is something to be done by
us as Christians; therefore we should walk worthy of our profession, not
forgetting that there is a divine power which takes a just survey of all our
actions, and will reward every one according to their works. Psalm lxii, 2.
"Also unto the Lord belongs mercy, for thou rememberest every man according
to his works." Therefore, it is our indispensable duty to improve all
opportunities to serve God, who gave us his only son to save all that come unto
him by faith and repentance.

Let me, my brethren, persuade you to a serious consideration of your danger
while you continue in an unconverted state. Did you feel the operations of
God's holy spirit, you then would leave all for an interest in the merits of
Christ; "For the kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field; for which
a man will fell all that he has to purchase, Matt. x. 44. So will every true
penitent part with all for the sake of Christ* I shall not attempt to drive you
to Christ by the terrors of the law, but I shall endeavor to allure you by the
invitation of the gospel, to come laboring and heavy laden.

Matt. xi. 27. Man at his best estate is like a shadow of the field. We should
always be preparing for death, not having our hearts set on the things of this
life: For what profit will it be to us, to pain the whole world and loose his
own soul. Matt. xvi. 26. We should be always preparing for the will of God,
working out our salvation with fear and trembling. O may we abound in the works
of the Lord. Let us not stand as fruitless trees or cumberers of the ground,
for by your works you shall be justified, and by your works you shall be
condemned; for every man shall be rewarded according to his works, Matt. xvi.
27. Let us then be pressing forward to the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let our hearts be fixed where true joys are to
be found. Let us lay up treasures in Heaven* where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, not thieves break through nor steal. Matt. vi. 20.

Now I am come to contemplate the death of Christ, it remains I make a short
contemplation. The death of Christ who died! Died to save lost man, 1 Cor. xv.
21. "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection from the
dead: For as in Adam all died even so in Christ, shall all be made alive. Let
us turn to the scriptures, and there we shall see how our Savior was denied by
one and betrayed by another. Matt. xxvi, 14. Judas went unto the Chief Priest,
and said, what will you give me, and they agreed for thirty pieces of silver,
then they sought opportunity to betray him. Verse 28. For this is my blood of
the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Ver. 33.
Peter answered and said unto him, though all men should be offended because of
thee, yet will I never be offended. Ver. 34. Jesus said unto him, verily I say
unto thee, this night before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thirce. Ver. 38,
Then faith he unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry
ye here and watch with me Ver. 39. And he went a little further and fell on his
face and prayed, saying, O Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me: Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.

My Brethren, here we see the love of God plainly set before us; that while we
were yet sinners, he sent his son to die for all those that come unto him,
laboring and heavy laden with a sense of their sins; let us come with a
thankful remembrance of his death, whose blood was shed for us guilty worms of
the dust. Mat. xxvi. 69. But Jesus held his peace, and the High Priest answered
and said unto him, I adjure thee by the Living God, that thou tell us, whether
thou be the Christ the son of God. And ver. 64. Jesus faith unto him, thou have
said: nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Ver.
64. Then the High Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemy;
what further need have we of witness? Behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.
Here the High Priest charged the blessed Jesus with blasphemy: But we must
believe that he is able to save all that come unto him, by faith and
repentance. Matt. xxviii. 18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, all
power is given unto me in heaven and on earth. As this should excite us to love
and fear God, and to strive to keep his holy commandments, which is the only
rule of life: But how apt are we to forget that God spoke these words, saying,
I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt and out of
the house of bondage, Exodus xx. 1. Thus we see how the children of Israel were
delivered from the Egyptian service.

But my Brethren, we are invited to the blessed Jesus, who was betrayed by one
and denied by another. Matt. xx. 24. The Son of Man goes as it is written of
him; but woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed; it had been good
for that man if he had never been born. Ver. 24. Then Judas which betrayed him
answered and said, Master is it I? He said unto him, thou have said.

Thus we see, my Brethren, that there is a woe pronounced agrinst every one
that sins by omission or commission, are we not going on in our sins, and
disobeying the word of God: "If ye love me, ye will keep my commandments." Are
we not denying the Lord Jesus, as Peter did. Matt. xxvi. 14. Then began he to
curse and swear, saying, I know not the man; and immediately the cock crew. And
ver. 74. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which he said unto him,
before the cock crow thou shall deny me thrice: And he went out and wept
bitterly. Surely then we ought to come to the Divine Sovereign, the blessed
Jesus who was crucified for us sinners. Oh! we ought to come on the bended
knees of our souls, and say, Lord, we believe, help thou our unbelief. Come my
Brethern, let us cry to the life giving Jesus, and say, Son of God, have mercy
on us! Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, have mercy on us!
Let us cast off all self-dependence, and rely on a crucified Savior. Luke
xxiii. 20. Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them.
Ver. 21. But they cried, saying, crucify him, crucify him. Here we may see the
love of God, in giving his Son to save all that come unto him by faith and
repentance. Let us trace the sufferings of our Savior a little further: Matt.
xxvi. 42. He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father,
if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.
Here we trace our Savior's example set before us; so that we should not murmur
at the hand of Divine Providence; for God has a right to deal with his
creatures as he pleases.

Come let us contemplate on the death of the blessed Jesus; and on the fearful
judgment of the Lord passing on the guilty sinner. Luke xxiii. 30. Then shall
they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us, and to the hills, cover us.
Ver. 32, 33. And there were also two malefactors led with him to be put to
death; and when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there
they crucified him and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on
the left; and thus was the scripture fulfilled: For he was numbered with
transgressors. Matt. xxvii. 29. And when they had plated a crown of thorns,
they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand. Ver. 41, 42. Likewise
the Chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders, said, he saved
others, himself he cannot save: If he be the king of Israel, let him come down
from the cross, and we will believe him. Ver. 44. Now from the sixth hour there
was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour. Ver. 46. And about the
ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, Lama Sabachthani!
That is to say, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

My brethern, should not a sense of these things on our mind implant in us a
spirit of love to God, which has provided a Savior, who is able to save to
the uttermost all that come unto him by faith and repentance* 2. Cor. vii. 10.
For Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, but
the sorrow of the world works death. My brethern, see what sin has done; it
has made all flesh guilty in the sight of God.

May we not adopt the language of David. Psalm. lxxx 8. O remember not against
us former iniquities. Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us. Psalm. lxxx
19. Turn us again, O Lord, God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall
be saved.

Let us contemplate a little further on the death of Christ. Matt. xxvii. 40.
Jesus, when he had cried with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. Ver. 4, And
behold the vail of the temple was sent in twain, from the top to the bottom;
and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent. Here we see that the death of
Christ caused all nature to tremble, and the power of heaven shaken: Here we
may see not only the evil of sin, but also the unmeritted mercy of God, in
giving his only Son. Should not our hearts be filled with sear and love to God;
and we must believe that Jesus is the Son of God. Matt. xxvii. 54. Now when the
Centurion and they that were with him, watching Jesus saw the earth quake, and
those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, truly this was the
Son of God. Now this was done for the remission of our sins, for without
shedding of blood there is no remission of sin. This we have confirmed in the
holy sacrament. Matt. xxvi. 27. For this is my blood of the New Testament,
which was shed for many: But the unbelieving Jews still persisted in their
unbelief, and would have prevented the resurrection of our Savior, if it had
been in their power. Matt. xxvii. 62. The Chief Priests and Pharisees come
together unto Pilate. Ver. 63, Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver
said, while he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again. Ver. 66. So
they went and made the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone and setting a watch.
Here we see the spirit of unbelief in Nathaniel. John i. 45 and 46. Philip
finds Nathaniel, and faith unto him, we have found him, of whom Moses in the
law and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph: And
Nathaniel said unto him, can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip
faith unto him, come and see. Thus we are to come and see the mercy of God, in
sending his Son to save lost men. Let us contemplate on the manner of Christ's
resurrection. Matt. xxv. 2. Behold there was a great earthquake; for the angel
of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled the stone from the door,
and sat upon it. Here we see that our Savior was attended by an angel; one of
those holy spirits we read of in the Revelations, vi. 8. They rest not day and
night, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was and is, and is to
come. Ver. 4, 12. Saying, with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb, that was
slain, to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing. And our Savior himself tells us he has received his
power. Matt. xxviii 19. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, all power
is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Then he gives his disciples their
charge. Ver. 19. Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. But I must conclude in a
few words, and say,

My dear Brethren, should we not admire the free grace of God, that he is
inviting of us to come and accept of Jesus Christ, on the terms of the gospel;
and he is calling us to repent of all our sins: This we cannot do of ourselves,
but we must be saved in the use of means not to neglect those two great
articles of the Christian religion, baptism and the sacrament; and we ought all
of us to seek by prayers: But the scripture has told us, that we must not
depend on the use of means alone. 1st Cor. iii. 6. The apostle says, I have
planted Apolos watered, but God gave the increase. Here we see if we are saved,
it must be by the power of God's holy spirit. But my dear Brethern the time is
hastening when we must appear.

A POEM for Children with Thoughts on Death.
1. O YE young and thoughtless youth, ( Eccle. xii. 1.

Come seek the living God,
The scriptures are a sacred truth,
Ye must believe the word.
2. It Is God alone can make you wife, ( Prove. iv. 7.

His wisdom's from above,
He fills the soul with sweet supplies
By his redeeming love.
3. Remember youth the time is short,
Improve the present day
And pray that God may guide your thoughts,
and teach your lips to pray. Psalm xxx. 9.

4. To pray unto the most high God,
and beg restraining grace,
Then by the power of his word
You Will see the Savior's face.
5. Little children they may die,
Turn to their native dust,
Their souls shall leap beyond the skies,
and live among the just.
6. Like little worms they turn and crawl,
and gasp for every breath,
The blessed Jesus sends his call,
and takes them to his rest.
7. Thus the youth are born to die, Psalm ciii. 15.

The time is hastening on,
The Blessed Jesus rends the sky,
and makes his power known.
8. Then ye shall hear the angels sing
The trumpet give a sound,
Glory, glory to our King,
The Savior's coming down. Matt. xxvi. 64.

9. Start ye Saints from dusty beds,
and hear a Savior call,
It Was Jesus Christ that died and bled,
and thus preserved thy soul.
10. This the portion of the just,
Who loved to serve the Lord,
Their bodies starting from the dust,
Shall rest upon their God.
11. They shall join that holy word,
That angels constant sing,
Glory glory to the Lord,
Hallelujahs to our King.
12. Thus the Savior will appear, Rev. i. 7, 8.

With guards of heavenly host,
Those blessed Saints, shall then declare,
It Is Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
13. Then shall ye hear the trumpet sound,
The graves give up their dead, Matt. xxvii, 51, 52.

Those blessed saints shall quick awake,
and leave their dusty beds.
14. Then shall you hear the trumpet sound,
and rend the native sky, 1 Cor. xv. 51, 52, 53, 54.

Those bodies starting from the ground,
In the twinkling of an eye.
15. There to sing the praise of God,
and join the angelic train,
And by the power of his word,
Unite together again.
16. Where angels stand for to admit Matt. iv. 3.

Their souls at the first word,
Cast sceptres down at Jesus feet
Crying holy holy Lord.
17. Now glory be unto our God
all praise be justly given,
Ye humble souls that love the Lord
Come seek the joys of Heaven.
HARTFORD, January 1, 1782.

