EMMA CORBETT: EXHIBITING HENRY and EMMA, THE FAITHFUL MODERN LOVERS, AS
DELINEATED BY THEMSELVES, IN THEIR ORIGINAL LETTERS.

PUBLISHED BY COURTNEY MELMOTH. Author of the PUPIL OF PLEASURE, etc. etc.

Ah pass not yet. If thou did ever know
The tenderest touches of impassioned woe!
Pass not: If truth, and fortitude, and love,
Can stay thy footsteps, or thy spirit move!
MONUMENT OF EMMA. THREE VOLUMES COMPLETE IN ONE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXXII.

TO DR. DELACOUR.
SIR,
I AM not going to ascribe to you a miracle. I renounce enthusiasm, and think
too highly of your understanding to insult it by flattery. But, so far as
second causes may be necessary to fulfill the fiat of the first, in the
government of human affairs, I do, in the most solemn manner, believe, you were
the means of saving me, in the summer of 1779 from death.

Prior to the event which procured me the benefit of your advice, it had been
my chief pleasure to compose the volumes which now approach you. Struck by an
uncommon tenderness in the circumstances, whereon the work is founded, I wished
earnestly for health to finish what might prove a source of virtuous
entertainment. Not that I laid any stress on my own effort toward it, but
because the facts were preeminently beautiful in themselves; and courted every
addition of fancy, with every embellishment of the heart. I recovered. Emma
Corbett was concluded. The incidents, without the least literary adornment,
take a strong hold of the feelings; and, probably, will owe more to their
simplicity and native TRUTH, than if, by a more elaborate effort, I had robbed
them of this genuine advantage.

The tear of Sensibility is at once the softest and best evidence of the praise
which it is my ambition to merit on this occasion: and if it be my lot to enjoy
this honor, you cannot be ignorant of the means by which it has been
conferred. Notwithstanding this, every thing, which tends to show the world how
entirely your generosity prevailed over your interest, will, I know, be
interdicted, I comply therefore, Sir, with the proscriptions of delicacy,
though I am thereby deprived of doing justice: and with whatever difficulty I
repress the current of my gratitude; only reserving to myself the pleasure to
declare publicly, how much I am, Sir,

Your most obliged and most obedient servant, COURTNEY MELMOTH.
BATH, February, 1781.
EMMA CORBETT.
LETTER I. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
HAMMOND, you have hurt me. I can no longer look on you with pleasure. Forbear
your visits. My daughter Emma shall not be yours. I have an objection. Will
you hear it explained? Being explained will you remove it? You can: you ought:
you must: or this closes our connection. To be at a word: will you render it
possible for me to call you my son? I write in confidence. Reply without delay.
I love exactness. --

Farewell. CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER II. Mr. HAMMOND's Answer.
THERE is then a possibility, O my dear Mr. Corbett, of surmounting this
objection! You ask, as a favor, what you might claim as a right. Generous
friend! O, name the circumstance, hint your expectations, and give me -- all
that I can desire -- an opportunity to obey them. Have you not been the
guardian of my youth? Are you not the father of Emma? I am all impatience, and
I am

Ever yours, HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER III. TO Mr. HAMMOND.
YOUR promises are fair, and the language in which they are expressed, is
proper to your age, and suitable to your character. I hasten to give you the
opportunity you invite. Resign your commission -- that commission which,
against all dissuasive hints, you have solicited and procured. Lay down your
sword, or else draw it in the cause of liberty and Heaven. Your school-fellow,
Edward, has, as you know, fallen a victim to these hostilities. My darling son
is no more. He was plentifully provided for in the colonies. -- The spot which
he occupied was disforested by his ancestors, who, with much toil and expense,
turned to a smiling domain what they found a wilderness, inauspicious to every
purpose of society. It descended to this unhappy youth just as tyranny began to
forge chains for freedom; he traversed the sea to defend his property. H^ ^ld
not suffer the legacy of his uncle to be ravished from him by the spoiler,
while a hand remained to prevent the plunder. He took possession of the land,
which before was under the superintendance of an agent. You know how soon he
was invaded, -- how soon his little territory was laid waste, -- his house set
on fire, -- and how, when the enemy advanced to his door, he was hurried into
arms. He became a soldier on necessity. He fought -- He fell! --

The blow which killed a son had well nigh killed a father also. -- Yet, in
presence of Emma and you, I exerted my utmost fortitude. But the wound is not
healed; it is still bleeding at my heart. -- To men's eyes it seems well. I have
tied about it a political bandage, yet I secretly detest every principle which
begun* and every motive which continues, this assassination of America. Long I
have kept the anguish of these sentiments to myself. It makes no part of my
conversation: -- but now, finding that your ardour, O my dear Harry, has taken
a wrong direction, it is time to speak -- it is time to tell you, what will
lose and what will gain me for ever. Hammond, you are about to engage in a
cruel cause -- a cause to which I object both as patriot and as parent. The
vigor with which you have sought to obtain an authority to go forth amongst
your countrymen, against your countrymen, bears in it something shocking to my
nature. Whom I thought tender, him I find bloody. Do you desire to be a hero?
the means are ready. Change the position of the attack, and that will, in
itself be heroism. Or, which is still better, if you could cultivate the
embellishing arts of peace, and the Muses who love you, apologize to your
patron the Earl for the trouble you have given -- take the hand of Emma
Corbett, and, with her, share the fortunes of her father.

These sentiments declare my opinion of your honor; and my esteem for your
person is expressed in the presents I tender. Perceiving how obstinately you
were bent to aid this fallacious plot against the rights of nature and mankind;
I thought to let you go blindly on to blacken yet more the catalogue of British
oppressors; but I well knew the source and progress of that sentiment which
unites you to my only surviving child, and I feel myself unwilling, that the
son of a dear deceased friend should thus prostitute his courage in an action
so peculiarly base, so peculiarly barbarous -- Emma, fortune, and my favor,
are before you. You know the prizes, and you are not now ignorant of the only
mode of conduct by which they can be obtained. Farewell then. Think seriously,
venerate my trust, and do not forfeit my esteem, I put you to the test.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER IV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
NO greater time is necessary to determine, than that which will be taken up in
penning the determination. I do venerate your trust. My principles hold every
man's private opinion a^ sacred; but the very same principles compel me to
forfeit even your affection, Sir, if it is to be preserved at the price of my
duty. We, unfortunately, happen to see the American dispute in opposite lights.
It is sufficient to a soldier that he believes his quarrel to be just. You
arraign my humanly. Wherefore? I retort not the accusation. May we not consider
a public contest in different points of view, and yet be friends? Both may act
from feeling* and both on principle. You imagine America is aggrieved, while I
look upon her at the aggressor. What of that? Do we interfere with the opinions
of each other? I was not accessory to the death of your son; and had it been my
fate to meet him in the field, I can conceive the point on which nature would
have insisted. She would gracefully have led us both a little from the line of
duty, and spared one in sympathy to the other N^y, more. Had I seen the sword
tremble at his bosom, my own should for that moment have been as a shield, and
you know not how far I would have ventured for the brother of Emma. But as to
the commission, O be assured, I did not solicit it till I had well reflected on
every consequence, probable and possible, of obtaining it. It is obtained, and
I rejoice; nor could it be resigned to purchase a diadem, with Emma on a throne
to wear it. Change sides! No, Sir; if these are to be the terms, take back the
hand you permitted me to win, and possess, undivided, her fortune and your own.
You have not looked accurately at my soul. As I am not, on the one hand, so
sensual, to gratify my passion at the expense of the holy faith and the solemn
services which I have sworn to my country; so neither am I so sordid on the
other, as to court her inheritance without many endeavors, consistent with the
powers of my youth, to add something to her fortune. Patrimony has dropped from
my hope, but nature may, perhaps, have bestowed the equivalent. The arts of
war, rather than those of peace, seem, at this conjuncture, to lay the
strongest claim to the genius of a young Englishman; and I have no notion of
that indolence which can be content to fall into the arms of beauty and
prosperity, without a single effort to deserve them. If, Sir, I have any tender
interest in the heart of Emma, as I think I have, it has been more generously
fought. But why do I argue with so much gravity, when perhaps you intend all
this in the way of trial: willing to see if my attachment to my native country
was not less than my passion for my mistress. Yes, yes, this is your
experiment. You wanted to know whether it was appetite or affection that
influenced me in regard to your daughter, and you will not, I trust, be
displeased to find the basis as solid as your friendship or solicitude might
desire.

Adieu, dear Sir; I thank you for the stratagem: and glory in every success
that draws me nearer to your heart. --

Adieu. HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER V. TO Mr. HAMMOND.
POOR misguided youth! receive the last kindness I can ever show you: receive
my pity. You will, however, in common politeness, cease to ^ender yourself
unwelcome, and save me from an appearance of inhospitality. I think you ought,
as a man of honor, to drop corresponding with Emma, and let it seem to be your
own act and deed self-suggested, and self-inspired. This, however, your
conscience will best settle. To that I refer you. As you so soon depart, a few
more letters cannot be very material. Farther avowals of love, however, I shall
consider as seductions. -- Farewell. To wish you success in your undertakings
would be to partake of your folly: you will therefore excuse me. I will only
say, what is perfectly true, that I am extremely sorry for (...) Heaven place
your feet in a fairer path. In that you are going to tread, Mr. Hammond, you
may find havoc and horror, but never can find either honor or happiness.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER VI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
APPREHEND nothing from my intrusion, Sir. I never enter any house, whose doors
do not move willingly to receive me. What you are pleased to call seduction,
appears to me so absolute a propriety, that I must take the liberty to persist
in it. I have reason to think the affections of your daughter are engaged. I
cultivated them under your approving smile, and with your immediate sanction. I
have not a heart that can put on or cast off its partialities, exactly as the
opinions of a third person -- even though he be a father -- happen to
fluctuate. It is Emma, therefore, and only Emma, can prevail with me to stop
the current of affection or of correspondence. I refer you to her conscience,
since it is not an apt reference you make to mine. I suggest no disobedience,
but shall never violate one tittle of that faith, which, as a voluntary bond of
soul, is firmly given by Emma Corbett to

HENRY HAMMOND,

LETTER VII. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
INEXORABLE boy! I shall urge you no more. Here let all connection cease for
ever. When I permitted you, under the fair disguise of simplicity which you
assumed, to seek the affections of my child, I had no conception there beat in
your bosom so sanguinary a heart. Yet, practice on her as you please, she will
return, I trust, to her duty, and have done with her deceiver.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER VIII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
HAVE a care, Sir. You are going over perilous ground. Do not, as a partizan,
extinguish what I feel for you as the parent of Emma. I obey so much of your
injunction as is possible, and desire this may be the last of our letters. Yet,
I cannot finish without a few more sentiments. The chances of war, Mr. Corbett,
offer no security from the plunder of the enemy. My safe return to these shores
is uncertain. I may become a prisoner: or I may fall. That part of your
correspondence, therefore, which rela^ to a political subject, will be best in
your own possession. You w^ ^d it enclosed. No accident can tear the deposit
from my bre^ but I dare not trust a less faithful asylum. That Heaven may (...)
you, and make us once more friends, is the fervent pray (...) your

H. HAMMOND.

LETTER IX. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
YOUR generous spirit charms while it distresses me. O, Hammond! why have you
thrown this new motive for relapsing tenderness in my way? why did you not
rather add fuel to flame, and strengthen my displeasure? Cruel Henry! Why will
you not accept my friendship upon conditions so humane? It is not even yet too
late. You still have it in your power (...) unit^ real happiness with true
honor. Labor, I conjure you^ to (...) and yourself. I pant to embrace you, to
give you the ^^ternal benediction, and to give you, with it, my only Child.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER X. TO C. CORBETT. Esquire.
IT is not possible to be done in the way you propose; though there is none
other that I would not eagerly attempt. Yet, to leave my Emma's father
alienated, is to go with a dagger in my bosom. O! it will be sufficiently
painful, without the aid of such aggravation. Let me implore you, Sir, to point
out some other means of reconcilement. Think, O think!

H. HAMMOND.

LETTER XI. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
IT will not admit a thought: nor are there any other means within reach. There
is, there can, there shall be none.

C. CORBETT.

LETTER XII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
THEN let me beg of you to drop the subject, and to believe, in this farewell
sentence, that there is not a blessing in human life which is not sincerely
wished you, by

H. HAMMOND.

LETTER XIII. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
YOUR ship will not be ready, then, to bear you into the paths of danger, for
some days. How uniformly amiable is your solicitude -- dearest and best of
friends -- and how kind your attention to every circumstance that has the least
tendency to affect my ease and my welfare! I reflect upon your generous
kindness with a kind of weeping rapture that wants a name: but, thank Heaven, I
find my nature sufficiently susceptible, and my heart sufficiently enlarged, to
answer the demands which your tenderness and constancy are daily drawing for;
and, though it be a proud boast, I will venture to say that, in sentiment and
friendship, in good will and good wishes, I can never die your debtor. Yet this
little delay, my dear Henry! -- into what an exultation of spirit did it not
throw us? Last night, my beloved friend -- oh, last night! the hours betwixt
six and ten! -- have you any idea of a period that could be rated in comparison
with them? What a space! it was all spirit and all soul. Every inferior sense
was annihilated, and the registering angel, if such there be, can hardly have
marked a passage more soft, more affectionate, more beautiful, or more pure.
During the whole course of that precious interview, alike elegant and ardent
were the expressions of our lips, the flutterings of our bosoms, and the
feelings of our hearts, -- not a look, not a word, not a whisper, not a moment,
but memory shall hoard with dearest care, and dwell* (...) with increasing
satisfaction: Virtue shall be summound to ^pe^ her immortal page, and
transcribe the correct pleasures of last night amongst the whitest transactions
of humanity. O! 'twas ^lo^ely, melancholy period, which the heart will dwell
upon with tenderest affection, while it remains accessible to any soft
impression. After you left me, my friend, I continued still in converse with
you* or personally in vision pure, or by the assistance of this little
instrument, as fancy took the lead. The bright scenes that were then painted --
with all their vivid images around me -- how, how shall I describe them? Ah,
Henry! the closer I look into your heart -- the deeper and the more
deliberately I examine and analize its properties, the more I admire and
applaud. Oh, my friend! my most congenial and most amiable friend, could I
speak or write of the spotless hours which we have passed together, with half
the heartfelt satisfaction that I think of them -- my, language would be
indeed eloquent: -- it would emulate your own. "Ye Prudes in Virtue say, --
Say, ye severest," do I confess too much? ah that I knew words sufficiently
ardent to say more! I am unequal to the task. It is pride and gratitude,
sensibility and softness. Such are my fixed and solemn sentiments, not spoken
at hazard, but grounded on the most perfect experience. The propriety of my
choice has been confirmed, Proofs have assisted proofs, and still the last is
the strongest.

Doubt not but I have read the sentiments which meant to reconcile me to your
departure, again and again, as tenderly as attentively. I have, indeed, perused
and re-perused them till the characters are almost washed away, -- I only mean,
from the paper. The impressions remain uninjured elsewhere. O Hammond, Hammond,
how the soft emotions agitate the heart at the command of your affecting pen!
As I read your pages of this morning, distress and joy, complaint and
resignation, the tear of anguish and the smile of hope, all struggled together.
In every pulse I felt the force of your tender eloquence. It had power to
smooth the rugged front of war, and I represented you returning victorious from
the battle. Every varying sensation took its turn to reign; at one moment I was
soothed, at another chilled. What feeling of the soul did not alternately
assert its dominion? I was disturbed, quieted, agonized, and made supremely
happy. Yet, O my friend, it requires an inspiration, even brigh^ than your own,
to disguise the tempest which is gathering around me, and to render me
insensible. I am not prone to make any event in life a source of unnecessary
misery. On the contrary* I have a strong constitutional propensity to content,
and a kind of resisting quality in my nature, which disposes me to ward off all
imaginary evil. But the departure of Henry is not an imaginary evil. It is a
blow, which, however suspended, cannot fail most deeply to affect whenever it
falls; and fall it m^st, within the compass of -- what? a few days -- ah, my
God! spare* spare me; -- the tribute of my tenderness is streaming on my paper.
My hand trembles in obedience to the terrors of my heart, and I drop the pen.

EMMA.
In continuation.
I must add to this letter a few after observations, which a reperusal of it
has given birth to. In the closing passages, perhaps it may appear that I have
s^^d too much. I am never quite satisfied with my expressions; afraid, from
motives of the most delicate consideration, lest I should say too little or too
much. I often ^epress what rise^ to my lip, and look cautiously, with the
mind^s eye, at every fond emotion, before I dare venture to give it the stamp
of language. But you are going from me. Ah! go not with one sentiment against
your Emma. If, in compliance with the decent usage of the world, or the
prejudice of a worthy father, or my particular sense of that precise decorum
which it becomes every unmarried woman to adopt: If, Henry* I have hence at any
time been witheld from more cordial declarations -- declarations which you
might well expect in return for yours, so ardent and so elegant -- allow for
me* allow for my sex, allow for my situation. Consider that I am a woman, and a
daughter, as well as the choice of Henry. That honor, which is so dear to us
both, has a claim to various duties. My nature keeps such a jealous eye upon
my conduct, that an instinctive something, like the internal disapprobation of
a wrong measure, has often repressed the tenderest language, lest I should pass
that sacred barrier, which constitutes the chief delicacy in the character of a
single woman. Perhaps, I have carried this scruple to an ex^reme: but I could
no more help it than I can prevent the tear from starting to my eye so often as
I turn my thoughts toward a separation. You have sometimes looked as if you
blame (...) me: but my error is, at worst, a little exuberance, springing from
a fair stem, and produced in a good soil; nor will my dear Henry think ill of
me for indulging it. Acquit me then, oh! acquit me of all contemptible finesse,
and do not believe that I can be one moment insensible, unmindful, or
ungrateful.

Your last letters, my friend, shall be preserved as relics of virtue,
victorious over every selfish principle; and, whenever I sicken at the folly
and depravity of mankind, I will turn to those precious pa^es, there feast upon
the hidden treasures of a tender heart, forget the silly pageants that form
society, and for thy dear sake, be reconciled to the species.

Again, adieu! EMMA.



LETTER XIII* TO EMMA CORBETT.
THE delightful letter of my charming Emma is lying in my bosom, as I take up
the pen to reply. It came to hand at my poor Louisa's -- at the house of my
languishing and lovely sister; she told me she expected you. I passed an hour
of pleasing attendance, after which it became painful -- ah, how painful! --
You did not come. Why was this? Yet it matters not. It was not possible, or it
was not fit. The fit and the possible, you know, are the principles which
govern our actions. I wanted heroism, nevertheless, to support the suspense
with decent composure. Louisa said to me, with a tear assisting the eloquence
of her expression, -- *" What, brother, has not the long tenor of a sister's
wretchedness and disappointment -- disappointment which is to last for ever,
taught you to bear the loss of a single interview?" I felt the force of the
appeal but continued to be uneasy. My sister withdrew, and my anxiety
increased. By way of mitigation, I took up a pen which lay before, me and
marked with it my emotions; I marked them, my Emma, in numbers, "for the
numbers came." Let them be acceptable. Let the sincerity in the sentiment atone
for any defect in the poetry Send me word that you are composed, and let me
meet you, as cheerful as you ought to be, in the morning. Louisa will look for
you by ten o'clock. -- Poor Louisa! ah, that Edward had not fallen! -- Ah, that
the brother of Emma were yet alive! -- that he saw the injuries done to this
unhappy country with my eyes, and that, as much inspired by Louisa as I by
Emma, he was now making loyal preparation to fight the battle of Britain by the
side of

HENRY HAMMOND.
Verses written by Mr. HAMMOND, in the moments of waiting an interview with
EMMA.
I.
TENDER tremours touch the bosom,
As the gentle hour moves by;
Expectation, almost weeping,
Tip-toe stands in either eye.
II.
Ah! what precious perturbations
Haunt the fancy of a friend;
Half an hour, of watchful waiting,
Seems a period without end.
III.
When the clouds hang dark and heavy,
Disappointment over me low'rs:
But as fairer fleeces favor,
Hope bestows her promised flowers.
IV.
Soon again soft fears assail me,
Since the visit is delayed;
Then -- ah then -- it is apprehension,
Of a thousand things afraid.
V.
Happily sickness may detain her --
Thus imagination cries:
Happily pain, or happily peril --
Then this bosom bleeding lies.
VI.
Every step that strikes the pavement
Every summons at the door;
Every sound of passing coaches,
Warm and chill these pulses more.
VII.
Now I dread the excusing message,
Now I dread some dire disease;
Too much wind, or too much sunshine,
Robs alike this breast of ease.
VIII.
Heaven must make a morn on purpose,
To compose the gentle heart;
Zephyrs bland must fan the season,
Air^ their softest balms impart.
IX.
Not a breath too much or little,
Not too hot or cold a ray;
Must impede the expectation,
When it is Emma's meeting day.
X.
Yet perchance, these lovely flutt'rings,
Beauteous fears, and kind distress,
Do but serve the more to heighten
Tender Henry's happiness.
XI.
When the fair indeed approaches*
Every rosy terror's over;
After little scattered cloudings,
Sunbeams only bless us more.
(Stanzas added when Mr. HAMMOND was about to depart.) XII.
Thus the flower, which blows at morning
Opens more and more till noon;
Then, as chilling eve comes onward,
Every color seems to swoon.
XIII.
But perhaps, tomorrow's radiance
May rise l^vlier from the rain,
And the bloom which 'erst did languish
Shall revive to bloom again.


LETTER XIV. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
WHATEVER is elegant, beautiful, or amiable, in that fair blossom, the human
understanding, under the highest culture, is expressed in the correspondence of
my dear Henry; especially in the precious favor that was enclosed in his last
billet, dated from the apartment of Louisa. Ah, that Emma were an
all-accomplished judge, whose plaudits might reflect all the honor which my
hero deserves to receive! This being impossible, let it suffice, that you have,
in these tender effusions, furnished your Emma with new proofs of tenderness,
though none were necessary to complete the measure of either sentiment in my
bosom. Yet such charming repetitions and innovations can never be unwelcome;
nor will Hammond refuse or overlook this unassuming tribute -- this numb^e and
acknowledging page, which simple nature and affection offer. It is not the full
foliage of the laurel, but it is the little unobtrusive leaf of gratitude and
love.

Yet must I not, and ought I not to tremble while I praise? O, this America, my
Henry! These chances of war! A theater of mischief already fatal to the lover
of Louisa -- I faint under the thought! The time steals on, even while I am
talking of its lapse. Your virtues all known -- all tried -- all pressing on
the eye, and twining round the heart. It is terrible -- it is too much! In
mercy be less kind -- less amiable -- less engaging. Oh, if you draw the chain
thus close, -- thus near; if you bind the lovely ^etter thus hard -- till every
comfort and every joy depends on the near and exquisite contact; if you
contrive thus to annihilate every object but yourself -- to create a void in
nature -- or fill it in my idea only by your existence -- and that existence is
to be exposed to hourly peril -- what is to become of me? Or when cruel
necessity shall tear you from me, which she is preparing to do, how am I to
support it? Fancy sickens to reflect upon the vast and formidable distance that
is so soon to divide us. To separate for such a purpose too! How few hopes --
how few consolations! Correspondence will be delayed -- interupted --
interdicted. The soft and sweet solace flowing from pen to pen will henceforth
lie at the mercy of winds and waves. Our sentiments will depend upon the
terrifying circumstances of war. We shall no longer breathe the same air,
repose in the same Island -- walk under the same hemisphere: but separation,
uncertainty, and wretchedness, must ensue.

O dire and deadly spirit of contention -- patron of carnage and encourager of
bloodshed! O thou, who ragest most unnaturally in the human bosom, (where all
the graces and the ^ffections should inhabit) and set man against man! --
Thou, who have swept a brother untimely to the grave, and ^t a father, a
sister, and a lover, to mourn his fate -- Thou whose spear seems now trembling
over my panting heart, which bleeds at the dangers of the youth whom I adore --
Oh, mischievous WAR! armed at all points against the happiness and humanity of
the species -- how v^ous and how dreadful are thy horrors! -- I cannot bear it
H^n^ --

Yet let me think a little. -- Are you not resolved? what (...) I doing?
laboring to unman you? Ah! forgive my inconsistency; I cannot help it --
indeed I cannot. No words, no pen, (...) even your own* my best friend,
all-eloquent, all Promethean (...) it is, can paint the effusions of nature as
they burst from me at this a^ing moment. Consider the fate of Edward, and think
of what may be your own: consider the sorrows of Louisa, and think on what may
soon be those of Emma.

Yet what have I said -- am I not satisfied with the most affectionate and in
v^riable solicitude, but I must interfere with a mode of conduct, which, you
assure me is a duty not to be laid aside without dishonor. Alas! Henry, I am
reduced, by this cruel commission of yours, to a very bitter exigence, which
neither permits me to censure or approve. I dare not write any more, for I feel
the ride of overwhelming softness pouring on me. Perhaps I might advise you, at
this tender crisis, to --

No: I will not trust myself with the pen. It would sully me in your esteem,
should I longer hold it. O Henry, Henry, pardon and pity me. Preserve me by
preserving yourself. Give not to glory more than is her due, but make some
little reserves for the trembling

EMMA.

LETTER XV. TO EMMA CORBETT,
ALAS! what is to be do^ with this bleeding tenderness of yours? For Heaven
sake, temper your sensibility with a little discretion, my beloved Emma. Your
elegant and affecting pages penetrate me to the soul. The tears of anguish
mingle with those of admiration as I read them. Yet let me implore you to
strengthen your mind a little, lest you wholly debilitate mine. Let not your
Henry disgrace the cause he is to defend, nor fully the profession ^e has
chosen. Dear, unhappy friend, make one great and generous effort to support
your drooping spirits, to sustain your wasting frame, and to preserve a life so
valuable to me, that the same stroke -- I cannot pursue the subject -- Rouse,
rouse yourself, my Emma. For my sake, let all your fortitude be exerted. We are
both young; there is the same protecting providence by water as by land; in the
fields of war, as on the plains of peace. The future is a wide space, and may
contain within its circle a thousand blessings. Struggle then against the storm
bravely. Your inferences are too gloomy: various opportunities will ^ffer,
doubt not, to speed our generous intercourse. The wide world of sentiment and
sensation still opens upon us. By aid of this little friendly instrument, we
may range through those paths which ocean seems to separate. However remote,
you should still learn to think i^ a superior blessing, that, in some part of
animated nature, there still exists the counterpart of Emma -- congenial as
dear; -- one, when no circumstance can change, but who must ever remain true to
^ry touch of joy, and every ^embling of woe. Look, Emma, at the paltry
passions, and vulgar gratifications of common life -- of common lovers. Look
attentively at these, and then examine your own heart -- examine mine. Consider
the pure nature of the affection that unites them. Does not the superiority of
our attachment make you generously proud? O Emma! you ought not to (...)
wretched. We have both reason to be content.

Does Emma still weep? let her rather gratefully acknowledge, that though the
pure sourc^ of sacred ami^y is occasionally embittered, as is, more or less,
every affection of the virtuous heart; there are moments in which happiness
breaks forth with a luster that makes amends for every intervening vexation.
Such was the period, when I wrote those hasty lines which you have honored
with most dear praise. In striking the balance then, let us not complain, my
friend; but when fretting at disappointment, or drooping under the languors of
distress, let us support ourselves with the assurance, that the rich current
will return after all obstructions, and flow sweetly and smoothly along its
proper channels. Its source, my dear Emma, can never be exhausted, It is as the
crystal fountain of living water, which streams for ever, and and suffers no
impurity to remain upon its surface.

Ah! what is there so likely to melt the spirit of a soldier into cowardice, as
the tears of Emma? She will not then give way to the tender torrent. She will
court the balmy blessings of ease and hope. She will check these convulsive
transports of distress* so destructive to my honor, and her own health. She
will buffet the wild waves of adversity, nor thus suffer them to overwhelm her.
Consider these things, O my beloved Emma! Come then, my friend, be still
yourself; repose with perfect confidence upon that faithful pillow which my
affection prepares for you; seek to amuse and to solace; cease to murmur and
repine.

Do these things, and all your generous wishes shall be rewarded -- Do these
things, and all shall be well. Peace shall revisit your gentle bosom, and
spread her whitest plumes about your pillow.

HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER XVI. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
I CAN make no terms with this rash brother of yours. He is pre-determined.
Try your influence, for the sake of Emma -- the sake of you murdered Edward --
for your own sake, and for that of him who would have been your father, and who
is still your m^ affectionate friend.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER XVII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
WHEREFORE, in the closing scene of my life, do you thus agonize me? Is that
consistent with the characters of parent or of friend? My brother strongly
imagines he is going into the paths of duty. The hapless Edward, though he trod
on the opposite side, imagined, alas! the same. If the intercession of Emma
fails, what can Louisa do? I every way want power. I want every thing but
resignation to the sovereign will of Heaven, to which I have brought myself. Do
not rob me of it, by reviving images which I have neither body or mind to bear;
but leave me, Mr. Corbett, I beseech you, leave me, to the force of my
religious principles, without awaking the passions I have l^lled. On the day
that my brother sails, I shall set out from this hurrying town. for my eternal
retirement.

Farewell. LOUISA HAMMOND.

LETTER XVIII. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
HOW sweetly, how elegantly, you reprove me, Hammond! and how grateful, how
pleasing, are the tears that I have shed over the pages before me! I blush to
think how far you surpass me Henry! Hope seldom spreads her day-beams over me
in those instances where her sweet delusions would be the most acceptable. But
you have inspired me. Poor pathetic Louisa, what would she give to have Edward
even in the situation of Henry! Avaunt then, impious despair! I am easier. I am
better. Infinitely easier; infinitely better. I give you my word and honor
that I am. Yet the dreaded day is always obtruding -- it appears like some
malignant spirit, crossing me at every turn -- at every step. How perverse is
human nature, which disposes us to reject the joy in possession, and anticipate
sorrows which may never come. O for the beautiful hour of your return, my
friend! It will arrive, Henry, will it not? and, in the mean time, your
sympathizing tenderness shall be salutary -- indeed it shall. It is.

Melt you into cowardice, did you say? Heaven forbid -- Eyes instantly be dry
-- your tears will prove a heresy to the object of my heart. O Henry you have
touched me nearly The consideration, the single consideration of your honor
shall reconcile me to a separation. Go then -- pursue the ways of glory; and
Oh, may they lead, speedily, to peace and

EMMA.

LETTER XIX. TO EMMA CORBETT.
NOW, my ever dear Emma, summon to your ^^d all your confidence and all your
courage. The separating moment comes on. The sailing orders are received. It is
the voice of my country that calls upon me -- calls in the hour of extremity.
She summons her sons to arms to her defense. Shall I not hear -- shall I not
obey her? Yes. I have the sanction of my friend -- I go under the auspices of
Emma. Her approbation is the animating trumpet -- Her virtue arrays me for the
battle. Methinks I now behold the lovely Emma, beaming inspiration through
beauty, standing before me. Away, (she cries) away Henry: I yield to the
graceful sacrifice. I lend you to my king: I trust you to Britain -- I give you
in charge to that providence, on whose equity we shall ultimately have claim: I
submit. Go then, my Henry -- farewell. -- Go. --

As the vessels pass and repass, my Emma, we will faithfully interchange the
affectionate enquiries: we will, with dear tautology repeat the vows which
shall one day be solemnized. But the parting adieus must this night be paid.
Let me breathe them into your bosom, O best of women, at the house of the
lovely sister of my soul. I will write no more. Let the silent tears of Louisa
be as a check upon our complaints. If patience can comfort her in the hours of
despair, surely pleasure might smile upon us in the moments of hope! Consider
the nature of the exigence that appeals to my firmness, and do not take from me
that force -- that ardour -- that intrepidity -- which are publicly due, in
times like these, to your country and to mine.

Adieu. H. HAMMOND.

LETTER XX. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
IT may not be, my brother. I cannot see you in the last hours of your stay in
England: I love you too dearly to support it. It is not even now, without pain,
I hold the pen. My tenderness is too strong, and my constitution too weak, to
bear such an interview -- to bear the tears of Emma, the embraces of my
brother, and my own distress. Excuse me, therefore. It is true affection that
persuades me to retire. I will not ^^man you, nor add to the weight of Emma's
sympathy. I will take my head from this weary pillow, and set out for my
cottage before you come. This illegible scrawl shall be delivered by the
servant whom I will leave to attend you. My wishes for you need not be
repeated. You do not want to be told how much I love you. Yet I have one little
request, nor will you refuse it to poor Louisa.

You are going to the spot where the dearest and loveliest of men -- suffer me
to call him so, and do not oppose the voice of party to the language of nature
-- lies murdered, or, if you like the term better, lies honorably slain.

His memory is precious to me, Henry -- his ashes cannot be indifferent. O! if
you could but find the ground where he fell -- if you could but assure me that
his sacred relics -- if you could but breathe over them one pious tear, and
one tender sigh -- for Louisa's sake. But it is impossible -- I feel my
weakness, and perhaps. I shall infect you with it.

Yet, as your bosom is at this time full of love, it is fitted for generous
actions. Should, therefore, kind fortune have allowed, amidst the tumults of
the war, one little commemorating hillock of earth to the remains of Edward --
O I forget not to visit it -- forge^ not to guard it from further violence --
forget not it is consecrated by a deluge of tears from a sister's eyes; by
friendship and by love.

Adieu. LOUISA HAMMOND.

LETTER XXI. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
THE appointment is made, and I shall, by a lucky arrangement, be able to pass
with you some hours of elegant distress. Alas! my friend, my dear Hen^ nature
will insist upon her tribute, and I cannot -- indeed I cannot -- refuse to pay
it. Yet you charm down the genius of grief by strong language, and I love you.
I hope, too much, to dishonor you. About the rights of conquest I know nothing
-- I only know, that as I lost a brother on one side of this bloody question,
so it is probable I may lose even more than a brother on the other; and yet,
both persuaded me they were in the way of their duty. Alas! how shall reason
draw her line on such occasion^! Must not reason be dumb, and humanity mourn?
But I have done. Women are surrounded by calamities; and nothing is left them
but to bow in submission to their woe. I am indisposed, and beg you would allow
me as much of this -- oh, how shall I write it -- last evening as you can.

EMMA.

LETTER XXII. EMMA TO HER FATHER. Written in her chamber, previous to the
interview.

YOU have found then, it seems, Louisa's billet, making the offer of her house
this evening to Emma and to Henry. By what chance the note dropped I am ignorant.
The hand of agitation is not, indeed, steady; nor can the agonized heart guard
against common chances. I am not sorry that the paper, by whatever means, has
got into your possession, oh, my dear father! It takes some part of the load
from my bosom; for I am hurt to appear plotting that, which will so thoroughly
bear explanation. You desire Mr. Hammond to visit me no more. He obeys. You
request that I would, without enquiring into reasons, forbear to speak of him
to you. I am obedient. You desired that my utmost interest might be tried, to
keep him from America. O, you can conjecture how readily, and, as you know
Henry's darling passion, you may guess how vainly, I undertook this. The double
pleasure of obliging you, my father, and of gratifying my own fond heart,
prevailed with me to urge this point, till I had well nigh turned his affection
to disgust You bid me cease to love, and with the utmost ingenuousness I tell
you it is impossible -- Impossible, my dear father, because repugnant to every
principle by which all the actions of my life have been governed.

My regard -- oh! that is too cold a word -- my love, for Henry, is not, you
know, the start of a moment, the romantic sally of a warm temper, nor the
effect of that silly admiration, which pays down the tribute of folly to the
charms of a red coat. I secretly grieve that the profession of arms should have
been chosen: I have shed too many tears to the m^mory of my brother, to be in
love with regimentals: but my tenderness was antecedent to all these
misfortunes; nor will it be in the power of any misfortune to diminish what
your judgment, and the eloquence of my own heart, have so long approved. Your
present avowed displeasure against Mr. Hammond is sudden; but settled affection
cannot readily accomodate itself to such revolutions. What is rooted in nature
cannot, without much labor, be eradicated by art. As it displeases you, Sir, I
am concerned at this. But shall I deceive, in order to make my peace? shall I
be unnatural, in order to be filial? Shall I propensely set one great duty
against another, and so destroy the excellence of both? No. You would hate me
for it, and I should hate myself. That I am in this bitter period, when I am
about to lose what you yourself so lately thought most precious, able to write
with so much argumentative composure, is, alas! no sign of my indifference, but
an instance -- perhaps the strongest that could be given -- of that steady
attachment, which, born of honor, is nourished by virtue. To be attached, is
the dictate of nature. To be attached to a man of sense and morals, is the
dictate of delicacy; and the symptom, I conceive, of a good disposition. Such,
my most honored father, were the elementary rules I caught from you. Would you
controvert your own maxims? Or, while the merit of the object increases, is it
a fit time to withdraw from it the love, which nature and common sense seem to
say should increase in proportion?

But you depend, I find, on the lenitives of absence, and of time. I will not
answer for the vigor of my own mind, for I know the frail^y of our nature. If
it is soothing to my father to count upon what these things may do, let me not
destroy his source of expectation. I am not, thanks to his corrected culture,
enough the giddy girl to burst forth into asseverations of constancy
everlasting, merely to vex a parent by setting my heart against his wishes: I
would desire rather to distrust my own temper; and, laying my affections open
to his view, beg him to form his judgment upon a survey of them. -- But I dare
not mislead one who has so entire a right to be treated frankly. I make no
vows; yet, in proportion as an attachment is deliberate, is it not fixed and
permanent? And this being my first and only affection, (having besides a man of
unblemished character and congenial manners for its object) have I not a right
strongly to suspect -- But enjoy the opinion you so strongly adopt. Bless you,
my father, for the gentleness of your inhibitions. You do not threaten -- You
do not rave. These might have augmented my distress, but could not have abated
my affection. A circumstance of which parents seem so unconscious, that they
destroy the effect of authority by the vehemence with which they exert it. They
confuse, but do not convince: terrify, but do not conciliate; and almost
justify disobedience, by their manner of enforcing duty.

Oh Heaven! the clock is striking -- the hour is come -- the minute -- the
moment is approaching. I will ring for a servant to take this into the parlour.
My feet will scarcely carry me down stairs. An ingenuous nature appeals to you
for pity, Sir -- will you refuse? Oh, my father, my father, my spirits have
done their utmost, ere the trial is begun. Suffer me to be unhappy. -- Prepare
for me -- oh! prepare for me the parental hand against my return, and do not
let my tenderness abate yours.

Adieu. EMMA.

LETTER XXIII. HENRY TO EMMA After the interview.

TEN minutes, while the chaise is getting ready, are mine: they shall be
devoted to Emma. Check, I once more conjure (...), the extreme of sensibility;
a few silent tears, a few gentle sighs, and the luxury of a soft and tender
sorrow, I wish not to restrain -- but such another conflict as that of last
night --

And yet I feel the absurdity of my own argument -- Fasten not, however, on any
desponding images. We shall meet again; and in happier days -- The sweets of
social and family intercourse shall yet be our's, and in the dear bosom of
domestic peace, we shall enjoy, without restraint, contrivance, or disguise,
all the benefits of so delicate and well directed an attachment -- Trust me, we
shall.

Ah, my Emma, you owe yourself and me these reasonable encouragements, and I
implore you to bestow them. If EMMA be not armed with fortitude, how can HENRY
expect to conquer? It is too mighty a calamity to feel for her, and for himself.

The moment of departure is come. I am called. Adieu -- dearest and most
amiable of friends -- adieu!

Hah! yonder is your servant -- He is running toward me -- He is here -- A
packet! Precious fellow traveller! I receive it just before I step into the
carriage. I hurry to press a water on this flying billet. Heaven guard and give
you its choicest blessings. Farewell -- ten thousand times farewell.

HENRY HAMMOND

LETTER XXIV. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
YET, yet a few words, my loved friend, and then -- what then? O adieu for a
tedious space -- for days, weeks, months, years -- perhaps for ever? -- Ah, my
poor heart!

Yet it is not so: this is the language of drooping nature in her most desolate
moment. It is our persons only that shall be separated, our souls shall be
drawn perpetually together in converse sweet, communion high -- pure as
precious -- delicate as delightful. What, alas! is space -- what is distance?
Our hearts shall kn^w no disunion -- I will not, I do not despair.

Henry! I am less wretched than I was last night; and though full fraught with
tender sorrow -- though my tears are flowing till they obscure my sight -- you
may see their traces on the paper -- I will have faith in your prophecy.

What a day for your journey! it is emblematic of our affection; inclined to
sunshine and to shower, to smiles and tears alternately. Be tender of yourself
for my sake. Guard against cold from the poignant severity of the night air.
The dangers to which you will professionally be exposed are, alas! sufficient:
oh, do not add to them by neglect. Farewell, I will think of you very tenderly,
and pray for you very fe^ven^ly. Heaven bless, sustain, and comfort you. How my
hard lingers -- But time grows short, and unless I make one violent effort, the
period of getting this to your hand may escape. -- Therefore, in one decisive
and affecting word -- Farewell

EMMA.

LETTER XXV. TO Sir ROBERT RAYMOND.
My dear Baronet,
I HAVE not yet had one glimpse of opportunity to mention those proposals to my
daughter, which are so acceptable to me. I can only tell you the young man is
gone. To deal plainly with you, she is much attached; but when you have
cultivated her acquaintance, I hope she will be judicious enough to make
distinctions. Follow your design of making my house yours, till you go into
the country, and then many occasions will present themselves of discovering
that merit which, I am sure, the generous Emma will not be able to resist. I am
resolved against Hammond; so that you need not fear a jarring interest. A girl
and boy inclination is fugitive. Sir Robert Raymond will inspire, I trust, a
superior passion on a superior principle. Come to us immediately, and join in
our parties.

Ever yours, CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER XXVI. TO EMMA CORBETT.
I FLOAT on the bosom of the ocean while I write this: but, as if in courtesy,
the wind it changed, or rather it ceases to blow sufficiently, and in this
harbor we are to ride till it rises. You well know, in what manner I shall
employ the interval; it shall be dedicated to softness and to Emma. I have
perused your dear parting legacy -- no, not legacy, that is too funeral a word
-- your parting pledge. -- Yes, I have perused it, and, soldier as I am, do not
blush to tell you that I have wept over its contents. I pressed it with fervent
and chaste ardour to my lips and to my bosom -- I laid it soft and close upon
the panting heart, and am relieved -- as much so, my Emma, as I ought to be, or
as is consistent with human nature at this crisis. Oh, my dear friend, it is
indeed a pathetic period. I now feel that I had set myself too hard a task. I
pretended to rally it off as a military maneuver; but I find "he jests at
scars that never felt a wound." Nature revolted, and I have suffered more from
not giving her fair play. The anguish of my mind --

[There is no brother officer at my elbow, and I may safely whisper forth my
lovely weakness to Emma.]

-- The anguish of my mind bore down all before it; and now the matter is over,
I will confess that the last hour I passed in your company* my friend, was the
most painful of my life. How are you a^ this moment, my Emma? O, how many
questions have I omitted -- how many have I yet to ask? O, for another hour! At
the end of the first stage I was strongly inclined to order the postill^o^ to
drive back. I had recollected much, and that, me thought, of moment too, to say
-- but I found it was only lingering nature, reluctant to let go its object,
and would have amounted to nothing (...) than tender repetition It would but
have enfeebled both, and deep^^^d in each bosom the poignancy of sorrow. Again,
my dear Emma, farewell. May heaven bring us once more within reach of each
other. -- You such as I wish you; Me such as you would have me. I shall now
seek the bed or rather the hammock; it is somewhat awkward to me. The sea is
not, you know* a soldier's element, and it will take a little time ere I can
adopt myself to the fatigues of it.

HENRY HAMMOND.
P. S. O, be very tender to my beloved Louisa. Supply a brother's absence;
nurse her declining health; draw, as if by stealth, the softest images over the
solemn sadness of her soul; and let not so much beauty, elegance, and virtue,
drop untimely into the grave.



LETTER XXVII. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
THE wind stirs not; there is not a breath of air moving in the atmosphere.
Under favor of this idea I am writing a hasty line, just to wrap up with the
incl^sed, which my heart recollected since your departure: let it lie, O my
beloved Henry, upon yours; and may it have all the tender power which I wish
to give it. Ah that I could crowd, into a few words, every thing sweet and
comfortable, to supply the defect of this brevity, and to soften the ills and
misfortunes which poor humanity is doomed to bear.

EMMA.

LETTER XXVIII. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
O HOW tenderly you have spoken to a brother's feelings, my beautiful sister!
It is a nice subject you have glanced upon; but what is there in your Henry's
power that he will not seek to do for Louisa? Yet it was hard to withdraw your
hand from me -- I missed the pressure, even while Emma was weeping on my bosom;
and I had much, very much for your private ear, which I would have contrived to
impart. Preserve the enclosed papers, which, in case of accident, you will
unseal, and act in conformity to their contents. They are the last desires of
your affectionate brother.

HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER XXIX. TO EMMA CORBETT.
THE wind is still insufficient, and the little which stirs is adverse, which
has given me an opportunity to receive the only part of your person that could,
consistently, attend me on the ocean. Do you know that this dear locket has
made me poetical. You must allow for verses written upon the waves. Yet I hate
apology. They have soothed a pensive hour for me, and may do the same for you.

That they may answer this good purpose, is the fondest desire of

HENRY HAMMOND,
Address to a LOCKET with a braid of EMMA's Hair.
I.
COME, thou soft and sacred favor,
The remembrance chaste impart;
Take thy station on my bosom,
Lightly lodging near the heart.
II.
While that tender thing shall flutter,
Thou the secret cause shall know;
Whether pleasure or disaster,
Thou will see what stirs it so.
III.
When the hope of happy tidings
Shall the sweet sensations move;
When the white and winged agents
Whisper friendship, whisper love;
IV.
Then, all sympathetic, thrilling*
Thou the rosy stream shall guide;
While, as runs the ruddy treasure,
You Are the Genius of the tide.
V.
Happily when this heart is sinking,
Thou shall soothe the rising sigh,
When with woe surcharged, it is heaving,
Thou will see the reason why.
VI.
Every curious eye escaping,
Here securely shall thou rest;
Though the universe were searching,
Thine the secrets of my breast.
VII.
Come then, dear and decent favor,
Learn what thou will never impart:
Fix thy throne, and fix it ever,
In the regions of my heart.
VIII.
Over these delicate dominions,
Cast a monarch's careful view,
Render every subject passion
Worthy me, and worthy you.
IX.
Let not realms so rich, so tender,
Suffer rebel weeds to grow,
But the flowr's -- ah! do not crush them,
In sweet vision let them blow.
X.
Gentlest sighs shall serve for breezes,
Softly aid them, ^^burn friend;
Silent tears, like dews descending,
Shall the lovely growth attend.
XI.
Thou shall watch them night and morning,
Thou shall see the nurselings rise:
Thou, with me, shall tremble for them,
Thou, with me, invoke the skies.
XII.
If at length, alas, they wither,
If they sicken, if they die*
In one grave -- oh, dear companion,
Still embosom'd will we lie.


LETTER XXX. TO C. CORBETT. Esquire.
THE prospect, Corbett, is not clear, I find; but something impels me to to try
whether it may not be improved. I suspect, however, that a youth of twenty-five
in scarlet, will leave an impression scarce to be erased by a middle-aged man
in a suit of snuff-colour, with slash sleeves, after the manner of our
ancestors. and it is too late now, Charles, to throw off a custom that has hung
on my back for more than twenty years. Yet I will come; for I want the
stability of domestic comfort after all my migrations.

Your daughter strikes me as the very woman, and he, in my eye, no other fault
than that of being too young, which I quarrel with chiefly because I strongly
suspect she will think me too old. No matter, I will put the best foot forward,
and be with you in a day or two. Mean time, I will get me a new wig; and, to
show you how much I am in earnest, will try to deceive your Emma as much as
conveniently may be, by ordering it to be made so as to resemble a responsible
head of hair; for I find, since I came home from India, there is nothing in a
young Lady's eye so ridiculous as a wig. And when I left my native land, a
flowing peruke was a Cupid in full dress. O temp^ra! But we will see what can
be done.

Dear friend, I am yours, and remember I have been so twenty-eight years.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XXXI. TO HENRY HAMMOND, Esquire.
WHAT a return have you made for the trifle I sent you, O, most dear and
ingenious friend I ever directing the current of that rich stream (which knows
no diminution, but scatters fertility and fragrance as it flows) to comfort, to
amuse, or to instruct me* How I rejoice, that the bagatelle pleased you. It was
my first intention to have the hair disposed into an ornament for the shirt,
but I considered the nature of that delicate sentiment you feel for Emma. I
reflected that it was retired, that it shunned every thing obtrusive, that it
could ill brook the idle, and perhaps the wanton curiosity of those cockaded
heroes, who imagine tenderness incompatible with bravery. On these accounts,
therefore, I chose to suit my locket to that situation only in which your
delicate partiality would be most likely to place it.

Round your neck, my dear Henry, let it ever hang, impervious to every eye but
that of the proprietor. -- A sacred calisman may it prove -- a soft shield
thrown over your bosom by the trembling hand of a friend! -- O, that I could
breathe upon it all the virtues that were supposed to be in possession of the
most benevolent geoii -- that it had strength of charm sufficient to preserve
you as securely from sickness, sorrow, and mischance, -- from the bullet and
the sword, -- as I do firmly believe the sight and touch of it will arm your
heart against the impression of every error, and the practice of every
irregularity.

Your letter, with its fair and tuneful enclosure, found me upon my pillow,
from which I hastened with a rapidity which is the spontaneous impulse of
unaffected tenderness. Like a much-wished-fo^ and much-wanted cordial* it found
me in an affecting moment. I read and recovered, wept and was well Oh, wondrous
power of virtuous affection! Yes, thou admirable and honorable friend, the die
is cast, thy invaluable love shall be the sustaining solace of my future
existence. Ah! may no jarring word or discordant thought ever rise up to
disturb an amity so sacred and so pure! The fine spirit of our esteem, my
Henry, shall extend its delicate influence over all the rougher passages, on a
sea far more stormy than that whose bosom is now pressed by your vessel -- Over
every troubled moment our affection shall softly diffuse itself, "Like the
sweet breezes of the South,
"Stealing and giving odor."
Oh, Henry, my heart dilates as I write and the soft drops descend in a
pathetic and sweet assurance of our future felicity; but do not be uneasy that
I weep, -- such tears will not hurt me. They are precious drops that invigorate
virtue, and freshen as they fall. Oh! those sacred hours we have passed
together, in friendship, in converse, in books; no divided attention, thought
saluting thought, the mutual tear, every thing, or dear or elegant, included in
every moment. Carry the remembrance of such intercourse over the world of
waters. Call to mind the time when our lengthened attention to the moral page,
instead of relaxing, grew stronger and more fixed; when our understandings and
our hearts seemed equally to refine and to expand!

Yes, Henry, I will try to adopt that gentle spirit of prophecy, which breathes
so beautiful an ardour over your consolatory pages. I do not expect to gather
the bloom of the rose, without feeling the puncture of the surrounding thorn. I
gratefully take it with all its little wounding appendages -- I place it in my
bosom.

-- I have promised not to repine: yet, if a gentle murmur sometimes escapes,
let me, I prithee, find indulgence for it, and do not chide me; oh, how often
have I wished since your departure, to be the companion of your voyage and all
its consequences, however multiplied, however menacing! And, after all, Henry,
your situation is more tolerable than mine: the traveling friend has the
advantage of those who are left, in solitude, behind. The very velocity of the
motion is favorable: in passing rapidly along, the freshness of the air, and
the change of objects, engage and divert the mind insensibly; while the poor
forlorn one, that remains fixed to the former spot, has only to mark the
present period, to look in vain around for what is lost, to cast a "longing,
lingering eye" upon the past, and, in the torture of reflection, to confess
that such things were, -- but are, alas! no more.

It has been my fortune to pass through the street where you resided, more than
once since your departure. O, think with what emotions I viewed those windows
which belonged to an apartment so lately yours! The sight of your grave could
scarcely have produced any thing more affecting: and yet I feel that I shall
like to pass often by them. I do not pretend to account for these little
touches, I only simply relate them. Will not your feeling nature easily explain
them?

And now confess, Hammond, that I have arrived at the due degree of heroism:
confess, that I am sufficiently soldier'd; for I can hold the pen, and impress
the quiet-seeming sentiment, with my eyes full of tears* and my heart full of
sorrow. What more can you expect from female philosophy? What more can you
expect from a friend who has been used to regret the absence of an hour as a
misfortune?

I shall send off this, on the slight chance of its reaching you. If it should
not -- what then? what will be its fate? -- I care not. Gross as is the world,
were every sentiment of my soul laid open to its view, I could support the
scrutiny. I still could " boast the graceful weakness," if indeed it be a
weakness of my heart. The possibility of your receiving my letter is worth the
hazard of dispatching it; and as every moment is now at the caprice of the
wind. I will no longer delay sealing.

Adieu! EMMA.

LETTER XXXII. TO EMMA CORBETT.
YOUR dear favor, like a parting blessing, comes to hand while the breezes are
rising, and the whole crew are engaged in the bustle of preparation. We have
already weighed anchor, the sails will soon cease to slap against the mast, for
I perceive the mariners are climbing the shrouds to square the canvass to the
gale, which is at length favorable, All hands are aloof -- All hearts are
panting with various passions^ -- I feel that we are in motion. -- I can hear
the cleaving keel cut the waves. -- The wind blows fresher, as we clear the
calms that brood in the harbor; and, as I turn my eye astern of the vessel, I
behold the billows whiten into foam. Alas! the shore seems to go back, and we
are getting into a wider sea. The watermen who have followed us thus far in
their boat on some necessary business, now tack about, and pepare again to
fetch the harbor.

Brief let me be. -- Many of my fellow officers are standing idle on the deck,
and some are roaring catches in the cabin; while Henry Hammond is writing an
adieu to one dear woman, who is the pride and pleasure of his life. I confess
also, that a sigh is heaving from my heart, and a tear is running along my
cheek. The officers look at me as if they suspected an infirmity. Let them. In
the day of battle we shall see, whether tenderness or dissipation inspire the
truer courage or magnanimity. I have a little bribed the boatmen, who are
rowing laboriously after us, but the last, last moment is come, and the last,
last adieus; the finishing farewell must be given -- farewell, then! I leave
you in full possession of my heart; I leave you to your own virtue, and to the
Providence of GOD.

HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER XXXIII. TO EMMA CORBETT.
MY brother and your friend, then, is gone! How fares it with you, my dear
Emma? Are the conflicting pangs of a parting so poignant somewhat subsided,
the tender spirits somewhat composed, the fluttered, agitated heart more
still? I ask you these questions in the bosom of my retreat. I date from my
sanctuary, where my widowed heart (for that has been long wedded) is retired to
muse upon the dead. Of the living, you, one other person, and Henry, are the
only objects of my case. For your welfare, and for your distress, I can yet
feel, and while you remain in it, the world will have something that ties me to
it -- the rest is Edward's.

Fifteen months of desperation are gone by, my friend, and five more have
followed those, less clamorous, but more deep. The frenzy of my soul is
succeeded by the still small sigh, and silent tear of settled sorrow. It is not
now the passion but the principle of grief. Here I sit under the dark umbrage
of these sepulchral bows -- ah shade most sacred! and invoke piety to
consecrate my grief. -- She comes -- she comes, my Emma!

-- Amidst the modest shadings of the evening, I behold her celestial form
descending on a moon-beam. Even now she diffuses a holy melancholy into my
heart. -- She fits me for the contemplations that are most dear. -- She utters
the name of EDWARD in tunes of Heavenly eloquence -- she touche^ the tender
strain -- she echoes the pensive sign in softest cadence, and increases the
stream of woe with cherub drops of sympathy. The lovely enthusiasm is complete!

It is now twilight, my Emma; the but is taking its circles in the ai^, and
poor Fidelio is sleeping at my feet -- I use the day's last moment to write,
supporting the paper on my lap. -- The owl, which shrinks from sunshine, has
left his ivy, and flits by me. -- The village bell is toiling -- This night
departed the soul of a WIDOW! -- It is the passing bell, then, that I hear! --
Oh! Heavens!

Alas, I meant to comfort you, and I shall infect you with my gloom.

-- The present pensive sweets be mine. -- Adieu! -- I lay down the pen till I
can use it to a more soothing purpose.

In continuation.

It is particularly unlucky, Emma, for you, that I should have contracted this
sequestered habit, when my soothing cares might be so particularly acceptable
to my friend. -- Yet, in the present situation of her heart, all attuned as it
is to gentle emotions, I am much inclined to ask her society.

The retreat is tender: the weather is fair. Close upon my cot, Simplicity
seems to have fixed her seat of "dearest residence." She has sequestered
herself in a bow^r of shrubs, at whose roots rambles the fertilizing till. My
shades are formed to receive and to embrace the gentle spirit of acquiescence.
Reposed in the thickest foliage. The saintly form of Melancholy also is there,
listening to the plaint of the stock-dove, and to the soft gradations of the
water-fall. Is not this an asylum for the heart of Emma? Even Louisa (ah, how
pre-eminently wretched! --) finds some consolation amongst these pensive sweets
of nature in her solitudes -- solitudes, my friend, not to annihilate but to
compose, not to extinguish the generous flame, but to attemper it. Ah, come
then -- come to the woman who esteems you. -- Come to the sister of Henry, --
come to the mourner of Edward! retirement is the norse of love. It Is
"hereabouts she dwells." Virtuous affection is blooming here amidst rose^.
Friendship, (ah, surely I might say KINDRED friendship) in the form of your
Louisa, attends. What, of soft, of sacred, of serene, is there wanting to
invite you? Here, as farther removed from the tumults of busy life, you will be
drawn more near to Henry. Directing the "mind's eye" only toward him, you will
seem to approximate almost all of life that is most precious to us both. The
pure air itself will assist. The softness of morn, and the serenity of eve,
will be alike auspicious -- the sign will become more soft -- the violent
agitations will subside -- the tempestuous passions will sink into a delicate
calm, like the smooth sea "when not a breath of wind blows over the surface."

A little time, passed in a recess so soothing, will answer a thousand good
purposes; at present I know the tender heart must feel, and the feeble frame
will suffer with it. My own misery is not noisy, and it will not interrupt
yours. The tears of sympathy, which happily you may bestow upon Louisa, shall be
gratefully repaid. In this way, we will be at "once indebted and discharged."
Attain, therefore, your father's assent and hasten to the cottager.

LOUISA HAMMOND.
N. B. I return the verses which Henry sent with the packet of pene, because I
cannot bear to keep any thing that is comfortable from you at this period
especially any thing from our beloved Hammond, whom we divide in dear affection
between us.

Verses from Mr. HAMMOND to EMMA, with a present of some Pens, given at parting.
I.
GO, ingenious artists, to her,
All ambitious to be pressed;
Dear disclosers of sensation:
Agents of the gentle breast.
II.
Whiter than your whitest feather,
Is the hand which you will embrace;
Yet more white the fair affection,
Whose emotions you shall trace.
III.
Go, and take a charge upon you,
Passing tender, passing dear;
Oh, the trust you bear is wondrous!
Gentle agents be sincere.
IV.
Every sacred secret marking,
Gods! how precious ye will prove!
Softest sympathies imparting,
Are ye not the plumes of Love?
V.
When first floating on the river,
Lovely was your limpid way;
Lovely was the silver surface,
Lovely was your watery play.
VI.
But for pastimes still more lovely,
Your sweet feathers now I send;
What so lovely, prithee tell me,
As the service of a friend?
VII.
Faithful to the fair deposits,
Your least stroke shall reach my heart;
In its elegant recesses,
Shall be fixed, what you impart.
VIII.
Then, dear instruments, I charge ye,
Often tempt my Emma's eyes;
Bid her press your downy feathers,
Bid her speed the soft replies.
IX.
Not the plumes which line her pillow,
Half so delicate shall prove;
(When all kind her pulses tremble)
As your downy shafts of love.
X.
Ye shall note her joy and anguish,
Gentle agents, be sincere!
Send me half each drop of sorrow,
Rob me not of half each tear.
XI.
Beauteous as the dews of morning,
When they bathe the lovely flower,
Are the lucid drops of Feeling,
When from fondness falls the shower.
XII.
Mark, I claim my just division,
Mark, I promise just return;
Some of your white winged associates
Must inform her how I mourn.
XIII.
When long leagues our persons sever,
Ye our wishes shall convey;
Ye shall tell the pangs of parting,
Ye shall mark the meeting day.
XIV.
Save me, powers! that strike the pulses,
When invades the quick surprise,
Yonder comes the gentle Emma,
Hither she directs her eyes.
XV.
How the feather I am using
Trembles to the trembling heart!
Agents, here behold a pattern!
See a sample of your art.
XVI.
Thus to me were Emma writing,
(And her thoughts like Henry's kind)
Sympathy would shake each feather,
All expressive of the mind:
XVII.
Go then, take this charge upon you,
Passing tender, passing dear;
Oh, the charge you bear is wondrous!
Gentle agents, be sincere.


LETTER XXXIV. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
FREDERICK, he is set off; but I have no reason to imagine his embarkation a
good omen. As far as the father's interest goes, I am safe, but that does not
go very far. To tell you the truth, I am myself somewhat an odd kind of a
fellow in this respect. I should not choose to accept an alienated or reluctant
hand. Nor could I sit quiet under the idea of possessing a woman, who gave her
person as an equivalent for a title and a fortune. These niceties, you will
say, are, at my age, somewhat out of date; and I ought not to expect such
etiquettes will be attended to by a fine young woman, whom, perhaps, you
imagine, I might jump at on any terms. Look'y' Frederick, leave me to settle my
own singularities, and do you settle yours. I think fit, for old acquaintance
sake, to unbosom to you a very foolish secret. The least you can do is to hear
my story, and to let me tell it my own way. I am now in love " nolens volens."
You may laugh, but I feel it is not in my power to extricate myself. Would the
wench had not fallen in my way! These are what I call cross incidents. When a
man is jogging on, and has got soberly to the resting place, then to have a
slap on the shoulder from such an urchin as Cupid, then to be attacked bow and
arrow in hand -- Is not this too bad -- Is not this too ridiculous -- too
humiliating?

After you have uttered the sarcastic yes, I shall proceed to acquaint you,
that this mighty ridiculous thing is the most serious torment: and what renders
it the more perplexing is, that, old fellow as I am, it is a circumstance
wholly new to me -- not more so to the veriest stripling when he wafts from him
the maiden sighs for a tripping chit of fifteen. I am not in my dotage, am I,
Berkley, at forty-three? No, hang it; that is not what they call being
well-stricken -- is it? I have some terms to keep with myself too. I should not
choose to be too absurd.

But this young adventurer! This happy hero! The parts of his character that I
have been able to pick up -- such as health, agreeableness, genius, spirit,
courage, and animation, are not absolutely in my favor, are they, Frederick?

Let us see what I have got to put in the balance against them. -- the gout --
smallpox pits -- not the ninetieth part of a muse -- less courage than
caution, and spirits somewhat harrassed out in the real wear and tear of
worldly events. I don't like it, Frederick. -- It will not do. My lighter scale is
hurled aloof, and I am bouncing my head against the beam most abominably. O
Frederick!

Is there, then, nothing to throw in by way of bringing a middle aged gentleman
on the equilibrium? Yes: A lusty lump of money. The golden make weight of fifty
thousand pounds. Fair force of metal, Frederick! Our cockaded spark has not any
thing to poise that, in the opinion of the world; and yet, if this should
happen to be Emma's opinion. I am so whimsical a mortal, that I should esteem
her less for the very circumstance which would make my sait more successful.
The fortune of Henry Hammond, I find, is small. He has not much money, but he
has what does a thousand times more execution in a delicate bosom: he has
sentiment. O that cursed sentiment! -- a term, Frederick, of late invention, to
express old emotions in a new way -- a term, which many use, more affect, few
understand, and still fewer feel, -- a term, which -- which -- in short --
curse that sentiment!

We deceive ourselves, my friend, and in my next I will tell you how. Good by'
for the present.

Yours, R. RAYMOND.

Letter XXXV. TO THE SAME.
I SAID I would tell you how we deceive ourselves. I will. The slender
circumstances, and even the great misfortunes of a lover, are no kind of
objection in the eyes of a sentimental mistress; embarrassments of the world
call forth the siner sentiments, and th^se excite sympathy. Now sympathy,
Frederick, is, in the female breast, a very tender sensation. It is a strange
thing, but a true, that this same adorable SENTIMENT has ever had (with indeed
very few exceptions) a most sore quarrel with solid silver and gold; and with
the coin current of a country. In the account of young English women (who are
the greatest worshippers of the fair idol) ^t really circulates as most
sterling; and the prevailing charms of a pathetic, poetical poverty is a more
welcome draft to them, than any which mere matter-of fact wealth could draw
upon his banker. Thus it is, that fathers sacrifice to Plutus, and children
(especially daughters) to a beggarly Deity, whom Plutus laughs to scorn: and
hence the source of ten thousand family feuds -- hence the rise of separate
maintenance; and the fall of domestic confidence. Sentimental Love is torn
almost to ta^^ers in his way to the altar; and when, in this effort, his robe
is most ragged, then is his gl^ry the most distinguished; for thus b^ggarly as
he i^, he shall laugh at the labors of a rich passion, and as he passes,
poverty-struck (as it should seem) through files of females, he will flaunt his
famine in your face, and sentimentally tell you, it is his letter of
recommendation. And all this, Frederick, while plain affection (in a
snuff-coloured coat for instance) throws in vain the massy money bag, across
his shoulders, and seeks Hymen's temple by the path that is obvious and
unentangled. Now a days, the broad highway is deserted; and the women rather
choose to stick those roses in their bosom that are encompassed by thorns, than
accept the richest bouquet, in the garden that lies open to the view, ready to
the hand, and that may be collected without any difficulty.

Difficulty! there it is again. That is another cursed thing which enters into
the spirit of a modern attachment! It is the first cousin of sentiment, or, as
I have heard, its parent. A sly old neighbor of mi^e, who has looked shrewdly
and silently at human nature, and whom I, sometimes, used to consult on that
subject, tells me, that difficulty is the happiest thing in the world to
sentimental lovers. I hinted to my friend in reply to this, that I then might
consider my age, my dark complexion, my wig, and my fair round body, ^s so many
points in my favor, since they would, no doubt, throw a respectable quantity
of the aforesaid difficulty in the way of my wishes, meaning my overtures to
Emma Corbett. Aye, quoth my friend -- but they are not the right sort of
difficulties. There are, continued he, difficulties which impede and
difficulties which advance. Of the former, yours, Sir Robert, happen to be the
most substantia], to which you might have added many more that have the
kindness to attend you. Of the latter, you, Sir Robert, to my recollection,
have not one: for you are too rich to experience an objection on the side of
cash, which, by incurring the contempt of the father, might possibly recommend
you to the child -- You are too sleek and too plump, to make a young lady
mi^take your countenance for the seat of sentiment, and there is so terrible an
air of plenty all over you, that you are, in my opinion, an unwise Baronet to
address any thing but one of those prudent young ladies, which, in a
matrimonial bargain, cling to the solid comforts, and will not like you the
worse for being so abundantly provided with the goods of this life -- But to
attempt a woman of sentiment, an ATTACHED woman of sentiment, the mistress of a
young soldier, who loves a man of poverty -- a man of poetry -- and, to crown
all, who loves a man that is not the present choice of her father -- Alas, poor
Sir Robert! you may think yourself well off, if she does not conceive toward
you, a generous kind of aversion, and order you to assume a genteel size, to
wear your own hair, and to adopt the melting mood before she suffers a second
visit.

Thus spoke my friend -- and I don't know what to think of his doctrine Give
her up, I positively cannot -- Gain her is not a little improbable. Yet I have
met her several times since my arrival, and she has not yet ordered me to
assume a genteel size, nor to wear my own hair. I design to make some little
alterations in the headway, it is true, but this is more in frolic than
seriousness: for I love to adopt little drolleries. They belong to my temper,
and have accompanied me to a very good end, through life -- which, I really
find, requires many little lifts to go pleasantly through.

It is on this account, Frederick, that I regret having seen the fair Emma
Corbett. My partiality is not, I find, such a one as I can accomodate to my old
habit of quaint jocularity. It has a little jarred the harmony of my little
system already, I do not enjoy the passing scene quite so care-free -- and why
should I disguise any thing from Frederick Berkley? -- I feel an earnest desire
to touch the heart of this girl so, that I should be as necessary to her
felicity as she is to mine; and the fear of not being able to accomplish this
makes me, at times, most peculiarly miserable. Thank discretion, however, she
knows, as yet* nothing of the matter; and I shall have the advantage soon of
being under the same roof. I could treat her with great tenderness: indeed I
could, Frederick.

Before I quite accede to the invitation -- though I have written to Corbett --
I will consider about it; and shall be glad to hear from you, in the mean time.
But you need not write any of your objections to my pursuit, lest you inspire
me with a love of difficulty, and I should, like a sentimental Lover, exert
myself to oppose them, in proportion as they appear insurmountable. But you may
send my word I am engaged in a hazardous undertaking, not doubting my success,
if you please.

So I am, yours, ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XXXVI. TO EMMA CORBETT.
AH, my friend, you must not come -- I am not now fit to receive you. I am too
gloomy and too sick. My constitution will not keep pace with my mind -- The
physician summons me from hence. O, I would willingly live and die here, but a
certain something, which, at this crisis, I am not at liberty to tell even to
thee, my Emma, makes it a duty for me to protract life, (if it be possible) and
even to love it. I c^n say no more, and you are too generous to torture me with
an enquiry.

Adieu! LOUISA HAMMOND.
P.S. I shall see you in town soon.



LETTER XXXVII. TO Mrs. ARNOLD.
YOUR ^illet, O Caroline, is arrived -- Surely the agony which threatens, will
not be added to the rest! If it be, the shortness of its continuance will
soften its severity; for in that case, the tender mercies of GOD will be upon
me, and I shall die. Ere this letter reaches you, I will myself embrace all
that remains of --

O Caroline, Caroline! -- Tears and terror prevent me from proceeding -- The
post is setting out, and I have time only to announce the journey of

LOUISA HAMMOND.

LETTER XXXVIII. TO LOUISA HAMMOND. Prior to the rec^ipt of the above.

BY all that is valuable to you, I enjoin the utmost expedition! Since I wrote
in the morning, the causes of apprehension are increased. If the memory of
Edward be dear to you, lose not a moment.

C. ARNOLD.

LETTER XXXIX Previous to the receiving the 36th letter.
TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
WE differ about the rural shades, my friend. I adopt the Poet's opinion
concerning them. "What are the falling ri^ls, the pendant shades,
"The morning bowers, the evening colonades,
"But soft recesses for the uneasy mind,
"To sigh, unheard in to the passing wind?
"So the struck deer, in some sequ^ster'd part,
"Lies down to die, the arrow in his heart.
"There bid in shades, and wasting day by day,
"Inly he bleeds, and pants his soul away."
But were I even to suppose with you, that solitude, my dear Louisa's
p^^^^ic^^ly precious solitude, would woo to it the tender form of patience, it
would, at this period, be impossible to take refuge, li^^^^ne haples^ deer,
amongst the branches. I have not been allowed breathing time since the news of
Henry's embarkation ^^ached me. It seems now the great point of my father to
disl^e, entirely, all traces of Mr. Hammond. A father's heart engages in this
endeavor; and though I know it to be hopel^ss, I forbear to disturb his plan
by unavailing contest, and am passive to the projects which surround (ah, how
vainly!) the honorable affection of my bosom. The acute pang, my friend, is
subsided, but my affection is only the more fixed upon that account. All places
being now pretty much alike, I suffer myself to be drawn about from one silly
circle to another. Yet how should my father thus mistake my temper? This
affection is no impromptu -- No enthusiastic flight of f^lly, fancy, or of
p^ssion. It has been the s^^w, progressive course of various combining and
irresistible circumstances -- circumstances, which, unfolding themselves trait
by trait, have discovered to me the merit of a most amiable character; and, on
the basis of experience, fixed me to it beyond all possibility of change. So
very complex, peculiar, and precious, Louisa, has been every movement in the
series of events which have contributed to cement and fasten the faith -- the
HOLY faith, established between Emma and your brother, that, though no
particular predestinarian, nor easily yielding to the wild images of
superstition, I am strongly inclined to think -- and there is my hope -- that
something more powerful than the more random agency of chance, must have
interfered. I am not of the light or fickle tribe: nor am I tumultuous. Extreme
violence I dread. That pathetic sobriety which is separated on the one hand
from the darkness of despair; and, on the other, from the perilous furor of
extacy, (if I at all know myself) discriminates my character. To the fortunes
of Mr. Hammond, I am tied by those fi^e bonds of sympathy, upon which time and
chance can have no influence. Wherefore, then, should I not give way to the
generous instinct? You have often heard me say, that I respect and venerate
every rule which reason has prescribe, to render female conduct correctly
amiable; and to preserve that beauteous decorum, without whose graces woman is
both despicable and wretched. But does reason bid us withold the mitigating
balm which is given us to heal the wounds of life? No, my friend Your own
hear^, virtuously attached to the memory of a most lovely, and most lamented
youth, will plead in my behalf, and justify my constancy. Heaven itself will
justify it, and so will the unchang^able GOD who inhabits that Heaven.

To delicacy I grant much. To custom all which she ought to expect. But to
nature, chastened and regulated by real virtue, I devote my heart. In devoting
it to them, I dedicate it to Henry; and it is with equal pride and pleasure I
am able to inform the sister of my dear Hammond, that, such has been the
delicacy of his manners, so uniformly pure hi^ sentiments, his tenderness so
adorned by dignity, so becoming a man to offer, and a woman to accept, --
ardent yet steady, and soft yet brigh^, -- that I do not recoll^ct one word,
either spoken or written, which dying, I could wish to blot from the tablature
of my memory. If this was the praise of the poet, what shall it b^ of the lover
-- of the lover, young, interesting, appr^ved of the most susceptible heart,
and a soldier? And is one's affection for such a man to obey the motion of
wheels, and fly off as they roll along? or is it to be buried in the grave of
everyday s^cie^y? or is it even to be given up for the gaudiest trappings of
tinsel lif^, which never, even at the most unengaged moment, could fascinate
the eyes, or sway the opinions of Emma?

O vain thought! O impotent exertion! Would my father have me flutter into
forgetfulness? it is impossible. Let him rather present to me a man more
amiable, more perfect, more tender, more engaging, and more ingenious, than
Hammond. Let him introduce to me a second Henry SUPERIOR to the first, or let
him forbear attempting to erase that lovely leaf, whereon the virtues of that
first are inscribed: Yet, I hold myself not at liberty to oppose the system of
my father. I maintain the modest purpose of my soul, and cherish the vow, which
in the presence of an attesting God, I have registered in my heart: but I do
not set myself avowedly against the pursuits of a parent. At the same time I
should esteem myself the lightest, as well as the most unworthy, of women, were
such pursuits to have any influence upon my faith. Time may convi^ce my father
of the propriety of a constancy so inflexible; and to that I trust. May heaven
augment the comforts of us both, Louisa.

Adieu. EMMA.

LETTER XL. TO C. CORBETT. Esquire.
HELP me, Corbett, (for I am a poor plain soul) to conquer a little scruple, or
rather to obviate it: that done (but first tha^ must be done) I am at your
service; and will be at your house (for I am tired of this tavern lif^) in two
hours. Now then for it.

Be honest: -- how stands the matter betwixt you and young Hammond? Is he gone,
under the seal of any promise received from you? I do not ask what Emma has
declared. She will answer me herself, when I venture to refer to her. But I
want to know whether you, as her father, have given him, at parting, any mark
of approbation. I must not be considered by these young folks, as an
impertinent old fellow, who presumes upon a sum of money and a paltry piece of
titleship, and so, in the end, become the object of de^ision to a whole family.
I understand tha^, during my long residence abroad, this Hammond was under your
guardianship; that he lived with you and Emma some years in the very house
called Castleberry, which I have purchased of you; that there the young man was
countenanced by you, and his addressess to your daughter not disapproved. N^w,
as I do not hear of his having done any thing to forfeit your affections, I
cannot conceive why you have, as you say, "resolved against him."

To be ingenuous, I am afraid you think I am a BETTER match. Look'y' Charles, I
am no hero, but an honest man, and you shall not break your word, (as many a
very honest man has done) in compliance with certain rigorous circumstances --
Let us talk like old friends, newly met.

On my leaving England, I was poor, you were rich. In the roll of human
affairs, perhaps, now that I am returned rich, you may be, comparatively, poor,
-- that is, you may have some wise scheme to carry, and cannot well bring it
about. I can no otherway account for this sudden change in disfavour of Hammond
-- for you used to be fixed in your opinions -- than that, impelled to an
alteration by distressing incidents, you, -- In short, is there any hard part
in your situation, which you imagine an alliance with me might remove? and, but
for this, would not Hammond be as much the object of your choice as he is that
of your daughter?

Corbett, speak plain. What cash do you want? Let not your necessities violate
your engagements. Condescend to be a borrower where you may so safely rely upon
your lender; and where, by contracting a debt, you may confer an obligation. To
plead for a rival would be unnatural -- but to save a friend from error, and
myself from disgrace, is not amiss.

An old and intimate friend of yours happened to step in, just as I was
directing my servant to carry my luggage to your house, Your name was no sooner
mentioned, than he exclaimed -- "Poor Corbett, how miserable must he be at the
departure of young Hammond, who is betrothed to his daughter Emma! The youth is
just gone a volunteer to America; and if in that enterpr^se he be not shot, he
is to marry on his return. Corbett doa^s upon him; and a fine spiri^ed young
fellow he is." --

This startled me; but I said nothing. I apply for explanation to you, dear
Charles. Let neither your prefer^^ce of me nor your private affairs, aught
avail. I had rather be very unhappy, than at all ridiculous. My friendship is
at your service, just as you have occasion to shape it; only I am sure, on a
little ^flection* you will not offer to give it the inhospitable ^orm of
infringing ^e (...) ^his of another.

Farewell. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XLI. TO Sir ROBERT RAYMOND.
YOU force me in to a very unwelcome explanation. Unwelcome, because
precipitate; and which I designed to have opened at a proper opportunity, in
the hour of confidence: however, as the circumstance is thus hastened on, I
must suit myself to it.

I am not by any means so rich as I was at your departure from this country for
India: yet I am too rich -- and should think myself so had I only one guinea
upon the earth -- to marry Emma to your fortune to mend mine. I did love
Hammond, even with a father's love, and in a legal sense to be his father was
my favorite intention. Yet that idea is now, of all others, the farthest from
my mind, and never CAN be revived. It is a little hard that you have got me
into such an exigence as to make it impossible for me, with any credit, to keep
the great secret of my life.

Henry Hammond is, against all advice, and persuasion, violently attached to
those cruel spoilers, who have gone sword in hand into the bowels of a country,
where my dear son has fallen a victim -- a country which is most barbarously
butchered, and to whose welfare I am bound by ties the most tender and
interesting. I would reject you, I would reject an EMPEROR that should pretend
to the hand of Emma, and yet sacrilegiously pollute his own hand, in the
lifeblood of AMERICA. Oh, thou hapless land! thou art precious to me beyond
the breath which I am now drawing! -- beyond every hope that I can form on this
side Heaven! -- beyond my daughter -- yes even beyond Emma, because thou art
equally the object of my love, and more of my pity! The rapacious HENRY is gone
to plunge another p^ignard in thy bosom! -- the bosom of my country -- the tomb
of Emma's brother, and the vault of every generous affection. Nature herself
lies bleeding on thy shore, and there the inhuman mother has plunged the dagger
(with her own barbarous hand) into the bowels of her child! --

But oh the deep and tremendous restitutions are at bond; I see them, with a
prophetic eye, this moment before me. Horrors shall be re-paid with
accumulation of horror. The wounds in America shall be succeeded by deep
mouthed gashes in the heart of Britain! The chain of solemn consequences
^^^ances. Yet, yet, my friend, a little while, and the poor forlorn one who has
fought and fallen at the gate of her proper habitation, for freedom -- for the
common privileges of life -- for all the sweet and binding principles in
humanity -- for father, son, and brother -- for the cradled infant, the wailing
widow, and t^^ weeping maid -- Yet, yet a little while, and she shall find an
avenger Indignant nations shall arm in her defense. -- Thrones and dominions
shall make her cause their own, and the fountains of blood which have run from
her exhausted veins, shall be answered by a yet fuller measure of the horrible
effusion. Blood for blood, and desolation for desolation^punc; O (...) poor
Edward! -- my ba^ied property! -- my massacred America!

You remember it was amongst my first questions that I desired to know your
opinion of the war? I received the answer which soothed my heart, and it was
not till after that moment, I suffered my full tide of ancient tenderness again
to flow.

To Henry I break no promise -- Emma's attachment, I think, may be subdued by
gentle means. O, if she still unites her heart (even her secret heart) to that
volunteer murderer, these silver hairs shall descend in sudden sorrow to the
grave. But indeed, I do not apprehend it. She is all duty. She loves the source
of her existence. Come then. Discover to her your virtues, and try to save me
from the distress of her preferring a rash boy, who is bent upon destroying
those which are so valuable to

Your CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER XLII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
YOU astonish me. I imagined you were, like myself, a citizen of the earth, and
of no particular party. For my own part, I have traveled away all enthusiasm
of the sort you mention. There is indeed, something like a natural affection,
which one bears to the place of one's nativity; because, there our b^ings were
first linked to the chain of society -- there first shot up our ideas -- there
grew our connections, our affections, our hopes, and our wishes, -- there our
little loves were first formed, and our little wants first accommodated. It is
upon these accounts that I am more happy to contemplate the scenes of England
than those of India -- that I rate more highly my own than I do a foreign
language -- that I look with fondest partiality at the spot (which is marked in
everlasting traces on the memory) devoted to the pastimes of my infancy, and
that I continue some sort of grateful tenderness for the very trees* whose
shades so often soothed me in the summer of my childhood. My predilection for
my native country, friend Corbett, "has this extent -- no more." It has been
my fate to travel -- I had almost said -- wherever Europeans are dispersed. I
have traveled too, where civil society has yet made no progress, but I have
never traveled (and oh may I never) where the "human face divine" did not meet
my eye. However varied by color, by ^t, and by feature, I saw enough to
discover my kind, and to acknowledege i^. I disputed not about the white or
black, the tawny or the yellow; nor about the different mixture, shade, or
distinction of these. -- I saw beings of the same erect form -- I saw MY
SPECIES; and in this very serious moment I declare to you, that I felt
attachment to the general figures of men and women, wherever I beheld them,
even before ^ ^h^w any thing of their particular dispositions. In looking more
clos^* I beh^ld amongst every people, whether savage or civili^ed, many things
to (...) and many to dislike: but not one to (...) them wholly from my
tenderness -- Foremost of those p^in^s* Corbett* which hurt (...), were the
b^ck^^^^gs that subsisted between one state and another. In passing through a
variety of countries, and seeing them all, either engaging, preparing to
engage, or healing the wounds of an engagement past, I began to think the
passion for honorable death (i. e. cutting throats and lopping limbs for
subsistence or for glory, for pride or pique) was universally peculiar to these
ages of iron and steel; till, devoting a cool hour to examine the map of the
world, and perceiving that, from the creation (or very soon after) even unto
this day, to shed blood in this manner has been the constant practice, I gave
up the idea of calling my fellow creatures particularly cruel or sanguinary
upon this account, and deplored a custom which I could not approve. Yet, in
every army are characters to be loved; and the human affections spread
themselves, more or less, over every clime. In considering the causes of wars,
between different proportions of the same species, (of whom numbers without
number have been s^ain) I have found them so wretchedly inadequate to the
horrible effects, that I have often melted into tears, but never have been
inflamed with anger. Tens of thousands, my friend, have been sacrificed to the
frown of a favorite, the whim of a prince, or the smile of a prostitute. The
occasions are contemptible, but the event is murder. What can a good natured
man do, but commiserate the abuse of power, and the madness of ambition? In
point of propriety, there is seldom a pin to choose on either side; and even
when it is Justice herself that draws the sword, and heads the phalanx, the
blood of many an innocent is shed in the contest; and in the warmest moment of
success, while victory is enjoying her jubilee, -- if all the milk of human
kindness were not drained out of the hero's bosom -- there is a^ much cause for
him to sorrow, as to rejoice. Oh Mr. Corbett, were he to retire after the shout
of acclamation to some quiet solitude, and there think on the means by which
the conquest has been gained -- were he to consider, that heaps of his
countrymen as well as of the enemy (all of whom were human beings) lie cut to
pieces upon the plain -- while another heap, yet more ^o be regretted, are
groaning in hospitals -- would not the laurel wither on his brow? would not the
sense of rapture be checked, sympathy stream from his eye, and re^o^ling horror
freeze up the blood about his heart? Such are my opinions. I caught them, my
friend, from the fountain head of a most touching experience. They flowed
immediately from the wounds of my fellow creatures. Appointed to the office of
surgeon, at a time of war, in the earlier part of my life, it was the fortune
of our ship more than once to feel the ^hocks of public hostility. I had so
much business upon my hands that it was almost too much for my heart. At the
conclusion of the voyage, an opportunity offered to quit my cruel station, and
I readily embraced it. Since that time I have kept myself unengaged from scenes
for which nature did not form me: and I am not of any party. I detest war, and
the thoughts of war, but I sincerely wish well to every human creature. That
England is at variance with her colonies is unhappy. In both countries I have
friends who are dear to me. In both I have property. But I dare not lean either
way, lest I should unsettle that system of general loving kindness, which, for
a great while, has been the basis of my happiness. I assiduously avoid
political conversation; and it is a certain prudence in your conduct (which
seldom suffers you to mention these things) that makes me so pleased, my dear
Corbett, with your society. I am now too far advanced in life to begin the
cares of a partizan, but as I have some feelings, I cut out some more congenial
employment for them. I love my jest. I love my friend. I love you; and I love
your daughter. Your ardent principles now convince me, that an alliance with
Hammond would be to unite fire with fire; I will therefore try, for her
father's sake, and for mine, how far Emma may be brought to like a man of
peace. I have only to desire that you will consider me as one who remains
neuter upon the same principle that you take a fide viz. because I think it is
right, and because I feel it to be happy. This condition observed, our ancient
friendship will stand firm, and I shall ever be,

Yours, ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XLIII. TO Sir ROBERT RAYMOND.
AGREED. Had Hammond remained neuter on motives of like benevolence I should
still have loved a name which is now detestable, so I beg you will not utter it
again. For my own part, I cannot remain neuter. My soul is on fire -- I breathe
generous vengeance against barbarous Britain: I own it; and, could I move this
lacerated body out of England without immediate peril of a life on which my
Emma has a claim, I would not continue in a soil so accursed. We now know each
other's opinion, and the subject disorders me so much when it is brought
forward, that I most readily acquiesce in your wishes to drop it for ever. My
feelings must ever remain; but it kills me to give them language. Come
directly. I have prepared Emma for the society of an amiable man, and have
explained our long and intimate connection.

Adieu! C. CORBETT.

LETTER XLIV. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
YOU alarm and check my curiosity in the same moment, Oh, beautiful
unfortunate! Yet is it not a little hard to have any concealments with the
sister of Edward, and the avowed admirer of Henry? Particular circumstances,
however, justify what, in general ones, would be a^ unkindness; and these, I am
convinced, sanctify the silence of Louisa. Sacred and embosomed, beyond the
reach of any participation, be all that you desire to keep so. I wait, in
patient tenderness, the moment of fuller confidence; and till that arrives,
will only assure you that I am connected with every turn of your life, and with
every stroke of your (...)* but will suffer myself to make no more the
premature enquiry. All this (...) you in return for the solicitude you express
for the welfare of Emma; whose chief pleasure on this side the separating sea,
consists in the correspondence which she maintains with Louisa.

After several days of tedious revelry, the hurry into which my heart has been
precipitated somewhat subsides. We have left the smoke of London, and got into
a s^rener system. The house of a very old friend of my father's, lately landed
from India, is now our residence, and it was once the residence of Emma and of
Henry; for it is that very Castleberry where my father (who has since sold it
to the present proprietor) had used to pass with his select friends, some
months of every summer. Since his American misfortunes -- O, pardon me the
mention of them! he detests the country, and has, I find, sold the whole
property to the agent employed to provide a country house and some pleasure
grounds for Sir Robert Raymond, (that is his name) previous to his arrival in
England. The agent fixed upon this spot, and it became the seat of Sir Robert
before my father knew that it was to be inhabited by a friend. Sir Robert is
delighted with the purchase, and my father rejoices to see a domain which he
once loved, so properly disposed of. You also remember this retreat; for was
you not the associate of our flowery infancy? -- Louisa and Edward, Henry and
Emma, formed the dear, family circle. You tell me it soothes you to indulge
these sentiments: but, perhaps, they may be too ^eat a trial for the present
state of your spirits, and I forbear.

Sir Robert Raymond, our host, is a br^^d set, brown faced, good-natured, very
sensible man, with some, not disgreeable particularities; a large fortune,
sometime since bequeathed him, and no sort of impertinence in consequence of
it. Humor, serious sense, and observation, divide his character. He was bred
to physic, and in the earlier part of his life practiced as a sea surgeon. He
is full of anecdote, and extremely assiduous to animate conversation, without
engrossing it. I am particularly the object of his notice, chiefly, no doubt,
because he perceives I stand most in need of comfort; and I return his
civilities as well as the situation of my heart will allow.

Yet, with respect to the country, I was somewhat mistaken, my friend. I happen
to be fixed in a spot where every leaf of every tree appear^ consecrated An
holy inspiration seems to breathe about me! Wherever I look I behold a trait of
Henry -- I tread the paths where, arm in arm, we have walked together, and I
sleep in the very apartment, which was formerly devoted to his repose. These
are small circumstances, Louisa; but they cling close to the heart. -- Yes, my
dearest friend, this place is not without some softnesses, some seducing
sweets, agreeable to the present distress which bears upon my spirits. However
depressed, however exhausted, I am in proper feeling to enjoy such a retreat.
The tender lapse of the streams, the balmy lightness of the air, the serene
quietness of shade, the freshness of that verdure which at once charms and
cherishes the eye, the carol of the gentler kind of birds, the unobtrusive
bloom of the softer and of flowers -- each and all of these conspire to produce
that weeping resignation which Louisa has described; and which is the natural
effect of a virtuous heart in disappointment. -- But still I am unhappy. Since
I am not permitted to talk of the dear cause of my grief, I feel more. Some
part of the sorrow, which used to vent itself in language, is now doubled by
solitude and silence; like brooks which murmur least, when they are most
profound. I write this in a little rocky cavity that stands in the garden,
where, at your beloved ^ear of twilight's soberest gray, I have stepped f^rth,
amidst the breathing fragrance of eve, to meditate and to mourn. But while I
write of my sequestered retreat it is about to be disturbed, for the tread of
an intruder assails my ear, -- it is Sir Robert Raymond. -- Adieu! oh, Louisa,
adieu!

EMMA.
P. S. If I too much affect you, check my pen.



LETTER XLV. TO EMMA CORBETT.
AH no, my charming sister, (I will not quit the claim --) I can bear it now --
I wish to weep -- to weep plenteously, for I am happy -- Oh, the proud word! I
had lately such prospects of horror before my eyes, that to find them thus
unexpectedly removed, makes me able to look at the light of the sun with a
smile; and that, though but of a moment's continuance, is happiness to a wretch
like me. -- Go on, therefore, go on -- proceed to amuse, to affect, to touch
me. All hail the varied emotions which your pen inspires! Ah! Emma, Emma, think
what a bright beam of bliss must break on the bosom of her, whose chief
surviving treasure is rescued from the jaws of DEATH. Think, O think, what a
PARENT feels, when wounded in every finer nerve, and then healed again -- alas,
what have I said? How wild is transport! Into what flights does extacy carry
the heart which is unused to a visitor so radiant! Oh Emma, Edward is dead; and
yet existence is, at this instant, accounted precious to his and to your

LOUISA HAMMOND.

LETTER XLVI. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
"A PARENT feels" -- I understand you not. And yet such sentiments, at such a
time, can surely spring from but ONE sacred source. A parent feel! O great God,
Louisa! how am I to interpret this? -- what am I to think? I pause from my own
feelings in sympathy of yours; -- yet what am I to think? Consider my
suspense. Consider what you owe to a faithful, long-tried friend. Consider I am
your own

EMMA.

LETTER XLVII. TO EMMA CORBETT.
YOU are, Emma, you are my friend. You are to me, and I to you, all which is
comprised in the sweet description which both have a thousand times repeated.
"We, Emma, like two artificial Gods,
"Have with our needles created both one flower;
"Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion:
"Both warbling of one song, both in one key:
"As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
"Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
"Like to a double cherry, seeming parted;
"Two lovely berries molded on one stem,
"So, with two seeming bodies, and one heart."
And shall I longer withold from you the new claims -- claims which yet you
know not of -- to love me? -- "What shall you think?" -- O, think of every
thing that is most tender -- think that I have a title to all your pity, to all
your affection -- think that the sole pledge of HONORABLE love it just
snatched from the grave; and think too, that you behold the widow of the
hapless Edward in

LOUISA --

LETTER XLVIII. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
A WIFE, a widow, and the mother of an orphan, -- at least of a dear fatherless
child! Married to my brother, and this the first (...)? I am all amazement, all
terror, and all tears. O explain the mystery! Since you have begun, suffer, m^
to continue the same sweet language, and to reproach you softly. "Is all the
council that we two have shared,
"The sister-vows, the hours that we have spent.
"When we have chid the hasty footed time
"For parting us -- Oh! and is all forgot?
No, no, you will tell me all, and be indeed the sister of

EMMA.

LETTER XLIX. TO EMMA CORBETT.
I HAVE gone too far to recede, and you shall know all, though I have broken a
trust, and my conscience smites me. I am used to misery* but the novelty of joy
was too much to bear, and has b^trayed me. To a very dear and gentle bosom I
confess, even to the sister of the man who had bound me in the bonds of honor,
and made secrecy a double duty. Yet, I will go on without reserve, so soon as a
firmer state of health will permit. -- The exertion of my spirits is now
succeeded by a worse languor than I have ever before experienced, and I am
reduced once more to the necessity of addressing you from my pillow. Suspend,
therefore, your curiosity; pity my weakness and pray for my recovery -- but do
not, on any account come to me, even should you hear no more from me for some
time. I know how to nurse my disorder, and till all matters are explained, I
would not wish you again to see the sister of Emma, and the widow of Edward. O
let my secret sleep in the innermost sanctuary of your bosom. Farewell.

LOUISA CORBETT.

LETTER L. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
BE so obliging as to tell me, whether it is madness, or dotage, to which I am
now reduced? That it is one or the other, (provided it be not a mixture of
both) is now past question. I cannot suffer Corbett to propose me to his
daughter, nor have I the confidence to propose myself. And, indeed, the more
frequently I converse with her (which I take all decent occasions of doing) the
more I see her, hear her voice, and perceive the sense "distinct and clear"
that is falling from her lips whenever she opens them, the less I am able to
speak, nay the less assurance have I to believe, that so much merit, youth, and
beauty, will have any thing to say, seriously, to a fellow with so sunburned a
visage, and unsentimental a set of features, as the middle-aged Robert Raymond.

She has an affecting trick of sighing bitterly, and of shedding tears, which
burst upon one so unpreparedly, that, though I knew them to be the effusions of
her friendship for the young volunteer, I could not find it in my heart to
check them; but let a few of the same kind steal down my own cheek in very
fellowship of sympathy. I should upon my word, I feel that I should, and I have
not sported with my emotions enough to disguise them.

Yet I have never heard her mention the name of Hammond since her arrival at
Castleberry, from whence you see I am now dating. Is not this strange? I always
thought the tongue was a traitor upon these occasions. She LOOKS Hammond,
methinks, but she SPEAKS him not. I think I can interpret her eyes; but they
are indeed the seat of every fine sentiment, and seem made to express every
thing that is gentle and tender, so that it is no wonder. You, friend
Frederick, are an adept in these matters. Inform me.

Little of this great world can I speak more "than pertains to feats" of salves
and plasters, and therefore "Little shall I grace my cause
"In judging for myself.
I do really think I am engaged in a very unthristy undertaking -- a
looking-glass that happens to hang near the table on which I am now writing,
confirms me in this opinion. There is such a palpable air of confidence in
supposing I should succeed, that had not the torrid zone scorched all the
graces of the blood out of my countenance, I should certainly blush.

I write, you see, in my old way, but I am put sorely out of my old road for
all that. It is, after all, a droll sort of a defect I possess, that of really
thinking I am too old and ugly to be an object of a young woman's attachment.
Yet, there is nothing very preposterous in this idea, either. Speak to Emma,
says passion. -- Dread a repulse, replies common sense. -- Then give up the
point, and think no more about it, cries Prudence. -- "Ah! teach me how I
should forget to think," answers Love, in the language of Romeo* A pretty
struggle this for a grave man of forty-three, Frederick, is it not? Between
ourselves, I fancy that, when I have procrastinated as much as possible, played
the fool with my feelings and made myself sufficiently miserable, I shall see
the propriety of ^scaping an explanation, and so make a match of it in the
Temple of Fancy only, where a man chooses his own mistress and can dread no
disappointment. After all, I cannot but apprehend there is some little delicacy
in this conduct. It proceeds from a quick terror of becoming ridiculous. Tender
attachments, and all the train of the sensations they produce, are extremely
graceful at ^^ve-and-twenty but, when one has reached the wrong side of forty,
I do truly think the belle passion somewhat outre. Yet, hitherto, having mixed
but little with amiable young women, and never with immodest ones, the ardours
of eighteen can scarce exceed my own, and I am, in this first affection, this
first love, (for it is absolutely such) as bashful and as awkward as a boy just
ushered into the society of the sex. "'It Is passing strange," and perhaps
"passing pi^iful;" but, however you may enjoy the confession, I fully feel all
the tremours of tenderness.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LI. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
"PRAY for your recovery!" Oh, how fervently do I pour the petitionary prayer
to the Great Restorer! Dear as is the name of Hammond, much as I love to write
it, and sweet as are the sensations which agitate my heart so often as I see it
marked upon the paper, there is, methinks, something more dear, more lovely,
and more sweet in that of Louisa Corbett. At least her title to use it seems to
bring the sister so close upon my bosom* and so soft upon my soul, that I feel
uncommon joy at the ^idings. A child too -- a little Edward -- is it not so?
but I will restrain the torrent -- I will forbear. I will "pray for your
recovery;" and then -- ah then, will you not have perfect confidence in your
sister.

EMMA.

LETTER LII. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
OF bodily disorders I know the symptoms, but cannot decide with equal skill or
precision about those of the mind. Pray, thou child of refinement, tell me,
what are we to think of a young lady when she seeks occasion to converse with
you, when she chooses, rather to chat, and walk with a man of forty-three than
with several younger and handsomer visitors who are now at my house; and, above
all, when she makes advances to pupillage, and desires to become a scholar?
Yes, yes, laugh away, but assure yourself that I have hopes: For Emma has
proposed, by way of country amusement, during her stay at my place, to --

-- Faith, Frederick, you are such a grinner, that I am almost afraid to speak
--

-- During her stay, as I said, at Castleberry, to study the art of -- Surgery!

Now, as this branch of knowledge can be of no real service to her, I will let
you know how I choose to interpret it -- choose, I say, so don't you put me out
of favor with the conceit, nor the conceit out of favor with me.

I choose therefore to consider it as a decent way of telling me my friendship
is not disagreeable, and this idea soothes me; so once again I entreat you will
not be such a raven as to croak the comfort from my bosom. Alas, dear friend,
half the hope of this little life are delusive, but while they delude us into
happiness, let us not affect to despise them. Imagination is only a gayer name
for matter of fact, in many cases -- think so, and ' it is so. If felicity be
seated in the mind, it must often depend upon the fair shadows of opinion, and,
one may say, without a paradox, that these are frequently substantial.

Adieu. ROBERT RAYMOND.

The End of the FIRST VOLUME.
September 20, 1782. BELL's Book Store, in Third Street.
THE SECOND VOLUME of this New and Entertaining Work, will be published about
Fourteen Days from this Da^e.
AND THE THIRD VOLUME, which will complete the whole Work, will also be
finished about one Month from this Date -- Price Half a Dollar, each Volume.

Now selling at BELL's Book Store, in Third-Street.

1. LORD LYTTELTON's Familiar Letters to his Friends, with his POEMS on several
Occas^ions. -- Price One Dollar. 2. THE BUDGET OF LOVE, being Letters which
passed between the present Prince of Wales, and Mrs Robinson, of Bristol, under
the borrowed names of Florizel and Perdita; with interesting Anecdotes of the
fair Heroine. One Dollar. 3. LESSONS in ELOCUTION* being Modern Miscellaneous
Pieces, from the best Authors; for the perusal of Persons of Taste and the
improvement of Youth -- Price Three Dollars. 4. Perry's Royal Standard English
Dictionary, exhibiting the most accurate Spelling, and the (...) Pronounciation
of Words, according to the present practice of Men of Letters, eminent Orators,
and polite Speakers in London; upon a Plan perfectly pl^in and entirely new --
Six Dollars. 5. Entick's English Dictionary, for the Pocket. -- Six Dollars. 6.
French and English Dictionary, with the English and French Dictionary, for the
Pocket, by Nugent. -- Ten Dollars. 7. ARISTOTLE's, MASTERPIECE, with
Directions for Midwives, complete in three Parts -- Price Two Dollars. 8.
SHERIDAN's Genuine SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL. -- One Dollar. 9. PUPIL OF PLEASURE, by
Melmoth -- Three Dollars. 10. REVOLUTION OF AMERICA, by the Honest and
Philosophical ABBE RAYNAL. -- Price One Dollar
EMMA CORBETT: EXHIBITING HENRY and EMMA, THE FAITHFUL MODERN LOVERS; AS
DELINEATED BY THEMSELVES, IN THEIR ORIGINAL LETTERS.

PUBLISHED BY COURTNEY MELMOTH. Author of the PUPIL OF PLEASURE, etc. etc.

Ah pass not yet. If thou did ever know
The tenderest touches of impassioned woe!
Pass not: If truth, and fortitude, and love,
Can stay thy footsteps, or thy spirit move!
MONUMENT OF EMMA. THE SECOND VOLUME.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXXII.

October First, 1782. BELL's Book-Store, in Third Street. Just Published, the
following NEW WORK, (Price One Dollar.) LORD LYTTELTON'S FAMILIAR LETTERS TO
HIS FRIENDS, With his POEMS on several Occasions. Introduction to LYTTELTON's
LETTERS.
THERE is no species of publication which seems to be more agreeably received
than that which illustrates the characters of men distinguished for their
abilities, venerable for their erudition, and admired for their virtues. The
political history of great men is useful and necessary to many; but the
domestic history of all men is useful and necessary to all.

Among the materials from whence the biographer forms the volume of domestic
characters, private letters are considered as the most valuable, because they
are the most unequivocal authorities of real sentiment and opinion.
Conversation is too fugitive to be remembered; public declarations may be
oftentimes suspected; but the epistolary communications of friendship may be
depended upon as faithful to the mind from whence they arise. The following
letters, therefore, as proceeding from a Nobleman whose great talents promised
no small utility to his country, and whose character has been the subject of
such general speculation, will, without doubt, meet with a favorable reception.

Memoradum, Great Variety of curious and useful Books, in History, Divinity,
Voyages, Travels, Poetry, Plays, Novels, and Entertainment, with Medical and
Surgical Works, Latin and Greek Classica, and evey Curiosity, whither Old or
New, that is come-at-able, in the American World of Books; may be had at said
BELL's Book-Store, near St. Paul's Church, in Third-Street, Philadelphia.

EMMA CORBETT.
LETTER LIII. TO MRS. ARNOLD.
BY a line just received from Louisa I am interdicted at present from writing
to her, and the sentiments which now oppress me are indeed, on all accounts,
improper to offer a mind pierced by so similar a sorrow. Yet, to restrain the
whole dreadful weight in my own bosom would surely kill me. Do you then, O my
dear cousin, my worthy Caroline, do you assist me. -- Tell me, I conjure you,
where the feeling heart shall find a sanctuary? Tell me, what foliage is thick
and impenetrable enough to repel that terror which assails an unhappy woman,
when the object of every hope and every fear is determined upon dangers the
most complicated and decisive? Henry, your favorite Henry, is gone, you know,
to defend his country, to signalize his bravery, and to serve his King. I admit
the propriety of the enterprise, according to the laws of honor, but I weep at
the extremity of its horror when tried by the laws of feeling and humanity.

The glowing arguments of that dear departed, I did not dare to oppose. I
faintly breathed the female resistance, I feared, lest my affection might seem
to be selfish, by contesting the point of separation. I violated the softness
of my sex, and the tenderness of my nature, to restrain the flowing tide that
rose in billows to my heart, which labored with the agony of suppression. His
being this moment upon the sea, eager to gain the seats of hostility, is a
proof of it! Perhaps, I might have seduced him from this adventure, since
humanity and love (oh, how opposite from ravage and war!) are the principles
which shine the brightest in the spotless history of Henry's youth. But I
dreaded the after operations of inexorable honor, which might detest the
trembling hand that saved it from the sword.

Yet now, my Caroline, now that he is far removed from the voice of my
complainings, and can no longer be disarmed by their sweet impression, suffer,
oh suffer me to mourn -- suffer me to execrate that wanton and insatiable
power, which scatters desolation over the land! Ah this dire demon of battle!
-- this daeman, who, with giant footsteps, tramples upon the best and most
beautiful affections of the soul -- who delights to hear the wail of the
wounded, and the groans of the expiring -- whose vessels sail upon a sea of
tears, and are wafted by sighs which are extorted from the tender bosom. I see,
I see the sanguinary power. He shoots athwart the realms of affrighted fancy,
in a robe of crimson ten times dyed in the blood of his votaries. The soft
verdure of the spring withers as he advances. The streams of plenty, which
fertilized a happy wo^ld, stand checked in their progress, or roll onward a bed
of troubled waters. Behold where the ruthless monarch approaches. The bounties
and the beauties of nature fall before him. -- Territories are torn up by the
roots, and empires mingle in the common ravage. Behold, chained to his
triumphal ^ar, fear, despair, and all the family of pain; while the lover, the
friend, the father, the widow, the orphan, and all the virtues bleed in the
procession. Dreadful, dreadful retinue! and all for what? -- for what, my
Caroline? Wherefore is the peace of the world thus to be destroyed? Wherefore
is man to raise his hand against the life of man, and deliberate murder to be
entitled to applause?

Hear, O humanity, the reply, and be still if thou can! The rulers of
different realms, in the wanton exertion of power, infringe upon what is
falsely called the property of each other. Men, who are utter strangers to the
very persons of one another, and are separated, perhaps, by partitions of a
thousand leagues, quarrel for a few vile acres of the dirt which shall
presently cover the toiling race; and the lives of a people are devoted to the
sword. Earth itself, wide as is extended her beautiful domain, is not enough
extensive for these pigmy mortals to divide amongst themselves; nor are the
natural miseries of a very short life, with all its moral, all its civil, all
its social evils, sufficient, without the aids of untimely and voluntary
slaughter. The hurry of the scene, the din of the battle* and that political
music which drowns the cry of distress, may pass over these sentiments, and
humanity will not have time to hear, nor to be heard. But in the quieter
moment, when the gentle power revisits the bosom, and resumes the lovely throne
from whence she has been driven, oh how impious, and ^ow contempt^^le, will
appear those bickerings, which terminate in the effusion of ^man bloo^. And
could these heroes enter cooly into the consequence of this barba^^us practice:
this practice of defacing and hacking away the expr^^s image of their God, to
ascertain privileges in a world which was made for the reception and
accommodation, the peace and the pleasure of all mankind -- could they be
spectators of the calamity which equally attends the shout of victory and the
shriek of defeat -- could they behold the inconsolable wife sink upon her
widowed bed, and the child, stretching forth its little hands in vain to greet
a returning father -- a father, left naked, mangled, and unburied, upon a
foreign and an inhospitable shore -- would not the touch of human pity assert
its softening pressure, and all agree to cultivate the blessings of universal
brotherhood?

How many wretches, forlorn and fallen, are at this instant pining away on the
sorrow-steeped couch, while the heedless m^ltitude echo the praises of one who
has earned a laurel at the expense of adding acres to his king, and anguish to
his country-women? -- I am no politician, Mrs. Arnold; I am a human being. I am
a Christian. I am one who profess to adore a religion of peace -- one too, who
can never be persuaded that the human form divine -- the express image of the
Deity -- is created thus fair, and thus amiable, to be cruelly sported away in
the riots of ambition, pride, and folly --

Ah, my dear Henry! alive as thou art to all that is most endearing, what will
be thy sensations after the bloody affray! Thou* whose bosom is gentler than
the mildest and kindliest breezes of the spring! -- what will thou feel, should
some hapless woman, attended by all her little orphans, demand, of thy
victorious hand, the slaughtered husband, and the slaughtered fire? Or should
but thy fancy suggest such a groupe, rushing through the ranks, and in piercing
tones of agony exclaiming -- " restore, restore them to me," -- how would
thou support it? Thou, Hammond, whom the female sigh, the female tear, the
female shriek, would at any time penetrate to the soul! --

On the other hand, (and the chance alas, is equal) should it be thy fate to
fall -- oh, thou dearest, best-beloved, and most worthy to be so -- should the
malignant star, that influences, full often, the heroes fortunes -- should it
ordain that --

O Caroline, Caroline, I congeal with horror. I can derive no lasting serenity
from the pious example of the resigned Louisa. I rage. I rave. I cannot bear
it. Indeed I cannot! Hope, duty, religion, are insufficient. I shall be
detected in the deepest agony of my sorrow. The tears are deluging my paper. My
senses seem to turn -- I am bowed to the earth -- I am -- oh, how shall I
conceal what I am? how disguise the horrors which press down the spirit of the
most afflicted

EMMA?

LETTER LIVE. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
MY fair pupil makes a surprising progress in her new studies; and were not her
heart too soft to support the pain occasioned by her hand, she would, in a
little time, perform her amputation, and dress her wound with the best of us.

She seeks this ba^ren novelty of knowledge by way of solace: yet it affords
her little; for, through all her efforts to amuse and to disguise, I can see
her distress. Ah, Frederick, that it was permitted me to relieve that distress!
Yet, if Henry's image still exists in her bosom -- and, oh! how likely that it
should! -- it would be the very phrenzy of hope to expect success on my part.
Would I had continued in India! Fortune has been extremely perverse. The gaiety
of my character is passing away. -- Every pleasant habit is dropping from me,
and the peace of my soul is about to take flight. Can a virtuous passion
produce these revolutions? Yes, Frederick, nothing but a virtuous passion can
produce them. It is a chaste affection, and will, depend upon it, be one way or
another rewarded. But it is very poignant; and yet, we best love the wounds of
elegant tenderness when they cut most deeply into the heart. My affection for
Emma increases with the increasing difficulty of declaring it; and though a
much longer silence seems intolerable, to break that silence appears a
circumstance yet less to be supported by

Your ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LV. TO EMMA CORBETT.
WELL, my dear and dutiful daughter, ever kind, and ever considerate to me: I
have not teased you by premature importunity -- I left you, quietly, to the
effects, first of society, and then of solitude. I want words to tell you how I
am touched by those exertions you have made to acquire a conquest of reason
over passion; and, though I have sometimes detected the tear upon your cheek,
and felt the breath of your sigh as it broke, by stealth, from your bosom; yet
-- In short, my sweet girl, it seems now to be a proper crisis to communicate
the hopes, anxieties, and expectations of my heart. O! I have some important
secrets to disclose; yet I tremble to begin. Wherefore should I tremble? You
are delicate and obliging. Ere I quit this sublunary scene, I have two great
ends to wish accomplished; and, after that, welcome the moment which shall
reunite me to the cherub who was once your mother, and who gave to me my NOW
only child -- who gave the pledge of her fidelity to these paternal arms, in
this very room: -- for here was Emma born, and here is the proper place to date
an address which entreats her to make her birth a blessing to me. -- When and
where, then, shall an aged father whisper his wishes to a daughter? -- O, let
the reciprocal duties be exchanged, my dear Emma, without much delay. I love
you with my whole soul, and you will return the full luxuriance of my
affection. The times are greatly changed, and require great innovations of
conduct. New modes of duty spring from new circumstances. Let us generously
accommodate ourselves to incidents, which render improper to day, what might
yesterday be right. I solicit an interview. Take your own time; yet think, that
time is very precious, and treat me like a friend -- treat me like a father.
Enough. I write to my child. I write to Emma, and her heart will tremble to the
tender claims of

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER LVI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
O My father, why this unnecessary preparation, this awful ceremony? Why the
formal interview so solemnly announced? -- announced too by a letter written
under the same roof! Ah, what, Sir, does it portend? Two points, two great
points, have you to adjust?

I come -- I fly to your apartment -- to that beloved apartment where my
virtuous mother -- I cannot go on, I confess that some terrible suggestions
have seized my heart. But I will not indulge them. I will attend my dearest
father ere this billet can well reach his expecting hand, from

EMMA.

LETTER LVII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
I AM suddenly summoned into my father's apartment. He is not there, but I
attend his coming. In ascending the stairs, I trembled at every step. In this
very room I was born. How could my father have the fortitude to sell this
mansion? How could he -- Hah! I hear a noise. -- He is coming. For some days I
have penetrated a certain design, and I predict the purpose of this meeting.
Perhaps -- Oh Heaven! he is just at the door. He stops at the head of the
stairs -- I hear him sigh heavily. This is not, I feel, a moment in which I can
bear any addition of distress. Here is a private door that leads to my
apartment. My father is pacing about on the other side. I hear the handle of
the door shake in his hand. Some violent agitation is upon him. At this time
the interview would kill me. -- He is opening the door. I hasten my retreat.

Adieu. EMMA.

LETTER LVIII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I SEND this, my dearest father, to your apartment, to beg you will defer the
honor you intend me till a quieter opportunity I find myself so extremely and
suddenly indisposed, that I should i^ reward your kind attention, by dividing
mine: and indeed, were I not afraid of seeming to press too hardly on your
indulgence, I should intercede with you to make my excuses for absenting any
sel^ this whole day from the company below; that I may try to recover myself by
keeping quite still in my own chamber.

EMMA.

LETTER LIX. TO EMMA CORBETT.
MY dear child! thank you for this relief. It is mutual, though I deplore the
occasion. Take a moment of better spirits, and better health, for our
affectionate conversation. Compose yourself. Nurse your tender heart into
tranquillity. I should not be equal myself to the task this morning. Pass the
day in all the privacy you think fit; and for your excuses to the worthy Sir
Robert, depend upon your friend and father.

C. CORBETT.

LETTER LX. TO EMMA CORBETT.
My dear Cousin,
IT is with great willingness I set down to make a reply to the letter you
addressed to me; but it is not without much concern that I find it necessary to
use the pen in answer to those which you addressed to Louisa, whose present
state of health is such as to prevent her writing. Anxious, however, even as
she presses the pillow of sickness, to alleviate the suspense of her beloved
Emma (in regard to the promised articles of confidence) she instructs me to
acquaint you, in the concisest way that I am able, of the means by which she
became the wife of your unfortunate brother, as well as with the reasons which
prevailed with her to keep that union a secret from his family, from her own,
and from the world. She conceives too, that the deeper colors of distress in
her fate, may, by comparison, alleviate the softer tints of wretchedness in
yours; for at the worst, my dear cousin, as matters now stand, you have a
lover living who is very properly the object of many a charming hope; while the
poor Louisa is daily tortured with reflecting on the death of one yet dearer
than a lover -- even a husband and a father, who is the object of many a misery
too mighty for the solace of sighs and tears.

With respect to the letter I have had the pleasure to receive from you it
bespeaks a heart overflowing with streams of genuine philanthropy, and
beautifully becomes the pen of Emma Corbett. But believe me, believe a woman
who has been connected from her infancy with men devoted to the trade of arms
-- believe the daughter of a veteran chief, and the widow of one who felt the
military passion in all its force -- believe her when she tells you, that such
gentle arguments are never of the least consequence in the eyes, or on the
minds of a soldier. They serve only to make female weakness the more pitied by
the men, who think the dignity of a more resolved courage concerned to show
itself in contrast. Sometimes, it is true, the tears of a wife will excite the
manly drop in the eye of a husband; but it tarries not. The voice of public
fame is, on these occasions, louder than that of private affection. The world
fixes an earnest look on the actions of an officer. One hero inflames another:
the sparks of glory pass like an electric power: the necessity of a brave
example becomes apparent: the profession soon grows into a darling passion: the
blood warms: the genius of war takes possession of every faculty: home
connexions are forgotten: the scene of action terminates the prospect: the
warrior can see no farther. Valor and victory seem marching before him. There
is not leisure for a private emotion, and tenderness would assist the efforts
of his foe He gives himself up, therefore, nobly and absolutely, to the battle;
wounds can make no impression upon him in the progress of his ardent career;
and death itself is, in that moment, less terrible than defeat.

These, my lovely cousin, are not the sentiments of a theorist, but caught
immediately from the lips of the very heroes who practiced every action they
relate. In the interval of peace, few men of any order have a more elegant
humanity than the English officers; and all the endearing qualifications, which
make up the great domestic characters, are to be found amongst them; but in the
day of contest, my cousin, a different duty calls upon them, and military fame
is as easily wounded, and its wounds as vital to felicity, as those of a woman.

Let not your glowing pencil paint the protectors of our country as beings
destitute of every tender feeling, but allow for their situation, which
sometimes renders incompatible the immediate union of love and glory: or the
duties of peace with the duties of war.

While I close this sentence, Louisa expresses a wish to write to you herself.
Tomorrow she imagines that she shall be equal to the task, and she assures me
that nothing which relates to the history of her husband and your brother, can
come so properly from any pen as her own. In the hope of her gaining strength
for the friendly effort, I will fold up my letter, and bid you farewell.

CAROLINE ARNOLD.
P. S. I find you are still indisposed, and may, perhaps, want amusement in
your solitude. To this end I send you the FRAGMENT of a little military history
found amongst my father's papers. It will show you that humanity and bravery
are nearly allied, and that the tender husband and good soldier often form the
same character, though they cannot always exert themselves in the same moment;
or, perhaps, were we to scrutinize nicely, we should, in reality, find, that
when the soldier is hazarding his life and liberty for that of his wife, his
children, his countrymen, and his King, he is then the tenderest lover, the
worthiest husband, the best parent, the most loyal subject, and the most
valuable citizen. I believe it was written by my father in his youth, and I
consider it as a family relic.

Adieu!



A MILITARY FRAGMENT. THE CARBINES.
*****OH for the history of that wound! said I, seeing a scar upon the cheek of
the person appointed to show me the hospital! -- Oh for the history of that
wound!

Not worth the telling, answered the man, pointing to the stump of his left
thigh as to a more important subject of curiosity He took me into a different
quarter of the building, which presented the lodgings of those who were
pensioners. In each was a small bed, a chair, and a table. The attendant's name
was Julius Carbine. At a door leading into one of the apartments be stopped:
and then looked through an aperture, which commanded the room.

The luckiest of all moments, said Julius -- for brother Nestor will soon be at
it, and it is a day of discipline. We will enter. -- Julius, said the owner of
the apartment, as we entered, sit down with your company. The side of the bed
was covered with a clean white cloth, by a little girl who opened the door, and
I had also a little girl with me, and we all sat down. It was actually the
brother, (...) not the brother soldier only, to whom Julius introduced us. In
their appearance there was a fraternal similarity, not so consisting in the
features and limbs which remained, as in the misfortunes which had happened to
those invisible parts which lay scattered in different quarters of the globe.

Julius was the younger of the Carbines, and as he placed himself side ways
upon the bed, and desired Carbine the elder (whose name was Nestor) to suspend
the attack -- he told his story.

We slept in the same cradle, and were nursed up for the service. Our little
arms --

He flourished a stump which projected about four inches from the right
shoulder -- Our little arms --

But I have begun the matter wrong and prematurely, for before I relate the
account which Carbine gave of himself, I should offer some description of his
person, as well as that of his brother Nestor. It is the stump of Julius which
reminds me of this.

Carbine the elder was the remnant of a noble figure, who in the uprightness of
his youth must have risen six feet from the earth perpendicularly. He had the
marks of about seventy years wearing in his face -- allowing for the natural
vigor of his form, the invasions of incident, time, and profession. The
present stoop in his shoulders was favorable to the height, or rather to the
want of height in his apartment. It is not without just cause that I called
Nestor a remnant. Nature originally formed in him her fairest proportions. At
the time I saw him he was a capital figure reduced. For instance, if you looked
him in the face, or, more properly to speak, in the residue of his face, you
would perceive, in his left cheek, a deep scarification, which boasted no sort
of rivalship with the glorious embrowning of the other that had received no
injury. Though Nestor himself said, "the whole cheek, in comparison with the
half cheek, looked like an errant poltroon." "It is a cheek," cried he, "which
seems to have done no duty; now here," continued he, turning the other side to
view with much triumph, "here are the signs of service."

Both the Carbines, indeed, had served to some purpose. In point of honorary
cred^ntials there was little cause of jealousy. Nothing could be more equally
divided than the mutual marks of brotherhood in bravery. Sorely battered were
the outworks of both. It is worth while to observe how the matter was settled
to their satisfaction and credit. The thigh of Julius became the victim of a
parapet, but then Nestor was even with him when he had the honor to drop his
left arm in the counterscarp. But as if fortune did not imagine an arm, and
that a left arm, a sufficient equivalent to a whole thigh, amputated at one
decisive whizz by a cannon ball, she deprived Nestor of his right foot, which
was left at the bottom of an entrenchment in Flanders. The younger Carbine had
the track of a musket visible at the extremity of his neck, and the bullets,
with which that musket was charged, slanted along the left jaw, carrying off
some of the finest teeth in the world, and which, perhaps, are even yet to be
seen in one of the fosses To bring the military scale even, on the part of
Julius, he has the good fortune to conceal under his hat (which, upon account
of that concealment he seldom wears) a respectable contusion, which, beginning
at the left ear, swept away, not only the g^eatest part of that, but all that
grew in its path, from one end to the other; which distinguishing stroke is in
honor of the bastion. But Julius had his unostentatious wounds too: his shirt
covering no less than six, insomuch that his bosom was crossed this way and
that, direct and transverse, like a draught board. I detected the flush of
something like victory in the countenance of Julius, as he threw open his
chitterlin, and opened his shirt-collar under pretense of too much heat: but
Carbine the elder checked his brother's ambition by by baring his right arm to
his shoulder, (or rather begging me to bare it) and there discovering a masked
battery of blows, which were a fair match for those in the breast of Julius.

Thus were the testimonies of their prow^ss participated; and if (said they)
either of us could have boasted a less equal division, it would have been a
blow too many for our friendship, and, perhaps, have bred ill blood betwixt us.

Here the fragment is torn.

-- the veteran Carbines, after having platooned and pioneered it for a number
of years, in the cause of their country, found at length they could keep the
field no longer.

They entered the Temple of Peace: but not quite on the footing of ordinary
members. The senior Carbine privately enjoyed some small privileges, and the
junior was in possession of the casualties derivable from showing the hospital
to such as had the curiosity to survey it: and he hopped about with his ruins
in a manner that engaged one's pity and admiration.

A second rent in the fragment.

--

Now Nestor was a man of enalienable affections. They were not to be subdued.
The military passion was by no means dead in his bosom. The heart of the
soldier was still visible in his little bedchamber. There were to be seen,
suspended from the walls, the battered co^slet that had covered his breast, and
the firelock, whose iron mouth was almost worn out by the loadings. They were
brightly burnished, and the nicest care taken to clean them weekly.

But this was nothing. The practical part of a soldier's discipline did Nestor
carry on in a room of forty inches diameter.

No sooner were we all seated by the side of the bed, than a singular ceremony
began. He had six sons, all little, all living for their country, and in secret
training for the battle under their father. It was his custom, thrice in the
week, to turn the key upon all the pensioners but his brother, and instruct his
family in the art of war. Poor as he was, he had actually been at the cost of
equipping them; had fitted up for them something that resembled a uniform, and
in miniature accoutrements, presented them with the sword, the musket, and the
bayonet.

The soldier's science was taught them by the veteran. One branch or another of
the art military was the subject of every day. The sons of Nestor Carbine knew
not the enervating luxuries of artificial heat: they thawed the severity of the
seasons with nobler fires. Their education was wholly martial. At night they
listened to the lecture, and their swords were drawn forth to practice what
they had heard in the morn. They engaged their strengthening arms in the mock
fight, that they might be prepared for the real one. It was now the evening of
the ravelin, then of the flanking; now of the fortification, then of the fosse;
now of the half moon, then of the epaulment; now of the saps, and then of the
ambuscade; now of the horn-works, and then of the bastion; now of the gabion,
and then again of the mines, the parapet, the battery, or the tenaille.

They had just began an engagement as we entered the room -- It will be best
related before the younger Carbine tells his story. Let him therefore repose a
little longer upon the bed.

The stripling troops were drawn up three deep in the center of the room, and
the object of attack was a large deal trunk set upright betwixt the contending
parties. One side were to oppose and one to defend. The father was commander,
and in good time came the brother, who, instead of reposing on the bed as
abovementioned, sprung up with surprising agility, and hopped away to head the
adverse party, making a kind of warlike music with a little drum tattoo'd by
the timber instrument that served him for an arm. Nestor, meantime, assumed a
whistle which served for a clarionet.

The engagement was carried on in the exactest military order; they advanced,
they retreated, they rallied, and they came on again. -- Every little heart
panted with ambition, every eye sparkled with expectation of victory. The mimic
ardour soon became real, and the two generals were themselves wrought up into a
serious sensation. Julius shouted, and Nestor encouraged. But, presently, the
aspect of the battle altered, for one of the besiegers (a boy of uncommon
bravery) took one of the besieged prisoner. The conqueror flourished his little
soil, but the captive shed tears of slavery and sorrow. The general on the
worsted side affected to be dismayed. His opponent spirited up his army,
pursued his victory, took a a second of the enemy prisoner, and the town (that
is the box) was taken.

A shout of joy was heard on one side, while the poor remains o^ the conquered
troops fled to a corner that was the interior encampment behind the bed. Julius
beat the dead march with his wooden drum-stick: but Nestor and his troops,
having burst the city gates, (that is the box lid) proceeded to plunder. It
contained all the magazines of the enemy, consisting of new foils, martial
caps, belts, wooden bayonets, confections, and fruits. These were the prizes of
conquest. They were all fairly won, and divided amongst the victors according
to seniority. The little girl, who had sat on the bed, now sprung up, took a
small ozier-basket, from a hook, and strewed flowers in the path of the
victorious, singing a song of triumph as they marched round the room. The
ceremonies, however, being over, both parties came forward, and shook hands
very heartily, in token of good will, and then the affair ended with "God save
great George our King" and a general huzza.

--

Our little arms, continued Julius, (whom I will interupt no more) were nursed
into early vigor for the field: for our father, whose bones -- May every Saint
bless them said Nestor -- have been reposing more than half a century, in
different parts of Flanders and Germany, struck first into that mode of
training which my brother ha^ adopted. Other people's children have playthings
given the^ because, forsooth, they whimper for them; but we were never allowed
so much as a hoop or a top till we gained it by a victory. We knew the
difficulty of obtaining the prize, and valued it the more; and thus were fitted
for deeds of hardihood, ere other infants had an idea of glory.

Poor creatures! said Nestor's second son scornfully.

We could vault upon the s^eeds of the menage before they could keep the saddle
of their wooden ponies. Ripe for practice, we were sent forth at an early age
to the field, and both of us entered as volunteers in the service of our
country. -- We did so said Nestor.

Nature -- for which stump as I am, I still thank her -- gave us no bad forms;
and, though we took the field with faces as effeminate as that of our mother,
[You was reckoned the very mode^ (...) her, you know, Nestor] -- yet the first
campaign left us no room to blush upon that score, Our virgin engagement
happened in the hottest glow of the summer, and we were soon rid of a delicacy
which is inglorious on the front of a soldier. Oh with what pleasure did we
contemplate the alterations at our return! -- I remember it said Nestor,
smiling.

The traits of the mother were quite worn out by the weather. -- In every
lineament there was seasoning. The sun had written hero in our countenances,
and we rejoiced in the dignity of the tan.

But mark the joke, Sir; a fantastical pair of wenches pretended to love us, in
our fair-weather suit of features, before we made the first sally, that is,
before we were worth loving; but took it into their heads to quarrel with our
appearance the very moment we returned. They wanted still to see the red and
white of the woman, and so took to themselves new paramours -- The jades gave
us up, Sir, for a couple of fellows who would shudder at the patter of a
hail-storm.

So much the better, said Nestor. We have had the satisfaction to see one of
the rascals hanged for sheep-stealing, and the other you know is to be put into
the pillory this day se'ennight.

And I Will be prepared for him, I warrant ye, exclaimed one of the boys. -- No,
child, said Nestor: he is no mark for the son of a soldier.

After this, Sir, we had no lazy periods of peace. Some part or another of
Europe was continually beating the drum or sounding the trumpet in the ear of
England. It was our duty to go forth in her defense.

Father, said the eldest of the boys, when is it likely we shall have a war?

My brother, Sir, -- (continued Carbine, who was not put out by any family
remarks) -- my brother, Sir, had the honor of the first misfortune. -- You do
not call it by a right name, said Nestor.

He triumphed in the first testimony of the warrior. -- I am an elder brother,
said Nestor, and the first blow was my birthright.

But I was soon even with him; for, toward the close of the campaign, a random
shot -- when I was thinking (...) nothing less, -- gave the four fingers of my
left hand to the ^^emy. In that condition we entered into winter quarters.

But no sooner was my brother cured of the wound in his face. -- You may see
the mark of it here, Sir, said Nestor. -- in his face, than he received one
much deeper in his heart!

In his heart, cried the youngest of the six sons, clapping his hand on his
father's side? -- why, you joke: here it is alive and merry now. I can feel it
beat.

God keep it so, answered the eldest. It will be a sore day for ^s when that
stops, I promise thee.

Give me thy hand, Ferdinand, said Nestor; and brother, do you go (...) with
your story, for it entertains the gentleman and his little daughter, and I like
to hear it. You were always good at a story from a child. Go on.

-- Would you believe it, Sir, that a fellow so sliced should have the
impudence to attack one of the prettiest girls in England?

In the world, you might have said, cried Nestor, shaking his knee.

-- Like a brave boy of the blade, he pushed his point right on, turned his
worst side to the wench, and insisted upon her taking the scars as a
recommendation.

Why they were so, said Nestor, holding his knee still while he spoke.

-- In this manner he continued to batter the citadel which trembled in the
bosom of the pool girl, and in less than a month (no time at all for such a
siege) he entered the fair castle of her affections in triumph.

By the blood that I have shed* Sir, said Nestor, and by the drops which yet
flow in my body, Frances was the best and bravest wench that ever lay by the
side of a soldier.

Nestor, said Julius, hold your tongue. -- His limbs, Sir, were almost
constantly on the move. War carried them away. What of that? His joke was
ready. Never mind, Frances, (would he say to his wife) I am the winner yet,
fear nothing. Were I reduced to my trunk, I should flourish still, my girl. A
soldier, whose children have blood in their veins, is invulnerable. He is
immortal in his sons.

Let us engage, father! said one of the boys eagerly, as he brandished his foil.

Thus would my brother heal up the wounds of the war: but be that as it may,
wounds are but sorry things in a family. Often ^s my brother disputed with me
on this subject. "Julius, (would he say) thou art but half a loyal subject
still -- thou give to thy country the services only of an individual, while I
furnish it with the force of a whole family. As an individual, thou must soon
die; but had thou taken care to multiply thyself as I have done, thou
might well expect to live and conquer these thousand years. Brot^^r,
brother, it is a false notion; a soldier ought of all men in (...) Majesty's
dominions the soonest to marry: he ought indeed." Notwithstanding this, Sir, I
could never be prevailed upon. No, though an honest girl offered to sling my
knapsack across her shoulder after the loss of my thigh. To confess the plain
truth, to you, I did not like certain ceremonies betwixt my brother and sister,
at their partings. Frances indeed wept but little, but, in my opinion, she
looked a much deeper sorrow than is to be expressed by a pair of wet eyes.

-- Nestor ^emm'd violently.

And as to my brother, though he cocked his hat fiercely -- pretended to have
caught cold -- rubbed up his accoutrements, and blustered mightily, he never
was steadily himself -- and how the devil should he be -- for a week after.
These things, Si^ (...) against the grain. The brush of a b^llet is nothing at
all: ^ay take off your head, or it may only take off your hat: either way, no
great matter -- but the cries of a woman, the piercing agonies of a wife, to
come across one's thoughts in the last moments -- No, Sir, -- no, damn it --
there is no bearing that -- I will live and die bachelor!

But this is not the worst, Sir. Death sometimes comes at the bottom of the
account to unsoldier a man. He knocked at brother Nestor's door, and carried
Frances away while she was nursing him of a fever into which he was thrown by
the pain of a wound. -- Zounds! that was a terrible day, Nestor, was it not?

Terrible! said Nestor, turning his head from the company.

She died suddenly. Courage, said I, brother. He waved his hand, and spoke not.
Brother, said I, have courage. "Fool, replied he, in a passion -- (if had he
called me so in cold blood, I would have had him out) -- Fool, said he, (in ^
way that one could not but forgive him, stamping his foot on the ground at the
same time) am I, think thou, before GOD ALMIGHTY or the enemy? What has
courage to do before him? thou should tell me to be patient." I said no
more: for the poor Frances lay dead before his eyes; and there being but one
bed of any size, the living and the dead lay together.

Child, (said Nestor, to the little girl, his daughter, who was sobbing at the
side of the bed, with her apron thrown over her eyes) -- come hither. Thou art
like thy mother -- kiss me.

Nestor (continued Julius) tied the crape round his arm, and his soul was in
mourning. He gave Frances to the earth. Decency -- Go no farther, said Nestor,

-- Decency required my attendance, Sir. My poor Carbine shed then the first
tears that I ever saw upon his cheek. Oh! he was melted down into something
softer than his mother. He wan^^d to prevent the man from striking the nails
into the coffin. --

Julius, GO NO FARTHER, I say, (cried Nestor) pressing his daughter close to
his breast.

I wish my uncle would hold his tongue, said one of the boys.

He opened the closed lid, and peeped in, (con^^nued Julius.) He cast a
lingering look into the grave. He drew his hand gently over the coffin as the
sexton was beginning to lower it. He kneeled down to see that it was put softly
into the ground. He let it go, and said he was perfectly resigned; then came
away, and then returned, then went off a second time, and sought the grave
again, wringing his hand, and declaring he was perfectly resigned all the time
--

Will kill me, Julius? said Nestor: stop, I say!

-- in short, sir, he -- he -- he -- did so many things upon that occasion,
that, surely, if a man has any love for a woman, he ought to be a bachelor.

[ The fragment is here defaced, and illegible for some pages.]

-- After the engagement the solemn thoughts again came on. -- Julius rubbed
his face twice or thrice along the pillow, and declared that while the wind
continued in that quarter, his old aches would twinge him a little.

And in this hospital, Sir, we are now laid up for life, said Julius.

He rubbed his face again upon the pillow. Well, said he rising, every dog has
his day!

Upon this Nestor began to whistle: -- not one of those tunes which arise from
vacancy, but a whistle truly contemplative; it was more slow and pensive as he
proceeded, and in its closing cadence, a tear started from his eye. Streaming
almost to the borders of the upper lip, it settled there, and though as he
waved his heed backwards and forwards, it trembled upon the edge of his cheek,
it did not fall.

When he had opened the door, I stole an opportunity to put something into his
hand.

He took it as money ought to be taken by a brave or worthy man who wants
assistance, and sees no shame in receiving it. A sober smile came into his
countenance: but the tear continued.

His daughter's hand was still closed in his; but she looked at the tear, and
was taking out her handkerchief.

Let it alone, my dear, said Nestor. IT IS YOUR MOTHER'S.

How are the Carbines to be envied, said I when we were stepping into the
street!

You flatter us, replied Nestor, bowing gently. -- I went two paces and turned
back. -- The tear had verged off, possibly while he was bowing.

It had got upon my little girl's face, and there it hung like a dew drop from
a rose-bud. -- Good God, said I, how rapid an exchange!

In saying this, I found it had vanished from the cheek of my daughter, in the
time that I was making the exclamation!

Alas, it is quite gone then! said I.

No! upon lifting my hand to my face sometime after, I found the precious
offering of sympathy had changed a third time its residence, and was trembling
on my own cheek. I blessed it, and --

LETTER LXI. TO EMMA CORBETT.
I HAVE been penning a narrative, at every interval from pain; and by the next
po^t, it shall be dispatched to Emma, from whom I desire anxiously to hear all
that concerns her happiness md her health.

LOUISA CORBETT.

LETTER LXII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
THE interview is past, and fresh horrors are heaped upon the bleeding heart

EMMA.
P. S. On, what does your Caroline's fragment prove, but that WAR, at best, is
terrible as glorious!



LET. LXIII. MR. CORBETT. TO HIS AGENT.
THE money cannot possibly be raised, and the ruin is complete of the wretched

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER LXIV. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
THE days of drollery are no more. The character of my heart is changed. Emma
is sick. Her father is laboring with some deep and concealed calamity; and
from these incidents of the family, you will gather the unhappy situation of

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXV. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
I KNOW not whether I shall live long enough to relate the horrors of my
situation!

On the evening of the day that I desired the suspension, I felt an impulse,
more strong and more sacred than that of common curiosity, to know the full
scope of my suspicions.

Before this interview, my distress appeared sufficiently great. Alas* we are
continually exclaiming that the heart will break, without knowing what
additional burdens it will bear, even when we think it is most surcharged.

Come hither, dear Emma, said my father -- drawing me gently to him -- his hand
trembling as he touched my gown.

-- Come hither, I want to thank you for the long series of soft compliances,
which your dutiful heart has poured into this aged bosom. But for you, my
child, your unfortunate father would have no support.

Unfortunate, Sir, did you say?

O most unfortunat^, my Emma! I am in distress -- worldly distress. And it is
so extreme, that I have been compelled (ah, hard necessity) to dispose of this
fair mansion, which has more than a century owned a Corbett far its Lord. This
very room, my dear, which gave -- oh spare, me Emma, -- this very room, the
consecrated spot of thy nativity, is now another's; and so are the late
hereditary lands that smile around it. The ruin has been deliberate too: and I
have concealed it from every eye; even (and indeed chiefts) from thine, till
now that I am in the arms of poverty. There is, at this moment, an execution
entering my house in London; which contains the last rel^^es of a fortune,
that, some years since, amounted to an hundred thousand pounds.

-- That accursed war! -- that dire American contention! -- that civil fury
which has separated the same interests of the same people! --

Here it begins, my child! -- but where will it close? Oh slavery -- oh
imprisonment! how terrible are thy horrid walls and galling fetters to one
whose bosom burns with the divine fame of liberty! -- how insupportable to an
old man! -- to a father, whose daughter's consequence in life must flow from
his.

O thou lovely stream from a fountain whose sources are stopped -- what, what
is to be done?

The decisive blow came yesterday upon me. I had, ere this, in reserve, one
rich casket -- but it is gone: the last capture has deprived us of it. It would
have been enough for my age and for your youth, but the post of yesterday --

It unnecessary to detail the calamity. It is crushing: it is irremediable; it
is ruinous I am in beggary

Oh, Emma! bred up to elevated expectations, what is to become of thee? Your
brother is slain. Your father old and enervated, a pre^^ to pain of body from
the most piercing of human disorders, and to anguish of mind, from reflections
the most cutting. Your property both at home and abroad (for mine was naturally
yours) lost or despoiled!

Emma! what is to become of thee? Would you renovate my youth -- would you
rebuild your fortunes? --

I could not speak* Louisa.

If you would, continued my father, receive with a smile those accents which
inform you, there is a gentleman -- rich, generous, virtuous, worthy, and of
whom you have a good opinion -- a gentleman who would esteem the hand of Emma
--

-- Ah, what have I said! -- shameful sacrifice! -- pardon, pardon me, my
child. You shall not be sold, my love. No, no: let us be above the sordid
commerce. Let us enter the gloomy gates together. Let us be poor -- let us be
necessitous -- let us combat the common wants of nature, -- but let us not be
contemptible.

I sunk, death like, into his arms, a weeping father's arms, which staggering
under their burden, bore me to the bed. There I still lie: and there, probably
in a few days -- oh! farewell to

EMMA.

LETTER LXVI. TO EMMA CORBETT. Prior to the receipt of the above.

NO, my loved sister, I will not, cannot, send a long story. A few pages will
comprise the main circumstances; and let those suffice till days of future
conversation. -- Your father had ever an ambition to enlarge the fortune of his
Edward by marriage: and Edward had already sufficient to his wishes. He
acquainted his father of the love which he bore to Louisa. It produced a
dispute. My brother happened to be present. He entered as your father
exclaimed, "What but beggary can be expected with a girl like Louisa Hammond,
of scarce an hundred pounds a year?" -- The conversation stopped.

Sir, (said Henry to Edward, when they were alone) had any man living but
Emma's father spoke in these terms of my sister, he should have been punished
for it severely. -- I love Emma Corbett, and to her he is indebted for --

And I love Louisa Hammond, Sir, (replied your brother) but my father has an
arm of his own, and that failing, he has that of a son, to defend him from the
insults of a boy, should he dare to --

It is an improper place to discuss the question, said Henry. They went out.
Henry commanded Edward, in terms of intolerable severity, never to offer his
hand to Louisa, while Edward insisted, that Henry should desist from farther
engaging the affections of Emma. The inhibition was promised to be observed,
and a breach of it was to terminate in the last frightful decision amongst men.
Edward dropped his visits, and I knew not the cause. Henry did the same, and
you were equally ignorant of the motive. I fell sick; a fever seized my
spirits, and my life was despaired of. Edward heard of my illnes^, and came to
visit me at a time when he knew Henry was from home. He found me in the
extremity -- the fever was become pu^rid, and the physician ordered no one to
approach my breath any nearer than could be avoided; the bed was strewed with
the herbs which are supposed to prevent infection. Regardless of this, and
every other image of self-preservation, Edward rushed into my chamber, threw
himself upon his knees by the side of the bed, and hung his head over my face,
which received and welcomed the tender tears that were streaming from his eyes.
O! Louisa, Louisa, (said he) I can bear it no longer! At these words Henry was
heard upon the stairs, Edward leaped up -- Heavens! said he, can it be
possible, is Henry returned? Well, it is no matter. My brother entered the
room, and at the sight of Edward stepped back, like a man astonished. Edward ran
up to him, threw his arms about his neck, and insisted that the embrace should
be returned. Oh Henry, he exclaimed, too long have we mutually suffered a false
delicacy to prevail. Enough have we sacrificed to pique, for Emma and Louisa
have been the victims. I heard that your sister was dying, and I could not deny
myself the mournful privilege of a friend -- will you chide me for it, Henry?
-- will you still withhold your hand and your heart from the brother of Emma
Corbett? Will you? This was the first moment I had been informed of the
dispute. The surprise was too much for me in the firmest state of my
constitution. In the condition I then was, it had well-nigh proved fatal. All
which my strength suffered me to do was to raise myself on my pillow, fold my
hands in the attitude of entreaty, and with feeble accents to implore, they
would spare my last moments, and not embitter them by their enmity.

Ere I had uttered this, Henry and Edward were weeping on the necks of each
other, and Henry said, alas! Edward, I owe you more than this, for on my part
was the promise first broken. I have secretly maintained the usual
correspondence with Emma, since she has been away: and found the tenderness
superior to the anger of my temper. Indeed we have both been wrong.
Henceforward, let us be more than friends -- if possible, let us be brothers.
Shall we not, my Edward?

Again, Emma, I clasped my hands, and a sudden sense of joy came over me that
gave a turn -- a happy turn to my disorder. I recovered. It was agreed between
us that the cause of the quarrel, and the means of the reconciliation, should
be equally a secret. The families were reunited, and none but Edward, Henry,
and Louisa, could account for the late coolness on the part of the two former.
But the harmony was not o^ long duration; -- it was again interrupted by your
father's violence in the cause of America, opposed to that of my brother in the
cause of Great Britain. Edward sided with the former, and, though it no longer
prevented an intercourse between us, it threatened an eternal separation of
political interests. At the same time Henry was permitted to address you, and
Edward continued openly his partiality for me. -- Nay, your father at last
declared, he hoped still to see the two countries restored to the embraces of
each other, and two happy matches to felicitate their union. You were, my dear
Emma, fortunately from home on a visit during most of these transactions, and
your Henry did not think it prudent to break the thread, of an elegant
affection by the little jarrings that were happening to cross it at home. The
contest now became fierce on the other side the Atlantic* and threatened to
carry bloodshed and rapine to that part of the continent where Edward had
property. Louisa (said he to me, one evening) I must cros^ the seas: my fortune
is in danger: it equally concerns you and me, that I should endeavor to defend
ti, yet I will wait another month to hear the event of terms that are proposing
between the countries -- if they produce peace, you know how ready I shall be
to continue in England; if they fail of that end, you must have resolution
enough to part from me for a short season. But, continued he, as no man can
tell the chances of the slightest separation, I ardently wish to call you by
the tenderest of all human titles, mine, before I go. Publicly this cannot be
done, for though my father affects to consent, our union would make him
unhappy. No, Louisa: let our happiness be known only to ourselves till it is
proper to communicate it. Impart it not* till my return at least, to Emma, to
Henry, or to any part of the family. I have my reasons for it, even more strong
than those that have been already related.

Soon after this conversation, Emma, we were privately married, and none of the
appointments that led to the ceremony, or which succeeded it, were discovered
or suspected. Previous to the voyage of my hapless husband, he put into my hand
a sealed paper, containing his will, and he desired I would not open it till
his return* in the fond hope of that return being possible* I have, till within
these few days, kept the seal unbroken, and now, alas! I find it is a
testamentary disposal of his property abroad, bequeathed entirely to me as sole
executrix. --

Yes, my dear Emma, there is a fatherless Edward, and Heaven only knows whether
the father had any knowledge of his birth before he died. I repeatedly sent
letters, full of all a mother's minute and affecting solicitude, but I received
no replies.

To Mrs. Arnold, dear and generous friend! I owe the power of keeping my
husband's secret, not-withstanding an event that promised to betray it. The
poor little one was lately taken ill, and his death ev^ry moment expected. It
was that (oh Nature!) made me write the disordered scrawl, which entreated Emma
to forbear her visit. On my reaching the house of our worthy Caroline. I found
the cold hand of death lay heavy on my child. I wept sore I offered up the
prayer of the desolate widow, not wholly to bereave me; and begged (ah, how
earnestly) the Blessed God to restore one or receive both!

My prayer was heard. My child grew well. Your letter came in the warmest,
newest, and most melting moment of matron extacy. The smile of the babe was in
my eye, and in my heart. I saw miniatur'd forth the features of the murdered
Edward. Oh the beautiful extreme of rapture! It grew too big for bearing. I
devoured my child with kisses. I ran with weeping joy to Mrs. Arnold. I thought
of thee, oh lovely Emma, as of Edward's sister, and I gave thee, in that
charmingly unguarded period, the dear deposit of my bosom, which none but
Caroline shares with thee.

Edward, the infant Edward, sleeps as I write this. His gentle breathing is as
the music of the spheres to his mother's ear. Ah, had there been a pause -- a
stop -- an eternal stop in that harmony, what should I have done? But he lives,
and I will not murmur. Oh for health to rear his tender youth. Emma, you are
his aunt, and oh, should this feeble frame fail to hold out so long as he may
want a protector (and when alas, will that cease to be!) will you not -- ah
will you not be unto him a mother? Consider that he has many claims upon you.
He is the son of Edward your brother, and the child of

LOUISA.

LETTER LXVII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
O Wonder-working Providence! I feel your intelligence, dearest Mrs. Corbett,
in every vein! I acknowledge you as a friend. I receive you as a sister. But
there is the boundary of my power. Embrace your child, and do not complain.
Louisa, you may now receive an example of patience from the fortitude of Emma.
The father and the child are both in the bed of sickness, and both laboring in
the dire extremes of distemper and distress. I can no more. Farewell. I murmur
not.

Emma.

LETTER LXVIII. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
CASTLEBERRY is the seat of confusion, and calamity. It seems as if I were
doomed to be the murderer of my guests. I can impute the illness of parent and
child to no other cause, than because the one too much desires a match, which
the other with too much reason detests. -- Oh, mighty God! the mystery is
explained. Let the enclosed speak it, for I have not power to transcribe.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXIX. TO Sir. ROBERT RAYMOND. The enclosed.

I AM not made for hypocrisy. You see the gloom of my soul. It fits in my
countenance; nor am I able to disguise it. It is now my turn to desire you will
deal with me plainly. Within a few hours my fortunes are altered so much for
the worse, that it is impossible for me to desire you will advance farther in
the treaty relating to Emma. I cannot now give her a single guinea; all she
will ever have is three thousand pounds, which is a legacy: nor can I expect
your passion to weigh down every pecuniary consideration. Three thousand
pounds, Sir Robert, is poverty to what my child might have expected. Suffer us
then to depart. I am stung to the quick by various wrongs. By the close of the
week I hope we shall be well enough to set out. Excuse the awkwardness of
corresponding under the same roof. There are points that cannot be spoken to.
This is one, I venerate and love you. But do not mention the subject to Emma,
or to

C. CORBETT.

LETTER LXX. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
THERE wanted no fresh impediments. They were manifold and mighty enough
before. To pursue my intentions, after what I am now told, would be indeed
impracticable. I should tremble to approach Emma, lest I should seem to act the
part rather of a purchaser than a lover^ O, I blame not that lovely pride which
poverty begets in a generous mind Shall I barely bargain for the hand of Emma?
Yet how shall I resign it? Let me think. --

* * * I have hit upon an expedient, Mr. Corbett: but it will want your
suffrage and assistance. -- There is but one way left to honor and oblige me,
and I call on you by the rights of ancient friendship to comply with my request.

-- No, it cannot be. It will not bear reflection. I must submit to my fate,
But do not leave me yet, -- Repose. Recover. Meditate what is best to be done.
Tell me the extent of your misfortune, and let us mutually concert its
mitigation.

ROBERT RAYMOND,

LETTER LXXI. TO THE SAME.
THE irresolute note which I sent this morning to your chamber, is not worth
your attempting to decypher. I wanted to express my sympathy of your present
misfortune in a way more answerable to the emotions of my friendship. I wished
to gather such knowledge of some persons connected with your loss. as might
enable me to plan some pious fraud to relieve your situation without wounding
your delicacy. But I should make bungling work of it, and destroy the felicity
I intended to promote. I am a man of plain feelings, and have no dexterity of
address when it is necessary to adorn them. Accept then, dear Corbett, of an
honest mind, in lieu of elegant manners. Is any decoration necessary to
introduce a friendly circumstance? -- and if there is not, wherefore do I thus
lengthen the preface?

Corbett, I am one of those whom the world calls an unthrifty fellow: for I
value money merely as it conduces to my happiness. My happiness depends on
society, and not on myself alone, I have fixed it in the dear domestic circle
that encloses Emma and her father. Beyond that barrier I do not desire to
wander; and if I can promote their felicity, my own will, of necessity, b^
complete. You see my system. It is simple and concise. By uncommon chance I am
become rich, you know. The sum I possess is too much to be dissipated, and not
enough if I had a passion to accumulate. It is quite sufficient to render three
persons happy, so far as happiness takes its color from money. Amongst three
persons then let it be divided; but let only two of those know the source by
which the third is supplied. You may easily persuade Emma to believe, (what
indeed will be true) that by an unexpected turn, your losses are repaired. She
will be too much rejoiced at the event to teaze herself about the means. Or, if
she should enquire, her curiosity is of a tender kind, and will readily be
pacified. I hope you love me too well to make scruples; and yet I shall prepare
myself to combat them. It is really a very hard and mortifying thing, that
these bare-weight duties betwixt friend and friend, should be so rare as to
make the offer of them a matter of embarrassment; as if there were nothing
expected in society but its etiquette and professions. All I desire is, that
you will lose no time in settling your affairs* and no otherwise remember the
mode by which they are accomodated, than as it may impress your bosom with
tender sensations, and strengthen the cement of that alliance which is formed
between us. With Emma, I will (on the above conditions) take my chance as
before, but for the wealth of worlds I would not have her acquainted with a
tittle of our private transactions. Nor must you attempt to sway her. Leave her
to the same chances as would before have happened. It is very unreasonable that
I should expect her to marry me for affection: but, for Heaven's sake* save me
the distress of accepting the sacrificed hand of gratitude. I am glad it is in
my power to offer my testimonies of friendship to you before she has been
influenced. I will be with you presently, and you shall have no prejudices of
custom about you, till you detect any thing of (what is foolishly called) the
wisdom of the world, clinging to the hand or the heart of

R. RAYMOND.

LETTER LXXII. TO SIR ROBERT RAYMOND.
WHAT can I say to you? Represent to yourself an old man, bathing his pillow
with his tears, and suddenly struck, first with fortune, then with transport!
Oh, Raymond, Raymond, the world sees these friendships too seldom to authorize
our accepting them: and many a man has been ruined because custom permitted him
not to be much obliged. My misfortunes, indeed, have arisen from the dire
casualties of war, and not from the wasting luxuries of peace. Public
desolation, and not private vice, has produced them. Yet -- the sum so large --
the situation so critical -- the --

Well, well, I will try to recover myself, and we will converse: but I trouble
strangely. I almost think I could make such an offer, even at this frozen time
of life, for my heart is yet warm; but Oh! how shall I bring myself to receive
it. I could bear your superiority, but how can I --

-- The world is too strong for the stoutest of us, Sir Robert. At what a pitch
must vulgar errors have arrived, and what a miserable age must we live in, when
the hand of liberality itself trembles while it is extending, lest its motive
should --

-- in short, my friend, I cannot write; but come to me.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER LXXIII. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
I FANCY there was some mistake in the letter that I enclosed from Corbett: for
I find his affairs are all re-adjusted, and the generous refusal of my
overtures to Emma (at a time when most parents would think them most
acceptable) has no longer force. The prohibition is taken off, and I am again
at liberty to make myself tenderly unhappy.

Corbett is now as much recovered in health as in his circumstances, and word
is just brought that Emma is better. O my heart, how shall I support the sight
of her! -- If her sickness has made any great alteration -- if she appears to
be in pain, or in any kind of danger, I shall assuredly discover myself.

Methinks I have more fondly wished myself her husband since her confinement
and indisposition, than while she was rejoicing in health and pleasure. I do
not desire to unite myself to her beauty, more than to her weakness and
distress. Surely, Frederick, the tender offices of a friend are most amiable,
where they are least observed by the world. The feeblenesses to which the
tender frame of a woman is subject are, perhaps, more seducing than her bloom.
The healthy flower looks superior to protection, and expands itself to the sun
in a kind of independent state; but in nursing that which droops (sweetly
dejected) and is ready to fall upon its bed, our care becomes more dear, as it
becomes more necessary. It is the parent and the friend rather than the mere
gardener, that, on such an occasion, influences: and indeed, it will be sound,
upon all occasions, that the gentlest parts of our nature are the best; and
objects are beloved in proportion, not as they are strong, forcible, and
defended, but as they are gentle, unresisting, and pathetic.

Emma di^s below stairs. I have not seen her for several days. In the present
state of my heart, Frederick, can you not imagine the nature of a sensation
which partakes equally, of hope and fea^? If you can, you will ascertain the
present situation of (...) Your

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXXIV. TO EMMA CORBETT.
YES, my dear child, what I asserted to you this morning is true. By a chance
seldom happening to persons in (...) I have recovered myself. It was like a
recovery in the last strug^ moment of a man's life; for had the relief been
delayed longe^ would have been the death of my credit, and you would have
mourned over these white hairs in a prison. Oh! the means, the MEANS, my child,
by which this mighty blessing was affected -- The generous hand, the generous
heart, from whence -- but I am forbid to speak. Cannot you guess? No -- It is
impossible! It seems to be a flight too sublime -- too near Heaven for any
earthly power to -- And yet, if there should be any human being, who has
rescued your father from shame, and yourself from indigence -- if, oh Emma,
there should be such a character, moving under your eye, and inviting your
notice, what -- what are the emotions, what the sentiments you owe him?

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER LXXV. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
FREDERICK, I have again beheld the source of my admiration and distress. She
came: she sat at table: said a few words in a silver voice: sighed softly, and
retired. I never beheld any "mortal mixture of earth's mould" so touchingly
sweet. She is more interesting as she is less in her bloom. Sorrow has taken
the rose out of her cheek, and left only the lily, which seems charmingly to
lament the loss of its companion. She rises every moment upon me; and sickness,
which has weakened her frame, appears to have given strength to my affection.
My wishes are augmented, but my expectations are not advanced. I see the policy
of retreat, and while I acknowledge it, am preparing to go on. Yes, Frederick,
I am resolved to open the subject, and that immediately.

Adieu! ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXXVI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
THESE transitions are almost too much for me -- but I welcome the dear
agitating stroke that gives felicity to my father. As the billet which
expresses it came to hand, I was about to seek your bosom, my venerable parent,
and there assure you with how cheerful a heart I would follow you through every
turn of your fortune, and with how ready a hand I ^ould labor for our
subsistence. I had prepared many a tender argument to prove the frugality of
nature, and to show how easily and how cheaply she might be supplied. I would
have represented to you the sweets of a touch which should have been smoothed
by a daughter's care; and of wholesome viands, provided by your child. No^
should I have failed to remind you of what, in your tenderness ^ather than in
your hurry, you have forgotten; namely, that sum of three thousand pounds,
which, in right of my late uncle, I am to inherit; -- nor of those glittering
baubles, which it would be infamous in Emma to reserve or to wear while her
father is in distress. But these arguments are unnecessary, as you are restored
i^ happiness, and there is, it seems, some noble instrument which Providence
has made use of to produce the blessing. What sentiments and what sensations I
owe to both, need scarcely be made a question. If my soul is not insensible, it
must pour itself forth in gratitude and prayer, in wonder and in praise. But
still, methinks, this friendship should be accepted sparingly, my dear father.
While a large sum of money is within the compass of our own ability, should not
our first application be to that, and --

Pray forgive me; you taught me to love the langauge of nature, and must not be
angry when occasion calls it forth. Benevolence is a beam from Heaven, and
descends into the heart of man to inspirit and to cheer: but if we do not
properly aecomomize it; if we are lavish of the luster, and do nothing of
ourselves, while it is darting upon us --

-- in short, my father, I feel myself a little jealous that, when it became
necessary for you to place a confidence in any second being, you did not show
your usual affection for

EMMA.

LETTER LXXVII. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
SOON after breakfast this morning, while Corbett and I were walking in the
garden, he took hold of my hand, and laying it to his breast, said, "Now, Sir
Robert, is the time: my daughter is recovered. Take an opportunity to display
your generous attatchment. [Faith, Frederick, I do not see the generosity of
trying to possess a fine young woman.] I will give you an opportunity,
(continued Mr. Corbett) and pray Heaven it be in her power to give you the
possession of her hand and her heart!" --

IN CONTINUATION.

Mr. Corbett informs me that Emma is now gone into the library, She is, he
says, all tenderness to day. It is then the crisis of declaration; the season
in most proper to speak; and I think I was never more unfit for the
undertaking. O that I were younger, handsomer, less rich, and more engaging.
Indeed, I wish most of those things altered, with which, till I beheld Emma
Corbett, I was perfectly satisfied. Not a syllable, however, of Henry falls
from her. Surely that looks wells. At what a twig does the drowning catch! I
will not close this letter till I can add to it the particulars of our
conference.

--

IN CONTINUATION.

It is past. It is decided. I have read my fate, without di^ my condition. I
entered the library, and found Emma -- (...) shall I describe to you the
situation in which I found her (...) had been observing the ravages of war, as
they are figured i^ the prints which are hung around the room. I saw the tears
still standing in her eyes. O those eyes!

And what has been the matter, Emma, said I?

I have been weeping over the representation of a complete victory. replied
Emma. She then traced the bloody progress of the pictured battle, and in all
the pathos of philanthropy addressed me thus:

"O Sir Robert, behold the images of conquest and defeat! Observe two mighty
hosts of human beings met together, after the most deliberate plans of attack,
to butcher one another -- to perpetrate generally that very crime which, in any
particular instance, is punished by the retaliation of a shameful death. To
destroy an individual is ignominy; but at the massacre of an army, the trumpet
sounds its note of boldest triumph The gallows and the halter, the awful trial
or gloomy dungeon preceding these, are prepared for him, who, in the phrenzy of
passion, or the raging of desire, deprives the irritating object of farther
power to torment; while the laurel and the bay contribute to the garland of
those heroes, who, after returning from the cities they have depopulated, and
the territories they have laid waste, come exulting home in all the honors of
blood and of slaughter --

She paused a moment. A glow of generous scorn was in her eye, and she again
extended her white arm along the picture, and proceeded.

"Here, sir, you may observe, lawful and glory-crowned murder, exhibited in
every form. See -- see, into that wretch's quivering side, the ball has just
entered! -- Here lies a head severed from the body. -- There are the mangled
relics of an arm torn from the shoulder; and there the wounded horses are
trampling upon their wounded masters!

"Rights -- territories -- and privileges, disputed or invaded, are the great
justifications! Poor, puer^le, and insufficient!

" -- A^, EARTH, thou common parent -- thou whose nourishing bosom furnishes to
all the children of content that will cultivate thee, how art thou made the
object of ambition, and the motive of sanguine altercation! Into what
ridiculous portions of ideal property art thou cut out? How art thou
quarrelled, how contended for? How often does the bounteous sun that shines
upon thy surface to expand the grain, and to cherish thy various productions --
Oh, how often ^o his beams retire, and leave thy verdant mantle dipped in gore!
Yet thou have thyself, (improvident mother of these wrangling emmets) thou have
thyself been, in some measure, accessory to these horrors. Oh! that pernicious
and fascinating dross that glows within thee! Why was not the radiant mischief
concealed? -- Why was the cunning and the curiosity of the child thus permitted
to rip the very bowels of its parent, and wage unnatural war with his brother
about the division of the spoil? A^arice and ambition are of the same family,
and assist the vices of each other: the one delights in the plunder, the other
in the havoc by which it is obtained.

" -- But yonder the ruin is more rapid and glorious -- behold in yonder corner
they are employed in removing the dying and the dead. In that lacerated body
there yet seems life. It is panting in the picture! -- how the streams of --
Ah, my God! the ^^ of of a horse seems ready to stamp upon his bosom -- another
sword is pointed at his throat. -- Stop, stop barbarian -- he is of thy kind --
he is thy follow creature -- perhaps he is closely, dearly, TENDERLY connected
-- restrain thy sacrilegious hand -- kill not her whose existence is interwoven
with his -- kill not his helpless children -- respect the tender state of
unprotected infancy -- respecting softening bonds of FAMILY -- respect thy GOD.
Oh! Henry, Henry, Henry, such perhaps, even such may be thy dire catastrophe --
such, Hammond, such -- "

She tell lifeless on the floor. Her soul was filled with images of the deepest
horror. It was a noble phrenzy of tenderness and humanity, but it rod too
quickly on her late recovery. -- She is again carried to her bed. Unhappy Emma!

Oh, Mr. Berkley, what remains? She has rescued me from the misery of a
declaration at least. Her own passion is hopeless, yet fixed; but mine is in
despair. She has added at once to my love and to my distress. What nobleness of
sentiment! -- What virtuous sorrow! -- What sacred integrity of attachment! I
shall be g^ad when the time for their departure arrives. I shall ever be united
to the family; but it is impossible, I find, to live longer as a part of it.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXXVIII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
THE heart of your daughter, my dear friend, is not at her disposal. Let her
never know a circumstance which can only render her unhappy.

Yours. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXXIX. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
WE are returned to town. The several enclosures will acquaint you with the
aff^cting transactions which have passed since the last stop in our
correspondence -- a stop, my dear Louisa, made in very sympathy: for, though
you have of late repeatedly told me that you found a pathetic kind of pleasure
in sharing griefs so congenial to your own, I could not but blush at the pain
which I must often have created you. Yet nature, at this very time -- poor
feeble nature, strongly prompts me to repeat the fault. My heart swells high
with sorrow, and I stand in need of the participating Louisa. Nor will any but
Louisa soothe me. Mrs Arnold is generous and sensible, elegant and informed,
but* oh! she has not drank so largely of that bitter, yet salutary cup which
subdues the effervescence of the spirit, and disposes us to melt at the
miseries of another. She is a widow without knowing the value of her husband,
and love seems a secondary passion in her mind to that of glory.

How is it, my friend, that we do not hear from Henry? Ah, what an affecting
difference betwixt a post office and a ship!

O distance, DISTANCE, it is now I begin to feel what thou art! Join, I conjure
you, Louisa, the prayer of Emma -- supplicate the power at whose commands the
winds and the waves are still, -- supplicate him in behalf of a hapless woman,
whose treasure is ^^^^ing on a precarious sea. Beseech that the hospitable
barks may salute each other, and that their separation may alleviate mine.
Implore that these things be granted, and my heart shall be at rest.

-- At rest! and will my alarms be hushed by such a circumstance? Are the
beatings of the billows all I have to fear? Alas, the perils of the water are
m^rely introductory to those of the land. Scarce will the dangers of the flood
be past, ere those of the field come on. Which way then shall my petition be
directed? The policy of nations, and the dictates of nature, the voice of
ambition, and that of peace, are so distinct, that a perpetual war seems to be
proclaimed between divine and human institutions. The tender and graceful
interest which nature bids us take in the fate of those whose lives and
fortunes are dear to us, make us wish well to the natives of our country, and
the friends of our heart: and it is on this principle, but not for the parade
of dominion, or the barbarian flush of victory, that I wish well to the cause
of Henry and his associates -- I do not say COUNTRYMEN, for it appears that we
are at war with these, as they with us: a large and once loving family divided
against itself. Whom are we, Louisa, to consider then as enemy, and whom as
friend? WE suffer, alas! bitterly, from the contest on either side.

Oh, God of tranquillity! heal up the mutual wound, and suffer not that which is
terrible between different people, even in hostile nations, to become more
intolerably so by allowing it to rage amongst brethren!

The paths of military honor, Louisa, are cut through the bowels of humanity;
and heroism laughs at the apostrophe of pity: but I, who want refinement to
extinguish the simplicity of my sensations, shall yet persist to call even
victory a calamity.

I am extremely ill but have relieved myself by writing.

Adieu! EMMA.

LETTER LXXX. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
I MOVE up and down, obedient to the impulse of my passion.

I am now in London, attending the sick chamber of Emma, into which I gain
access only by virtue of my profession. Her affection preys fast upon her
health. Yet it becomes her age, and its object is amiable. It is an affection
which nature, virtue, and religion, conjoin to make respectable. Youth gives it
a new charm. Misfortune throws over it a tender and interesting shade. Sickness
adorns it with peculiar softness; and absence assists sensibility, in rendering
the whole more touching.

Such is the love of Emma: while mine is the passion of a man who hovers round
the idol of his heart with the most doting fondness, at the time that he is
convinced of the folly and impropriety.

In vain, Frederick, you ridicule, invite, and advise. I cannot quit Emma. She
is sick, and I am wretched. She loves another, and it does not relax the
diligent attentions I pay to her virtue and her beauty. She has fallen in the
path of my life, and I make a dead stop. I cannot pass on. Sneer not, jest not,
but pity my sensibility; and if you choose to call it by a more censurable
name, whatsoever it be, pity me by that.

I am trying to recover myself, but make no progress. To speak the truth, I
undertake the business with reluctance, and cannot expect to succeed in it.

Farewell. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER LXXXI. TO EMMA CORBETT.
THERE will be no occasion, my beloved girl, to use any longer the fortunes of
a daughter, or a friend. I still have a succedaneum in the care of providence,
who has, in some measure, repaired the depredations of war.

Your cousin Fanshaw is just dead, and, though he would suffer neither of us to
approach him while living, (how inconsistent!) has at length made his will in
my favor, annexing this remakable codicil: -- "To Charles Corbett ten thousand
pounds, because I hear he is a sufferer by the war with America; and to Emma
Corbett, his daughter, (whose fortune must of course be lessened by the same
means) five thousand pounds, provided she does not marry an officer, or any
person concerned in promoting the contest."

Adieu! Let these tidings revive you. CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER LXXXII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
BLESSED be the memory of the man whose generosity has taken such a load from
my heart! Yes, my dear and venerable father, I am revived. Sickness and sorrow
stand suspended at your tidings. We have now sufficient to gratify every wish
that contented natures can form. I had been casting about for means to seduce
you into accepting my freewill offering of tenderness -- my mite of duty; but
my perplexity is relieved. Ten thousand pounds will gild the evening of a
virtuous life, and three are competent to all the wants of

EMMA.

LETTER LXXXIII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
THIS yet-continued delay terrifies me. Oh, what minutes have I told over --
what days and weeks have I passed:

I conjure you to let Roberts purchase all the newspapers he can collect for a
month back, and send them, without loss of time, to the trembling

EMMA.

LETTER LXXXIV. TO EMMA CORBETT.
THREE thousand pounds, my sweet daughter! why, that which is properly your own
independence is now eight thousand! How could you congratulate me, and forget
to felicitate yourself? But you generously annihilated the latter consideration
in reflecting upon the first. Such is the noble negligence of your nature. I
must assist you, too, in observing, that the barriers of (...) now thrown down,
and the avenue open, clear, and uno^ (...), to any tender partiality* which,
you suppose, may gratify the expectations of your most affectionate father,

C. CORBETT.

LETTER LXXXV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I WILL not affect to misconceive you, my only parent. You seem constantly
anxious to connect me with some worthy man, as the associate of my life; yet do
not recollect that my choice is made, my principles fixed, and my heart
inalienably engaged. An unsubdued veneration for truth attends me. I caught the
inspiring affection I bear her, from the respectable authors of my being. It is
a prejudice as early as it is amiable, and you should not wonder if I walk
steadily in the way of my directors. This, sir, I have often told you. I have
been brought up to consider the happiness of life, not as deducible from the
maxims of the world, but from implicit reliance upon that power whom Heaven has
seated upon the throne of the soul, as an un^^ring judge in all cases of moral
arbitration. It has been a hard task for me to struggle with the various
inflictions which have long hung over our house, and though the burst of nature
has sometimes broken unawares, it was not in those seasons that I was the most
unhappy. -- When only the pitying eye of GOD was upon me, when I sought the
silent corner, and could secretly commune with my own heart, and enter into all
its inclinings: then -- then, my father, it was that the extreme of your Emma's
wretchedness came over her; for she found it impossible to wean her affections
from an object, one so entirely and with so good reason approved, and now so
entirely, and (you will pardon me) without any solid reasons, rejected. I have
not, at this period, my dearest father, collection of mind enough for much
argument; but you will please to recollect that it was you who first kindled
the sparks of tenderness for Henry. Besides that we were brought up together,
when gentle impressions are easily admitted and u^reservedly avowed, you
represented him as an orphan of honor, talents, and good sense. I depend on
every thing you say, and was charmed with a sentiment correspondent to my own.
The affection was full grown, and had expanded into blossom, ere you attempted
to destroy, or even to check it. Then, all at once, you said you had your
reasons, (which to this hour remain partly unexplained) to desire I would think
no more of Henry Hammond: yet, you averred, it was not fortune or any other
circumstance relating to what to the world calls a good match, that created a
change in your esteem. Want of worth, I am sure, it could not be; and yet you
still persist to d^ssuade me from attaching myself to merit, elegance, and
virtue.

I am glad this method of addressing each other by letter, though in the same
house, has, by accident, been adopted It appeared awkward at first, but has
now the familiarity of a habit. It may well be said, in my case, "to excuse the
blush, and pour out all the heart." Yet wherefore do I talk of blushing!
Surely, it is not necessary. I yield not to any romantic pomps of passion. I
make it not a subject, where it can be likely to create one discordant feeling.
I love with simplicity and truth: and it is far beyond my power -- far, even as
the preservation of a solemn vow is from the breach of it, to change my object
but with a change of its purity. The oaths that are taken at the altar, Sir,
may ratify tenderness, but cannot create it: and amongst the sordid connections
of men, it is not uncommon to be inv^sted with the public sanction, without
ever receiving a private assent from the understanding or the heart. I do not
think the law of the land, of itself, sufficient to make a woman happy.
Marriage is a very honorable, but it may be a very miserable institution: that
is, it may produce misery while it confers honor. The ceremony is only the
seal of mutual love, but the bond should be mad^ before; and in point of
attachment I hold myself at this moment as religiously united to Henry as if
all the forms of the earth had pass^d my lips in confirmation. The same idea
will be lodged in my bosom, whether that confirmation be remote or near. It is
not intended by Heaven to be the affection of a year only. It is to last for
life. It is to follow its object through all perils and dangers. Its holy
ardour is to burn equally bright and pure, and nothing but death is to
extinguish it. Thus contracted, my father, in spirit and in truth, you will
easily j^dge how light must be the sacrifice of my cousin's strange legacy. The
political tenets of Mr. Hammond have nothing to do with my friendship for him.
As they have carried him into a dangerous path of life, far from me, I so far
deplore them. I chose not the officer; but the man! and though it is, alas, but
too unlikely that our personal interests should be made one, yet the union of
our souls is too sincere, and too strong, for five and twenty times the
conditional five thousand pounds to loosen or dissolve. I felt myself about to
declare that not any earthly motive could induce me to embrace this gorgeous
bribe: but I am suddenly checked, and find, upon scrutiny into this filial
bosom, O my dear dear father, tha^ one motive, and only one those might have
been, which could make your Emma the victim of money.

Had the late convulsions of fortune remained in their full force -- had it
pleased God to increase their violence -- had all that could have been raised
by the a^ds of property and industry proved insufficient -- and had those
venerable ha^s been inaeed consigned to sorrow, and none but a daughter's
duteous hand to help a parent's poverty; in that dire case, my beloved father,
if you have a true sense of my nature, you will guess what I should have been
tempted to do. I should have accepted the conditions in the codicil, and
secured to my father a resource from indigence at a time of his life when
humanity is the least able to bear it. I would not then have "married an
officer engaged in the national contest." Yet even then, my affection would
remain, though its ultimate views would be changed.

In the private recesses of my soul, the image of Henry would still be
engraved; and, although I sacrificed all that was possible or necessary, to
duty, it would be long, very long, ere I could withdraw that chaste and
charming sentiment which gives me in all transitions, a title to esteem -- ah
more than esteem -- to love -- him tenderly.

EMMA.

LETTER LXXXVI. TO H. HAMMOND, Esquire. (At New York, Boston, or elsewhere, in the
army of General --, in America.)
OH Henry, I can bear it no longer. Heaven knows where you may be at this
moment! Heaven knows whether you exist! My alarm is extreme. I hazard the fate
of a few lines. If they reach you, relate your situation, relate your
disasters. Do not torture -- do not kill me; but seize the first instant to
quiet the terrors of my heart. You do not know what I am enduring for your dear
sake! You do not know what domestic calamities have been heaped upon the
anguish which seemed to admit no exaggeration! Not one moment's peace, not one
moment's health, shall I know, till I hear from you.

-- Hear from you! Perhaps alas, even while I write -- perhaps some savage hand
--

Oh Henry, Henry -- to love virtuously, constantly, and entirely -- to know the
full value and the full danger of the beloved object -- to wish information,
yet dread to hear it; is it. oh is it amongst the supremest of curses or of
blessings?

EMMA.

LETTER LXXXVII. TO THE SAME.
ALTHOUGH I have a letter now tossing with the sea, and know it must be many a
day upon its perturbed bosom ere it gets to hand; yet I again have taken up the
pen, with increase of terror, and, if it were possible, of tenderness. I am
ill, and they will not suffer me to quit my chamber. They want to deny me the
use of the only instruments which can even have a chance of conveying to you
the state of my heart. They tell me it is dangerous. How I despise their
pedantry! I want not to be taught the theory of patience; I have practiced it
long. But horrors, too great for patience itself, at length invade me! Oh, by
the agony which you cause, and by all the dreadful nights and days that you
make me suffer, respect my misfortunes! Relieve, recompense, and redress them.
One page, one line, one sentence, will suffice. Say but that all is well -- say
that you breathe, and I will be again composed. Oh, Mr. Hammond, wheresoever
you are, or whatever has befallen you, if there has been a possibility of
sending to me, you should (in pity to the condition of my mind) you ought to
have remembered me. Unless -- which Heaven avert! -- ah I will not suffer
myself to rest a moment on such a horrid thought -- and yet this suspense --
this agonizing suspense presents nothing but images the most dire. Tell me
explicitly, fully, circumstantially. I conjure, I insist that you let me know
every thing without disguise, without delay. Alas! how I w^ite on -- how I
rave. But I will be very calm; indeed I will. I will endeavor to fit my mind
for every stroke but --

-- Oh Hammond, Hammond, what a wretch have you made of

EMMA CORBETT.

LETTER LXXXVIII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
COngratulate me, oh Louisa! congratulate yourself -- congratulate humanity;
for one of its chief ornaments yet lives. I exist, I breathe. I recover. Henry
is well. Behold the enclosed. Sanctify it with a sister's kiss, but oh, erase
not those which Emma has impressed on every line. It is dated at sea; but the
intelligence chears me. I trust in Providence, and am most happy. Receive my
treasure, but keep it not beyond the returning of the post. So long I part from
this dear associate of my pillow, in love to thee, thou sister of Henry. I
cannot sleep while it is out of my possession. It is an instance of my
friendship which surpasses all common bounds. My fever abates: my pulses resume
a wholesome measure. Hope is busy in every vein. I can bear the visitation of
the sunbeam, and will now retire to rest, softly supplicating that power which
alone can relieve me, to continue the bounty he has begun.

Adieu! EMMA.

LETTER LXXXIX. TO EMMA CORBETT. The enclosure from Mr. Hammond.

AT length, my beloved friend, an opportunity presents itself. I had prepared a
large packet against this dear chance, but it was filled with gloom,
despondence, and images of severe distress. Better prospects appear; and I have
buried my ill n^ws in the ocean. We are joined by ships which are freighted
with large and liberal offers of conciliation. They are formed, methinks, to
suit the ambitious and grasping spirit even of an American, and they must, I
think, be accepted. Once more regulated by maternal laws, the wayward child
shall again prosper. The treasures of either hemisphere shall again be shared.
The arms of a great nation shall no longer be employed to annoy but to defend.
Our refractory fellow subjects shall soften into their former sentiments. I am
now, Emma, within fight of the land; Reconciliation is expanding her angel
plumes before us, and my presence will, I trust, be no further necessary, than
as it will give me an opportunity to witness the joy when a truant child is
restored to the protection of an offended parent. Great Britain, all insulted
as she is, ineffective as have been her affectionate advances, and scorned as
have been her professed kindness, shall receive with transport her America The
temporary estrangement shall only serve, like the quarrel of friends, to
brighten the bonds of future amity.

O PEACE, thou image of Divinity itself! -- descend, oh descend upon that earth
from whence the mistakes of altercating relations have so long affrighted thee!
Melt the hearts of contending countrymen, and shape every jarring interest they
maintain till all confess thy celestial sway. -- Subdue, gentiest power! the
fierce soul of ambition, soften the ^^^ws of authority, and let the countenance
of offended Majesty (...) the tenderness of a father -- ah! come, I implore
thee, and come, without delay! Let not Henry fight against the cause for which
Ed^ fell! Let there be no longer cause to fight. Expand thy snowy (...) over
the same people -- replace brother in the embraces of brother, and friend in
the foldings of friend. Let a soldier in this instance sup^ (...) ^athe the
sword. Reserve his arm for the natural enem^^s of his country and make it not a
duty to go forth against a civil foe I address thee, O loveliest, O divine
spirit of peace, in the name of all the dear and delicate affections --
affections which make up thy enchanting train. I call upon thee in the names of
nature, reason, humanity, and good faith -- in the names of father, child, and
all connections that are most precious. -- I call in the names of Emma and
Louisa. My invocation can ascend no higher, nor can --

-- Hah -- soft, soft, my Emma -- methinks the invocation is (...) The courted
Deity descends in all the benignity of her bright^* She is surrounded with
sunbeams softened by tender fleecings of (...) which form her chariot. The
eternal olive mixes in the ray which waves over the turrets of the western
world. War is disarmed The horrid parent of fetters is himself in chains. He
sullenly yields his giant limbs. He is bound as a prisoner, and the victory is
given to nature and to peace!

-- Oh what a lucid throng comes forward as incident to the conquest. The Arts
revive. The Muses confess the triumph of the affections with a song.
Vegetation, thou lately trampled down, springs up and freshens under the feet
of Industry and Repose, who both assist the general restoration of their
flowery realms. The sacred power of Friendship regains his station in the human
mind. The tender power of Love re-ascends his throne, and stretches his roseat
scepter over the human heart. The trembling maids -- the Emmas which embellish
the earth, receive their returning heroes without a wound!

Our sails are thrown back, my beloved Emma. The surface of the sea at this
moment is emblematic of peace. The Captain of our vessel is preparing papers
for England, to be taken by the ship which is gently floating along-side of us.
She is going from the General with dispatches; probably of the pleasing nature.
All seems full of promise -- and oh, what sweet and affecting pleasure it
affords me, while I am writing this! (the barks of fair proposal making the
best of their way before me) I anticipate the transport with which my tidings
will be received -- and imagine the effect they will have on the exactest form,
and most touching features, my eyes ever beheld. I see, methinks, the soft tear
of genuine joy course along the cheek, or bathing the crystal that covers my
portrait -- the invisible sigh steals through its vermeil passages -- the rosy
gates of life and love are opened to welcome the news, and balmily breathe over
it a tender aspiration.

Adieu! Adieu! the pacquets are ready. I am in hope: I am in Heaven.

Adieu! HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER XC. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
A Fortunate chance has happened, Frederick, in this family, since my last.
Emma is all rapture and all health. She has heard from Henry Hammond, and the
effect of this intelligence writes triumphant love upon every feature. Her
languor is gone. Her tears stream from happiness only. She sighs with bl^ss.

Upon my entering the room about an hour ago, she caught hold of my hand, and,
as I was about feeling her pulse, exclaimed -- "O, Sir Robert, the panacea is
arrived. I am well. I am happy."

By my soul, Frederick, her joy and her sorrow are alike amiable; and though
both are to me as adver^^ winds, yet the more she distresses me, the more I
love her.

Adieu! ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XCI. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
O Good God! who shall presume to fathom the depths of human misery, when it is
thy will to exercise the chastening rod? The felicity so lately brought me was
as the lightning before the storm, and only announced its approach. The
thunderbolt has at length fallen to crush the most unfortunate

EMMA CORBETT.

LETTER XCII. TO EMMA CORBETT.
IS he then dead? is he too numbered with the slain^ and (...) the noble youth
so soon followed the lovely Edward* Alas! I suspected this, even while your
letter of fairer information lay before me. In vain expectance of finding
something that relates to the fate of my husband, even against the convictions
I have of his death, I fondly examine every paper and public print relating to
the war, that falls in my way. In the Gazette of last night I perceive there
has been an engagement, and I read with streaming eyes an account of the
wounded and the slain. Yet, are you sure of your intelligence? I hope it is, in
part, ill-founded; for I perceive not the name of Hammond in either list An
Ensign Haddock, and a Captain Hammerson, are mentioned amongst the wounded; but
these do not approach very near even in sound I will enquire farther
immediately; mean time hope -- hope every thing, dearest friend. My brother! --
oh no -- I will not have it so.

LOUISA CORBETT.

LETTER XCIII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
THE Gazette! slain! wounded! -- Oh, I had no conception to what an extreme of
misery I was reserved! You have mistaken me; but of what dire information has
that mistake been productive? There has then been an engagement! You have seen
the bloody lift. It must have been purposely concealed from me. The skirmish,
you say* was sudden You read of a Captain Hammerson. In the hurry of war it is
easy to drop one syllable, or to add another. These conflicts are too great.

The enclosed will show you that the wounds of Henry need not have been
subjoined to the violence of a parent blinded by the rage of hydra party!

The wounds of Henry, did I say -- O hold -- hold my heart; I cannot bear it --
indeed I cannot.

Adieu! I will think upon a remedy.

Adieu! EMMA.

LETTER XCIV. TO EMMA CORBETT.
EMMA, be yourself. You must make one generous effort. I see you languishing
under my eye and cannot bear it. Thrice have I seen you in the sick chamber
within a few weeks. It is easy to perceive that your whole soul is pining after
Henry -- the perfidious Henry; with whom your union must never be while you
think proper to own a father, and accept his protection. I tell thee, Emma,
that were he this moment returned, and returned with what degenerate Britons
now call glory -- nay, could he lay the conquest of the plundered colonies at
thy feet, there exists a reason which would make it vile -- yes, mark the
strength of the term -- VILE, in Emma Corbett to accept it. (...) I see nothing
less than the entire explanation of the fact will convince thee. To crush,
therefore, every lingering hope at once* know, thou dear infatuated, thy father
still leans his very soul on the welfare of America. Those fortunes which have
been destroyed, those debts which have impoverished me, as well as those ample
streams of commerce which rolled unobstructed from shore to shore, were all
dedicated to injured America. For her thy brother's blood was shed, and had I
yet more sons, more fortunes, and more resources* they should all be at the
service of that violated country. She is injured -- she is aggrieved, my
daughter. Her oppressions are at my heart. The strings that fix it to my bosom
are trembling for her. She glows with a generous love of freedom. She has been
condemned without a hearing. She was stabbed into resistance. The sword was
held to her throat ere she thought of selfdefence. Conflagration, famine, and
parricide, have entered her late peaceful habitations. The common bounties of
Providence have been denied her. The blood of citizens, of brothers, and of
friends, are flowing in rivers through her streets.

I have not, Emma, been one of those who hawk about my principles, and saunter
in babbling ignorance from coffee-house to coffee-house. I am fixed in my
politics, and think my steady adherence to them a part of my religion. Since
we are cruelly taught to make a sanguinary mark of distinction between an
Englishman and an American, I own myself the latter, and deplore the
infirmities that prevent me from rushing to the field. My child, my child, I
know the ruinous rapacity, the murder, the VILLAINY of this unnatural war. I
enter deeply, and pathetically, into every wrong which America sustains, It is
the only point wherein I am enthusiastic, and it is the only point where
enthusiasm is great and glorious! Do not imagine, rash girl! -- monstrous
thought -- do not DARE to imagine, ungrateful Henry shall ever receive the hand
of Emma. Spare me, beloved daughter, in this one part -- this fore, this tender
part -- and in every other, command your father -- You owe me this submission,
you owe me this FAVOR, this indulgence. I would have preserved your Hammond,
and opposed his entering into this wicked employment, but it was impossible.
High of heart, he scorned to be even tenderly controuled. I endeavored to win
him generously over to an honorable cause. He called it insult, bribery,
baseness. The military distraction was throbbing in every vein. When I argued,
he justified every measure of ministry. Great Britain, he said, was grossly
abused -- her lenity scorned -- her laws defi^d -- her sublime prerogative
contemptously set at naught. He spoke loud and vehement of American rebellion.
The honor of the empire, he said, now depended on the exertion of each
individual, and it was the duty of every young man (whom every tie of interest,
every bond of loyalty, and every principle of policy called upon) to manifest
his zeal, his courage, and his attachment. He went on, my child, in all the
foaming folly of youth, declaring, that he should account himself b^^e, were he
to deny the contribution of his arm. The greater his love for Emma, the nobler
his sacrifice, he said. He was determined: he had made up his mind: and was
resolved to defend his country or gloriously perish in her ruins. I pitied his
delirium, yet venerated his ardour. Well directed, of what was it not
susceptible. He was above admonition, and kept erring on. In true tenderness to
thee, my Emma, I forgot the dignity of age, and even stooped to intercede.
After all my letters to him were in vain, I privately sought a personal
interview, but his boiling spirit took fire. I reluctantly withdrew, and gave
up the point.

Oh America, thou bleeding innocent, how art thou laden with oppressions -- Oh
my child, my child -- Nature, Religion, and Religion's God, are on her side;
and will you take to your arms, and to your embraces, a youth who propensely
violates these? -- a cruel youth, whose reeking blade may at this moment smoke
with kindred gore -- Tyranny has not a reserve of barbarity in store. She is
exhausted. Your Henry is a volunteer amongst those who, as an acquisition to
the British army, have added the tomahawk, the hatchet, and the scalping knife.
And will the tenderhearted Emma continue to love such a barbarian? Away away,
it will not bear a thought -- Banish, obliterate, detest him. He is in open
rebellion against the laws of nature. Let your affections flow into a fairer
channel -- ah, suffer a parent's hand to conduct them. He h^ a friend in
reserve, my dear -- such a friend --

But tell me that you have resumed yourself. Tell me that you are indeed my
daughter.

Adieu! CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER XCV. TO F BERKLEY, Esquire.
I WILL withdraw my foolish self from this ill starred attempt. Go down to
Castleberry, and I will meet you there without delay.

The perplexity of interests in this family, where each part opposes t^ other,
and where still greater entanglement is promised, are really too great for me
who have made a sudden transition from quietness to agi^ation.

You cannot reprobate my weakness in a keener style of censure than I myself
^o. Oh, I kn^w full well the u^fitness of such storms to the sober season of my
life. I co^^al the cause from all but you, and your reproof shows me, how
little mercy I might expect were that cause imparted to less generous hearts.

The matter grows too interesting. A certain darling passion, which scarce
confines Corbett on this side phrenzy, and the avowed pre-engagements of Emma,
which are mo^e than barriers of iron against me, unite to convince me of the
necessity of retreat. Expect me, therefore; and when we are together, prepare
yourself with subject of conversatio^, which, indeed, may take any turn but
that of my infirmity: all men, who are conscious they possess any, proscribe
this. In happiness and in misery, Frederick, we have a few grains of self-love;
and, while all its proud associates crowd about us, we suffer no theme to be
discussed that can humiliate us to ourselves.

Yours, ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XCVI. TO THE SAME.
STOP, stop, dear friend. Visit not Castleberry yet. I have twice attempted to
take leave, and twice ^ailed -- twice pa^^ed, and twice unpacked my portmanteau
-- twice ordered my servant to get horses, and twice pretended to be
weatherwise, and, as an excuse for changing my mind, have prophesied a change
of atmosphere. In the noontide brightness of the sun I have predicted storms
and hurricanes. And it is in vain the fellow casts his eye to the heavens, and
declares that the weather is fixed. It is his master, alas -- and not the air,
which is unsettled.

A little delay can make no difference. Indulge me. Humor me.

Within a post or two I will decide, and decide too as you and as commonsense
demand of me.

Farewell. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XCVII. TO THE SAME.
I COME, my dear Frederick; I come. The Confusion of the Corbetts -- the absurd
yet afflicting emotions of my own heart -- the -- the -- the -- In short -- ^
set out tomorrow.

Adieu. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER XCVIII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I HAVE a suspicion that Mr. Hammond is wounded; let that circumstance, oh my
father, account to you for the horrors of mind which have for some days locked
up every power of hand and of voice. The former faculty is in some measure
restored, so far at least, as tremblingly to trace upon paper something like an
answer to your affecting favor; every syllable of which is as an envenomed
arrow fixing in my bosom. Your determined objection then to poor Henry is at
last accounted for. I thought the sanguine track of party was washed wholly
from a father's heart by the blood of my brother. Shall political prejudices
interrupt the finest affections of humanity? Horrid is the aspect of battle,
view it on either side. It cannot shift to an attitude, nor take one position,
to soften its terrors upon the reflecting mind. TO THAT it is uniformly odious;
nor is it at all amended by considering, that as it began soon after the
creation, it will scarcely end till the destruction of the world. It has, even
within the narrow precincts of our family, divided the son from the father, and
the lover from his mistress; let it not be rendered more dire by setting the
interest of the daughter against that of her most honored parent, since that
would be to encourage the madness of mortals, and the civil pestilence, that,
in the form of a family-war, is gone forth against us. It ^ould violate the
gentle law of nature, and tear down those conciliating ties which fasten
kindred in one vast chain of connection ample as earth, and beautiful as Heaven.
You have painted your own patriotism and that of Henry, sir, with equal vigor
of language; at least, you have said enough either way to prove that both fancy
the cause adopted is the cause of rectitude and glory. When one side attacks,
the other must naturally defend; on which account, while the spirit of
contention remains, some will vehemently censure the very measures which some
as vehemently applaud. But, in avowing your own enthusiasm, my dear father,
(...) not, in effect, justify that of Henry? You both seem to hug to your
bosoms a political Cleopatra, for whose sake you are willing to gain or to lose
a world. England is to Henry what America is to you. Each insists that he is
espousing the cause of an injured friend: and while this is the case, how can
it be expected that either should yield? In fact, would not such a concession,
according to the prescriptions of honor, in this world's acceptance of the
word, be accounted base? You have, you say, attempted to direct the sword of
Henry on the better side of the dispute. Which is that better side? Henry
declares for Britain; you for America. What third person shall decide between
you? The feeble voice of a woman will neither be heard or admitted. Else, might
she venture to assert that your countrymen are bleeding abroad, while the point
of right and wrong is adjusting at home. This, however, is clear, my dear
father, from your own premises: if Henry thought himself insulted by the
proposal of changing his side, you would have been no less stung, had a similar
proposition come from him to you. And this proves, that both are acting on what
is called patriotic principle. What right reason then has the one to be
displeased with the other? Yet upon this displeasure on your part, you urge me
to withdraw my vows. Are then virtuous resolutions so to be withdrawn, my
father? When affection is fashioned by the feelings, and long cherished in a
soul which neither projects nor practices any ill, whose every thought is
submitted to the holy criticism of Heaven, nor ever dreads the scrutiny -- is
it, under these circumstances, of a texture so convenient, as to shift from
side to side with every gale of opinion? Wherefore, let me once again tenderly
enquire, wherefore did you originally inspire me with a veneration for sober
reason? why infuse in me a steady and generous way of thinking? Was it designed
for ornament or for use? If not intended as the governing rule of conduct,
through every maze of this mortal pilgrimage, oh wherefore did you not at first,
even in the nursery, while every power was impressive and would have taken the
form you chose to give it -- wherefore then did you not lead me into the path
that I was to tread without stop or turning? Alas! you have given me fixed
principles, acknowledged they were good, saw them with joy take root in my
heart, and now you expect in their fullest growth, and finest foliage, that
they should suddenly perish. But the habits of my youth are grown so strong,
that I feel it is too late for me to deal in disguises. I will not now begin an
artificial character. Oh! suffer me to implore you, sir, to continue my
attachment to Truth and Nature. I know nothing of State wrangles, or Congress
quarrels. I mix not with the infuriate errors of party. I only act up to those
simple principles of moral life, which assure me that constancy in favor of a
known valuable object (not obstinate predilection to a bad one) is the basis on
which the superstructure of all that is noble, just, and good, must be raised.
My wisdom is extremely limited. It stretches not into those maxims which
desolate the earth for a vapor of victory, nor does it presume to penetrate
the scheme of government. All it does pretend to, belongs to that small and
dear system in which every woman ought to be instructed; namely, that a
well-fixed tenderness should never be removed, that it should brave the storms
of fortune and distress, that while life remains it should be the animating
purpose of life to cultivate it, and that death, and death only, should
dissolve the bonds which virtue had made. If my beloved father would for one
moment lay the clamorous contentions of a bickering species aside, and submit
to be charmed by that dispassionate power which decides calmly of truth and
falsehood, he would be convinced of this. I am sure he would: for his nature is
gentle and his heart is soft. Ah think wha^ a task it is for your soul-sick
Emma to be under the necessity of using these pleadings at such a time! Come to
her bedside -- perhaps the cause of our disputes may now --

Oh for pity my father, hasten to me -- aid me in this dreadful conflict --
rescue me from myself -- wipe away the bitterest tear that anguish ever drew
from the heart of a daughter, and recover me, ere it be yet too late, from the
arms of death.

EMMA.

The End of the SECOND VOLUME, of EMMA CORBETT, According to the London Edition.
MOMUS; or the LAUGHING PHILOSOPHER. The HUMORS of a WET SUNDAY, near LONDON.
HAVING dined with a friend a few Sundays ago, at his villa within a few miles
of London, I was, on my return home, overtaken by a violent shower, and obliged
to put up at the first public house I met with upon the road. While I was there
watching the weather from a window, that I might seize a favorable moment to
pursue my journey, without being in a dripping condition, I was not a little
amused with a collection of draggled females; who, with their loving husbands,
etc. were driven, by the torrents pouring upon their heads, to shelter
themselves under the same roof.

"Lord have mercy upon me!" exclaimed a woman of the largest size, and rendered
still more weighty by her corpulence, "Lord have mercy upon me!" wiping her
face, which shone like a cook-maid's, with her apron, "I am sure this is making
a toil of a pleasure; here we labor and take pains all the week, on purpose to
have a little comfort on a Sunday, and now you see, I shall spoil every
individual thing about me; besides, I am so fatigued into the bargain: but I
told my husband this very morning, that I would never set out again without a
coach, or shay, or something to carry me."

"You're in the right of it," replied her friend, a tall, raw-boned woman, with
her mouthful of pins, with which she was endeavoring to pin up her petticoat;
"I am sure, I will not slave myself to death again for all the pleasure upon
earth; and yet I Will not sit at home all day neither."

"What Is that you will not do?" said a poor meagre, half starved fellow, who was
by this time come up to them with a heavy child on each arm. "I am sure you
have not the reason to complain I have, who have carried the boys so many
miles; -- you are never satisfied; but you shall carry them yourself the rest
of the way, or leave them behind."

Here, being hardly able to stand with his encumbrances, he was going to throw
off his load; -- his rib then called out to him in a raised, but not in a very
melodious voice, "Don't offer to set my children down, don't, I say; do you
think I will have their coats wetted, and their frocks dirtied? Who must clean
them? Not you, I suppose, you will tell me, like a sneaking devil as you are;
but come what will, please God, you shall stand at the wash tub till you drop;
for I will see them all got up, to cure you of dragging me home upon my feet:
and now we are brought into this precious pickle, I wonder what is to become of
us."

"Oh, (replied her unwieldly neighbor) we must stay till we can light of a
coach; and in the mean time let us call for something. -- What do you like
best, Ma'm?"

"You may call for what you please, (answered the distressed husband,
interrupting her) but then you must pay for it, as I have not a single sixpence
left out of my whole week's wages -- it is all gone."

"Gone?" cries his glamorous lady; "gone? Why, then, if we should have the good
luck to meet with a shay or a coach, we must be wet to the skin, because you
have no money to pay for it."

"No; but you have," replied he, "for I gave you every penny that I received
last right, and did not even keep back enough for a single pot of porter: I am
sure, I drank nothing but Adam's ale after my bread and cheese before I went to
bed, which has made me as weak as a rat."

"Weak?" said she, "weak with drinking water? That Is a good one, indeed! I am
sure there is not a wholesomer liquor in the world."

"Then I wonder, my dear," answered he, with an arch look, "that you drink so
much strong beer yourself."

"I drink strong beer? Aye, and so I do, or else how should I be able to suckle
my two twins, God help me! As women go through so much in this world, they had
need of something to support them; but men are always grudging them, and taking
every thing for themselves."

"Zounds! what ails the woman," exclaimed the provoked husband, "with her
grudging? Didn't I give you all?"

"Yes, and then went and run up a long score at the Black Dog; so we shall not
have a farthing left to pay our rent."

"Why, we cannot eat our cake and have it," said he; "you wanted to come a
pleasuring, and let us hear no more about it."

The waiter now made his appearance with a bowl of punch, and a plate of cold
boiled beef; and by so doing put a stop to their altercation, as they all fell
to as if they had not eaten a morsel that day, they had dined very heartily
upon a fillet of veal, and a gammon of bacon, and greens, at an Ordinary at
Hammersmith, and dispatched a large quantity of stout beer, with a pot of tea,
and several plates of bread and butter.

The present refreshment put them into a tolerable humor. The mother of the
twins took them by turns to the breast, while the father of them sat down in
the corner of the room to rest himself till the rain was over.

When he began to think of setting off for the capital, the huge-waisted lady
said to his wife, in a whisper, "If you will lend me enough to discharge the
reckoning, I will treat in return next Sunday."

While this affair was agitating in one part of the room, a smart altercation
was carried on in another, between a lover and his mistress, who had just been
caught in the shower, and were drying themselves over a pot of coffee. The lady
was dressed in the very extremity of the fashion; her hair was stretched to above
twice the length of her face; her hat was quite narrow before, and immensely
broad behind; her Polonese was tied up with the most elegant air imaginable;
and she had a pretty little foot just covered with a white slipper with a
purple rose, heel, and binding. -- He had his hand on her shoulder, and she was
putting some sugar into his cup, when a returned post-chaise drove up to the
door. "There is a carriage," said she briskly, "let us secure it." -- Away ran
he, but soon came b^ck. "Well," said the lady, "will he wait?" "Wait!" replied
the lover; "I did not ask him, as he will not carry us to London under half a
guinea; he is no common driver, it is a Lord's carriage." "Well, and if my Lord
was here," answered she, "he would be happy to have my company upon any terms;
and so you have let him go, rather than give such a paltry sum to accommodate
me; but I shall not walk, I assure you, nor draggle my petticoats like the
wives of your dirty mechanics, I did not attach myself to you, but to enjoy all
the pleasures of life; yet you are so scandalously mean, as to deny me the
common conveniences: but I will leave you -- I could not be used worse if I
was married." -- Here she flounced out of the room, and I presently saw her
drive off with an officer in his phaeton, in which she certainly must have been
half drowned, as the rain continued to come down with great violence; and the
captain was too genteel to have a top to his chaise, out of which she was
afterward thrown by his driving too near a post just at the entrance into
London, by which accident both her leg and arm were broken.

The curious trio above mentioned having thoroughly lined their insides, set
out on foot, and became quite regardless of their outsides; but their expenses
had been so heavy, and the reparations of the damages which their clothes had
sustained made such breaches in their pockets, that they were obliged not only
to work harder than usual during the following week, but to deny themselves
some of the lowest necessaries of life; yet all their labor and economy would
not enable them to make an other excursion when the next Sunday arrived; and as
that Sunday happened to be a remarkably ^^ne one, they spent it in quarrelling
-- because they could not enjoy it, by abusing it.

AN EXTRAORDINARY LOVE-LETTER, From Mr. PETER PLAINMAN to Miss PRISCILLA
PRUDISH. [Taken from a genuine Copy.]
MADAM,
I AM a little afraid you and I shall never come together. There is that
expectation of flattery about you that I cannot bear. Yet as I love you well
enough to be honest -- a bold word that -- I will once for all speak my mind,
and I desire your attention. I believe I do not admire you or value you for any
one of those charms for which you admire and value yourself. I do not, for
instance pay any adoration to the present brightness of your eyes, because I am
so strange a fellow as to consider them philosophical^y. They are very
brilliant, to be sure; but what are they? What are they, Madam, ab origin?
Fops, Fools, and Poets would, in their usual airy manner, tell you, that they
were made of celestial fire, that they were two animated balls of beauty, two
love-darting mirrors formed by the graces, and a pack of such fluff: But I
scorn to figure away at the expense of fair truth. I write in honest prose,
Madam, and therefore in honest prose I tell you, that those same balls of
etherial beauty, those same love-darting mirrors, are at best two pieces of
ordinary clay varnished. The varnish, I allow, is good, and well put on; thanks
to the sound health of the father that begot you, and the mother who bore you;
But what of all this? I am not such a short-sighted, amorous puppy, but I can
look forward alittle beyond the length of my nose, to the time when the gloss
will all be worn away, when the japan of Nature will be utterly gone, and the
devil a spark of fire will you have about you. If you live long enough, you
will be purblind, and then what becomes of your love-darters? Don't be quite so
vain, my young beauty. Another mighty matter upon which you have, it seems, to
pique yourself, is your face; I mean such things as we call cheeks, lips, and
complexion. I wish it to be known to you, that I have but a very poor opinion
of these divine graces, as you call them. Some time ago, I remember you showed
me, in a great air of triumph, a paper scrawled upon by some storid puppy of
your acquaintance, who swore, in very sorry verses, that your cheeks threw into
utter despair all the lillies and roses in the creation; your skin too, was, if
I recollect, polished marble; the veins were compared to the azure of the third
Heaven, and the color was whiter than alabaster. It Is a lie, PRISCILLA, it is a
sad lie; you are indebted to poetical fiction for all this trash: the rogues
who deal in it have, as they tell us, a license from that si^ly fellow APOLLO,
to play such pranks with idle girls and boys who believe them. For my part, I
never could be taken in by the tag of a rhyme, nor the cadence of a couplet,
nor the transposition of ten saucy syllables, since I was born; I always looked
upon them as mere ear-traps. What a collection of falsities is here, indeed! I
never saw a pair of cheeks in my life, that were fairer than a lilly, nor a
pair of lips that were redder than a rose. As to alabaster, I will take upon me
to say, there never was a woman's skin half so white in the whole world; and I
should be very glad to see a complexion so well polished as a piece of Egyptian
marble. No, no; these flights will not pass upon men of cool prose. They will not
indeed, PRISCILLA; upon my soul they will not. Metaphor, metaphor, my dear, is a
mere bam; it tickles the child's ear; but I heartily despise it. Not but that I
give to a fine form its proper portion of praise. I am perfectly sensible to
handsome features* I like to see the proper proportions of red and white: I am
very well pleased with a sparkling pair of eyes; but I have no idea of calling
any of these what they really are not, nor of comparing them with objects to
which they have no likeness whatever. For instance now, your bosom is said to
be purer than the driven snow: If that is not carrying the jest as far as it
will fairly go, I don't know what is. Snow, quoth'e -- Why, Madam, if a
snow-ball and your bosom were shown together, and any thing in the world but a
poet to be the judge, he would say that you were a swarthy gipsey in the
comparison. But how you ladies can be pleased with all this high flying is to
me astonishing, -- Zoon^. Priscilla, how can this be? If a man was to compare
me to a stick or a stone, or a tree or a plant, that I was no more like than I
am like the main ocean, should I perk up my head, and look about me the more
for that? As to features, skin, complexion, etc. they are so tr^l^ things of
today, that if I was a woman, I should be afraid to put any trust in them. They
have more enemies than the ever-persecuted have. I could recount such a
catalogue as would make Your hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fretful por^^pine.
Go into your garden -- fix your attention on the fairest flower* take care
that it is in the luxuriance of its bloom. Did you ever behold tints more
exquisite, scollops more exact, colors better mixed, or beauties better
varied? Now leave it. Pay it a second visit to morrow morning. What are you
surprised at? That a flower should fade! A slight blast of wind in the night
has wholly destroyed it; the tints are dead; the colors are faded; the beauty
is no more. Step now to your toilette. Indeed, Priscilla, you are very pretty:
What a face, what an air, what a shape! In the evening one of the thousand
enemies of handsome features overtakes you, and your second visit to the mirror
shows -- an ugly woman. I believe you have wit enough to see whereto all this
tends -- it tends, Priscilla, to your instruction. I would not have you fi^ too
violent a dependence upon features. Nor do I, Priscilla, e^timate you according
to your wealth: Certain it is, old Prudish, your father, left you rich; but I
wish you were not so fascinated with these possessions. I heard you (...) in
such raptures of a new coach, and new diamonds, that I am ^uch afraid you are
far gone in the frippe^ies of life. A slight fever would soon show you the
impotency of gold, and it would divest of all the trappings in which you have
wantonly dressed the finest fe^t of horses in the universe. Every thing I have
mentioned is held on a sad tenure, even the tenure of a regular pulse. I think
there is under all your false ideas a good heart; it is this, Priscilla, which
draws me toward you. I think I could banish the frailties that cling at
present about your affections. If you can bear me after this letter, I shall
have a better opinion of you than ever: If you are offended, and take pet at
it, I shall lose you, it is true; but then I shall know by experience, that
your love was not worth seeking. I know we should live very happy together, if
you would but comply with my terms. They are neither difficult nor various:
1st. Break your looking glass. 2d. Turn all your poets out of doors. 3dly.
Throw their verses into the fire; and, lastly, Make a solemn vow never more to
put your trust in metaphors and comparisons, two cursed things which have done
more injury to young women than libertinism itself. What say you, will you
agree to these conditions, and take to your bosom, without either lace on his
coat, poetry in his head, or puppyism at his heart,

Your old friend, and humble servant, PETER PLAINMAN?

The End of the SECOND VOLUME.
BELL's Book Store, in Third-Street, October 7, 1782. The THIRD VOLUME, which
will complete this new and entertaining work will be finished about fourteen
days from this date. Price, Half a Dollar, each Volume.
Now selling at BELL's Book Store in Third Street,
1. THOMSON on the Four Seasons: Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; with Poems
on several Occasions. Three Dollars 2. HOME, Lord KAIMS, his Six Sketches on
the History of Man; including his History and Progress of the Female Sex. Three
Dollars. 3. YOUNG's Night Thoughts on Life, Death, and Immortality; with his
Poetical- Paraphrase on part of the Book of Job, and his Poem on the Last Day.
Three Dollars. 4. VOLTAIRE's Miscellanies, containing the Pupil of Nature, the
Princess of Babylon, Zadig or the Book of Fate, an Oriental History. Three
Dollars. 5. SONGS, by George Alexander Stevens, the greatest master of
Sing-Song in the Universe. Two Dollars.
EMMA CORBETT: EXHIBITING HENRY and EMMA, THE FAITHFUL MODERN LOVERS; AS
DELINEATED BY THEMSELVES, IN THEIR ORIGINAL LETTERS.

PUBLISHED BY COURTNEY MELMOTH. Author of the PUPIL OF PLEASURE, etc. etc.

Ah pass not yet. If thou did ever know
The tenderest touches of impassioned woe!
Pass not: If truth, and fortitude, and love,
Can stay thy footsteps, or thy spirit move!
MONUMENT OF EMMA. THE THIRD AND LAST VOLUME.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXXII.

LINES written by a LADY, after reading THOMSON'S SPRING.
ADVANCE celestial nine, and tune the strings,
Assist my timid muse the while she sings,
And teach her, in the most exalted strains,
To found his praise who in her favor reigns.
Immortal Thomson! though, alas; no more,
Thy genius lives in true poetic lore;
How does thy charming Spring adorn the page,
Delight the young, give pleasure to the sage!
Description lends her aid, and hence arise
The flowerets ri^ ^ith variegated dies!
Jonquil of yellow ^ue, and blushing rose,
In potent fragrance all their sweets disclose;
The purling rills thy muse was wont to praise,
Whose lucid current glides in winding maze,
Is sure an emblem of thy flowing verse,
From the fair stream what beauteous thoughts emerse;
Apollo's harp not more melodious proved,
When he of Daphne sung, the nymph he loved.
Than thy harmonious lyre when thou defined,
The exalted passion of the human mind,
And trill'd like him the charms of love refined.
Eaxton, a town in old England. CLARA.

The following little Poem was wrote in a blank leaf before Thomson's Seasons,
as a compliment to that ingenious Author, by his great admirer and namesake,
the Rev. Mr. William Thomson, some time Fellow of Queen's College, in Oxford.
HAIL, NATURE's Poet! whom she taught alone
To sing her Works in numbers like her own:
Sweet as the thrush that warbles in the dale,
And soft as Philomela's tender tale.
She lent her pencil too, of wondrous power,
To catch the rainbow, and to form the flower,
Of many mingling ^ues; and, smiling, said,
(But first with laurel crowned her Favourite's head)
"These beauteous children, though so fair they shine,
"Fade in my SEASONS, let them live in thine."
And live they shall the charm of every eye,
'Till NATURE sickens, and the SEASONS die.
This much celebrated Work of THOMSON on the FOUR SEASONS, Price Three Dollars.
May be had at Bell's Book-Store.

EMMA CORBETT.
LETTER XCIX. TO EMMA CORBETT.
UNgrateful Emma! perverse and insensate child! You merit neither the pangs you
cost me, nor the tenderness you receive from me, I gave you a reason cogent
enough to have weaned a worthy girl from a thousand Hammonds. To that I might
have added the sudden departure of a generous friend, who I now tell you (for I
can hold no longer) would have laid his fortune at your feet. This, indeed, you
must have seen, since nothing but the most extreme stupidity could remain
ignorant of those attentions which, for many weeks past, have been lavished
upon you by Sir Robert Raymond, a man, oh inconsiderate! who saved thy aged
father in the very crisis of his misfortunes; and, too delicate to demand as a
debt the tender returns of love, which he would have sued for as a favor, is
gone, almost brokenhearted, away. I had promised to conceal his confidence,
but you extort it from me: nay, you continue still to dote upon the wretch who
is fighting against all the best and dearest connexions of your family. I will
not endure it. You assume the language of decision, and call it the sentiment
of reason. You set yourself up as a judge, and lift your woman's voice against
the sacred principles of patriot and parent. It is not to be borne. Let me hear
no more on the subject. Cease your threats about daggers, darts, and death. I
look DOWN upon such romance. Forbear to urge me. You are not to learn the
touches of my temper. My principles are not less sacred than your passion. Your
principles! What are they? Airy nothings. Mine are the solemn affections of a
lover of his country, and a detester of its oppressors, a aetester of Henry
Hammond! Why will you drive me to this? I know nothing of his wounds; but if he
has received some, there is reason to suppose he has given more: at least his
bloody endeavors cannot have been wanting, and every one is in the bosom of
your father's native land. Your affection is that of a girl whimpering after a
boy. Is this an affection to be brought in competition with that glorious fire
which the love of liberty, and an abhorrence (as settled as it is sublime) of
rights usurped and faith broken? Is your pu^rile, yet headstrong inclination
worthy to be brought into consideration with the passion that fills the breast,
and fires the soul, of your affl^cted and off^nded father,

CHARLES CORBETT?

LETTER C. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
THE characters of my pen will discover to you the condition of my heart.
Sickness, sorrow, distraction, and despair, are the apologies I have to offer
for silence. Do not grieve for the news you sent, or rather that you sent me
such news. It inspires a thought whose influence chea^s me; but I want health.
Oh that I could recover! -- that I could gain but a little strength!

Enough. Writing will exhaust me. I must nurse myself. A new cause of sorrow
too! Sir Robert Raymond has -- Generous man! how I feel for him!

Louisa adieu. Pray for my recovery, I conjure you. I would use it to a worthy
purpose. I would apply it, as every gift of God ought to be applied.

Louisa, farewell. EMMA.

LETTER CI. TO EMMA CORBETT.
THE news of the day -- oh, how shall I relate it! The rebels, as they are
called, have cut to pieces the greatest part of --: And yet this is mere
newspaper report. Henry perhaps may be amongst those who escaped the slaughter.

I cannot support these strokes. I will enquire no more. Let us hope. --
Despair would kill me.

LOUISA CORBETT.

LETTER CII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
IT is sufficient. Let our researches cease. God Almighty bless my Louisa and
her babe! Heaven's pity and protection be upon them! Emma, bent on her knee,
offers this prayer to her Maker. It is her legacy. It is her last leave of love
and sisterhood.

Adieu! Adieu! Adieu! EMMA.

LETTER CIII. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
O RAYMOND, Raymond! my oldest friend, my truest companion! Pity, a^ pity the
anguish of a father -- pity a parent whose persecutions have driven away his
child! Emma has eloped. Heaven knows where she has wandered. Under presence of
visiting a friend near town, she went in one of the public stages, with intent,
as she said, to return in the evening. The friend whom she pretended to visit
was Mrs. Arnold of Richmond, on whom she had often called in a neighbourly way.
I remained therefore perfectly unalarmed till twilight. A tempest of thunder
and lightening happening about nine o'clock, I sent over a servant to Mrs.
Arnold's, imagining she might be afraid to come through it alone. The servant
returned from Mrs. Arnold with news that Emma called there for a few minutes by
way of morning ride, but went away in a great hurry. It was near midnight
before I received these horrid tidings, and then I ordered my horses to be
harnessed, and went at full speed to every house where the stages set up. The
people were all in bed, and I obtained answers to my questions with difficulty.
None were satisfactory. I traversed the streets in a distracted manner; for oh,
you know how I dote upon Emma! I could not give the coachman any direction, and
he continued dr^ggi^g me about; but I bid him go any where rather than to my
own house. No trace -- no clue -- no glimmering of hope! Hard hearted girl!
What though I urged her to forget the ungenerous Henry, am not I her father?
But I will be calm, I will c^^ her from my affections for ever. I am just got
home. It is day break. The servants are all dispersed to hunt after a runaway
g^. What a dreadful morning! The hemisphere is all in a blaze! -- The wind
blows hard! -- The firmament opens its fla^ing breast! -- I see into its
bowels. I am sitting all alone. Oh, my heart, what a thunderclap was there! --
It is now rolling along the sphere. Oh Emma, Emma, my daughter -- my child --
my darling -- where, where art thou? Another! WONDER WORKING GOD! Behold a
contri^e parent upon his knees, lame and decrepid as he is, to supplicate a
cove^ing for the beloved fugitive. Perhaps, Raymond, our poor disconsolate --
the mutual joy of our hearts -- perhaps some sudden stroke of -- I dare not
turn imagination that horrible way, No, no: Emma is at last disobedient, she is
base, she has abused her father, she --

Wherefore do not my servants return? Villains, how dare they sport with a
sorrow like mine? They know not what it is to be a parent!

Alas! I ^ave. They have not been long gone from me, and were they already to
come back, I should banish them from my presence for ever. I know not what I
would have. I only know, Oh Raymond, that the universe cannot contain a more
unhappy man than

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CIV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
AS your letter arrived, I was about to send to you an express. I have heard
from Emma. Oh, my friend, you must arm yourself with fortitude. The post
brought me the enclosed about an hour before dark. Emma lives, is recovering --
for the rest, prepare yourself. Prepare yourself to hear of fidelity, heroism,
and resolution, which claim admiration, even from us whom they afflict,
whatever be their issue.

I perceive that the present state of your mind, my dear unhappy Corbett, too
much resembles my own, for my company to serve you. Let us try the force of
separate reflection.

Read the letter of our beloved wanderer, and tell me what is to be done!

Yours, ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CV. TO SIR R. RAYMOND. The Enclosure from Emma.

SIR,
I CLAIM the assistance of a man whom I know to be generous, who honors me
with his esteem, and whom I venerate for the ancient friendship that has long
united our families. By the powerful force of all these feelings, I conjure
you, on the receipt of this letter, to visit my father. Assure him that his
dear, dear image lives unimpaired in my heart. Tell him that my absenting
myself in this manner is not the truant trick of a girl who triumphs in the
vexation of a parent, but proceeds from a motive most virtuous, most
irresistible, most conscientious -- from a duty that appeals to my heart, my
senses, and my soul. O let him not think that I glory in the necessity which
takes me one moment from him. I lament, I weep, I mourn over it. I could wish
that each duty went hand in hand, and that some of their objects did not lie so
wide apart from others. Superior to every deceit, I would have consulted my
father even on the present measure, but he will recollect the terror into which
his late conversations threw me, and will then be convinced how impossible it
was to risque such an ecclaircissment* Yet even now I will forbear to justify
my departure, because I would suffer some reproach myself, rather than try to
establish an irregular example. But the Power who is giving me strength to
sustain the great business I am about to undertake, has placed in my bosom
something which reconciles me to the enterprise. Oh Sir Robert, there is a duty
which must be performed -- at least attempted. Nature, reason, honor, and
faith the most hallowed, all stir within me; nay God himself, at the marking of
whose awful name I bow, seems looking down from his heaven of heavens with
approbation. I may seem to be romantic, when I mean only to show myself
sincere. All sort of research will be vain, I would not have yielded to the
least semblance of a scheme, which is most terrible to my nature, could it by
any means have been avoided. My father will call to mind certain sentiments,
and do me justice in his own dear bosom on this occasion.

Sir Robert Raymond, I ever desired to be uniform, and to reconcile the
distinct parts of my conduct with the whole. Yet I will bear up against the
charge of impropriety in this one instance for the sake of -- but further
explanation is unnece^^ary. Go then, oh amiable mediator betwixt parent and
child -- go, and plead my cause in all the eloquence of friendship. Obtain for
me the paternal pardon -- sustain his heart, and do not leave him a prey to
sorrow.

Excuse my forbearing to give you my address. Pity the concealments which are
thus imposed. Be it sufficient that I will continue to send you accounts of
myself at every opportunity.

Oh, farewell! EMMA CORBETT.

LETTER CVI. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
YOUR letter, Sir Robert, with its dear and dreadful enclosure, came to hand.
It is now before my eyes, which are streaming in penitence for the phrenzy
which has banished my daughter. I now behold the whole matter too plain. Oh, my
friend, I treated the most dutiful of children with unwonted harshness, and in
the patriot I extinguished the parent. I expected that a soul like Emma's
should circumscribe itself within the pale of politics. Curse on the rage of
party! Execrated be the tyrannies of war. Ah what are causes, countries,
worlds, to the loss of one dear child, adorned with the virtues of Emma Corbett
-- Blind, doting zeal: what have thou to do with an old man's heart? What,
with the sacred season of the silver hair? Is mine an age to engage in these
tumultuous subjects? No. I should have taken my darling daughter to my bosom,
and with an enlarged benevolence prayed fervently for the returning embrace of
a divided people. That would have been true patriotism and true philanthropy.
Instead of which, dolt and dotard as I was, I mixed with hotheaded giddiness
in the affray. I interested myself in every fugitive breath of vague
intelligence; and, while I talked of justice, I was encouraging slaughter;
wholly forgetting, or too blood-thirsty to remember, that either army is
composed of kindred and of countrymen. Behold Raymond, how I am punished! But
where, where all this time is Emma? No date! No address! A young creature
unfriended, alone, of a delicate frame, and harrassed by fatigue! Sick also!
Never used to travel unattended -- Oh heaven! But she will return. The thought
makes me easier. Let me indulge it. How tender will I be to her -- with what
fondness will I hang upon her neck, and hide her blushes in my bosom -- how
will I talk -- how soothe -- how console her -- oh I will kiss her into
confidence and composure. I will even converse -- (pardon me Sir Robert, pardon
the effusions of a repenting heart) -- I will even converse upon her darling
theme. -- The name of Henry shall be mentioned, and if it does her good, not
without tenderness, Alas! what has the youth done, but -- Yes, yes, Emma will
return. She must. She shall. The slender and trembling thread of my being is
sustained by no other hope.

I have sent advertisements to the papers, inviting her home, describing
person, circumstances, and situations, but concealing names. I have dispatched
various messengers to all the ports to have her tenderly entreated, almost
cordially controuled, should her romantic nature -- for oh I suspect she
meditates -- Was there ever any thing so wild -- But she will never be able to
carry it into execution, and I will not even suppose it practicable. She will
return. I shall recover the treasure of my age. But the interim is anguish --
oh, hasten my friend to soften it. I am sick, and Emma is not at my side. I see
her not at the harpsichord -- I hear not her enchanting ^e -- I contemplate not
her lovely features -- all, all the exact images of her dear mother -- her
mother! who would shudder in her grave were she --

A servant enters to tell me there is nothing but her own little money-box
missing. Her clothes are all above stairs. I dare not go to look at them. I
dare not open the door of her chamber. It would certainly be my death.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CVII. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
I AM not sorry you found it inconvenient to meet me. Objects of gloom, I know
are intolerable to you. Castleberry at present affords little else. I used, my
friend, to fly from these as assiduously as yourself. Yet now they are become
very dear I love the solitude which this scene affords me. It was lately
adorned by the society of Emma. Ah elegant and hapless girl! She has not only
eloped, but engaged me to justify the step she has taken to her father. Oh
Frederick, her language is so sweet, her power over me so resistless, and her
firm affection for this happy Hammond, this heroic rival so respectable, that
my whole soul yields implicit obedience to the very desires which involve me in
despair! What, of things possible, would I not do to secure to her but one
moment's happiness? Alas! my friend, sincerely as I know you love me, I dare
not tell you all that I intend to do Yet consider a young creature about to
venture on the wild and uncertain ocean, moved by a sacred impulse in favor of
a worthy lover, who himself left a blooming mistress, whose society he consents
to sacrifice to his country. Consider also this lover, as one who is the choice
of Emma, and is every way suitable to her in pe^^on as in age.

When you have maturely weighed these circumstances, then tell me what at my
age and under my circumstances I ought to do. My friend, no man knows what
virtue or what energy there is in him till after the hour of serious exertion.

There is a project, Berkley, rolling in my mind, and if on a little more
reflection I can reconcile it wholly to the dictate that uniformly sways me, I
shall undertake something that will excite your ridicule. But for any thing of
that kind I shall be prepared. I have only two great powers to consult, my
reason and my conscience. What they inspire can never be laughed away. Laugh
then, but do not forget that your mirth is at the expense of a friend who is
seriously unhappy.

Adieu! ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CVIII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
PORTSMOUTH.
I AM writing in a common public-house at this town, from whence in about half
an hour I shall set off for America. I ^m resolved to perform this voyage at
all hazards. Do not, dear Louisa, accuse me of wanting confidence because I did
not acquaint you with my design. I could never support the idea of involving a
friend in the perils of a trust, which may produce altercation in the issue.
When the soul is settled in its plan, it is useless to ask advice; and to
enjoin secrecy in any family matter, is generally to embroil the person
entrusted with some part of it or another.

The haste and agitation in which I write is not to be expressed. The house is
crowded with sailors and their parting friends. I am equipped with a proper
disguise. No matter what embarrassments I have had to procure or to put it on.
The wind does not allow me leisure for descriptions. I am going as a cabin
passenger in a vessel called the Henry. The very sound of the name affects me
with a sweet superstition. A boat is coming from the ship to take me on board,
and the captain is already here, pouring brandy down his throat as if it were
so much water. I sport thus with circumstances to take all your grief away upon
my account, O my beloved sister; for you see I am equal to the task. The
boatmen appear. They tell me the gales are favorable. The first view of the
ocean is awful. But it leads to Henry.

Adieu. The mariners are impatient. They call me fair-weather sailor, which is
a joke levelled purely at my complexion; but they have no suspicion of Emma.
Oh, farewell! They hurry me. I must fold up the letter -- I must bid you indeed
adieu.

EMMA.

LETTER CIX. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
FR^DERICK, I am now resolved. Away selfish weaknesses -- away all that is
unbecoming the period of my life. Come onward ye powers of more suitable
attachment. Come divinest image of graceful and honorable FRIENDSHIP -- come
and poss^ss me wholly.

Berkley, I have made up my mind, and it is easier. My spirit settles. I
recover from the giddiness of passion, and rise to more disinterested joys, in
which the appetites have no share.

Adieu, my friend. I am preparing again for sea. You guess my destina^ion. I
follow the fortunes of the incomparable Emma in her ^ender pilgrimage over the
wav^s. There, by this time, floats the fair and faithful fugitive. My servant
is packing up. -- Oh, let me go catch the disconsolate Corbett by the hand, and
linger not another moment.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CX. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
YOU were scarce gone twenty minutes, my most generous Raymond, ere a letter
came to hand by private conveyance -- a letter, my friend, whose contents -- oh
Sir Robert, I sink under the double conflict of delight and of d^spair.

Inexplicable Providence! I have yet a son. Edward still lives. At this
tumultuous moment I am dropping the fa^her's tear upon the bl^ss^d paper that
presents the news. Oh for some few months of firmer health! This unmitigable
disorder^ which chains me to the chamber and the chair! Go then, my friend --
go, most admirable! most excellent! fly to my children! Ah, that a parent's
heart-heaved sighs could speed your vessel on its way! God give it swiftness.
Happily you may yet see, and yet save, my children.

Oh, if you should --

-- forgetting all agony, I have dropped involuntarily upon my knee to enforce
the prayer --

Oh, if you should, I conjure you to exert yourself! Tell Emma I relent. I
yield to her pleading softness -- I am no more the mad Patriot -- I am
henceforth all the parent. Tell Edward that I adore his virtue, but tremble for
his life. Tell him, enough of civil blood will be shed without swelling the
current by any stream from his veins. Bid him then yield up the -- Ah heaven!
what am I about to say -- he cannot remain neuter. All things forbid it -- his
honor -- his principles -- his life -- his soul -- his country.

-- What, Raymond, shall I do, and whither shall I turn? What are my late
misfortunes to compare with these? My son and my daughter both -- both taken
from me. Yet go, my friend. This follows you by express. If I never see you
more, farewell for ever.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CXI. E. CORBETT TO HIS FATHER.
AFTER having been thirteen months agonized amongst the wounded, and more than
once considered as the prize of death, I am at length able to write a few lines
to acquaint you that I exist; by which information, I flatter myself I shall
make a father, a sister, and a friend, most happy. The arm and shoulder, which
were wounded, are at length cured without amputation* but the half of the left
cheek is gone. These tidings I had caused to be conveyed to England long since,
by letters sent at different opportunities, by various means of conveyance; but
as I have not received your replies, I fear either those miscarried, or mine
have never reached you. Indeed, war puts a dreadful stop to this branch of
communication, although the only one which can relieve the pains of so perilous
an absence.

WASHINGTON offers me the means of future retreat and inactivity, in
consideration, I suppose, of my scars. But I am now too far engaged to accept
this with any honor. I wish it may be no more necessary to fire; and they talk
indeed of peace, but there is no real prospect of such a blessing being at
hand. I fought, at first, in my own defense, and must, I fear, continue to do
so still. The English persist to call those cowards whom they prove to be men,
and feel to be heroes. Tomorrow I shall once more fix the bayonet, and
shoulder the musket. Every man fights in this country; we arm not for pay but
for property, not for the wages of war, but for liberty and life.

Wherefore does my old friend Henry stay idling at home, "Now half the Youth of
Europe are in Arms?" Why does he not take one side or the other, as principle
directs? He was wont to maintain with me warm disputes in favor of
Great Britain, but by this time his opinion must be changed, and the cause of
America must be dear to him, were it only in respect of her youth, her bravery,
and her misfortunes. Tell him I should be glad to receive him here -- to
receive him, in that case, as a brother; and on those conditions, too, we will
both return one day or another, and enjoy the fruits of a double marriage; for
notwithstanding your resistance, my father, I must still remind you that I have
a heart only for Louisa. God send all together, happy, of one mind, and in one
house: I care not in what kingdom or in what country.

EDWARD CORBETT.

LETTER CXII TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I WAS mounting my horse as your letter and its enclosure (which I return to a
father's throbbing bosom) arrived. I took my foot from the stirrup, to read, to
weep, and to rejoice.

Oh, Mr. Corbett, you ought never to despair. The Power who could raise your
son almost from amongst the dead, and who was indeed dead long since in the
imagination of his family, may yet preserve to you a daughter.

How all the links of this dear connecting chain cling togteher! It is surely
the hand of Providence which rivets each. I here devote myself an humble
instrument, and hasten to prove the sentiments I profess. Be comforted. My ever
dear Corbett, be comforted; and farewell.

ROBERT RAYMOMD.

LETTER CXIII. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
I AM an old man, in a sad, sick chamber, without any human being to smoothe
the thorny pillow. Oh Louisa, Louisa, I am bereft of all! Leave for a little
while your house, and hasten to mine. I now fondly approximate every person who
has been dear to any part of my family, and who has had more claim to our
tenderness than the sister of Henry? Yet let me not forget in my sorrow to tell
you of one joy that sparkles in the cup of bitterness which is allotted me to
drink. My son Edward lives, and he mentions Louisa Hammond not coldly! Come and
let us talk of him together. All ambitious views are worn from my heart. Renew
your gentle hopes, and fear not to avow them. Ah that Henry and Edward were
both safe from the calamities of war, and both within the reach of these
paternal arms! Oh you know not the pain in which I write. Come then, if the
father of Edward -- the yet existing Edward -- be estimable.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CXIV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
PROVIDENCE and GOD! What have I read -- Is it not vision -- Is it not delirium
-- Is it not the vapor of the soul for ever painting its idol image -- Edward
alive -- Oh the poor Emma -- the generous Henry -- the godlike Edward -- You
have transported me. I know not what I write. Ease me, satisfy me. I cannot
bear it. I am in heaven. I am distracted.

LOUISA HAMMOND.

LETTER CXV. TO LOUISA HAMMOND.
WHAT would I not give to recall the heedless thing I have committed to the
post? A servant has been to the office to recall it, but it is gone. In the
hurry of my heart I have ^bruptly told what should have been opened by the
gentlest gradations. But if you are greatly afflicted, it will, I trust, be of
a joyful nature, and produce no mischief.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CXVI. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
I AM commissioned by a friend, on whose veracity I can depend, to impart a
piece of new^ to my Louisa, which is delightful as unexpected. It is foreign
news, and America has some sort of connection with it; but I cannot be more
explicit till I know what present health you are in possession of, since the
least alarms are not to be hazarded in a state like yours.

Tell me that you are very stout, and you shall hear more.

I am sorry my business detains me so long from you. It is nearly finished, and
then I shall be wholly at your service.

For Emma, what can I say, but that she is a glorious girl?

CAROLINE ARNOLD.

LETTER CXVII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
IT is every way confirmed. The pleasure is too mighty -- my very brain turns
with transport! Yes, I will fly to your chamber -- I will fly to my father. Oh
prepare, prepare to receive another daughter, for I am -- I am -- how shall I
speak it -- I am no more the widow, but the WIFE of Edward -- And we have a
son. I will bring him under my arm. I cannot explain -- I am too happy. should
I not be happy. My husband lives, and his father at length acknowledges

LOUISA CORBETT.

LETTER CXVIII. TO LOUISA CORBETT.
OH my child, my child! my arms are open. -- Let them embrace and own you
without delay.

The coach shall be at your door early in the morning, and convey you to -- a
parent in

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CXIX. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I WRITE, sitting on the side of Louisa's bed. She cannot have the pleasure to
attend you at present, being suddenly taken ill.

Do not therefore think of sending your coach till you hear further from

CAROLINE ARNOLD.

LETTER CXX. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I TROUBLE not my dear father with relating the dangers of the sea, the
tempests which have deformed its bosom, nor the various inconveniences I have
experienced since I lost sight of every object I had be^n accustomed to behold.
My soul has been too intently occupied with what I have left, and with what I
am in search of, to afford any sensations of common fear or common curiosity.

I cast the eye of steady attachment over this undulating world, and imagine
myself guarded from all the ordinary dangers of the ocean, by the protecting
Power who proportions my spirits to the toils they undergo.

I escape suspicion from the crew. I write without knowing the time I may be
able to send. The unsteady motion of the vessel distorts the characters of my
pen: so do not attribute to distress of heart what is the effect of mere
situation.

Adieu; oh, adieu. Of every letter I will send duplicates, that no chance may
be lost to ease your suspense.

EMMA.

LETTER CXXI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
ACCIDENT favors me. I trace the footsteps of Emma. I am now in the house from
which she lately departed. On my arrival here I overheard some sailors upon the
quay reading aloud one of your advertisements, after which two of them swore it
must mean the fair-looking boy who lodged a few nights ago at the ship, and
sailed in the Henry letter of marque. I caught at this, and am so far rewarded
in my enquiry. Farewell. The opportunity of following your child presents
itself. Adieu.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXII. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
OH, Mr. Corbett, the abrupt joy produced by your late intelligence, has
counteracted the tender design^ of Ed^ard, and thrown his poor Louisa into a
condition which makes me tr^^ble. The settled calm of her mind has long been
overthrown, and I, who have been her almost constant companion, can assure you,
that when she has thought herself the most tranquil, she has been nearest that
state which of all others, in this sorrow-teeming world, is the most affecting.
Indeed, sir, you should have been less precipitate -- yet you meant kindly. You
acknowledge her for a daughter. It is impossible to tell you in what a style of
enthusiastic gratitude she speaks of this. All will be well, and yet -- soft!
she wakes! Oh what a look! how wild! how fearful! I must leave of writing.

CAROLINE ARNOLD.

LETTER CXXIII. TO MRS. ARNOLD.
A CURSE attends all I do, and all I say. Oh that I could find the wretch who
still cherishes the deathful spirit of this exterminating war! I would rush
upon him, and seize him as the betrayer of both the bleeding countries which he
has sacrificed to the lust of dominion, and the avarice of power. Alas, the
misfortunes which he has brought upon the state are contemptible in the
comparison with that anguish, that horror, that desolation, which rends away
the softening ties of private life! -- which tears the heart-string^ of family
and friend.

Man of blood, come forward! -- if thou art bold enough, stand forth! -- meet
the swollen eye of a father, whose house thou have despoiled of all his little
treasure!

Oh Mrs. Arnold, this rage is vain. My soul is compounded of ten thousand
violences, each retrograde, each inconsistent! I am execrating myself, for have
I not myself pushed on the terrors I deplore? I have. Fool! Dotard! Villain!

Hah! Letters are brought. The knock of the post goes through my heart. Away,
vile stannels! The well-known characters carry off all bodily sensation as I
behold them. I have them before me --

-- Oh horror, horror! Oh my child, my Emma! -- Read, pity m^ -- ah no, read
and detest me.

CHARLES CORBETT.

LETTER CXXIV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire. The Enclosure from Emma.

AMERICA.
BOUND by promise, by obligation, and by the laws of nature, to send you
faithful accounts of myself, I dare no longer conceal the incidents which have
happened to the veriest wretch that ever --

My dear dear parent, turn all your anger into compassion, if all that remains
of Emma be yet dear or yet alive in your remembrance.

Our vessel has been attacked, has fought, and is taken. Oh the mountains of
men, murdered by men, that lately lay strewed about me! My blood runs cold!
some of it indeed is shed, for I am wounded; but it is slightly, and in no
important part. Ah that it were a death's wound, rather than --

-- I am watched. Pens and paper are objects of suspicion.

Ah what have they to fear? Emma is no intriguing captive -- she is a prisoner,
and a mourner who bows to her fate. She resists not.

I must hide this poor remnant of narrative in my bosom.

Fresh prisoners are brought.

They are entering! What crowds! What --

Oh my God, is it possible! -- do not my eyes --

SECOND ENCLOSURE FROM SIR R. RAYMOND.
CORBETT, the seal of Providence is surely upon my enterprise! Oh happy chance!
I have at once saved and rescued your daughter. I^ pleased God to carry me into
the same place of confinement, where I found her mingled with the multitude of
our unhappy countrymen. A violent shriek upon my entrance betrayed her to me.
Her man's apparel became no longer a veil to hide her from eyes so familiar
with her voice and her features. She fainted in my arms.

The prisoners were too much involved in the sullen gloom of their own
melancholy to regard the distress of another. The paper which I enclose,
spotted as you see, with drops of blood from her own lovely arm, fell from her
bosom. By the time she recovered, one of the officers who had guarded us
approached. -- She looked at him a moment (it being the first time she had seen
him since he came in) and then sunk without any appearance of life upon the
floor. She lay as a corpse.

Oh merciful Heaven! -- Oh God, great and gracious God! cried the officer, it
is -- it is -- it must be Emma -- it must be my SISTER.

Presently, Emma and Edward Corbett (for it was your son, my friend) were both
embracing upon their knees.

It was no time to explain. She was moved out of the prison. I was permitted to
attend. Edward Corbett in his own arms conveyed her to an apartment. He
obtained leave of absence from the farther duties of the day. He was the nurse
of your poor Emma. Oh, Mr. Corbett, I was not idle.

Washington happened to be quartered at the same town, preparing the maneuvers
of a new attack. He is easy of access; and being at liberty on a parole of
honor, I gained an interview.

Ah, can you not guess its motive? what could it be but the freedom of the
captive Emma? The General heard the story of her love as I related it. I
concealed no part from him but that which had reference to my own former folly.
I brought the narrative down to the moment of reciting it. The soldier's cheek
was not without the graceful dignity of a tear. He wept.

Sacred, said he, be the rights of hospitality: I am not at war with the
affections. Ever privileged be their emotions. I feel them all. The beauteous
prisoner is at liberty, Sir Robert, to go where she pleases. I shall appoint
persons to attend her, who may prevent all interruption and insult; but you,
methinks, Sir Robert, should continue to follow her fortunes as a friend, --
you are both free.

I flew to Edward Corbett with the tidings. Emma had by this time acquainted
him with her situation.

At what a moment did I enter the room! Your son was pronouncing, or rather
attempting to pronounce, the names of wife and parent, of Louisa and his little
Edward. And have I then these blessings, (cried he) and is my father yet in
ignorance what claims, what doubly tender claims, Louisa Corbett has upon him?
He then pressed his sister in his arms, and they wept together.

Surprises came too fast upon the hapless youth. He knew not that Henry was
under arms. He did not know that he was an enemy. Yet he dropped for a while
the fierceness of the soldier, and acted as a man -- as the child of nature --
as the husband of Louisa, and the brother of Emma. Then go, my sister, said he,
your career is too glorious to be checked. In contemplating your conduct, I
rise above all the prejudices of party. Alas, my sister, I know too well the
sorrows of love and separation not to respect them. You find me here the foe of
Henry, bu^ it is not now the day of battle, and were he at this moment here,
should I not expand these arms to receive the lover of Emma? Go then. But we
are on the eve of a desperate undertaking. Our army moves tomorrow. I tremble
for thee! Perhaps we may never meet more -- perhaps -- ah retire, retire, my
best-loved sister, ere the idea of losing you for ever should tempt me to break
my promise, and --

-- This fraternal kiss, this affectionate embrace, and farewell. Give me not
leisure to ^efl^ct, let me not have opportunity to consider the consequences of
thus -- Ah take her from me* Sir Robert, she is gaining on my affections, and I
shall not be able --

Here he stopped, Mr. Corbett; Emma beheld the gathering storm of tenderness
coming on, and exerting a resolution more than human, as fearing she should be
prevented from pursuing the great object of her adventure, which was even
dearer than a brother, she caught me by the arm, and shortened a scene too
poignant to be continued.

No sooner were we alone -- I am interrupted. Farewell.

IN CONTINUATION.
No sooner had we got beyond the reach of those sighs which were breaking from
the heart of Edward, than his lovely sister fell upon her knees, pressed my
hand to her bosom, and spoke thus. -- On generous deliver, I devote to thee the
first moment which the confusion of crouding incidents allow to pour forth the
tribute of my gratitude. I ask not the means by which Heaven directed you to
me, but I feel the motive of your voyage so pathetically, so perfectly, so --
ah Sir Robert, wherefore do you heap on me this agonizing goodness? Wherefore
did you pursue the footsteps of one whose pre-occupied heart and plighted hand
make it impossible to reward your kindness or your generosity? Not even a
beloved brother, whom I thought breathed no more, not even Edward, long lost
and newly found* could prevail with me to forego the purpose of my pilgrimage.
No, by this affecting effusion of tears which are now ba^hing your hand* I
swear -- But it is unnecessary. Behold a woman firmly resolved, Sir Robert; oh
why are you then -- Indeed it is vain, indeed it is. Go then I conjure you,
return to my dear, my drooping father -- assure him that his Emma is in no
danger -- tell him that his darling son is found: Alas! how I forget myself, of
this you say he is already informed, but at all events return; it is to no end
that you follow me: how can you expect --

I expect it not Miss Corbett, said I, attempting to raise her up.

Here will I remain, cried she, till you pledge to me your honor that you will
here close the debts which it will never be in my power to discharge. It is no
place or time for arg^ment, Sir Robert. You are even now preventing me from the
great business of my life* I beseech you to leave me. I am not ignorant of your
passion, but I thought your prudence in never revealing it to me by your own
mouth -- in short, sir, I must insist on --

I saw her mistake, my dear Corbett, and briefly explained it. H^w shall I
describe to you the emanation, the burst of tender gratitude, when she found --
but indeed I do not deserve half she said, or half she thought.

Alas! it is passion still that drives me on -- not, indeed, the passion which
partakes of one gross image, or of one vehem^nt appe^i^e. P^ed be the wretch
who persecutes an engaged heart. Yet I love to see, to serve, to oblige her. --
I love to --

Again interrupted! No wonder. I am writing amidst scenes of constant
disturbance. The seats and theaters of war are before me The guards of a
generous enemy, in compassion to private woe, are in front and in rear. It is
all deathful preparation. There is no prospect of peace. On every brow is
defiance. In every eye flashes the bloody determination. We hear the shrieks of
widows, and daughters, and fatherless children, as we move forward. Families
are bu^ied in burying their dead, rescued from the corruption of promiscuous
carnage. Hearses and funerals pass thick along. The bell of death tolls out in
every street; but Emma is still fixed in her design. Her eyes melt, her
countenance is pale, but her heart pants with love, and her soul is undaunted.

Adieu!

IN CONTINUATION.
Oh sacred force of sovereign tenderness! Emma has tidings of her Henry. Our
enquiries have at length terminated in success. He is now with his regiment off
John's Town. Thither we are bending our course with the utmost expedition. I
send you not the minutiae of intervening adventures. They yield to enterprises
of greater moment. We are within one day's journey of the place.

By Heavens, Corbett, the roses are suddenly thrown over the cheek of your
child, and the pale of fatigue and sickness, and loss of blood, (which has not
been inconsiderable) all give way to the joyful expectation of seeing her Henry.

Surely it requires only a generous effort to turn our disappointments to
amiable account. To conquer affection is not, I feel, always possible; but to
direct it from one worthy path into another, when the former is unfit or
unjust, is assuredly in our power. Henry himself cannot adore Emma more
sincerely than myself. My whole heart is here is; often it trembles, often it bleeds,
but the choice either to be the object of esteem or the object of aversion is
before me. Oh! I would not forfeit the partial sentiment which my conduct has
lodged in the breast of Emma, for any other earthly enjoyment. She owns me for
her friend, her first of friends She talks to me without reserve. She looks at
me sometimes till the heart's soft tear is in her eye. Ah, that tear! it is
more worth than the possession of all the reluctant beauty that ever gold,
grandeur, or importunity, extorted into their arms. I feel it stream over my
senses. Blessed sympathy! Pure effusion! Generous, glorious Emma!

I am penciling these informations of our route, sometimes in the vehicle and
sometimes in a room.

Emma has this moment desired the driver to stop. The door of the chaise is
open; she jumps out, saying to me in a whisper, that a lucky thought strikes
her.

I will follow her.

IN CONTINUATION.
God of all goodness! did thou ever create another Emma?

In passing along, she took note of some bushes which were covered thickly with
a dun colored berry that clustered in the h^dge-rows. I assisted her in
gathering these without daring to ask for information as to causes. She has an
air of entreaty which cuts short all curiosity about motive, and leaves us no
other solicitude than that of gratifying her by implicit obedience.

I knew not the design of Emma in picking the berries till the evening, and
then she explained to me their use.

Now for an experiment, dear Sir Robert, said she, taking up the bundle, and
going into her chamber at a publick-house where we baited at twilight.

In about an hour she re-entered -- she re-entered, Corbett; but oh, how
different from that Emma who had so recen^ly retired! You know the clear and
lucid w^ite that mixes with the eloquent bloom in her countenance -- you know
that rich tint of tenderness and ardour, of pat^etic softness and graceful
passion, which form her complexion. Imagine my astonishment at beholding these
discolored in the darkest shade of that peculiar disguise which the juice of
the berries we had collected cast over the skin. The stain was deep, strong,
and apparently fixed. It resembled almost exactly the hue of some of the
savages whom we had observed to be wounded in a town through which we passed.

It was certainly inspiration, (said Emma, rejoicing at the alteration as she
surveyed it in the glass.) Ah how preferable this precious dye, continued she,
to the fairest complexion in the world.

I shall assist Henry, I shall touch his dear hand, and attend him in every
danger, without distressing him by surprise, or disarming him by softness. Oh,
my good Sir Robert, romantic as may s^em the steps I have taken, be assured
that I proceed with the utmost caution. I do not even now design to interfere
with the horrid virtues of Henry's profession. I will not dare to place myself
betwixt him and his duty. I will share his dangers, but cannot consent any
longer to bear about a wretched being without at least attempting to render it
serviceable to my friend. Your generosity well fits you to receive these
apologies, if indeed any apologies should be necessary for the conduct of Emma
on this trying occasion.

I could not reply, Mr. Corbett. Even her avowals of the affection that she
bears to Henry become new sources of my tenderness and admiration. But we are
setting off again.

The next stage brings us to --

Adieu.

IN CONTINUATION.
Oh Corbett, Corbett, who shall anticipate a moment's joy, a moment's
satisfaction! By what an accident was my last sentence interrupted! -- Your son
-- your poor son -- your Edward, your dear, your darling Edward, is now indeed
--

Bear up, my hapless friend, against the storm. To learn to suffer is the
science of humanity. Each has his throes of heart. War, which levels millions
with the dust, has at length --

But oh the generous youth, in what a cause he fell! -- Unable to support our
departure, he obtained his furlow and followed us. The humane general permitted
him to seek his sister, and either guide her to the arms of Henry, or persuade
her to return. He promised ^o return in three days. Alas! he will return no
more. A party of the English were burning a village after a sudden attack.
Edward drew his unavailing sword to defend himself and the inhabitants, who
were flying different ways in terror and despair. And there my friend it was
your son received his wound -- his wound of death!

The conquerers drove off the cattle, loaded themselves with the ^i^s of
conquest, then suffered the peasants to escape, and returned to the troops from
whence they had been detached.

Edward bled fast; but having traced our route, he gave directions to the two
soldiers w^o accompanied him, and pressed onward. He was resolved once more, he
said, to behold his sister. The men, who were indeed of those under his
command, obeyed his orders, supported him on each side as he sat in the chaise,
till, poor young man! --

-- You know the rest. He sunk upon one of their shoulders, and with his dying
breath insisted on their taking his corpse to Emma, of whom he had received
tidings by the guide who had last left us, and whom he met on his return.

The poor fellows came on disconsolate with their dead master. They reached the
town where we stopped, and were passing the window of our inn, when we heard a
cry of -- "the armies are engaged, the armies are engaged!"

The postilion got from his horse; the two soldiers (who had taken the
precaution to alter their dress as American.) escaped from the carriage, and
joined the multitude that thronged the streets.

The body of Edward was deserted. Emma, (who had the just finished her remarks
on her disguise) seeing a man lie motionless, approached the chaise door, and
there she beheld --

Oh Mr. Corbett, what accumulated miseries is it fated for this virtuous woman
to undergo!

It Is I then that have caused thy death, thou beloved youth, said she! No
language can describe her agonies, but they were attended to by none but
myself: for the whole town was in consternation at the news of the engagement,
Every house was emp^i^d. The two armies had marched all night, and distributed
their forces. We heard of the largest parties being engaged off John's-Town,
and in that place was quartered the regiment of Henry. What was to be done?
Edward lay dead before us. Emma was folding his clay-cold b^^y in her arms. She
seemed to be (...) in a stup^r of ir^emediable grief. She forgot for awhile her
^y. The alarm spread every moment more wide -- horror exhibi^ed itself in every
possible form. To continue in such a si^u^^ion was madness: to leave the
breathless remains of Edward -- oh shocking thought! -- Oh Mr. Corbett, the
exigencies of wa^, and the terrors of a town under such a panic, are not to be
described* Old men were moving their d^crepid limb^ from door to door in
despair of escape, and mothers with their children went w^^ling by us.

With pious haste, these hands, assisted by my heart, (which is devoted to
every connection of Emma) prepared an hasty grave for the relics of your son,
-- Emma, touched at the ceremony* burst into a flood of tears, and exerting
herself beyond what is reported of her sex, joined in the last sad offices of
love.

We are just come from the sacred spot where Edward is deposited! Emma recov^rs
-- she has been several times upon her knees during my marking these
circumstances of our distress. Let us go on* Sir Robert, she says, or rather,
oh generous man, remain you here, and let me proceed; my duty to Henry yet
remains. --

It was in vain to expostulate. She saw the danger, but felt no emotions of
dismay. All feminine and gentle as she is, she ro^e above the spirit of
humanity.

I insisted on the privilege of attending. She pressed my hand within her^,
and we set out for the scene of action.

It was altogether an impulse of most solemn enthusiasm. Emma was resolved, --
and I am the friend of Emma.

Yet the tearful looks which she cast toward Edward's grave pierced me to the
heart. One hallowed kiss more imprinted upon that earth, Sir Robert, and I will
delay no longer. Pity a sister.

I stood at some distance, and saw the lovely one depart. O what minutes were
these! She came forward as if she had made up her mind, and then, while the
resolution seemed nearly formed, nature rel^psed again into a sister's
tenderness, and yet once more she embraced the earth.

At last, summoning her utmost strength, she exclaimed "the will of God be
done:" and then, in weeping submission, joined me.

IN CONTINUATION.
Surely Emma Corbett is an angel, and not a mortal woman! I have had ^ear
thirty hours severe sickness, a fever as violent as sudden seized me. It could
not have happened at a crisis more cruel, for we are in the very midst of
personal dangers; yet nothing could tempt Emma to leave me one moment. She has
nursed me a^ I were her child. She administered the cordials with her own dear
hand. Never was parent half so tender: such softness of gratitude -- such over
powering attention. Oh, bless her, bless her. I am now able to pass on, and to
pursue the footsteps of my beloved associate.

Adieu, Adieu.

IN CONTINUATION.
Oh Heavens! I tremble to tell you how ^ear we are to the field of battle!

We can hear guns firing in the neighboring woods. The English are skirmishing
with the rebels in twenty different parts of these environs.

IN CONTINUATION.
Yes, Corbett, Henry is amongst them. He is spoken of by these p^or trembling
peasants and their masters, as the most gallant officer in the army of the
British General. No person ventures now to go to bed. It is altogether a scene
of bloodshed, havoc, and horror. The feeble Emma droops under her fatigue.

I write as moments permit, resolved every way to show my affection to your
dear family as far as it be possible; though Heaven only can tell whether this
pacque^ will over --

-- Oh dreadful extremity! some wounded men are passing by us in a w^ggon, Emma
rushes forward to enquire of the drive^ i^ Mr. Hammond yet lives --

"He has been fighting since daybreak." Such the reply:

A young woman is a this moment following the corpse of her husband. It is
indeed too much. Emma is bowed to the earth. Oh, if she dies,

IN CONTINUATION.
Better tidings! The rebels are routed. We have traversed the environs, but in
vain: The English are said to be on their return to John's-Town. Emma breathes
in expectation. O for strength a little longer, and all will be well, Sir
Robert, says she. --

IN CONTINUATION.
The dreadful news is arrived. -- Oh Mr. Corbett, the blow is struck. The life
of your poor Emma must soon close, for Henry Hammond is -- how shall I speak it
-- Henry Hammond is DEAD.

IN CONTINUATION.
The men who have escaped the slaughter are returned and confirm the news. Emma
-- the agonized Emma -- is at the point of --

-- I cannot speak: I cannot write. I shall not survive her.

Adieu.
P. S. Perhaps this is the last account either of us may be able to transmit.
-- An officer, whom I have just met, is appointed to go off with dispatches to
England. The opportunity must not be lost. Oh Corbett, if you never hear more,
receive the last prayers of one whose life is valuable only as it can promote
the happiness of Emma: that being now for ever obstructed, for ever closed,
what is there in this world that can render tolerable the existence of such a
wretch as

ROBERT RAYMOND.



N. B. I have ventured to whisper it very softly to Emma, that I am about to
seal the packet which my trembling hand has written as it could snatch the
flying minute. -- " To my father! said she. Oh God, oh God! Tell -- tell him --

Here she folded her arms, looked up to heaven, tried to articulate more, and
sunk upon the bed.

Unfortunate Corbett* This fatal war has reduced all the honors and blessings
of your house to the dust. Alas! how many thousand fathers beside has it not
wounded beyond the reach of this world's remedies?

I have stolen from the chamber of Emma to scribble the enclosure in the
presence of proper witnesses, by whom it is attested. As we are dying in
virtue, do thou, oh venerable man, still try to live in peace, and await the
stroke which shall be commissioned from above, in God's good time, to summon
you to us.

One more look at Emma, that I may send you the latest intelligence.

She breathes --

The silver chord is not quite broken: yet the cold, cold dews descend so fast
--

N^ -- I have, after the pause of another hour, visited her again.

In her pulse there is yet promise. In her eye there is yet hope* Poor Corbett*
let it comfort you -- let it reconcile you to life.

A third time I have looked in upon her. The officer who is going to the
headquarters with the news of the various fortunes that have attended the
detached parties in this part of the country, has in great humanity, waited. I
told him, that a father's hapiness or despair was concerned in his obliging me.
His last minute is come. At that minute your cherub child appears to me -- for
I dare not deceive you -- from another hand it will come with a more crushing
weight --

-- Now, now -- even now, my friend, you are, I fear, within a few seconds of
being childless.

If her fever continues to rage another hour, as it rages at this crisis, no
earthly power can delay her passage to Heaven! At this we ought not to grieve
perhaps, but humanity, shaken to her center, cannot --

Oh, my God, I heard a shriek --

-- I dare not stay another moment. Oh, farewell.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire. From Henry Hammond.

THAT paragon of her sex, your daughter! That man too, soaring above the flight
of humanity, who attended her as the companion of all her perils, all her
pangs! The writer of this letter (or more properly speaking, the person by whom
this letter is dictated) is at a loss by what means, or in what language, to
convey to you the wonders which yet he is most anxious to impart.

By gentle degrees -- oh, Mr. Corbett, let me open upon you the blessings
which* by the contrivance of Providence, have been brought about, Summon your
heart to hear the best, the dearest news which is in the nature of human things
for you to hear. O let the agony of that information, which Sir Robert
Raymond's letter has doubtless produced, be, in great measure, done away, by
the happier tidings that will salute you in this.

The hand writing of the pers^n now dictating would too much discompose you. He
makes use, therefore, of an amanuensis to prepare the way to circumstances of
uncommon joy; and to give them to you in the security of more progressive
explanation.

The leading step to every other felicity you must hear first You, who have
deeply drank of the bitter cup, must now try to support, without intoxication,
the taste of sweeter ingredients.

From the point of death, your Emma has recovered. The interposing hand of
Heaven was suddenly extended.

Ten days after the departure of S^r Robert's packet, she was in a situation to
leave her bed. To what purpose did she leave it? Resolution, oh how sacred is
thy force, when animated by the breath of love!

If Henry be dead, said she, it is still the duty of Emma to pay him the
mournful offices which she has paid to Edward.

She insisted on searching for the corpse of the man who had caused all her
misfortunes.

The generous Sir Robert Raymond was at that time himself confined by sickness
which threatened his life: -- when he was out of danger, Emma gave him in
tenderest charge, and sat out, alone, toward th^se woods where some late
skirmishes had passed. On her way she had the precaution to use again those
berries which tinge the skin: to these she added a certain ba^k that had been
mentioned to her in the course of her various enquiries.

Behold, oh Mr. Corbett, behold the dear and delicate Emma, wandering
unprotected, in the woods of America. -- Behold her bearing over her tender
shoulder the mere necessaries of decent covering. -- Behold the most gentle,
and most female form exposed to all the dangers of a wild and unknown country
-- picking her food from the ^edges -- straying she knew not whither -- in
disguise -- in disorder -- in despair!

Incredible were the toils of her research -- incredible her fatigue. The
forests are here, you know, of great extent: the wilds immeasureable.

After several days traveling, during which time she had not encountered any
passenger who could give her the least intelligence, she sat herself down as
usual, about the noon, and wept over her misfortunes.

Scarce had she rested a moment, ere the clamor of human voices, shouting at a
small distance, caught her attention. She pressed hastily forward through the
foliage, and observed at a little aperture in the forest, a par^y of soldiers
engaging with a tribe of Indians; but while she was eagerly examining the
persons of the former, the latter were put to flight, and retreated with the
utmost precipitation: the soldiers pursued, and both were out of sight er^ Emma
had time to approach nearer to them.

She saw enough, however, to convince her that the regimentals were British,
and the uniform of the officers such as belonged to the regiment of Henry; you
will guess her despair when she did not perceive Henry amongst them.

The bodies of several English soldiers were seen in different parts of the
forest, but the corpse of Hammond could, by no diligence, be found.

Still indefatigable, she went on, though by this time reduced almost to the
last exigencies of nature, and every thing subdued but tender resolution, and
the love which inspired it.

At length, Providence relented to her wish^s, and directed her steps to a
bread common path way, across which was ex^end^d a human figure, lying as dead,
with an arrow sticking in his bosom. You already perceive, that it was no other
than Henry himself. This, you may perceive, but no tongue can give you the
faintest idea of that unparalleled heroism and fidelity, which now inspired the
soul of Emma! She found the body yet warm, the pulse slowly moving, and the
heart languidly bea^ing wi^h life. She extracted, the arrow, and sucked the
wound -- she had heard of the Indians using shafts whose points were envenomed:
and rightly concluding this to be one of them, applied to it her lovely ^ips
without hesitation. -- This additional danger was an additional motive to the
deed. Oh Mr. Corbett, what an angel is Emma!

Signs of existence increased. With scarce a covering from the ^^y, the
affectionate Emma sheltered her unfortunate charge for many days. Ere his
senses returned, she thickened her disguise by all the arts in her power. Oh
can any thing less eloquent than the great Author of Nature describe to you the
transport of this wondrous creature, when she first beheld the long closed eye
of Henry open on the light -- and open on herself?

Think, Mr. Corbett, how difficult concealment must have been at this extatic
moment; then, consider what presence of mind was necessary to repress the dear
and dangerous effusion. The silver tones of the softest voice in the world were
so artfully changed, as to correspond with the rest of her appearance. She fed
him with what the fortune of an hour's hunti^g amongst the fruits of the forest
afforded. He could not move. No soldiers returned. Men drop in a skirmish, and
are sought for no more! No house was near: no hu^: and she dared not stray too
far from the place where he lay, lest she should lose sight of the spot. But
now Henry felt the puncture of a want which even Emma could not accommodate.
Fruits and vegetables, collected by chance, as they grew obvious, and within
the beat of Emma's journeyings, were too unsubstantial. It seemed as if famine
would complete what poison had begun. For lack of proper nutriment, after
fatigues so imminent, he was reduced to an extreme of languor even worse than
that of Emma; whom tenderness seemed to have rendered superior to every thing
that could befall herself.

In these moments it was that Henry yielded to despair -- in these moments his
heart melted with gratitude to his protector --

Oh, generous unknown, (said he feebly) whosoever thou art, receive the dying
acknowledgments of the man whom thou have endeavored to rescue from an
untimely death. Had those kind endeavors succeeded, what thanks should thou
receive from one of the best -- the dearest -- But it may not be -- I am nearly
exhausted -- perhaps, ere yet another hour moves by --. Lest that should be the
c^se, let me, oh let me while yet I have the power to call down heav^n's
choicest blessings on that lovely mourner, whose tears are happily streaming at
this moment for the expi^ing Henry -- Ah Sir, all worthy youth, could thou
see her -- could thou attest for me these dying sentiments -- could thou
assure her that with my latest dreath -- But that is impossible; she is a
thousand leagues from these fatal shores. No matter. Oh hear me GOD! do thou,
this night, this instant, suggest to her what was my last employment -- my last
aspiration. Oh Emma! Emma! my life, my love! --

Here he fell on the bosom of Emma, and would indeed have died had he known it
was Emma that supported him.

She pressed his hand. She could not speak. To the Omnipotent Father of Mercy
she cast the imploring eye!

Let not the human heart give up its confidence in Heaven. It is never too late
to trust!

A team now passed within fight of this disconsolate pair. They were laden with
provisions and apparel drawn in fledges, and small wagons, and were on their
way to three detachments of soldiers, (who had applied to the General for these
accomodations) that were stationed on the north side of the forest. Amongst
this groupe were also some cattle, of which some were cows. It is unnecessary
to say what use the unwearied Emma made of these: her winning address, and the
moving simplicity of her grief, joined to the wretched situation of an English
officer who appeared to be almost at the point of death, gained so entirely
upon the soldiers and people who attended the fledges and wagons, that they
administered whatever could promote the wish of Emma, and even furnished her
with a fledge, a m^le, and a guide, to carry Captain Hammond to John's-Town.

Thus providentially saved from death a second time, I shall not trouble you
with other difficulties in the passage, or in the progress of Henry's recovery,
though the least of these were enough to immortalize Emma Corbett; but I shall
convey your imagination to John's-Town, where Henry and his protector at last
arrived, and found Sir Robert Raymond recovered from his fever, and just about
to set out again in pursuit of Emma.

To her assiduous cares were now superadded those of this excellent man, and
Henry became in a short time the nurseling of both* He could walk, converse,
and his wound was healing. Emma's dear perilous experiment was guarded -- the
prospect clear on every side. One afternoon Sir Robert gradually prepared Henry
for the softest surprise that could touch the heart of a lover; h^ discovered
himself to be the friend of Mr. Corbett -- he assured Henry that he saw Emma ^n
good health a little before he left England -- he asserted, in the strongest
terms, her constancy, her attachment, her love -- and said that such was the
force of her affection he should not wonder some day or other to hear that she
was arrived in America.

-- Yes, and in America she is arrived, cried she, (entering at this moment,
agreeable to the plan concerted) She is arrived (...) she is here -- she is now
in the presence of her beloved Henry -- she now offers him the hand of Emma for
EVER!

Emma was yet in her boy's apparel, but had washed the stain from her lovely
countenance, and discovered enough to throw Henry first upon his knee to the
restoring God, and then into the arms of this tenderest of women.

You will not expect I should tell you what either felt at that moment! You
will not expect I should describe the series of delicious. sorrow and
gratulations which followed, while all the enterprises of Emma were relating to
Henry. He found himself the most blessed, most honored, and most beloved of men!
He found Emma all that language cannot express. He found --

-- In short, it was a false rumor you see that reached Emma at John's-Town,
respecting the death of Henry. He was reserved for Emma to discover and to
restore.

He is discovered, he is restored. -- Emma is now before him -- Emma the most
generous, most --

-- Oh, Mr. Corbett! Henry is the happiest of mankind. He now TELLS you that he
is -- he dictates these explanatory sheets -- they flow from his grateful heart
-- the tenderest mercies of Providence have been upon him; they are to be seen
-- they may be felt: you will no longer refuse to give him the hand of Emma! ah
that he were worthy of her. Disclose, he beseeches you, these tender
circumstances to Louisa, his sister. Oh! he can hold no longer, he is too, too
happy; he takes the pen from the amanuensis and -- No! it is not necessary to
sign the letter, The writer is now known.

Adieu!

LETTER CXXVI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
THE blessings of Providence are at length manifest; since the packet from
Henry must, ere this, be come to band. It is not easy to tell you how totally I
have in them annihilated myself, for many days past. Henry recovers apace. The
attentions of Emma, indeed, so pointed and so pure, might almost raise him from
the dead. Yet I almost envy her the share she has had in this discovery, and
all its happy consequences. I can scarce forgive my illness for sei^^g me at
such a time. It is Emma alone who has been the savior of Henry. It is Henry
only who can merit such salvation. You can image to yourself nothing so tender
as his gratitude, so warm as his affections, or so perfect as his delicacy.
From his somewhat military style of address I expected not this, and am equally
surprised and delighted. Yes, my dear old companion, you have yet a daughter,
and will, in a few days, boast also --

Oh my friend, how infinitely I fall beneath the standard of my ambition! How
incorrect is human virtue! How frail is human fortitude! The prospect of
Henry's becoming your SON does not charm this rebel heart half so sincerely as
it ought to do; and yet, Heaven is witness, that I am doing every thing to
advance his health and his happiness

Self interested, perhaps, still. I d^nt on promoting the felicity of Emma by
any means. I am proud to please her. I consider the youth of Henry, and wish it
the joys it is formed to taste. I reflect on my own age, and think that I am
too silly to be pardoned. I am entirely convinced of my folly, and yet hug it
to my heart. Ah Mr. Corbett, what is there in that subtle and active principle
which we thus feed in our bosoms, and which turns, serpent-like, against the
nourisher? It stings, and we are not angry: it tortures, and we do not, cannot
command it to depart from us. Something, like the healing balm, flows into the
wound, and recompenses us for all we suffer The misery which is the consequence
of a tenderness like mine, is compounded of such sweet ingredients, that it is
not in the nature of the tender heart to wish it were removed. And yet, my
friend, it is most intense. I have found the vanity of attempting to argue
myself into neutrality* It is virtue and beauty that have attracted -- that
have bound me! Ere a soul like mine can free itself from such captivity, the
enchanting powers of its object must change; its beauty become deformity, and
its virtue vice. It Is out of the question. The great point of moral propriety
is in every man's power, and consequently in mine. The human heart loves as it
lists -- it sees its bias, and trembles toward it: but society, religion,
and the laws, are all to be respected, and he who presumes to overleap these,
renders himself contemptible.

Adieu. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXVII. TO THE SAME.
EMMA, in all the graces of the female dress, appears more lovely from the late
concealment of her charms. She has resumed her former self. -- Oh, Corbett,
what a woman! -- Happy, happy Henry! what years of bliss --

-- My friend, I am not well. -- I am not as I ought to be. -- I cannot write!
Farewell, farewell.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXVIII. TO H. HAMMOND, Esquire.
ABSENCE from home must have thrown your pecuniary affairs into disorder: at
any rate, the war must have rendered your remittances irregular. As a soldier
and a single man, you might dispense with these inconveniences; as a connected
man, about to take on him the sweet charge of providing for a virtuous woman,
you feel how much the case is altered. It is by mere chance I have found out
that you are waiting a supply from England. On the present occasion, that you
should want cash is most natural: that you should wait for it, is most cruel.
Luckily, I have brought with me enough to accommodate us both The enclosed may
answer an immediate purpose. You say you are my friend, show yourself such by
using what I offer till your return to England, when you will please to pay me
the amount. I am not, you see, involving you in an obligation, but drawing you
into a deb^* The only interest I shall desire, is, that my name may not be
mentioned to Emma in this business. These circumstances between u^ men are
nothing; -- they are things of course. Women, you know, look through a medium
so peculiar, and are indeed, whether married or single, so delicately
circumstanced, that a man of hon^^^ trembles to offer, what they tremble to
accept. I know you want money, and so don't be foolish.

Adieu. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXIX. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
HENRY grows importunate. He urges me to assure Emma, by virtue of my medical
knowledge, that his health is established. He affects unusual mirth and
vivacity to prove this. He is become intimate with the chaplain of the
regiment, who is engaged to perform the --

-- By Heavens, Corbett, I cannot bring myself either to forget these things,
or to think of them without misery. Inconsistent! I shall do all right
ultimately, but opposite sensations are at war within me. I walk in the proper
path, but I am too suscep^ible of the thorns which wound me.

Farewell. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXX. TO THE SAME.
TOMORROW, oh Corbett, is to be the day! -- Henry p^esse^ me to attend. He
knows not I have any reason for th^se heartfelt objections. Emma looks,
unutterable sympathy. She seems laboring for an apology. She pities me. Her
tears attest it. Henry beholds them descend, and kisses them away with a
trembling lip. What! give her to another -- be accessory to the last
circumstance of my despair! Oh most agonizing -- most impossible!

Yet Henry entreats -- he appeals to me in the name of parent, savior --

-- What shall I do? I wish them happy, happy even together -- but to be
present at the ceremony! -- to assist the stroke that cuts off every hope for
ever! Nature recoils at the task and I am too much the subject of her authority
to go through it.

Adieu. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXXI. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
OH my friend* receive the tribute of my sympathy. Generous man! what can I do
to soften the woes of which I am unhappily the cause? Invent, I beseech you,
some reason to absent yourself on the morrow. Call to your aid some pious
disguise to save yourself and me ten thousand wounds. Your presence will wholly
destroy the bliss of the day -- even of that day which gives to me the hand of
Henry. Indeed it will. I see your emotions. I see your conflicts. They escape
your soul's most amiable effort. They break through your bosom. I see them in
your tears. I feel them in your sighs. For my sake -- for your own -- for
Heaven's -- do not continue longer, much longer under our ^oof. I esteem you so
truly that I cannot bear the constraint which will soon be imposed. Your
virtues have placed you in the second place of my affections -- the second
place is friendship, and that is yours while I can distinguish -- while I can
feel one worthy sensation. But oh consider, that the first place is love, and
that is Henry's -- Henry my almost husband.

He presses, he importunes, he insists, in all the emphasis of tender
controulment, that tomorrow may be the day. He almost chides me for coldness
of sentiment toward him.

-- Alas, my dear friend, it is your sorrow, painted in your countenance, and
in your late conversation when we have been together, which produces this
grateful reluctance.

I owe you -- ah what do I not owe you? I would do much -- I would do every
thing that is possible to serve you.

The billet you sent me this morning cuts me deeply. You there hint your design
to leave Philadelphia. --

I perceive the motive; nay, you disdain disguise, and have in part avowed it.
All but this, you say, you can support. My dear, dear friend -- author of many
a comfort -- soother of many a care -- what would I give, had no accident of
life produced in your gentle breast these sentiments for Emma.

Hitherto all has been well -- all has been great and glorious. You still
assure me you can act the only part that remains. Of that I am not to be told.
Yet your friendship is attended by so much suffering, so much piercing
sensibility, that even at this blessed moment my heart bleeds for you.

If you will -- oh hard request -- if you will gently withdraw yourself for a
time only, till you have gained composure, I will defer -- I will frame some
fresh excuses to Henry for my --

Pity me Sir Robert, and save us both the pangs of an explanation. It will,
perhaps, not be in my power to correspond in this way any more. I know your
friendsh^^ will insist upon my fulfilling to the utmost every duty in life, and
every engagement. Should this, therefore, be the last letter that pas^es
between us, I conjure you to believe, that of every petition, of every fervent
prayer that I offer to Heaven, your health and your happiness will form a part.
I did not think it possible that any thing could fall out to make me wretched,
with the immediate prospect of being united to Henry; and yet such is my
genuine esteem for you, Sir Robert, that I cannot be perfectly happy while I am
conscious of creating misery to one of the noblest of mankind. Henry enters,
and I can say no more.

EMMA.

LETTER CXXXII. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
WHY leave us at this charming crisis, oh invaluable friend? Will you, who have
brought my treasure safe through so many perils, refuse to see it locked for
ever securely in the faithful arms to whose embrace you preserved it? Unkind!
Your servant brings word too that you now lie sick at your apartment: yet that
you resolve to depart on a tour the instant you can bear to be removed. This
must not be. Emma has delayed the nuptials because she was too much harrassed
in spirits. And now I will myself put them off a little, that they may not want
the ornament of such a friend as Sir Robert Raymond. Yes: I will defer even the
possession of Emma, till her most generous protector is able to sanctify the
union by his presence. You keep your chamber, it seems. I will enter it without
delay. You shall not deny me admittance. You shall not suffer me to depart till
you are in a condition to do so too. Emma insists upon this.

Adieu, ever dear, ever valuable Sir Robert, adieu!

HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER CXXXIII. TO EMMA CORBETT.
OBLITERATE the contents of the billet, and every trace of the conversation!
'Twas feeble humanity. 'Twas the graceful relapse of the heart, which started a
little from its purposed point, but returns again, and re-fixes on its center.
I feel that my very pride is touched. Oh, Emma, you must not so far outstrip me
in generosity. Delay no longer your nuptials; and may the choicest benedictions
of Almighty God be shed upon them! I am wholly myself again, and I am yours, in
the spirit of holy friendship, while I have being.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXXIV. TO HENRY HAMMOND.
I WILL not suffer you to protract your joys any longer upon my account. I
write to you from a village where I am, by advice removed for air. Send me word
that you are the happiest of mankind, and when I can bring as much health in my
face as either a bride or a bridegroom ought to look at, I will not fail to
greet you in Philadelphia, where I am extremely glad to find all remains quiet.

Farewell. My tenderest respects await Emma -- Hammond I had almost said.

Farewell. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXXV. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
THE greatest trial of mine, and perhaps of human life, is past; for I have
just heard that your daughter is the wife of Henry, and yet I am able to hold
the pen. Is there not a certain decent pride that sustains us after the great
and difficult duties are performed? Something like a preternatural
consciousness plays about my heart, as I consider this triumph over my own
passions. It is a sacrifice of self to society. It is -- oh Mr. Corbett, I wish
them very happy. This is their wedding day; an express has just reached the
retirement I now enjoy -- enjoy did I say! Alas, can you not trace the bleeding
heart -- can you not trace the piercing thorn through --

Away! it shall not be! And yet, to thee, my friend, I may safely trust ought
that remains of unsubdued infirmi^^* If happily you should detect one tear's deep
mark upon my letter, if, perchance --

It is absurd. Henry Hammond is formed for Emma. I will m^se upon my obstinate
weakness, and become once more a reasonable creature -- I will indeed, my dear
old friend! give me a little time.

It is near eleven o'clock at night as I write this period.

I did not attend the ceremony, which was this morning performed.

I do not propose returning to Philadelphia for some days.

It Is a dreary uncomfortable night. I am here too in a large apartment alone.
Sighs burst from my bosom, and tears fall from my eyes, without any apparent
cause. The effect of a thick drifly atmosphere perhaps --

-- of a drifly atmosphere! Ah, no -- to the passing feeblenesses of nature we
are all liable.

Happily, tomorrow's sun may make me nearer what I wish, and what I ought to be.
In that fond hope I will now seek repose.

Corbett, what can be the reason of it? At the close of the last sentence I
went into my chamber in order to go to bed, but I sat myself down in a chair by
the side of it, and have not attempted to undress, though the daylight is
beginning to dawn upon me. A thousand half-form'd images have been teazing me.
I am about fourteen miles from that Philadelphia which now contains the
loveliest couple I ever beheld. Corbett, I am extremely weak -- and extremely
ashamed of myself --

Fi^ upon me, how can I talk thus! You, perhaps, are mourning the death of a
son, and the absence of a daughter, added to the grief of those disorders which
tear your aged frame, and render you as wretched -- as you are respectable.
Unhappy parent, dear friend, adieu! -- of my calamities you shall hear no more.
I blush, and silence sits on this selfish subject for ever.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXXVI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I RECEIVED your congratulations; I received your blessing; and to crown the
whole of human happiness, I have received the hand of your daughter. Yet my
transport has hurried me into an expression too bold. Oh, I am a mortal still,
Mr. Corbett: still am I vulnerable in a vital part. The fearful accounts you
have transmitted of my poor sister, and of your own declining health, alarm and
wound me. Hapless Louisa! dear relict of the generous Edward! Ah, that we had
you both here, nursed by our care, and protected under the shelter of our most
affectionate embraces, Sir Robert Raymond too, our second father, and our first
of friends, would rejoice at this. Yet he keeps aloof from us. He used to be
enamoured of our society, and no^ the deepest solitudes have seduced him from
us. In vain I invite, in vain I implore. He is melancholy: he is mournful. Is
there a cause for this? Ah, that I could remove it! I have now been six weeks
in the possession of Emma Corbett. She is my wife! God of Heaven, how I thrill
with gratitude! Yet oh, Supreme Bestower of every good, if it were thy divine
pleasure to restore my sister and my friends -- if it be consistent with that
awful design into whose depths I presume not to pry, to extend to these a
portion of that felicity thou have given to Emma and to me, the measure of my
bliss will be full indeed! I am soothed by the prayer. It will be accepted. It
was offered in the soul's most empassioned sincerity. Oh, my father, join it --
join it fervently. It is now in heaven before the throne, the mercy-seat! Have
faith; have hope. We shall all be happy.

What can I say soft enough to convey to you the remembrances of a daughter's
duty? Wait a little for her own language, which is the only proper vehicle to
convey the emotions of her heart.

HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER CXXXVII TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
I HAVE brought my pulses to be almost as obedient as I wish them. Reason is
not so weak a power as we make her appear. Her province is perhaps
misunderstood, my friend It is not tyranny, but a mild and genial authority,
which she should exercise. The subjects of her sway are the passions; those of
the tender kind are with the most difficulty governed.

I have applied to this our intellectual sovereign on a different principle. I
implored her, not to inspire me with that indifference which is the usual
prayer of the disappointed. The object of my love is married to the man of her
heart. She obtained him at the price of almost unparalleled hazards. I saw
every hope of possession cut off. It was an intolerable agony. I bore it till I
became almost desperate. I indulged the passion even till the indissoluble
bonds were tied against me. I saw the madness of my pursuit, and retired --
retired, my dear Corbett, not to meditate revenge against a happy rival, but to
manage my own wretchedness, and to think.

A serious appeal from the passions to the judgment is seldom made in vain. We
miscarry, chiefly because we are not serious, but only suppose ourselves so.

I selected a quiet hour, and laid the simple facts before me. They were not
elaborate. The woman of my affection (^hus I argued) is now happily married.
She is generous enough to pity and respect me for misery that she has very
unwillingly occasioned. Accidents have confirmed what Corbett at first
betrayed. I have too much contributed to her present happiness for her to treat
me untenderly: and yet my farther intimacy will increase her distress, even if
it does not spread itself in time to her husband. How bitterly does she pay for
my former services! What hinders her, now that she is in the arms of Henry,
from looking upon my passion as insulting and impious? Those very services. Do
I then presume, and persecute her upon these? Oh indelicacy! oh folly.

But can I conquer my affection? No. It is not possible; it is not necessary.
To extinguish bad passions, and to regulate good ones, are the two great points
within the compass of reason. To covet any longer the person of Emma would be
infamous. It is interdicted by law, by religion, and by God. But, are the
merely sensual passions then at my age so very gross, that by no exertion, no
interest, I can subdue them? What will be the consequence of my persisting? The
distress of Emma, who now should taste only of joy, the suspicion of Henry,
whose heart melts in gratitude toward me, and my own conscious upbraiding. Can
I sustain these, or is an obstinate attachment to the only point which reason
refuses me, (and which, after all, is hopeless) strong enough to support me?
But what then am I to do? Does reason bring with her no compensations -- no
equipoise of rewards for punishments so severe? She does, and MANY. Shall I not
rank amongst those the delights of a friendship not less tender though less
interested -- the secret-breathed prayer for one human being whose happiness is
dearer to me than that of any other upon the earth -- the generous sigh -- the
softening tear -- the social smile -- the self gratulation -- the flush of
virtue, pleased with herself -- the smile of Emma -- the assent of HEAVEN?

Oh Mr. Corbett, we have glorious faculties, had we the resolution to exert
them. We are afraid to begin. The heart trembles at a view of its labor. We
venture to climb the steep, and are dismayed. But every difficulty of soul and
body diminishes by earnest perseverance. However cragged the mountain, or
slippery its path, every effort brings us nearer to the summit; the second step
is easier than the first, the third is smoother than the second. It is the
motive of climbing that gives us fortitude. When the motive it so great as to
concern the happiness of others, and our own duty is included, surely we should
struggle to ascend. I, Corbett, have struggled -- I cannot say how much or how
long, but I can and do tell you, in the sincerity of my soul, that though I am
not, nor perhaps shall EVER be again a happy man, I do not wish either the
death of Henry, or the alienation of his Emma's affection. I can support the
presence of both, when softness and wedded love sits fairest upon their
features. And, though many a rising tear warns me that it is time to retire, no
sentiment of irregular desire invades my heart. Henry cultivates my friendship
with kindest care; I do not impute to him, his happiness as his fault I recede
not from his embrace, though I seldom make advances to conversation that
relates to Emma, and yet Emma is his perpetual subject, and his darling theme.
Her own conduct is such as corresponds with every part of her former life.
Perhaps there never was a more affecting situation than she has to perform
whenever I am present. It is indeed too much for a nature so gentle, and so
ingenuous. But I will remove the effect, by removing the cause. Humanity should
not presume to be perfect. I have carried a conquest as far, perhaps, as it can
go. I have acquired strength by an examination of weakness. Let me not sink
into captivity by fool-hardiness. I have done much. In attempting more, I may
lose all the laurels I have won. Involuntary thoughts will trespass on the
firmest mind. Emma is a tender wife, a tender friend. Heaven continue her so,
while earth has a feeling to make life desirable. But the familiar intercourse
of a private family is somewhat too much for me at present. I constrain Emma,
whenever I visit her, and nature impells my steps toward Philadelphia but too
often -- to appear restrained. I beg you will tell my steward to prepare
Castleberry for my reception. I will return to England. There is no danger of a
relapse; but I am obliged to repeat the rescuing arguments too often. A few
months absence will complete my work. Henry and his WIFE -- I wish, Corbett, I
could write that word with a steadier hand -- are happy. I leave them in the
arms of each other. I --

-- Oh Corbett, Corbett, I will set off for England without delay!

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXXXVIII. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
I KNOW your character, and will give you another opportunity to gratify it;
for I will offer you an occasion to oblige me. I have for some time felt myself
extremely indisposed, not I believe in consequence of agitated spirits or of my
late fatigues in nursing the dear Henry, whom Heaven has restored to my
solicitude and my affections, but from some other cause which feels more
internal. I have not dared to breathe this matter to Henry, and indeed the
satisfaction which I receive in seeing him well, and you -- O my generous
friend -- happy, would incline me still to silence, were not my pains growing
so strong that I cannot any longer conceal them. A little, however, of that
kind ministration which your skilful judgment knows so well how to bestow, and
whose good effects I have already so frequently experienced, will, I dare say,
set all right again. Give me your advice in confidence, and without delay.
Blessings attend your gentle heart and noble nature.

EMMA.

LETTER CXXXIX. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
MY baggage was prepared, the wind was fair, the war would not have prevented
me from setting out for England, and yet I am delayed. Human happiness shifts
from point to point of her compass* and is never fixed.

Emma is again indisposed.

You must not expect me.

IN CONTINUATION.

Unhappy Corbett, when will fate cease to persecute your family, or to torture
your friend? I tremble at the symptoms which discover themselves in Emma.

Yet do not despair. I may be deceived. We have long experienced the healing
hand! remember this, and be still.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXL. TO SIR R. RAYMOND.
OH my wife, my wife -- the treasure of my existence! Leave her not, Sir Robert
-- leave her not a moment. Long has she concealed her misery from a wretch who
is fated by every means to distress her.

Yes, Sir Robert, I and only I have murdered her. I am the accursed cause. Come
to me, I conjure you, this moment. To what am I reserved! Is this my happiness
-- these the joys of possessing Emma -- the great the glorious Emma? Are six
months of bliss SUPREME thus to terminate? Oh that I had died -- that I had
remained for ever undiscovered -- that I had never, never -- On my knees I beg
your aid, your society, your consolation. Quit your solitude. Reside, lodge,
live here. I send by express. I have orders to join my regiment again. Curse on
the war! I will have no more to do with it. Come immediately.

HENRY HAMMOND.

LETTER CXLI. TO C. CORBETT, Esquire.
MR. Corbett, had it pleased heaven to turn away this bitter cup, or given me a
less tender nature, or --

-- yet let me not dare to murmur. I am perhaps blaming what is best.

Wretched veteran in sorrow, how shall I explain myself to you -- how conceal
what must, I foresee, be communicated?

But oh, consider my misery; I am upon the spot. I am a spectator of the scene
-- I have been behind the awful curtain.

EMMA IS POISONED!

Shall I proceed?

Henry is in the direst parchings of a fever, into which grief, tenderness, and
terror, have conspired to throw him.

Oh that barbed and envenomed shaft! -- that execrable infection which the
lovely lips of the loveliest woman drew from the bosom -- the wounded bosom of
her husband!

This moment I have opened and read the enclosed --

Whatever be the event, be proud, Corbett, be enthusiastically proud, that
Heaven made you the instrument to produce so much excellence and virtue as
shines forth in Emma. I tremble. I adore!

THE ENCLOSURE FROM EMMA.
I SEND this to your room, written in that of my husband. If you do not join me
in my present purpose, his affection will destroy him.

His fever is increased since you left his chamber, but his delirium is less
violent. He has an interval of sense. He has just kissed my cheek: he felt it
wet and wiped off the tear. If I write legibly, come directly, and tell him
that I am out of all danger: tell him that the venom is all extracted: that the
present appearances are only the natural effects of a stubborn infection pas^ng
away: that I shall speedily recover. If you have any friendship for me, induce
him to believe this -- induce him by your countenance, your voice, your
spirits. It may stop the progress of his disorder -- it may give it a turn --
it may save his precious life. I am appealing to Sir Robert Raymond. I know the
friend whom I address. As to myself, I shall do very well. I feel that I shall.
I take every thing you prescribe -- I obey all the other people order me. I
will refuse nothing, if you will but restore my Henry -- restore my husband --

Henry is enough himself to enquire what I am about? Asks how I find myself. --
I have undrawn the curtain, and assured him of the alteration. He is sensible
of it. He frequently clasped his hands, and thanked his God: he is BLESSING God!

He calls for you.

Now is the moment. Stay not an instant longer than you have read this. Haste,
oh haste, to (...) EMMA.

I went. The poor man is piously deceived. Tears of bliss are at this instant
coursing along his face. He took my hand. He laid it upon his heart. Let not
Emma come too near me (said he) perhaps my disorder may injure her. Tell her I
bless her; but let her not approach my breath any more. Oh, Sir Robert,
(continued he) you are now a witness to my joy. I feel nothing of my disorder.
I am quite well: bear the tidings to my wife. It will assist her recovery. It
will make her happy

I begged him to be composed.

He saved with incoherent joy.

Emma entered in the height of counterfeited spirits.

Henry was transported, and cried, Emma shall live!

IN CONTINUATION.
The fate of Emma will be slower than the fate of Henry -- for Henry, alas, is
NO MORE.

He yielded his last breath about eleven o'clock this night.

He died in the arms of Emma.

Emma is this moment on the bed, clasping the breathless body.

Heaven thinks fit to make me a witness and a partaker of these calamities,
which I relate by events, and not with the circumstances that produced them.

The facts will torture, but the narrative would kill you: poor, beloved,
war-despoiled, old man!

I talk not to you of my feelings.

I only know that I would have shortened my own existence many years, to have
saved the life of the hapless youth whose corpse is stretched under my eye.

This may seem unnatural, and sound untrue. I am before the Searcher of Hearts,
who looks into this deathful apartment. I can firmly appeal to his divine
attestation.

IN CONTINUATION.
I have exhausted all words of praise in speaking of your daughter* and yet I
cannot conceive a language to do her justice.

She was prevailed upon to leave the room of Henry soon after midnight. Upon
seeing me near her as she rose, she burst into tears, and bid me look upon the
bed.

It is poor Henry, (said she) -- it is the man I sought -- the man I found --
the man I saved -- the man whom Providence lent -- but to resume. --

It is my HUSBAND --

Alas! it was my husband -- I am the widowed Emma.

Be it so. I am not desperate. I am humiliated. It is very hard.

I (...) scarcely bear it. He was extremely young. You cannot think how I loved
him, Sir Robert. My heart is ready to break, but I will not rapine. I know my
duty. Indeed I do. And I will pursue it. You shall see I will, my friend.

Oh, Corbett, grief now wholly overwhelmed her, and she fell again upon the
bed.

Other duties press on me, said she. I must yet get health to sustain them. I
will compose myself.

She was ^ed into another apartment. Her step, her look, her voice, her motion,
are not to be described.

EMMA ^ook leave of HENRY. You may image to yourself something like the p^^ting.

IN CONTINUATION.
Henry is in his gr^^e. Emma is not outrageous but inconso^^ble. -- Grief is at
her heart. Disease is preying upon her frame. But she does not exalt the
murmuring voice against the correcting hand.

I believe in God, said she to me some time (...)* My trials are extreme; but I
shall be unworthy to join Henry again, if I sink beneath them.

I feel ha^ ^^all (...), but wish it to be a distant (...): for, oh, Sir
Robert, I have reasons -- such reasons!

IN CONTINUATION.
Her reasons yet to live cannot any longer be concealed from you, my venerable
afflicted!

Your daughter would live to be the parent of that LITTLE ONE with which Henry
has left her --

SHE IS WITH CHILD.

The poison will not, I hope --

And yet it is possible that --

-- the case is new.

IN CONTINUATION.
Emma has formed another resolution, of which Emma is alone capable.

Thus she spoke: --

My aged father, my distracted Louisa, my dear Henry's sister; oh lead me to
them. My medicines may be taken on the sea. In following a virtuous, and heaven
directed affection, I have as idea of peril. Henry is dead, and I have nothing
to fear -- a friend -- a parent lives, and I have yet a little to hope. Oh,
Author of Nature, endue me with new force, new patience. Sir Robert, be still
yourself, and quit not Emma.

You know my answer.

We are upon our return. Emma is very commodiously situated. She has a cabin
to herself. All that art could do in medicine has been attempted.

It is in vain --

-- Corbett, SHE MUST DIE.

You will lose your daughter --

Her malady is gradual, but sure -- I dare not flatter you.

IN CONTINUATION
I went a little while ago into the cabin, and found your lovely one,
anticipating all the tender providence of a mother. She was employed in those
soft cares which the prospect -- the very near prospect of her travail
justified.

-- a little white robe or wrapper lay on the table finished before her.

-- she had begun to plait the cap.

-- if these, Sir Robert, (said she) should ever become useful -- if I should
follow my husband ere I can suckle his child at this faithful bosom, do not
forget -- I conjure you do not -- if the little wretch should live -- do not
forget to tell it that it was a mother's hand which prepared the mantle that
first wrapped its tender form. Tell it, that for its dear sake I would have
lived had it been possible --

Then pau^ing a little, she exclaimed -- and here is my husband's picture -- in
that trunk are Emma's letters -- yonder is the man's apparel in which I sought
for my poor Henry. These legacies of love, (he pledges of a parent's fidelity)
I bequeath my child, happen what m^. They cannot but b^ pr^. Will they not be
^al^ed, think you* Sir Robert?

She perceive^ ^h my distress was ^ great^

Sir Robert Raymond, I glory in your attachment; I glory in your friendship.
Had the world contained, or could it ever contain, any man in the eyes of Emma,
but him who sleeps beneath its surface, it is not a question who would have
captivated her heart.

At what a time was this spoken! Oh, Mr. Corbett, the single sensation of that
moment was worth a myriad of vulgar lives.

IN CONTINUATION.
We are landed. Emma lives. -- We send this by the post, which is just setting
out. It will reach you some hours before we shall. I write to prevent
surprises. For Heaven's sake, exert yourself to meet your daughter. Let me
prepare you for her appearance. Be not too much alarmed at her languor. You
must not expect to see the bloom in her cheek; the luster in her eye, nor her
proportion of limbs, so exactly formed or furnished; yet she is truly touching,
truly lovely.

I am myself much changed: but, indeed, my friend, I shall be to the latest
moment of my existence,

Unalterably Yours, ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXLII. TO F. BERKLEY, Esquire.
THE enclosed rough draught of letters will enable you, oh my friend, to trace
the vestiges of some unhappy human beings since their departure from London to
their return.

At present, fortune seems to continue our wretchedness by means the most
complicate and inventive.

Two hours ago we arrived at the house of the unfortunate Corbett. It was with
the utmost difficulty his daughter reached town.

The first object that struck her was a HEARSE standing close beside her
father's door. In the passage she beheld the undertakers bearing a coffin down
stairs, The woe-worn Corbett was supported between two servants, to take his
last mournful leave of the friend whose remains were about to be deposited. He
could not move. He had not received my letter from Portsmouth dispatched three
days before. It had been miss-sent. The le^^er did not come to hand till two
hours after our arrival. He was not PREPARED to receive us.

Our chaife drew up still closer. Emma rushed out. -- The poor old man -- the
daughter. --

-- We are not provided with a language to express these horrors. --

Almost an hour the child and parent remained speechless -- it was surprise and
agony, at once dumb and dreadful.

The hearse waited. The coffin was placed in it, and shu^ up.

The bell is at this instant telling for poor LOUISA: The s^xt^ is come to tell
the attendants that the clerg^man is waiting, Wretched widow of Edward! She
died distracted. The hearte^ driving off.

What a house is here! Alas, it has long and truly been the house of mourning!

Corbett and Emma are still together in the next room to that in which I write.
The servants look amazement and dismay.

I hear, methinks, the voice of my aged associate in friendship and in sorrow.
I am called suddenly and hastily --

Oh friend, oh Berkley: to what am I reserved! A PREMATURE LABOR has been
brought on by hurry, agitation, and fatigue. This morning's sun sees Emma the
mother of a living child. -- The poison seems not to have been in the least
degree communicated to this precious pledge. It is a female.

Alas! Emma would leap for joy at this circumstance; she would forget awhile
her woes in viewing the babe whom Henry had bequeathed. She would present it
with some testimony of maternal transport to her drooping father. But that --
even Henry's offspring can no longer soothe -- for EMMA CORBETT IS DEAD.

Her death instantly succeeded the pangs of the birth. It happened at midnight.
Her frame must have dropped in consequence of the venom, which resisted the
force and subtilty of all application. Soon -- too soon -- would the fair
victim of constancy have sunk to the tomb; but these precipitating agonies
added to the rest -- oh, they were too much. She fell before them.

In the expiring moment she called me to her -- "'It Is Emma's infant: take it,
said she: it is a parting gift -- I can no more -- my father -- my poor
father!" --

She dropped upon the pillow, from which she twice vainly endeavored to raise
her head, and lift her eye to the objects about her -- THEN BREATHED HER LAST.

Thus lived, and thus died, the most faithful and beautiful of women.

Charles Corbett stands fixed over the corpse of his daughter.

The old man is now bereft of all! "I am childless, Sir Robert, (^ exclaim) --
Behold what CIVIL WAR has done for me*" --

Berkley, I have kissed the clay cold lips -- I have pressed the clay cold
hand. On that bed the -- that very bed --

-- But I dare not indulge reflection. Pierced as I am, I would fain preserve a
decent sorrow Ah that I were in my grave! Impious wish! Is there a single point
of space in the petty allotment of man, in which something important is not to
be done?

You aged forlo^n one, now weeping over his child, looks up to me alone for
something which resembles comfort, during the wretched residue of life.

The funeral obsequies of Emma are yet to be performed --

The widow of Edward has left a son --

The widow of Henry a daughter --

I will not die till Heaven's appointed hour: I have much occasion still for
life.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXLIII. TO THE SAME.
I AM just come from the most agonizing ceremony, oh Frederick, that can
possibly pass under the eye of man! -- May you never feel what otherwise you
can never know! Easy in your fortunes, quiet in your situation, unconnected in
your interests, you can, happily for you, have no conception -- at least no
perfect one -- of that rend in the heart which is made by death, when youth,
innocence, and beauty, are committed to the dust -- when the parent hangs his
drooping head over the last sad mansion -- when the orphans --

What have I said? Youth, innocence, and beauty! -- and do all these then go
down to the earth's cold bosom? Shall none of them ascend? The gloom of the
soul carries sensation almost into sin! They shall ALL ascend! The one shall
ensure everlasting existence to the others. Innocence shall immortalize beauty
and youth.

I am reasoning with an almost breaking heart, Berkley: while poor old Corbett,
the survivor of his family, in all the solemn pathos of grief, forgets every
pain of body, nursing that which is seated within.

The romance of youth may teach you to expect that I should summon to my
assistance every infernal power -- that I should tax heaven itself with
cruelty, and take refuge from altercating man, amidst the friendly concealment
of impenetrable woods. This may, perhaps, answer the purpose of the novellist,
but it corresponds not with the nature of your friend. No, Berkley. It is not
in a moment like this that the truly touched and truly tender indulge
themselves in outrage. The first burst is past: that which began with loudness,
with vehemence, and with vociferation, settles into the still, the solemn, and
the affecting. The temper, stormy and headstrong, of Corbett himself,
terminates in the eloquence of dumb distress.

The tears fall fast from me as I write. More impetuous periods I have felt: so
awful and so affecting a crisis, never. You, who knew not Emma, and have not a
regular though you have a worthy heart, cannot know what I have lost. The
manner of her death -- the motive -- and the whole tenor of circumstances
connected with it, throw over every passage of the scene, a color so movingly
sad, that I sit wonder-struck in the room, and seem almost in my grave, with
the world about me.

I have exerted myself to say thus much at the winding up of this solemn
catastrophe, lest you, my dear Berkley, or any other person, into whose hands
these incidents may fall, should presume to question the ways of ALMIGHTY GOD,
which a re-justifiable in every part of this pathetic story. Erroneous notions
of punishment and reward are perhaps the leading steps to irreligion and
infidelity.

The vile herd of novellists have done an essential injury to the cause of
virtue, by sacrificing to the pleasure of the reader beyond the simplicity of
truth. Difficulty, in the beginning of a narrative; love, in the middle; and
marriage, at the end, make up, almost invariably, the recipe of a modern
romance. This is called rewarding virtue; a bad character or two, perhaps,
drops off, and that is called punishing vice. False, foolish, conclusion!

Look into life. Does not heaven's blessed beam shine equally on the just and
the unjust? Are all rewards so mechanically contrived? Has virtue no joys of
her own? -- joys, which generous sorrow only can produce? Is the sacred
struggle of a good man altogether afflictive? To pass through a road perplexed
and thorny -- to travel through an hard and difficult life, without tearing the
finer principles from the heart, does it require no better conduct than moves
in the machinery of those contemptible pages where all is given up to lettered
art, and distorted imagination? Are there no sweets in the pensive sigh -- the
pious tear? Break they from the mourner without offering him any balm? Has
heaven born constancy no comforts? Consider the life of Emma! Has death, at
once virtuous and christian, nothing to lift the survivor's spirit above every
care of vulgar being?

Oh Frederick, I am touched by a very tender example. In lamenting as I now
lament, say, my friend, are there no dear and welcome mitigations? Yes, I feel
-- I feel that there are. Would I part with this generous grief? Ah no! What
would I take in exchange? -- The universe should not buy it from me. I even
anticipate the holy satisfaction, when I shall steal from the shout and strife
of society to the tomb of a virtuous woman. Think you I love her less because I
no more shall see her? Has she suffered in my esteem by her ascension into
heaven? Shall she lose as an angel, what she acquired as a mortal? I love her
better. The Omnipotent placed her in the path of my life, to fix and
concentrate the best of passions. I am not of disposition or age to change
again.

Oh that the daughter of Emma may live! Shall I be content with a parent's
common duty -- to cloathe, to feed, to educate? Consider, Berkley, whose babe
it is!

I have hurried down stairs to examine my treasure*

-- it lives, it sleeps* I have felt its gentle breath on my cheek.

God will spare it. Louisa's orphan too is mine. Corbett too shall live. I have
moved toward his bedside often since I began to write. His face is hid -- he
will not yet endure existence, but the hours of resignation are at hand.

I conjure you then Berkley, to settle your opinions about Providence. -- Bring
your piety to a point. Cultivate your tenderness. Love, like Emma; and if you
meet with such a disappointment, do not transfer your affection, but turn it to
a generous account. The vulgar effect of tender distress is dissipation or
despair. Had I yielded to these, a poor old man would have wanted a friend: two
lovely infants, a parent; and I, the self approving bosom-ray, which chears my
spirit in this vale of sorrow. Circumscribe not, therefore, the rewards of
Heaven.

The writer of a romance would paint me as (...) wretch without hope, who calls
down the stroke of fate in pity to his aid. Attend you to the reality, my
friend; and behold a man who wishes still to live; and who thinks himself
rewarded.

Farewell. ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXLIV. TO THE SAME.
WE are removed to Castleberry. Oh, it was gloomy and mournful greeting that I
paid it! -- Every tree, every book, every chair, appeared before me as the
spectre of a buried joy. Emma enters the bosom, and touches at a thousand
points. -- Yet even in this woe, there is a mixture of sweetness. I would not
be without it. The mad metropolis, I am told, is just illuminated for success
in battle. The house of Corbett is an example of the reasons either party have
to rejoice on this, or on any similar occasion. It is not an enemy that has
done this great mischief -- it is, we may truly say, our late familiar friend.

I enter the metropolis no more. A few years only can be mine. They shall be
engaged in reconciling my poor dear Corbett to life, on Heaven's own terms, and
preparing for age a peaceful pillow, for infancy a nursing cradle. Berkley
congratulate me! My children are both well. The bounty of eke Almighty is upon
me.

Oh friend, receive my cordial blessing: let your heart be kind, you life be
pure, and -- farewell.

ROBERT RAYMOND.

LETTER CXLV. TO THE SAME.
IN the close of our correspondence on this subject, receive the tribute of a
tender, tearful moment -- receive an Epitaph for Emma's marble.

The little Emma will, I fondly fancy, resemble her cherub mother: at least, I
am hourly shaping her lovely features into imaginary similitude; and when
affection is looking for a likeness, the either finds or forms it.

But whatever be the exterior of this dear, dear legacy, oh may her mind take
its color from the parent; and Emma, who is in heaven, again give luster to
earth in the virtues of her child.

Adieu! ROBERT RAYMOND.

INSCRIPTION The Author of Emma Corbett is indebted for this monumental tribute
to an elegant and tender friend.
For the MONUMENT of EMMA.
AH pass not yet. If thou did ever know
The tenderest touches of impassioned woe*
Pass not: if Truth, and Fortitude, and Love,
Can stay thy footsteps, or thy spirit move!
Pass not: if every elegance of soul
Can charm thy senses, or thy steps control,
Pass not: if more than Roman virtue, here
With more than female softness, claim the tear.
Nor pass, if heaven-born sympathy have art
To urge the thrilling pulses of thy heart.
But if, nor suffering worth thy soul can move,
Nor the sweet impulse of a generous love;
If fortitude, with glowing be^uty joined,
Knows not the power to captivate thy mind;
If health, if joy, devoted to the tomb,
If life, laid down to ward a lover's doom;
If patience, preseverance, ardour, truth,
Blended with every charm of female youth;
If these, and every virtue, every grace,
Want power to melt the soul upon thy face:
Then quickly pass -- this hallowed spot forbear!
THE FEELING HEART ALONE SHOULD TARRY HERE.
The End of the THIRD, and LAST VOLUME, of EMMA CORBETT. According to the
London Edition.
A SPEECH on the probability of a HAPPY MARRIAGE addressed By a FATHER to his
DAUGHTER. From the French of JOHN JAMES ROUSSEAU.
YOU are now, Sophy, grown up to woman's estate; and you are not to remain
always single. Your mother and I would have you happy, because our happiness
depends on yours. The happiness of a virtuous young woman, is to make an honest
man happy: we must therefore think of marrying you. We must think of this
betimes, for your fate through life depends on your marriage; and we cannot
think too much upon it.

Nothing perhaps is more difficult than the choice of a good husband, except
perhaps the choosing of a good wife. You, Sophy, will be this rare woman; you
will be the pride of our lives, and our happiness in old age. But however great
merit you may have, there are men who have still more. There is no man who
ought not to think it an honor to obtain you: there are many whom it would do
you honor to obtain. Among this number the business is to find one suitable to
you, to get acquainted with him, and to make him acquainted with you.

The greatest happiness of marriage, depends on so many points of agreement,
that it would be a folly to think to find them all; the most important must be
made sure of, preferably to the rest; if the others can be procured too, so
much the better; if they cannot, they must be overlooked. Perfect happiness is
not to be found in this world; but the greatest of misfortunes, and that which
may always be avoided, is to be unhappy by one's own fault.

There is a suitableness which may be called natural; there is also a
suitableness arising from the institutions of men, and a suitableness that
depends wholly on opinion; of the two last, parents are the proper judges; of
the first, the children alone can judge. In marriages made by the authority of
parents, those suitablenesses that arise from civil institutions and opinion
are alone minded; the matches are not between the persons, but between their
rank and fortunes; but both these are subject to change: the persons alone
remain the same, in all places, and at all times; the happiness or unhappiness
of the marriage state depends, in spite of fortune, on personal and mental
suitableness.

Your mother was a woman of family, I had a large fortune; these were the sole
considerations that influenced our parents to join us together. I have lost my
fortune, she has lost her rank; forgot by her family. what does it signify to
her that she was born a lady? In the midst of our distress, the union of our
hearts made up for every thing* the conformity of our tastes made us choose
this retirement. We live happy in our poverty; each is to the other instead of
all. Sophy is our common treasure; we thank the Almighty for giving her, and
taking away every thing else. You see, child, whither Providence has brought
us. Those considerations which occasioned our marriage are vanished, and that
which was accounted as nothing makes all our happiness.

It is for man and wife to suit themselves. Mutual inclination ought to be
their first tie; their eyes, their hearts ought to be their first guides; for
as their primary duty, after they are joined together, is to love one another,
and as to love, or not to love, does not depend on us, this duty necessarily
implies another, namely, to begin with loving one another before marriage. This
is a law of nature which cannot be abrogated; these w^o have restricted it, by
many civil laws, have had more regard to the appearance of order than to the
happiness or the morals of the people. You see my dear that the morality we
preach to you is not difficult; it tends only to make you your own mistress,
and to make us refer ourselves entirely to you for the choice of your husband.

After giving you our reasons for leaving you at full liberty to make your own
choice, it is proper to mention those which ought induce you to use it with
prudence. Sophy, you have got good nature, and good sense, much integrity and
piety, and those qualifications which a woman ought to have; and you are not
disagreeable, but you have no fortune; you have the best riches indeed, but you
want those which are most valued by the world. Do not aspire, therefore, to
what you cannot attain to; and regulate your ambition not by your own judgment,
or your mother^s and mine, but by the opinion of men. If nothing were to be
considered but merit equal to your own, I know not where I should set limits to
your hopes; but never raise them above your fortune, which you are to remember
is very small. You never saw our prosperity; you were born after we failed in
the world. You have made our poverty pleasing to us, and we have shared in it
without pain. Never, child, seek for that wealth which we thank Heaven for
taking from us; we never casted happiness until we lost our riches.

You are too agreeable, Sophy, not to please somebody; and you are not so poor
as to render you a burden to an honest man. You will be courted, and perhaps
by persons who are not worthy of you. If they show themselves what they really
are, you will form a just estimate of them, their outside will not impose upon
you long; but, though you have good judgment, and can discern merit, you want
experience, and know not how far men can disemble. An artful cheat may study
your taste, in order to seduce you, and counterfeit before you the virtues to
which he is an absolute stranger. Such a one, child, would ruin you before you
perceived it; and you would not see your error, until it was past recovery.
The most dangerous of all snares, and the only one from which reason can
restrain you, is that into which the passions hurry one* if ever you have the
misfortune to fall into it, you will see nothing but illusions and chimeras,
your eyes will be fascinated, your judgment will be confused, your will, will
be corrupted, you will cherish your very error; and when you come to see it,
you will have no desire to leave it. It is to Sophy's reason, not to the bias
of her heart, that we commit her; while passion has no ascendency over you,
judge for yourself; but whenever you fall in love, commit the care of yourself
to your mother.

This agreement which I propose to you, shows our esteem for you, and restores
the natural order. It is usual for parents to choose a husband for their
daughters, and to consult her only for form's sake: We shall do just the
contrary; you shall choose, and we shall be consulted. Make use of this right,
Sophy, freely and wisely; the husband that is suitable for you ought to be your
own choice, and not our's; but it is who must judge whether you are not
mistaken in his suitableness for you, and whether you are not doing, without
knowing it, what you have no mind to. Birth, fortune rank, or the opinion of
the world, will have no weight with us. Take an honest man, whose person you
like, and whose temper is suitable to you; whatever he be in other respects, we
shall recieve him for our son-in-law: his income will be always large enough,
if he has hands, and good morals, and loves his family. His rank will always
be high, if be ennobles it by virtue* If every body should blame us, what does
it signify? We seek not the approbation of the public; your happiness suffices
to us.

The END of WRITING; an Imitation of some French Verses: Addressed to Authors.
THESE fair sheets of foolscap which thus ye are soiling,
Still cutting, and scribbling, and blotting, and spoiling.
This paper, I say, had an honest beginning,
Being born of good flax, and begotten by spinning;
To the loom in due time, and the ragshop it past,
Into leaves of fine foolscap converted at last.
Now, seized by the Wits, it incessently teems
Or with visions in verse, or political dreams;
Till his Worship, just roused from his afternoon's doze,
With a pipe of Virginia regaleth his nose:
Then twisted, and twirl'd, and condemned to the taper,
In a puff is consumed this unfortunate paper.
It is thus, my good friends, that Truth sets before ye,
Of your boasted employment -- the tragical story:
Your choicest productions, whatever be their name,
Will end, at the best, in the vapor of fame:
That vapor, my friends, do ye think it will stay?
-- Like his Worship's last whiff, it will vanish away.
BELL's Book-Store, in Third Street.
On the British Classic MILTON, by Lord LYTTELTON.
I FIND in Milton's Paradise Lost, and Regained, every thing that is sublime in
thought, beautiful in imagery, and energetic in language and expression. To
attain a reputation for eloquence is my aim and my ambition; and, if I should
acquire the art of clothing my thought in happy language, adorning them with
striking images, or enforcing them by commanding words, I shall be indebted for
such advantages to the study of our great British classic.

This very excellent Work of MILTON's PARADISE LOST, and PARADISE REGAINED,
with POEMS on several occasions, 2 Vols may now be had Price Six Dollars at
BELL's Book Store, in Third Street Philadelphia; With every other Curiosity
that i^ ^^me-at-able in the American World of Books.


