M'FINGAL. A MODERN EPIC POEM, IN FOUR CANTOS.

Ergo non satis est risu diducere rictum
Auditoris: et est quaedam tamen hic quoque virtus.
Est brevitate opus, ut currat sententia, neu se
Imp^diat verbis (...) onerantibus aures.
Et se^m me opus est modo tristi, soepe jocoso,
Defe^^ente vicem modo Rhetoris, atque Poetae,
(...) parcentis vi^ibus atque
Extenuantis eas consulto. Ridiculum acri
Fortias et melius magnas ple^u^nque secat res.
Horat. Lib. I. Sat. (...) HARTFORD: Printed by HUDSON and GOODWIN, near the
Great Bridge, 1782.

M'FINGAL: CANTO FIRST, OR THE TOWN-MEETING, A. M.
WHEN Yankies, skilled in martial rule,
First put the British troops to school;
Instructed them in warlike trade,
And new maneuvers of parade;
The true war-dance of Yanky-reels,
And manual exercise of heels;
Made them give up, like saints complete,
The arm of flesh and trust the feet,
And work, like Christians undissembling,
Salvation out, by fear and trembling;
Taught Percy fashion^^^^ races,
And modern modes of Chevy-chaces:
From Boston, in his best array,
Great 'Squire M'Fingal took his way,
And graced with ensigns of renown,
Steered homeward to his native town.
His high descent our heralds trace
To See Fingal, an ancient Epic Poem, published as the work of Ossian, a
Caledonian Bard, of the third century, by James M Pherson, a S^^^ch ^inific^ial
scribbles.
Ossian's famed Fingal^^^ race:
For though their name some part may lack,
Old Fingal spelt it with a Mac;
Which great M'Pherson, with submission
We hope will add, the next edition.
His fathers flourished in the Highlands
Of Scotia's fog-benighted islands;
Whence gained our 'Squire two gifts by right,
R^pellion and the Second-sight.
O^ these the first, in ancient days,
Had gained the noblest palms of praise,
'Gain^t Kings stood forth and many a crowned head
With terror of its might confounded;
T^ll rose a King with potent charm
His foes by goodness to disarm,
Whom every Scot and Jacobite
(...) sell in love with, at first sight;
Whose gracious speech, with aid of pensions,
Hushed down all murmurs of diss^^sions,
And with the sound of potent m^tal,
Brought all their blust' ring swarms to settle;
Who rained his ministerial m^nnas,
Till loud Sedition sung (...);
The good Lords-Bishops and the Kirk
United in the public work;
Rebellion from the northern regions,
With ^^te and Manstield swore allegiance;
And all combined to raze as nuisance,
Of church and state, the constitutions;
^ull down the empire, on whose ruins
They meant to edify their new ones;
Enslave the Amer'can wildernesses,
And tear the provinces in pieces
For these our 'Squire among the valiant'st,
Employed his time and tools and talents;
And in their cause with manly zeal
Used his first virtue, to rebel;
And found this new rebellion pleasing
As his old king-destroying treason.
Nor less availed his (...) slight,
And Scottish gift of second-sight.
No ancient sybil famed in rhyme
Saw deeper in the womb of time;
No block in old Dodona's grove,
Could ever more orac'lar prove.
Nor only saw he all that was,
But much that never came to pass;
Whereby all Prophets far out went he,
Though former days produced a plenty:
For any man with half an eye,
What stands before him may (...)
But optics sharp it needs I ween,
To see what is not to be seen.
As in the days of ancient fame
Prophets and poets were the same,
And all the praise that poets gain
Is but for what the invent and feign:
So gained our 'Squire his fame by seeing
Such things as never would have being.
Whence he for oracles was grown
The very The Tripod was a sacred three-legged stool, from which the ancient
priests uttered their oracles.
tripod of his town.
Gazettes no sooner rose a lie in,
But strait he fell to prophesying;
Made dreadful slaughter in his course,
O'erthrew provincials, foot and horse;
Brought armies over by sudden pressings
Of Hanoverians, Swiss and Hessians;
Feasted with blood his Scottish clan,
And hanged all rebels, to a man;
Divided their estates and pelf,
And took a goodly share himself.
All this with spirit energetic,
He did by second-sight prophetic.
Thus stored with intellectual riches,
Skilled was our 'Squire in making speeches,
Where strength of brains united centers
With strength of lungs surpassing Stentor's.
But as some muskets so contrive it,
As often to miss the mark they drive at,
And though well aimed at duck or plover,
Bear wide and kick their owners over:
So fared our 'Squire, whose reasoning toil
Would often on himself recoil,
And so much injured more his side
The stronger arg'ments he applied:
As old war-elephants dismayed,
Trod down the troops they came to aid,
And hurt their own side more in battle
Than less and ordinary cattle.
Yet at town-meetings every chief
Pinned faith on great M'Fingal's sleeve,
And as he motion'd, all by rote
Raised sympathetic hands to vote.
The town, our Hero's scene of action,
Had long been torn by feuds of faction,
And as each party's strength prevails,
It turned up did'rent, heads or tails;
With constant rattl'ing in a trice
Showed various sides as often as dice:
As that sam'd weaver, Homer's Odyssey.
wise^t' Ulysses,
By night each day's-work picked in pieces,
And though she stoutly did bestir her,
Its finishing was never the nearer:
So did this town with steadfast zeal
Weave cob-webs for the public weal,
Which when completed, or before,
A second vote in pieces tore.
They met, made speeches full long winded,
Resolved, protested, and rescinded;
Addresses signed, then chose Committees,
To stop all drinking of Bohea-teas;
With winds of doctrine veer'd about,
And turned all Whig-Committees out.
Meanwhile our Hero, as their head,
In pomp the tory faction led,
Still following, as the 'Squire should please,
Successive on, like files of geese.
And now the town was summoned greeting,
To grand parading of town-meeting;
A show, that strangers might appall,
As Rome's grave senate did the Gaul.
High over the rout, on pulpit-stairs,
Like den of thieves in house of prayers,
(That house, which loath a rule to break,
Served heaven but one day in the week,
Open the rest for all supplies
Of news and politics and lies)
Stood forth the constable, and bore
His staff, like Merc'ry's wand of yore,
Waved potent round, the peace to keep,
As that laid dead men's souls to sleep.
Above and near the hermetic staff,
The moderator's upper half,
In grandeur over the cushion bowed,
Like Sol half-seen behind a cloud.
Beneath stood voters of all colors,
Whigs, tories, orators and bawlers,
With every tongue in either faction,
Prepared, like minute-men, for action;
Where truth and falsehood, wrong and right,
Draw all their legions out to fight;
With equal uproar, scarcely rave
Opposing winds in AEolus' cave;
Such dialogues with earnest face,
Held never Balaam with his ass.
With daring zeal and courage blessed
Honorius first the crowd addressed;
When now our 'Squire returning late,
Arrived to aid the grand debate,
With strange ^our faces sat him down,
While thus the orator went on.
" -- For ages blessed, thus Britain rose
The terror of encircling foes;
Her heroes ruled the bloody plain;
Her conquering standard awed the main:
The different palms her triumphs grace,
Of arms in war, of arts in peace:
Unharrass'd by material care,
Each rising province flourished fair;
Whose various wealth with liberal hand,
By far o'er-paid the parent-land.
But though so bright her sun might shine,
'Twas quickly hasting to decline,
With feeble rays, too weak to assuage,
The damps, that chill the eye of age.
For sta^es, like men, are doomed as well
The infirmities of age to feel;
And from their different forms of empire
Are seized with every deep distemper.
Some states high fevers have made head in,
Which naught could cure but (...) us bleeding;
While others have grown dull and dozy,
Or fixed in helpless idiocy;
Or turned demoniacs to belabour
Each peaceful habitant and neighbor;
Or vexed with hypocondriac fits,
Have broke their strength and lost their wits.
Thus now while hoary years prevail,
Good Mother Britain seemed to fail;
Her back bent, crippled with the weight
Of age and debts and cares of state:
For debts she owed, and those so large,
As twice her wealth could not discharge,
And now 'twas thought, so high they would grown,
She Would break and come upon the town;
Her arms, of nations once the dread,
She scarce could lift above her head;
Her deasen'd ears (^twas all their hope)
The final trump perhaps might op^,
So long they would been in stupid mo^d,
Shut to the hearing of all good;
Grim Death had put her in his scroll,
Down on the execution-roll;
And Gallic crows, as the grew weaker,
Began to whet their beaks to pick her.
And now her powers decaying fast,
Her grand Climact rye had ^he past,
And, just like all old women else,
Fell in the vapors much by spells.
Strange whimsies on her fancy (...),
And gave her brain a dismal shock;
Her memory fails, her judgment ends;
She quite forgot her nearest friends.
Lost all her former sense and knowledge,
And fitted fast for B^th^lem college;
Of all the powers she once retained,
Conceit and pride alone remained.
As Eve when falling was so modest
To fancy she should grow a goddess;
As madmen, straw who long have slept on,
Will style them, Jupiter or Neptune:
So Britain 'midst her airs so slighty,
Now took a whim to be Almighty;
Urged on to desperate heights of frenzy,
A^^irm'd her own Omnipotency;
Would rather ruin all her race,
Than 'ba^e Supremacy an ace;
Assumed all rights divine, as grown
The churches head, like good Pope Joan
S^ore all the world should bow and skip
To her almighty Goody ship;
A^ath'matiz'd each unbeliever,
And vowed to live and rule forever.
Her servants humored every whim,
And owned at once her power supreme,
Her follies pleased in all their stages,
For sake of legacies and wages;
In The Parliament House is called by that name
Stephen's Chapel then in state too
Set up her golden calf to pray to,
Proclaimed its power and right divine,
And (...) for worship at its shrine,
And for poor Heretics to burn us
Bade North prepare his fiery furnace;
Struck bar^^ins with the Romish churches
Infallibility to purchase;
Set wide for Popery the door,
Made friends with Babel's scarlet whore,
Joined both the matrons firm in clan;
No sisters made a better span.
No wonder the^^, ere this was over,
That she should make her children suffer.
She first, without pretense of reason,
Claimed right whatever we had to seize on;
And with determined resolution,
To put her claims in execution,
Sent sire and sword, and called it, Lenity,
Starved us, and christened it, Humanity.
For she, her case grown desperater,
Mistook the plainest things in nature;
Had lost all use of eyes or wit^;
Took slavery for the bill of rights;
Trembled at Whigs and deemed them foes,
And stopped at loyalty her n^se;
Styled her own children, brats and caitiffs,
And knew us not from the Indian natives.
What though with supplicating prayer
We begged our lives and goods she would spare;
Not vainer vows, with sillier call,
Elijah's prophets raised to Baa^;
A worshipped stock of god, or goddess,
Had better heard and understood us.
So once Egyptians at the Nile
Adored their guardian Crocodile,
Who heard them first with kindest ear,
And ate them to reward their prayer;
And could he talk, as kings can do,
Had made as gracious speeches too.
Thus spite of prayers her schemes pursuing,
She still went on to work our ruin;
Annulled our charters of releases,
And tore our title-deeds in pieces;
Then signed her warrants of ejection,
And gallows raised to stretch our necks on;
And on these errands sent in rage,
Her bailiff, and her hangman, Gage,
And at his heels, like dogs to bait us,
Dispatched her P^sse C^mi^atus.
No state ever chose a si^^er person,
To carry such a silly farce on.
A^ Heathen gods in ancient days
Received at second-hand their praise,
Stood imag'd forth in stones and stocks,
And deified in barber's blocks;
So Gage was chose to represent
The omnipotence of Parliament.
And as old heroes gained, by shifts,
From gods, as poets tell, their gifts;
Our General, as his actions show,
Gained like assistance from below,
By Satan graced with full supplies,
From all his magazine of lies.
Yet could his practice never impart
The wit to tell a lie with art.
Those lies alone are formidable,
Where artful truth is mixed with fable;
But Gage has bungled often so vilely
No soul would credit lies so silly,
Outwent all faith and stretched beyond
Credulity's extremest end.
Whence plain it seems though Satan once
Over looked with scorn each brainless dunce,
And blund'ring brutes in Eden shunning,
Chose out the serpent for his cunning;
Of late he is not half so nice,
Nor picks assistants, 'cause they are wise.
For had he stood upon perfection,
His present friends had lost the election,
And fared as hard in this proceeding,
As owls and asses did in Eden.
Yet fools are often dangerous enemies,
As meanest reptiles are most venomous;
Nor ever could Gage by craft and prowess
Have done a whit more mischief to us:
Since he began the unnatural war,
The work his masters sent him for.
And are there in this freeborn land
Among ourselves a venal band,
A dastard race, who long have sold
Their souls and consciences for gold;
Who wish to stab their country's vitals,
If they might heir surviving titles;
With joy behold our mischiefs brewing,
Insult and triumph in our ruin?
Priests who, if Satan should sit down,
To make a Bible of his own,
Would gladly for the sake of mitres,
Turn his inspired and sacred writers;
Lawyers, who should he wish to prove
His title to his old seat above,
Would, if his cause he would give 'em fees in,
Bring writs of Entry sur disseisin,
Plead for him boldly at the session,
And hope to put him in possession;
Merchants who, for his kindly aid,
Would make him partners in their trade,
Hang out their signs in goodly show,
Inscribed with " Beelzebub and Co."
And Judges, who would list his pages,
For proper liveries and wages;
And who as humbly cringe and bow
To all his mortal servants now?
There are; and shame with pointing gesture^,
Marks out the Addressers and Protesters;
Whom, following down the stream of sat,
Contempts ineffable await,
And public infamy forlorn,
Dread hate and everlasting scorn."
As thus he spoke, our 'Squire M'Fingal
Gave to his partisans a signal.
Not quicker rolled the waves to land,
When Moses waved his potent wand,
Nor with more uproar, than the Tories
Set up a general rout in chorus;
Laughed, hissed, hemmed, murmured, groaned and jeered;
Honorius now could scarce be heard.
Our Muse amid the increasing roar,
Could not distinguish one word more:
Though she sat by, in firm record
To take in shorthand every word;
As ancient Muses wont, to whom
Old Bards for depositions come;
Who must have writ'em; for how else
Could they each speech verbatim tell's?
And though some readers of romances
Are apt to strain their tortured fancies,
And doubt, when lovers all alone
Their sad soliloquies do groan,
Grieve many a page with no one near 'em,
And naught but rocks and groves to hear 'em,
What spright infernal could have tattled,
And told the authors all they prattled;
Whence some weak minds have made objection,
That what they scribbled must be fiction:
It Is false; for while the lovers spoke,
The Muse was by, with table book,
And least some blunder might ensue,
Echo stood clerk and kept the (...).
And though the speech ben't worth a groat,
As usual, 'tisn't the author's sault,
But error merely of the prater,
Who should have talked to the purpose better:
Which full excuse, my critic-brothers,
May help me out, as well as others;
And it is designed, though here it lurk,
To serve as preface to this work.
So let it be -- for now our 'Squire
No longer could contain his ire;
And rising 'midst applauding Tories,
Thus vented wrath upon Honorius.
Quoth he, "'It Is wondrous what strange stu^^
Your Whig's-heads are compounded of;
Which force of logic cannot pierce
Nor syllogistic car^e and fierce,
Nor weight of scripture or of reason
Su^^i^e to make the least impression.
Not heeding what ye raised contest on,
Ye prate, and beg or steel the question;
And when your boasted arguings fail,
Strait leave all reasoning off, to rail.
Have not our High-Church Clergy made i^
Appear from scriptures which ye credit,
That right divine from heaven was lent
To kings, that is the Parliament,
Their subjects to oppress and teaze,
And serve the Devil when they please?
Did they not write and pray and preach,
And torture all the parts of speech,
About Rebellion made a pother,
From one end of the ^^nd to the other?
And yet pained fewer pros'lyte Whigs,
Than old The stories of St. Anthony and his pig, and St. Austin's preaching to
fishes, are told in the Popish legend.
St. Anth'ny amongst the pigs;
And changed not half so many vicious
As Austin, when he preached to fishes;
Who thronged to hear, the legend tells,
Were edified and wegg'd their ta^ls:
But scarce you would prove it, if you tried,
That ever one Whig was edified.
Have ye not heard from High-church Clergymen, one at Boston, one at New York
Parson Walter
Much di^e presage of many a halter?
What warnings had ye of your duty
From our old Reverend Sam. Auchmu^y*
From Priests of all degrees and metres,
TO our fag-end man poor Peter's, a Tory-Clergyman in Connecticut, who after
making himself derestable by his inimical conduct, absconded from the contempt,
rather than the vengeance of his countrymen, and fled to England to make
complaints against that colony: Cooper, a writer, poet, and (...) of the same
stamp, President of the college at New York: S^^bury, a Clergyman of the same
province.
Parson Peter's?
Have not our Cooper and our Seabury
Sung hymns, like Barak and old Deborah;
Proved all intrigues to set you free
Rebellion against the (...) that ^e;
Brought over many a scripture text
That used to wink at rebel sects,
Coax'd wayward ones to favor regents,
Or paraph^as'd them to obedience;
Proved every king, even those confessed
Horns of the Apocalyptic beast,
And sprouting from its noddles seven,
Ordained, as bishops are, by heaven;
(For reasons similar, as we are told
That Tophet was ^^^in'd of old)
By this lay-(...) v^lid
Becomes all (...) and hallowed,
Takes patent out (...) heaven has signed (...);
And starts up s^rait, the Lord's anointed?
Like extreme unction that can cleanse
Each penitent from (...) sins,
Make them run glib, when oil'd by Pries^,
The heavenly road, like wheels new greased,
Serve them, like shoeball, for defenses
Against wear and tear of consciences:
So king's anointment cleans betimes,
Like fuller's earth, all spots of crimes,
For future knav'ries gives commissions,
Like Papists sinning under license.
For heaven ordained the origin,
Divines declare, of pain and sin;
Prove such great good they both have done us;
Kind mercy 'twas they came upon us:
For without pain and sin and folly
Man never were blessed, or wise, or holy;
And we should See the Modern Metaphysical Divinity.
thank the Lord, it is so,
As authors grave wrote long ago.
Now heaven its issues never brings
Without the means, and these are kings;
And he, who blames when they announce ills;
Would counteract the eternal counsels.
As when the Jews a murmuring race,
By constant grumblings fell from grace,
Heaven taught them first to know their distance
By famine, slavery and Philistines;
When these could no repentance bring,
In wrath it sent them last a king:
So nineteen, it is believed, in twenty
Of modern kings for plagues are sent you;
Nor can your cavillers pretend,
But that they answer well their end.
It Is yours to yield to their command,
As rods in Providence's hand;
And is it means to send you pain,
You turn your noses up in vain;
Your only way's in peace to bear it,
And make necessity a merit.
Hence sure perdition must await
The man, who rises against the state,
Who meets at once the damning sentence,
Without one loophole for repentance;
Even though he 'gain the royal see,
And rank among the powers that be:
For hell is theirs, the scripture shows,
Whoever the powers that be oppose,
And all those powers (I am clear that it is (...))
Are damned for ever, ex officio.
Thus far our Clergy; but it is true,
We lacked not earthly reas'ners too.
Had I the Virgil's Aeneid, 6th book, line 625.
Poet's brazen lungs
As sound-board to his hundred tongues,
I could not half the scriblers muster
That swarmed round Rivington in cluster,
Assemblies, Councilmen, forsooth;
Brush, Cooper, Wilkins, Chandler, Booth.
Yet all their arguments and sap'^nce,
You did not value at three halfpence.
Did not our Massachusettensis See a course of es^ays, under the signature of
Massachusettensis.

For your conviction strain his senses?
Scrawl every moment he could spare,
From cards and barbers and the fair;
Show, clear as sun in noonday heavens,
You did not feel a single grievance;
Demonstrate all your opposition
Sprung from the "Committees of Correspondence are the foulest and most
venomous serpent, that ever issued from the eggs of sedition." etc,
eggs of foul sedition;
Swear he had seen the nest she laid in,
And knew how long she had been sitting;
Could tell exact what strength of heat is
Required to hatch her out Committees;
What shapes they take, and how much longer's
The space before they grow to a Congress?
New whitewash'd Hutchinson and varnished,
Our Gage, who'd got a little tarnish'd,
Made 'em new masks, in time no doubt,
For Hutchinson's was quite worn out;
And while he muddled all his head,
You did not heed a word he said.
Did not our grave Attorney General of Massachusetts Bay, a Judge of Admiralty,
Gage's chief Adviser and Proclamation-maker, author of a farce called the
Americans Rou^ed, and of a great variety of essays on the Ministerial side, in
the Boston newspapers.
Judge Sewall hit
The summit of news-paper wit?
Filled every leaf of every paper
Of Mills and Hicks and mother Draper;
Drew proclamations, works of toil,
In true sublime of scarecrow style;
Wrote farces too, against Sons of Freedom,
All for your good, and none would read 'em;
Denounced damnation on their frenzy,
Who died in Whig-impenitency;
Affirmed that heaven would lend us aid,
As all our Tory-writers said,
And calculated so its kindness,
He told the moment when it joined us."
" 'Twas then belike, Honorius cried,
When you the public fast defied,
Refused to heaven to raise a prayer,
Because you would no connections there:
And since with rev'rent hearts and faces
To Governors you would made addresses,
In them, who made you Tories, seeing
You lived and moved and had your being;
Your humble vows you would not breathe
To powers you would no acquaintance with."
"As for your fasts, replied our 'Squire,
What circumstance could fasts require;
We kept them not, but 'twas no crime;
We held them merely loss of time.
For what advantage firm and lasting,
Pray did you ever get by fasting?
And what the gains that can arise
From vows and offerings to the skies?
Will heaven reward with posts and fees,
Or send us Tea, as Consignees,
Give pensions, sal'ries, places, bribes,
Or choose us judges, clerks, or scribes?
Has it commissions in its gift,
Or cash, to serve us at a lift?
Are acts of parliament there made,
To carry on the placeman's trade?
Or has it passed a single bill
To let us plunder whom we will?
And look our list of placemen all over;
Did heaven appoint our chief judge, Oliver,
^ill that high bench with ignoramus,
Or has it councils by mandamus?
Who made that wit of A proper emblem (...) genius.
water gruel,
A Judge of Admiralty, Sewall?
And were they not mere earthly struggles,
That raised up Murray, say, and Ruggles?
Did heaven send down, our pains to medicine,
That old simplicity of Edson,
Or by election pick out from us,
That Marshfield blund'rer Not. Ray Thomas;
Or had it any hand in serving
A Loring, Pepp'rell, Brown, or Erving?
Yet we have some saints, the very thing,
We'll pit against the best you will bring.
For can the strongest fancy paint
Than Hutchinson a greater saint?
Was there a parson used to pray
At times more reg'lar twice a day;
As folks exact have dinners got,
Whether they have appetites or not?
Was there a zealot more alarming
Against public vice to hold forth sermon,
Or fixed at church, whose inward motion
Rolled up his eyes with more devotion?
What Puritan could ever pray
In Godlier tone, than treas'rer Treasurer of Massachusetts Bay, and one of the
Manda^us Council.
Gray,
Or at town-meetings speechify'ng,
Could utter more melodious whine,
And shut his eyes and vent his moan,
Like owl afflicted in the sun?
Who once ^^nt home his canting rival,
Lord Dartmouth's self, might out be drivel."
"Have you forgot, Honorius cried,
How your prime saint the truth defied,
Affirmed he never wrote a line
Your charter'd rights to undermine;
When his own letters then were by,
That proved his message all a lie?
How many promises he sealed,
To get the oppressive acts repealed,
Yet once arrived on England's shore,
Set on the Premier to pass more?
But these are no defects, we grant,
In a right loyal Tory saint,
Whose godlike virtues must with ease
Atone such venal crimes as these:
Or ye perhaps in scripture spy
A new commandment, " Thou shall lie;"
And if 't be so (as who can tell?)
There Is no one sure ye keep so well."
" Quoth he, For lies and promise-breaking
Ye need not be in such a taking;
For lying is, we know and teach,
The highest privilege of speech;
The universal Magna Charta,
To which all human race is party,
Whence children first, as David says,
Lay claim to 't in their earliest days;
The only stratagem in war,
Our Generals have occasion for;
The only freedom of the press
Our politicians need in peace:
And it is a shame you wish to abridge us
Of these our darling privileges.
Thank heaven, your shot have missed their aim,
For lying is no sin, or shame.
As men last wills may change again,
Though drawn in name of God, amen;
Besure they must have much the more,
Over promises as great a power,
Which made in haste, with small inspection,
So much the more will need correction;
And when they have careless spoke, or penned 'em,
Have right to look 'em over and mend 'em;
Revise their vows, or change the text,
By way of codicil annexed,
Turn out a promise, that was base,
And put a better in its place.
So Gage of late agreed, you know,
To let the Boston people go;
Yet when he saw against troops that braved him,
They were the only guards that saved him,
Kept off that Satan of a Putnam,
From breaking in to maul and mutt'n him;
He Would too much wit such leagues to observe,
And shut them in again to starve.
So Moses writes, when female Jews
Made oaths and vows unfit for use,
Their parents then might set them free
From that conscientious tyranny:
And shall men feel that spir'tual bondage
Forever, when they grow beyond age;
Nor have power their own oaths to change?
I think the tale were very strange.
Shall vows but bind the stout and strong,
And let go women weak and young,
As nets enclose the larger crew,
And let the smaller fry creep through?
Besides, the Whigs have all been set on,
The Tories to affright and threaten,
Till Gage amidst his trembling sits
Has hardly kept him in his wits;
And though he speak with art and finesse,
It Is said beneath duress per minas.
For we are in peril of our souls
From feathers, tar and lib'rty-poles:
And vows extorted are not binding
In law, and so not worth the minding
For we have in this hurly-burly
Sent off our consciences on furlow,
Thrown our religion over in form;
Our ship to lighten in the storm.
Nor need we blush your Whigs before;
If we have no virtue you have no more.
Yet black with sins, would stain a mitre,
Rail ye at crimes by ten tims whiter,
And stuffed with choler atrabilious,
Insult us here for peccadilloes?
While all your vices run so high
That mercy scarce could find supply:
While should you offer to repent,
You Would need more fasting days than Lent,
More groans than haunted churchyard valleys,
And more confessions than bread-alleys.
I Will show you all at fitter time,
The extent and greatness of your crime*
And here demonstrate to your face,
Your want of virtue, as of grace,
Evinced from topics old and recent:
But thus much must suffice at present.
To the after-portion of the day,
I leave what more remains to say;
When I Have good hope you will all appear,
More fitted and prepared to hear,
And grieved for all your vile demeanor:
But now it is time to adjourn for dinner."
END OF CANTO FIRST.
M'FINGAL: CANTO SECOND, OR THE TOWN-MEETING, P. M.
THE Sun, who never (...) to dine,
Two hours had passed ^he midway line,
And driving at his usual rate;
Lashed on his downward car of state.
And now expired the short vacation,
And dinner done in epic fashion;
While all the crew beneath the trees,
Eat pocket-pies, or bread and cheese;
Nor shall we, like old Homer care
To versify their bill of fare,
For now each party, seasted well,
Thronged in, like sheep, at sound of bell,
With equal spirit took their places;
And meeting oped with three Oh yesses:
When first the daring Whigs to oppose,
Again the great M'Fingal rose,
Stretched magisterial arm ama^n,
And thus assumed the accusing strain.
"Ye Whigs attend, and hear affrighted
The crimes whereof ye stand indicted,
The sins and follies past all compass,
That prove you guilty or non compos.
I leave the verdict to your senses,
And jury of your consciences;
Which though they are neither good nor true,
Must yet convict you and your crew,
Ungrateful sons! a factious band,
That rise against your parent-land!
Ye viper'd race, that burst in strife,
The welcome womb, that gave you life,
Tear with sharp fangs and forked tongue,
The indulgent bowels, whence you sprung;
And scorn the debt of obligation
You justly owe the British nation,
Which since you cannot pay, your crew
Affect to swear 'twas never due,
Did not the deeds of England's Primate
First drive your fathers to this climate,
Whom jails and sines and every ill
Forced to their good against their will?
Ye owe to their obliging temper
The peopling your new tangled empire,
While every British act and canon
Stood forth ^ou causa sine qua no^.
Did they not send you charters (...),
And give you lands you owned before,
Permit you all to spill your blood,
And drive out heathen where you could*
On these mild terms, that conquest won,
The realm you gained should be their own.
Or when of late attacked by those,
Whom her connection made your foes,
Did they not then, distressed in war,
Send Generals to your help from far,
Whose aid you owned in terms less haughty,
And thankfully o'erpaid your quota?
Say, at what period did they grudge
To send you Governor or judge,
With all their missionary crew,
To teach you (...) and gospel too?
Brought over all felons in the nation,
To help you on in population;
Proposed their Bishops to surrender,
And made their Priests a legal tender,
Who only asked in surplice clad,
The simple ty the of all you had:
And now to keep all knaves in awe,
Have sent their troops to establish law,
And with gunpowder, fire and ball,
Reform your people one and all.
Yet when their insolence and pride
Have angered all the world beside,
When fear and want at once invade,
Can you refuse to lend them aid;
And rather risq^e your heads in fight,
Than gratefully throw in your mite?
Can they for debts make satisfaction,
Should they dispose their realm by auction;
And fell off Britain's goods and land all
To France and Spain by inch of candle?
Shall good king George, with want oppressed,
Insert his name in bankrupt list,
And shut up shop, like failing merchant,
That sears the bailiffs should make search in it;
With poverty shall princes strive,
And nobles lack whereon to live?
Have they not racked their whole inventions,
To feed their brats on posts and pensions,
Made even Scotch friends with taxes groan,
And picked poor Ireland to the bone;
Yet have on hand as well deserving,
Ten thousand bastards left for starving?
And can you now with conscience clear,
Refuse them an asylum here,
Or not maintain in manner sitting,
These genuine sons of mother Britain?
(...) ^vade these crimes of blackest grain,
You prate of liberty in vain,
And strive to hide your vile designs,
With terms abstruse like school-divines.
Your boasted patriotism is scarce,
And country's love is but a farce;
And after all the proofs you bring,
We Tories know there is no such thing.
Our English writers of great fame
Prove public virtue but a name.
Has not Ministerial Pensioners.
Dalrymple showed in print,
And Ministerial Pensioners.
Johnson too, there is nothing in it?
Produced you demonstration ample
From other's and their own example,
That self is still, in either faction,
The only principle of action;
The loadstone, whose attracting t^ther
Keeps the politic world together:
And spite of all your double-dealing,
We Tories know it is so, by feeling.
Who heeds your babbling of transmitting
Freedom to (...) of your begetting,
Or will proceed as though there were a tie,
Or obligation to posterity?
We get 'em, bear 'em, bre^d and nurse;
What has poster'ty done for us,
That we, lest they their rights should lose
Should trust our necks to gripe of ^oose?
And who believes you will not run?
You're cowards, every mother's son;
And should you offer to deny,
We Have (...) to prove it by.
(...) the opinion first, as refer^e,
(...) your old General, stout Sir Jeffery,
Who swore that with five thousand foot
He Would rout you all, and in pursuit,
Run through the land as easily,
As camel through a needle's eye.
Did not the valiant Col'nel Grant
Against your courage make his slant,
Affirm your universal failure
In every principle of valor,
And swear no scamp'rers ever could match you,
So swift, a bullet scarce could catch you?
And will ye not confess in this,
A judge most competent he is,
Well skilled on runnings to decide,
As what himself has often tried?
'Twoul^ not methinks be labor lost,
If you would sit down and count the cost;
And ere you call your Yankies out,
First think what work you have set about.
Have ye not roused, his force to try on,
That grim old beast, the British lion?
And know you not that at a sup
He Is large enough to eat you up?
Have you surveyed his jaws beneath,
Drawn inventories of his teeth,
Or have you weighed in even balance
His strength and magnitude of talons?
His roar would turn your boasts to fear,
As easily as sour small-beer,
And make your feet from dreadful fray,
By native instinct* run away.
Britain, depend on it, will take on her
TO assert her dignity and honor,
And ere she would lose your share of pelf,
Destroy your country and herself.
For has not North declared they fight
To gain substantial rev'nue by it,
Denied he would ever deign to treat,
Till on your knees and at his feet?
And feel you not a trisling ague,
From Van's Delenda est Carthago?
For this, now Britain has come to it,
Think you she has not means to do it?
Has she not set to work all engines
To spirit up the native Indians,
Send on your backs a savage band,
With each a hatchet in his hand,
TO amuse themselves with scalping knives,
And butcher children and your wives;
That she may boast again with vanity,
Her English national humanity?
(For now in its p^^maeval sense,
This term, human'ty, comprehends
All things of which, on this fide hell,
The human mind is capable;
And thus it is well, by writers sage,
Applied to Britain and to Gage.)
And on this work to raise allies,
She sent her duplicate of Guys,
To drive, at diff^rent parts at once, on
Her stout Guy Carlton and Guy Johnson;
To each of whom, to send again ye
Old Guy of Warwick were a ninny;
Though the dun cow he felled in war,
These killcows are his betters far.
And has she not assayed her notes,
To rouse your slaves to cut your throats,
Sent over ambassadors with ^uineas,
To bribe your blacks in Carolinas?
And has not Ga^^, her missionary
Turned many an (...) a Tory,
A^^ made (...) Amer'can (...) see grow,
By (...) a new converted Negro?
As friends to gov'rnment did not he
Their slaves at Boston late set free;
Enlist them all in black parade,
Set off with regimental red?
And were they not accounted then
Among his very bravest men?
And when such means she stoops to take,
Think you she is not wide awake?
As Eliphaz' good man in Job
Owned numerous allies through the globe;
Had brought the The stones and all the elements wi^h thee
Shall ratify a strict confed'racy;
Wild beasts their savage temper shall forget,
And for a firm alliance with thee (...): etc.
Blackmore's Paraphrase (...).
sto^es along the street
To ratify a covenant meet,
And every beast from lice to lions,
To join in leagues of strict alliance:
Has she not cring'd, in spite of pride,
For like assistance for and wide?
Was there a creature so despised,
Its and she has not sought and prized?
Till all this formidable league rose
Of Indians, British troops and Negroes,
And can you break these triple bands
By all your workmanship of hands?"
" Sir, quoth Honorius, we presume
You guess from past feats, what is to come,
And from ^he mighty deeds of Gage,
Foretell how fierce the war he will wage.
You doubtless recollected here
The annals of his first great year:
While wearying out the Tories' patience,
He spent his breath in proclamations;
While all hi^ mighty noise and vapor
Was used in wrangling upon paper;
And boasted military (...);
Closed in the straining of his wits;
While troops in Boston commons placed
Laid naught but quires of paper was^e;
While strokes alternate stu^^ ^'d ^he nation,
Protest, address and proclamation;
And speech ^et speech, (...) clash'd wi^h fib,
And Gage still answered, squib for squib,
Though this not all his time was lost on;
He fortified the town of Boston;
Built breast works that might l^nd assistance
To keep the patriots at a distance;
(For howsoe'er the rogues might (...),
He liked them best the says (...) off)
Of mighty use and help to (...)
His courage, when (...),
And whence ^ight often in (...) station,
He Would boldly pop his proclamation.
Our hearts must in our bo^^ me ^^eeze
At such heroic deeds as these."
"Vain, quoth the 'Squire, you will find to (...)
At Gage's first triumphant your;
For Providence, disp^^^d to (...) us,
Can use what instruments it please^
To pay a tax at Peter's wish,
His chief cashier was once a Fish;
An Ass, in ^alaam's sad disaster,
Turned orator and saved hi^ master;
A Goose placed centry on his (...)
Preserved old Rome from desolation;
An English Bishop's See Bishop (...)
(...) of late
Disclosed rebellions against the state;
So Frogs croak'd Pharaoh to repentance,
And Lice reversed the threatening sentence:
And heaven can ruin you at pleasure,
By our scorned Gage, as well as Caesar.
Yet did our hero in these days
Pick up some laurel wreaths of praise.
And as the statuary of Seville
Made his cracked saint an exc'llent devil;
So though our war few triumphs brings,
We gained great same in other things.
Did not our troops show much discerning,
And skill your various arts in learning?
Outwent they not each native Noodle
By far in playing Yanky-doodle;
Which, as 'twas your New England tune;
'Twas mavelous they took so soon?
And ere the year was fully through,
Did not they learn to ^oot it too;
And such a dance as never was known,
For twenty miles on end lead down?
Was there a Yanky trick you knew,
They did not play as well as you?
Did they not lay their heads together,
And gain your art to tar and feather,
When Col'nel Nesbitt through the town,
In triumph bore the country-clown?
Oh, what a glorious work to sing
The ve^'ran troops of Britain's king,
Advent'ring for the heroic laurel,
With bag of feathers and tar-barrel (...)
To paint the cart where culprits ride,
And Nesbitt marching at its side,
Great executioner and proud,
Like hangman high on Holbourn road;
And over the bright triumpha^ car
The waving ensigns of the war!
As when a triumph Rome decreed,
For great Calig'la's valiant deed,
Who had subdued the British seas,
By gath'^ing cockles from their base;
In pompous ^ar the conqu'ror bore
His captived scallops from the shore,
Ovations gained his crabs for fetching,
And mighty seats of oyster-catching:
Over Yankies thus the war begun,
They tarr'd and triumphed over one;
And sought and boasted through the season,
With might as great, and equal reason.
Y^^ thus, though skilled in vict'ry's toils,
They boast, not unexpert, in wiles.
For gained they not an equal same in
The arts of f^crecy and scheming?
In stratagems showed mighty force,
And moderniz'd the Trojan horse,
Played over again those tricks Ulyssea^,
In their famed Salem-expedition?
For as that horse, the Poets tell ye,
Bore Grecian armies in his belly;
Till their full reckoning run, with joy
Their Sinon midwif'd them in Troy:
So in one ship was Leslie bold
Crammed with three hundred men in hold,
Equipped for enterprise and sail,
Like Jonas stowed in womb of whale.
To Marblehead in depth of night,
The cautious vessel winged her flight.
And now the sabbath's silent day
Called all your Yankies off to pray;
Removed each prying jealous neighbor,
The scheme and vessel fell in labor;
Forth from its hollow womb poured hastily
The Myrmidons of Col'n^l Leslie:
Not thicker over the blackened strand
The Sea Homer's battle of the frogs and mice.
frogs' detachment rushed to land,
Equipped by onset or surprise
To storm the entrenchment of the mice.
Through Salem strait without delay,
The bold battalion took its way,
Marched over a bridge in open sight
Of several Yankies armed for fight,
Then without loss of time, or men
Veer'd round for Boston back again;
And found so well their projects thrive,
That every soul got home alive.
Thus Gage's arms did fortune bless
With triumph, safety and success:
But mercy is without dispute
His first and darling attribute;
So great it far outwent and conquered
His military skill at Concord.
There when the war he chose to wage
Shone the benevolence of Gage;
Sent troops to that ill-omen'd place
On errands mere of special grace,
And all the work he chose them for
Was to See Gage's answer to Governor Trumbull.
prevent a civil war:
And for that purpose he projected
The only certain way to effect it,
To take your powder, stores and arms,
And all your means of doing harms:
As prudent folks take knives away,
Lest children cut themselves at play.
And yet though this was all his scheme,
This war you still will charge on him;
And though he often has swore and said it,
Stick close to facts and give no credit.
Think you, he wished you would brave and beard him?
Why, 'twas the very thing that scared him.
He Would rather you should all have run,
Than stayed to fire a single gun.
And for the civil war you lament,
Faith, you yourselves must take the blame in it;
For had you then, as he intended,
Given up your arms, it must have ended.
Since that is no war, each mortal knows,
Where one side only gives the blows,
And the other bears 'em; on reflection
The most you'^^ call it is correction.
Nor could the contest have gone higher,
If you had never returned the fire;
But when you shot, and not before,
It then commenced a civil war.
Else Gage, to end this controversy,
Had but corrected you in mercy:
Whom mother Britain old and wise,
Sent over, the Col'nies to chastise;
Command obedience on their peril
Of ministerial whip and ferule;
And since they never must come of age,
Governed and tutored them by Gage.
Still more, that this was all their errand,
The army's conduct makes apparent.
What though at Lexington you can say
They kil^'d a few they did not fancy,
At Concord then, with manful popping,
Discharged a round the ball to open?
Yet when they saw your rebel-rout
Determined still to hold it out;
Did they not show their love to peace,
And wish, that discord strait might cease,
Demonstrate, and by proofs uncommon,
Their orders were to injure no man?
For did not every Reg'lar run
As soon as ever you fired a gun;
Take the first shot you sent them greeting,
As meant their signal for retreating;
And fearful if they staid for sport,
You might by accident be hurt,
Convey themselves with speed away
Full twenty miles in half a day;
Race till their legs were grown so weary,
They Would scarce suffice their weight to carry?
Whence Gage extols, from general hearsay,
The great "Too much praise cannot be given to Lord Percy for his remarkable
activity through the whole day."

Gage'^ account of the Lexington battle.


activ'ty of Lord Piercy;
Whose brave example led them on,
And spirited the troops to run;
And now may boast at royal levees
A Yanky-chace worth forty Chevys.
Yet you as vile as they were kind,
Pursued, like tigers, still behind,
Fired on them at your will, and shut
The town, as though you would starve them out;
And with " And with a preposterous parade of military arrangement they affect
to ^old the army besieged."

Gage's last grand proclamation.


parade prepost' rous hedged
A ^^^ct to hold them there besieged;
(Though Gage, whom proclamations call
Your Gov'r^^^ and Vice Admiral,
Whose power gubernatorial still
Extends as far as Bunker's hill;
Whose admiralty reaches clever,
Near half a mile up Mystic river,
Whose naval force commands the seat,
Can run away when'er he please)
Scared troops of Tories into town,
And burnt their hay and houses down,
And menaced Gage, unless he would flee,
To drive him headlong to the sea;
As once, to faithless Jews a sign,
The de'el, turned hog-reeve, did the swine,
But now your triumphs all are over;
For see from Britain's angry shore
With mighty ho^^s of valor join
Her How, her Clinton and Burgoyne.
As comets through the affrighted skies
Pour baleful ruin, as they rife;
As AE (...) with infernal roar
In conflagration sweeps the shore;
Or as He was a representative of (...) field, and employed ^o carry their
(...) town resolves to Boston. He armed himself in as (...) military array, as
another Hud^bra^, (...) he was afraid he should be robbed of them.
Abi^^h White when sent
Our Marshfield friends to represent,
Himself while dread array involves,
Commissions, (...), swords, resolves,
In awful pomp descending down,
Bore terror on the factious town:
Not wi^h less (...) and (...),
(...) these Gen^rals ^orth to fight.
No more each (...) This was a fact Some British officers, soon after Gage's
arrival in Boston, walking on Beacon-H^ll after sunset, were affrighted by
noises in the air (supposed to be the flying of bugs and (...)) which they took
to be the sound of bullets, and left the (...) with great precipitation:
Concerning which they wrote terrible accounts to England of their being shot at
with (...); as appears by one or two (...), extracts, from which were published
in the English (...).
Col'nel run.
From w^^zzing beetles, as air-(...),
Thinks hornbugs bullets, or through scars
Muskitoes takes for musketeers;
Nor scapes, as though you would gained allies
From B^lz^bub's whole host of flies.
No bug their warlike hearts appalls;
They better know the ^ound of balls.
I hear the di^ of battle bray,
The trump of horror marks its way.
I see a far the sack of (...),
The gallows strung with Whig-committees;
Your Moderators triced, like (...),
And gate-posts graced with heads of Chairmen;
Your Generals sor wave-o^^rings hanging,
And ladders thronged with Priests haranguing.
Wh^^ pill^ries glad the Tories' eyes
With patriot-(...) ^or sacrifice!
What whipping-posts your chosen race
Admit (...) in embrace,
While each hears off his crimes, (...)!
Like Bunyan's pilgrim, on his back!
Where then, when To ies scarce got clear,
Shall Whigs and Congresses appear?
What rock, and mountains shall you call
To wrap you over with their fall,
And save your heads in these sad weathers,
From fire and sword, and tar and feathers
For ^o, with British troops (...),
Again our Ne^^^t heaves in (...):
He comes, he comes, your (...) to storm,
And ri^g your troops in uniform!
To m^^t such (...) will ye (...),
With (...);
Who wield their (...),
With (...)!
(...), where (...) brings
Destruction on (...),
While through the deeps her potent thunder
Shall sound the alarm to rob and plunder!
As Phoebus first, so Homer speaks,
When he marched out to attack the Greeks,
Against (...) sent forth his arrows fatal,
And slow the auxiliaries, their cattle;
So where our ships shall stretch the keel,
What conquered oxen shall they steal!
What heroes rising from the deep
Invade your marshalled hosts of sheep!
Disperse whole troops of horse, and pressing
Make cows surrender at discretion;
Attack your hens, like Alexanders,
And reg'ments rout of geese and ganders;
Or where united arms combine
Lead captive many a herd of swine!
Then rush in dreadful fury down
To fire on every seaport town;
Display their glory and their wits,
Fright unar^^'d children into sits,
And stoutly from the unequal fray,
Make many a woman run away!
And can ye doubt whenever we please
Our chiefs shall boast such deeds as these
Have we not chiefs transcending far,
The old famed thunderbolts of war;
Beyond the brave romantic fighters,
Styled swords of death by novel-writers?
Nor in romancing ages ever rose
So terrible a tier of heroes.
From Gage, what flashes fright the waves!
How loud a blunderbuss is Graves!
How Newport dreads the blustering sallies,
That thunder from our popgun, Wallace,
While noise in formidable strains
Spouts from his thimble-full of brains!
I see you sink with awed surprise!
I see our Tory-brethren rise!
And as the sect'ries Sandemanian,
Our friends describe their wished Millennium;
Tell how the world in every region
At once shall own their true religion;
For heaven with plagues of awful dread
Shall knock all heretics of the head;
And then their church, the meek in spirit,
The earth, as promised, shall inherit,
From the dead wicked, as heirs male,
And next remainder-men in tail:
Such ruin shall the Whigs oppress!
Such spoils our Tory friends shall bless!
While Consiscation at command
Shall stalk in horror through the land,
Shall give your Whig-estates away,
And call our brethren into play.
And can ye doubt or scruple more,
These things are near you at the door?
Behold! for though to reasoning blind,
Signs of the times ye sure might mind,
And view impending sat as plain
As ye'd foretell a shower of rain.
Has not heaven warned you what must ensue,
And Providence declared against you;
Hung forth its dire portents of war,
By Such stories of prodigies were at that time industriously propagated by the
Tory-patty in various parts of New England, to terrify and intimidate the
superstitious.
signs and beacons in the air;
Alarmed old women all around
By fearful noises under ground;
While earth for many dozen leagues
Groaned with her dismal load or Whigs?
Was there a meteor far and wide
But mustered on the Tory-side?
A star malign that has not bent
Its aspects for the Parliament,
Foreboding your defeat and misery;
As once they sought against old Sisera?
Was there a cloud that spread the skies,
But bore our armies of allies?
While dreadful hosts of fire stood forth
'Mid baleful glimm'rings from the North;
Which plainly shows which part they joined,
For North's the minister, ye mind;
Whence often your quibblers in gazettes
On Northern blasts have strained their wits;
And think ye not the clouds know how
To make the pun as well as you?
Did there arise an apparition,
But grinn'd sorth ruin to sedition?
A death-watch, but has joined our leagues,
And click'd destruction to the Whigs?
Heard ye not, when the wind was fair,
At night our or'tors in the air,
That, loud as admiralty-libel,
Read awful chapters from the bible,
And death and deviltry denounced,
And told you how you would soon be trounc'd?
I see to join our conquering side
Heaven, earth and hell at once allied!
See from your overthrow and end
The Tories paradise ascend;
Like that new world that claims its station
Beyond the final conflagration!
I see the day that lo^s your share
In utter darkness and despair;
The day of joy, when North, our Lord,
His saithful favorites shall reward!
No Tory then shall set before him
Small wish of 'Squire, or Justice Quo^^^:
But before his unmistaken eyes
See Lordships, posts and pensions ^i^e.
A wake to gladness then, ye Tories,
The unbounce^ prospect lies before us?
The power displayed in Gage's banners
Shall cut Amer'can lands to manors,
And over our happy conquered ground
Dispense estates and titles round.
Behold, the world shall stare at new setts
Of home-made See Hutchinson's and Oliver's letters.
earls in Massachusetts;
Admire, arrayed in ducal tassels,
Your Ol'vers, Hutchinsons and Vassals;
See joined in minsterial work
His grace of Albany and York!
What Lordships from each carved estate,
On our New York Assembly wait!
What titled Members of the ministerial Majority in the New York assembly;
Wilkins a noted writer.
Jaun^vs, Gales and Bi^^ops;
Lord Brush, Lord Wilkins and Lord Philips!
In wide-sleev'd pomp of godly guise,
What solemn ^ows of bishops rise!
Aloft a card'nal's hat is spread
Over punster President Cooper is a notorious punster: Vardell, author of some
poetical satires on the sons of liberty in New York, and royal professor in
King's college; Chandler and Auch^^^y, High-church and Tory-writers of the
Cleri^al order.
Cooper's reverend head!
In Vardel' hat poetic zealot,
I view a lawn-bedizen'd prelate!
While mitres fall, as it is their duty,
On heads of Chandler and Auchmuty!
Knights, viscounts, barons shall ye meet
As thick as pavements in the street!
Even I perhaps, heaven speed my claim,
Shall fix a Sir before my name.
For titles all our foreheads ache;
For what blessed changes can they make!
Place reverence, grace and excellence
Where neither claimed the least pretense;
Transform by patent's magic words
Men, likest devils, into Lords;
Whence commoners to peers translated
Are justly said to be created!
Now where commissioners ye saw
Shall boards of nobles deal you law!
Long-rob'd comptrollers judge your rights,
And tide-waiters start up in knights!
While Whigs subdued in slavish awe,
Our wood shall hew, our water draw,
And bless that mildness, when past hope,
Which saved their necks from noose of rope,
For as to gain assistance we
Design their Negroes to set free;
For Whigs, when we enough shall bang 'em,
Perhaps it is better not to hang 'em;
Except their chiefs; the vulgar knaves
Will do more good preserved for slaves."
"'It Is well, Honorius cried, your scheme
Has painted out a pretty dream.
We cannot confute your second sight;
We shall be slaves and you a knight:
These things must come: but I divine
They Will come not in your day, or mine.
But oh, my friends, my brethren, hear,
And turn for once the attentive ear.
Ye see how prompt to aid our woes,
The tender mercies of our foes;
Ye see wi^h what unvaried rancour
^till for our blood their minions hanker,
Nor aught can sat their mad ambition,
From us, but death, or worse, submission.
Shall these then riot in our spoil,
Reap the glad harvest of our toil,
Rise from their country's ruin proud,
And roll their chariot wheels in blood?
And can ye sleep while high out spread
Hangs desolation over your head?
See Gage with inauspicious star
Has oped the gates of civil war;
When streams of gore from freemen slain,
E^^rimson'd Concord's fatal plain;
Whose warning voice with awful sound,
Still cries, like Abel's from the ground,
And heaven, attentive to its call,
Shall doom the proud oppressor's ^all.
Rise then, ere ruin (...) surprise,
To victory, to vengeance rise!
Hark, how the distant din alarms!
The echoing trumpet breathes, to arms;
From provinces remote, afar,
The sons of glory rouse to war;
It Is freedom calls; the enraptured sound
The Apalachian hills rebound;
The Georgian shores her voice shall hear,
And start from lethargies of fear.
From the parched zone, with glowing ray,
Where pours the sun intenser day,
To shores where icy waters roll,
And tremble to the dusky pole,
Inspired by freedom's heavenly charms,
United nations wake to arms.
The star of conquest lights their way,
And guides their vengeance on their prey --
Yes, though tyrannic sorce oppose,
Still shall they triumph over their soes,
Fill heaven the happy land shall bless,
Wi^h safety, liberty and peace.
And ye whose souls of dastard mould
Start at the brav'ry of the bold;
To love your country who pretend,
Yet want all spirit to defend;
Who feel your fancies so prolific,
Engend'ring vision'd whims terrific,
O'er-run with horrors of coercion,
Fire, blood and thunder in reversion,
King's standards, pill'ries, confiscations,
And Gage's scarecrow proclamations,
With all the trumpery of fear;
Hear bullets whizzing in your rear;
Who scarce could rouse, if caught in fray,
Presence of mind to run away;
See naught but halters rise to view
In all your dreams (and dreams are true)
And while these phantoms haunt your brains,
Bow down the willing neck to chains;
Heavens! are ye sons of sires so great,
Immortal in the fields of fate,
Who braved all deaths by land or sea,
Who bled, who conquered to be free!
Hence, coward souls, the worst disgrace
Of our forefathers' valiant race;
Hie homeward from the glorious field;
There turn the wheel, the distaff wield;
Act what ye are, nor dare to stain
The warrior's arms with touch profane:
There beg your more heroic wives
To guard your children and your lives;
Beneath their aprons find a screen,
Nor dare to mingle more with men."
As thus he said, the Tories' anger
Could now restrain itself no longer,
Who tried before by many a freak, or
Insulting noise, to stop the speaker;
Swung the unoil'd hinge of each pew-door;
Their feet kept shuffling on the floor;
Made their disapprobation known
By many a murmur, hum and groan,
That to his speech supplied the place
Of counterpart in thorough-base:
As bag-pipes, while the tune they breathe,
Still drone and grumble underneath;
Or as the sam'd Demosthenes
Harangued the rumbling of the seas,
H^ld forth with eloquence full grave
To audience loud of wind and wave;
And had a stiller congregation
Than Tories are to hear the oration.
But now the storm grew high and louder
As nearer thundrings of a cloud are,
And every soul with heart and voice
Supplied his quota of the noise;
(...) ^^^ning ^ar was set on torture
Each ^ory bell' wing out, to order;
And some, with tongue not low or weak,
Were clam'ring fast, for leave to speak;
The moderator, with great vi'^ence,
The cushion thump'd with "Silence, silence;"
The constable to every prater
Bawled out, " Pray hear the moderator;"
Some called the vote, and some in turn
Were screaming high, " adjourn, adjourn:"
Not cha^s heard such ^ars and clashes
When ^ll the el'ments sought for places.
Each bludgeon soon for (...);
Each (...) stood ready (...);
The storm each moment louder grew;
His sword the great M'Ti^^^ dr^w,
Prepared in either chance to share,
To keep the peace, or aid the war.
Nor lacked they each poetic being,
Whom bards alone are skilled in secing;
Plumb'd Victory stood perched on high,
Upon the pulpit-canopy,
To join, as is her custom tried,
Like Indians, on the strongest side;
The Destinies with shears and distaf^,
Drew near their threads of life to twist off;
The Furies 'gan to feast on blows,
And broken heads or bloody nose;
When on a sudden from without
Arose a loud terrific shout;
And strait the people all at once heard
Of tongues an universal concert;
Like AEsop's times, as sable runs,
When every creature talked at once,
Or like the variegated gabble
That crazed the carpenters of Babel,
Each party soon forgot the quarrel,
And let the other go on parole;
Eager to know what fearful matter
Had conjured up such general clatter;
And left the church in thin array,
As though it had been lecture-day.
Our 'Squire M'Fingal straitway beckon^d
The constable to stand his second,
And sallied forth with aspect fierce
The crowd assembled to disperse.
The moderator out of view
Beneath a bench had lain p^rdue;
Peeped up his head to view the ^^ay,
Beheld the wranglers run away,
And left alone with solemn face,
Adjourned them without time or place.
END OF CANTO SECOND.
M 'FINGAL: CANTO THIRD, OR THE LIBERTY POLE.
NOW armed with ministerial ire,
Fierce sallied forth our loyal 'Squire,
And on his striding steps attends,
His desperate clan of Tory friends;
When sudden met his angry eye,
A pole, ascending through the sky,
Which numerous throngs of Whiggish race
Were raising in the marketplace;
Not higher schoolboys kites aspire,
Or royal mas^ or country spire,
Like spears at (...) tilting
Or Satan's walking-staff in Milton;
And on its top the flag unfurled,
Waved triumph over the prostrate world,
Inscribed with inconsistent types
Of liberty and thirteen stripes.
Beneath, the crowd without delay,
The dedication-rites essay,
And gladly pay in ancient fashion,
The ceremonies of libation;
While briskly to each patriot lip
Walks eager round the inspiring f^ip:
Delicious draught, whose powers inherit
The quintessence of public spirit!
Which whosoever tastes, perceives his mind!
To nobler politics refined,
Or roused for martial controversy,
As from transforming cups of Circe;
Or warmed with Homer's nectar'd liquor,
That filled the veins of gods with ichor.
At hand for new supplies in store,
The tavern opes its friendly door,
Whence to and fro the waiters run,
Like bucket-men at fires in town.
Then with three shouts that tore the sky,
It Is consecrate to Liberty;
To guard it from the attacks of Tories,
A grand committee culled of four is,
Who foremost on the patriot spot,
Had brought the flip and paid the shot.
By this, M'Fingal with his train,
Advanced upon the adjacent plain,
And fierce with loyal rage possessed,
Poured forth the zeal, that fired his breast.
" What madbrain'd rebel gave commission,
To raise this Maypole of fedition!
Like Babel reared by bawling throngs,
With like confusion too of tongues,
To point at heaven and summon down,
The thunders of the British crown?
Say will this paltry pole secure
Your forfeit heads from Gage's power?
Attacked by heroes brave and crafty,
Is this to stand your ark of safety?
Or driven by Scottish lord and laddie,
Think ye to rest beneath its shadow?
When bombs, like fiery serpents, fly
And balls move hissing through the sky,
Will this vile (...), devote to freedom,
Save like the ^ewish pole in Edom,
Or like the brazen snake of Moses,
Cure your cracked skulls and battered noses?
Ye dupes to every factious rogue,
Or tavernprating demagogue,
Whose tongue but rings, with sound more full,
On the empty drumhead of his skull,
Behold you know not what noisy fools
Use you, worse simpletons, for tools?
For Liberty in your own by-sense
Is but for crimes a patent license;
To break of law the Egyptian yoke,
And throw the world in common stock,
Reduce all grievances and ills
To Magna Charta of your wills,
Establish cheats and frauds and nonsense,
Framed by the model of your conscience,
Cry justice down, as out of fashion
And fix its scale of depreciation,
Defy all creditors to trouble ye,
And pass new years of Jewish jubilee;
Drive judges out, like Aaron's calves,
By jurisdictions of white s^aves,
And make the bar and benc^ and steeple,
Submit to our sovereign Lord, the People;
Assure each knave his whole assets,
By general amnesty of debts;
By plunder rise to power and glory,
And brand all property as tory;
Expose all wares to lawful seizures
Of mobbers and monopolizers;
Break heads and windows and the peace,
For your own interest and increase;
Dispute and pray and fight and groan,
For public good, and mean your own;
Prevent the laws, by fierce attacks,
From quitting scores upon your backs,
Lay your old dread, the gallows, low,
And seize the stocks your ancient foe;
And turn them, as convenient engines
To wreak your patriotic vengeance;
While all, your claims who understand,
Confess they are in the owner's hand^
And when by clamours and confusions,
Your freedom's grown a public nuisance,
Cry, Liberty, with powerful yearning,
As he does, fire, whose house is burning,
Though he already has much more,
Than he can find occasion for.
While every dunce, that turns the plains
Though bankrupt in estate and brains,
By this new light transformed to traitor,
Forsakes his plow to turn dictator,
Starts an haranguing chief of Whigs,
And drags you by the ears, like pigs.
All bluster armed with factious license,
Transformed at once to politicians;
(...) leather-aproa'd clown grown wise,
Presents his forward face to advise,
And (...) legislators meet
From every workshop through the street;
His goose the tailor finds new use in,
To patch and turn the constitution;
The black smith comes with sledge and grate,
To ^onbind the wheels of state;
The quack forbears his patient's souse,
To purge the Council and the House,
The tinker quits his melds and doxies,
To east assembly-men at proxies.
From dunghills deep of sable hue,
Your dirtbred patriots spring to view,
To wealth and power and pension rise,
Like new-wing'd maggots changed to flies;
And sluttring round in proud parade,
Strut in the robe, or gay cockade.
See Arnold's perjuries at the time of his pretended bankruptcy, which was the
first rise of his fortune, and his curious law suit against a brother-skipper,
who had charged him with having caught the abovementioned disease, by his
connection with a certain African princess in the West Indies, with its
humorous issue, are matters, not I believe so generally known, as the other
circumstances of his public and private character.
Arnold quits for ways more certain,
His bankrupt perj'ries for his fortune,
Brews rum no longer in his store,
Jockey and skipper now no more;
Forsakes his warehouses and docks,
And writs of slander for the po^,
And purged by patriotism from shame,
Grows General of the foremost name.
M'Fingal having here inserted the names and characters of several great men,
whom the public have not yet fully detected, it is thought proper to omit
sundry paragraphs of his speech, in the present edition.
Hiatus.
For in this ferment of the stream,
The dregs have worked up to the brim,
And by the rule of topsyturvys,
The skum stands swelling on the surface.
You Have caused your pyramid to ascend
And set it on the little end;
Like Hudibras, your empire's made,
Whose crapper had o'ertop'd his head;
You Have pash'd and turned the whole world up-
Side down and got yourselves a-top:
While all the great ones of your state,
Are crushed beneath the pop'lar weight,
Nor can you boast this present hour,
The shadow of the form of power.
For what is your Congress, or its end?
A power to advise and recommend;
To call for troops, adjust your quotas,
And yet no soul is bound to notice;
To pawn your faith to the utmost limit,
But cannot bind you to redeem it,
And when in want no more in them lies,
Than begging of your State-Assemblies;
Can utter oracles of dread,
Like friar Bacon's brazen head,
But should a faction ever dispute 'em,
Has never an arm to execute 'em.
As though you chose supreme dictators,
And put them under conservators;
You Have but pursued the selfsame way,
With Shakespeare's Trinclo in the play,
" You shall be viceroys here, it is true,
But we'll be viceroys over you."
What wild confusion hence must ensue,
Though common danger yet cements you;
So some wrecked vessel, all in shatters,
Is held up by surrounding waters,
But stranded, when the pressure ceases,
Falls by its rottenness to pieces.
And fall it must -- if wars were ended,
You Will never have sense enough to mend it;
But creeping on with low intrigues
Like vermin of an hundred legs,
Will find as short a life assigned,
As all things else of reptile kind.
Your Commonwealth's a common harlot,
The property of every varlet,
Which now in taste and full employ,
All sorts admire, as all enjoy;
But soon a battered strumpet grown,
You Will curse and drum her out of town.
Such is the government you chose,
For this you bade the world be foes,
For this so marked for dissolution,
You scorn the British constitution,
That constitution, formed by sages,
The wonder of all modern ages:
Which owns no failure in reality,
Except corruption and venality;
And only proves the adage just,
That best things spoiled corrupt to worst.
So man supreme in mortal station,
And mighty lord of this creation,
When once his corse is dead as herring,
Becomes the most offensive carrion,
And sooner breeds the plague, it is found,
Than all beasts rotting 'bove the ground.
Yet for this gov'rnment, to dismay us,
You Have called up anarchy from chaos,
With all the followers of her school,
Uproar and rage and wild misrule;
For whom this rout of Whigs distracted
And ravings dire of every cracked head;
These new-cast legislative engines
Of county-musters and conventions,
Committees vile of correspondence,
And mobs, whose tricks have almost undone's;
While reason fails to check your course,
And loyalty's kicked out of door^,
And folly, like inviting landlord,
Hoists on your poles her royal standard.
While the king's friends in doleful dumps,
Have worn their courage to the stumps,
And leaving George in sad disaster,
Most sinfully deny their master.
What furies raged when you in sea,
In shape of Indians drowned the tea,
When your gay sparks, fatigued to watch it,
Assumed the moggison and hatchet,
With wampo^^d blankets hid their laces,
And like their sweethearts, primed their faces:
While not a redcoat dared oppose,
And scarce a Tory showed his nose,
While Hutchinson for sure retreat,
Manouvred to his country seat,
And thence affrighted in the (...),
Stole off bareheaded through the woods!
Have you not roused your (...) to join,
And make Mandamus-man resign,
Called forth cach du^^^-fress'd curmudgeon,
With dirty trowsers and white bludgeon,
Forced all our Councils th^^ the land,
To yield their necks to your command;
While paleness marks their late disgraces
Through all their rueful length of faces?
Have you not caused as woeful work,
In loyal city of New York,
When all the rabble well cockaded,
In triumph through the streets paraded;
And mobb'd the Tories, seared their spouses,
And ransacked all the custom-houses,
Made such a tumult, bluster, jarring,
That mid the clash of tempests warring,
Smith's weathercock with veers forlorn,
Could hardly tell which way to turn;
Burnt effigies of the higher powers,
Contrived in planetary hours,
As witches with clay-images,
Destroy or torture whom they please;
Till sired with rage, the ungrateful club
Spared not your best friend, Beelzebub,
O'erlook'd his favors and forgot
The reverence due his cloven foot,
And in the selfsame furnace frying,
Burned him and North and Bute and Tryon?
Did you not in as vile and shallow way,
Fright our poor Philadelphian, Galloway,
Your Congress when the daring ribald
Belied, berated and besribbled?
What ropes and halters did you send,
Terrific emblems of his end,
Till least he would hang in more than effigy,
Fled in a fog the trembling refugee?
Now rising in progression fatal,
Have you not ventured to give battle?
When treason cha^^d our heroes troubled,
With rusty gun and leathern doublet,
Turned all stonewalls and groves and bushes,
To ba^t'ries armed with blunderbusses,
And with deep wounds that fate portend,
Gaul'd many a reg'lar's latter end,
Drove them to Boston, as in jail,
Confined without mainprize or bail.
Were not these deeds enough betimes,
To heap the measure of your crimes,
But in this loyal town and dwelling,
You raise these en^^gns of rebellion?
It Is done; fair Mercy shuts her door;
And Vengeance now shall sleep no more;
Rise then, my friends, in terror rise,
And wipe this scandal from the skies!
You Will see their Dagon, though well jointed,
Will sink before the Lord's anointed,
And like old jeric^^^ proud wall,
Before our ram's horns prostrate sall."
This said, our 'Squire, yet undismayed,
Called forth the Constable to aid,
And bade him read in nearer station,
The riot-act and proclamation;
Who now advancing towered the ring,
Be (...), " Our sovereign Lord the King" --
When thousand clamorous tongues he hears,
And clubs and stones assail his ^ars;
To sty was vain, to sight was idle,
By foes encompassed in the middle;
In stratagem his aid he found,
And fell right craftily to ground;
Then crept to seek an hiding place,
'Twas all he could, beneath a brace;
Where soon the conquering crew espied him,
And where he lurked, they caught and tied him.
At once with resolution fatal,
Both Whigs and Tories rushed to battle;
Instead of weapons, either band
Seized on such arms, as came to hand.
And as famed Ovid's Metamorphoses, Book (...).
Ovid paints the adventures
Of wrangling Lapithae and Centaurs,
Who at their feast, by Bacchus led,
Threw bottles at each other's head,
And these arm, failing in their scuffles,
Attacked wi^h handirons, tongs and shovels;
So clubs and billets, staves and stones
Met fierce, encount'ring every sconce,
And covered over with (...) and pains
Each void receptacle for brains;
Their clamours rend the hills around,
And earth rebellows with the sound;
And many a groan increased the din
From broken nose and battered shin.
M'Fingal rising at the word,
Drew forth his old militia sword;
Thrice cried, "King George," as erst in distress
Romancing heroes did their mistress,
And brandishing the blade in air,
Struck terror through the opposing war.
The Whigs, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion shrunk behind.
With whirling steel around addressed,
Fierce through their thickest throng he pressed,
(Who rolled on either (...) in arch,
Like Red Sea waves in Israel's march)
And like a meteor rushing through,
Struck on their pole a vengeful blow.
Around, the Whigs, of clubs and stones
Discharged who^e vollies in pla^^on^,
That over in whistling terror (...),
But not a foe dares venture ni^^^.
And now perhaps with conquest crowned,
Our 'Squire had felled their pole to ground;
Had not some Power, a Whig at heart,
Descended down and too^ their part;
(Whether 'twere Pallas, Mars or Iris,
It Is scarce worth while to make enquiries)
Who at the nick of time alarming,
Assamed the graver form of Chairman;
Addressed a Whig, in every scene
The stoutest wrestler on the green,
And pointed where the spade was sound,
Late used to fix their pole in ground,
And urged with equal arms and might
To dare our 'Squire to single ^ight. The learned reader will readily observe
the allusions in (...) to the single combats of Paris and (...) in ^^omer,
A^^eas and T^rnus in Virg^l, and Michael and (...) in Milton.

The Whig thus armed, untaught to yield,
Advanced tremendous to the field;
Nor did M'Fingal shun the foe,
But stood to brave the desperate blow;
While all the party gazed suspended,
To see the deadly combat ended.
And Jove in equal balance weighed
The sword against the brandished spade,
He weighed; but lighter than a dream,
The sword flew up and kicked the beam.
Our 'Squire on tiptoe rising fair,
Lifts high a noble stroke in air,
Which hung not, but like dreadful engines
Descended on the foe in vengeance.
But ah, in danger with dishonor
The sword perfidious ^ails its owner;
That sword, which often had stood its ground
By huge trainbands encompassed round,
Or on the bench, with blade right loyal,
Had won the day at many a trial,
Of stones and clubs had braved the alarms,
Shrunk from these new Vulcanian arms.
The spade so tempered from the sledge,
Nor (...) solid harmed its edge,
Now met it from his arm of might
Descending with steep force to smite;
The (...) snapp'd short -- and from his hand
With ru^t embrown'd the glittering sand.
Swift turned M'Fingal at the view,
And (...) ^or aid the attendant crew,
In (...), the Tories all had run,
When (...) the fight was well begun;
Their ^^^ing wigs he saw decreased,
Far in the horizon towered the west.
Amazed he viewed the shameful sight,
And saw no refuge but in flight:
But age unweildy checked his pace,
Though fear had winged his flying race;
For not a trifling prize at stake;
No less than great M'Fingal's back.
With legs and arms he worked his course,
Like rider that outgoes his horse,
And labored hard to get away, as
Old Satan In Milton.
struggling on through chaos:
Till looking back he spied in rear
The spade-arm'd chief advanced too near.
Then stopped and seized a stone that lay,
An ancient landmark near the way;
Nor shall we, as old Bards have done,
Assirm it weighed an hundred ton:
But such a stone as at (...) shift
A modern might (...) to lift,
Since men, to credit their enigmas,
Are dwindled down to dwarfs and pigmies,
And giants exiled with their cronies,
To Brobdingnags and Patagonias.
But while our hero turned him round,
And stooped to raise it from the ground,
The deadly spade discharged a blow
Tremendous on his rear below:
His bent knee failed, and void of strength,
Stretched on the ground his manly length;
Like ancient oak o'^rturn'd he lay,
Or towers to tempests fallen a prey,
And more things else -- but all men know 'e^^,
If slightly versed in Epic Poem.
At once the crew, at this sad crisis,
Fall on and bind him ere he rises,
And with loud shouts and joyful soul
Conduct him prisoner to the pole.]
When now the Mob in lucky hour,
Had got their enemies in their power,
They first proceed by wise command
To take the constable in hand.
Then from the pol^'s sublimest top,
They speeded to let down the rope,
At once its other end in haste bind,
And make it fast upon his waist band,
Till like the earth, as stretched on tenter,
He hung self-balanc'd on his center.
Then upwards all hands hoisting sail,
They swung him, like a keg of ale,
Till to the pinnacle so fair,
He rose like meteor in the air.
As Socrates is represented in Aristophanes's Comedy of the Clouds, as hoisted
in a basket to aid contemplation.
Socrates of old at first did
To aid philosophy get hoisted,
And found his thoughts flow strangely clear,
Swung in a basket in mid air:
Our culprit thus in purer sky,
With like advantage raised his eye;
And looking forth in prospect wide
His Tory errors clearly spied,
And from his elevated station,
With bawling voice began addressing,
" Good gentlemen and friends and kin,
For heaven's sake hear, if not for mine!
I here renounce the Pope, the Turks,
The King, the Devil and all their works;
And will, set me but once at ease,
Turn Whig or Christian, what you please;
And always mind your laws as justly;
Should I live long as old Methus'^ah,
I Will never join with British rage,
Nor help Lord North, or General Gage,
Nor lift my gun in future fights,
Nor take away your charter'd rights,
Nor overcome your new-raised levies,
Destroy your towns, nor burn your navies,
Nor cut your poles down while I Have breath,
Though raised more thick than hatchel-teeth:
But leave king George and all his elves
To do their conquering work themselves."
This said, they lowered him down in state,
Spread at all points, like falling cat;
But took a vote first on the question,
That they would accept this full confession,
And to their fellowship and favor,
Restore him on his good behavior.
Not so, our Squire sul mits to rule,
But stood heroic as a mule.
" You Will find it all in vain, quoth he,
To play your rebel tricks on me.
All punishments the world can render,
Serve only to provoke the offender;
The will's confirmed by treatment horrid,
As hides grow harder when they are curried.
No man ever felt the halter draw,
With good opinion of the law;
Or held in method orthodox
His love of justice in the stocks;
Or failed to lose by sheriff's shears
At once his loyalty and ears,
Have you made Murray look less big,
Or smoked old Williams to a Whig?
Did our mobb'd Oliver quit his station,
Or heed his vows of resignation?
Has Rivington, in dread of stripes,
Ceased lying since you stole his types?
And can you think my faith will after,
By tarring, whipping, or the halter?
I Will stand the worst; for re^^mpence
I trust King George and Providence.
And when, our conquest gained, I come,
Arrav'd in law and terror home,
You Will rue this inauspicious morn,
And curse the day you ever were born,
In Job's high style of imprecations,
With all his plagues, without his patience."
Meanwhile beside the pole, the guard
A Bench of Justice had prepared,
Where sitting round in awful sort,
The grand Committee hold their court;
While all the crew in silent awe,
Wait from their lips the lore of law.
Few moments with deliberation,
They hold the solemn consultation,
When soon in judgment (...), ^gree
And Clerk declares the (...) decree;
" That 'Squire M'Fingal having grown
The vilest Tory in the town,
And now on full examination,
Convicted by his own confession,
Finding no tokens of repentance,
This Court proceed to render sentence:
That first the Mob a s^ip-knot single
Tie round the neck of said M'Fingal;
And in due form do tar him next,
And feather, as the law directs;
Then through the town attendant ride him,
In cart with Constable beside him,
And having held him up to shame,
Bring to the pole from whence ^e came."
Forth with the crowd proceed to d^^k
With halter'd noose M'Fingal's neck,
While he, in peril of his soul,
Stood tied half hanging to the pole;
Then listing high the pond' rous jar,
Poured over his head the smoking tar:
With less profusion erst was spread
The Jewish oil on royal head,
That down his beard and vestments ran,
And covered all his outward man.
As when (so (...).
Claudian sings) the Gods
And earth-born giants fell at odds,
The stout Enceladus in malice
Tore mountains up to throw at Pallas;
And as he held them over his head,
The river from their fountains fed,
Poured down his back its copious tide,
And wore its channels in his hyde:
So from the high raised urn the torrents,
Spread down his side their various currents;
His flowing wig, as next the brim,
First met and drank the fable stream;
Adown h^s visage stern and grave,
Rolled and adhered the viseid wave;
With arms depending as he stood,
Each cuff capacious holds the flood;
From nose and chin's remotest end,
The tarry (...) depend;
Till all overspread, with colors gay
He g'itter'd to the western ray,
Like fleet-bound trees in wintry skies,
Or ^^pland idol carved in ice.
And now the feather-bag displayed,
Is waved in triumph over his head,
And spreads hun over with feathers missive,
And down upon the tar adhesive:
Not Mi^^'s son, with wings for ears,
Such plumes around his visage wears;
Nor Milton's six winged angel gathers,
Such superfluity of feathers.
Till all complete appears our 'Squire
Like Gorgon or Chimera dire;
Nor more could boast on Alluding to Plato's famous definition of Man, (...)
Plato's plan
To rank amid the race of man,
Or prove his claim to human nature,
As a two-legg'd, unfeather'd creature,
Then on the two-wheel'd car of state,
They raised our grand Du^mvirate.
And as at Rome a like committee,
That found an owl within their city,
With solemn rites and sad processions,
At every shrine performed lustrations;
And least infection should abound,
From prodigy with face so round,
All Rome attends him through the street,
In triumph to his country-seat:
With like devotion all the choir
Paraded round our feathered 'Squire;
In front the martial music comes
Of horns and fiddles, fises and drums,
With jingling sound of carriage bells,
And treble creak of rusted wheels;
Behind, the crowd in lengthened row,
With grave procession closed the show;
And at fit periods every throat
Combined in universal shout,
And hailed great liberty in chorus,
Or bawi'd, Confusion to the Tories.
Not louder storm the welkin braves,
From (...) of con^licting waves;
Less dire in Lybian wilds the noise
When rav'ning lions lift their voice;
Or triumphs at town-meetings made,
On passing votes to reg 'late trade.
Thus having borne them round the town,
Last at the pole they set them down,
And towered the tavern take their way,
To end in mirth the festal day.
And now the Mob dispersed and gone,
Left 'Squire and Constable alone.
The Constable in rueful case
Leaned sad and solemn over a brace,
And fast beside him, cheek by jowl,
Stuck 'Squire M'Fingal against the pole,
Glued by the tar to his rear applied,
Like barnacle on vessel's side.
But though his body lacked physician,
His spirit, was in worse condition.
He found his fears of whips and ropes,
By many a dram outweigh'd his hopes.
As men in goal without mainprize,
View every thing with other eyes,
And all goes wrong in church and state
Seen through perspective of the grate:
So now M'Fingal's second-sight
Beheld all things in different light;
His visual nerve, well purged with tar,
Saw all the coming scenes of war.
As his prophetic soul grew stronger,
He found be could hold in no longer;
First from the pole, as fierce he shook,
His wig from pitchy durance broke,
His mouth unglued, his feathers slutter'd,
His tarr'd skirts cracked, and thus he uttered,
" Ah, Mr. Constable, in vain
We strive against wind and tide and rain!
Behold my doom! this feathered omen
^ertends what dismal times are coming.
Now future scenes before my eyes,
And second-sighted forms arise;
I hear a voice that calls away,
And cries, the Whigs will win the day;
My beck'ning Genius gives command,
And bids us fly the fatal land;
Where changing name and constitution,
Rebellion turns to revolution,
While Loyalty oppressed in tears,
Stands trembling for its neck and ears.
Go, summon all our brethren greeting,
To muster at our usual meeting.
There my prophetic voice shall warn 'em,
Of all things future that concern 'em,
And scenes disclose on which, my friend,
Their conduct and their lives depend:
There I -- but first it is more of use,
From this vile pole to set me loose;
There go with cautious steps and steady,
While I steer home and make all ready,
END OF CANTO THIRD
M 'FINGAL: CANTO FOURTH, OR THE VISION.
Now night came down, and rose full soon
That patroness of rogues, the Moon;
Beneath whose kind, protecting ray
Wolves, brute and human, prowl for prey.
The honest world all snored in chorus,
While owls, and ghosts and thieves and Tories,
Whom erst the midday sun had awed,
Crept from their lurking holes abroad.
On cautious hinges, slow and stiller
Wide oped the great M'Fingal's P^ndi^r interea d^mus omnipotentis Olympi,
Conci^liumque vocat Divum pater atque (...) ^ex
Siderearn in sedem.
Lib. 10. Aeneid.
cellar,
Where shut from prying eyes in cluster,
The Tory Pandemonium muster.
Their chiefs all sitting round descried are,
On kegs of (...) and seats of cider;
When first M'Fingal dimly seen
Rose solemn from the turnep-bin.
Nor yet his -- His form had not yet lost
All its original brightness, nor appeared
Less than (...) raised.

form had wholly lost
The original brightness it could boast,
Nor less appeared than Justice Quorum,
In feathered majesty before 'em.
Adown his tarstreak'd visage, clear
Fell glist'ning fast the indignant tear,
And thus his voice, in mournful wise,
Pursued the prologue of his sighs.
" Brethren and friends, the glorious band
Of loyalty in rebel land!
It was not thus you have seen me sitting
Returned in triumph from town-meeting,
When blustering Whigs were put to stand,
And votes obeyed my guiding hand,
And new commissions pleased my eyes;
Blessed days, but ah, no more to rise!
Alas, against my better light
And optics sure of second-sight,
My stubborn soul in error strong,
Had says in Hutchinson too long.
See what brave trophies still we bring
From all our battles for the king;
And yet these plagues now past before us,
Are but our entering wedge of sorrows.
I see in glooms tempestuous stand
The cloud impending over the land;
That cloud, which still beyond their hope^
Serves all our orators with tropes,
Which though from our own vapors fed,
Shall point its thunders on our head!
I see the Mob, bestipp'd in taverns,
(...) us, like wolves, through wilds and caverns!
What dungeons rise to alarm our fears,
What horsewhips whistle round our ears!
Tar yet in embryo in the pine
Shall run, on Tories backs to shine;
Trees rooted fair in groves of fallows
Are growing for our future gallows;
And geese unhatch'd, when plucked in fray,
Shall rue the feath'ring of that day.
For me, before these fatal days
I mean to fly th'accursed place,
And follow omens, which of late
Have warned me of impending fate;
Yet passed unnoticed over my view,
Till sad conviction proved them true;
As prophecies of best intent,
Are only heeded in the event.
For late in visions of the night
The gallows stood before my sight;
I saw its ladder heaved on end;
I saw the deadly rope descend;
And in its noose that wavering swang,
Friend Malcolm was a Scotchman, Aid to Governor Tryon in his expedition
against the R^g^lato^s in North Carolina. Where in the engagement he met with
the accident of the breeches here alluded to. He was afterward an underofficer
of the customs in Boston, where becoming obnoxious, he was tarred, feathered,
and half hanged by the mob, about the year 1774. After this he was neglected
and avoided by his own party, and thinking his merits and sufferings
unrewarded, appeared equally malevolent against Whigs and Tories.

The pretenses of the Highlanders to prophecy by secondsight are too well known
to need an explanation.


Malcolm hung, or seemed to hang.
How changed from him, who bold as lion,
Stood Aid-de-Camp to Governor Tryon,
Made rebels vanish once, like witches,
And saved his life, but dropped his breeches.
I searce had made a fearful bow,
And trembling asked him, " How do you do."
When lifting up his eyes so wide,
His eyes alone, his hands were tied;
With feeble voice, as spirits use,
Now almost choked with gripe of noose;
" Ah There is in this scene a general allusion to the appearance and speech of
Hector's ghost in the second book of his the (...).
fly, my friend, he cried, escape,
And keep yourself from this sad scrape;
Enough you have talked and writ and planned;
The Whigs have got the upper hand.
Dame Fortune's wheel has turned so short,
It plunged us fairly in the dirt;
Could mortal arm our fears have ended,
This arm (and shook it) had defended.
But longer now it is vain to stay;
See (...) the Reg'lars run away:
Wait not till things grow desperater,
For hanging is no laughing matter:
Thus might your grandsires' fortunes tell you or,
Who both were hanged the last rebellion;
Adventure then no (...) stay,
But call your friends and run away.
For lo, through deepest glooms of night
I come to aid thy second-sight,
Disclose the plagues that round us wait
And wake the dark decrees of fate.
Aseend this ladder whence unsur^'d
The curtain opes of ^'other world,
For here new worlds their scenes unfold,
Seen from this backdoor of the old.
As when AEneas risqued bis life,
Like Orpheus vent'^ing for his wife,
And bo^e in show his mortal ^arcase,
Through realms of Er^^us and Or^^s,
Then in the happy fields E^ys^am,
Staw all this embryon sons in (...);
As shown by great archangel, Michael,
Old Adam saw the world's whole sequel,
And from the mount's extended space,
The rising fortunes of his race;
So from this stage shall thou behold,
The war its coming scenes unfold,
Raised by my arm to meet thine eye;
My Adam, thou, thine Angel, I.
But first my power for visions See Milton's Paradise Lost, Book II.
bright,
Must eleanse from clouds thy mental sight,
Remove the dim suffusions spread,
Which bribes and fa^'ries there have bred;
And from the well of Bute infuse,
Three genuine drops of Highland dews,
To purge, like euphrasy and rue,
Thine eyes, for much thou have to view.
Now sreed from Tory darkness raise
Thy head and spy the coming days;
For lo before our second-sight,
The Continent ascends in light;
From north to south what gathering swarms,
Increase the pride of rebel arms!
Through every State our legions brave,
Speed gallant marches to the grave,
Of battling Whigs the frequent prize,
While rebel trophies stain the skies.
Behold over northern realms afar,
Extend the kindling slames of war!
See famed St. John's and Montreal,
Doomed by Montgomt'ry's arm to sall
Where Hudson with majestic sway,
Through hills disparted plows his way;
Fate spreads on B^mus' Heights alarms,
And pours desturction on our arms;
There Bennington's ensanguin'd plain,
And Stony-Point, the prize of Wayne.
Behold near Del'ware's icy roar,
Where morning dawns on Tre^^on's shore,
While Hessians spread their Christmas (...),
Rush rude these uninvited guests;
Nor aught avail, to Whigs a prize,
Their martial whiskers grisly size.
On (...) plains our heroes yield,
And spread in slight the vanquished field,
While fear to Mawhood's heels puts on
Wings, wide as worn by Maia's son.
Behold the Pennsylvanian shore,
Enriched with streams of British gore;
Where many a ^et'ran chief in bed
Of honor rests his slumbring head,
And in soft vales in land of foes,
Their wearied virtue fines repose.
See plund'ring Dunmore's negro band
Fly headlong from Virginia's stran^;
And far on southern hills our cousins,
The Scotch M'Donalds fall by dozens;
Or where King's Mountain lifts its head,
Our ruined bands in triumph led!
Behold over Tarlton's blustering train,
The Rebels stretch the captive chain!
Afar near Eutaw's fatal springs
Descending Victory spreads her wings!
Through all the land in various chase,
We hunt the rainbow of success;
In vain! their Chief superior still
Eludes our force with Fabian skill,
Or swif^ descending by surprise,
Like Prussia's eagle sweeps the prize."
I looked, nor yet, oppressed with fears,
Gave credit to my eyes or ears,
But held the views an empty dream,
On Berkly's immaterial scheme;
And pondring sad with troubled breast
At length my rising doubts expressed.
" Ah whither, thus by rebels smitten,
Is fled the omnipotence of Britain,
Or failed its usual guard to keep,
Gone traunting or fallen asleep;
As Baal his prophets left confounded,
And bawling vot'ries gash'd and wounded?
Did not, retired to bowers Elysian,
Great Mars leave with her his commission,
And Neptune erst in treaty free,
Give up dominion over the sea?
Else where is the faith of samed orations,
Address, debate and proclamations,
Or courtly ^ert^^on, laurea^^ ode,
And ballads on the watery God;
With whose high (...) great George enriches
His eloquence of gracious speeches?
Not faithful to our (...) eyes,
These deadly forms of vision (...);
But sure some Whig-inspiring sprite
Now palms delusion on our sight.
I Would scarcely trust a tale so (...),
Should revelation prompt the strain,
Or O^tian's ghost the scenes rehearse,
In all the melody of Ease, the ancient Scottish language, in which os^ian
(...) his poems.
Ease."
" Too long, quoth M^^^olm, with confusion
You Have dwelt already in (...),
As Scep^i^s, of all fools the chief,
Hold faith in creeds of unbelief.
I come to draw thy veil aside
Of error, prejudice and pride.
Fools love deception, but the wise
Prefer sad truths to pleasing lies.
For know those hopes can never succeed
That trust on Britain's breaking reed.
For weak'ning long from bad to worse
By fatal atrophy of purse,
She feels at length with trembling heart,
Her foes have found her mortal part.
As famed Achilles, dipped by Thetis
In Styx, as sung in ancient ditties,
Grew all caseharden'd over like steel,
Invulnerable, save his heel,
And laughed at swords and spears, as squibs,
And all diseases, but the kibes;
Yet met at last his fatal wound,
By Paris' arrow nailed to ground:
So Britain's boasted strength deserts,
In these her empire's utmost skirts,
Removed beyond her fierce impressions,
And atmosphere of omnipresence;
Nor to these shores remoter ends,
Her dwarf omnipotence extends:
Whence in this turn of things so strange,
It Is time our principles to change.
For vain that boasted faith, which gathers
No perquisite, but tar and feathers,
No pay, but Whig's insulting malice,
And no promotion, but the gallows.
I Have long enough stood firm and steady,
Half hanged for loyalty already:
And could I save my neck and pelf
I Would turn a flaming Whig myself,
And quit this cause and course and calling,
Like rats that fly from house (...) falling.
But since, obnoxious here to f^^e,
This saving wisdom comes too late,
Our noblest hopes already cr^^t,
Our sal'^ies gone, our titles lost,
Doomed to worse sufferings from the mob,
Than Satan's furg'ri^s used on Job;
What more remains but now with slight,
What Is left of us to save by slight?
Now raise thine eyes for visions true
Again ascending wait thy view."
I looked and clad in early light,
The spires of Boston rose to sight;
The more over eastern hills afar,
Illum'd ^^e varying scenes of war.
Great How had long since in the lap
Of Loring taken out his nap,
And with the sun's ascending ray,
The cuckold came to take his pay.
When all the encircling hills around,
With instantaneous breastworks crowned,
With pointed thunders m^t his sight,
By magic reared the former night.
Each summit, sar as eye commands,
Shone peopled with rebellious bands.
Aloft their towering heroes rise,
As Titans erst assailed the skies,
Leagued with superior force to prove,
The sceptered hand of British Jove,
Mounds piled on hills ascended fair
With bat^'ries placed in middle air,
That raised like angry clouds on high
Seemed like the artill'ry of the sky,
And hurled their fiery bolts amain,
In thunder on the trembling plain.
I saw along the prostrate strand,
Our baffled Generals quit the land,
And swift as frighted mermaids flee,
TO our boasted element, the sea!
Resign that long contested shore,
Again the prize of rebel-power,
And towered their town of refuge fly,
Like convict Jews condemned to die.
Then towered the north, I turned my eyes,
Where Saratoga's heights arise,
And saw our chosen vet'ran band,
Descend in terror over the land;
TO oppose this fury of alarms,
Saw all New England wake to arms,
And every Yanky full of mettle,
Swarm forth, like bees at sound of kettle.
Not Rome, when Tarquin raped ^^ucretia,
Saw wilder mustring of militia.
Through all the woods and plains of fight,
What mortal battles filled my sight,
While British corses strewn the shore,
And Hudson tinged his streams with gore!
What tongue can tell the dismal day,
Or paint the party-color'd fray;
When yeomen left their fields afar,
To plow the crimson plains of war;
When zeal to swords transformed their shares,
And turned their pruning hooks to spears,
Changed tailor's geese to guns and ball,
And stretched to pikes the cobler's awl;
While hunters fierce like mighty Nimrod,
Made on our troops a daring inroad;
And levelling squint on barrel round,
Brought our beau-officers to ground;
While rifle-frocks sent Generals cap'ring,
And redcoats shrunk from leathern apron,
And (...) and gorget run
From whinyard brown and rus^y gun:
While sunburnt wigs in high command,
Rush furious on our frighted band,
And ancient beards and hoary hair,
Like meteors stream in troubled air.
With looks unshorn not Samson more
Made useless all the show of war,
Nor sought with ass;es jaw for rarity,
With more success or singularity.
I saw our vet'ran thousands yield
And pile their muskets on the field,
And peasant guards in rueful plight
March off our captured bands from sight;
While every rebel-sife in play,
To Yanky-doodle tuned its lay,
And like the music of the spheres,
Mellisluous soothed their vanquished ea^
" Alas, said I, what baleful star,
Sheds fatal influence on the war,
And who that chosen Chief of fame,
That heads this grand parade of shame?"
" There see how fate, great Malcolm cried,
Strikes with its bolts the towers of pride.
Behold that martial Macaroni,
Compound of Phoebus and Bellona,
With warlike sword and singsong lay,
Equipped alike for seast or fray,
Where equal wit and valor join;
This, this is he, the famed Burgoyne:
Who pawned his honor and commission,
To coax the Patriots to submission,
By songs and b^lls secure obedience,
And (...) the ladies to allegiance.
Often his camp muses he will parade,
At Boston in the grand blockade,
And well invoked with punch of arrack,
Hold converse sweet in tent or barrack,
Inspired in more heroic fashion,
Both by his theme and situation;
While farce and proclamation grand,
Rise fair beneath his plastic hand.
For genius swells more strong and clear
When close confined, like bottled beer:
So Prior's wit gained greater power,
By inspiration of the tower;
And Raleigh fast in prison hurled
Wrote all the history of the world:
So Wilkes grew, while in goal he lay,
More patriotic every day,
But sound his zeal, when not confined,
Soon sink below the freezing point,
And public spirit once so fair,
Evaporate in open air.
But thou, great favorite of Venus,
By no such luck shall cramp thy genius;
Thy friendly stars till wars shall cease,
Shall ward the illfortune of release,
And hold there fa^t in bonds not feeble,
In good condition still to scribble.
Such merit (...) shield from siring,
Bomb, carcass, (...) and cold iron,
Nor trusts thy doubly ^^^rell'd head,
To rude assaults of flying lead.
Hence in this Sarat^gue retreat,
For pure good fortune thou wilt be beat;
Not taken often, (...) or rescued,
Pass for small change, (...) simple Prescott;
But captured there, as fates befall,
Shall stand thy hand sor't, once for all.
Then raise thy daring thoughts sublime,
And dip thy conquering pen in rhyme,
And changing war for (...) and jokes,
Write new Blockades and Maids of Oaks The Maid of the (...) and the Blockade
of Boston, are ^arces -- the first (...) by General ^urgoyne, the other
generally (...)
."
This said, he turned, and saw the tale,
Had dyed my trembling cheeks with pale;
Then pitying in a milder vein
Pursued the visionary strain.
" Too much perhaps has pained your view*
Of vict'ries gained by rebel crews;
Now see the deeds not small or scanty,
Of British Valor and Humanity;
And learn from this auspicious sight,
How England's sons and friends can fight,
In what dread scenes their courage grows,
And how they conquer all their foes."
I looked and saw in wintry skies
Our spacious prison-walls arise,
Where Britons all their captives taming,
Plied them with scourging, cold and famine;
Reduced to life's concluding stages,
By noxious food and plagues contagious.
Aloft the mighty Loring s^ood,
And thrived, like The notion of Vampyres is a superstition, that had greatly
prev^nted in many parts of Europe. They pretend it is a dead body, which rises
out of its grave in the night, and sucks the blood of the living.
Vampyre, on their blood,
And counting all his gains arising,
Dealt daily rations out of poison.
Amid the dead that crowd the scene,
The moving skeleton^ were seen.
At hand our troops in vaunting strains,
Insulted all their wants and pains,
And turned on all the dying tribe,
The b^^ter taunt and scornful gibe:
And British officers of might,
Triumphant at the joyful sight,
Over foes disarmed with courage daring,
Exhausted all their tropes of swearing.
Around all stained with rebel blood,
Like Milton's lazar house it stood,
Where grim Despair attended nuri^,
And Death was Gov'rnor of the house,
Amazed I cried, " Is this the way,
That British Valor wins the day?"
More had I said, in strains unwelcome,
Till interrupted thus by Malcolm:
" Blame not, quoth he, but learn the reason
Of this new mode of conquering treason.
It Is but a wise, politic plan,
To root out all the rebel-clan;
(For surely treason never can thrive,
Where not a soul is left alive:)
A scheme, all other chiefs to surpass,
And to do the effectual work to purpose,
For war itself is nothing further,
But the art and mystery of murder,
And who most methods has essayed,
Is the best General of the trade,
And stands Death's Plenipotentiary,
To conquer, poison, sta^^e and bury.
This How well knew, and thus began,
(Despising, Cariton's coaxing plan,
Who kept his prisoners well and merry,
And dealt them food like Commissary,
And by paroles and ransoms vain,
Dismissed them all to fight again:)
Whence his first captives with great spirit,
He tied up for his troops to ^ire This was done openly and without censure by
the troops tinder Howe's command in many instances, on his first conquest of
Long Island.
at,
And hoped they would learn on foes thus taken,
To aim at rebels without shaking.
Then wise in stratagem he planned
The sure destruction of the land,
Turned famine, sickness and despair,
To useful enginry of war,
Instead of cannon, musket, mortar,
Used pestilence and death and torture,
Sent forth the small pox and the greater,
To thin the ^and of every traitor,
And ordered out with like endeavor,
De^achments of the prison-fever;
Spread desolation over their head,
And plagues in Providence's stead,
Performed with equal skill and beauty,
The avenging angel's tour of duty,
Brought all the elements to join,
And stars to assist the great design,
As once in league with Kishon's brook,
Famed Israel's foes they fought and took.
Then proud to raise a glorious name,
And em'lous of his country's fame,
He bade these prison-walls arise,
Like temple towering to the skies,
Where British Clemency renowned,
Might fix her seat on sacred ground;
(That Virtue, as each herald says,
Of whole blood ^in to Punic Faith)
Where all her Godlike powers unveiling,
She finds a grateful shrine to dwell in.
Then at this altar for her honor,
Chose this Highpriest to wait upon her,
Who with just rites, in ancient guises,
Presents these human sacrifices;
Great L^^ing, famed above laymen,
A proper Priest for Lybian Ammon,
Wh^, while Howe's gift his brows adorns,
Had marched that deity in horns.
Here (...) day her vot'ries tell
She more devours than the idol Bell;
And thirsts more rav'nously for gore,
Than any worshipped Power before.
That ancient Heathen Godhead, Moloch,
Often stayed his stomach with a bullock,
Or if his morning rage you would check first,
One child sufficed him for a breakfast.
But British Clemency with zeal
Devours her hundreds at a meal,
Right well by Nat'ralists defined,
A Being of carniv'rous kind.
So erst See Rabclais's history of the giant Gargantua.
Gargantua pleased his palate,
And eat his pilgrims up for sallad.
Not blessed with maw less ceremonious,
The wide-mouthed whale that swallowed Jonas,
Like earthquake gapes, to death de^ote,
That open sepulcher, her throat;
The grave, or barren womb you would stuff,
And sooner being to cry, enough;
Or fatten up to fair condition,
The leanflesh'd kine of Pharaoh's vision.
Behold her temple where it stands
Erect by famed Britannic hands;
It Is the blackhole of Indian structure,
New-built with English architecture,
On plan, it is said, contrived and wrote,
By Clive, before he cut his throat;
Who ere he took himself in hand,
Was her Highpriest in Nabob-land:
And when with conquering glory crowned,
He'^^ well enslaved the nation round,
With pitying heart the generous chief,
(Since slav'ry's worse than loss of life)
Bade desolation circle far,
And famine end the work of war;
Thus loosed their chains and for their merits,
Dismissed them free to worlds of spirits:
Whence they with gratitude and praise,
Returned Clive in the latter years of his life conceived himself perpetually
haunted by the ghosts of those, who were the victi^^s of his British humanity
in the East Indies.
to attend his latter days,
And hovering round his restless bed,
Spread nightly visions over his head.
" Now turn, he cried, to nobler sights,
And mark the prowess of our fights:
Behold like whelps of British Lion,
The warriors, Clinton, Vaughan and Tryon,
March forth with patriotic joy,
To ravish, plunder, burn, destroy.
Great Generals foremost in the nation,
The journeymen of Desolation!
Like Samson's foxes each assails,
Let loose with firebrands in their tails,
And spreads destruction more forlorn,
Than they did in Philistine corn.
And see in flames their triumphs rise,
I^^un^ing all the nether skies,
And streaming, like a new Aurora,
The western hemisphere with glory!
What towns in ashes laid confess
These heroes' prowess and success!
What blackened walls, or burning fane,
For trophies spread the ruined plain!
What females caught in evil hour,
By force submit to British power,
Or plundered Negroes in disaster
Confess king George their lord and master!
What crimson corses strew their way
Till smoking carnage dims the day!
Along the shore for sure reduction
They wield their bosom of destruction.
Great Homer likens, in his Ilias,
To dogstar bright the fierce Achilles;
But never beheld in red procession,
Three dogstars rise in constellation;
Or saw in glooms of evening misty,
Such signs of fiery triplicity,
Which far beyond the comet's tail,
Portend destruction where they sail.
Oh had Great-Britain's godlike shore,
Produced but ten such heroes more,
They Would spared the pains and held the station,
Of this world's final conflagration,
Which when its time comes, at a stand,
Would find its work all done to its hand!
Yet though gay hopes our eyes may bless;
Indignant fate forbids success;
Like morning dreams our conquest flies,
Dispersed before the dawn arise."
Here Malcolm paused; when pond'ring long,
Grief thus gave utt'rance to my tongue.
" Where shrink in fear our friends dismayed,
And all the Tories' promised aid,
Can none amid these fierce alarms
Assist the power of royal arms?"
" In vain, he cried, our king depends,
On promised aid of Tory-friends.
When our own efforts want success,
Friends ever fail as fears increase.
As leaves in blooming verdure wove,
In warmth of summer cloth the grove,
But when autumnal frosts arise,
Leave bare their trunks to wintry skies;
So while your power can aid their ends,
You never can need ten thousand friends,
But once in want by foes dismayed,
May advertise them stolen or strayed*
Thus ere Great-Britain's strength grew slack,
She gained that aid, she did not lack,
But now in dread, imploring pity,
All hear unmoved her dol'rous ditty;
Allegiance wandering turns astray,
And Faith grows dim for lack of pay.
In vain she tries by new inventions,
Fear, falsehood, flattery, threats and pensions,
Or sends Commiss'ners with credentials
Of promises and penitentials.
As for his fare over Styx of old,
The Trojan stole the bough of gold,
And least grim Cerberus should make head,
Stuffed both his fobs with (...) Medicat^m ^i^gib^s off^m (...) lib. 6. (...)
41^;
gingerbread;
Behold at Britain's utmost shifts,
Comes Johnstone loaded with like gifts,
To venture through the Whiggish tribe,
To cuddle, wheedle, coax and bribe,
Enter their lands and on his journey,
Possession take, as King's Attorney,
Buy all the vassals to protect him,
And bribe the tenants not to eject him;
And call to aid his desperate mission,
His petticoated politician,
While Venus joined to assist the farce,
Strolls forth Ambassador for Mars.
In vain he strives, for while he lingers,
These mastiffs bite his offering fingers;
Nor buys for George and realms infernal,
One spaniel, but the mongrel Arnold.
" Twere vain to paint in vision'd show,
The mighty nothings done by How;
What towns he takes in mortal fray,
As stations, whence to run away;
What conquests gained in battles warm,
To us no aid, to them no harm;
For still the event alike is fatal,
What'er success attend the battle,
If he gain victory, or lose it,
Who never had skill enough to use it;
And better 'twere at their expense,
TO have drubb'd him into common sense,
And waked by bastings on his rear,
The activity, though but of fear.
By slow advance his arms prevail,
Like emblematic march of snail;
That be Millennium nigh or far,
'Twould long before him end the war.
From York to Philadelphian ground,
He sweeps the mighty flourish round,
Wheeled circ'lar by excentric stars,
Like racing boys at prison-bars,
Who take the adverse crew in whole,
By running round the opp'site goal;
Works wide the traverse of his course,
Like ship in storms' opposing force,
Like millhorse circling in his race,
Advances not a single pace,
And leaves no trophies of reduction,
Save that of cankerworms, destruction.
Thus having long both countries cursed,
He quits them, as he found them first,
Steers home disgraced, of little worth,
To join Burgoyne and ^ail at North.
Now raise thine eyes, and view with pleasure,
The triumphs of his famed successor."
I looked, and now by magic lore,
Faint rose to view the Jersey shore;
But dimly seen, in glooms arrayed,
For Night had poured her sable shade,
And every star, with glimm'rings pale,
Was muffled deep in evening veil:
Scarce visible in dusky night,
Advancing redcoats rose to sight;
The lengthened train in gleaming rows
Stole silent from their slumbering foes,
Slow moved the baggage and the train,
Like snail crept noiseless over the plain;
No trembling soldier dared to speak,
And not a wheel presumed to creak.
My looks my new surprise confessed,
Till by great Malcolm thus addressed:"
" Spend not thy wits in vain researches;
It Is one of Clinton's moonlight marches.
From Philadelphia now retreating,
To save his anxious troops a beating,
With hasty stride he flies in vain,
His rear attacked on Monmo^^h plain:
With various chance the mortal fray
Is lea^^then'd to the close of day,
When his tired bands o'ermatch'd in fight,
Are rescued by descending night;
He forms his camp with vain parade,
Till evening spreads the world with shade,
Then still, like some endangered spark,
Steals off on tipt^^ in the dark;
Yet writes his king in boasting tone,
How grand he marched by light of moon.
I see him; but thou can not; proud
He leads in front the trembling crowd,
And wisely knows, if danger's near,
'Twill fall the heaviest on his rear.
Go on, great General, nor regard
The scoffs of every scribbling Bard,
Who sing how Gods that fatal night
Aided by miracles your slight,
As once they used, in Homer's day,
To help weak heroes run away;
Tell how the hours at awful trial,
Went back, as erst on A^az' dial,
While British Joshua stayed the moon,
On Monmouth plains for Ajalon:
Heed not their sncers and gibes so arch,
Because she set before your march.
A small mistake, your meaning right,
You take her influence for her light;
Her influence, which shall be your guide,
And over your Gen'ralship preside.
Hence still shall teem your empty skull,
With vict'ries when the moon's at full,
Which by transition yet more strange,
Wane to defeats before the change;
Hence all your movements, all your notions
Shall steer by like excentri^ motions,
Eclipsed in many a fatal crists,
And dimmed when Washington arises.
And see how Fate, herself turned traitor,
Inverts the ancient course of nature,
And changes manners, tempers, climes,
To suit the genius of the times.
See Bourbon forms his generous plan,
First guardian of the rights of man,
And prompt in firm alliance joins,
To aid the Rebels proud designs.
Behold from realms of eastern day,
His sails innum'rous shape their way,
In warlike line the billows sweep,
And roll the thunders of the deep.
See low in equinoctial skies,
The Western Islands fall their prize.
See British flags o'ermatch'd in might,
Put all their faith in instant flight,
Or broken squadrons from the affray,
Drag slow their wounded hulks away.
Behold his chiefs in daring setts,
D'Estaings, De Grasses and Fayettes,
Spread through our camps their dread alarms,
And swell the sears of rebel-arms.
Yet ere our empire sink in night,
One gleam of hope shall strike the sight;
As lamps that fail of oil and fire,
Collect one glimm^^^g to expire.
And lo where southern shores extend,
Behold our union'^ hosts descend,
Where Charlestown views with varying beams,
Her turrets gild the encircling streams.
There by superior might compelled,
Behold their gallant Lincoln yield,
Nor aught the wreaths avail him now,
Plucked from Burgoyne's imperious brow.
See furious from the vanquished strand,
Cornwallis leads his mighty band!
The southern realms and Georgian shore
Submit and own the victor's power.
Lo sunk before his wasting way,
The Carolinas fall his prey!
In vain embattled hosts of ^oes
Essay in warring strife to oppose.
See shrinking from his conquering eye,
The rebel legions fall or fly;
And withering in these torrid skies,
The northern laurel fades and dies.
With rapid force he leads his band
To fair Virginia's fated strand,
Triumphant eyes the traveled zone,
And boasts the southern realms his own.
Nor yet this hero's glories bright
Blaze only in (...) fields of fight,
Not Howe's humanity more deserving,
In gifts of hanging and of starving;
Not Arnold plunders more tobacco,
Or steals more Negroes for Jamaica;
Scarce Rodney's self among the Eustatians,
Insults so well the laws of nations;
Even Tryon's fame grows dim, and mourning,
He yields the laurel crown of burning.
I see with rapture and surprise,
New triumphs sparkling in thine eyes.
But view where now renewed in might,
Again the rebels dare the fight."
I looked and far in southern skies,
Saw Green, their second hope, arise,
And with his small but gallant band,
Invade the Carolinian land.
As winds in stormy circles whirled
Rush ^^^lowing over the darkened world,
And where their wasting fury roves,
Successive sweep the astonished groves.
Thus where he pours the rapid fight,
Our boasted conquests sink in night,
And wide over all the extended field,
Our sorts resign, our armies yield,
Till now regained the vanquished land,
He lifts his standard on the strand.
Again to fair Virginia's coast,
I turned and viewed the British host,
Where Chesapeak's wide waters lave
Her shores and join the Atlantic wave.
There famed Cornwallis towering rose,
And scorned secure his distant soes;
His bands the haughty rampart raise,
And bid the imperial standard blaze.
When lo, where ocean's bounds extend,
I saw the Gallic sails ascend,
With favoring breezes stem their way,
And crowd with ships the spacious bay.
Lo Washington from northern shores,
Over many a region, wheels his force,
And Rochambeau, with legions bright,
Descends in terrors to the fight.
Not swifter cleaves his rapid way,
The eagle cow'ring over his prey,
Or knights in feigned romance that fly
On fairy pinions through the sky.
Amazed the Briton's startled pride,
Sees ruin wake on every side;
And all his troops to fate consigned,
By instantaneous stroke Burgoyn'd.
Not Cadmus viewed with more surprise,
From earth embattled armies rise,
When by superior power impelled,
He sowed with dragon's teeth the field.
Here Gallic troops in terror ^and,
There rush in arms the Rebel band;
Nor hope remains from mortal fight,
Or that last British refuge, flight.
I saw with looks downcast and grave,
The Chief emerging from his Alluding to the well known fact of Cornwallis's
taking up his residence in a cave, during the siege of York-Town.
cave,
(Where chaced like hare in mighty round,
His hunters eathed him first in ground)
And doomed by ^ate to rebel sway,
Yield all his captur'd hosts a prey.
There while I viewed the vanquished town,
Thus with a sigh my friend went on:
" Beholdst thou not that band forlorn,
Like slaves in Roman triumphs borne;
Their faces lengthening with their fears,
And cheeks distained with streams of tears,
Like dramatis personoe sage,
Equipt to act on Tyburn's stage.
Lo these are they, who lured by follies,
Left all and followed great Cornwallis;
True to their King, with firm devotion,
For conscience sake and hoped promotion,
Expectant of the promised glories,
And new Millennial state of Tories.
Alas, in vain, all doubts forgetting,
They tried the omnipotence of Britain;
But found her arm, once strong and brave,
So shortened now she cannot save.
Not more aghast departed souls,
Who risk'd their fate on Popish bulls,
And find St. Peter at the wicket
Refuse to countersign their ticket,
When driven to purgatory back,
With all their pardons in their pack:
Than Tories must'ring at their stations
On faith of royal proclamations.
As Pagan Chiefs at every crisis,
Confirmed their leagues by sacrifices,
And herds of beasts to all their deities,
Oblations fell at close of treaties:
Cornwallis thus in ancient fashion,
Concludes his league of cap'tulation,
And victims due to Rebel-glories,
Gives this sin-off'ring up of Tories.
See where relieved from sad embargo,
Steer off consigned a recreant cargo,
Like old scapegoats to roam in pain,
Marked like their great forerunner, Cain*
The rest, now doomed by British leagues,
To justice of resentful Whigs,
Hold worthless lives on (...) ill,
Of tenancy at Rebel-will,
While hovering over their forfeit persons,
The gallows waits his sure reversions.
Thou too, M'Fingal, ere that day,
Shall taste the terror (...) the affray.
See over thee hangs in angry skies,
Where Whiggish constellations rise,
And while plebeian signs ascend,
Their mob-inspiring aspects bend;
That baleful Star, whose -- From his horrid Law
Shaken (...) and war.

horrid hair
Shakes forth the plagues of down and tar*
I see the pole, that rears on high
Its flag terrific through the sky;
The Mob beneath prepared to attack,
And tar predestined for thy back!
Ah qui^, my friend, this dangerous home,
Nor wait the darker sceres to come;
For know that Fate's auspicious door,
Once shut to flight is oped no more,
Nor wears its hinge by various stations,
Like Mercy's door in proclamations.
But lest thou pause, or doubt to fly,
To stranger visions turn shine eye:
Each cloud that (...) thy mental ray,
And all the mortal mists decay;
See more than human Powers befriend,
And lo their hostile forms ascend!
See towering over the extended strand,
The Genius of the western land,
In vengeance armed, his sword assumes,
And stands, like Tories, dressed in plumes,
See over you Council seat with pride,
How Freedom spreads her banners wide!
There Patriotism with torch addressed,
To fire with zeal each daring breast!
While all the Virtues in their band,
Escape from you unfriendly land,
Desert their ancient British station,
Possessed with rage of emigration.
Honor, his business at a stand,
For scar of starving quits their land;
And Justice, long disgraced at Court, had
By Mansfield's sentence been transported.
Victory and Fame attend their way,
Though Britain wish their longer stay,
Care not what George or North would be at,
Nor heed their writs of (...);
But fired with love of colonizing,
Quit the fallen empire for the rising."
I looked and saw with horror smitten,
These hostile powers averse to Britain.
When lo, an awful spectre rose,
With languid paleness on his brows;
Wan dropsies swelled his sorm beneath,
And iced his bloated cheeks with death:
His tattered robes exposed him bare,
To every blast of ruder air;
On two weak crutches propt he stood,
That bo^^ at every step he trod,
Gilt titles graced their sides so slender,
One, " Regulation," the other, " Tender;"
His breast plate engraved with various dates,
" The faith of all the United States:"
Before him went his funeral (...),
His grave stood dug to wait his fall,
I started, and a have I cried,
" What means this spectre at their side*
What danger from a (...) so (...),
And why he joins that splendid train?"
" Alas, great Malcolm cried, experience
Might ^each you not to trust appearance
Here stands, as dressed by fierce B^llona,
The ghost of Continental Money,
Of dame Necessity descended,
With whom Cre^^lity engendered.
Though born with constitution f^^il,
And feeble strength that seen must (...)
Yet strangely versed in magic lore,
And gifted with transforming power.
His skill the wealth Peruvian joins
With diamonds of Brazilian mine^.
As erst Jove sell by subtle wiles,
On Danae's apron through the tiles,
In showers of gold; his potent hand
Shall shed like show'^s through all the lard.
Less great the magic art was (...),
Of tallies cast by Charles these second,
Or Law's famed Mississipi (...),
Or all the wealth of South sea dreams,
For he of all the world alone
Owns the longsought Philos'pher's s^one,
Restores the sab'lous times to view,
And proves the tale of (...).
Over heaps of rage, he wave (...),
All turn to gold at his (...),
Provide for present wants and future,
Raise armies, victual, clothe, (...),
Adjourn our conquests by (...),
Cheek Howe's (...),
Then makes all days of (...) vain,
And (...) all back to (...) again.
In vain great How shall play his part,
To ape and counterfeit his art;
In vain shall Clinton, more belated,
A conj'rer turn to imitate it;
With like ill luck and power as narrow,
They Will fare, like sor'cers of old Pharaoh,
Who though the art they understood
Of turning rivers into blood,
And caused their frogs and snakest' exist,
That with some merit croak'd and hissed,
Yet never by every quaint device,
Could frame the true Mosaic lice.
He for the Whigs his arts shall try,
Their first, and long their sole ally;
A patriot firm, while breath he draws,
He Will perish in his country's cause;
And when his magic labors cease,
Lie buried in eternal peace.
Now view the scenes in future hours,
That wait the famed European Powers.
See where you chalky cliffs arise,
The hills of Britain strike your eyes:
Its small extension long supplied,
By vast immensity of pride;
So small, that had it found a station
In this new world at first creation,
Or were by Justice doomed to suffer,
And ^^r its crimes transported over,
We'd find full room for it in lake Eri, or
That larger waterpond, Superior,
Where North on margin taking stand,
Would not be able to spy land.
No more, elate with power, at ease
She deals her insults round the seas;
See dwindling from her height amain,
What piles of ruin spread the plain;
With mouldering hulks her ports are filled,
And brambles clothe the cultured field!
See on her cliffs her Genius lies,
His handkerchief at both his eyes,
With many a deepdrawn sigh and groan,
To mourn her ruin and his own!
While joyous Holland, France and Spain,
With conquering navies rule the main,
And Russian banners wide unfurled,
Spread commerce round the eastern world.
And see (sight hateful and tormenting)
The Amer'can empire proud and vaunting,
From anarchy shall change her crafis,
And fix her power on firmer basis;
To glory, wealth and same ascend,
Her commerce rise, her realms extend;
Where now the panther guards his den,
Her de^^^^ forests swarm with men,
Her cities, towers and columns rise,
And dazzling temples meet the skies;
Her pines descending to the main,
In triumph spread the watery plain,
Ride inland lakes with favoring gales,
And crowd her ports with whit'ning sails;
Till to the skirts of western day,
The peopled regions own her sway."
Thus far M'Fingal told his tale,
When thundering shouts his ears assail,
And strait a Tory that stood centry,
Aghast rushed headlong down the entry,
And with wild outcry, like magician,
Dispersed the residue of vision:
For now the Whigs intell'gence found
Of Tories mustring under ground,
And with rude bangs and loud uproar,
'Gan thunder furious at the door.
The lights put out, each Tory calls
To cover him, on cellar walls,
Creeps in each box, or bin, or tub,
To hide his head from wrath of mob,
Or lurks, where cabbages in row
Adorned the side with verdant show.
M'Fingal deemed it vain to stay,
And risk his bones in second fray;
But chose a grand retreat from soes,
In lit'ral sense, beneath their nose.
The window then, which none else knew,
He softly opened and crept through
And crawling s^ow in deadly fear,
By movements wise made good his rear,
Then scorning all the fame of martyr,
For Boston took his swift departure;
Nor dared look back on fatal spot,
More than the family of Lot.
Not North in more distressed condition,
Outvoted first by opposition:
Nor good king George when that dire phan^o^^
Of Independence comes to haunt him,
Which hovering round by night and day,
Not all his conj'rers yet can lay.
His friends, assembled for his sake,
He wisely lest in pawn at stake,
To tarring, feath'ring, kicks and drubs
Of furious, disappointed mobs,
And with their forfeit hides to pay
For him, their leader, crept away.
So when wise Noah summoned greeting
All animals to general meeting;
From every side the members sent
All kinds of beasts to represent;
Each from the flood took care to embark,
And save his carcass in the ark;
But as it fares in state and church,
Left his constituents in the lurch.
FINIS.

