The OUTCASTS Comforted. A SERMON Delivered at the University in Philadelphia,
January 4, 1782, To the Members of the BAPTIST CHURCH, Who have been rejected
by their Brethren, For holding the Doctrine of The final Restoration of all
Things. By ELHANAN WINCHESTER. Published at the earnest Desire of the Hearers.

But this I confess unto thee, that after the Way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the GOD of my Fathers, believing all Things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets.

Acts xxiv, 14. PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year 1782.

TO all those of every Denomination, who have been, or may be, rejected by
their Brethren, for the Belief of the glorious Doctrine of the Restitution of
all Things (of which God has spoken by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets,
since the World began) and especially to the Baptist Church in Philadelphia,
holding the same, this plain Sermon is humbly inscribed, by their sincere
Friend, and Servant for the Lord's Sake,

THE AUTHOR.

Isaiah, lxvi. 5. Hear the Word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his Word; your
Brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my Name's Sake, said, Let the
LORD be glorified, but HE shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be ashamed.


O WHAT comfortable Words are these! Words sufficient to cheer the Hearts of
the Mourners, and to cause the Outcasts to rejoice. Here is an Invitation to
those who tremble at the Word of the LORD, they are called to hearken to the
chearing Voice of their GOD, who promises to appear to their Joy, and to the
Shame of their Brethren, who cast them out, under a Pretense of glorifying GOD
thereby.

Let us in the first Place inquire into the Characters of those who are spoken
^o ^n the Words of my Text; they are such as tremble at the Word of the LORD.

We read in Ezra, x. 3, of those who trembled at the Commandment of GOD. These
are such as believe the Truth of GOD with their whole Hearts, who feel the
Power of the same within their Breasts; who loathe themselves on the Account of
their Iniquities, and live so under a Sense of the Majesty of GOD, that they
are continually abased and humbled before him. Persons of this Character are
very dear to GOD, as we find written in Psalm xxxiv. 18. "The LORD is nigh unto
them that are of a broken Heart; and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit,"
and in Psalm li. 17, "The Sacrifices of GOD are a broken Spirit; a broken and a
contrite Heart, O GOD, thou will not despise," and Psalm cxxxviii. 6. "Though
the LORD be high, yet has he Respect unto the Lowly; but the Proud he knows
afar off," and Psalm cxlvii. 3, "He heals the broken in Heart, and binds up
their Wounds," and in the 57th Chapter of this Prophecy of Isaiah, and 15th
Verse, we read, "For thus says the high and lofty ONE that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose Name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy Place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble,
and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones," and in the second Verse of this
Chapter, we read "But to this Man will I look (or have Regard) even to him that
is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word."

And how often does our Savior say, "He that humbles himself shall be
exalted." Matt. xxiii, 12. Luke xiv. 11. xviii. 14. There is nothing so
contrary to God as a proud haughty Spirit, but he delights in the humble. Let
us therefore humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of God, that he may exalt
us in ^^e Time; yea, let us be clothed with Humility, for God re^nteth the
Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble* I. Peter, v. 5, etc.

The nearer Brings are to God, the more humble they are; and the farther from
him, the prouder. A better Instance to prove this can hardly be found than that
of Michael the Archangel. Contending with the Devil (or Lucifer) he disputed
about the Body of Moses, yet durst not bring a railing Accusation against him,
but said, "The Lord rebuke thee. Jude, Ver. 9." But Satan is said to be the
"Accuser of the Brethren, which accused them before GOD Day and Night. Rev.
xii. 10." See Michael the nighest Being to GOD, and Lucifer the farthest from
him; one filled with the profoundest Humility, and the other with the most
daring Pride and Insolence; Michael not daring to bring a railing Accusation
against the Devil himself, yet the Devil daring to accuse the Brethren Day and
Night before GOD. The Difference is amazing, and is a proper Looking Glass for
us all. Pride is the Image of Satan, Humility the Image of Christ, in which all
Beings stand that are conformed to him, in Proportion as they are so.

Those who tremble at the Word of the LORD, may be described in the following
manner:

They feel the Power of it in their Hearts:

They believe every Word of GOD is true, and shall have its Accomplishment:

They fear to deny with the Mouth what they believe in the Heart* even though
the Confession of the same should expose them to the Scorn and Derision of
their Acquaintance:

They endeavor to be conformed, both in Temper and Conduct, to the Will of GOD
made known to them; and to obey GOD rather than Men.

I think these are the true Marks of those who tremble at the Word of GOD.
Happy are they who answer this Description!

Having very briefly described those to whom the LORD speaks, let as consider
what he says, "Your Brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my Name's
Sake, etc."

We are assured in the Sacred Pages, that Reproach and Persecution must
infallibly be every living Christian's Lot; and the Savior of Mankind has
pronounced a Blessing to those who meet therewith for his S^ke, saying,
"B^essed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness Sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Bl^ssed are ^e when Men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all Manner of Evil against you falsely, for my S^ke:
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your Reward in Heaven; for so
persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you. Matt. v. 10, 11, 12." --
"B^^ssed are ye when Men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their Company, and shall reproach you, and cast out you. Name as evil for the
Son of Man's Sake. Rejoice ye in tha^ Day, and leap for Joy: For behold your
Reward is great in Heaven; for in like Manner did their Fathers unto the
Prophets. Luke vi. 22, 23." -- And Jesus assured his Disciples, that they must
continually expect Hatred, Calumny, and Persecution, from the Men of the World:
Some of his intimations of that Kind, I will repeat to you: "And ye shall be
hated of all Men for my Name's Sake, Matt. x. 22, xxiv, 9. Mark xiii, 13. Luke
xxi, 17." -- "It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the
Servant as his Lord: If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his Household? Matt. x. 25." -- "If the World
hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the
World, the World would love his own; but because ye are not of the World, but I
have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. Remember the
Word that I said unto you. The Servant is not greater than the Lord. If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my Saying,
they will keep yours also. But all these Things will they do unto you for my
Name's Sake, because they know not him that sent me. John xv. 18, 19, 20, 21."
-- "These Things I have spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They
shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, the Time comes that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does GOD Service. In the World ye shall have
Tribulation. John xvi. 1, 2, 33."

And the Apostles of Christ experienced these Things, and taught all Christians
to expect the same. St. Paul, after speaking of his own Trials (lest any should
think t^em peculiar to Paul and the Apostles) adds, "Yea, and all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. II. Tim. iii, 12." And
St. Peter says, "If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ happy are ye: For
the Spirit of Glory and of GOD rests on you. On their Part he is evil spoken
of, but on your Part he is glorified. I. Pet. iv, l4."

And St. John ob^erves, that "Cain was of that wicked one, and slew his
Brother; and wherefore slew he him? (says he) Because his own W^^ks were evil,
and his Brother's righteous." And then he adds, very pertinently, "Marvel not,
my Brethren, if the World have you. I. John, iii. 12, 13." What St. Paul said
concerning Ishmael the Mocker, remains still as true as over, "But as then, he
that was born after the F^esh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit,
even so it is now. Gal. iv, 29"

From the World we ate taught to expect Persecution; but our Text says, "Your
Brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my Name's Sake, said, Let the
Lord be glorified."

We have experienced something of what the Spouse did; for she says (Sol.
So^gs. i. 6,) "My Mother's Children were angry with me." It has been the^
unhappy Case almost ever since Christianity has been known in the World, that
its Professors have been exceedingly divided in their Judgments, and not only
so, but they have reproached, revi^ed, censured and persecuted one another in
the most dreadful Manner; many Times even to Death, and where they have not had
that in their Power, they have often shown by their bitter Words, hard
Speeches, false Accusations, and malicious Reproaches, what they would have
done if they could. Strange as i^ may seem, the best Profession in the World
has been abused, and made the Occasion of more War and Bloodshed in
Christendom, for many Centuries, than all other Things put together.

One great Cause of so much unprofitable Contention is, that Truth has been
divided, torn to Pieces, and sometimes even lost in the Debates raised about
it; one Party has had some Truth, another has also had some, but each thinking
they had the whole, have endeavored to overthrow all that their Antagonists
held; both have been dividing the living Child of Truth, under a Notion that it
was found no where but with them; and thus each have opposed the Truth in each
other, under the Notion of its being erroneous: On the contrary we say, that
al^ Denomination have it among them in Part, and th^se divided Parts brought
together, just make up that Collection of Truths that we believe.

I have often considered it with Astonishment, that two Ministers shall preach,
and prove what they say from the Scriptures, and neither of them shall be
looked upon as holding damnable Heresy, and yet we shall be looked upon as the
worst of Heretics by both of them, and all their People, for believing only
what both of them put together have asserted I was in Company once with two
public Speakers, one of them said that he believed as much as he did his own
Existence, that God loved all, and that Christ died for all, without Exception;
the other said that nothing was more evident to him than this, viz. that Christ
could not die in vain for any, that he must see of the Travail of his Sou^, and
be satisfied, and that all for whom the Savior died, must be finally made
happy; now could each of these have believed those Truths which the other held
as incontestible, they would have held Things as we do immediately, for we
be^^^^e firmly what both of them put together did; and the^^fo^e is it possible
that we are Heretics, for believi^^ the F^und^tion Principles of the whole
Christian World, I leave every one to judge!


One will say, GOD loves all his Cre^tures without Exception, that he is good
to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works; the other will maintain
that all the Obj^ct^ of his Love must finally come to the Enjoyment of himself;
and that his Mercy endures for ever, and cannot fail. We heartily believe both
these Testimonies.

One will assert that, Christ died for all, tasted Death for every one; the
other, that Christ shall see of the Travail of his Soul, and shall be
satisfied, and that all for whom his Blood was sired, shall be cleansed
thereby: All this we steadfastly believe.

One will declare that GOD wills that all shall be saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth; the other, that whatever GOD wills, must be
accomplished at last.

None can say with Truth, that we deny either of these Assertions.

One will say that GOD at first purposed all his Creatures to praise and
glorify his Name to all Eternity, and to be happy in the Enjoyment of himself;
the other will declare that the Purposes of GOD must stand, that with GOD there
is no Variableness, nor Shadow of Turning, that he is of one Mind, and that
none can turn him, and that what his Soul desires, that he does: We freely
consent to the Truth of all this.

One will say that GOD would save all if he could, that his Will is good
toward all; the other will assert, that he is infinitely able to do all that
he pleases, and that he could bring all to him if he would.

And do not we as fully believe both of these Positions, as we do our own
Existence?

One will declare that the Blood of Jesus Christ was freely shed for all; the
other, that his Blood is infinitely sufficient to cleanse and purity all. This
is what we believe.

One will say, with the Scripture that all Things are given to Christ; the
other, in Conformity to the same sacred Writtings, will maintain, that all that
the Father gives him shall come to him; that he will give eternal Life to as
many as the Father has given him. This is our Belief. We believe the Truth of
both those Positions. None will come to Christ but those whom the Father gives
him; and he has given him all Things without Exception. Thus we see that our
Belief is in Fact the Belief of all the Christian World put together. And
instead of tending to increase the divided Churches, it tends to unite them all
in one, as it allows the Truth in a Measure amongst all, and that as there is
no Church wholly pure in all Things, so none can be found but what has some
true Witnesses for God therein; some Tokens of the Divine Presence, and some
glorious Truths remain in every Church under the Sun; and this glorious Cha^n
of Truths that, we believe, bids fair one Day to unite all together in one
close System of Benevolence; and it is my Opinion that the Time is not very
remote, when "Zion's Watchmen shall see Eye to Eye. When we shall not need to
teach every Man his Neighbor, saying, Know the LORD, for all shall know him
from the least to the greatest, and serve him with one Consent."

Our Belief respecting the Restoration of all Things is not only founded upon
the plainest Letter of Scripture (as all may see, who will be at the Pains to
read over the printed Collection of Texts) but is exactly according to the
Experience of every Christian. For let me ask any who were ever made to
experience the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts, by the Holy Ghost,
these Questions: Did you not a^ that Time see, and feel yourselves the vilest
of all Sinners, even the most stubborn and rebellious of the human Race?

Did you not view the Love of God infinitely full, free, unmerited, and
undeserved? Did you not behold in Christ an infinite Fullness, Sufficiency and
Willingness to save all? Did you not earnestly long that all might come and
partake of his Grace? If you had had as much Power as good Will, would you not
have brought all to bow to the Scepter of Grace, and to be reconciled to their
GOD through Jesus Christ: Did you not feel a Disp^sition to pray for all Men,
that they might be saved? To the^e Questions all new born simple Souls, who
have ever tasted of Love Divine, would answer in the Affirmative, with all
their Hearts, if they were not ^ed aside by some System. Now then let me say,
From whence do these Views and Desires come? Certainly from the Ocean of all
Goodness. Can a smal^ Drop then be larger than the unfa^homed Abyss of Love?
Have you more Compassion toward your Fellow Creatures, than their Creator, to
whom they are all nearer than Children are to their Parents? Would you bring
all to submit to GOD, and be happy, if you could? And will not he to whom
Nothing (that he pleases to do) is impossible, bring all his Creatures to be
reconciled to himself? Has he taught us to love a^l, even our worst Enemies?
And does he not love all himself? Has he taught us to pray for all, that they
might be saved? And will he never hear nor answer those Prayers, put up in the
Name of Christ, agreeable to his Will? Has he taught us to do good to a^l? And
will he not much more do Good to all? H^s he taught us to be more perfect than
himself? Has he provided so much for the Bodies of all, and nothing for the
Souls of the most of his Creatures? Will he suffer his gracious Designs to be
frustrated, and thereby lose his Labou^?

But above all, Will he suffer his Words, his Promises, his Oaths, to be made
null, void, and of none Effect? GOD forbid. "GOD is not a M^n that he should
lie, neither the Son of Man that he should repent. Has he said, and shall he
not do it? Or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Number. xix. 23."
"And also the Str^^^th (or Eternity) of Israel, will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a Men that he should repent, l. Sam. xv. 29." "For the Gifts and Calling
of God are without Repentance. Romans xi. 29."

Now if we attend to the plain Letter of the Scripture, we shall find that GOD
has declared that he will "make all Things new; that he will gather together
in Christ all Things both in Heaven and on Earth; even in him who having made
Peace, through the Blood of his Cross, shall have that great Honor to
reconcile all Things to GOD, both which are in Heaven and on Earth; yea, he
has sworn by himself, that to him every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall
swear." See Rev. xxi. 5. Ephesians i. 10. Col. i 20. Isaiah, xlv. 23 Then when
all Things shall be made new, gathered together in Christ, reconciled to GOD,
brought to bow the Knee and swear to him; shall that glorious Passage, Rev. v.
13, be fulfilled. "And every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and
under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all than are in them, heard I
saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits
upon the Thron^; and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." O what a glorious Day
will that be! The distant Thought of which fills us with the greatest Joy and
Satisfaction. If "there it Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents," what
unknown, what inconceivable Joy shall there be when all that have sinned
against their great Creator, shall repent, acknowledge him to be wholly just,
and themselves entirely to blame, fall at his Feet, and swear Allegiance to
their righteous Sovereign; never more to rebel against him to all Eternity! O
glorious Period, when the Chordage of all Hearts shall be taken in Hand by GOD
himself, and tuned to his never ceasing Praise!

But could we believe that Sin and Misery should endure to all Eternity, that
the blessed God, worthy of all Praise, from all Intelligences, should be hated
by vast Numbers of the Beings he has made capable of loving and serving him,
and that to all endless Ages, we should be filled with the greatest Sorrow
imaginable! For even when we see poor miserable Wretches, under the Power and
Government of Satan, profaning and blaspheming the Name of God, it fills our
Hearts with Grief inexpressible; how inconceivable would our Distress then be,
if we could be made to believe, that they must, to all endless Ages, continue
in Rage, Blasphemy, and Despair! But Glory to God in the highest, we believe
that the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, of the ever adorable JEHOVAH shall shine
most gloriously, in the entire Destruction of all Evil, and total Subjection,
and complete Restoration of all his Creatures. "We believe, and therefore we
speak." Great is our Joy; though we are despised, rejected, and treated with
Contempt by many for the Gospel's Sake which we believe, yet we would not part
with the Satisfaction we find therein, for all the Glories of the World, and
the Applause of all Mankind.

Many say, "What need have we to care about what becomes of others? If we are
happy ourselves, that is all that we need to seek after, or be concerned
about." This Language well enough becomes those that have a Religion founded in
Selfishness, or those who have narrow Notions and Ideas of God's Love,
supposing it to be confined to them and their Party; but it is as opposite to
the true Spirits of Christianity, and the Language of those who dwell in "Love,
and dwell in God," as Darkness is to Light, Evil to Good, or Satan to Christ.
The Spirit of Jesus teaches us to fulfill the royal Law, "Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thyself." Christianity leads us to seek the Salvation and
Happiness of all; and certainly then to rejoice in the Welfare of all; and he
who is not willing that God should bring all to love, praise, and enjoy him;
^ay, who would not be ready to wish, at least, that the Doctrine of the
Restoration might be true, discovers a Temper very different from Christ, who
died that Sinners might be restored; and from Moses, who begged the Lord to
pardon Israel's Sins; and if not, to blot him out of his Book; and from St.
Paul, who could wish himself accursed from Christ, for his Brethren, and
Kinsmen according to the Flesh. See Exodus xxxii. 32. Romans ix. 3.

The Nature of Grace leads us to desire the Happiness of all our fellow
Creatures; this is known to all experienced Christians; and I suppose that the
Joy in Heaven will continue increasing, as the divine Work of the Restoration
goes on, and will not come to its highest Pitch, till every Creature in the
Universe shall be brought willingly to submit to Jesus, and be made happy in
his Love.

This is our Belief for which we have suffered Reproach, and Censure from our
Brethren; for this we are called Heretics. Deceivers, deceived ones, etc. Yea
some of our Brethren do not scruple to tell us, that we shall be damned if we
live and die in the Belief of the Restoration. This perhaps may startle some,
but it has been frequently said; and a certain Minister, who held none could be
saved but a certain elect Number, once said to me (among other Things of the
like Nature) these Words, "If you are one of GOD's Elect, he will bring you off
from these Sen^^ments before you die.'
But they would do well to consider what Christ says. Matt. vii. 1, 2. Luke vi.
37, "judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what Judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged, and with what Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again. Judge not and ye shall not be judged; condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned;" Paul says, Romans xiv. 4, 10, 14. "Who art thou that judge another
Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls; yea, he shall be
holden up; for GOD is able to make him stand. But why do thou judge thy
Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? For we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Let us not therefore judge one another any
more; but judge this rather, that no Man put a Stumbling Block or an Occasion
to fall in his Brother's Way." And in I. Cor. iv. 5. he say, "Therefore judge
Nothing before the Tim, unti^ the Lord come, who both will bring to Light the
h^lden Things of Darkness, and will make manifest the Cou^se^s of the Hearts;
and then shall ev^ry Man have Praise of GOD" St. Jame^ speaks to the sam^
Pu^pose saying, "There is o^^ Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy;
who art thou that judge another? J^mes iv. 12." We read, "He that believes
not shall be damned. Mark xvi. 16." But where do we read that we shall be
damned for believing "the Restitution of a^l Things, which GOD has spoken by
the Mouth of all his holy Prophets since the World began? Acts iii. 21." St.
Paul say^, Romans x. 9 "That if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thy Heart, that GOD has raised him from the Dead, thou
shall be saved." Now it is evident that we confess Christ Jesus with our
Mouths, and G^d knows that we believe in our Hearts, that he was raised from
the Dead, by the Almighty Power o^ GOD. We can ^ree^y subscribe to the Articles
of the Creeds used in the Protestant Church; where then is our Belief
defective? Surely we believe in GOD the Father, one Lord Jesus Christ, the Holy
Ghost, etc. But it is said, that we shall be damned for believing too much;
that is what we cannot believe, because we receive Nothing as a Matter of Faith
or Practice, but what we look upon to be plainly expr^ssed in the very Letter
of the Scripture; our Belief is according to the Ideas we have of infinite
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness united, and every Way worthy of the GOD we adore.
The very Spirit of the whole Bible holds forth to our View the Doctrine that we
profess; and even upon a Supposition that we are mistaken, we cannot think that
our God will cast us off, for having too grand and exalted Ideas of his
Character, and the Perfections of infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, of
which he is possessed.

It is said that we bring in damnable Heresies, etc. The Words "damnable
Heresies" occur but once in Scripture, viz. in II. Pet. ii. 1. Where we read
t^^us, "But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift Destruction." Surely this Character cannot fairly be applied to us; we
trust that we do not deny the Lord that bought us; but we may observe that the
Lord bought even the Persons who denied him; which proves something very
different from what the Text is usually brought for. The Word "Heresies" is
mentioned I. Co^ 21* 19, where it is expressed thus "For there must be the
Heresies or Sects among you, that they which are approved may be made
m^r^i^^l^" But Nothing can be concluded from that Pass^ge against us, as Heresy
se^ms to signify only a D^vision or Sect, and if we are Heretics for being
divided from other Churches, all Protestant Chu^ches are H^retick^ for
separating from the Church of Rome. And indeed it is come to tha^ Pass in the
World, that the Church of Rome declares all damned, that die out of the Pale of
the same; and ma^y P^otestants declare that all are damned who die in at. Thus
how shall unlearned People know that to believe, when ^^e Learned differ ^o
much? We say "Tha^ God is no Respector or Persons; but a^ in every Nation, so
in every Denomination, him that fear GOD and works Righteousnes^ is
accepted before him." Christ is not confined to any outward Church, but has
his precious Ones in all.

The Word "Heresies" is mentioned in Gal. v 20 joined with Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousnes^, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Strife, Seditions, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
such like, which are the Fruits of the Flesh; Heresies are reckoned in the
Number, and are therefore akin to those abominable Vices; but surely no Person
that understands our Belief, can suppose that it has any Connection at all with
^ha^ Cata^ogue of Sins; but, on the other Hand, that it leads to the strictest
Holiness.

St. Paul in his Epistle to Titus, Chap. iii. Verses 10, 11, says, "A Man that
is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition reject; knowing that he
that i^ such is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself." It a^pears
plain from these Words, that a Heretic is one who sins in such a Manner, as
not only to be known, and rejected by others, but to be self condemned; and
even then he was not to be rejected till after the first and second Admoniti^n:
But we can say (I believe) with Truth, that we are not self condemned for our
Principles; our Hearts do not condemn us, for believing that he who has
conquered our st^bborn Wills, will finally conquer, and bring into Subjection
to himself all his Creatures: Yet we are rejected for this innocent Belief, and
that without one previous Admonition, or any Conviction laid before us, to
prove that we are wrong.

St. Paul, in Acts xxiv. 14, says, "But this I confess unto thee, that, after
the Way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing
all Things which a^e written in the Law and in the Prophets." So we find that
Heresy is an ancient Name for true Religion, and that a Man may believe all
that Moses and the Prophets have written, and truly worship God, and yet be
charged with Heresy, which is the Case with us at this Time; for we sincerely
believe all that the Scriptures declare, as we understand them, and endeavor
to worship God through Christ, according to his Directions; yet we are charged
with Heresy As for the Word Heresy, it has been used for so many different
Things, and on so many Occasions, that Nothing can be concluded against any
Persons on the Account of their being called Heretics; for it is well known,
that all Kinds of Opinions in Matters of Religion have been branded as
Heresies; those who have the Power in their Hands, always esteem themselves
Orthodox, and call those whom they oppress and persecute Heretics; and it
frequently happens, that what is called Orthodoxy in one Nation, is called
Heresy in another; and what is praised and extolled for Truth in one Age or
Generation, is condemned for Error in the next; yea sometimes in the same Age,
under different Administrations of Government, each Party will have an
Opportunity of persecuting the other as Heretics. And it is well known in the
World, that not only religious, but philosophical Sentiments, have been called
Heresies; among the ancient Fathers, the Opinion of there being Antipodes, or
People who inhabited an opposite Part of the Earth from that where they dwelt,
was looked upon absurd, blasphemous, and heretical; yet we know the Truth of it
now with Certainty. Columbus was excommunicated by the Pope's Bull as a
Heretic, for daring to believe that there was a western Passage to China, and
for the wild Design that he had of seeking a new Country, etc. but what a Loss
would it have been to Mankind, if he and all others, had been (through Fear of
the Curses of the Church) deterred from making Discoveries? Galileo, the famous
Improver of Telescopes, because he was convinced of the Copernican System by
the Discoveries he made, was sent for to Rome, as being a dangerous Heretic,
and was there obliged to renounce his Belief of the Sun's being fixed in the
Heavens, and that the Earth and Planets performed their Revolutions round it,
etc. and upon his relapsing into his former Errors again after his Return home,
he was sent for the second Time to Rome, imprisoned in the Inquisition (it is a
Wonder he was not burnt for his Heresy) and when released from Prison, was ever
afterward confined to certain Limits, as a very dangerous Person, and forbid
to propagate such heretical Notions
. But that is but a small matter. The worst Heresy is that of the Heart, which
is a selfish, envious, proud, wrathful, and worldly Spirit; from which if we
are entirely delivered, there is Nothing that can harm (...).

We have experienced what it is to be hated and cast out by our Brethren, for
the Name of the Lord, for the Sake of the dear Savior, and the Testimony that
we hold. We have searched the Scriptures for ourselves, and the Belief of them
that we have, has not been taught us by Tradition, Education, or the Will of
Man; but as we trust by the Spirit of the living God. Since it has pleased the
Lord therefore to confirm us in the Truth as it is in Jesus, we have Reason to
rejoice in being persecuted for his Sake It is a Question, whether if we had
been guilty of any scandalous Crimes, such as Lying, Drunkenness, or any Thing
of the like Nature, we had been cast out as soon for those as we have been for
the Belief of what appears to us to be the Truth of God. Are not some tolerated
and even esteemed in Churches, who have been guilty of some of those Things,
while those who have professed the Belief of the Restoration, have not had
common Civility shown them?
.

Is it not melancholy to think, that different Sentiments respecting Religion
should cause Hatred and Persecution? Yet this we find to be the Case; and
especially we see, that the Doctrine that we hold, raises the Enmity of Mankind
more than any Thing else; this, it is likely, is because it proclaims the
entire Destruction of Satan's Kingdom at last. What makes our Trials the more
grievous, is the same Consideration that David had, "For it was not an Enemy
that reproached me; then I could have borne it; neither was it he that hated
me, that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him;
but it was thou, a Man, mine Equal, my Guide, and mine Acquaintance: We took
sweet Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God in Company. Psalm lv.
12, 13, 14."

Who could have thought that those with whom we were united, should so soon
separate us from their Company, since we were willing to allow every one
Liberty of Thinking, and Freedom of Conversation, and had no Desire to break
Fellowship with any of them? But we may learn thereby not to trust in the
warmest Professions of Friendship.

It is said, Jer. ix. 4, "Take ye Heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye
not in any Brother; for every Brother will utterly supplant, and every
Neighbor will walk with Slanders." And the Prophet Micah speaks in much the
same Language, saying, "The best of them is as a Brier, and the most upright is
sharper than a Thorn Hedge: Trust ye not in a Friend, put ye not Confident, in
a Guide; Keep (...) D^ors of thy Mouth from her that lie^^ in thy Bos^om."
Micah vii. 4 5.

This Advice given by the Spirit of God is worthy of Attention in this Day, as
well as when it was first wrote, Had not the Author been betrayed by some of
his peculiar Friends, it is not certain whether to this Day he had been
confirmed in his present Sentiments, far less advanced them in public; but in
the Freedom of Conversation, happening to drop some Words that Way, not
thinking they would ever be mentioned, he was presently complained of to two
Ministers, whom he desired to keep the Ma^ter secret for the present, as he was
not fully confirmed in it; but the Affair g^tting abroad, he was obliged either
to retract publicly as an Error what he was partly convinced of, or maintain
and openly vindicate the same; this Necessity brought him to cry to God for
Direction, and ^o search the Scriptures to find the Truth, by which Means he
was ^stablished in the Belief of the Restoration, which h^ has ever since
confessed, and publicly proclaimed, believing it to be his Duty so to do as a
Minister of the Gospel.
I have considered the Reasons of our being hated, and cast out by our
Brethren, and have endeavored to clear up the Matter, and set our Sentiments
in a proper Light, thereby to show that we are rejected for the Lord's Sake,
though their Language is according to the Text, "Let the Lord be glorified;"
all is done for the Glory of God, the Welfare of the Church, and the Good of
the excommunicated ones, through ab^^lute Necessity; and was there ever a
Persecution in Ch^^stendom, but the same Pretensions were made in Favor of it?

But let us attend to the comforting Words of the LORD. It is said, in the
Conclusion of my Text, "But he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be
ashamed." Blessed be GOD, he does not despise the Outcasts; he forsakes not
those who tremble at his Word, even though they are rejected by their Brethren.
God is never nearer at Hand to his Children, than when they are in the Midst of
the Furnace of Affliction.

"But he shall appear to your Joy." O my Brethren, have we not abundant Reason
to believe that God will appear to our Joy? Has he not manifested himself
already in our Hearts? Do we not feel his Presence with us? He has already
discovered to us more of the Beauty of Religion than we formerly knew; more of
the Nature and Necessity of that saving Change, without which none can enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; these Discoveries give us great Comfort, and an
earnest Desire to be perfectly conformed to that divine Being, who has thus
far appeared to our joy and Satisfaction.

Blessed be God, we trust the Time is at Hand, when the Lord will appear more
abundantly to our Joy, and cause his Power to be known through the Earth, when
he will build up Zion, and appear in his Glory, and destroy Antichrist with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his Appearing, and spread the
glorious Gospel of his u^iversal Love and Power, through the Earth; and cause
^ha^ blessed Doctrine now so much despised, to be heard and received from Pole
to Pole, and the whole World to submit to the Savior of Mankind, who died to
restore all to God again. Will not those then be ashamed, who have hated us,
and cast us out for the Belief of God's universal Love, when the Knowledge
thereof shall be as universal as the Light of the Sun?

But, oh, when Christ shall appear to judge the World, what Account will they
be able to give him of their Conduct toward us? He will then put to Silence
the ignorant Cavils, and hard Speeches of M^n, who have set themselves against
his Truth. Will they be able to answer him, when he shall say, "Who has
required this at your Hands?" But God is good, and just, and therefore to him
we would refer the whole Ma^ter,

I shall now close the whole with an Address to you, who have been hated and
cast out by your Brethren, for the glorious Cause of Jesus Christ, and the
Profession of his Gospel of universal Love; called "damnable Heresy" by many.

My dear Brethren and Sisters,
You have been highly favored of the Lord, not only in having experienced the
Truth in your Hearts, but in being called to stand as ^itnesses of the
everlasting, universal, restoring Love, and Power of our dear Savior. You have
already suffered much of your Brethren, and have been rejected by them. Thanks
to the Providence of God, we live in a Country where we are allowed to worship
according to our own Consciences, and none can hinder us.

But though we may not expect to meet with Imprisonment, Banishment,
Confiscation of Goods or Death, at present; yet we may expect, as we have
already experienced, what the Apostle Paul calls "cruel Mockings," Reproaches,
Revilings, Slanders, Censures, and the unbounded Rage and Persecution of the
Tongue; which is frequently worse to bear than Death itself, as the Experience
of many testifies, and therefore it is called by St. Paul "cruel," in
Preference to all other Kinds of Sufferings.

Arm yourselves therefore continually with Humility, Meekness, universal
Benevolence, and unfeigned Resignation to the Will of God; and then you will
not only be able to bear all that the Rage and Malice of Men can cast upon you,
with Patience, but will be able to repay them all with loving Kindness.

You must expect, that the Adversary of Mankind will try his utmost to draw you
off from the Truth; for he is loath to have it known in the World, that he is a
conquered Potentate, and that his Kingdom must one Day be entirely destroyed;
and as he has for a long Time kept the Doctrine of the final Restoration of all
Things, hid and covered, so you may expect he will greatly rage against it now
it begins again to appear. But fear not my Brethren, the Cause is God's, and
not ours; let us commit ourselves into his Hands, who is able to keep us from
falling, and to give us the Victory over the Powers of Darkness, through the
Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of our Testimony.

Finally, as our Religion calls us to the greatest Purity and Ho^iness
imaginable, even to be clothed with the Image and Nature of Christ, let us
endeavor to enter into the Spirit of the Gospel continually, that we may grow
more and more into the Likeness of the Savior, that when he shall appear, we
may rejoice in his coming, and not be ashamed.

THE END.

