THE ADVENTURES OF A HACKNEY COACH.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

-- TREMBLE THOU WRETCH,
THAT HAVE WITHIN THEE UNDIVULGED CRIMES
UNWHIPT OF JUSTICE!
-- AND THOU SIMULAR OF VIRTUE
THAT ARE INCESTUOUS!
-- CLOSE PENT UP GUILTS
RIVE YOUR CONCEALING CONTINENTS.
SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED AND SOLD BY ENOCH STORY, IN
STRAWBERRY-ALLEY, ABOUT MIDWAY. M, DCC, LXXXIII.

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.
WHEN I sat down to collect the particulars of the following work, the uncommon
success of which stimulates me to a continuation, which will be ready for my
numerous readers in a short time, I examined every character introduced with
the equitable eye of justice. When I exhibited them to the inspection of those
powerful members of society, Genius and Friendship, I was led to think the
coloring beautiful, and the execution every way characteristically just. Since
then it has found its way to the public tribunal, where the former illustrious
character will pay no attention to the magic eloquence of the latter. -- I have
been told my strictures on Mr. Garrick are beneath the pen that executed the
foregoing part of the work: to this it would be idle to pay any attention,
while my assertions are founded in truth. -- If those elevated admirers of Mr.
G. who will not think him any other than the paragon of perfection, while his
great powers ennobled the dramatic muse, will take the trouble of scrutinizing
his conduct, as Manager and Dramatic Reviewer, and leave husband, brother,
friend, out of the question, they will not think me divested of feeling, nor
brand me as the disturber of his renowned manes. Mr. Garrick's dramatic fame I
bow down to with as much reverence, as the warmest idolater at his shrine; but
detest with the majority of mankind, his parsimonious principles; nor will I
think the gift of two guineas to the best pastoral poet of this age, nor the
bequest of a rotten building to his veteran brothers of the sock and buskin,
monuments of benevolence, and of a soul of extraordinary feeling. -- I looked
for the best information in the delineation of every character, and the general
voice told me I found it.

I assure the candid reader, a degeneracy of soul I have been ever a stranger
to; and though I do not expect to die worth a hundred thousand pounds, I am not
hopeless that my grave will not be honored with the tear of friendship, as
warm and sincerely flowing, as if I had died the first favorite of Plutus.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADY CRAVEN.
MADAM,
CHANCE put into my hand an old worn-out pen of Yorick's -- I gazed on it with
the enthusiasm that took possession of your Ladyship's bosom, when his
Recording Angel entranced your attention! -- This Pen, whispered my Genius, may
do wonders yet; -- whip out your knife, -- put it in repair; -- if this world
presents a blank of ingenuity, take a trip to that of invention! (...) are
certain of the Prize of Fame, while you brandish this renowned Talisman! --
This sweet whispering found a pleasing passage to my heart. -- I sat down by my
fireside; examined the treasure of my memory -- found it contained a mine for
my purpose, without spurring my Pegasus into imaginary regions: -- Truth took
her seat beside me; examined the contents; -- and found they corresponded with
her registry. I put them into form -- and am happy in presenting them to the
heart of sensibility. I am, MADAM, with respect free from adulation,

Your Ladyship's very humble and devoted Servant, THE AUTHOR.
Land. March 11, 1781.
CONTENTS.
The two Ladies, Page 1 Origin of the Coach, 4 The Old Officer, 9 The Review in
Hyde-Park, 10 The Officer's Funeral, 13 The Wedding, 22 The Sailor, 26 Doctor
Goldsmith, 30 Hyde-Park, 32 The Sponge, 37 The Miser, 42 Miss C * * * * *, 45
The Resurrection Thieves, 48 The Priest, 53 The Suicide, 59 The Milliner's
Prentice, 67 The Pickpockets, 71 The Country Girl, 76 The Disconsolate Woman,
80 Ned Shuter, 83 The Fine Lady. 88 Garrick's Farewell, 91 The Spouters, 97
Maria and Lavinia, 100 The Prince of Wales, 102 Chelsea, 103 The Harridan, 108
The Happy Pair, 113 John W * * * *, 116 Ned Shuter's Funeral, 122 Funeral of
Lear, 129 Dr. Dodd's Execution, 136 The Patriot, 142 Lord Chatham's Funeral,
143 The Natty Lads, 145 The Conclusion, 149
THE ADVENTURES OF A HACKNEY COACH.
The TWO LADIES.
THIS is the most fashionable Coach on the stand, says a pretty young lady,
stepping into me, with all the hilarity of soul that distinguishes the cheerful
children of prosperity; after whom followed an elderly lady her mother. This
Coach, says the old lady, from its neat appearance, was never intended for a
Hack, I am positive: No doubt it was, in its primitive state the vehicle of
pride and presumption; but finding Their faint means would not grant
continuance. were obliged to dispose of it for half the money it cost them,
before they had soiled the pannels. It Is very like, Mamma; there are such a
number of coach-going gentry in this capital now adays, that people of
distinction are puzzled to discover the Baronet of Grosvenor-square from the
aspiring cheesemonger of Fish-streethill. It Is surprising some of those
literary beings do not give us The Adventures of a Hackney Coach; I am sure
there is an extensive field for a fertile genius, and no contemptible one: We
have The Adventures of a Guinea, a most entertaining work; and similar
adventures, full of fancy and instruction. It is one hour the seat of pleasure;
the next, of anxiety: Incidents innumerable it is daily a witness of: --
Disappointment often steps into it from a great man's levee with a heart full
of anguish; pleasure takes a juant to Vauxhall with the siren of his ruin: The
nuptial pair to be married; the disconsolate maid to her lover's funeral. In
short, I don't know adventures, if naturally related, would prove a higher
source of pleasure to the generality of readers.

Thy wishes my fair companion, shall be from this day, which is the first of my
setting out, complied with; I have no doubt from my present elegant appearance,
of being speedily acquainted with the various characters of life; and of
putting into thy hands in a few years, a repository of entertainment and
instruction, as full as the Bath Machine that has just passed me.

Before I introduce any of the characters I mean to exhibit to my reader, I
must beg leave to introduce my

ORIGIN.
I WAS made by a distinguished Coach-maker, of Great Queenstreet,
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, for Mr. M --, a very worthy merchant in
Thread-needle-street, who acquired a considerable property, by an early and
intense application to commercial business. He had as great a soresight of
future events as most speculative men; could decypher a man of small capital
and great appearance, whom he generally called a cracker; shook hands with the
first merchants on the Royal Exchange, and was ever foremost in all their
cabinet councils. As he had a rising family he was circumspect even in trifles;
studied little else than how to acquire a provision to shield them from the
winter of adversity. Notwithstanding all this sagacity, he trusted as much to
appearances, where riches centered, as his unthinking neighbors; and by the
failure of that plunderer F -- e, this laborious son of industry, and his
darling family, were bereft of the honest harvest of many toiling years. At the
time of this national calamity, I was at his little villa at Clapham Common,
with his wife and children, who mostly resided there.

When Rumor, the harbinger of these dreadful tidings arrived, the genius of
misery only could express the horror that ran through the family; which was
scarcely felt, before the unfortunate wreck himself arrived with the
confirmation.

He entered the back part of his garden and retired to an arbor, where he and
his little family used often to assemble -- to hide the bitterness of his
affliction.

He did not remain long in this situation, when his wife and children came to
pour the balm of consolation into his bleeding bosom. His eldest daughter, with
surprising fortitude suppressed her anguish, while she began to chase from his
tortured imagination, the approaching spirit of despair.

You know my dear Papa, says she, with the endearing tenderness of youthful
affection, when Lady Notable did us the honor of a visit last, how very much
she admired my embroidery, placed it in as flattering a point of view as the
ingenious and unrivalled Mrs. Wright's. My brother Billy's minatures are much
admired likewise: I have now a very good likeness, neatly executed of the
Duchess of --; Lady Notable showed it to her, and she admires it highly: She is
a good creature, -- I will make her a present of it; she will be a friend to
us, my dear Papa, and will recommend me.

There is no fear, between my brother and I, but we will realize something to
begin the world anew. --

This little villa belongs to my uncle, who often told me we should reside
here, if we wanted his assistance; he too will be generous; for you know he
calls my Mamma his darling sister.

We will retrench all our superfluities, and live like our primitive parents,
when there were no F -- s

He pressed the little charmer to his bosom; and desired her brothers and
sisters to do the same; after which he rose, with his wife in one hand, and she
in the other, and walked into the house.

A few days after I was driven to the coachmakers, where I was made but two
months before; who told my master he would settle with him next morning; when
he generously returned the original price.

I did not remain long in this situation, when I was purchased by a
Hackney-man, of Oxford-street; who had me numbered and sent to his stand next
day in Piccadilly.

I remained but a few minutes here, when I took up

AN OLD OFFICER.
THIS is a Character, of all others, I have the highest respect for; but more
so, since I heard the story of Captain Shandy and Le Fevre, which was read by a
sensible gentleman, a companion of my old master's at Clapham, who often
delighted him with his excellent company, with a good book, his constant
companion. We have made many little excursions round London; in all of which he
has amused him highly with the best literary works, and his own sensible
observations.

This venerable veteran was accompanied by his wife, the patient and loving
partner of his life, in many a hostile clime: Old as they were, their satiety
did not cease from military pleasures, for they desired they might be taken to

THE REVIEW IN HYDE-PARK.
PHOEBUS was in his utmost splendour and pleasure diffused the happy tidings to
all her children within the vicinity of London. The Park was uncommonly crowded
-- The KING and his amiable CONSORT had just arrived and were receiving the
royal salute as we got up to the lines. Harmony took her seat in the soul and
all was charmed attention for some minutes. --

Well EMILY, says the veteran, how do you like the troops? They make a very
noble appearance,says she, worthy the admiration of their Royal Master and the
warriors in his train: It brings to my recollection some pretty lines I once
met in a poem but little known, written in compliment to General WOLF, on the
conquest of Quebec; and may very properly be introduced here: To the shrill
numbers of the martial fife
They move harmonious. -- O! it is fine to see
Firm virtue and united vigor; -- he
Darts his experienced eye along the files,
Observes their warm alacrity and smiles.


Very happily observed, says he, the KING is fond of his soldiers and waits for
a glorious opportunity to show our perfidious enemies and his admiring
countrymen, the spirit and intrepidity of his renowned grandfather and the
immortal WOLF.

"Observe that Hero on the right hand of his Sovereign, the valiant and
successful Amherst; what perils has he not encountered for his thankful
country, near half an age in her service with unsullied honor! highly beloved
and gratefully rewarded. -- On his left, behold the happy heir of eternal
honor, the offspring of the glorious Granby! Methinks I see thee, blissful
Spirit! with a branch from thy palm of victory binding his youthful brows! hear
thee tell him, when his country calls to remember thy unshaken loyalty and
victorious fame; the soldiers view him with paternal fondness tracing delighted
in his youthful countenance the lines of valor and humanity! Happy youth! may
thou sink to the grave with the same weeping honors on thy hearse, thy father's
spirit found on his.

"Beside him stands that brave officer Townsend, with all the soldier in his
appearance! he is just returned from the government of that kingdom that knew
not how to prize his liberality till it lost him: He fought with the spirit of
Hannibal, when his brave counryman dropped at Quebec! and highly deserves every
honor his generous Prince bestowed on him.

"The greatest military monarch in the world, immortal Prussia is not
surrounded by braver heroes.

"Let us retire; the KING is leaving the field." I left this happy couple at
their habitation, wishing them that serene repose attendant on felicity,

A few days after I attended

AN OFFICER's FUNERAL.
IT was one of those cheerless mornings, when the sun withdrew his enlivening
beams from the heavy atmosphere of London, that I was ordered out very early to
attend the funeral of an officer belonging to a regiment in America; who died
at his father's in Westminster.

My company consisted of some of his most affectionate companions, who were
assembled to pay the last sad tribute to their departed friend. This testimony
of friendship to survivors is a pleasing momento of indubitable sincerity,
notwithstanding what the children of disappointment may assert to the contrary.

Their discourse chiefly turned on the many virtues of the deceased: His
convivial disposition; amiable fidelity; and above all, the affection he bore
his faithful nurse; whose husband was one of the unfortunate soldiers that fell
at the battle of Bunkers-Hill; his allowing her sixpence a day out of his pay
from that hour and taking her child into his protection.

"But see," says one of my companions, "the disconsolate Theodora at her
window; she has been watching the sad procession, though early; -- amiable
woman! how much art thou to be pitied!" She was dressed in deep mourning, with
her window open. -- she raised her swimming eyes to heaven; and as she closed
them the passing breeze bore from their heavy lids a tear -- and dropped it on
the coffin.

During the momentary intervals from grief, she rested her eyes on the hearse,
till it was out of sight; then sat down in the window seat and wept bitterly.

"This lovely woman's connection with Charles," continued he, "may not be so
well known as it should be; and as I had the happiness of a closer intimacy
with them both, than most others, I shall relate it.

"This excellent young Lady is the daughter of a Baronet in the West of
England, who died some few months ago, leaving her, at her own disposal a
fortune of ten thousand pounds. In a village near her residence Charles was
brought up, under the inspection of his grandfather, an officer on half pay,
who retired to his rural asylum after many hardships, and little else to solace
old age, than a heart of integrity.

"Charles was the favorite of this veteran; he infused in him the virtues of
the soldier and the man. The father of the youth, observing the wonderful
progress he was making, was resolved, though dear his company was to him, to
let him remain with his excellent preceptor, till he was every thing he could
wish.

"In this retirement he lived till he was eighteen years old, the delight of
every companion and the lover of the beauteous Theodora! The war-worn Hero was
a constant visitor at the Baronet's, always accompanied by his pupil.

"Theodora and her maid used frequently to meet them in a pathway that led from
her house to the village; and by that means had an opportunity of indulging
herself with the conversation of her favorite Charles.

"They generally let the old Granby go up the avenue, while they walked through
that part of the demesne that led to the back part of the house. Every one of
these excursions was considered by them both as the height of human felicity;
how delicious was her winning converse to the happy Charles! every interview,
their smiling genius revelled on a bed of roses.

And the soft language of the soul,
Flowed from her never silent eye.


"Charles, ere his blisses were tasted by some fortunate rival, was determined
in one of those walks to unbosom himself to Theodora. She listened to him with
the attention his virtues merited; told him to wait till next morning, and he
should have her answer.

"Ere he was yet risen from his fanciful embraces of Theodora, her maid and
confidante was dispatched with the following short letter to him:

Dear CHARLES,
I do not doubt the sincerity of your love: I should as soon doubt my own
feelings in your favor: I will break the subject to my father to day; If he
consents I shall be happy; if he disapproves I shall be miserable; yet, though
he should, be satisfied I will be thine only, while living.

THEODORA".

"This terminated as poor Charles's fears foreboded; the connection was broke
between them; the old officer ceased to visit the Baronet, and Charles had only
a few mutual glances at church every Sunday to comfort him; and an ardent
letter now and then, which was left in a box-tree for him by the hapless
Theodora.

"In the last he found there, was enclosed her picture, neatly folded in a
paper, with the following words: The painter's genius, however sublime, would
convey to my fancy a faint image of my Charles, compared with that already
engraved on my heart, which no time can obliterate; so that I desire no shadow
in return for this trif^e.?

"In this vicissitude of hope and anxiety, he continued for a year after the
separation; when his father drew a part of his mother's fortune from the funds,
and purchased an ensigncy for him, in a regiment ordered for America shortly
after. You are acquainted with the rest of the story.

"Three years have elapsed since he left the last passionate kiss upon
Theodora's lips; he was every thing in the field his brave preceptor was
anxious for, valiant and enterprizing. But who can turn aside the shaft of
adverse fortune? he was wounded at the head of a scouting party, but not
mortally.

"His mourning mother, when she heard the melancholy tidings, begged he would
return to her arms; he was too affectionate to disobey the voice of parental
love and arrived about three months since.

"Theodora, whose father has been dead these nine months on hearing the state
of her lover hurried up to town, to participate in his affliction; she took
lodgings in the same street, that she might be near him, visited him every day,
morning and evening.

"When he had a respite from his anguish, so as to be able to sit up, she would
read by him, or tell some soothing tale. But alas! the dreadful herald of her
grief arrived and destroyed the prospect of her future felicity; his wound
turned to a mortification, which deprived him of his life; and left his family
inconsolable, and his lover in a state of phrenzy."

By this time we arrived at the Churchyard, where they left me to join the
melancholy train: Poor Charles was consigned to his clay-cold mansion; and I
returned with his affectionate friends to where I took them up.

THE WEDDING.
I WAS engaged a few days after to go to Westham in Essex, by an affectionate
couple who were desirous of tasting the joys inseparable from wedded love. The
bride was one of those captivating vestals that win upon the affections rather
than enchant the eye; possessing that agreeable something, to be seen
beautifully dressed in that admired actress, Miss Brown, of Covent Garden
theater; but not in Mrs. Hartley, who is a Venus de Medicis.

She was accompanied by two agreeable females in neat habiliments; the
bridegroom had one attendant and the bride's father, who was a widower, was the
last who took a seat with this happy assemblage.

Our journey was very pleasant; the young folks of the village, who had timely
information of this event, were prepared with the sweets of the season made up
in various forms. When the bride was handed out, she was presented with a
handsome bouquet, by a comely youth; while the bridegroom received the like
favor from a sprightly lass with the countenance of Hygaeia.

Six feemale villagers instantly stepped from the throng, strewing the way with
flowers till they were in the church.

As they returned from the altar, they were presented with a chaplet of
flowers, which they were requested to preserve, while it remained together, as
a testimony of the felicity they wished them.

The bridegroom was not behind hand in acknowledging the honor they did him, he
gave them five guineas, which made them as happy as their wishes.

We drove to Wanstead, where the bride's father had a villa. "I cannot divine,
my dear Amelia," says her father, "what makes you so dull this morning, you
were all cheerfulness yesterday?" Indeed, Sir, says she, "I cannot account for
it, it arises from no cause of displeasure; you have married me to the man I
love, and I will ever retain a just sense of your goodness; there are hours
when this languor of the mind will not suffer us to think or speak; they are
winged with melancholy on the nuptial morn of every rational woman."

"Your husband served me with a son's integrity in his apprenticeship, and I
doubt not but he will be an ornament to the line of life I shall leave him in.
-- His father was an honest man, an excellent companion; we seldom missed
spending a convivial evening together at the Queen's arms. -- Your husband took
a liking to me from his childhood^ I have had him in my thoughts for thee a
long time; but more so since his father's misfortune in trad^. -- I shall leave
you a comfortable provision -- and my blessing."

The tear of fatherly affection dropped from his eye; he strove to conceal it
-- it was the lucent messenger of a soul in ecstacy: -- They saw in it the
image of benignant nature, and both fell on his neck with gratitude and wept.

"I Shall retire," says he, to this little habitation we are going to, for the
remainder of my days; I can bring to my imagination, as I sit under my
favorite elm, the memory of my lost friends -- dwell upon their virtues --
point to many a memorial of their sincerity; and when thy happy appearance
cheers my little dwelling, think it a day of celestial festivity.

As this happy company were to spend some days in the country, I returned to
town without them.

THE SAILOR.
"HOLLO! -- Coachman!" -- bawled a Sailor, as we were driving through
White-chapel, -- "steer me right a head to some pretty little cock-boat in
Covent Garden; but avast -- don't run me a board a fire-ship. -- A good tight
cabin this, "says he, looking round me; "what damned bum boats we have got
about Wapping -- 'Twas when the seas were roaring

"Aye! sink me to the bilboes! those land lubbers of Westminster take care of
their tinsel carcases; let 'em alone for that. -- Hollo! -- pilot! tell that
there lass with the short petticoats and tight heels to step aboard, I Have got a
letter from her brother for her."

"What cheer! what cheer, Nan! -- what storm have thou been in, my lass, thy
rigging seems a little tattered and yet thy bottom is tight and clean?"

"The storm of adversity, says the poor girl -- "O, -- an' that be all, here is
what will set thee to rights speedily, my girl;" pulling a dirty letter from
his pocket. -- She read it, and found it contained an order on her brother's
owner for ten pounds.

"But tell me, my lass, what hove the out of thy last birth?" -- "An act of
charity," says she; "my master has got a new mistress, as great a virago as any
under heaven. An old sailor, once a comrade of my father's, who is reduced to
beggary, used daily to come for a little charity: I told his story to my old
mistress, good soul! who desired I might give him every day what I could spare:
-- I did so; -- we considered him a pensioner in the family; the children grew
delighted with the Admiral's sea stories, (as they used to call him) and often
had him down to the kitchen to divert them. My poor mistress had not been dead
six months before my master married this cursed shrew and then our calm
prospect was changed to a dreadful storm; the poor Admiral was discharged and
to prevent my assisting him with her bounty, as she called it, I was discarded
likewise.

"I have been six months out of place, and was very much reduced when
Providence directed me to you." "Sink me! what a picaroon harpy! -- never mind,
never mind, my good girl; thy deeds are registered where here is will never be;
let that be thy consolation."

Here lives Tom's owner, let us unship ourselves." Saying which, he gave a
spring out of me, and handed her into the house, with that warmth of affection
proceeding from a generous soul.

This humane creature's case was truly pitiable; and yet such revolutions in
families are daily seen. What an offense to humanity! -- when a man is blessed in
one blissful object, and doubly happy in her children: why, ah! why should he
steep their little pillows with the tears flowing from an injudicious choice!
rather, why could he not find that society in them, he once experienced with
their loving mother, -- and think of them only?

I returned to my stand without them and the next day took up that universally
admired character

DOCTOR GOLDSMITH.
"TO have the pleasure of meeting Doctor Goldsmith this morning, is a happiness
I did not expect," says a smart little man addressing a gentleman of a saturine
complexion, who saluted him. A poor female with one leg, who was blacking shoes
near them, raised her head at the salutation, and instantly cried out, "Ah, God
bless him, he was born to protect the wretched, and will go to Heaven for it"
"Let us retire," says he, "this poor woman's benediction will draw a crowd
about us." "I am just returning to Chiswick," says his friend, and if you will
do me the honor of your company to dinner, I shall be highly obliged; you shall
be master of your own time as usual; and retire when you think proper."

"With all my heart, says he. It fell to my lot to accompany this genius.

The day being uncommonly fine he desired the coachman to take off his number,
that we might go through

HYDE-PARK.
"WHAT a motley scene," "says the genius, "is ever here about this time of the
day! pomp, self-importance and lounging nobility, ambling in the troop of
pleasure. -- Poverty looking up to them for relief, yet fearful of the harsh
menance of denial. -- There shines the proud ensign of nobility -- a star; --
here sickens in the eye of suffering virtue -- a tear. -- Yon tattered wretch,
possibly, owes her remnant of poverty to some of these lords of the creation;
-- yet they pass her by with all the indifference of a merciless vizier." --

"Here comes the beautiful Duchess of -- with a splendid train of fashionable
youths around her; -- if I had a wife, I should be sorry to see her a spectacle
for such gazers. -- The fair tints of vernal loveliness adorn her delightful
countenance! -- perfection is charmed with her graceful form! and the perpetual
buzz of flattery give her cheeks an additional bloom, that almost hides their
native roses.

"Beautiful woman! -- thy situation in life places thee above the contempt of
bitter invective, else thy pillow would be lined with many a thorn. -- The
world is villainous, and fiction has taken the seat of truth, which makes it
dangerous for any, but such as thee, to be seen in this situation. And yet, thy
wife (speaking to his companion) is a much happier woman; -- the flowers of her
little garden cannot flatter her: A good book; thy society; and a few friends,
whose converse never stained the tablet of scandal, seated in her little bower,
are the utmost earthly happiness she desires. -- Let us quit this scene of
gaiety."

"You forgot," says his companion, "to give me your opinion of the Prospect of
Poetry." "I did so; I was so immersed in a variety of business, that I had not
time to read it till last night; I had it once in my possession, when I was at
Lishoy; The Village where he was born, which he calls Auburn in his Deserted
Village; it belongs to the Parish of Nogheval, in the county of Westmeath. This
I had from a school fellow of his, who loved him and reveres his memory His
biographers are mistaken, who say he was born in Roscommon. "Tossed as the sea,
by passions let the soul
Like the brine sparkle, like the billows roll;
Then anger kindles in the warrior's eyes,
And earth usurps the thunder of the skies:
See how they mount upon the groaning car,
Shake the long lance, and overtake the war;
Alost in air resounds the whirling thong,
The horses fly, the chariot smokes along;
The foaming coursers press upon their heels;
Back run the lines beneath the whirling wheels;
Fle^^er than light they flash along the fields,
And suns by thousands blaze upon their shields:
The twisted serpents round their helmets rolled,
Must hiss in verse, and bite in burnished gold:
The war breaks in: -- now millions are no more!
And a long groan pursues the gushing gore:
Spears, darts, and jav'lins launch along the sky,
Plunge into blood or into shivers fly.
Thus let your Heroes rage, by Mars possessed,
And feel an Iliad rising in thy breast;
But s^on cement those wounds, let discord cease,
And warring worlds unite in friendly peace."

I lost it, and did not meet with a copy till you savoured me with yours.

"If my opinion could enlarge the merit of it; I think it inferior to no poem
on the subject in any language, and superior to most: One passage gave me
infinite pleasure, and as I have it in my pocket, I shall read it for you.

"This is the sublime! without swelling into bombast. The Author Dr. De-la-Cour.
is but little known out of that part of the world he lives in Cork.
; I am told he is stepping fast into the age of childhood, like his predecessor
SWIFT and finds but little comfort from any thing but his own random thoughts.

"I remember the ingenious Earl of Orrery thought the dedication of this poem
to him a great compliment. It is the most elegant piece of poetic genius I have
ever seen from Ireland."

His companion proposing that he should return to London in his carriage, put
an end to my journey with this sensible genius.

THE SPONGE.
"TAKE you me for a sponge, Sir? says a gentleman, stepping into me. "Yes, and
know you to be one," says the gentleman, with an indignant smile; "thou were
nursed in the cradle of infamy, thou were fed by the hand of hypocrisy; thou
have given genius a ghastly smile; and the sufferings of virtue, the tears of
Medusa. I have traced thee through every stage of life, and found thee what I
assert. You live by the exercise of every vice, and that day is fair indeed,
when merit does not receive a wound from the poinard of thy malignant spirit.
Thy abettors are the terrors of society! Their remorse is that of the
crocodile; and the feelings of Tarquin, their humanity. Thou have neither
genius, education, nor what are called the shining qualities of illustrious
life to recommend thee; and yet the hateful volume of thy martyrdom takes the
lead of every other of their perusal, where bleeding reputation presents her
mangled image! and the tear of pity was never traced upon the sanguine page!
Thy subscription to this villainous work is extensive and by this thou art
enabled to triumph over honor and unsullied integrity."

My companion escaped from this bitter lecture of the injured heart as speedily
as he could. My driver was resolved to be a connoisseur in this masterly
painting, and therefore did not attempt to stir, till his exasperated fare
exerted his Tartarean voice with the penetrating words, "Go on, you rascal!" A
crack of the whip accompanied this harsh appellation and we passed through the
shouting crowd with the swiftest celerity.

We stopped at the Mount-street Coffee-house; where a gentleman took a seat
with him, who saluted him by the name of Mr. Cheany. I believe this to be a
corruption of china; it is, probably; the baptismal signature of some facetious
wight, who seeing such distorted images, from his infernal fancy, as we behold
on china, bequeathed him this expressive legacy for his excellent designing.

"Well, my propitious genius!" says his companion, "what news from Mount Ida!
does the pulse of the goddess beat in unison with mine? -- what says she?" "She
is a compound of inconsistency," says he, "one hour she is on the wing to
Scotland, panting for your embraces; the next, a very Sigismunda, dissolved in
tears: feasting on a lover's smiles this minute, and sighing at a father's
sorrows the next: In short, I believe, Hope and you will never take a seat in
that quarter."

"I cannot fail to make the voyage with safety, in the beauteous Manilla, while
you are at the helm: come, my fortunate Archer! be successful in this, and thou
shall repose with my generosity under a shadow of laurels, and magnificent
happiness! I played pretty deep last night at Arthur's; the blind goddess shook
the box every cast! here are two fifties on this tempting paper! manage this
affair, and they shall be multiplied to the store of Croesus."

"Your former liberality made me hazard every finer movement of the heart in
this enterprise, a discovery would be winged with inevitable ruin: It is not
your sanctuary would protect me from the fury of her ferocious Knights of the
Rainbow, who eye me with the fierceness of a vulture, and wait but for the
opportunity to devour. You shall hear from me in a few days: if my genius wears
her wonted smile, the willow shall not deck your brows.

"This morning I am engaged by a lady of distinction, to settle the
preliminaries of a crim con with her paramour, a handsome youth in the city,
the son of a merchant, who caught a fast hold of her affections last night at
the opera. If I succeed in this negotiation, the richest votary at the temple
of Plutus will grudge me the treasure of my victory! my paper, then, will bear
the impression of hundreds, instead of fifties; for the feelings of ecstasy are
trifling to the transports that will arise from this interview! she is all
phrenzy to embrace this Adonis of traffic. Farewell! you may rely on my
assiduity."

It is a reed that may pierce him to the heart! thought I, and make him as
hateful to himself as thou art to honor and honesty.

THE MISER.
BY this man's corrugated brow, and watchful attention to his pockets, he seems
to be a Miser: -- I was not mistaken. He desired he might be taken to the Bank.
-- He observed a perpetual silence on the way. -- A poor old soldier with one
arm, on his return, begged a small portion of his charity. -- He had none; --
but he had a canvass bag, which contained what would answer the same purpose;
but his callous soul caught the alarm on the poor man's supplication, and it
was hurried with the rapidity of lightning into his pocket.

"Stay," says he, "I think my maid gave me a farthing, when she returned from
the chandler's shop this morning, if I have it I will give it to thee." -- He
had it not; but a gentleman, who begged to take a seat with him, offered to
lend him a shilling. "O, by no means," says he, "he is but a poor old soldier!"
"A poor old soldier!" rejoined the other, "who has a better right to your
bounty? the first, the foremost in the list of indigence, once the trusty
guardian of that treasure you are hiding from the world, -- the glorious
privilege of nature -- your freedom. Come, Sir, the giving of your shilling and
mine will never injure us, and it will be a mine to him.

"Probably his little family wait with weeping anxiety for the little harvest
of the day, and at present it does not consist of above a penny."

"Fine preaching, indeed!" says the Miser; "no, no, you may give him your
shilling, but mine shall be reserved for a nobler purpose; it shall go toward
the endowing of an hospital, which I have had in my thoughts some time; and
then I shall have the prayers of thousands." -- "Away!" says the gentleman,
jumping on the pavement, "'it is not in your nature." -- He gave the soldier his
mite, and quit the Miser.

I was uneasy till I got rid of this detested being, which shortly happened.

A few days after I took up a nobler subject of humanity.

MISS C * * * * Y.
"COME, my dear," says she to her little boy, "we will go seek this poor woman,
and relieve her if we can." She had a petition in her hand; it came that
morning from a poor woman, who had been seized with the pains of travail, in a
miserable habitation, friendless and forlorn. I had heard such a number of
humane souls, that take more delight in this first principle of nature, than
boasting of starched virtue, mention this woman's goodness of heart on many
occasions similar to this, that I ceased to wonder at her ready attention to
the petition.

"Do you stay in the carriage, my dear," says she to her child, "while I step
up stairs, and see this poor woman's situation." She remained about half an
hour, and returned with the following tale.

"I was apprehensive, my dear, my sudden appearance might throw the poor woman
into confusion; to prevent which, I stepped into her neighbor's apartment, and
sent to apprize her of my visit. She did not keep me long, when the little girl
that brought me the petition conducted me to her chilling abode.

"She told me she was the wife of an industrious tradesman, who had been pressed
on board a tender off the Tower, about six weeks ago; that she never knew
calamity till then: She spent the residue of his earnings endeavoring to
procure his discharge: The few friends she had were as poor as herself, and she
ceased to persevere in the pursuit the last week, giving herself up to her
sorrows. "Yes, indeed," says her little one, "my mammy does nothing but weep
night and day, though I do every thing in my power to please her." I gave the
poor comfortless woman an assurance of her husband's discharge, cost what it
would: Her thanks were too much for me to listen to. I relieved her for the
present, and desired her little girl might call on me every week, till she was
restored to her health, -- and her husband."

A lady, shortly after, mentioned ths circumstance to her companions, as I was
taking them to this excellent woman's benefit; with the conclusive part, that
she had not only released the husband, but restored them to their former
comfortable situation, with her own bounty, and that of the admirers of her
benevolence.

THE RESURRECTION THIEVES.
THE pulse of toil was still; -- and Morpheus began his silent reign, when I
was summoned by a hoarse voice, as I was returning home from my stand, to an
obscure house, where four masked figures instantly ^^ok a seat in me.

My conception of their destination I soon found to be erroneous; I thought
their intention was to rob the living: But I was mistaken, for their prey in
this nocturnal enterprise, was a poor wretch's corpse, who they understood,
from a villainous sexton, was a friendless stranger who died that morning in the
habitation of misery, and was buried in a shell at the expense of the parish.

Perhaps some Chatterton -- or Boyse, whose surprising indifference to a decent
situation in life, or death, was marked for this detested undertaking. Dear
names! -- let me give a tear to each of your memories; and may they find
companions from the Samaritan soul of sensibility in this pause of exquisite
sorrow.

When we arrived at that distinguished churchyard that gave up its dead more
than once, for a more shocking purpose than anatomy; If my reader will read the
Chronicle of Singular Events a few years back, he will there find that a number
of bodies from this violated cemetery were sold by the sexton, to a monster
that kept wild beasts near London, on which they lived till this nefarious
proceeding was discovered; when the hellish delinquents met a fate too mild for
such an abominable crime.
they left me, taking my driver along with them, to prevent his giving the
alarm, and leaving one of their companions to keep watch. But, "murder, though
it have no tongue, will speak with most miraculous organ," and in less than
five minutes the villainy was discovered; for my safeguard (which they did not
recollect) was subject to fits, by which means a violent alarm was instantly
given.

The lanterned host, with their clappers thundering din, hurried to the
helpless son of Hippocrates, who lay plunging in the kennel.

One party surrounded me, thinking I contained some prey for the constable of
the night; while another, who smoked the proceeding by seeing a gliding figure
in the churchyard, who they instantly termed a Resurrection Devil, got over
the railing and secured the thieves.

Men, women and children, on the alarm being given, from the illustrious group
in the attic story, to the subterraneous sprites of the cellar, started from
their sleep, and popping their heads out of the surrounding windows, gave a
shout of applause, at their being apprehended, enough to rouse the dead.

So violent was the bitter phrenzy of those that were near them; that they
discharged the drowning flood of their jordans on them, inattentive to the
tottering file of Somnus' veterans, the conquerors of goblin armies that were
heroically guarding them to the round-house. My driver making it appear that he
was forced into the churchyard along with them, they suffered him to mount to
his elevated situation, and return home with me.

For the pleasure of those feeling minds, whose humanity is shocked with this
outrage on the grave, I have the satisfaction to inform them, that those
plunderers, of, perhaps, one of their companions in some quarter of the globe,
whose heart was a mine of virtue and benevolence, were heavily fined on their
trial, and imprisoned for six months, and the perfidious sexton received a
severe flagellation from the hands of that merciful minister of justice, Jack
Ketch.

Some time after I became the companion of

A PRIEST.
"BEGONE, ye wooden deities! ye cold sprinklings of superstition! the Lethe of
iniquity! in whose shallow fount the crimes of our sanctum sanctorum bigots are
daily plunged, that they may exhibit to an astonished world that virgin purity
of heart that mark their immaculate actions! rest with the fools that are above
the joys of sensual pleasure. Thou, my little rose-lip'd queen! whose charms
excel the brightest saint in our legionary calendar, to thee, my lovely deity,
I shall bow the knee tonight!"

Courteous reader, excuse me; I should have introduced this damsel to thee
before, who was handed into me by this amorous pastor, with that ecstatic fire
that blazed in the bosom of Abelard, when his kiss of rapture revelled over the
beauteous cheek of Eloisa, and in the soft impression left the lily of his
felicity, encircled in the blooming rose of her beauty! this I would have done,
but that it would be inflicting a severe penance on my genius to interrupt the
enthusiasm of his carnal adoration.

Three times my Dalilah companion cried out, bravissimo! at the lovely phrenzy
of her raven's-grey Sixtus, who seemed to be a branch of the renowned Pontiff's
prolific stock, and considered women and wine the greatest happiness the human
heart could aspire to.

"Transcendent woman!" cried he, "what fascinating lures we behold in the
dominion of thy beauty! vernal pleasure scatters her fragrant roses in all thy
steps! the sweet blandishments of love flow from the Hybla of your tongues! and
the Graces adorn ye with the smiles of Hebe, and the beatific charms of beauty!
often in thy flowery scenes I rove delighted with Proteus, my cheerful companion!
-- last week I rambled to Vauxhall a-la-militaire -- last Monday I figured in
the boxes of the Hay-Market theater with a lovely fille-de-joy, in Parisian
splendour! and last night I revelled in Lovejoy's Circassian convent! -- well
done Sixtus! thought I. "You are the happiest creature in the world," says his
companion, "that can divide your time so pleasantly, between imaginary saints
and the angels of the blissful paradise of Covent Garden! with the first you
may indulge yourself in all the luxury of fanciful gratification, just like a
poet when he banquets on the Hesperian beauties of his muse: with the last, you
are not so secure; a penance may ensue, severer than the terrors of your
Duke-Street inquisition.

"I passed yesterday through the arch that leads from the Sardinian
ambassador's Chapel into Lincoln's-Inn-Fields; where I beheld a man on his bare
knees, in the kennel, in an agony of grief not to be expressed: His incoherent
lamentation brought a crowd round him, who concluded him insane; till a friend
of his told them it was a penance inflicted on him by one of your rigid rulers,
who ensnared him into a confession of a criminal tete-a-tete with a publican's
wife in the neighborhood, where the good Levite lodged; and who, I dare say,
burned the same incense on the altar of her credulous confession as often as
the culprit. The poor wretch was sentenced to rave, -- weep, -- and thump his
agonized breast for half an hour in his situation, the sport of unfeeling
wretches, and the pity of the enlightened beholders; who could not help pouring
their maledictions on the cruel persecutors of your church, who seem to delight
in this sacrifice of peace and happiness."

"Call it not persecution," says he, "if it was not for this weakness of the
understanding, a priest's situation would be as disagreeable as a Welsh
curate's. This blind zeal of our followers give us a supremacy highly
necessary, where there is no establishment to support us. If it was not for our
incessant exertions to quench the lamp of reason and intellectual refinement
the Protestants are daily lighting in the breasts of our deluded multitude, we
might wander with the itinerant orators of Moorfields, and
Tottenham-Court-Road, the mendicants of arrogance, whose pulpit is a beer
barrel, and whose canopy the sky.

"Let us drop the subject, and enter into the temple of superior felicity."

I left his inamorato, and the saint of his adoration at the Fountain Tavern,
Catherine-street; where, we may suppose he sipped Sabaen nectar from the lips
of wanton happiness; and the tears of penitence from the current of reflection.

THE SUICIDE.
RETURNING from the Royal Exchange this morning, I was stopped at the
Somerset House Coffee-house, in the Strand; where a gentleman, with an
inimitable wildness of countenance, took a seat in me.

There was something so expressive of the baleful purpose he was engaged in,
that I shuddered to meet the heavy lightning that shot from his frantic soul,
through his tearless eye.

He desired he might be taken to Kentish Town. He spoke this with a manly
firmness, and an emphasis of the utmost harmony at heart.

Wretched mortal! thought I; could nothing lure thee from the frightful verge
of misery; -- the freezing gulf of eternity! -- how many sad examples fill the
tearful volume of affliction! -- untune the genial heart! -- and rend the bosom
of serene philosophy! -- Poor Werter! -- thy cureless woes were too poignant
for thy fortitude; -- Melancholy reposed her heavy head early on thy breast,
and led thee her unsocial round, with sighs and tears thy constant companions,
till the sable portal of the grave enclosed thy crimson corse, and sealed the
eye of genius and thy hapless love with thy Charlotte's flowing sorrows.

My companion fixed his eyes on a crowd that was approaching; there were two
poor youths going to be executed: -- he looked wistfully at them with weeping
compassion. -- "Thy situation, poor fellows, I cannot help feeling for!" says
he, "though my own is attended with a lesser ray of hope, in the state I am
rushing into: I shudder on the dreadful precipice, -- but misery could not wear
a more hideous aspect when she feasted on the afflictions of wretched Ugolino,
and his little victims of unparalleled cruelty, than she wears in my presence
this minute! -- begone, thou horrible fiend! thy bitter luxury in my cup of
misery here, is just exhausted; seek some other residence, and let me enjoy one
placid moment in this sad hour of calamity "Oh death! thou pleasing end of
human woe,
Tbou cure for life! -- thou greatest good below!
Still may thou fly the coward and the slave,
And thy soft slumbers only bless the brave."


"My dear, -- my hapless Maria! -- may the inflexible heart of thy cruel father
melt with compassion over my untimely bier: -- may he choose, from the
fortunate of mankind, an object worthy of that amiable treasure, thy
affections, when thy Frederick's sufferings rest in oblivion. -- Thus I finish
the terrific behest of madness and affliction!"

The report of the pistol alarmed my driver, and some laborers who were in an
adjacent field, who ran to his assistance; one of them was a tenant of his, and
felt his loss in a sensible manner.

We drove to his habitation, where the face of harmony was changed to a scene
of tears, and audible sorrow. His faithful domestics, trembling with the shock
of anguish, bore him in. The best of masters! -- the most excellent of friends!
-- was the tenor of their lamentations. Anthony's affliction over the bleeding
body of his beloved Caesar, could only be expressive of the faintest picture
here of sorrow.

On my return, I discovered the following paper, which dropped from his pocket
in the confusion.

I sit down, for the last time, to trouble my amiable Maria with the weeping
thoughts of a soul she has long been acquainted with; whose dearest happiness
fled from her halcyon seat, when thy unpitying father withdrew thy society, the
only one she with bliss rejoiced in. Angel of felicity! whose refined
adornments of mind and person have proved the bane of my tranquillity, receive
this parting attestation, this violent pledge of my sincerity! -- Could I raise
thee to a diadem, how great would be my glory! but that is beyond my reach: An
easy competence, sufficient for the blissful asylum of content, is all my
portion: This, I remember, you with exultation called a treasure, while your
Frederick partook of it. Oh, Maria! your tedious and secret removal weighs my
poor spirit to the shades of death: I cannot linger here: This world presents
nothing but a comfortless waste! -- the light-hearted this hour, are my
companions the next; and all I think and feel, melancholy expression would but
faintly convey to you.

This morning I shall seal my doom -- perhaps this hour -- the shivering fit
has often come over me, which I baffled with the lenitives of philosophy. But,
alas! I cannot do it longer -- the rage of unspeakable phrenzy seizes on my
senses, and in a few minutes I shall rest on the pillow of the greatly
unfortunate.

In whatever region thou art conveyed to, dear spirit of excellence pour thy
benediction to the throne of mercy, for thy bleeding sacrifice!

-- thy unfortunate FREDERICK.


This letter was returned to his family in the evening.

My reflections continued for some days, on the lamentable exit of this poor
being; whose philosophy was a shadow; and whose feelings, had they been less
refined, would have done honor to humanity.

Does the fault lie in nature, or the clime? My reader will, probably, say the
first; in which opinion I will readily coincide: It cannot be confined to any
clime in particular; for every region has this lunacy upon record. I have heard
it asserted, by scientific researchers, that the British clime is full of this
vapor of phrenzy; but I will not, by any means, give my consent to it: I am
very well persuaded every enlightened country in the terraqueous globe can
produce yearly instances of the like nature. We pay more attention to what
happens at home, than we do to any other quarter; and from this alone arises
that universal received opinion, that Britain is more culpable in this respect.

May the hand of Heaven interfere, and destroy this plague of the mind -- this
fell ravager of peace and happiness.

THE MILLINER's PRENTICE.
"YOU seem greatly fatigued, my dear," says a gentleman to her; "will you
permit me to carry your band-box, or do me the pleasure of your company in this
coach? I will be happy in conducting you to wherever you are going." "Indeed
Sir," says she, very modestly, "I am very faint, for I have not rested since I
breakfasted: My situation in life is more than I can patiently bear." "I
sincerely believe it," says he, "the hardships of this life crowd upon us
before we can gather strength to support them, let that fortitude be thy
companion through life, that propt through a series of afflictions thy renowned
and virtuous country woman, the memorable Elizabeth.

"Anguish often slumbers on the pillow of regal virtue, as well as thine; your
parents should have been more watchful of your soul's ease."

"There, Sir," says she, "you present to my imagination a picture I would
willingly avoid looking at; I lost my felicity when I buried my amiable father;
my happiness died with him; and left me with a mourning mother, to bemoan his
loss in a comfortless situation.

"He was a captain in a regiment stationed in Ireland, where he died; my
mother, fond of living within the bosom of her little family, free from the
inquisitive and prying eyes of busy, meddling neighbors, who cannot be happy if
they are not acquainted with every domestic secret around them, was obliged,
after this heavy affliction, to quit that kingdom.

"She had ever a predilection for the village where I was born in Warwickshire,
where she settled about three years ago, and lives at present, with my brother
and sister. A friendly lady in the neighborhood showed me many marks of her
esteem; and requested I might be put prentice to her milliner in Cornhill.

"I am sensible of the sincerity of her friendship, for the day I was bound,
she put into my master's hands a two hundred pound bank note, to be delivered
to me at the expiration of my time.

"This she did, lest any unforeseen accident should deprive her of the means on
which I was to build my future independence. She little knows the slavery of a
milliner's younger prentice, and the vices they are exposed to." She shall
speedily be acquainted with them," says her companion, "for I will, with your
permission, solicit her countenance and your mother's to our immediate union."

This was one of the unexpected sallies of violent love, and she blushed
exceedingly, without a reply to it, for some minutes.

To read a countenance on this occasion requires some sensible deliberation;
she did not think herself sufficiently an adept in this point, so referred him
to her master, for the most material part of the reply she would wish to give
him.

He begged an interview with her that evening in the Temple Gardens; when he
would give such proofs to her friend, as would leave no doubt of the sincerity
of his proposal: She saw that harbinger of the virtuous soul, truth, glow in
his countenance as he advanced this proposal; and she no longer doubted him:
The meeting was settled between them, and the issue of this adventure will
appear to the reader's satisfaction, in another part of this work.

THE PICKPOCKETS.
WE'LL take a pleasurable jaunt to the Spaniards on Hampstead hill, George,"
says a smart woman to a handsome young fellow. "By no means," says he; "we'll
go to St. Martin's church, there is a charity sermon to be preached there by
the Bishop of P --, who ever brings a great congregation with him: It is the
only place we can do business to day; and after let us proceed to the
Spaniards." "'It Is very well," says she. -- I could not help admiring the
exterior of this youth: He had all that refined elegance in his person and
manner my reader would expect from the finest mould of nature, and the tuition
of the Graces: -- And can this man be a pickpocket, thought I. -- "You look
very well today, George," says his companion; "the K -- would as soon be
suspected of your intention this morning." "'It Is a cursed life," says he, "but
I must feed my ambition." -- I waited till they returned with the spoil, and
then we drove rapidly off to Hampstead.

"Thy advice has been very prophetic today, and I have profited largely by
it," says she; "how did you come off?" -- "Nabob like," says he, "my plunder is
a little brilliant! I tipped the sextoness half a crown, and she placed me in one
of the best seats in the church, among a set of weighty dowagers: -- This neat
repeater, set round with diamonds is no trifle; Varnish, the watchmaker, of
Bartholomew's Close, shall baptize it with a new name, and away it goes to the
East Indies.

"This massy snuff box is of the true antique; my friend Solomon, of St.
Mary-Axe, will soon dispose of this: He will not scruple saying it was the
companion of Edward Worthly Montague in his travels to the written mountains;
and off it goes to a virtuoso, at as great a price as the Monk's horn-box -- if
Yorick's heirs would dispose of it.

"The rest are trifles, a gold etwee, a smelling bottle, a purse with two
guineas, and a lottery ticket. Come, my ingenious sister in the magic art,
let us see your spoil."

"Here Is the beauteous assemblage that will tell no tales," producing a purse
of guineas, -- "and this beautiful topaz ring, five guineas, and a bank note
for ten pounds in another: -- I have got a watch too -- but fire me, it is
Cockspur-Street sterling, that Jew Mr. Pinchbeck.
has often bit me in this manner.

"Yonder goes Harriet, as I live let us post after her, and take a view of her
new flash-man, I am told he is very handsome, and has seen better days."

"He has," says her companion, -- "I understood at the billiard table, the
other day, that he was an officer in America, lost considerably at hazard, and
was necessitated to sell his commission to discharge some pressing debts.

"He has been in London some months, and constantly attends our nocturnal
meetings in Russel-Court; -- he won twenty pieces last night from Ned
Nimblewrist, and seems affectionately fond of Harriet; she never suffers him to
decide her disputes like most women in her situation, but rather wishes to
screen him from public attention. I found him at the Cocoa Tree the other day
very melancholy, which convinces me how very disagreeable his situation is to
him. He is very accomplished, but what can he do in London, where nothing but
the means will signify a rush? Without that, a man cuts as ridiculous an
appearance as the Vicar of Wakefield's son, trudging from the fair with his
green spectacles. But see, they salute us, -- we'll discharge the coach, and
step into the garden after them."

I was very happy in getting rid of such sharpers, and returned to town with a
hope that I might one day have the pleasure of conducting them on board some
lighter, for Mr. Campbell's Marine academy at Woolwich: -- I will not say to
Tyburn.

THE COUNTRY GIRL.
"LARD love you, Sir, an you be so koind to direct me to Chandos-Street Common
Garden," says a rosy country girl, with a little parcel under her arm,
addressing herself to an old gentleman with a complacent countenance.

"'It Is a dangerous road, child, -- and as thou seem a stranger, we will step
into this coach, and I will be your safeguard through it." "Ah! dear a me,"
says the simpleton; "I should be waundidly afread to trust myself, for I heard
as how they be voil folks in London." "Fear not, sweet innocence," says the
courteous stranger, "I am the parent of such as thee, and will protect thee
with as much attention."

"GOD Almighty bless you for your koindness."

On the way he asked her what business could bring her to London, alone, or
could tempt her to leave the inn without a guide? She said her sweetheart had
listed for a soldier, and had gone to America; that she could not bear the
country after him, for he used every evening, as duly as the sun went down, to
meet her in the meadow when she was milking, and assist her going home: -- "He
was the sweetest soul living, (continued she) and waited for the death of an
aunt who is to leave him ten pounds a year. For the last month I did nothing
but weep, but more so when I went to the meadow, -- we were as merry as the
lark once," -- here she wept bitterly.

"I was advised," says she, "to come to a sister of mine that lives in Chandos
Street, and she would get me a place: -- I had but little money when I took my
place in the wagon; and when I got to the inn, I had but a shilling left;
which I kept, lest I should not find my sister. There were several in the
inn-yard offered their sarvices to show me the way, particularly an old lady,
with a patch on her face, dressed very genteelish; but I was afread, and
pretended to know London as well as they, so I left them whispering about me."

"Thou did very right," says the old gentleman, "for they wanted to ensnare
thee, -- I am very glad I happened to meet you, for my daughter wants a child's
maid, and you will just answer her; it is such as thee I could wish every
mother would place with her children: Their little minds would then be free
from the taints of corrupt and perfidious servants, that swarm in this
metropolis.

"I shall leave you with your sister till tomorrow; when you may take up your
abode where your affliction will be lightened in the bosom of innocent
tranquillity."

I left this couple, and returning to my stand, took up

A DISCONSOLATE WOMAN.
HER husband had been just hurried from her embraces by two of those vultures
of inhumanity, sheriff's officers; she was in a violent agitation of mind, --
she trembled exceedingly, as she was stepping in, and instantly burst into
tears. "No: -- says she, (let what will betide) he shall not be from my arms
tonight, -- my affectionate husband! -- unfeeling creditor that my children
could not stop thy rigor for a few days; but thy heart will ache for it yet.

When she arrived at her house, a little boy came running to the door. "Well,
my dear Mamma, -- did you find him?" -- "No, child, but I will not be long so."
"O, indeed," says he, "he said he was only going to take a walk with the two
gentlemen, and would be home in about an hour." "Fear not, Charles," says she,
"so he shall."

She did not keep me long, when she returned with a few valuable articles,
which she took to a pawnbrokers, and deposited for as much as would procure his
enlargement; from whence she hurried to Southampton Buildings, Holborn; and
returned -- with her soul's felicity! -- and a countenance of inexpressible
delight.

"He is disappointed," says she; "he thought to injure you in the tenderest
point, by confining you, and this for a trifling quarrel: -- Shame on the
villain, -- have no farther intercourse with him, and a little time, and
industry will restore us to what we have lost by his cruelty. My dear husband!
-- I scarcely knew how to face my children, -- poor Charles said he would not
stir from the door till you returned, -- and see, he has kept his word."

The little fellow kept skipping about the hall till he embraced his father,
and harmony and joy once more took their seat in this little family.

NED SHUTER.
"YOU will be sure, Ned, to come at nine this evening." Says a smart female, to
a lively featured man who had taken a seat in me. -- "I shall be punctual,
Harriet," says he; -- adieu."

He desired he might be taken to Suffolk-Street, Middlesex Hospital. On my way
I could not help reconnoitering this man's facetious countenance; there was
something very interesting in it; -- it contained more expression than any I
had seen for a long time, -- there was all that vivacity of soul sparkling in
his eyes, that Reynolds would give to the comic muse! -- He drew a manuscript
from his pocket -- looked over it in a cursory manner. -- "I shall never endure
to get it by heart," says he; "this fellow's muse of fire will set the
green-room in a blaze! I wish the Lilliputian manager of the next house had
secured him before he had bit us in this manner."

He beckoned to a gentleman on the opposite side of the way, who ran to meet
him, -- shook him by the hand very cordially, -- inquired after his health, --
"pretty well, pretty well," says he, "I shall kill the king of grief yet. But
tell me what success the last campaign, any thing of the vis comica in it?"
"Yes, faith, a great deal," says the other: "Some silly youths left their solid
pudding in London, for the empty praise of a barn; mad to put the buskined muse
out of countenance; we had a whining Romeo -- a ranting Richard -- a very
dolorific Hamlet, and a Lear of sixteen years old. -- Bob gave the rustics the
cries of London, after the manner of the inimitable Mr. Shuter, they were so
well pleased they would have given any price to have heard the original. -- We
shared pretty well with tolerable benefits.

"Our Calista had the good fortune to captivate a Tony Lumkin, a well fed booby
with twelve hundred a year; it occasioned much mirth with the ill-natured.
Rancour, as usual, was highly applauded for authentic information; in one
circle it was firmly asserted there would be a young Montezuma before six
months at least: But we that knew the worth of Calista better, rejoiced,
heartily wishing her that felicity her amiable life merited. -- I shall see you
at the theater -- farewell."

I found by their discourse, the facetious Ned Shuter was the person whose
countenance made such an impression on me. Conveying my first master from the
theater, I had often heard him mention this gentleman's name in a strain of
approbation, felt only when the heart accompanies the tongue.

We had got to the top of Berner's-Street, when he pulled out the check string,
-- there was a poor wretch, with an anguish-worn countenance, sitting beside a
watchman's box: -- She was almost naked, with an infant folded in her shivering
arms. -- A peeress stopped her carriage and sent her a shilling, -- three fourths
of her body was bent over her infant, so that the donation was not seen by her,
till a little boy told it was dropped into her lap. She paid no attention to any
thing but her babe, and continued rocking it in her cradle of misery, till my
humane passenger wrapped her in his great coat.

He took some money from his pocket, and gave her a guinea; -- desired she
would call at his lodgings Windmill-Street every week, "I will endeavor to
assist you." Saying which, he returned to me with his eyes swimming in tears.
The people that were gathered round, together with her own weakness, prevented
her from showing her gratitude, which he wished to avoid.

"God of Humanity!" says he, "I thank thee that thou have enabled me to draw
from the margin of calamity, a miserable sufferer of thy children, and her
helpless innocent! -- divine Langhorne! how beautifully have thou pictured a
scene like that just before me, in thy apology for vagrants.

Cold on Canadian hills or Minden's plain,
Perhaps that parent mourned her soldier slain,
Bent oe'r her babe -- her eye dissolved in dew,
The big drops mingling with the milk he drew,
Gave the sad presage of his future years,
The child of misery, -- babtiz'd in tears.
I returned without this distinguished son of humanity.

A few days after I took up

A FINE LADY.
"DRIVE to the florist's in Cheapside," says she; I must positively have an
elegant nosegay on the occasion, cost what it will. -- Let me think two moss
roses, with three carnations between them, and the minionet I have already,
will be very lovely! -- it will be a good signal for my dear William to
discover me. -- Mrs. Fanciful, of Tavistock-Street, shall make me the
handsomest masquerade habit that will be there. -- My papa told me that he
would not sing psalms for nothing, -- his daughter's future figure in life
depends on a bold stroke in her prime; and he will stint himself in every
particular to support me." -- She could not get the flowers under half a
guinea, and sooner than be without them, she gave it, from one of the loveliest
hands I had ever seen.

One of those silent objects of distress, who had been just raised from the
falling sickness, cast a weeping glance at the dear purchase. She gave it a
look of thoughtless admiration, inattentive to the face of sorrow. -- Good
Heaven! thought I, as we returned, what a world of extravagance we live in! --
how thoughtless of past indigence, and how madly vain in the sunshine of
prosperity. -- Here is a being now, the daughter of a psalm-singer, totally
absorbed in thoughts of pleasure and dissipation, and by her own account, her
father the agent of her ensuing ruin.

The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon:
Virtue itself escapes not calumnious strokes,
And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Possibly I may meet thee yet, silly damsel, faint and weary; when a shilling
of what thou art lavishing now, will not be left thee to purchase a seat in me;
and as little attention paid thee, as thy heart paid the sickly daughter of
adversity it disdained looking at just now.

May thy foolish father see his folly betimes, and snatch thee from the
approaching genius of bitter reflection. -- Thy face is too lovely to perish in
the wild of misfortune.

GARRICK's FAREWELL.
AN uncommon demand for coaches this evening, by the enthusiastic admirers of
dramatic excellence, who were hurrying to Drury Lane theater to see that great
luminary of theatric genius, Mr. Garrick, take his farewell of an admiring and
polished audience, who for thirty years showed him the highest marks of their
favor, drew me to the house of a distinguished gentleman in the republic of
letters; he was accompanied by his wife and daughter.

A taciturnity, the companion of men of severe study, deprived me of this
gentleman's observations on the occasion while he was going, but he made me
ample amends on his return.

"Well, my dear," says his wife, "what do you think about the little man's
departure?" "I am sorry for his departure, as an actor, but must confess myself
highly pleased at his leaving the literary chair, in which he reviewed dramatic
composition so disingenuously. -- I would not be the primary cause of as many
heart-achs as he has occasioned, to purchase the universe. -- He was a
wonderful actor! the mirror of our immortal Shakespeare -- in whom we saw the
life and soul of his matchless muse: divest him of this -- what is he? Is he an
honest man? -- Yes -- simply so. -- Where are his good actions? do they consist
in cruel oppression? and so did avarice. Fie on them! they are rank weeds! --
do they consist in patronizing flatterers, the weather-cocks of indigence?

"Call me the children of affliction, from the cave of obscurity: See what a
crowd lay their sufferings at his door! Observe that pensive genius, wrapped in
the gloom of pining anguish: -- the years of captivity crowded on him so fast,
that his abilities perished almost unnoticed, in the wreck of oppression before
this mock monarch quit his mimick kingdom. What is his name? L --; see his
Ranger, Benedict, Iago, Pierre, Wolsey, and Richard: -- Where lies the
superiority? -- criticism is puzzled to find it out. Did he use him cruelly? so
tyrannically, that when he found him treading close on his heels in the public
favor, he engaged him at a great salary for a number of years at his theater,
and exhibited him in the ciphers of the stage; such as the Prin^ in Romeo and
Juliet, when himself played Romeo. In this manner did he exercise his
monarchical tyranny, till he reduced him in public estimation to the applause
of a scene shifter. -- Hundreds can authenticate my assertion; it is not built
upon the base of retaliation, for I know him not -- thank Heaven.

"Is this the object of universal admiration! -- Observe that literary being
with the manuscript -- what says he? That he gave him a comedy, highly approved
by his ingenious friends, which he kept till the opening of the ensuing season,
and then returned it, with a compliment to the author on his abilities, and his
judicious advice to amend and correct it: At the same time he stripped it of its
most brilliant thoughts, and tortured the poor man's ears, next season, with
the plagiary in a piece from his own manufactory at Hampton.

"What says Mossop to him? That the best critics of the age could get him to
say only -- "The man had some genius." -- Then where lies this man's
munificence, his honesty, and loud-boasted virtues. -- Shame on the world! --
He is a gay convivial companion -- that gives a varnish to his crimes: -- Full
master of the superficial etiquette of polished life; a member of the first
literary societies in London; and quietly inurns the children of his fertile
imagination, now and then, at Bath-Easton.

Tell me, ye puffing tribe, is this his liberality? Ye who partook of his
bounty such a number of years, disclose the popular secret! -- What, all mute!
Is Lear, then, abated of all his train? His office of bribery is closed, and
the pen of dissimulation is employed for a new master. He made the ingenious
Cunningham a present of two guineas for the dedication of his poems to him! --
Excellent patron! how I envy thee thy liberality of soul! the public did not
reward thee so, for thy flowers from the foot of Parnassus -- they were lavish
in their praises on them -- a century will show which blooms longest."

My companion being arrived at his house, I was deprived of the remainder of
his remarks on this high favored Roscius, whom I heard such a number of
opinions of, the chief of which terminated like this gentleman's.

THE SPOUTERS.
THIS evening I was summoned to one of those distinguished houses where
'prentic'd kings alarm the gaping street.

The company consisted of a few youths who had caught the theatrical influenza
that rages with such violence; and injures the tranquillity of many parents in
this populous city.

By the time I arrived at the door, they were kicking up a dust with the people
of the house; one of them who personated Alexander the Great, was so elated
with the sublimity of his eloquence, that he broke a pier glass with his
truncheon, as he swung his Herculean arm backwards. -- The landlord insisted on
immediate payment for the accident; the hero, with all the majesty of
Macedonia's conqueror, told him all accidents in the green room were overlooked
by the managers; and if he expected payment, he must wait till he took his seat
in the chair Roscius had just retired from -- "Damn Rogers, and you," rejoined
the landlord; "I will be paid for my property, -- I Will lace you tighter than
you were laced in that tinsel doublet you wore just now, if you don't make good
the damage." Here a general engagement took place; the heroes took fire at the
indignity offered their Garrick, and all was uproar in an instant: -- the
landlady ran for a constable. -- Alexander made his escape; and poor Hamlet,
who had given the landlord a black eye, was secured. When the constable was
shown his prey, he griped him like a tiger by the collar, and was hurrying him
off to prison, when he roared out, with becoming energy, -- "Perdition catch
thee, -- I prithee take thy fingers from my throat, -- I am Hamlet the Dane!"
"I don't doubt it," says the constable, "I had much rather you were Christian
the Dane, you should be speedily inaugurated with a crown of Tyburn
manufacture." -- The poor Prince was taken to prison, and the rest of his
comrades, after promising to enlarge him the next morning, took their seat in
me. -- They were troublesome passengers, and I was anxious to get rid of them,
which soon happened; for they ran from me like so many bedlamites, to get six
pennyworth of Miss Brown's See the Duenna, a Comic Opera.
pretty blue-eyd nun of St. Catharines.

MARIA AND LAVINIA.
"AS the hours are heavy in town, Maria, and the day is fine," says a young
lady, addressing her companion, "suppose we step into the coach and take a
little jaunt to Chelsea." "Nothing pleasanter," says Maria; "I love country
excursions and am seldom indulged that way.

"Bless me! -- something is going forward in the gay world, that has mustered
this amazing concourse of agreeable faces." -- "The KING is going to the house
of peers," says Lavinia; "the people of London, the women in particular, are
delighted with this species of pleasure; -- the picture they present to their
pleased imaginations of a crowned head is superior to any they have ever seen,
and they are willing to have a lasting impression, by seeing one as often as
they can. The King of England, I have often heard, has more princely dignity in
his countenance and deportment than any Monarch in the universe. -- Prussia has
more of the hostile hero in his war worn figure, and less of the king; --
France is a mere petit maitre; -- Spain a huntsman fit only to rule a kennel of
hounds; -- and the Emperor of Germany the prince of justice and humanity, which
is superior to his princely appearance." -- "But see, as I live," says Maria,
"here comes

THE PRINCE OF WALES.
WHAT a lovely Youth! -- victory has laurels yet in store for thee; -- thou art
born to rule a great and sensible people, tenacious of their freedom, and
affectionate to their Prince; in whose veins run the clear current of brave and
memorable Britons: a people that will never forsake thee, while thou preservest
their rights untainted."

We proceeded till we arrived in

CHELSEA.
MARIA is one of those happy females that take a particular pleasure in
reviewing the scenes of domestic felicity; -- she saw a pensioner sitting on a
bench, under a tree near the hospital. He had a fine little boy dandling on his
knee, and another about nine years old stood before him, performing the manual
exercise with the old man's crutch; this was a delicious treat to Maria. -- She
sat down beside the veteran.

"You seem quite happy with your little soldier, and this smiling prattler,"
says she, taking the child in her arms, and pressing it to her bosom.

"My present situation, dear lady, may be justly called happiness, as it is so
closely connected with innocence; there was a time, when I could kiss my
children and enjoy their endearing society but seldom, being then confined to
duty. I am recovering the lost felicity with my grand children; they are the
harbingers of cheerfulness, -- their little sports divert me, and help to
brighten my solitary hours in this comfortable asylum. Their mother is an
industrious soul, -- she rents a small habitation in the village, that she may
be near me; it was her mother's dying request; she knew she would be my best
comforter in my last moments. She generally spends an hour or two with me when
her task for the day is concluded, when we take the little ones home. She has
been a widow these two years; she lost a valuable friend in the death of an
officer, in whose service we were in Germany and London; and who showed us many
instances of his affection; my daughter nursed a child for him, and was much
beloved by the family; it was his settled resolution to bequeath us an
independence, above hardship, in our decline. -- He died suddenly in the
country, and left us to the situation in which you have found us; -- poor Major
Noble!" -- "Noble!" exclaimed Maria, -- "of Clifford-Street,
Burlington-Gardens." "The same," says the veteran. "Ye gracious powers that
lift the delighted soul to ecstasy, enable me to support this sudden transport!
My brave old man! let me embrace you for the happy discovery! -- do you see
nothing of my father in me?" -- "Yes," says the enraptured veteran, gazing on
her with eyes swimming in ardor; "I behold his manly soul smiling in thy
gracious countenance!" "But tell me," says the lovely Maria, "why did you and
she fly to obscurity from us? why did you desist from claiming from my
affectionate mother your master's promise?" -- "We did not desist," says he,
"till your pampered housekeeper told us, you would not see any of your father's
dependants; we repeatedly endeavored to get an interview with you, or your
dear mother, but ever met with contemptuous answers; -- you were in the
country, or engaged abroad, whenever we called." "Well," says Maria, "the
perfidious wretch shall be discharged this evening; bring my poor nurse to us
the instant she returns from London, she and you shall be situated to your
wishes. I will take the little ones to my mother, who will be rejoiced to see
them. -- Be sure you accompany your daughter the instant she returns."

"Well, Lavinia," says Maria, on their return, "don't you think this morning's
adventure a little extraordinary?" "I think it a great instance of divine
Providence," says she. "When I tell you," says Maria, "what a treasure I have
recovered in this venerable old man and his faithful daughter, what a hoard of
integrity and affection toward me and my mother, you will congratulate me on
one of the most pleasing events of my life." "I do, most sincerely," says
Lavinia; "and shall often borrow your little charge, to show my generous
friends a picture of your transcendent goodness."

Happy woman! -- while the dissipated of thy sex are revelling in the lap of
pleasure, you are busy in promoting the happiness of your fellow creatures. --
It is such exalted beings I would wish to accompany through life.

Some time after I became the companion of

A HARRIDAN.
"BE expeditious, Lucy," -- says an emaciated old man, tottering under the
weight of age and infirmities, -- "I shall call on you in the evening, and will
expect a lovely exotic." "You shall not be disappointed," says the withered
Harridan. -- Let me look in thy wicked countenance, -- what a wretched picture
of iniquity! -- the blush of shame has fled from thee many a year since, and
the tinge of art supplies its place; -- I would give the world to know the
villainous purpose of thy soul this minute. -- Thou have got hold of some fair
daughter of affliction, and art busy in conveying her to that lecher's loathed
embrace, To melt the ice that chills his shivering heart. Some darling,
perhaps, of a fond father and mother, whose misfortunes rest in the grave with
them; while their poor child is left trembling in the arms of infirm virtue.

Some wretch, perhaps, committed by a remorseless creditor to a loathsome
prison, has been tempted for his enlargement, to barter his child's future
felicity: -- what horrid pictures, in such a situation, does imagination
present to torture the feelings! I will look no more at them.

I had scarce formed the intention, when the lovely victim took her seat beside
the Runnion; she was handed in by one of those gorgons of society, the mistress
of a register-office. Though sorrow had been her partner for some time, and was
still visible in her tearful eye, she retained a just resemblance of Rowe's
beautiful picture; The bloom of opening flowers unsullied beauty,
Softness, and sweetest innocence she wears,
And looks like nature in the world's first spring.


Alas! thought I, fair creature, thy doom is almost confirmed; and in a little
while, possibly, thou will have naught but sighs and tears to alleviate thy
misfortune.

"Will you be so kind, Madam," says she, "to tell me what my occupation is to
be in your family?" "My own maid, child; I will show thee a parent's fondness,
and felicitate thy innocent wishes. My family consists of an old brother and
myself; we live very retired, and seldom mix with the gay world. -- My last
maid behaved herself so well, that I married her the other day to an eminent
apothecary; and gave her a handsome fortune. -- As I have no children, it gives
me inexpressible pleasure in promoting the happiness of those around me. --
Your last residence I understand was with a clergyman's widow, since dead;"
"Yes, Madam," says the fugitive; "I lived with her in Shropsh^^e from my
childhood, -- my father was her brother, who died a short while after I was
born, followed by my mother the week after, -- he was an officer of excise, and
lest very little for my support, -- I found an affectionate parent in my aunt,
who taught me the essential requisites for a decent servitude; -- she could do
nothing else for me, as her support arose from a yearly bounty. -- I never knew
distress till my tears bedewed her coffin, -- pardon me, Madam." -- "I am
heartily sorry I have awakened your afflictions, my dear child -- be cheerful
-- dry up your tears, -- I will endeavor to prove as worthy your affection as
she; -- If you cannot love me as a parent, I will do every thing to make you
love me as a friend." -- Abominable monster! thought I, could not the innocent
relation of her grief move thy hard heart to a virtuous purpose. -- Thy pangs
in a future state must be dreadful indeed: repentance in this life cannot
possibly erase thy crimes from the infernal roll. -- GOD help thee, hapless
maid, -- and send thee a protector in the hour of calamity!

THE HAPPY PAIR.
"IF you recollect, my dear," says a pretty woman, addressing her husband,
"this is the coach that was the instrument of uniting us." "You are very
right," says he, "it was in this I endeavored to convince my Constantia, of
what she has often told me she has experienced since -- connubial happiness, --
I shall never forget the anxiety I felt as I walked round the Temple-Fountain
that evening, waiting for your appearance: the hapless lover that left the
following beautiful stanzas on a bank his mistress used generally contemplate
on every evening, could only feel as I did: Gentle Zephyr, as you fly,
If you kiss my fair one's ear,
Whisper soft that you're a sigh;
But from whose heart she must not hear.
Limpid rill, if ever my love
Near thy gurgling runnel rove,
Murmur that from tears you rise;
But tell her not from whose sad eyes.'


"Indeed, Ferdinand," says she, "my disagreeable situation, not the violence of
indiscretion, pressed me to a compliance with the assignation. I had much fear
and trembling on the occasion; but I had a fast friend beside me, who was awake
to my interest. -- May our future hours be blessed with the same sincerity of
soul we have felt in our dwelling since; -- and the happy day remembered with
transport that gave us mutual felicity." I joined my best wishes most fervently
with Constantia's, -- they were a tribute to virtue and honor.

A few days after I took up that very sanctified and distinguished zealot,

JOHN W * * * * y.
HE had just returned from his farewell visit to a pious lady of distinction,
who had, before her righteous spirit flew to her Redeemer's bosom, bequeathed
him a small mark of her esteem for his Christian consolation, and a
considerable donation to be distributed among the afflicted in spirit. --
"Credulous woman!" says he, as he looked over the bequest, "this treasure of
thine, hoarded with so much secresy from thy relatives, shall be disposed of in
a different manner from the religious enthusiasm of thy last hours: -- thou
have given it from thy nephews for no other reason than one marrying a virtuous
maid, against thy consent; and the other observing a disrespect to the pious
incantations of our midnight assemblies. -- Thy dutiful niece who soothed thee
in thy weary afflictive hours, with a daughter's fondness, must sink into
pining obscurity with thy generous bequest of twenty pounds a year; while this
noble donation is entrusted to me, for those who never felt a pang for the
preservation of thy health. The white cloaks By Mr. W****y's express desire the
women of his assembly in the Foundry appear in white cloaks, from what cause I
will not pretend to say, unless it be that they are an emblem of virginity.
of our order in the Foundry, shall receive their weekly stipend of half a
crown each, out of thy bounty; which thy immaculate spirit shall often hear
loudly acknowledged in spiritual groans, wasted to to thy blissful mansion!
This distribution shall cease after a few weeks. It should appear now as my own
bounty, but that thou have mentioned thy bequest to some of our spiritual
friends, who might attaint my sanctity and Christian integrity. If the
satirical author of Sketches for Tabernacle Frames should get the most distant
information of this affair, I should be hunted with the same terriers, that led
me such a perilous chase when Warburton attacked me about my affair of crim-con
in America." -- What a disciple of iniquity this venerable founder of the new
birth exhibits! and how fortunate in gaining such an ascendency over the minds
of so many thousand frantic followers of the new light, the "ignis fatuus" of
Moorfields, and the Seven Dials. W -- d might have been called the boisterous
prophet of unheard of wonders: but this calm doctor of spiritual grace, seems
to pride himself on appearing the flowery linguist of mystical divinity.

As an instance of W -- 's pulpit thunder, give me leave to squeeze in here a
bellowing exclamation of his, and a sailor's laconic reply, the authenticity of
which my reader may rely on.

This wonderful doctor of souls was preaching to a numerous congregation in his
conventicle in Tottenham-Court Road, with his usual vehemence, with his eyes
flaming in their sockets, and an expansion in his arms as though he were
buffeting the billows.

"We will suppose this temple of worthies," says he, "my dear brethren, a ship
in a dreadful tempest! your spiritual pilot not on board to guide you to the
beacon of safety! he that has conducted you through the many storms of this
perilous life, with celestial comfort! I need not tell you how watchful I have
been for the comfort of your dear souls! in such a situation, "when the winds
howl over the darkly rolling sea," as that profane writer Ossian expresses it!
in such a situation, what would you do to be saved? -- I ask you, what would
you do to be saved? -- "why, d -- n my eyes," replied the tar, "take to the
long boat to be sure; what would you have us do?"

But to return to my inspired companion, whose rhapsodical doctrine has set so
many wretched mortals madding; whose seraphic hymns have taken place of
simplicity and Cunningham, in every village and town in the three kingdoms;
whose cantings, the cobbler, the hosier, and the barber, hourly belch in the
face of decency and decorum, while the fizgigs of the assembly chant their
raptured acknowledgment for the dear comfort in a torrent of groans.

This sedulous minister of hocus-pocus orthodoxy, has with his colleague W --
d, and the numerous uneducated cushion thumpers that cant and declaim in the
rostrum with them, with the thunder of Alecto's horn, or as Creech emphatically
expresses it, Who rage and storm, and blasphemously loud,
As Stentor bellowing to the Grecian crowd,
Or Homer's Mars, --
done more real injury to society, than the evils of Pandora let loose among
them.

Many a poor proselyte to their ridiculous doctrine, sits moping in her family,
made up of sighs, and reiterated lamentations, indifferent to her husband and
children; while her domestic concerns are left to pilfering servants: no
lenitives can sooth her but the soft measure of a hymn; nay, Should the whole
frame of nature round her break,
She unconcerned would hear the mighty crack."
so confident is she of her strength in the Lord. No society can charm her but
the dear good man! the harbinger of love! her parlour can find no room for the
profane picture of Shakespeare or Otway; but her dear brother W****y must
appear in the most conspicuous situation, in a frame of curious carving and
gilding, though her family wanted a dinner, -- what madness!

I parted from this hypocritical impostor, with the same detestation I felt
when I parted with the pickpockets; and the same earnest hope, that I might
shortly attend his banishment; which would restore a multitude of his Majesty's
subjects to their right reason and extirpate a seminary of the vilest
hypocrites that ever disgraced Religion.

Next day I took up a company of the middling order of beings, who were going
to honest

NED SHUTER's FUNERAL.
WHEN I recollected the many instances I had heard of this man's life of
humanity, and that memorable one I was witness of, mentioned in a former page,
I was sunk to the same melancholy situation of my companions.

They were a set of people that had shared his munificence, when they were in
the rear of fortune, and were now assembled to testify their gratitude with
their tears at his grave.

"He had a soul," says one, "superior to any I have ever known; his feelings
were alive to the most distant call of indigence -- and he suffered himself to
want, rather than not relieve. -- His visits to the very poor were frequent;
the sudden transitions from grief to joy he was fond of looking at, he used to
call it the finest picture in nature. -- I remember a noble instance of his
fellow-feeling I was a witness of at Jupp's, his favorite house of resort. The
facetious and memorable Harry Howard came in there one evening, wrapped up in
disconsolation, he called for a pint of porter, rested his head on the table,
and continued in that situation till Shuter came in. -- "What, Harry," says he
clapping him on the shoulder, "melancholy!" "Yes," says Harry, "a little,"
"What Is the matter?" says Ned. "A rapacious landlord has seized on my little
effects for rent, to the amount of five guineas; which I would be enabled to
give him in a few days. -- I left my wife and little ones lamenting; I could
not stand it, -- and stepped here to soften my affliction, and devise some
means to rescue my property from the merciless ruffian." "'It Is very unlucky,"
says Ned, I have a heart ache this moment myself." "Ah! but you have no wife
and children," says Harry. "No, but I have four guineas, which I insist you
will accept of -- my heart ache arises for want of the fifth; -- but I will
borrow it for you. -- You know I am an enemy to set speeches, give me the
language of cheerfulness, -- sing me a song in return -- it is all it merits."

"In this manner," says my companion, "did this incomparable player spend his
days: -- it is a doubt to me whether Thalia or Humanity will shed most tears at
his funeral.

"His foibles, if they may be called such, arose from a peculiar turn of
thinking: they might be said to be comprehended in this point only, that he
loved the society of middling and low life; ever preferring it to the gorgeous
etiquette of the most princely, -- was happier at Jupp's, with his bottle of
port and cheerful companion, than he could find himself at a peer's, where his
humorous converse would be expected in return for his entertainment.

"From this singularity of taste, his representations of characters in low life
were beyond any ever seen; he could cast his flexible features to any
situation; and his audience of the upper gallery saw the caricatura so very
strong, that they never failed to bestow on him their loudest pea^^ of applause.

"If those of the upper gallery were so highly delighted, the rest of the
audience saw his superiority with the same unspeakable pleasure in his Midas,
Miser, Hardcastle, Sir Harry Sycamore, Master Stephen, and innumerable
characters of the same cast.

"His liberality ever outran the greatness of his salary, Fourteen pounds a
week.
which exposed him very often to the buffets of adversity."

By this time we arrived at St. Paul's Covent Garden, where he was interred. --
I shall never forget a singular circumstance attending this man's funeral: the
poor women in Covent Garden market, all decently attired, left their stalls to
the care of their children, and joined the melancholy procession: their
benedictions were innumerable and so fervently uttered, that the soul might be
said to accompany every word. -- I thought their appearance superior to all the
posthumous pageantry I had ever seen enter Westminster Abbey. A neat tablet has
been erected opposite his grave with the following inscription.

Mr. EDWARD SHUTER, COMEDIAN: Died November 1, 1776, Aged 50.

Farewell: -- remember me.




Some time after, returning with a gentleman from the London Coffee House, I
discovered, on his leaving me, the following poem which he dropped on my seat.
If my reader can find any entertainment in it, it is at his service.

THE FUNERAL OF LEAR; A VISION. Inscribed to the Memory of SPRANGER BARRY, Esquire.
WHAT plaintive sorrows pierce the midnight gloom?
Whence is that ^rantic voice in wild despair?
Whence that procession winding to the tomb?
Say -- is it the corse of -- venerable Lear?
Is the great monarch of the human heart,
Gone -- to illustrate the seraphic band?
Relentless Death! thy swift, unerring dart,
Not all the force of nature can withstand!
He that could warm the coldest heart to love!
Whose sigh was pity! -- and whose voice delight!
Whose tender sweetness charmed the mystic dove,
And outwing'd rapture in her heavenly flight!
He that could charm the poet's sweetest song,
And bear his swelling numbers to the skies!
Who gave such transport to the list^ning throng,
That nature smiled -- while pity fill^d her eyes!
Now, nearer moving, let me mark the train,
(By genius chosen) that his corse attend;
With ears attentive, catch the solemn strain
That flows from lost Cordelia, -- and the friend!
CORDELIA. Here my virgins strew your flowers!
Wake the voice of sorrow here!
Hither bring your rosy bowers,
Fragrant sweets to grace his bier! --
Laurels, myrtles, strew around:
Ever hallowed be the ground.
"But lo! -- two rose-wing'd seraphs wind the dale,
With dazzling diadems that 'lume the sky!
A more than sweetness scents the western gale,
And magic minstrels marshal them on high!
"See the imperial Bards of Britain's isle!
SHAKESPEARE and OTWAY, nature's darling (...)
They that can sorrows keenest woes beguile,
And calm the raging tempest of despair."

SHAKESPEARE. "Be still, ye bosoms of impassioned grief!
Nor nourish longer the oppressive sigh;
His gentle soul has found that sweet relief,
Which mortals know that learn of him to die.
"And you Cordelia my afflicted child,
Learn t'approve whatever the heaven's decree!
Though hard the conflict, think their mandates mild:
Avoid the path that leads to misery.
"The splendid glories of immortal fame
Shall gild the annals of remotest days;
Unfading laurels crown his sacred name,
And genius triumph on the wings of praise!"

OTWAY. "Hither we came from scenes of perfect joys;
Such scenes as fancy drew on Tempe's plain;
Where peace resides and no false hope annoys,
But truth and virtue hold a peaceful reign.
"Where Belvidera and Monimia dwell;
Where sweet serenity their consorts cheer
Where no big passion heaves the sad -- farewell!
Where thou wilt enjoy that happinest with Lear."

CORDELIA. "Vain are your lessons to assuage my woe!
My heart still feels the final fond adieu!
These springs of sorrow must for ever flow,
Bright and incessant as the evening dew.
"View the fair bosom of the flowery mead,
How sweet its incense over the blooming plain,
A day! -- an hour! -- may all its honors shade --
Light is their loss! -- we know they will bloom again.
"When merit sinks to cold oblivion's cell,
The muse may sooth, but cannot charm the breast;
The solemn sounds of yonder sullen knell,
Will ever remind me of my halcyon rest.
"Can I forget the eloquence that hung
On every pause, -- in every look that spoke?
Can I forget the magic of his tongue?
As well attempt his image to revoke.
"Can I forget his captivating grace?
His noble action, and alluring charms?
Can I forget the Heaven in his face?
Can I forget the transport in his arms?
"Oh! he was all that rapturd poet's feign,
When heavenly ecstacy their bosoms fire!
Fair as the vernal rose on April's plain,
My utmost bliss and pride of my desire.
"Here ye sad mourners, lay your sacred bier!
Scatter your sweets, my virgins round his tomb,
Ye grateful muses, sing his requiem here!
Ye happy bards, ascend your brightest loom!

MUSES. "Wake the lute! the harp and lyre!
Wake in sadness every note!
Join ye bright seraphic choir,
Let your solemn voices float;
Strew your offerings on his bier;
Be his memory ever dear!
"All the honors we possess,
Love and gratitude demand;
All that either can express,
Touched his heart and graced his hand!
He near half an age with pride,
Charmed our number's raised their worth!
Brought to nature all allied,
Pause, -- expression, -- image, -- forth!
Strew your offerings on his bier!
Be his memory ever dear!"

MELPOMENE. "All that my SHAKESPEARE'S energy expressed,
Shone in his fancy's mirror finely dressed!
His was my tender OTWAY'S lovely page,
The brilliant treasure of a worthless age.
"Full often -- when weeping (...) treads the stage,
(When steril breasts his load of anguish bear,)
Shall faithful memory sorrow on the page,
And vainly wish -- for him that should be there.
"Shade of VARANES! take this soothing verse,
The plaintive tribute of a sorrowing muse!
Thy great perfections could her powers rehearse,
Immortal Shakespeare should her numbers choose.
"Full often refulgent fancy shall behold
Othello's piercing woes! -- and frantic Lear!
While genius, bending over thy hallowed mould,
Gives the sad sigh! and sympathetic tear!
"Close your sad rites, for anguish sinks my child,
Rise my Cordelia -- through this tempest wild,
We'll seek the bosom of affliction's cave --
And sink together to the peaceful grave.

BARDS. "Ever may the genial spring,
Here her earliest tribute bring!
None but hallowed souls presume,
To approach thy sacred tomb!
Peaceful slumbers wait thy rest,
Such as wait the truly blessed!
And till souls are called to rise,
To take their station in the skies,
"Our sacred choir to thy dear memory true,
Shall here with Fame attend! -- dear LEAR, adieu!"

DR. DODD's EXECUTION.
I THINK he had many virtues, and deserved a better fate." "'It Is a merciful
opinion, and will do thee more honor than a thousand ill-natured reflections,"
says an elderly gentleman, to a young man, who had both taken a seat in me.

"I will acknowledge the justice of his sentence," continued the first; but I
think the many essential services he has done the public, -- the streaming
tears of the Magdalen, the benediction of the captive and his wretched family,
just freed from the dreary tomb of relentless oppression, -- should extenuate
the rigid behest of justice, -- should grant him the poor privilege of
lingering out a miserable existence in the obscurity his sorrowing soul
desires. -- From the gloomy confines of self reproach, and never ceasing
anguish, to cast a retrospective look at his former elevated situation in life,
-- his boundless popularity! -- admired genius and powerful influence! will be
punishment enough Heaven knows! to a mind formed like his."

By this time we arrived in Oxford-street. What a crowd! -- it was as much as
we could do to get along: -- the melancholy procession had not yet arrived. --
"We will have an opportunity," continued he, if we stop here, to hear the
various opinions of the multitude assembled on this solemn occasion; they will
speak their minds freely, -- it is the privilege of Englishmen; -- and what
their honest natures cannot conceal."

"Poor soul!" says a tattered wretch, he relieved me in my last lying-in." Thou
art a grateful creature for the acknowledgement at this hour," says an old
gentleman, giving her a shilling. -- "He was a vile hypocrite," says a fine
gentleman, riding by, who paid more attention to the one offense, than to the
numberless good actions of the criminal.

"Thou art a merciless monster," says a clergyman, "and deserve a worse fate
for thy cruel assertion." Hundreds wished for an opportunity to appease their
rage, by executing a certain lord high in office in the criminal's stead.

His cruel decree in the privy council, -- the weight of his thoughts with the
most merciful of kings, who was pressed by pity and clemency to ascend their
throne, but could not vanquish the voice of obduracy.

"A thousand guineas, says a young fellow, "was offered the turnkey last night
for his enlargement." "Split my topsails, Jack," says a sailor to his
companion, I wish I had been in his place, the poor parson should be free from
the sharks this morning." "If he was a popish parson and in my country," says
the other, dash me on the needles! he would never swing in the sheriff's picture
frame; no, no, they are too fond of their admirals of the Breast fleet there.

By this time the wretched criminal appeared, with general commiseration around
him; -- the voice of pity echoed to his ear the universal concern. --
Captivity," says my young companion, "has robbed thee of thy lively
countenance; -- thy features confess the tyrant hand of affliction, -- serenity
has fled thy bosom; thy tears have formed a channel in thy cheeks; -- and now
they flow abundant. -- Merciful Heaven! to be five months shut from the
cheerful habitation of friendship! -- the happy embraces of connubial felicity!
-- and yet thy cup of misery is not the bitterest; parental anguish does not
wring thy soul -- thou have taken leave of no weeping children, none but an
affectionate wife, and a few faithful friends -- it is enough!"

As there was a report prevailed that some means would be used to prevent his
execution, my passengers were anxious to see the issue. -- We drove as close to
Tyburn as the multitude would suffer us. -- A gentleman gave a guinea for a
front seat in one of the galleries: it might have been applied to a nobler
purpose.

As the criminal kept the hind leaf of his hat very low upon his face, it was
impossible to discover his countenance at a distance; he had not remained long
in this situation when a sudden gust of wind blew his hat off; -- then at once,
his fears of death were evident, -- his disordered features blushed for
concealment, which were instantly hid. Shortly after he embraced his worthy
friend Dr. *****, who attended him; spoke for a few minutes to the unhappy
youth, his companion, and then his afflictions ceased in this world.

We waited till he was delivered to his friends, which happened some minutes
before his fellow sufferer; which the spectators took particular notice of,
together with the executioner's manner of cutting him down; he put his left
hand down his collar in such a manner, that he seemed disengaging one thing
from another; and with a knife in the other hand, he cut the cord. -- I am thus
particular as it was firmly believed by every one, but the inhuman, that he was
alive at the time.

Some time after, I became the companion of

A PATRIOT.
"PEACE to his hallowed manes!" says an old gentleman to his companion, "and
may he find that bliss in the life he is removed to, his honest nature diffused
in this. -- He was the glory of Britain and the admiration of every enlightened
nation. Long, long shall Britannia bewail the luckless hour she lost thy
favored voice, -- the happy harbinger of assured success.. -- Let us proceed,
my friend to the melancholy scene." I did not divine what this pathetic flow
of the soul could arise from, till we arrived at

LORD CHATHAM's FUNERAL.
"GRATEFUL people," says he, as we passed through the multitude, "the incessant
rain of this morning will not retard ye from pouring the tribute of your tears
at his funeral. -- What noble worthies from the sad procession! -- The voice of
merriment is mute, and sorrow's requiem, like midnight's melancholy bird, is
only heard around.

Behold the illustrious patriots, Camden and Rockingham! the afflictions of
their country give way to a nobler sorrow, the flowing tears of eternal
friendship. -- See the dishevelled youth, his loving son; -- disconsolation has
taken early possession of his youthful bosom, and he walks in her tearful path
with ceaseless sorrow. -- Thy father's memorable life, in time's immortal list
of fortunate events, shall often present thee a heavenly balm for thy afflictions.

How finely Hacket expresses himself in praise of the illustrious dead!

"How sleep the brave, who sink to rest
With all their country's wishes blessed!
When spring with dewy fingers cold,
Returns to deck their hallowed mould,
She there shall dress a sweeter sod
Than fancy's feet have ever trod.
"By fairy hands their knell is rung,
By forms unseen their dirge is sung,
There honor comes, a pilgrim gray,
To bless the turf that wraps their clay;
And freedom shall a while repair,
To dwell a weeping hermit there."
"Let us quit the carriage, and endeavor to get into the Abbey."

Their place was immediately taken by what some people near me called

TWO NATTY LADS.
A VIOLENT outcry of a genteel woman-pickpocket being detected, and then at the
Gun-Tavern, Westminster bridge, curiosity urged my companions to see the thief.
-- They had a fellow feeling on the occasion.

By the time we got near the door, they were hurrying her to prison. My reader
will not be surprised when I tell him it was the distinguished Bet West,
already introduced to him in a former page, that was the criminal. She had, on
that solemn morning, assumed the name of Mary Groves; but no deception could be
of any use to her, her face was too conspicuous in Akerman's court beauties, to
escape making a lasting impression.

It seems she had pilfered a watch, which she instantly conjured with the
dexterity of Breslaw, into *** ****. Some female novices searched her from head
to foot, -- the poor creature was guiltless, -- she had no such thing. -- An
adept in the magic art, who had retired to Woolwich to hide the blushes of her
iniquity in her decline, started from the throng, inspired by the animating
amazonian spirit of London, a few glasses of right Hollands, and instantly
pulled from the curious repository the shining treasure! -- those that were
gathered round to see the sight, stood mute when they beheld it, but could not
long govern their roaring throats, nor grumble pity.

The discovery was instantly rumoured, and she was conducted to prison amidst
the applause of some hundreds of honest people, and the regret of a number of
her relations of the diving generation, Jews and Gentiles.

"Poor Bet, says one of the Natty Lads, "though we had a tiff about the
division of our spoil the last time at Vauxhall, d -- my eyes but I am sorry
for thee: -- this will be the three-and-twentieth time Jack Ketch will take his
stand beside thee in the Old Baily, throwing his baleful eyes on thee like a
Cerberus. -- Shall we go see her, Ned?" -- "With all my heart," says his
companion, I love to comfort the afflicted; I have a few grunter's gigs A cant
term for shillings.
at the poor girl's service, which may soften the weight of her misfortune. --
-- Let Us quit the coach and step after her." -- Though I admire the generosity
of thy feelings, thought I, I should be heartily glad to hear of thy captivity
with her, which might bring thee to a sense of thinking and acting justly; and
probably prevent a multiplicity of sighs and tears, the constant companions of
thy aged and honest parents.

CONCLUSION.
IF my readers should think my first appearance respectable, -- I shall present
them with another volume some time hence; at present I must retire to get a set
of new wheels, and some embellishment.

My good natured readers, I hope, have found some entertainment in this volume,
it was for them it was solely written. If it should prove an incitement to
virtue, rectitude and benevolence, the author has obtained his end in writing
it.

To his hydra readers, of which there will be not a few, no matter where, he
will only say, that what he has written, personal and otherwise, he is
confirmed in the truth of; and though the sword of Rinaldo was flourished by
his most implacable enemy over his head, denouncing immediate vengeance, it
shall never scare him from his future attempts of exhibiting pictures of vice
and degeneracy, however dignified.

THE END.

