THE DOUBLE CONSPIRACY, OR Treason Discovered but not Punished.

A MATTER OF FACT, Delineated after the Life, in the Form of A PLAY.

Nemo crudeliter agit, quin citius seriusue detegatur.

FRAGM. ANONY. PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1783.

PREFACE.
THE Writer of the following Dramatic Representatation, imagines that no
apology will be necessary for it is publication: The transactions referred to,
were singular and important, and deserve to be known and attended to, by every
friend to his country, throughout the United States; for whether it is believed
or not, yet it is an indubitable truth, that that State or Kingdom is
approaching, with a rapid step, to its final dissolution, wherein such
execrable villainies are connived at, and such eminent patriotism disapproved
of, as are displayed in the following pages.

It is expected that the Performance will be considered as a true and impartial
history of (...), and not as a work of fancy: The Writer chose this dress, as
it suited his intention of representing things after the real life, better than
any other; and the materials he was furnished with, being principally
depositions given under oath, were more easily digested into it verbatim; and
he can assure the world, that from this, and other sources equally certain, he
obtained such a clear and positive knowledge of the whole affair, that he
thinks he can safely vouch for the truth and justness of every material
circumstance in the portrait; and that he can, under proper advantages, bring
satisfactory proof for their support: He therefore claims no merit, nor
demerit, further than the bare collation, and hopes to be secured from any
severe reflections of the critical reader, upon the language, the characters or
the drama. That every inhabitant of the United States may always for the
future, receive his just deserts, and occasion no more be given, for complaints
of a similar kind, is the sincere wish of

The WRITER.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN,
Whigs.
FRANKLY, Fearless, Standwell, Landlord,
Gallop, a Post-Rider, Flutter, an Illicit Trader, Tories,
Gibber, Fidfaddy,
Plunket, an Episcopal Clergyman. John, Son to Gibber. Spy, from New York.
WOMEN,
Mrs. Gibber, Wife to Gibber, Betty, Daughter to Gibber.
SCENE, the State of Connecticut.

PROLOGUE, To be Spoken by Mr. FRANKLY.
TO show the vile intentions of the mind;
To paint the real vices of mankind;
To drag out crimes concealed in shades of nigh^
To fetch the lurking mischief to the light;
To show the effects of every baleful ill,
By black examples drawn with won'drous skill:
For this, the Drama first adorned the stage,
Checking the progress of a vicious age;
Here see, our crimes and follies, all portray'd,
The road to virtue, joy, and bliss displayed*
This, proves the wisdom of the heavenly plan;
That, the perverseness in the heart of man:
But here our author far exceeds the rest,
He dwelt unnoticed in the villian's breast,
There saw how treason from the infernal seed,
Sprung forth, increased, and ripened for the deed;
While Satan, pouring in the envenomed gall,
Conducted, guided, and assisted all.
Far distant since, before the world began,
Or ever being claimed a kindred Man,
Within the blessed abodes of heaven above,
The empyreal regions of eternal love;
Satan, that first old vile arch traitor, fell,
And drew with him his Myriads to rebel:
The great Supreme, in vengeance, quick prepared,
A fi'ry prison; -- treason's just reward:
And thunders rolling from the Almighty's throne,
To hell's dark center, drove the traitors down:
So Judas too, when he his Lord betrayed,
Was sent to his own place, by Justice made;
There, joined by kindred souls, with sim'lar guilt,
Feel weighty vengeance for the blood they have spilt.
Thus Heaven and Earth were freed, the traitors now,
Were all imprisoned in the shades below,
No more to vex the realms of joy and peace,
With war, sedition, slaughter, and distress.
But see and wonder, that our happy Land,
Where freedom arms a patriotic band.
Where mild and equal Laws, by wisdom given,
Form a most fair epitome of Heaven;
Should be defaced by treason's noxious breath;
Should, in it is bosom, keep and cherish death,
Transgress the first great Law; make nature groan;
And rob Newgate, and Satan, of their own.
Ye sons of freedom, rouse! avert your shame!
Pursue the glories of your dawning fame!
Distinguish well your friends, from artful foes!
These you will reject, but honor pay to those:
Establish firm, the Fabric you have begun,
To last, and shine, as long as yonder sun,
Nor sooner fall, than when the King of Kings,
Brings to a final close, all earthly things.
The double CONSPIRACY.
ACT. I.
Frankly's House. SCENE opens, and discovers Frankly sitting solus, in a musing
posture: After some time he speaks; WELL! since it is so, (...) must acquiesce,
and trust in Heaven for relief in Heaven, who is witness of all those vile
transactions. -- Internal Enemies, without number plotting the ruin of their
Country; -- their native County; which has given them being, subsistence and
protection: -- This is treason of the blackest dye! -- It is really melancholy
to reflect on our present dangers, more especially since there is so little
probability, that we shall ever be extricated from them! -- It seems that we
are destitute of Men of principle and stability: -- Men, that in defiance of
every hazard and difficulty, dare boldly engage in an attempt to support the
Laws, and to scourge those impudent offenders, who have so long transgressed
with impunity. -- This most scandalous illicit trade! -- The gaudy glare of
British finery, has allured the People into a fatal torpor and security: --
They foolishly imagine, that those insignificant fripperies of English
voluptuousness, will amply compensate the loss of every civil and religious
privilege; -- or rather, they reflect not at all, else they would shudder at
the Idea of bartering their wealth, their liberty, their honor, their
conscience, and their Country, for those cob-web vanities, the furniture of
idleness and luxury: -- Britain never hit upon such a promising prospect for
obtaining their point as this nefarious commerce; -- deceit and treachery have
been ineffectual; -- insidious proposals for an accommodation have proved
abortive; -- the enchanting glitter of their darling gold, lost it is bewitching
power, and produced no effect; -- sire and sword, with all their attendant
horrors, served no other purpose, but to exhibit to the admiring World, the
patriotic virtue of America's Sons: -- The British Court were sensible that the
reduction of this Country, could not be effected, unless the morals of it is
inhabitants were first destroyed, and their principles debased, by the
introduction of luxury and dissipation among them, from whence effeminacy, and
an unfitness for the field might proceed: -- The desired point is already
nearly obtained: -- And can nothing be done to prevent it is completion? -- I
fear nothing to effect. -- There is such an inconsistency in the conduct of
mankind! -- Such a wavering in sentiments and actions! -- Such a predominancy
of self, that many of the most noisy Patriots, are either Whigs or Tories, as
the circumstances of the times suit themselves, or their particular
connections! -- There is no dependence upon any one: -- It is impossible to
know who can be trusted and confided in: -- He, therefore, that undertakes for
his country at this juncture, must do it alone and unsupported; -- he must
expect to sacrifice ease, health, interest, character, and perhaps life; in the
unequal struggle, and in the end will have no other consolation, but the
approbation of his own conscience: -- But I am resolved to make the experiment,
to make one adventurous effort, for the relief of my Country, let the event be
fortunate or adverse; -- at the worst, I shall have the consolation to reflect,
that I had tried; and that every event which may succeed, must be considered as
fatalities, which I could neither avoid nor prevent: -- It is more eligible, to
perish in an arduous struggle for Liberty, than to be quiet and passive, 'till
my Country is overthrown. A short pause.

I expect one or two Gentlemen here to night, to consult on the subject: -- I
think they are faithful and such as I can rely on: -- But yet, upon
recollection, I Will not trust them; -- I Will trust no man living with any secret
of importance: -- I Have been deceived so often, that it can be repeated no more:
-- I Will converse with them, hear their opinions, and then act agreeable to my
own: -- But --

Enter Fearless and Standwell. Gentlemen, you never were more welco^^ to me,
than at this time: -- Pray take seats, and let us have a confidential review of
the present state of our affairs.

Fear. That is the design of our visit, and I dare say it will be very
agreeable to all present.


Frank. It must be acknowledged, that the necessity of our meeting, is a very
humiliating Idea; -- that the Authority of the State, should be so destitute of
power and efficiency, that three private persons, in an obscure corner, should
be called upon, by the urgency of affairs, to take the regulation of a great
Empire into their hands: -- But so it is, my friends, and let us discharge the
important trust, with faithfulness to ourselves, and Country.


Stand. We shall all, Mr. Frankly, have reason to thank you, for proposing this
interview, and making the first move for this consultation: -- There is a
strange supineness, a surprising inattention, among all ranks of People, to the
glorious cause, which at first animated them, with such a noble emulation, and
distinguished them from the ordinary race of Patriots.


Frank. Yes, my friend, they have so far lost their first spirit, that instead
of relieving their Country in it is present danger, I fear that an attempt for
that purpose, would meet with a universal disapprobation, and be called a
disturbing of the public peace: But this, instead of frightening us from our
pursuit, ought to be one of the most powerful motives, to engage us therein,
with the greater resolution and ardour.


Stand. True, Sir, the fewer our friends, the more necessity for our gallant
and spirited exertions.


Fear. I hope we shall never be deterred from the execution of our duty, by
such a Bugbear as popular clamor: -- What! when our Country is on the verge of
destruction, and just ready to tumble from the horrid precipice; shall we,
careless and supine, sit still, with folded hands, and not extend a finger to
it is relief; because, forsooth, we are afraid that somebody or other, will
insult, or laugh at us for it? -- the bare Idea is disgraceful to humanity: --
I despise the dastardly soul, who could be capable of such meanness?


Frank. And even here, my friends, great wisdom and prudence is necessary: --
We must defeat the plots of our foes, without displeasing our friends, when it
can possibly be avoided; for this will hurt the cause, we are endeavoring ^o
support.


Stand. Nothing can be more just than this: -- Great discretion must be used,
lest by an ill placed zeal, and an imprudent ardour, we defeat our own purposes.


Fear. I readily grant, it will be of importance, to show a proper regard, and
deference, to our real friends; yet let no man be terrified, for fear our
measures should not please them, so well as we could wish; -- I have always
been a Bigot to the public voice; but in this State, where is the importance of
it? -- When we have named a few, a very few, faithful friends, we have done;
Tories, Traders, and the whole herd of timorous half toryfied Whigs, are worth
not the least notice: -- I still assert, that if we are to be so happy, as to
adopt a plan against the illicit trade, the man that hesitates, and fails to
execute his part, through fear that his character might suffer, deserves to
have his name branded with eternal infamy, and sink into endless oblivion and
obscurity, never to see the light any more, unless it be to go

"Black'ning downward on the lapse of time,
"The equal object of eternal shame."

Stand. My friend's zeal and spirit pleases me: -- The mode of conduct, which
we may resolve upon, must certainly be carried into execution, in defiance of
every opposition: -- But while we determine to act with the greatest decision
and spirit, we must remember to deliberate with the utmost caution and
circumspection.


Frank. Let us attend to the object of our meeting: -- Let us open our minds
with the greatest freedom: -- I am impatient to know the result of our councils.


Fear. It is really time to enter upon the business in hand: -- Our
introductory conversation has been sufficiently lengthy. -- Mr. Frankly, we are
all attention to you.


Frank. Britain having waged a cruel and unnatural war against us, which, in
the utmost malice of her evil genius, she has been carrying on, for almost six
years, with all her force: -- Fire and sword, bribery and seduction are among
the weapons, that she has employed against us: -- But finding that these proved
ineffectual, to subjugate a brave and determined People, she now has recourse
to artifice, hoping to effect by this, what her arms and gold, were unable to
do. -- General Robertson of New York, has given a general invitation, to all
the inhabitants of these States, to come thither and trade: -- Nothing could be
more pleasing to the Tories, and those of the Whigs, who were willing to sell
their Country, as Judas did his Savior, for hard money: -- They have accepted
the fatal invitation, and the illicit trade, through their hands, is briskly
carried on, and rapidly increases every day. -- This ruinous and destructive
commerce, spills the vital blood of the Country, by stripping it of it is two
most important articles, cash and provisions; while the wants of the enemy, are
thereby immediately supplied: -- But this is not the worst of it; those goods
which are introduced into the Country, in this way, are more destructive than
Stygian poison; -- dressed out in a sumptuous garb, we forget the great
concerns of our Country, and sink into a state of langour and security, more
fatal to the body politic, than a Lethargy is to the human: -- Add to this, the
breach of says to our generous Ally, who might, with Justice, be offended at
such an illiberal return, for his unaffected generosity: -- This, Gentlemen, is
our situation! -- These are the evils, under which we labor, and which demand
our attention, and a spirited application of the proper remedies.


Fear. Gentlemen, the subject demands frankness; -- our sentiments must not be
disguised: -- It appears, that a number of the meanest, and vilest of those,
whom Satan claims as his own, are now gaining the highest pitch of affluence,
in the plunder of their Country; -- directed and assisted by all the subtilties
of their Master, they have hitherto proceeded with impunity, in defiance of
every effort to interrupt their career: -- Must the vengeance of my Country
continue forever to sleep? -- Are our disasters arisen to such a pitch, that
the torrent of destruction must inevitably overwhelm us? -- Must the glorious
Fabric, which we have so nobly reared, at the expense of so much blood and
treasure, be destroyed to the foundations, by a set of base mercenary
wretches, whom if we should extirpate from the face of the Earth, Humanity
itself would give a smile of approbation? -- No, my friends, it cannot, must
not be! -- Let us arouse from our supineness, and make those Parricides feel
the weight of our animated exertions: -- Our Authority, conniving at those
execrable doings, I doubt, will afford us no aid, nor support; -- let us then
proceed, without their knowledge or approbation, and with the resolution of
Patriots, strike a blow, that may astonish the world: -- Let us ^a^m ourselves
and our trusty friends, and proceed without delay, to the cursed repositories,
of forbidden luxury, and there, by an unusual and unexpected manoevre, commit
to the flames, every remnant of those treacherous allurements: -- This will be
acting to purpose; -- this will give a fatal check to those detestable
practices: -- Many will join and assist us; -- more will approve of the design,
and give us their best wishes; -- and none will condemn it, but those that are
interested, whose objections our Muskets will readily answer.


Frank. I approve of your zeal, my friend, but not of your proposal: -- The
whole cause, and reason of those practices, which we complain of, is want of
efficiency in our Laws; and their execution, would de attended with the
accomplishment of all our desires: -- What hinders our putting them in force?
-- They actually exist, with heir full Authority, and we are at perfect liberty
to use them; and while this is the case, I fear it would be rash, and imprudent
to act without them, in a matter of such consequence: -- I would wish to do
nothing inconsiderately, nothing that might appear rash and hasty, or that
might give umbrage to our friends.


Stand. I am much pleased with what you offer, Mr. Frankly, -- you have
convinced me, that a project, which lay in my mind, would be improper to adopt:
I had proposed, in Idea, to seize all suspected Persons, goods, and provisions,
and retain them secure, 'till a legal trial could be ob^ained: -- But now I
see, that if the Law will not support, and the Authority assist us, our efforts
will be vain and futile, and instead of profiting the Country, will bring
shame, and disgrace upon ourselves.


Fear. I will not urge the proposal, Gentlemen, but acquiesce in your Judgment:
-- Yet I must confess, that I have a poor opinion of the Laws, if they are to
be executed, by the present Authority.


Stand. The Laws of this State, I believe, Gentlemen, are sufficient, if duly
executed, to remedy every evil we labor under* -- But, as Mr. Frankly has
observed, they are not put in force; -- they lie dormant and useless; -- not
the least respect is paid them; -- and the hardy villain, continues in the open
practice, of every enormity, fearless of punishment, and in defiance of the
hand of Justice: -- An undisturbed course of Law, would make the guilty
culprits tremble: -- To the attainment of this end, let a number of resolute
citizens, associate together, under the strictest bonds of fidelity; -- let
them take those neglected Laws in their hands, and see them executed, with a
fortitude that no difficulties can dismay: -- if they can be united in council,
and vigilant, and decisive in conduct, we have every thing to hope, from such
an attempt.


Fear. I fear your proposal, Mr. Standwell, though a good one, is
impracticable: -- The objection again recurs, what can be done without the
concurrence of the Authority?


Stand. If the Authority do not readily assist us, we will oblige them; -- they
dare not refuse their concurrence, when we have the Laws in our hands; -- if
they dare, -- let infamy be their portion!


Fear. But where shall we find a sufficient number of Men to join us; -- Men
possessed of fidelity secresy and inflexible constancy?


Stand. It will not be a little disgraceful to the Whigs, if they should be
found, on trial, to be more deficient in the practice of those virtues, than
the faithless and unprincipled Tories: -- However abandoned they may be, they
cannot be accused of betraying one another, divulging secrets of importance, or
deserting their cause; for they are as true, and as persevering in their plans,
as the Devils are in wickedness.


Fear. I doubt they will fail you, if you depend upon them, for great numbers
of the pretended Whigs, are Tories in disguise, and the most numerous part of
the rest, are neither Whigs, nor Tories from principle; but either, just as
suits their passions, or interests.


Stand. Though your representation, be just, as I fear it is, yet I am
confident, that as many as one faithful and trusty Man, can be found in each
parish, throughout the coast, who will be ready, and willing to engage in the
affair; and such a number, I believe, will be sufficient for the purpose: --
let these be selected, and instructed in their several parts, and I do not
doubt but we shall effectually succeed.


Fear. Your plan is a good one, -- I have no objections against it; yet, I
fear, you are a little too sanguine in your expectations, of it is answering the
desired purpose: -- Suppose the Magistrates assist you, and you find a
sufficient number of true Men; -- What will be the consequence of a general
seizure? -- You may be assured, that the Traders keep but a trifle on hand; --
no sooner is a cargo landed, but it is put into fifty hands, and distributed
through every part of the Country: -- It would therefore, puzzle a Conjuror, to
discover enough to pay the expense of seizure; -- and if we once give the
alarm, they will immediately adopt new measures, which may elude all future
enquiries: -- We shall therefore, defeat our own intentions if we don't strike
the first blow, at the root.


Stand. Then you don't approve of the execution of the Laws, and the seizing of
illicit goods?


Fear. I do; -- I think it a necessary step; but at the same time, I think that
this alone is not sufficient: -- I say, that the Ax must be laid to the root of
the tree: -- The Guards on the Coast, must be enlarged, and regulated on a
better establishment: -- The civil Law must be supported by the Martial, and
Justice administered with more decision and dispatch; else our puny efforts
will be succeeded by insults, more intolerable than death.


Frank. I am happy, my friend, to find that your sentiments exactly coincide
with mine: -- Something more must be done, than barely seizing a few articles
of illicit goods, if we mean to rescue our Country, from the ravenous Jaws of
those Harpies: -- But will not it be difficult for us to effect those important
matters?


Fear. Not at all, Sir: -- We are of more importance, in the political scale,
than perhaps you imagine; -- by a plan concerted with wisdom, and executed with
prudence and spirit, a few obscure persons may produce unthought of revolutions
in a State: -- This is sufficiently manifested, by those destructives plots,
and machinations of the Tories, which we are met on purpose to counterplot and
defeat: -- Let us only be as wise and active for our own safety, as they be for
our destruction, and all will be secure.


Frank. We should be glad, Sir, to be made acquainted with the particular mode,
you would wish to adopt, for the accomplishment of those desirable ends.


Fear. Let each of us exert the whole of our influence with our friends, both
by writing and conversation: -- Let us urge upon them, the exigency of our
affairs, and the necessity of a speedy remedy; -- let us not leave them, 'till
an enumeration of facts, supported by the most cogent arguments, shall oblige
them to be of our opinion: -- Thus in a short time, the popular voice will be
on our side, which the Assembly will hardly fail to notice.


Frank. By making our designs in this manner public, we give our Enemies every
opportunity to oppose and defeat them.


Fear. That Is no objection against the measure: -- when I am going to hang a
Man, I choose to inform him of it, that he may prepare for his sat.


Frank. True, you ought so to do; -- but if you are wise, you will wait 'till
you have him in your power.


Fear. We will act more secretly then: -- Let us inform, in a confidential
manner, those Members of the Council, and Assembly, with whom we are
acquainted, of our eminent dangers, and of the only means which can afford
relief: -- A few friends can be desired to support us: -- A matter which
equally concerns them, will be listened to with attention: -- A number of
General officers in the Army, might also be made acquainted with our distress;
-- they would do us most important service, both at Congress and Assembly: --
it might likewise, be a mean of procuring a detachment from the continental
Line, to be sent into our neighborhood, which is a circumstance that I judge
to be of the utmost consequence.


Frank. Gentlemen, I am perfectly pleased with all parts of this last proposal;
-- I have listened to it, with the utmost attention, and satisfaction, and must
beg leave to observe, that I had formed the out lines of the same plan, before
this meeting, and had communicated it to one of the first Men in the State, who
highly approved of it, and assured me of his support and assistance.


Fear. I have no doubt of it is success, if we are not deficient on our part; --
the utmost vigilance is required.


Frank. Have you nothing further to suggest, that would be advantageous to our
main design?


Fear. Nothing, Sir; -- I believe the two plans which have been mentioned, are
the only ones we can adopt, since my first proposal is discarded.


Frank. I shall continue to object against that, 'till all others have been
tried; but if every legal method fails, I shall be willing to have recourse to
that in the last resort; for having begun, I shall not desist, 'till my Country
is safe, or 'till I am frustrated of so desirable a good, by the failure of
every possible remedy.


Stand. Having determined upon the plans, let us be agreed as to their
execution: -- Mr. Fearless has given us sufficient instruction, concerning his
own proposal, it only remains, that we take Mr. Frankly's directions concerning
the other; -- I suppose him to be much better acacquainted with the subject of
the illicit trade, than either of us.


Fear. Without doubt he is; -- his industry and opportunities have greatly
exceeded ours: -- Mr. Frankly, we shall receive your commands with pleasure.


Frank. It will be necessary, that you continue to make the most deligent and
exact enquiry, into the state of the illicit trade; -- by whom it is regulated
and conducted; -- at what times, and places the goods are landed from the
Island; where, and in what manner they are secreted; -- you must discover their
private repositories; -- the time, and manner of their conveyance from place to
place; -- what the chief remittances to the Island are, with every other
circumstance that concerns the business: -- To effect this, we must inviolably
keep our own counsel; -- our bosoms must be as impenetrable as the grave; --
nothing must transpire as we regard the salvation of our Country; -- and after
we have obtained the necessary information, we must make a general seizure of
all British goods, as near as may be, at the same hour, that the greatest
possible blow, may be struck at once; because, as has been already observed, as
soon as they are alarmed, they will immediately change their measures; the
detection of which, will be then more difficult than they be now.


Fear. We shall comply with all your requisitions, with the utmost readiness,
and have only to desire you to appoint the time of seizure.


Frank. That I may be better able to observe, and choose that, which will be the
most proper, you will communicate to me, from time to time, all intelligence of
importance, which you may obtain.


Fear. We shall take every opportunity to answer your desires; -- our
discoveries will be always at your service.


Frank. I have likewise to observe, that I may probably stand in need of your
assistance, at particular times, to convey intelligence to confidential
friends, at a distance; and perhaps for some other purposes, not proper to name.


Fear. You need not be explicit; -- we can depend upon your fidelity, and shall
be ready to attend your commands at all hours.


Frank. Permit me, my friends, before we part, to repeat my injunctions of
secresy upon you: -- Let every thing we say, or do, be deemed inviolably
sacred, an^ not to be divulged, without incurring the guilt of sacrilege: -- I
wish you may feel that by failing in this point, we trifle with our lives, and
all that is, or ought to be dear, to Men and Christians.


Stand. There is the greatest propriety in your caution: -- But I hope events
will prove, that to us it was needless.


Frank. I am much obliged to you, Gentlemen, for your friendly communication,
on this most interesting subject: -- I hope we shall have the satisfaction ere
long, to congratulate each other, upon the success of our measures.


Fear. I have the most animating expectation, that success will attend their
execution; -- we have concerted them with unanimity, and I dare engage for all
present, that each one's part, will be punctually performed: -- Mr. Standwell
shall we walk?

They rise, and after compliments, exeunt. Frankly solus. This interview has
given me great satisfaction; -- I feel an agreeable calmness on my mind, to
reflect, that my Country is not yet entirely destitute of supporters; -- she
will maintain her Freedom, in spite of infernal malice, which is exerted to
overthrow it; -- If only ten faithful Men can be found, all is safe!

Not Britain's troops, though countless as the sand,
Not blackest treason lurking through the land,
Can ever dethrone the Goddess Liberty,
My Country can! she must! she will be free!

Scene closes. End of the first Act.
ACT II.
Gibber's House. SCENE opens, and discovers Gibber, his Wife, Son, and
Daughter, sitting by the sire, Mrs. Gibber making hasty pudding. Mrs. Gib. I
WISH, You, you would contrive some scheme to get rid of this plaguey state money; --
it is falling all the while, and will be good for nothing bimeby: We shall
certainly be ruined, You, and come to the town; -- I Would g^t off such rotten
stuff some way or rother, if I got nothing ^or't, You.


Gibb. Don't be feart, Wife, before you're hurt: -- We shall do well enough,
never fear: I shall not keep no more on it than I owe the collector for rates; and
I shall keep it from him, as long as I can, to be sure: -- and I wish'twou'd
n't be good for nothing when he gets it; -- for my part, I will not take no more
on it, under four for one; -- it will be ten for one before I pay the collector;
-- and so much we gain clear, Wife, d'y' see, besides helping to kill the
money, and, when the Country's conquered, and the times settled, I Will tell
(...) King, all I Have done, and then he will give me the best Rebel farm in the
parish; -- don't you think so, Wife?


Mrs. Gibb. There may be something in th^^, You; -- but will not the collector
make you, make up the sinkings; -- I Am sure I Have heard such a thing talked on.


Gibb. Don't fear, Wife; they may perhaps have mentioned such a thing, -- but
they have not done it yet, as I Have heard on, and they will not I don't think; for
sometimes the Rebels an't always the cunningest, to find out the best plans for
themselves, and when they have, they durst n't execute 'em, for fear the People
will rise, and oppose'em; -- as I guess would be the case, in this case; for
all the Loyals would oppose it certainly, and I can tell you, Wife, for your
comfort, that Squire Slipcoat told me the other day, we were the strongest party
hereabouts: But if they do their worst, I can even pay the collector when he
calls, and so I shall lose nothing that way neither.


Mrs. Gibb. Why yes you will, You, you will lose the farm you talked on, if you
don't help to spoil the money, or hurt the Country some other way.


Gibb. Wife, don't you be concerned; -- I do do a good deal slily; -- 'tan't
but a few days ago, I gin Tom Ketchum, two hard dollars, to go to the Island to
bring off counterfeit money.


Mrs. Gibb. Why I never heard o'that before, You; I wonder you did n't tell me
on it; -- that was a good thing in you, You; -- keep adoing so, and we shall
have a farm, as sure as a Gun.


Gibb. Why I Have done a great deal more than that, Wife; -- three years ago, I
laid in with a dozen young fellows, to go and join the Regulars, and I gin 'em
a hard dollar apiece, for bounty; and I s'pose my name was sent to the King
for it; -- he is heard all about me before now, I Will warrant ye, Wife.


Mrs. Gibb. Why, You, I Am glad on it with all my heart; -- I use to be afraid,
you was so softly a Man, you would n't do nothing, and when the Reg'lars come,
I always though it they would take you for a Whig, and send you to the West Indies, and
cumfristricate your farm, for you; -- but I see you do do something, and I wish
you would do ten times as much again; I want to have you git three or four, or six
or seven, or a dozen farms; -- 'twou'd n't be too much for us, You.


Gibb. I know that as well as you do, Wife; -- but you don't consider the times
are crooked as the Devil; -- if one don't mind his hits, he will get snubb'd as
quick as you would say Jack Robbinson; -- I Would better be called a half Whig, whilst
the times last, if I do lose a little by it; than to be hanged for a Tory, and
so lose all.


Mrs. Gibb. But ay, if I was a Man, I would n't mind that, I Would warrant ye; --
it is just as I told you, you're afraid on 'em, and durst n't stir, and do
nothing.


Gibb. No I an't, Wife, that an't the thing; I say it is better for the King,
and me too, to keep doing a little for him a great while, than to get s^apt up
by, trying to do more.


Mrs. Gibb. Yes* but I know you could do more, and be safe too, if you wan't
afraid: -- What'll you do when you're drafted one of these days; -- I look
for it every day when it'll come, -- and if you should go, or hire a Man, 'twill
be all up with you, if the King should hear on it; then where is all your farms,
You?


Gibb. I Have got a plan for that too; -- when cousin Jo was at our house the other
night from the Island, I sent word to son Billy, that I was going to clamming
next Monday, and he must come over in a Boat, or send somebody, and take me,
and carry me to the Island, then they would parole me, and send me home, and then
you see, I shall not be drafted no more, for they don't draft pri^'ners.


Mrs. Gibb. Why railly, You, I believe that is a good plan; -- I should n't
ha'tho't o'that: -- I begin to think you do do something; -- but I wish you would
do a great deal more, you could I know if you wan't scart to death; -- if you would
only take two or three of the leading Men in the Parish, and send 'em to the
Island, the danger'd be over then, and we could do what we pleased; -- besides,
such a thing'd be worth telling on; -- you would be called a bold Man amongst 'em,
and one that feared nothing; -- you would stand a chance to be sent for to the
Island, and made a sergeant on, because you would got courage, they would say; -- if I
only wore breeches, I Would see the Rebels all shot, before I Would bear what you do,
I Would warrant 'em; -- all the money we can rap and rend, goes to pay rates, so
that we are so poor, we cannot do nothing, if we'd never so good a mind to: --
As true as I live, and breathe, I Would send to Clinton and get a Regiment of
Reg'lars, to come here, and then the day'd be our own; -- 'twould be their turn
to be hanged, and go to Newgate; -- that would be something like a tanzy; -- we
should live like folks then; -- every body knows, that we cannot never take no
comfort, as long as them devilish Rebels an't hanged, and nothing could ever
make me feel better, than to see them villains, with iron russles on, agoing to
Newgate, or the Gallows; -- I Would have them to know if I could have my will, I Would
neither eat nor drink, 'till'twas done.


John. I wish Mother'd hold her tongue, and not keep 'ternally talking 'bout
such things; -- don't you think, that I and Father, don't know what we are
about? -- it don't signify, Mother, for you always to be finding fault with our
plans, and telling what you would do; -- I tell you what, if you would your will only
three days, we should all swing fort: -- You don't know nothing about it.


Bet. I was just agoing to speak, John, and say just as you have said; for Mr.
Frankly told me about sun down, that he meant to come and see us to night, and
I Am afraid he is been at the door, and heard all Mother's said.


John. Ay, Bett, if he has not, it is ten to one, if some other Whig or other,
han't been a eyedropping, and heard all Mother's nonsense, and gone and told
the General on us all, and we shall be haul'd before a court martial for it, and
every Devil of us'll be hanged, I tell you as quick as a minute.


Mrs. Gibb. (Stirring the hasty pudding; and as she speaks she flourishes the
stick) Take me before a court martial, d'y' say? -- They Would better be hanged
than touch me; -- I Would fill their faces full of this hasty pudding, boiling hot,
I Would warrant 'em.


John. Oh! oh! damn it, Mother, take care of your pudding; -- you have burnt me
to death. Bawls out.


Gibb. John, leave your squawling! be still I say! -- I tell you, Wife, you
talk like a silly woman, as you be; -- do you think you would scare a continental
Soldier, with hasty pudding? -- they have more courage than that, I Will warrant
ye; -- you could n't please the hungry dogs better than by throwing hasty
pudding at 'em, ha! ha! ha! -- I fancy they would tackle in with a kettle of it,
with more courage than they would with the Reg'lars, and empty it faster than
you could with your ladle. All laugh.


Mrs. Gibb. Well rot 'em, I don't believe they will ever come; -- but if they
should take us, and send us to Newgate, we shall have the more a coming from
the King, for Mr. Plunket says, the King's a godly King, and always pays well,
those who suffer for him, and that is my comfort.


Gibb. Ay, Wife, the King loves Justice, as well as mercy, as the poor
wretches, who are fighting against him, will soon find to their sorrow; -- they
little think what a dreadful day of reckoning is coming for 'em; and it may be,
as I hope it is, nigh at hand, when they will have judgment without mercy.


Mrs. Gibb. Yes, You, that will be something like a voice in shame, when
they are all dying in a heap, and no notice taken on it; -- yet as'ral all, I
should be a'most tempted to pity 'em, if they had n't used us so bad, and bro't
it all upon themselves; -- and more than all that, when the Rebels are all
killed and cut to pieces, our troubles will all be over and gone, and that'll
be a joyful day to us: -- Betty, you would better draw some cider; -- let us drink,
and be merry a little before Mr. Frankly comes, for I guess he will be here pretty
soon, and spoil all our sun.


Bet. John, you shall go and get the cider: -- You know I looked a'ter the hogs,
and shut up the geese to night, besides milking all the cows alone.


John. I don't care for that, sauciness; -- Mother bid you go, and you shall
go, or I Will make you; -- go along, I say Strikes her -- she screams.


Bet. Get away; -- I Will tell Father on you.


Gibb. John, you brute, let her alone; -- it is a mavelous thing to me, that
you must undertake family government, when your Mother, and I are by; -- I Will
teach you how to behave better than this, I Will warrant ye.


Strikes him. Mrs. Gibb. (Taking hold of his arm) He an't to blame, You, she
deserved it; -- she did n't go when I bid her.


Gibb. Wife, mind your business, and hold your tongue; Betty, sit down; --
John, be easy, and go and draw the cider. Exit John snuftily.


Mrs. Gibb. You're an old provoking fellow; -- you would spoil fifty children if we
had 'em; -- you have no more government than a goose, and will not let me have none.


Bet. Yes, yes, Mother, that is just like you, your always -- A Knocking.


Gibb. Whist! be still! -- who is there? Loud.


Frank. (without) Your Neighbor Frankly.


Gibb. Oh! very well: -- Walk in.


Enter Frankly. Frank. I hope I find you, and your family well, neighbor
Gibber.


Gibb. Yes thank ye, able to move; -- You left your'n well did n't ye?


Frank. Yes Sir, we were all indifferently well, only excepting the common
infirmities of life.


Gibb. Ay, if nothing else ails ye, you do as well as the best on us all; -- so
you must n't complain.


Frank. That Is very true; -- we ought by no means to camplain, when in the
worst circumstances, and much less, when in the best; -- we always suffer less
than we deserve.


Gibb. ( Aside) And so do all other Rebels.


Frank. I observed, Mr. Gibber, that when I knocked at your door, you enquired
who was there, before you bid me come in; what can be the reason of this, Sir;
-- you did not do so formerly.


Gibb. I tell you what, Neighbor Frankly, it is clipping times; -- there is so
many devili^h Tories about, we don't know when we are safe; -- for my part I Am
a'most afraid to sleep a nights.


Frank. (Aside) The hottest Tory in America afraid of Tories; -- a very pretty
tale to deceive the world with: -- Though the times are critical, and dangers
surround on every side, yet I Am not in the least concerned to rest in my own
house; -- no one dare disturb my quiet there.


Gibb. You Have more courage than I, or you would be afraid on 'em; -- Have you any
news from abroad?


Frank. Yes, Sir, there are various reports in circulation; -- some of them I
hope are true, because they are favorable to the States; but for the same
reason, they will be disagreeable to you.


Gibb. Why so? -- How can good news not be agreeable to me?


Frank. Why, to speak plain, I Have always supposed you to be a Tory at heart.


Gibb. How? -- I a Tory? -- you don't mean as you say, I hope.


Frank. I do, Sir, -- I really think you're a Tory.


Gibb. I wont be called a Tory, that is pos; Rising in anger. call me a Tory
again if you dare. Shaking his fist.


Frank. Come, come, Mr. Gibber, I could not have imagined, that calling you a
Tory, would have disturbed you; for I supposed you to be really one, and would
not have been ashamed to acknowledge your attachments.


Gibb. I tell you what, Neighbor Frankly, I never love to quarrel with people,
especially Neighbors; but af'ral that, I Will not be called a Tory by any Man
living; -- why, Neighbor Frankly, I scorn a Tory as much as you do.


Frank. Sit down, Mr. Gibber, I Will not offend you with the name; for I believe
our difference consists wholly in this, that you understand one thing by it,
and I another.


Gibb. Very well, Neighbor, I Will overlook it for this time; -- but you must
take care how you affront me again; -- you see I Am a man of spirit, and if you
provoke me again, I may do something, not so clever among Neighbors: -- Wife,
an't supp^r almost ready? -- John, where is the cider you went to draw so long
ago?


John. It stands on the table.


Gibb. Bring it here (John fetches it) Neighbor Frankly, my humble service to
you; -- I Am glad to see you at my house, with all my heart.


Frank. I am much obliged to you, Sir.


Gibber tastes the cup, then rises in a violent passion, throws the contents
into John 's face, and knocks him over in his chair. Frank. ( rising and going
to Gibber) I Am astonished, Mr. Gibber; -- What has disturbed you so suddenly?
-- You act like one beside himself.


Gibb. If you knew how devilishly I was plagued, you would n't ask ^hat's the
matter; -- I told this rascal above an hour ago, to go and draw a pot of cider,
and instead of minding on me, he has filled it out of the swill barrel: -- an't
this intolerable, Neighbor Frankly?


Mrs. Gibb. Ay, ay, it is good enough for you, old fellow; -- you would n't
follow my advice, and now you see it is turned out just as I told you; -- you have
been rightly served; -- you may learn to mind me next time an' you will.


Gibb. Yes, yes, Wife, you must always put in your ear to help the matter: -- I
wish you would hold your tongue, and not stand up for such a booby, when folks are
here, you will make us ridiculous all over the Parish.


Mrs. Gibb. I don't care how soon all the world knows it, no not I; -- but
you would need to be concerned; -- you will be ridiculous with a witness to it.


Frank. Come, Mrs Gibber, I believe it is best to drop the dispute for this
time: -- I think you are a very happy couple; these little fallings out, they
say, are a sign of great mutual Love, and it will not be advantageous to turn
the tokens of Love, into occasions of hate.


Gibb. Neighbor Frankly, you're a very kind man; -- I don't know what the
world would come to, if 'twan't for such men as you; -- You see, Wife, Mr.
Frankly blamed you, because he though it you deserved it most.


Frank. No reflections now I entreat, good Mr. Gibber; -- let all rest for the
present, that I may enjoy the pleasure of your company while I stay.


Gibb. Very well, Sir, I Will obey you, if my Wife will let me.


Mrs. Gibb. 'Twou'd be comical indeed, if I would n't let you let me alone.


Gibb. Come no more on it; -- John, now let us see if we can have a little cider.


Mrs. Gibb. Ay that is clever; -- I though it you promised not to quarrel wi^h me
again, and now you go to rip up the very bottom on it all.


Gibb. No more words, Wife, -- I Will draw it myself.


Takes the cup and exit. Frank. ( Aside to Mrs. Gibber) Are you not a little
out of the way, (...) to make the old Gentleman go and draw cider himself,
after he had ordered his Son? -- Don't you think it will be of bad consequence
to the Boy?


Mrs. Gibb. (Aloud) I out of the way? -- No indeed; -- he is a wilful old fool:
-- I told Bett to go first, and the old dog took it into his pate to quarrel
with me about it, and order John to go; -- so you see he is all to blame about
it; -- I though it before you did n't understand it; -- so don't blame me now if I
let him take the --


Enter Gibber with cider Gibb. I guess now, Neighbor Frankly, we have got some
cider, and since we have had so much fuss about it already, let us drink round
without any more compliments.


They drink and when it comes to John he drinks the whole. Bet. Father! Father!
do see our John, he is drunk it every bit up, and han't gin me a drop on it.


Gibb. Pox on the cider; -- Betty hold your tongue, and go and draw some
yourself if you want: -- Come, Wife, an't supper a'most ready; -- I believe, in
my soul, your pudding is burnt to, we have been talking so long: -- Come, let
Betty set the table, and do you take up supper.


Frank. You enquired after news, Mr. Gibber, when I first came in, but before I
had time to relate it, the conversation changed.


Gibb. That Is well though it on; -- I should be mighty glad to hear it.


Frank. In the first place, it is reported, that Burgoyne is coming over with
twenty thousand men, to join Clinton at New York.


Gibb. (With pleasure sparkling in his countenance) Do you say so? -- It
surprises me; -- you don't believe it I hope: -- If it is true the Country'll
be conquered this summer, I Am afraid.


Frank. Nothing of that, Sir; -- we have trapped him once already, and having
learned how it is done, we can do it again more easily; -- so that if he comes,
he will only march through the Country under guard again: -- but they say also,
that Green has entirely defeated Cornwallis; -- killed two thirds of his army,
and made the rest prisoners; -- of course the southern States, are once more
freed, from the rapine of British tyranny.


Gibb. (With evident marks of distress) You tell surprising news indeed, Mr.
Frankly: -- (Appears greatly agitated) It is so good I can hardly believe it:
-- (Exceeding uneasy) Well! (Sighs) I always said, that Britain never would
conquer America; -- I never though it they took the right methods for it; -- if I Would
been to have advised 'em, I Am sure I could have done better than they have.


Frank. (Aside) If he could have executed his desires I believe him. You know,
Mr. Gibber, very surprising events often unfold in the dispensations of
Providence, such as no Eye could foresee, nor Arm prevent: -- I am firmly
persuaded that America has always been the peculiar care of Heaven.


Gibb. Wife, an't supper a'most ready?


Mrs. Gibb. Yes it is ready this minute.


Gibb, Will Not you drink again before supper, Neighbor Frankly?


Frank. I thank you, Sir, it will be needless.


Gibb. ( Aside) I Am glad on it, for I hate to draw it myself and God knows I
cannot make none of my folks go.


Mrs. Gibb. Come, You, sit down, sit down, Neighbor Frankly, and eat a bit of
hasty pudding and molasses; -- it is poor stuff to ask folks to eat; -- I Am
ashamed on it, and if I Would known of any body's being here, I should have tried
to have got something better: -- My Husband always'll have hasty pudding for
supper, and if he would let me have some tea to drink myself, and treat my friends,
he might even split his guts with it an' he would.


Frank. Why, Mrs. Gibber, don't your Husband provide you with tea, and such
small affairs, as every body knows Women must have?


Gibb. Don't mind her, Neighbor Frankly, she is only trying to pick another
quarrel with me, and make you a witness of it: -- There never was a Woman
better provided for, with every thing the world affords, than my Wife always
is; and get she is 'tarnally grumbling, kaze she don't wear the breeches, as she
says.


Mrs. Gibb. You old liar! -- You know you have not got me a pound of tea, nor
sugar, nor molasses, nor no such thing, since I lay in with Molly, and then all
you got for me, was two ounces of rice.


Gibb. Ay, who lies now? -- You said I had n't got you no molasses since you
lay in; -- if that is true who got the molasses we are eating?


Mrs. Gibb. Well, I don'^ care; if you have got some molasses, you have not got
nothing else, I know.


Frank. ( Aside) A queer so^^ of family this! They Are all perfect in their
parts.


Gibb. Come, lay to, Neighbor Frankly; -- hasty pudding is slippery stuff, and
if you don't mind, you will not get your part on it.


Frank. Let there be no trouble on my account; -- it is very good, and there is
plenty of it.


Bet. I believe our John will split his guts; -- he eats as if he had n't eat a
bit this month.


John. You're only afraid, Bett, you shall not get your belly full.


Mrs. Gibb. Children, let eating stop your mouths; -- there is nothing to he
heard but your gabble.


Gibb. Was n't you telling some news, just as we sat down to supper? I should
be glad to hear it out now.


Frank. I have nothing more, Mr. Gibber, except it is, that Gibraltar
surrendered at discretion, to the Spanish arms, on the 16th of December last.


Gibb. This astonishes me more than any thing you have told me! (Appears greatly
disturbed) Come, we have done supper; ( Rising) much good may't do us; -- I must
go out a few minutes. Exit.


Frank. I wonder, Mrs. Gibber, where you got that curious piece of linen; --
you did not make it, surely.


Mrs. Gibb. No Sir, we did n't make it, and I don't know where my Husband got
it; -- do you know Betty?


Bet. Yes, he got it at Mr. Flutter's shop, for three shillings hard money a
yard.


Mrs. Gibb. ( Aside) Our Betty's a plaguey fool.


Frank. ( Aside) Right from the Island: -- Have you heard, Ma'm, that Mr.
Flutter had all his goods seized yesterday?


Mrs. Gibb. I Am sure that was hard; -- the man paid honestly for 'em, I
believe: -- Betty, has Goody Chin sent home the warming pan? I would n't go to
bed in a cold bed another night, for nothing.


Bet. No she has not.


Mrs. Gibb. Then I must a'ter it. Exit.


Frank. Well, John, what think you, shall we be conquered this summer?


John. I Am afraid we shall.


Frank. What makes you think so, John?


John. So many drafts, and so much rates to pay; we must give up.


Frank. Not at all, John, without we destroy ourselves.


John. We shall not do that I guess; -- we shall do what we can to save us.


Frank. I believe him now (Aside) But this Long Island trade, John, will ruin
us, if we cannot stop it.


John. I don't know nothing about that; -- I guess there an't much on it done.


Frank. But the Tories, John.


John. There an't so many, I don't believe, as folks talks on.


Frank. But you know they are very spiteful and mischievous.


John. I never see it: -- They'm very good Neighbors.


Frank. But don't you think they would kill folks if they could, John.


John. Kill folks? -- No indeed; -- What kill folks for nothing and be hanged
for it; -- that is a pretty story indeed; -- there is no such fools I hope: --
(Aside) He begins to come a little too close upon me; he will catch me bimeby;
I Will be missing. Exit.


Frank. What will you do for lawn and guaze, Betty, now Mr. Flutter's goods are
seized?


Bet. Oh! we can get some, somewhere else.


Frank. Then you have more strings to your bow than one.


Bet. Yes to be sure


Frank. How long before your Dadda and Mamma will be back?


Bet. Not before morning, I believe, for they are gone to bed.


Frank. Gone to bed? -- I thought they would be back in a few minutes


Bet. They Are certainly gone to bed.


Frank. Then I Will go home, I Will not keep you up. -- Good night, Miss. Rising.


Bet. Good night, Sir.


Frank. (going out) Tories every one, rank Tories. Aside.

Exit. Betty sola. I Am glad he is gone; now I can let in my spark; -- he is come
right from the Island, and John says he is been waiting for me, this whole hour
in the hen roost; and I durst n't, for the world, let him be seen by any of the
Rebels, for they would hang him as quick as they would hang a Gammon: -- Our John'll be
hung too, if he don't go off: -- I Will go and tell him this minute; -- I Would
rather give sixpence than have him hanged; -- not that I care so much about
him; but it would break up all our plans. Exit.

After she is gone a knocking is heard two or three times. Enter Gibber. The
cursed Rebel is gone then: ( Knocking again) Who Is there?


Spy. ( without) A true and trusty friend.


Gibb. A true and trusty friend: -- Ay that is the countersign: -- It Is one of
our friends, from the Island; -- the house is now clear, and it is past eleven;
( Looking at his watch) I Will let him in this minute.


goes to the door and opens it. Enter Spy. Spy. Mr. Gibber, your humble
servant; -- I hope I Am safe. Looking round.


Gibb. Safe? -- Ay that you be; -- but I tell you what, Sir, we live in a
damned world; -- the Rebels act like bewitched of late; -- we cannot have a
friend to visit us from the Island, but he is smelt out, and then away he goes
to Newgate, or the Gallows: -- But you need not be scart at my house; -- you're
as safe as a thief in a mill, whilst you stay here; -- I Have contrived a sly
hole for you, and if any body appears, do you slip in there, and the Devil
cannot find you.


Spy. You are very careful for us, Mr. Gibber; -- I believe you are a stanch
loyalist, and if ever I get back again to New York, I will report your zeal to
the General.


Gibb. Do my, good friend, and tell him all about, how much I do, and how much
I suffer in the cause of my King.


Spy. But the point is, how I shall ever get there again; for the Boat I come
over in, was fired upon three times, before we could land; and the cursed dogs
picked one lusty fellow out of her; -- and now by your account, it is still more
difficult to get back* for our boat is returned, and I suppose there is not
(...) on all the coast, but what has a picket guard about it: -- I Am really
afraid the crows will pick my bones here.


Gibb. Don't you fear; -- we'll contrive some scheme to get you back again
safe: -- Whilst at my house, as I told you, you're safe enough; -- so you may
be as merry as you please: -- Don't you want a dram?


Spy. I think I do: -- I Have been above an hour in your hen roost, and it is a
good deal cold to night; a dram will warm my stomach, and prevent my taking
cold, which would be a damned affair indeed; for if I should cough in your
hole, and any of the Rebels in the house; -- dam me, I Would rather a sixty gun
ship was down my throat; -- I pledge you Sir.


Gibb. Take hold, I shall not drink none myself.


Spy. ( After drinking a glass) Ay this is good old Jamaica; -- it does one's
soul good; -- an't Betty at home to night?


Gibb. She was at home just now, and's not far out of the way, for she knew of
your being at the door, and longs very much to see you; -- I Have often heard her
pity the poor young men in New York, who could n't git a pretty girl to play
with, twice in a year.


Spy. Oddsbodikins! ( Slapping his thigh) I must have a little fun with her to
night, if they gibbit me in the morning.


Gibb. You must n't be long about it, for you know we are to consult to night
about those things, that you sent word by cousin Jo about.


Enter Betty. Spy. Dear Miss Betty, how do you do? -- the sight of you revives
me more than a double-bowl of syllabub.


Bet. Sir, I Am mighty glad to see you; -- but I Am afraid they will hang you; --
how durst you come amongst the Rebels?


Gibb. I Will go and leave you; -- I see you want to be alone: -- you will be ready
to attend at two o'clock.


Spy. Depend upon it, Sir, I shall be ready. Exit Gibber. It Is devilish clever,
Betty, to get along side of a pretty girl, after all the fatigues and dangers
of a long campaign.


Bet. I wonder in my soul, how it is you do so long without any girls; -- for my
part, I should run mad, if I had not a spark, but once in six months.


Spy. I don't hardly know myself how it is we do; -- we fare bad enough I Am
sure; -- we are forced to suffer a great deal before we can get a girl there,
and after we have had one, we are ten times worse off than we was before.


Bet. Yes, yes, I understand you; -- I Have seen a child cry for an apple, and
a'ter he would got a mouthful on it, he was fifty times more bewitched a'ter it, than
he was before.


Spy. (Aside) She Is made a good mistake for me, she thinks I Am in great need.
-- Well, Betty, you know we have but little time; we must improve it well.


Bet. You may be sure, I shall not be backward adoing my part: -- It Is a good
while now, since I Have had a spark that suited me: -- a'most all the young men
in our parts, have gone to New York, except a few Rebels; -- so I Am obliged to
take up with them in a pinch.


Spy. Why, Betty, you don't let a damned Rebel touch you I hope -- I wish you
had not told me on it this half hour, for I shall not have half so good a stomach
for you for it; -- I fear they have spoilt you.


Bet. Don't blame me, my dear -- make it your own case: -- would not you play a
little with a pretty girl at New York, if she was a Rebel, rather than have
none? -- Well that was all that ever I did in my life.


Spy. I don't know but I should, Betty; -- but I Would rather have you than a cart
load of 'em: -- You're in truth a sweet girl, a very angel. Hugs and kisses her
very amourously.


Bet. I always loved good sparks, and I think you're the best that ever I had
in my life.


Spy. Why the girls used to call me a good spark in former days, and I believe
I have not lost my skill yet; -- I guess I can please 'em as well as ever: --
Seems to me it is a little too light here; -- I Am afraid some Rebel or other
will peep in, and see us, and then I Am gone, as sleek as a whistle; -- cannot we
go into a dark room? -- I Am persuaded I should be as good again a spark there.


Bet. There Is no other room in the house, Sir, that will do, only the bed-room
where I sleep.


Spy. So much the better, my sweetest honey; -- don't let us stay a moment, but
go there this.


Bet. But we mustn't go to bed; -- if we should, I Am afraid they would come, and
catch you, before you could put on your clothes.


Spy. Don't mind that now, my honeysuckle; -- our time is short, let us be
expeditious.

Enclosed by your sweet arms, I Have naught to fear,
No dangers can disturb my quiet here:
I would not f^ll, those heavenly joys to act,
Though death should strike me lifeless in the fact.

Exeunt. End of the second act.
ACT III.
SCENE continues at Gibber 's House. Enter Gibber and John. Gibb. FASTEN all
the doors in a minute, John, and let us have all the lights put out.


John fastens the doors, and Gibber puts out the candles. John. Bu^ how will
the Loyals get in, now the doors are all locked?


Gibb. They must be help^ in at the back window, John; -- you know it will not be
safe for us to have the doors on the latch; -- we should be in danger every
minute of being ca^cht.


John. But you don't mean to trust to the doors being locked, I hope, -- they
can be broke down at a jerk, and then I would not give that ( Snapping his
fingers) for your (...).


Gibb. No, no, John, we are better soldiers than that comes to; -- here is a
string, which I shall tie to my finger, and it goes down through a hole in the
floor, and out at the backside of the house into the garden, where you mu^t lie
hid, and give notice of any body's coming, by pulling the string.


John. That Is a good contrivance for your old pate; -- I wonder who told you
on it.


Gibb. Leave off being saucy, or I Will lather your hide well, you blockhead: --
go and call the Spy this minute.


John. He needn't be disturbed yet; -- nobody an't come; -- and he, and our
Betty want to lie together, all the time they can get.


Gibb. I want to talk with him a little before the rest come; -- so go along I
say. Exit. John.

Gibber solus. I Am much mistaken, if we don't contrive some plan to night, to
be revenged on th^se devilish Rebels, that have had their heads so long, and
have abused me so much, and I could not help it; -- Nobody knows, and never will
know, how much I Have undergone for my King; -- but I trust a day of relief is at
hand, when I shall receive full pay, for all I Have suffered from 'em: -- I Am a
tenderhearted Man, and don't love to see my Neighbors in distress; -- but I
shall not pity 'em ^ow, it is the fruit of their own doings: -- I should be afraid
they would kill me, if I should go and set their houses afire; but it would do my
soul good, to see 'em in flames, and they, poor wretches, in 'em. Enter John
and Spy. Take your station, John, in the current bushes, at the corner of the
Garden, and if any body's a coming pull the string; -- mind, and keep yourself
hid. Exit. John.


Spy. It Is two o'clock devilish quick, Mr. Gibber; -- it seems to me, 'tan't
ten minutes, since Betty and I went to bed: -- But what did you call me up for?
-- There Is nobody come.


Gibb. I wanted to talk with you a little, about some things, first: -- So I
called you up before the time a little.


Spy. That Is pretty indeed; -- I wish you would been further off; -- you have
disturbed us in the midst of our sun.


Gibb. Come, come, I though it you would been a better Loyal, than not to be willing to
deny yourself a few minutes pleasure, for the sake of promoting the good of the
cause.


Spy. Well! I Will say no more about it then; -- let us proceed on business: --
Our situation is dangerous; -- our time short; -- our business important; -- we
must be vigilent, and expeditious.


Gibb. I wanted to know, before our friends come, what they say in New York
about the cause; -- you know there, ten times as well as we do here, how things
are like to go in the end: -- Do they think they can ever subdue the Rebels?


Spy. It is not, Sir, the business I was sent upon, to tell you what they can
do there; but to tell you what you can, and must do here.


Gibb. No but if they cannot do nothing there, we cannot do nothing here: -- If
we should only attempt such a thing, without we could be supported, we should
all be hung before we'd begun, and there'd be an end on it.


Spy. There will be very little danger of being hung, for doing what is
proposed; -- you cannot suppose we desire to endanger your lives.


Gibb. No, I s'pose you don't mean to; -- but how can we do any thing without?


Spy. Why you know the Rebels have stopped the smuggling trade; -- our first
business will be to set that agoing again.


Gibb. Well that is proper enough to be done: -- but what else have you got for
us to do?


Spy. We must hit upon some plan for the Loyalists in the Country, to assist
the Associators when they come over.


Gibb. Ay, ay, that'll be a dangerous scheme I Will warrant ye* -- I would not
give a copper for any Man's head that lifted a finger in that plan: -- you're
be conjured to set such a thing on foot among us; -- we are all dead men if you
don't withdraw that motion.


Spy. You're a man of fine courage upon my word.


Gibb. Oh! Sir, take care of yourself, -- somebody's coming. (The Spy slips
into the hole) A knocking is heard.


Gibb. (very loud) Who Is there?


Plunk. (without) A friend.


Gibb. What business have you to disturb me so late in the night?


Plunk. Arise, friend Gibber, arise and let me in.


Gibb. Arise, friend, arise; ay, that is the countersign; -- it is the Reverend
Mr. Plunket's voice; -- they are the true Loyals, who were to meet here to
night.


Plunk. Come, Mr. Gibber, no delay.


Gibb. Have patience, I Will let you in directly.


Exit Gibber, and soon after returns with Plunket, Fidfaddy, and Flutter. Gibb.
Come, Sir, you may come out of your hole, there is nobody but friends; -- Enter
Spy Gentlemen, I Am very glad to see you here.


Fid. Stay a bit, Mr. G^bber, an't you mistaken a little? -- If you an't you have
got a good pair of owls eyes of your own, to see so well in the dark.


Gibb. No matter, Ge^tlemen, for that small mistake; -- a slip of the tongue
don't always break the neck; -- I Am as sorry as any body that we are obliged to
sit in the dark: Cannot you find chairs?


Fid. We should pass very well for conjurors if we could, when I don't believe
it was ever darker in Egypt.


Gibb. Here, Gentlemen, sit down, and let us proceed on business.


Fid. Ay, with all expedition; -- it is very uncomfortable to sit here in the
cold and dark, and the fear of being trapan'd makes my blood run cold.


Plunk. My friend^, we must bear up under every thing that befalls us, with
Christian fortitude, and constancy; and generously expose ourselves to every
danger, in the execution of this charitable business; and if we fail of an
adequate reward in this world, we may rest assured, we shall not in the n^xt.


Fid. But my thinks, Sir, if I was sure of no other pay but what I shall get
there, I Would not risk my neck for it, I Would warran^^^.


Plunk. The justic^ of our cause is so conspicuous, that we cannot (...) of
(...) an ample recompense, even in this world: -- The King is on our side, my
friends, who will both pay and pro^ect us.


Fid. We needn't multiply words about the Justice of our cause; -- we are all
sati^fied in that point: -- And as to pay, I want no other than to see the
damned Rebels once humbled: -- If I could but only see their houses in flames,
and they themselves, with b^yonets at their breasts, begging for mercy 'twou'd
make me feel better, than to be King of all the World.


Flut. That I Am afraid is more than can be bro't about at present: -- The
R^bels are plaguey stubborn fellow^, and will not be bro't to a^k for mercy,
without many a hard blow.


Fid. Ay, you're a half Whig; -- but 'tan't best for you to talk
discouragingly; if you do, I Will be in your cho^s in a (...).


Flut. Don't be angry, I only tell you the truth, that you may be prepared
for it; -- and I should think, Gentlemen, that 'tan't best to say much about
killing, and burning 'till we are stronger; -- this Long Island trade briskly
carried on, does the business fast enough, so that in a little time we may be
ready for every thing that can happen.


Fid. You may be sure, Flutter will stand up for the trade; -- He gets money
so, without fighting for it; -- he cares for little else besides his purse; you
may always find him, where there is the least fighting, and the most money: -- I
tell you plainly, Gentlemen, I Am not very fond of such fellows; -- give me the
Man that will fight, and let the money go to the Devil: -- I Will lay you a
wager, that this same Flutter, though he is so zealous now, will be a Whig again,
as soon as he has well lined his pockets.


Plunk. Enough on that head, Mr. Fidfaddy; -- there is no necessity for all
f^ghting, and Mr. Flutter acts his part well: -- But let us (...) the Gentleman
from New York: -- You have undoubtedly, Sir, information of importance to
communicate; -- and in the first place, what are the politics of the day.


Spy. Gen^^emen, however disagre^able it may be, yet you may rest a^sur'd, that
the British have laid aside all tho'ts of subduing this Country by force of
arms; -- the Rebels are so numerous and warlike, and have such powerful Allies,
and plentiful resourses, that it is impossible ever to conquer them: -- You see
the British troops are defeated in all parts; -- every expedition miscarries;
-- their arms a^e disgraced; -- and their power shamefully circumscribed to
limits, which are every day growing narrower: -- This is the daily topic of
conversation of all ranks at New York.


Plunk. You relate such strange things, that it will give my faith a severe
trial to credit it; -- What? The mighty Britain not subdue the ignorant
undisciplined rabble of America! -- Astonishing! I will not believe a word of it.


Gibb. I Am persuaded, Mr. Plunket, the man speaks the truth; -- I Have known him
from a child, and he never was caught in a lie in all his life; -- his story
makes my belly ach; but then I must believe him af'ral.


Spy. I fancy you may venture to believe me this once, -- for I am here by
General Clinton's orders, and if I fail to execute them, he will not fail to
execute me: -- I should cut a fine figure to return to his Excellency, and tell
him I could do no business, because nobody would credit me; -- such horrid
trifling in affairs of such importance, would entirely spoil the fine character
you have there, and would go near to cost me my head, besides breaking up the
best plan that ever was laid.


Plunk. We must hear him, I believe then; -- but if you say any thing, beside
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, you will not only suffer
immediate death, but will be eternally damned afterward.


Spy. Truly, I never understood before, that Mr. Plunket was a civil
Magistrate, to administer oaths, and to pronounce sentence of death; and a
Pope, to send folks to the Devil; yet as great a novelty as it is, I find it is
true: -- But leaving this, I return to the point: -- I am sensible, Gentlemen,
that what I Have related has a melancholy aspect: -- I wish things were
otherwise; -- but so matters are, and they cannot be helped; -- we can only make
the best of our situation, by rendering that of our enemies as distressing as
possible: -- This will be effected in part by plundering as much of their
property as we are able, and by destroying the rest.


Plunk. But how can we, under our present circumstances, attempt any such
thing, with safety to ourselves: -- without that support, which you say the
King cannot afford us, we should soon lose our lives, if we begun to plunder and
burn.


Spy. Don't fear for your safety, Mr. Plunket; -- every thing that can possibly
happen has been attended to and provided against; -- you have parts to act, in
the execution of which, you will be perfectly safe: -- to bring devastation and
distress upon the Country they cannot conquer, is now the policy of Britain; --
Arnold is at the head of the plan, and a good fellow he is; -- he will not stop
his sword for the shrieks of the Virgin, nor the cries of the infant; -- his
malice against the Country is now raised to so high a pitch, that were it in
his power, he would spread flames and death, from one end of the Continent to
the other.


Plunk. To see him fulfill his warmest desires, would give me the sincerest
pleasure; -- my heart is entirely with his in this matter; -- but how can this
be done, without an armed force sufficient to disperse the Rebels.


Spy. It cannot be expected, that we shall do all at once; -- we must do every
thing we can, and leave the rest to Providence: -- The first thing to be done,
is to circulate as much counterfeit money as possible: -- Money, Gentlemen, is
the sinews of war; -- it is a hinge on which all their movements turn; -- and
we all know that America has none, but are sensible at the same time that their
paper currency, has been a substitute for it, and has answered all the purposes
of solid coin: -- Now to destroy the credit of this, is to baffle them in their
only resource.


Flut. The paper money is so sunk already, that I think it lost time to trouble
ourselves any further about that.


Spy. The credit of it, though low, is not sufficiently gone; -- it passes at
the exchange as current as silver; and while that is the case, it much
embarrasses the conducting of the illicit trade; -- a most important
consideration; since the express purpose of the trade is, to drain as much as
possible of hard money, and provisions, from the Country; by which their
affairs will be embarrassed; -- their armies will want supplies; -- and their
resistance will be feeble: -- Now it is evident, that while their currency has a
circulation, the People will insist upon the Merchant's taking it, or they
will not trade; -- in either way Government will be disappointed in their designs.


Gibb. You're right; -- all paper money must be spoilt, and nothing will spoil
it so well, as putting out so much counterfeit, as will make every body afraid
on it all.


Spy. That Is the design, Mr. Gibber, and you must be the man to receive and
distribute it; -- you, and your friends, must be indefatigable in conveying it
into circulation, as speedily as po^sible.


Gibb. But the question is first, how I shall git it? -- For I Will be hanged, if
I get killed a gitting on it.


Spy. That Is my business, Mr. Gibber; -- you will receive the money free of
trouble and danger; -- it will be your part to circulate it, cautiously and
faithfully.


Gibb. Never fear me, I Will scatter it fast enough, I Will warrant ye; -- I love
to live well, you know; -- I can buy some cattle with it, and other articles;
-- spend a great deal more at taverns, and in good company; -- give some away
to children and Negroes; -- contrive now and then to lose a bundle; -- but
above all, I can give it away, faster than you can make it at New York.


Spy. I depend, Mr. Gibber, on your fidelity; -- and I have it in command from
the General, to promise you a reward beyond your utmost wishes, if you conduct
agreeable to our expectations.


Gibb. I shall do the best I can, for this scheme will please my Wife beyond
all bounds.


Spy. Having dispatched the money, let us attend, in the next place, to the
trade, and how it may be conducted most successfully.


Plunk. This, I fancy, is a most intricate business; -- it will require our
utmost penetration and ingenuity, to guard it on all sides against
interruption; -- the Rebels are all alert on this subject, and seem to be
determined to disconcert every measure; and they have been fortunate enough to
succeed in their first attempt, so as to render a total change of the mode
absolutely necessary.


Flut. True, Mr. Plunket, I Have experienced what you say to my sorrow; -- I Have
been entirely out of business, ever since my goods were seized; and every
scheme to get any more has failed.


Fid. The coast is lined with guards all along shore, and the Sound is full of
Boats and Privateers, so that I should think it impossible ever to escape 'em
all.


Flut. Yes, and there is that damned Frankly, and his Comrades, whom I dread
more than all the guards; -- a few dollars will make any centry be still, but
money nor threats cannot move them, I know.


Spy. It Is all true, Gentlemen; but you must remember that every thing is known
better at New York, than it is here, and they are better able to find remedies
for all difficulties, which I can assure you is already done; -- a plan is
deeply laid, and in part executed, that will effectually restore the trade; --
all that is wanted is a little assistance from you.


Plunk. Every assistance you request, will most readily be afforded: -- but I Am
impatient to hear what this plan can be; -- it must certainly be an ingenious
one, to overcome so many obstacles, and at the some time, to be kept a secret
from the eyes of the world: -- to me indeed it appears little less than
impossible.


Spy. Oh! Sir, nothing can be more natural and easy; it is no more than setting
on foot, a plundering scheme to the Island, under a notion of retaliation: --
Let a number of Boats be equipped, and property officer'd, and the business is
done: -- The Governor of Connecticut is old, and can easily be duped into
measures, by their having a plausible appearance, that will ultimately end in
the ruin of the State.


Plunk. This is truly a deep laid plan, and I believe it will succeed, if Men
subtle and faithful enough, can be found to execute it.


Spy. That Is the easiest part of the whole: -- The bare Idea of hard money, is
so bewitching to Men, who have so long been destitute of it, that the
consideration of a trifling sum in prospect, will induce the hottest Whig in
the State, to abandon his principles, desert the cause of his Country, and join
heartily with us, in subverting it is Independency.


Plunk. But can it be concealed from the prying eyes of the Populace?


Spy. I Have no fear on that head: -- Retaliation is a very popular notion in the
Country now, and the pleasure arising from it is being put in practice, will
overbalance every consequence.


Plunk. I Am exceedingly pleased with the design: -- I find that there is wiser
heads in the world than mine: -- but will not it be difficult to preserve, among
those who carry it on, an union and good understanding, so necessary to it is
success? -- From the nature of the service, they will be rivals of interest, as
well as honor, whence jealousies and disputes, will be apt to arise, which
will prove fatal to the plan, if not to all concerned.


Spy. Measures are concerted to prevent all this: -- no one is to be employed
to command a Boat in this service, but such as we shall choose, from among
those, who are in appearance the most furious, and noisy, in the cause of their
Country, but in reallity, would readily sell it for hard cash; -- and if any of
a different character should unfortunately get a commission, reports must be
circulated to his disadvantage, and you must never leave traducing him, 'till
he is either turned out, or quits the service: -- Care must also be taken, to
preserve the popular clamor in favor of retaliation, and plundering those
goods, which, it must be said, are placed along the north shore of Long Island,
for a bait to the Connecticut People: -- by these means the business will
receive no check; -- but if any insuperable difficulties should arise, the
party that thinks himself aggrieved, must be satisfied from the King's treasury.


Plunk. The whole is exquisite; -- it charms my heart, to think of the
important, and salutary consequences that must ensue: -- But is not there a
deficiency, observable in the plan? -- You can transport as many goods as you
please, across the Sound, and receive hard money therefore, but you say nothing
about provisions, and that is a capital point.


Spy. If we can exchange our goods for hard money, our principal end is
obtained; -- it being impossible for them to exist without it. -- I would just
observe here, that it is happy for us, in the execution of this project, that
the Americans have yet to learn, that parting with staple commodities, and
specie, for foreign articles of Luxury, introduces a gay and gaudy poverty: --
Yet so great is their infatuation, through love of finery; -- so agreeable are
tinsel'd ornaments to their natural genius, that a man would part with his
working cattle, for a velvet suit, and a woman her milch cow, for a si^k gown,
though thereby they deprive themselves of their only means of subsistence: --
This disposition properly encouraged, will assist us greatly; -- we can lull
them asleep, by our finery* and make them forget the great concerns of their
Country: -- You never knew a peasant, that distinguished himself as a soldier,
in a velvet coat.


Plunk. True, Sir; -- but the Country will still be in a flourishing condition,
though destitute of money, if they have plenty of provisions; while our friends
at New York are suffering for want of them.


Spy. Nothing will be easier than to convey over all the provisions that can be
procured: -- They must be previously deposited in some secret, and unguarded
place on the shore, from whence they will be taken in the night, by a boat
which set sail for the Island the day before, and returned under cover of the
darkness.


Plunk. No further objection can be made to the plan: -- It is, I think,
brought to perfection.


Spy. I have yet to mention one thing more, which will very greatly advance the
trade.


Plunk. Pray what is that?


Spy. It is making a sham use of hostilities.


Plunk. Pray how, and to what purpose?


Spy. Let one of the Traders go to the Island, and agree with the Merchants
upon time and place: -- After his return, he will sit out a vessel for the
West Indies, or elsewhere; but before he gets out of the Sound, he must be
taken, and carried to New York, according to agreement: -- Returning from his
short captiv^ty, apparently in the greatest poverty and distress, he will sit
out a Boat, or small Privateer, to get satisfaction for his late loss, and he
will be sure to capture some small craft, loaded with goods, to the full amount
of his vessel and cargo: -- But this is a tender point: -- I need not be
explicit, for those, who act upon this plan, must first go to the Island, where
they will receive every direction; -- the Boatmen will be greatly assistant,
and all may be helpful to one another.


Plunk. What wisdom and foresight in the Authors of such plans!


Spy. I will just hint one thing more, to convince you, that every engine is at
work, to accomplish this business: -- Let all masters of vessels, and boats
employed by us, have a written protection, from the Commander in Chief, that if
they should happen to be really taken, by some of his Majesty's cruizers, that
were ignorant of the plan, their vessels and cargoes might be returned to them
again without fraud or emb^zzlement: -- This plan has this important advantage,
that all Rebels, who may happen to be on board such captur'd vessels, may be
retained prisoners of war, while all true Loyalists, will be immediately
discharged, with all their proper^y, unhurt.


Plunk. This part is pleasing above all others: -- here is a proper distinction
between friends and enemies.


Spy. It is expected, Gentlemen, that you will all be assiduous, in carrying
into execution, th^se plans for renewing the trade, though the greatest share of
trouble will fall upon Mr. Flutter, who will go with me to the Island, and
procure such papers, and instructions, as may be necessary: -- You Have no
objections, Mr. Flutter?


Flut. I shall serve my King, in this way with the utmost readiness; for being
out of business, my family, in their expensive way of living, will soon bring
me to poverty.


Plunk. You may depend, Sir, upon the strenuous exertions of each of us: -- But
have you any thing more to communicate?


Spy. I have, and most important matters too; -- you no doubt have heard of the
association of the Refugees on the Island.


Plunk. We Have heard of it; but are entirely ignorant of it is design.


Spy. The design is very extensive; -- they have a number of armed vessels and
transpor^s, sufficient for defense, and conveyance across the Sound, to some of
the sea port towns in this State, which is to be the seat of their operations;
-- they are to be supplied with arms, and ammunition from the public stores,
but are to have no pay, nor provisions, but what they can get; -- this will be
a stimulus to them, to urge them on in quest of plunder: -- They will be
directed to seize, and bring off as much property as possible, and to burn and
destroy the rest; and all persons of every age and sex, will be put to the
sword without distinction, ^^cept perhaps a few, who may be preserved alive,
from mere grace and favor.


Plunk. I doubt this last will hurt their character, as it appears rather too
cruel.


Spy. It is thought to be necessary, since it will intimidate the Country, and
strike it with a dread of their arms.


Plunk. I fear you will be mistaken here; for I Have observed that this Country is
more apt to be enraged, than intimidated at such treatment; -- they will all
share the same fate themselves, I doubt.


Spy. They certainly expect it, if they fall into the enemies hands; but you
may be assured they will die to a man, rather than be taken; -- it will be bloody
work for the Rebels.


Plunk. Well, I can only say, go on, and Heaven succeed you.


Spy. The operations of this a^mament, will afford a happy asylum for our
p^^^ecuted friends in the Country to ^lee to, from the malice of their enemies.


Gibb. Now I Am made for this world; -- I Have though it in my soul I should be hanged
a thousand times; -- but now I shall be safe; -- I will not be ^eart to death no
more.


Spy. But don't relax in the least, on this account; -- be as cautious and
vigilant as ^ver; -- you may be arrested and secured, before you can get under
their protection: And besides, whilst you are here, you are much more
serviceable to the cause, than you could be there.


Plunk. True, Sir, an open enemy is not so dangerous as a secret one; -- this
is the reason that Spies, by the Law of nations, are always executed, as soon
as detected.


Spy. Ay, and the Rebels would mutton me quick enough, if they knew of my being
here; for I can do 'em more hurt in one night than I could in ten years at
New York.


Plunk. Your being caught now, would be of infinite damage to us; -- let our
business be concluded with all expedition, and do you make your escape to
New York, with the utmost speed: -- but cannot the Loyals in the Country, be
assistant to the associated force in their operations?


Spy. Assistant? -- Indeed Sir they will be; -- so important a circumstance as
that, could not be neglected: -- To raise a body of troops in the Country, and
assist them in getting to New York, is one thing designed to be effected by the
Association: -- It Is above two months now, since Clinton and Arnold, sent each
a declaration into the Country, offering full pardon and protection, to all who
were willing to return to their allegiance.


Plunk. These, Sir, we have seen, but have been doubtful of their effect.


Spy. The proposed effect could not fail to take place; -- they were designed,
not to convert any of the adherents to Congress, but to revive the hearts of
the true Loyalists, and convince them that they were not f^rgotten, and thus
preparing the way, for the inlisting orders, which immediately followed.


Plunk. Inlisting orders do you say? -- You surprise me.


Spy. Yes! -- It Is now two months, since inlisting orders were sent into
different parts of the Country, by trusty hands: -- And I know it to be true,
that above two thousand Men are already inlisted, who are all ready, at a
moments warning, to act in concert with the associated forces.


Plunk. Now I Am astonished! -- Can it be true? -- The world's now our own! --
But how is it possible, that this could be completed without a discovery?


Spy. When it was proposed, to raise this body of troops, in the Country, the
proper officers were all picked ou^; and* together with the orders, was sent a
promise of their commissions, upon their procuring the specified number of Men:
-- This made them vigilant and circumspect.


Plunk. So far is good; but how could the inlistments be concealed?


Spy. When any man, after seeing the orders, and knowing the conditions, was
desirous of inlisting, he declared in the presence of two Men, who had
previously engaged, that he accepted of the offers, and conditions, and was
determined to comply with every requisition; -- in confirmation of this, he
then signed a b^ank paper, which was carefully conveyed to me at N^w-York.


Plunk. What a wise foresight was this? -- The discovery of a proper
inlistment, would have been the death of all that had signed it.


Spy. We could not be ignorant of this; and therefore it was necessary to adopt
a mode, that would secure the inlisted from danger.


Plunk. But how are these men to be collected, and sent off?


Spy. I was a going to tell you; -- the first descent that will be made by the
Associators, is fixed at about the middle of April; -- as many Men as possible
must be in readiness by that time, from this State, that of New York, and
Massachusetts, and even as far as Vermont, whether inlistments are sent: -- A
few days before their approach, they will give you notice of the time; -- this
you will circulate to all friends, with the utmost expedition: -- Then
immediately, you will prepare to collect yourselves with all diligence, at some
suitable rendezvous, a reasonable distance from the water side, and so situate,
if possible, as to have considerable settlements, on the nearest rout, from
thence, to the place where the descent will be made, so that you can do the
more mischief, in your march to join the Associators: -- They will assist your
collecting, by making a false alarm, a day or two before the time appointed,
and at some distance from the place of action; -- at the alarm numbers of you
will appear zealous in the Country's cause, and march with the rest for it is
defense, taking care to leave them at the first opportunity, and immediately
join your friends, at the appointed rendezvous: -- After the inhabitants of the
Country, are thus pretty generally drawn off, and the Loyalists collected, the
true alarm will be given, by a heavy discharge of artillery: -- You will then,
suddenly rush from your ambuscade, and, with an unrelenting hand, spread ruin,
destruction, and slaughter; -- killing, without pity, every man, woman, and
child; -- making complete havoc of cattle, and all other stock; -- and burning
every house, and other building, that may be within your reach, while marching
to join the associated force.


Plunk. But is not this rather too cruel, Sir? -- will not reason, and common
sense, reproach us for barbarity?


Spy. It is the intention of his most gracious Majesty, not only to impoverish,
but to depopulate the Country, as fast as possible: -- You may be assured, that
the King is meditating a terrible vengeance, against those daring Rebels, that
refuse to submit to his righteous Authority: -- The present design, I must
confess, is unprecedented among civilized nations; but the enormities practiced
in this Country, are likewise unprecedented, and call aloud for unprecedented
punishment: -- His Majesty, therefore, determines, by the help of God, to
extirpate them, by degrees, from the face of the Earth, that all nations may
tremble, when they see the dreadful consequences of awaking the wrath of
inexorable Britain: -- And all that are assistant in accomplishing this
desirable business, will not only save themselves from a swift destruction, but
will merit applause from all good Men, and will receive a glorious reward from
the King.


Fid. This is, this is, what I Have always wished for: -- The Rebels deserve every
thing, the King can do to 'em: -- I Have always told 'em they would have it with a
vengeance bimeby, but they only laughed at me sor't; and now they may take what
follows; -- my thinks they will cut a fine figure, running a wild goose chase
after the Loyal Refugees, at the same time that their houses are in flames at
home, and their wives and children, with their throats cut: -- But they shall
have no pity from me, I Will warrant 'em.


Gibb. Pity 'em? -- No indeed! -- They may die and be po^t, af'ral me; -- it is
good enough for 'em; -- they deserve it all and more too; -- they might have
behaved better an' they would.


Plunk. We need^'t carry the point any further, Gentleman; the case is very
plain, that the exercise of pity toward them, at this critical juncture, will
procure the ruin of ourselves, and our cause; -- let us therefore, lay aside
every unmanly passion, and forward this plan, all that lies in our power; the
good consequences of which, can be proved from reason, and common sense, to
outweigh every other consideration.


Spy. Gentlemen, I am glad to see you so engaged in this plan; -- your
approbation is absolutely necessary to it is execution; -- you can be of great
service to those levies, by assisting them with your advice, and supplying them
with necessaries: -- I must just inform you, that Col. Lopjaw has the principal
hand, in conducting this affair; to him therefore you will apply for
directions; -- you will give full credit to all he shall say: -- Don't forget
the other plans. -- By a little policy, the Rebels themselves, can be made
subservient to our designs; -- they have so many passions, prejudices,
suspicions, and jealousies, that they can easily be set at swords points with
each other, which will assist us greatly, by taking off the attention of the
world from us: -- Gentlemen, our business is ended.


Plunk. Well, my dear Christian friends, let no man's heart fail him, in this
great and important business; -- let none of those, that have put their hands
to the plough, look back; -- but let us persevere to the end, doing what our
hands find to do, with all our might, as for our lives: -- And if there is any
so inconsiderate, as to refuse doing his duty in this day of need, I shall only
repeat these words of scripture to him, "Cursed is he that keeps his hands
from shedding blood."


All. Amen! Amen! Exeunt.

Gibber solus. What we have so long, and earnestly desired is now coming to pass:
-- Those sons of darkness, who have with so much malice, plotted the ruin of
others, will meet their fate at a time they little expect it.

When ^ull'd to sleep, beneath night's sable wing,
A fatal hour will sudden ruin bring;
The astonished land will scarce perceive her fall,
'Till one wide desolation covers all.

Scene closes. End of the third act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
A Tavern. Scene opens, and discovers the Landlord looking over his books. I
COULD NOT have though it, I Would so many dribbling debts due; -- here is above thirty
pounds for drams and nips: -- People are so abominable careless! -- I shall
lose money by my tavern, at this rate; and yet they will be mad, if I insist upon
pay down always: -- However they cannot say nothing, if I ask 'em for these
dribblets now, which have been due, some on 'em, this six or seven years: -- I
wish people, these hard times at least, would reckon up how much they could
afford to spend at a tavern, and so pay more often, -- 'twou'd be better for
them, and me too: -- Enter Fearless. Sir, your most obedient; -- you're well,
Sir, I hope; -- will you take a seat? -- It Is dull raw weather, and my fire is
rather low; -- we'll have it better directly: -- Boy! Hand in some wood.

Fear. There needs no excuse, Landlord; -- pray, give yourself not the least
trouble, on my account; I only stepped in, to hear the news, and converse a
little upon politics.


Land. The post is not come in yet; -- I expect him every minute; -- I Am
anxious to know every thing that is said or done, at this time.


Fear. So am I; -- I look upon this as an important era in American politics;
-- our affairs are fast approaching to a decisive crisis.


Land. There is abundant reason for what you say; -- the disagreeable
occurrences to the southward, have given an unexpected turn to our prospects of
glory and success.


Fear. I am not so much concerned, at any misfortunes of our troops, as I be at
the secret pl^t^, and machinations of the Tories; -- the first, can be remedied
by vigilance, and activity, but I fear the last, can neither be detected, nor
prevented.


Land. Very true, Sir, the first is bad, but the last is worse: -- I Have been
jealous that some desperate measures, have been a contriving this good while;
-- I Have not the least proof; but from appearances I Am suspicious.


Fear. You don't judge without probable grounds, Sir: -- You have noticed, I
dare say, the peculiar alertness, and pleasure that has been observable, in the
countenance of every Tory, ever since the infamous defection of Arnold.


Enter Frankly. Frank. Gentlemen, your humble servant; -- the post is not
arrived, I perceive.


Land. He has not; -- please to take a seat.


Frank. Have you any news worth the hearing, Gentlemen?


Land. Nothing at all, Sir.


Frank. Then I must beg leave to relate, what I have just heard.


Fear. You Will oblige us much, Sir; -- please to proceed.


Frank. A Gentlemen of veracity, who has been a long time prisoner on the
Island, and has this day arrived in town from thence, imforms me, that the
Refugees and others, to the amount of about three thousand, have associated
themselves together, under a Board of Directors, of their own creating; and
their design is, to come over to the main, and there to plunder, burn, and kill
all before them.


Fear. This don't surprise me in the least; -- I expected nothing less from
those bloodthirsty men: -- Their malignant dispositions urges them to measures
that humanity revolts at the Idea of.


Frank. Clinton supplies this murdering banditti, with armed vessels, and
transports, sufficient for their operations, together with arms, and
ammunition, and he is to have a negative upon all their movements; with only
this reservation, they are to be commanded by the said Board of Directors: --
They will draw no pay, nor provisions, but what they can plunder, will be their
own.


Fear. My blood boils, when I see the barbarous repetition, of the cruel, and
unprecedented measures, which are continually adopted, by British lawlessness,
for the base purpose, of worrying, and dragooning, a brave and free people,
into an ignominious state of servitude, and wretchedness.


Frank. I should think, Gentlemen, it is high time for America to arouse, and
act like herself; -- for the genius of the people, to renew the enthusiasm,
which opened the war, and put the law of retaliation in force, if Congress
longer neglect to perform their solemn engagements for that purpose.


Fear. There is a certain point, Gentlemen, to which patience and forbearance
is a virtue; but beyond that it is the greatest madness and folly: -- The
almost infinite number of insults, which our feelings have suffered, since the
commencement of the war, from British pride and insolence, declares, in
language too powerful to be neglected, that if we fail to recriminate, slavery
is our due, and slavery will most certainly, and justly, be our portion.


Land. I Am of opinion, that if the British had not gi'n over all tho'ts of
conquering us, they would never though it of such a plan as this Association: -- When
they no longer expect to subdue us, they have nothing else to do, but make
themselves rich, and us poor.


Frank. It will be happy for us, if the influence of this Association extends
no further, than plundering a few towns; -- for my part, I wish I could truly
assert, that there was nothing of the like kind, on foot among ourselves.


Fear. ( Apart to Landlord) You see we are not alone in suspecting that the --


Enter Fidfaddy. Land. Sit down, Fidfaddy: -- Have you settled that dirty
affair with Col. Trueheart?


Fid. Not I: -- I Have no affair to settle with him, that troubles me much.


Land. Ay, Fidfaddy, the Colonel's a Gentleman, and scorns to dirty his
fingers, with such mean rascals as you; and that is your security: -- But you
may depend on it, Fidfaddy, if you would insulted me, as you did him, I Would have made
you sorry you ever was born.


Fid. Mythinks you're mighty queer; -- I don't know what you mean; -- I never
insulted him as I know on.


Fear. A certain concomitant of Toryism, is lying: -- Fidfaddy, you have the
barefaced e^frontery, to deny your abuse to him, even in the presence of those,
who were eye and ear witnesses of the facts: -- This is a most expressive
specimen of genuine Toryism.


Land. An't you ashamed of your self now, Fidfaddy? -- To be detected in this
manner, is perfectly ridiculous.


Fear. Ashamed? -- No indeed: -- There cannot be a greater prodigy in nature,
than to see a Tory ashamed; -- for it is morally impossible, in the nature of
things, for any man ever to be a Tory, before he has destroyed all remains of
those feelings, from which shame can ever arise, even after committing the
vilest enormities.


Land. You're right, Sir; for I never saw a Tory, but I, at the same time, saw
a thief, a liar, a robber, a traitor, a murderer, and every thing else that is
bad.


Fid. Do you call me a thief, a liar, --


Land. Stop your insults, at my house; -- I Will not bear a word from you; --
yes, you're all those, and ten thousand times more; -- there hasn't been a day
this twenty years, but what you have deserved the gibbet for your villainies.


Fid. These are high words; -- I guess you will have to prove 'em.


Land. Nothing would be more agreeable, than to be put upon the proof; -- we
should soon be rid of you, I Would warrant you. Enter Standwell and Plunket. Mr.
Standwell, I Am a'most ashamed on you; -- do you keep company with such a vile
Tory as Plunket?


Stand. Accident is my excuse for this time; -- I don't practice it, for I have
as good an esteem for an infernal, as for any of the tribe: -- But I see that
you are chargeable with a similar crime your selves; -- how happens this,
Gentlemen?


Frank. As accident is your excuse, necessity must be ours: -- This impudent
fellow come in here, and we cannot rid ourselves of him unless by force.


Stand. If he behaves civilly, it is best I believe to omit rash measures, and
let him sit in the corner with Plunket, if they choose to stay in the house.


Fid. You're a pack of damned Rebels; -- I shall not forget none of these abuses;
-- things will get right bimeby.


Stand. Perhaps not so soon as you imagine; -- you may depend upon hard blows
first.


Fid. Yes, yes, I s'pose so; -- but I b'lieve you will get the most on 'em; -- I
hope you will.


Plunk. What a parcel of eternal fools you be, to seek your own destruction so
eagerly; -- although mercy is once more offered, by our most gracious King, and
you could have your pardons signed and sealed to you, only by asking for 'em;
yet, like fool hardy wretches, you despise the proffered kindness, which I can
assure you, will never be repeated more, and are desperate enough to continue
obstinately bent, in pursuing this most daring, and impious rebellion, against
the best of Kings, and to insult and abuse his dutiful and loyal subjects: --
How amazingly great your guilt!


Frank. By the offers of mercy, which you mention, I suppose you mean Clinton's
declaration.


Plunk. I do, and it ought to melt the most hardest heart, into a deep sense of
the vast, and unbounded condescension, and goodness of the King, in yet
stooping so low, as to give you one more space to repent in, after you have so
long continued in rebellion, against his righteous Authority, and have so
repeatedly slighted his reiterated offers of pardon and forgiveness, which he
has most graciously been pleased, to grant you so often: -- And let the
con^ideration, of the dreadful heiniousness, of still continuing, to reject his
proposals of favor, lie with proper weight on your minds.


Frank. If we could be convinced, that we were in rebellion, and stood in need
of pardon, we should most readily accept of the offers: -- But do you think it
is safe, to trust to this declaration?


Plunk. Safe, do you ask? -- I Am surprised at the question! -- Heaven and Earth
may pass away, but not one jot or tittle of the King's word shall ever fail; --
it will all be performed to a punctilio.


Frank. I must confess, that I am not so credulous; -- so many have been
deceived already, by trusting to such broken reeds, that I should not really
think myself safe, under it is protection.


Plunk. Then you, in effect, give the lie to the King; -- you durst not trust
so faithful a King; -- astonishing! -- Had you confidence in him, only as a
grain of mustard seed, it would instantly remove all your doubts and fears,
though they were as great, and extensive, as your guilt.


Frank. Without doubt, Sir; but we lack such sort of faith: -- I have no
disposition to trust a man with my life, who has so often proved himself, to be
totally devoid of every principle of truth and humanity.


Plunk. Who made you a judge of the truth of what the King says, or of the
humanity of what he does! -- I tell you, ye plaguey fools, if you believe it is
possible, for the King ever to utter a fashood, or do a cruel action, you
deserve to be hung in gibbets, as traitors.


Frank. Then you suppose the King to be as infallible as his Holiness, the
Pope: -- But what if be denies to day, what he asserted yesterday; -- would not
that be a contradiction?


Plunk. If such a thing should happen, you must suppose that the nature of
things alters just so; -- or you must believe, that he is so much above the
common race of mortals, that you are not able to comprehend the misterious
meaning of what he says; -- at any rate, we are never to dispute the truth of
Majesty; but always to rest satisfied, that he never utters any thing but the
simple verity.


Frank. Allowing what you have now said to be just, yet what shall we do, if he
commands, by one edict, under the severest penalties, what he forbids under
pain of death, by another.


Plunk. He never did any such thing, I Will warrant ye.


Frank. Not too hasty, Sir! -- We shall soon make you acknowledge it.


Plunk. You lie, Sir! -- The thing is impossible.


Frank. You are sensible, Sir, that it is death by the Laws of England, for any
person to join, and assist an Assembly, riotously collected, for the purpose of
subverting the Laws of the Land.


Plunk. I know it well, Sir; -- and what then?


Frank. Only turn to your adored declaration, and you will find, it enjoins
upon all, as a positive duty, without which, no one can be restored to the
favor of his most sacred Majesty; -- to collect riotously together in large
bodies; -- to exert themselves, in overthrowing the constitution of the Empire;
-- to endeavor at subverting the established Laws of their native Land; -- to
sow dissension, disturbance, and confusion, far and wide; -- in short, to
overwhelm the Country, in slaughter, bloodshed, ruin, and devastation. -- Hear,
and blush for your connections, Mr. Plunket.


Plunk. You're a parcel of cursed Rebels; -- no true Loyal can endure your
company; Enter Gibber. Mr. Gibber, I Am glad to see you; -- these Rebels are
very hard upon us; -- we can sight 'em now, on an equal footing.


Gibb. I should be mighty glad, to see it out with 'em; but I cannot stay now;
I Have some business to do, which must be done to night.


Plunk. I Will not stay then, if you go; -- I shall be as uneasy, as a fish out
of water, to be here alone.


Gibb. ( Apart to Plunket) I want you to go long of me, to marry our Betty;
I Have been a'ter you, and you wan't at home; -- her hushand has come from the
Island, and says it must be done to night; and I guess it is time, by her looks.


Plunk. I Will go immediately: -- Landlord, gi^e me a glass of your Nantz, and
I Will free myself of your company very quick.


Land. With all my heart, Sir; and glad to get rid on you so.


Plunk. Mr. Gibber, here is success to the British arms, and a speedy downfall
to rebellion.


Gibb. That Is a good toast: -- Here Is a health to King George, and all his good
friends in America.


Fid. Amen to that, by my old leather breeches: -- Here Is damnation to the
Congress, by my soul, and all the damned Yankees.


Gibb. Let us push our boat now. Exeunt hastily.


Land. I believe it is time, you scoundrels.


Frank Such conversation is surely intolerable; -- but we must bear it for the
present: -- I hope before long, that we may have it in our power, to silence
such foul mouthed rascals.


Land. Come think no more on 'em, -- they are gone, and I Am very glad on it; for
now I can take a little pleasure in your company: -- Whilst they was here, I
felt as bad as I should in Newgate.


Stand. They must certainly have a peculiar faculty of producing pain, if they
are capable of rendering the place where they be, as irksome as that den of
horror: -- To be confined so far under ground, and among such inhabitants,
would be far more terrible to me than death.


Fear. That Is the very design of the prison; -- when a malefactor is found
guilty of such enormous crimes, that death is too low a punishment for him,
though inflicted with all it is horrors, and torments, he is then consigned to
Newgate, as to a punishment, in some degree adequate, to the crimes of one, who
deserves more than death.


Stand. Considered in this view I approve of it; -- though I must confess, that
my nature revolted, at the Idea of treating a fellow creature with so much
severity, though he were guilty of the blackest villainies; -- but now I
perceive it was designed for the Tories, and it is suitable for them.


Land. Nobody can ever pity those monsters, I Am sure, if they were to lie there
all their days.


Fear. No Sir; -- they would deserve no pity, though the horror of their
confinement, should be aggravated by torments of the most excruciating nature:
-- The common death of a malefactor, would, in their case, by no means satisfy
the broken Laws of their injured Country; -- nothing but the painful extension
of a miserable existence, can be adequate to their crimes, and make such
atonement for them, as humanity itself requires.


Stand. If the Tories are as bad as I have lately heard hinted from you, and
Mr. Frankly, I entirely acquiesce in what you say; but I can hardly believe
them to be so horridly abandoned.


Frank. As soon as we have received the news, we design a private interview;
when I am persuaded, you will be convinced of the truth of all that has been
hinted.


Land. There needs no words to convince me, that the Devil, and a Tory, are as
devilish, as their chains will let them: -- They Are at least first cousins, and
nothing could please me better than to see --


Frank. (hearing a noise) Hush! -- Somebody approaches.


Enter Gallop. Land. Mr. Gallop, I Am glad to see you; -- we have waited a good
while for you.


Gal. I believe I have not news enough to pay for it; -- if I had not a been
hindered longer than I expected, I Would have been here three hours ago. The
newspapers are distributed.


Frank. The papers, Gentlemen, we can read at our leisure; -- we shall only
enquire, Mr. Gallop, whether you have any verbal news.


Gal. I don't think of any thing worth naming, -- I did hear too, by a man from
Philadelphia, that the trade from that city, to New York, is as brisk as ever
'twas before the war; and they are no ways private about it neither.


Fear. I am surprised! -- What trade with the enemy from the first city on the
Continent; -- and where the Congress sits too: -- It cannot be! -- I don't
believe a word of it: -- It is only a shameful lie, invented by the traders
here, to keep themselves in countenance; -- and I am astonished to hear you
report it


Gal. I Am not answerable for other people's faults; -- I only told you what I
heard, and if it is a lie, you have it as cheap as I; -- nobody can blame me for
telling what I hear, sure.


Fear. Yes they can; -- the state of our affairs, at this juncture, is so
critical, that every one, and post riders more especially, ought to spread no
reports, but those they are satisfied are true, and even then, prudence is
necessary: -- To act otherways is a species of business, that no considerate
man that is friendly, will be guilty of.


Gal. Every man, you know, must think for himself.


Frank. But what else have you, Mr. Gallop?


Gal. Nothing material, without it is, that the old continental money passes at
one hundred and fifty for one, at the Southward.


Fear. How did you get this information?


Gal. By the Southern post.


Fear. You may depend upon it, that the Southern post is a Tory, else he would
never have reported such a notorious falsehood.


Gal. I Am as much a Tory as he; -- he only told what he heard, and I Have done
the same, -- and shall continue to do so, af'ral you.


Fear. So you may; -- but if you are a real friend to your Country, you ought
to use a little prudence at least: -- Indiscretion hurts the cause, as much as
enmity; and when any one assists the enemy, through imprudence, he is so far a
Tory: -- I do not suppose that you are inimical upon design; yet I must
observe, that you often do mischief, for want of prudence and discretion.


Gal. I tell you what, Sir, the people ought to know every thing that is doing,
that they may know how to take advantage of the times, and improve those good
opportunities of making their fortunes: -- They complain, and with reason too,
that intelligence has often been kept from 'em, to their great damage.


Fear. And I Will tell you what too, Mr. Gallop, I Will exert myself to the utmost,
to bring to the most exemplary punishment, the man that I find taking those
advantages you mention; -- it is most disgraceful to humanity, that any among
the race, is capable of being so sordid, so base, so abject, and so lost to all
the tender feelings of humanity, as to improve opportunities of enriching
themselves, out of the ruins of their Country; -- yet this is what you
recommend, and are using your influence to promote.


Gal. I Have always been a friend to my Country, and really wish there was
nothing done wrong in it; -- I should be as much pleased as any on you, to see
the trade stopped, and the money not depreciate no more, and to have all
hu^ksters and sharpers banished the Country forever: -- But as I know of a
great many, that have got large fortunes, by trading and jockying about, why
may not I do so as well as they? -- It Is unreasonable to forbid me, and permit
them.


Fear. This I take to be a sample of your defense of such conduct, and it
amounts to just this, that because there is a number of sly artful villain^,
that are able to elude the Laws, and continue in the practice of every species
of enormity, in spite of every eff^rt to detect, and suppress them, that
therefore it (...), and what every one ought to do: -- A most (...)
vindication! -- A little despicable wealth, though in distant prospect, has the
lament^^le power, of unhinging the man, of suspending the use of his rational
faculties, and of producing effects, which could only be expected from a
confirmed state of madness and stupidity.


Gal. You may give me as much ill language as you please; -- I shall not return it
for I didn't come here to quarrel.


Fear. I Am not quarrelling with you; -- my whole wish and desire is only, to
have you preserve a consistency in your conduct: -- If you mean to be really a
Whig, then join heartily with the friends of your Country, in suppressing every
ruinous practice, and in counterworking the plots of an artful foe.


Gal. I believe I do more good to the cause, than a thousand such ho^ headed,
harum starum fellows, as you be, who are all smoke and no fire.


Fr^nk I suppose, Mr Gallop, that you are endeavoring to bring about a plan,
which I here is in agitation, and which you imagine will establish our
independency at one jolt.


Gal. What plan is it, pray?


Frank. It is this: -- That considering we have plenty of provisions, and no
money; and the enemy have money, but no provisions; all the meat and flour in
the Country, is to be collected and sent to them, for which they will pay the
solid coin: -- By this mean, our finances will be established on a respectable
^ooting; -- our soldiers will be paid; -- and our cause flourish.


Gal. Why I must confess, I Am full in the opinion, that such a step would be
the most proper we could take at this time; for the enemy will, in spite of our
teeth, have all our provisions that they want, and the money for 'em all
centres in private hands, and does the Country no good: -- Now I Would prop^se that
the matter be taken up by Congress, and let all the profits go into the
continental Treasury, for the use of the States.


Fear. This is a happy thought; -- it never entered my noddle before; --
Congress would cut a glorious figure, in the eye of the world, in trading with
the enemy, nay with the very garrison, which is in effect besieged: -- This
cannot fail of placing our finances upon a sure foundation; -- it will defuse
life and vigor through every department; -- restore the expiring patriotism of
my Countrymen, to it is original ardor; -- but above all, by putting a few
dollars into the pockets of the soldiers, our army would make a most formidable
appearance, though destitute of provisions; -- the enemy sure, must tremble at
the sight of such an invincible Phalanx.


Gal. All the world will be convinced, some time or other, that this is the
only plan to gain our point: -- But I must be going: -- Good b'ye. Exit Gallop.


Fear. What a dirty villain this Gallop is! -- Spreading false reports through
the Country, and encouraging the illicit trade.


Frank. True, he deserves a lodgment in Newgate; but at this time he is not
worth notice, since we have more important business on hand: -- Let us retire
and proceed upon it.


All. Agreed Exeunt.


SCENE II.
SCENE changes to a private Room. Enter Landlord, Frankly, Fearless and
Standwell. Frank. I SUPPOSE, Landlord, we need not fear a discovery.


Land Nobody can disturb, or overhear us here, Sir.


Frank. Gentlemen, we are now to consult upon the most importan^ matters; the
circumstances of our Country are most serious and alarming; and our united
exertions are demanded to prevent it is overthrow.


Stand. There seems, Gentlemen, to be something on the carpet, which I am
ignorant of: -- I must request an explanation.


Frank. Why, Sir, have not you heard of the Association at New York and the
Island? -- Don't you know that the R^^ugees design to commence desultory
operations on our coasts, to kill, plunder, and burn, all before them? -- Have
not we every reason to believe, that the Tories among us, are contriving to act
in concert with them? -- why else, are we so often disturbed, late in the
night, by the clatter of horses passing? -- How else, does it happen, that they
are so frequently detected in midnight assemblies? -- How else, can we account
for that remarkable cheerfulness, which is apparent in the countenance of every
Tory, when it is certain, their cause never was at so low an ebb, as it appears
at this time? -- For what purpose do you think, Gentlemen, is that enormous
quantity of provision, and ammunition, which I observed in the house of every
Tory, at the late general seizure? -- Have we not, from these circumstances,
good reason to apprehend that some desperate measures are meditating* by those
outcasts from humanity?


Stand. If I had observed such things as those, I should have thought so; but I
must confess, they have escaped my utmost vigilance.


Fear. The Tories are very wary, and they contrive their plans with great
secresy; -- they are sensible that su^^ess depends entirely upon working in the
dark: -- It ^ust therefore, be a curious and penetrating eye, that can pry into
their councils, discover their secret machinations, unravel their black
conspiracies, and drag the wretched mis^reants, from their lurking holes, to
the light.


Stand. Yet it must be attempted, if what is hinted be tru^.


Frank. You may be assured, that we do not speak from conjecture: -- We have
the most positive evidence, that one of the most cr^^l, and bloody designs, is
on soot among those worse than savages, and that it is almost ripe for
execution.


Land. I have taken notice of the behavior of the To^ies, this good while, and
have been jealous they have been upon some plan: -- I Will be hanged if they can
deceive me; -- nobody has a better faculty of creeping into folks, and finding
on 'em out than I.


Fear. How surprising it is! -- How unworthy our rank in the scale of being! --
To plot, for months together, the destruction of intimate friends, and
neighbors, manifests a species of infernal malice, that wants a name, and
exhibits a specimen of the wickedness, that Man is capable of: -- It is true
indeed, that passion, and interest, can obliterate every tender feeling of
humanity; but when once mankind have given themselves up, to the entire
dominion of (...), and (...) themselves, of every restraint, the infernal
Devils must acknowledge themselves exceeded by the incarnate.


Stand. Since they so nearly resemble each other, their punishment ought to be
in some measure similar: -- The D^vils are secured by chains of darkness, in
the bottomless pit; -- let the Tories be chained to the bottom of the deep, and
dark pit of Newgate; -- for crimes by which the laws of humanity are
aggravatedly transgressed, humanity itself requires an aggravated punishment.


Fear. Humanity is a noble virtue, and ought to be practiced on all occasions;
-- but do we deviate from it is most rigid rules, when we consign to Newgate,
there to drag out a painful existence, the merciless wretch, who can
deliberately determine on the utter destruction of his kindest friends; -- who
can calmly resolve to cut the throa^s of the weak, and infirm in cold blood,
without regard to age or sex; -- who can take a savage kind of delight, to view
in prospect, the canflagration of his Country; -- who can perseveringly,
furnish an unnatural and cruel foe, with aid, assistance, and support; -- who
can without ^emorse, enter into a treasonable conspiracy, so black, so horrid,
that a savage, from the wilds of America, would blush to hear it recounted, and
would accuse the perpetrators of cruelty, and barbarity?


Frank. America has hitherto been the peculiar care of a watchful Providence,
and I believe will be so still: -- Heaven seems to design great and glorious
things for this Country, -- to make it the Theater of some remarkable display
of his mighty power, and will never suffer it to be desolated by his implacable
enemies, in Earth, or Hell; -- not a single instance of treason, of any
consequence, during this long, and malevolent contest, has ever been executed
against us; though many times, the fatal train has been laid, and the match
lighted and ready, when a beneficent Providence, ever attentive to our welfare,
averted the blow, and saved us from impending ruin: -- the Deity, who has so
often rescued us, almost miraculously, expects that we should still put
confidence in him, and rely upon his power, for safety and protection: -- Thus
doing America never will fall.


Stand. Your observation is worthy of the highest notice: -- To have so few
instances of treason (and none of those to succeed) in a war, from whose nature
and circumstances, more than usual might have been expected, reflects the
highest honor on our Country and cause, and proves both, to be under the
peculiar care of Heaven: -- But still it will be necessary to exert ourselves,
and make use of our best endeavoure: -- Providence don't usually work without
means.


Frank. True, Sir, to expect the Deity will help those, that wont help
themselves is an impious presumption: -- It is we ourselves, my friends, that
must relieve our Country, with the aid, and guidance of Providence; -- and, in
the fullest confidence of those that are present, I inform you, that we have
only to execute a plan already concerted, that will be sufficient to unravel
those dark proceedings of the Tories, and free the Country from such noisome
pests, by the execution of ample justice.


Fear. We are extremely happy in the information: -- but who


Frank. Ask no questions, Gentlemen; but rest satisfied, that the measures will
be decisive, and that Men of Authority, and ability are to have the chief
management: -- You are only to be faithful to your trust, and ready at all
hours to execute every order that may be given you.


Stand. It will be only by secrecy, confidence, and fidelity, that we can hope
for su^cess: -- Let there be, therefore, no suspicion or distrust among us; --
let each one observe a perfect silence: -- It will be sufficient that Mr.
Frankly knows the whole: -- we can execute his orders as well, though we are
unacquainted to what individual point they tend.


Frank. Let us remember, my friends, to be as true, and faithful to ourselves,
and our cause, as the Tories are to theirs; and not give occasion for a
disgraceful contrast between us, and those abandoned villains: -- That union,
secrecy, and fidelity are qualities which they possess, none will deny; but
that they are virtues in them none will allow, since they prostitute them, to
the most bloody purposes.


Fear. The principles and conduct of the Tories must be most abominable, when
they are able to turn into the most detestable vices, those qualities, which of
themselves are most eminent virtues: -- Faithfulness, secrecy, and concord,
have ever been esteemed virtues of a superior rank; but no sooner are they
contaminated, by the baleful breath of those infidels in politics, but their
amiable natures are changed into others as hideous and hateful: -- As a body
infected with the plauge, turns all it is mild and salutary food into a
poisonous, and deadly contagion, destructive of all within the sphere of it is
influence.


Frank. Let us then practice them for the best of all purposes, as
perseveringly as they do for the worst: -- Let us prosecute the design, with
unabating vigor, and faithfulness: -- Let us be as wise as serpents, for the
industry, and malice of the infernal regions is against us; -- yet let us not
be disheartened on that account, for the chief Authority of the United States,
have engaged their aid and support: -- And I can with assurance flatter myself,
that we shall finally have the pleasure, to see our exertions crowned with
success; -- our enemies baffled and confounded; -- and treason receive it is
just desert.


Stand. It is a pleasing thought, my friends, to reflect, that while our
sanguinary foes are meditating a bloody carnage, a number of generous minds,
animated with a patriotic ardor, nobly determine to make a voluntary sacrifice
of ease, interest, and character, and to expose their lives to an enraged, and
blood-thirsty foe, for the purpose of detecting their horrid plots, breaking up
their treasonable combinations, and bringing the black conspirators to condign
punishment.


Frank. Gentlemen, I have taken a peculiar satisfaction in this interview; --
we have conversed freely, upon the most alarming situation of our affairs; --
we know that serious dangers await our Country, and that our united exertions
are necessary to avert them: -- The evening being far advanced, it is time to
retire -- prudence requires that our meetings be neither long nor frequent.


All rise, and compliment the Landlord. Land. Gentlemen, your humble servant;
-- I wish you all a good night. ( Exeunt) ( S^l^s) If I Would been told two years
ago, that my Neighbors could have been capable of such diabolical design, I
should have spit in the man's face, and told him he lied: -- But now I Am
convinced, I Am satisfied, that those whom I Have always used in the b^st manner,
are now contriving my destruction; together with that of my family, and
friends: -- So black, so horrid, so aggravated a plot, is scarce to be found in
the history of savages; -- But I Am confident it will never be executed; -- the
combination against it, is too powerful to be baffled, by all their powers
human, and infernal.

In war and faction, let the Tories join;
Let fire and slaughter, be their (...) design;
One single Whig, with his (...) breath,
Will blast their schemes, and give ten thousand death.

Exit. End of the fourth act.
ACT V.
SCENE I. Gibber's House.
Gibber and his Wife. Mrs. Gibb. I CANNOT imagine what is become of our John,
You, -- he never staid so long before, I don't remember.


Gibb. I Am verily afraid, Wife, something^s the matter with him, that he don't
come; -- I cannot think what it should be neither, without it is, that they have
some great business to do, that they cannot leave so quick: -- However, I guess
we shall hear from him to night, if he don't come himself.


Mrs. Gibb. I hope he will come himself, and bring good news for us; -- I want to
see this matter well through with, plaguly.


Enter Fidfaddy. Fid. How do you do, Mr. Gibber.


Gibb. As well as common, I thank ye* -- I Am glad you have come in; -- we have just
been a talking 'bout our John; -- he went last week to Frederic^^urgh, to see
'bout the affair, and an't got home yet; -- we begin to be concerned 'bout him;
-- do you know any thing 'bout him, Mr. Fidfaddy?


Fid. Have you any cou^ins to visit you to night?


Gibb. No we have not; -- the house is clear; -- you may talk freely.


Fid. Mr. Gibb^r, the Devil's in it all! -- We are all undone! -- Your John, and
five or six more, were taken last night.


Gibb. Taken do you say? -- What do you mean? -- Who a plague took 'em?


Fid That damned Frankly, and his party of Russians; -- they (...) in upon 'em,
in the dead of the night, seized (...), and dragged 'em away by force of arms.


Gibb. By what Authority, do the Devils use men so?


Fid. The Devil knows, for I don't; -- they showed no Authority.


Gibb. But what have they done with 'em?


Fid. Done with 'em? -- Why took 'em right to head quarters, you may swear.


Gibb. What shall we do? -- Do you think they will hang our John?


Fid. Yes indeed, and all the rest, if they have hemp enough.


Gibb. Well poor soul, if they hang him, he must hang by his own neck, that is
all; -- I cannot help him now.


Mrs. Gibber cries. Fid. This is the cursedest affair, that ever happened to
us; -- all our fine schemes are broke up now.


Gibb. Ay, but do you think the whole plan is found out.


Fid. You may depend on it; -- it is all gone over the dam, and the Devil will
have full swing now.


Gibb. But how could they find it out? -- I cannot hardly believe it is yet; --
we was so careful,


Fid. Some cursed traitor or other has betrayed us: -- I Have been jealous of two
or three this great while, and now it is plain as the sun, that they are villains.


Gibb. But what shall we do, Mr. Fidfaddy?


Fid. Do? -- Why there is nothing to be done, but be hanged, or run away, as
fast as our legs will carry us.


Enter Plunket. Plunk. For God's sake, my Christian friends, take care of
yourselves! -- All Is gone! -- All the Devils in Hell have broke loose among the
Rebels; -- Flutter, and your John, with eight or ten more, were taken last
night, with fire and sword, at the point of the bayonet, by that abominable
Rebel Frankly and his herd of Hell hounds, and hurried away to head quarters,
without time scarce to put on their clothes; -- and you will both be taken so
night, if you don't fly for your lives: -- the whole scheme is discovered by
some damned traitor, and we shall all be hanged, if we don't escape to the
Island, or be able to lie it out with 'em: -- I advise you to push with all
speed, for the Island, and I Will stay, and do the best I can.


Fid. But you would tell a lie to get clear, would you?


Plunk. It Is no lying when we deceive the Rebels, to clear the innocent, and
support a just cause; -- I Would lie 'em all to the Devil if I could.


Gibb. But there is our John! -- I Am sorry for him; -- he will be hanged I Am
afraid; and I don't know what'll become on him; -- he is been a wicked fellow.


Mrs. Gibb. Yes, You, and it is you have bro't him to it: This is one of your
plans: -- It Is all turned out just as I told you; -- I always though it you would get
somebody hanged before you would done: -- If you would only minded me, there'd have been
no traiters among us, I warrant ye; -- nobody'd have known it, but true friends,
certain: -- And now our John is gone for it, and I shall not never see him no more,
cries. -- I wonder you could act so.


Plunk. Mrs. Gibber, you mustn't be cast down too much; -- you ought to be
resigned to the will of Heaven in all things, and consider that such mishaps as
these are the fortune of war: -- Nobody's to blame; -- these events were
unforeseen, and could not be prevented: -- And if John is hanged, it will be a
comfort to you, in your affliction, to reflect, that he dies in a good cause,
and will certainly go to Heaven.


Mrs. Gibb. You all did as well as you could, I s'pose; but you might have saved
John's neck if you had tried; -- and now I never shall got over his being
hanged in all my life. cries again.


Plunk. We are all heartily sorry for what has happened, both for your sakes,
and that of the general cause, Mrs. Gibber; but crying about it, will do no
good now; we must endeavor to bear up under all our troubles, with Christian
patience and fortitude, and do all in our power to remedy these disasters.


Fid. But can any thing be done, Mr. Plunket.


Plunk. Ye^, we can save ourselves, and friends, from any further calamity: --
I believe they have broke up all our burning, and plundering schemes, by taking
so many officers and Captains of boats; we must therefore, lay aside all our
former designs, and direct our whole attention to our immediate dangers.


Fid. But how, and in what manner can we do any good?


Plunk. By trying; -- there is nothing like trying* -- I Will mention what is just
come into my mind; -- perhaps you may think of something better: -- You know
the great Men of these parts are very fond of places of honor, and are much
afraid of losing them: -- You will therefore, immediately touch them in this
delicate point, by spreading rumors abroad, that those, that are carrying on
this plan against us, are young upstarts, who are setting themselves up upon
the ruin of the present Authority, without regarding the cause of their Country
in what they are ^^ing: -- The suspicious and jealous tempers of the (...). Men
will effectually make this plan succeed; -- and thus we shall yet baffle the
vengeance of the Rebels, and ^ave our friends from an untimely death.


Fid. This is the very plan, for all the world, Mr. Plu^^ket; -- for talking
along with Squire Pursegu^ to day, he told me that he didn't know nothing about
them men b^ing taken, 'till he heard on it this morning, and he seemed to be
very angry, that such disturbances should be made, by persons of no Authority:
-- I Will warrant you, that (...) so affronted, 'cause they didn't come, and git
a w^^t o^ him, that he is on our side a'ready.


Plunk. I don't believe that any of the Authority in the town knew any thing of
the matter; and they will take it as the greatest slight, and affront, that could
be put upon 'em, when they come to understand how it was transacted, and by
whom: -- But we must not forget to make 'em believe too, that all that they
have taken are clever with disposed persons, and entirely innocent of any
crime, and that the ill will, and malice of Frankly, and his gang was the sole
occasion of all the tumult


Fid. I know I can set all my relations up in arms about the affair: -- And I Am
related, you know, to a'most all the leading men in the parish.


Plunk. I am sensible of it; -- you are under the best advantages of us all; --
You must be active, and improve them well; -- and we must all be industrious,
if we expect to relieve ourselves, and our dear friends, from this dreadful
situation.


Mrs. Gibb. Pray do try, both on you, with all your might, and save our John,
if you can; -- I would not begrutch a hundred pounds, no more than a copper, to
git him cleared.


Plunk. You may depend upon our best endeavors, and I hope we shall succeed to
our wishes.


Fid. But who can this Judas be?


Plunk. Don't trouble yourself about him now; -- time will discover him.


Fid. Let him be who he will, I Will be the death on him, I swear.


Plunk. He certainly deserves it, for betraying his trust.


Fid. You must all be convinced by this time, that we cannot carry on none of
our plans, as long as that devilish crew are allowed to be on the face of the
earth.


Plunk. They Are bad fellows; -- but what can be done with 'em?


Fid. Why, slip 'em off to the Island; -- there is fifty guineas reward for each
of their heads, dead or alive, for seizing goods, and now 'twill be double; --
and that money I Will have before long, I warrant ye.


Plunk. Well if you can get it, by taking them to the Island; -- get it I say.


Fid. If I cannot do that, I Will kill 'em; for get rid on 'em I will, I swear, or
die myself.


Plunk. But, my friends, we must attend to our own situation; -- they will be
after us to night; -- we must not sleep at home 'till the storm is blown over.


Gibb. I Will not lie at home this month, I warrant ye: -- they will not send me
a'ter John, yet a while, pox on 'em.


Plunk. Time is precious, my friends, let us be going, and be sure to remember
our business, and distressed friends.


Fid. Aye, aye, never fear, we'll be as fly as the Devil for 'em: -- They Will be
at home directly, if I an't mistaken.


Plunk. May Heaven be on our side, and befriend the innocent in distress: --
Mr. Gibber, I wish you a good night.


Gibb. Good nighty to you all. Exit Plunk. and Fid.


SCENE closes.
SCENE II. Frankly's House.
SCENE opens and discovers Frankly, Fearless and Standwell in conversation.
Frank. WHEN once the passions of mankind, by (...) and disappointment, are
wrought to so high a pitch thy reason is unable to quell the tumult, a kind of
despair takes possession of the soul, and impels to resolve, regardless of
consequence, upon measures, which are unbecoming the man: Yet, since happiness
is the ultimate end of all our pursuits, an endeavoring to remove every
unusual sensation from our breasts, is certainly laudable, and worthy of our
nature; though the mode we may adopt, in some peculiar moments of distress,
should not be strictly conformable to the rigid rules of Virtue: -- I
therefore, approve of your determinations.


Fear. Those instantaneous feelings, which are occasioned by grievous
disappointments, heightened by the grossest abuse and insult, and still further
aggravated, by an ungrateful return, for eminent services, never give a man
time to reflect, whether relief and satisfaction is to be obtained by those
means, which conscience in a calm moment would approve of: Common sense will
direct him, in such an exigency, to the most suitable methods to obtain redress
and safety, and these he will immediately determine to pursue, as being, in
fact, his only alternative.


Stand. Being fully persuaded, that the Deity never designed, that man, who is
endued with such strong desires of existence, should be passive in distress,
and quietly yield to his fate, I am firmly resolved, to act agreeable to the
Laws of Nature, and to defend myself in every circumstance: -- Let the villains
stand aloof, and not irritate men, that are deliberately desperate. -- Every
irrational animal, by natural instinct, flies from danger, and boldly resists
the hand, that attempts to do it an injury; and can it be supposed, that man,
the glory of this lower creation, shall act counter, to the most vigorous, and
potent of his natural feelings, and not be suffered to enjoy a privilege,
which the very beasts have full possession of? -- Forbid it Heaven!


Frank. After being denied the support, and protection of the Laws of the
State, it wou^d be the completion of calamity, not to have it in our power, to
recur to those of nature; -- indeed the very supposition is absurd, for the
Laws of nature necessarily take place, when all other Laws cease their
operation; -- and this, Gentlemen, must now be our support and defense, against
the malice of friends and foes.


Fear. The sensibility of my soul has been so often irritated, by the barbarous
repetitions of a series of the most cruel and pointed insults, that it is
impossible I should endure them any longer: -- An injury I can bear with some
degree of of patience; but an affront, repeated with aggravating circumstances,
is too bitterly provoking for humanity: -- Every one, therefore, must expect a
severe return, for every scoffing reproach and insult: -- From my positive
knowledge of the late designs of the Tories, I know they deserve death, by all
Laws, human and divine; and if they should receive it from my hand, it would
only be the execution of that justice, which ought to have been done by the
magistrate; and thereby have prevented those high handed provocations, and
threats, that may raise my hand.


Frank. If those base and unfeeling wretches, should continue in any reasonable
bounds, it will be noble in us, to treat them, and their insults, with total
neglect and inattention; but when they become outrageous either in words, or
actions, the only way left, for us to preserve the least tincture of honor
among mankind, will be to knock them down without hesitation: -- Indeed what
else can we do? -- To scold and wrangle with them, will be only to return
railing for railing, and will serve no other purpose, but to level us with the
miscreants we dispute with; -- (...) submit the affair to the decision of fifty
cuffs will be more ineligible than to die handsomely by a ball, or halter; --
and if we wait for redress from the civil Law, we shall lean upon a broken
st^ff, which instead of supporting us, will only pierce our hands: -- To the
Law of Nature, therefore, let us appeal, as to our last resource^ -- Let it is
rule be our guide, and all our actions honorable, and decisive.


Stand. If the Tories are wise for themselves, they will be more sparing of
their provocations for the future, -- this will be their only course to be
safe; -- I have been somewhat indulgent to them hitherto; -- having turned the
malice of magistrates, and people against us, and rescued themselves from a
deserved punishment, they may be allowed to exult a little of their exploits:
-- But now they must stay their hand: -- we can endure it no longer; honor and
existence both forbid it.


Frank. And here, my friends, is a mystery that astonishes; -- a parcel of the
refuge of mankind, numbers of whom notorious villains from their infancy, and
all professed and avowed enemies to this Country, have been able to obtain such
influence over the minds of people, as to induce those, that are appointed by
the community, to be executors of the Laws, scourges of the guilty, and
protectors of the innocent; to induce these, I say, to lay aside every social,
civil, and legal obligation; -- to acquit those bloody wretches, that deserved
the gibbit; -- and to condemn to infamy the patriotic few, that boldly da^ed to
oppose the overwhelming deluge, which was laying waste the Country. -- Let
those who have taken a solemn oath, to see justice administered, and the Laws
executed, answer for their conduct, to their Maker, and their consciences.


Fear. It will be a consolation to us in every event, to reflect, that we have
averted the threatened dangers, and saved our Country; from the dreadful
calamities, which were impending; although the rescue has been so contrary to
our reasonable ex^^ctations; and though our ungrateful Country should sti^l
remain insensible of the importance of our services, and refuse to reward us
according to our real merits, let us not follow the example of the infamous
Arnold, and desert a just cause, because our Country requi^^s evil for good: --
This would be adopting a villainly, worse than that we complain of; -- On the
contrary, let us persevere, in promoting the good of our Country, at every
hazard; -- let us reject, with disdain, every accommodation with so detestable
a foe; -- probably we may have another opportunity of baffling their designs
and freeing our Country from their baleful intentions.


Frank. Happy should I be, if we had the conducting of this affair over again;
-- sure I am, that our measures should be concerted with so much prudence, and
executed with such dexterity, that neither the connections that subsist between
Whig and Tory, nor the malevolence of party jealousy, should ever be able to
screen the culprits from the just vengeance of the broken Laws: -- When we at
first engaged in the matter, we thought that the justice of our cause, would
ensure success, even against the torrent of popular passion, prejudice, and
jealousy: -- But too late we found our error, and that the Tories, by skilfully
employing a better policy, and adapting their artful insinuations, to the
prevailing foibles of the populace, were lucky enough to ba^^^e and confound
us. -- Such an interruption never could happen again.


Stand. I think we have nothing to accuse ourselves of, Gentlemen: -- When
every circumstance is considered, and every difficulty, with which we had to
encounter, is taken into view, it is a matter of wonder, that we effected so
much as we did: -- In one thing we certainly succeeded to admiration; -- our
councils and designs were perfectly concealed from the eyes of all; -- every
enterprise wa^ as sudden and unexpected as a thunder clap; -- and it was so
difficult to penetrate into our designs, further than we unfolded them, that it
often gave me no small degree of pleasure, to see the rabble staring, and
wondering what was on the carpet: -- And indeed so decisive were our measures,
that if the Whigs had not deserted us, at the critical moment of necessity; --
if our friends, who were connected with us, had not betrayed and forsaken us,
at the very juncture, when their presence, and fidelity, were most especially
important to our proceedings, the Tories would have been crushed, treason
punished, and patriotism rewarded: -- But now the natural disposition of those
seditious monsters, to insult, and scurrility, being sharpened by their late
disappointments; and being sensible, that they can have that support, and
protection, from the civil Authority, which Whigs cannot, they will set no
bounds to their abusive and insulting sauciness; -- but I shall never bear, nor
forbear any longer; -- decisive severity will immediately succeed their further
insolence, and convince them, that I can both feel, and revenge an affront: --
It is impossible to do o^herways.


Fear. Yes, those insults are too much to be born! -- The world will say they
are too much! -- To undertake such an arduous business, alone, and unassisted;
-- to pass through all the dangers, and fatigues of it is prosecution; -- to
expend a large portion of time, and money; -- to detect, and unravel a fatal
plot against the Country; -- to rescue it from imminent dangers; -- to bring
the conspirators to the bar of justice; -- and at the time, when nothing was
wanting, to rid the land of those noisome pests, but attention to the
evidences, which were r^^dy to be adduced, in support of facts, to have the
popular clamor, with the civil Authority at it is head, rise to such a height,
as to render it prudent to stop the proceedings; -- prudent did I say? -- Nay
it was absolutely necessary to leave the prosecution, and take care of
ourselves; for we were hunted with more fury, than if we had been canibals, and
pursued with greater rancour, and speed than high way robbers and all this, for
no other reason, but because we had saved them from the sword, and the flames:
-- While at the very same time, to aggravate our painful feelings, those
faithful servants of Satan, and genuine heirs of Hell, the Tories, were
befriended, caressed, applauded, pitied, and treated with the greatest
kindness, and attention: -- All this is indeed too much! -- It is too much for
flesh and blood to endure! -- Patience has nothing to do here! -- She sinks
under the burden of such complicated distress, and affords no relief! -- What
shall we say further? -- For such important services, instead of a reward, to
lose our good name, to be condemned to infamy, to be esteemed pests to society,
and disturbers of the public peace; and above all to be obliged to stand the
taunt, and endure the insolence of those domineering scoundrels: -- It is too,
too much! -- I cannot! -- I will not sustain the reproach, and ignominy.


Frank. Nothing remains for us, my friends, but to secure, and defend ourselves
for the future; -- there can be no alteration, nor redress, for what is past:
-- The reproach which our Country has undeservedly fixed upon us, must
unavoidable remain: -- The Authority can never be prevailed upon to afford us
their protection, and assistance; -- and the populace will never consent to
have the affairs manifested to the world in their proper light: -- They are too
much interested in the illicit trade, and have too many relations in the bloody
conspiracy, to wish an enquiry into either: -- The (...) which the General sent
to give the world a right understanding of all the proceedings, how carefully
was it concealed from the eyes of all, those only excepted, who, it was known,
would misrepresent it is contents, and destroy their effects: -- A p^^fect
conviction that our conduct was noble, and praise worthy, induced our enemies,
to practice every low art, which Satan could inve^^* to prevent a manifestation
of the truth, in it is proper color: -- The causes of this still remaining
unchanged, must be expected to produce their natural effects: -- Therefore, the
approbation of Heaven, and our own consciences, is all the reward, or
consolation, we shall ^ver (...), for all we have done, and suffered.


Fear. I can truly say. Gentlemen, that I wish for no other recompense from my
Country, that it is approbation, and acceptance of my services; -- money has
small influence to induce me, to do either a good, or bad action; -- and as to
the case before us, money could not pay us; -- nothing but those generous
feelings, which arise from a consciousness of having performed noble, and
benevolent actions, could ever balance the anxiety, and pain, always attendant
on such an undertaking.


Stand. Although a pecuniary reward will not give us full satisfaction, yet we
ought to have it, to reimburse our expenditures of time and money; -- to be
defrauded of that, after losing every thing else, is sure an aggravation.


Frank. It is so trifling, compared with other things, that I shall never give
myself the trouble of an uneasy thought about it: -- All I lament is, that the
virtue of my Country is so near expiring, while our dangers remain, and the
great and arduous contest for Liberty, is yet to be closed: -- It is certainly
a symptom of a fatal disease approaching to the body politic, when the
generous, and disinterested Patriot is neglected, and despised, while the
sordid, and bloody Tory is honored, and carassed; the certain consequene of
which is, a decrease of the former, and an increase of the latter, to the
destruction of the community, on the plan of independency* -- It is matter of
no small surprise to me, that our State Doctors have never noticed this
disorder, and made application of the proper remedies, by a total change of
measures; -- one would naturally think, that a consideration of their own
safety, apart from any concern for their Country, would be sufficient, to
influence them to this conduct; for they cannot be insensible, that they will
be the first sacrifices, at the subjugation of America.


SCENE closes.
SCENE III. Gibber's House.
Mrs. Gibber and Betty at work. Bet. MOTHER, I wonder when Father'll get back.


Mrs. Gibb. I expect him every minute now.


Bet. But do you think he will git our John?


Mrs. Gibb. Why yes, child, he cannot help it; -- you know all the Captains, and
Squires in all the town, and every body else, signed a petition for him to come
home.


Bet. I Am afraid they will not mind it abit.


Mrs. Gibb. They will mind it, you dunce; -- they let 'em all go, that every
body signs for; -- they have signed for thirty or forty a'ready and got 'em all
home safe, in spite on 'em all; -- and John'^l be to home to night too.


Bet. I hop^ so, but I Am afraid he will not: -- You know that plaguey Ketchum,
before he bro't 'em out, was here always 'long with o^r John, contriving 'bout
the plan; and he knew all 'bout it, and 'bout John's going to the Island a'ter
goods, and counterfeit money, and he is told on it all before now, and I Am afraid
they will b'lieve him, before they will all the Squires, and Captains in the
Government, and if they do, they will hang him, certain.


Enter Fidfaddy. Fid. An't your husband got hon yet?


Mrs. Gibb. No he has not; but we expect him all the while now.


Fid. You may depend on it, John will be cleared; -- I see the petition, that
your Husband took with him; -- it makes him one of the cleverest young fellows
in the world, and a good friend to his Country, and says that he was taken for
nothing, by some evil minded persons, out of pure spite; and 'twas signed by
all the parish.


Enter Plunket. Plunk. Mrs. Gibber, I give you joy; -- your Son is on the road,
and will be here in a few minutes.


Mrs. Gibb. Do You say so? -- How'd ye hear on it? -- Who told ye?


Plunk. I saw a man, who rode with 'em all day, and left 'em only a few miles
back.


Mrs. Gibb. I always though it he would be to home to night; -- I told 'em all the
while, they would never hang him: -- But af'rall I Am glad he is a coming home.


Plunk. You Would need to be very thankful for it, Mrs. Gibber; -- he is had a narrow
squeak for his life, I Will assure you: -- If the Rebels had not been eternal
fools, there'd been no help for 'em all; -- but we worked the card nicely; --
we made 'em believe the moon was made of green cheese, and they did our
business for us, better than we could have done it ourselves.


Fid. Ay, ay, I set all my relations in a flame at once, by only telling on
'em, that all that Frankly was a'ter, (...) to be a great man; -- they fetched
the parish together in a jissin, and I believe they would a killed him, if they
had not found, he would good Authority for what he did.


Plunk. Yes I see how it worked; -- you did well.


Fid. There was another thing, that helped a good deal; -- the old people was
all dreadful mad, that these young upstarts, should carry on such a scheme of
their own heads, and never let them know nothing about it: -- They Would break it
up, they said, 'cause of that.


Plunk. You took care to humor such things, I dare say.


Fid. To be shure, all that lay in my power; -- and a'ter I Would got things ready,
I told my relations, they was going to take me off to head quarters; -- they
told me not to be concerned about it; for they would not let 'em take me off,
they would warrant 'em; they would fight first, they said.


Plunk. Ay, Mr. Fidfaddy, you had a good chance; -- I think you conducted
charmingly: -- For my part, I could do nothing: -- you know 'twou'dn't do for
me to be seen in it: -- Yet I was not wanting; -- I blew the fire as much as
possible privately.


Fid. But mythinks the Devil's to pay a'ter all: -- When we'd got what we
wanted, I meant to have kept the upper hand and insulted Frankly, and his gang
eternally; -- but I find I have not courage enough; -- I durstn't speak to him for
my soul; -- if he only looks on me I Am scart out of my wits; -- he looks so
sullen, and at the same time, so careless, that I don't know what to make on it;
-- nothing don't trouble him, and yet I heard him declare the other night, that
he would beat the first man's brains out, that was saucy to him; -- this struck me
like a clap of thunder; -- and if all the Loyals were as 'fraid on him as I be,
he would drive ten thousand on us to the Devil.


Plunk. Ay, he is an impudent, fool hardened wretch.


Enter Gibber, and John. Mrs. Gibb. Good lack a day, if here an't our John
come! -- Why how do you do, my Son? -- han't the devilish Rebels killed you?


John. No, no, they have not killed me; but I Have had a cursed sweat.


Mrs. Gibb. Why what did they do to you, my Son!


John. Nothing on'y put a pair of iron ruffles on me, and flung me into the
Provost, where I Have lain 'bove this four months.


Mrs. Gibb. Didn't they give you nothing to eat, Johnny?


John. Yes a little wormy bread, and stinking meat, and water to drink with it;
-- and that is all we have had, but what we got ourselves.


Mrs. Gibb. Well, Johnny, you have got clear on 'em now, my Son, and I hope
you have got more wit, than tell Ketchum on it next time, for he would tell on it again
in a minute.


John. Ay, damn him, he will never tell on it again I warrant ye; -- I Will be
cursed, if I don't kill him before tomorrow night.


Plunk. No, no, John, that wont do; -- you mustn't be so hasty about it; -- it
will be only throwing away your life foolishly; -- you can take all
opportunities of provoking him, and perhaps after a while, he would be mad enough
to strike you, and if he does, you can kill him, and be safe; and this will be
acting like a Christian, John.


John. I Will not wait for that, by my soul: -- I Will have a quick and sweet
revenge on Ketchum, Frankly, and all the rest, damn 'em; -- I Will make day light
shine through 'em quick enough.


Fid. John, you must take Mr. Plunket's advice; -- you don't know so much about
'em as we do they all keep their arms, and if you should molest 'em, you would die
first, I Will warrant ye.


John. What, do they carry pistols with 'em?


Fid. Indeed they do, to my certain knowledge.


John. Well, damn 'em then; -- that is all I Have got to say.


Mrs. Gibb. Why, You, did they let Johnny come out, as soon as you showed 'em
the paper.


Gibb. Yes in half a minute, and the General says, he would send the Devil here, if
the people would petition for him.


Plunk. My dear friends, we have all great reason to rejoice, and be very
thankful, that we have got through with those difficulties so well as we have; --
but I Am much afraid that the troubles will not end here: -- Frankly, and one or
two of his friends, who have been faithful to him, are much chagrin'd, and
exasperated, at their disappointments; and I doubt they have friends enough to
procure an over-hawling of the affair, which would yet be attended with
dreadful consequences; we must, therefore, have a meeting immediately, at your
house, Mr. Gibber, to talk the matter over, and lay the foundation of some new
plans.


Gibb. With all my heart, Sir, and a piece of my liver.


Plunk. You Will attend, Mr. Fidfaddy, and give notice to all true friends.


Fid. I Will not be wanting on my part.


They compliment and Exeunt. Mrs. Gibb. John, if I was you, I would not sleep,
'till I Would paid 'em well.


Bet. Yes, John, and I Would let 'em see how good 'twas, to be shut up a fasting,
as you have been.


Gibb. I Would send 'em all to the Devil, I Would warrant 'em.


John. Don't fear me; -- I Have suffered too much from 'em, ever to put up
with it: -- They Would got me hanged if they could; and now if I kill 'em all,
'twill be good enough for 'em, damn 'em: -- They may learn to let folks alone
next time.

Revenge is sweet, and if my life is spared,
I Will give the dogs a just but dear reward;
I Will make the rascals know my crime was small;
I only meant to burn and kill 'em all

SCENE closes.
EPILOGUE, To be Spoken by Mrs. GIBBER.
I HAVE often heard it represented,
That women cannot be contented,
Unless at liberty to gabble,
And imitate a Yankee rabble;
Or the mixed rumbling of a mill;
Or wagons clatt'ring down a hill:
In such wild var'egated clamours,
There Is much of scandal, much of amors.
With much of nonsense, and defaming,
And much not worth, nor fit the naming;
And to keep up the noisy clatter,
We Are often forced, for want of matter,
Our greatest secrets to reveal,
And blab out things we should conceal,
Betray the cause we have espoused,
And get our Husbands foundly sous'd:
But if you have seen the play to night,
You Will swear, that all was said in spite,
And that af'rall these plaguey jokes,
We women still are clever folks,
Are always wise, and good and kind,
No mischief dwells within our mind;
Think much, talk little, softly too,
We tell no tales, are chaste and true:
When an event has taken place,
We knew it well before it was.
And can declare* when things we see,
We told exactly how ^hey'd be;
We are, like turtle doves, most harmless,
Never breed confusion in our fam'lies,
Nor raise disorders in the State,
Nor vent our malice, spleen, or hate:
Should you suppose 'twere otherwise,
It Is a deception of your eyes;
And if you ever find intrigues,
It Is fate has plan'd them, or the Whigs:
No Tory, male or female's found,
Obscurely working under ground,
Or ever once his cause forsook,
Or ever trod back the step he would took;
But Whigs, those inconsistent elves,
Will mob us first, and then themselves;
Contrive deep plans to undermine us;
But quickly change their minds* and join us;
Fight all the Reg'lars in New York,
Yet help them onward in their work;
Give them their money, and provision,
And sink the Country to perdition:
So if the land is overturned,
Themselves all killed, their towns all burned,
With not a house, or soul upon it,
It Is they themselves, not us, have done it*
FINIS.

