THE DOCTRINE OF Final Universal Salvation EXAMINED AND SHOWN TO BE
UNSCRIPTURAL: IN Answer to a Pamphlet ENTITLED Salvation for all Men
ILLUSTRATED AND VINDICATED AS A SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE.

BY WILLIAM GORDON, Pastor of the third Church in Roxbury.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by T. AND J. FLEET, at the BIBLE and HEART in
Cornhill, 1783.

The PREFACE.
THE author of the following sheets does not mean to detract from the merit of
his worthy brethren, who have published on the same side of the question. He
had began before he knew the design of others; and upon observing that his own
plan was different, pursued it, desirous of contributing to the extinction of
an ancient and generally exploded sentiment; and of furnishing an antidote
against the seemingly malignant poison of the OLD SERPENT, first instilled into
the ears of our common mother Eve, when he gave the lie to God's threatening
and said unto the woman -- "Ye shall NOT SURELY DIE."

The mental tastes of men are as various as their animal; and therefore a
variety of publications may please a much greater number, and by that means do
more universal service, than any single one however well executed.

The Friend of Truth will never regret, that he stands not alone in support of
it. He rejoices, at seeing numbers coming in to the aid of a good cause. And
the author of this performance hopes, that should that be attacked afresh,
there will not be wanting those who shall offer themselves willingly to the
service of the Lord in defense of it; and the more so, as he will probably be
prevented by particular engagements of a different nature.

Syriac was the vulgar language of Judea in the days of our Savior; but with
regard to every book of the New Testament, the presumption is in favor of its
being written in Greek; and we must necessarily admit that the Evangelists were
divinely influenced to give us the true sense of our Lord's expressions in the
Greek words they used, which vindicates the representation made of them as
though uttered by our Lord.

The pamphlet designed to be answered is anonymous; and, whatever may have been
whispered in private circles, it has never been properly announced to the
public, who compiled or who prefaced it. And it ought to be remembered, that
when gentlemen think it eligible to enter into the literary world incog, they
are not entitled to special respect from any excellency of private character,
but may be fairly treated as though they were wholly unknown.

THE Doctrine of Final Universal Salvation EXAMINED, And shown to be
unscriptural.
INDIFFERENCE to religious sentiments, thought to be of divine revelation,
however hastily pronounced a proof of candor, catholicism and good sense,
must, upon mature deliberation, appear little other than an affront to the
wisdom of that Being, who is supposed to have revealed them.

That the writer of the following sheets pretends not to such indifference,
cannot be complained of by those who are endeavoring to spread their own
particular tenets, which, though not really novel, are new to the generality of
the present generation.

When persons reject doctrines upon the sole plea of their being new, it is
warrantable to convince them of their mistake: but it is not the antiquity or
novelty of doctrines, that should incline us to receive or reject them -- no --
but their being, or not being, contained directly or indirectly in the sacred
writings. The appeal is to be made to Moses and the Prophets, to the
Evangelists and Apostles, for it is the Bible that contains the religion of
consistent Protestants, and not the writings of Origin or Clement of
Alexandria, or any other uninspired divine.

Should it be asserted, that our Lord's words in Matthew, when he says, "there
be eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake,"
are to be understood literally; and should it be brought in proof, that the
pious and learned Origin castrated himself, the argument would produce a sneer
rather than conviction.

Whoever consults the first volume of the celebrated Mosheim's Ecclesiastical
History, will learn from thence, that Origin and Clement were notorious, for
introducing into the church, that " pagan philosophy and vain deceit, (alluded
to by Dr. Hartley, but with a different view) and for mingling them with
christianity, and so corrupting it." Salvation for all Men illustrated and
vindicated, p. 21.


Clement of Alexandria, who was the praeceptor of Origin, flourished about the
year 206, and lived till toward 220. "His excessive attachment to the reigning
philosophy led him into a variety of pernicious errors." Mosheim, Vol. I. p.
148.
Origin, who died in the year 254, aged 69, enchanted by the charms of the
Platonic philosophy, set it up as the test of all religion, and imagined that
the reasons of each doctrine were to be found in that favorite philosophy, and
their nature and extent to be determined by it." Mosheim, Vol. I. p. 221.


But to dismiss Clement and Origin, and attend to Jeremiah White, chaplain to
Oliver Cromwell, who is honored with the epithets of pious, ingenious and
excellent. If these epithets are designed to bias the mind and prejudice the
reader, in favor of the chaplain's reasoning, it must be imputed to weakness
or craft; but whether lay-craft or priestcraft is immaterial to the case in
hand. That the chaplain was ingenious will appear from the following anecdote,
which will also prove at the same instant, that Oliver Cromwell was still more
ingenious. Jerry while in a state of celibacy was ambitious of matrimonial
connexions with his master's daughter, and labored privately to gain her
affections. Oliver obtained information of it, and, watching the opportunity,
enters abruptly into the room where Jerry was upon his knees before his
Dulcinia. The sight of him in such a posture led Cromwell to ask the reason of
it. Jerry ingeniously answered, that he was beseeching her ladyship to
intercede on his behalf, that he might obtain one of her maids of honor
(mentioning the name) in marriage. O! cries the more ingenious master, is that
all! Well! I will help you out of your difficulty; and immediately summoned the
unsuspecting innocent maid into his presence, enjoined her compliance with the
wish of the chaplain, and then saw to it, that it was so and the parties
married.

But if Oliver's Chaplain was ever so pious, ingenious and excellent, what is
that to the purpose? No man is to receive the doctrine of Universal Salvation
upon that account; any more than that monster of monsters the doctrine of
transubstantiation, because embraced taught and defended by many Papists far
more pious, ingenious and excellent than ever was Jeremiah White.

We are told (p. 4) that Mr. White's introduction "breathes a spirit of piety
and benevolence," it is not pretended however that this is an argument in
favor of a Universal Restoration of the human race; and yet it may serve to
captivate silly women, whether in petticoats or breeches, who are ever learning
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; and to make them believe
that he has the true knack of interpreting scripture.

The only answer, that Mr. White's benevolent rant and rhapsody upon the divine
goodness is entitled to, are the following lines of Dr. Young.

"Not, thus, our infidels the Eternal draw,
A God all-o'er, consummate, absolute,
Full orb'd, in his whole round of rays complete:
They set at odds heaven's jarring attributes;
And, with one excellence, another wound;
Maim heaven's perfection, break its equal beams,
Bid mercy triumph over -- God himself,
Undeify'd by their opprobrious praise:
A God all mercy, is a God unjust." The Complaint, Night iv.

Having done with Mr. White's introduction we should now proceed to his
scripture arguments, which we must suppose have not suffered by being printed
in the present form; but it may be proper to lay down beforehand certain
principles and rules, to be regarded, while we are interpreting the scriptures,
and profess to venerate them as divine oracles.

The writers being inspired by one and the same Spirit, no real contradiction
of doctrine can be admitted; and each must be understood in a sense that
accords with the whole.

The meaning of particular passages is not to be determined by the sound of
words; but the sound of words is to be determined by the meaning of such
passages, which must be fixed by the connection, circumstances, and agreement
with other passages.

We must not use a violence in forcing particular senses upon scripture
expressions, when we should blush to practice the same with human compositions.

These maxims being admitted, let us pass on to try Mr. White's scripture
arguments.

The first he produces is from the 1st epistle to Timothy ii. 3, 4. God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth. He tells us that "the letter of this text is full and express, God will
have ALL MEN to be saved, and should we press it, there are almost as many
arguments as words;" but we may press it to death before we can extract one
argument from it in favor of the Universal Restoration of the human race. ALL
MEN are in capitals, as though ALL necessarily meant every individual; and as
though it would be absurd to understand the term with any limitation; whereas
there are many universals in scripture use, that, if not understood with
limitations, imply the greatest falsehoods. It is truly ridiculous, to observe
how some trifling geniuses will furnish themselves with a set of universals,
and, by jingling the same, please themselves and amuse their admirers.

Unhappily for the chaplain, he says, "the words are to be taken in the same
latitude and extent with other places," and quotes chapter vi. 13. God that
quickneth all things. Working upon it by his own example, the letter is full
and express, God that quickneth ALL THINGS; and yet ALL in this passage cannot
be understood without a limitation; for stocks and stones and a number of other
inanimate things God does not quicken. We live in an age of wonders. Who knows,
but what some wonderful interpreter, one of ten thousand, may arise shortly,
who shall attempt proving from this passage, together with the words of John
the baptist -- God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham --
that the period will come when universal animation shall prevail, and the
mountains shall skip with real life like rams, and the little hills like lambs.

Mr White or his transcriber has mis-quoted when he says "our Savior tells us,
all things live to God. Luke 20.38. for things is not expressed, and cannot be
implied in the original, as the transciber will know by consulting the Greek,
which it is apprehended he understands.

The original word and its compound, usually translated all, occur, in the
masculine, feminine and neuter genders, in the singular and plural numbers, not
less than 1278 times. Matt. 131. Mark 72. Luke 174. John 63. Acts 184. Romans 71.
1 Cor. 111. 2 Cor. 52. Gal. 16. Ephesians. 53. Phil. 34. Coll. 40. 1 Thessa. 18. 2
Thessa. 16. 1 Timothy 24. 2 Timothy 18. Titus 14. Philm. 2. Heb. 51. James 13. 1 Pet.
18. 2 Pet. 7. 1 John 27. 2 John 2. 3 John 2. Jude 6. Rev. 59.


It is translated variously by the terms -- whole -- whosoever -- whatsoever --
whomsoever -- all manner of -- and all. When connected with a negative, it
answers to any; but our translators instead of not any render the terms no;
thus no flesh should be saved (Mark 13.20) no flesh shall be justified (Romans
3.20)

It often intends every individual without exception, and at other times
signifies only every kind, or a great number, and that even when the number is
less than half of the kind. It is used with like latitude that attends the term
all, and when the English idiom will admit, is mostly translated by it.

What follows will evince, that it is by no means necessary to believe, that
every single man and woman will be saved; because we read, "God will have ALL
men to be saved!"

When we are told (Mat. 4.23) that our Lord healed every (as it is in the
original and is so rendered Mat. 9.35) sickness, and every disease, we cannot
understand any thing beyond what our translators have intimated by saying, all
manner of sickness and all manner of disease. (The same may be observed of
Matt. 10.1.) It would be absurd to suppose that all (or even half of) the sick
and all the diseased of all Galilee should be brought to him. When it is
mentioned (in the next, the 24th verse) that his fame went throughout all
Syria, and they brought unto him all sick people; nothing more could be
designed than great numbers, and yet probably not a quarter of all the sick
through Syria, which was a large country. When our Lord told his apostles (Mat.
10.22) that they should be hated of all men, he necessarily excepted all that
should entertain them and hear their words. When he pronounces the mustard seed
(Mat. 13.32) the least of all seeds, could he mean any other than that it was a
small seed, one of the least? as every one knows there are much smaller seeds.
What a huge and strong net must that be (mentioned in the 47th v.) which when
cast into the sea, could gather of every kind; if by every (the same in the
original with all) is intended every one whatsoever without exception! Our Lord
charged his disciples (Mat. 23.3.) to observe all whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees sitting in Moses's seat bade them observe; but it was only that all
whatsoever, which agreed with Moses and the Prophets; for they taught many
things from that seat, which were derogatory from the glory of God and opposite
to his holy commands. "Had He enjoined an absolute submission to their
dictates, He would in effect have forbid their believing in himself, whom the
scribes rejected." Every American is aware, that the expression must be limited
or that otherwise it is not true, that all they that take the sword shall
perish with or by the sword (Mat. 26.52)

When Simon said to our Lord (Mark 1.37) all men seek for thee, did he include
all the Sadducees, Scribes and Pharisees? Our Lord and the disciples that
attended him were Jews, some of them eat with unwashed hands; and yet we read,
that the Pharisees and all the Jews except they wash their hands often eat not
(Mark 7.3.) When our Lord said, all things are possible to him that believes
(Mark 9.23) were there not numberless exceptions supposed, though the words are
full and express? The like when he said (Mark 11.24) what things so ever ye
desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them: and
again (Mark 13.13.) ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: and again
(ver. 23.) behold I have foretold you all things. Did every individual of the
Jewish council consent, though it is asserted that they all condemned him, i.
e. Christ, to be guilty of death (Mark 14.64) when we read (Luke 23, 51) that
the counselor Joseph of Arimathea had not consented to the counsel and deed of
them?

We are informed (Luke 3.21) that all the people were baptized by John; but
from John's continuing to baptize long after this, it is evident, that all
means only great numbers of all ranks and professions among the Jews. Our Lord
tells the Pharisees (Luke 16.16.) that every man pressed into the kingdom of
God; and yet they, so far from doing it, hindered others all they could. When
Luke says (19.7.) that they all murmured at seeing our Lord going to be guest
with Zaccheus, he could mean no more, than that there was a general murmur; for
among the multitude there were many followers, who were so attached to Christ
as to be satisfied with all he did. When the woman of Samaria cried out to the
citizens "come see a man who told me all things that ever I did. Is not this
the Christ?" (John 4.29.) none of them were so foolish as to imagine, that she
included every transaction of her life. When our Lord, to encourage his
apostles, promises the Comforter, and adds (John 14.26) "He shall teach you all
things," He did not include all the arts and sciences or other superfluous
knowledge; but all that was necessary for them to know.

What words can be more full and express than the following, "there were
dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven (Acts
2.5.) It is not only every nation, but every nation under heaven; and yet there
were many nations at that time under heaven that were not known to any one in
Jerusalem; though we should admit that America was not then peopled, whereas
the contrary is most probable. Every nation under heaven where the dispersed
Jews dwelt, is evidently all that is intended. The disciples, we are informed,
had all things common (Acts 2.44) but he that would infer from thence, that it
was so in every particular is not a fit member for either religious or civil
society, and would not be admitted to reside long even among Indians, was he to
attempt reducing his principles to practice. Ananias says to Saul (Acts 22.15.)
"thou shall be his witness unto all men," though there were millions to whom
Paul never preached, nor wrote, and to whom his very name was unknown.

The apostle Paul writes of himself (Romans 7.8.) "Sin taking occasion by the
commandment wrought in me all concupiscence;" the translators have justly
rendered it all manner of concupiscence. Again (1 Cor. 6.12) " all things are
lawful unto me;" though none testified more strongly against all things that
were sinful, and to his being under the law to Christ, and not without law to
God. He was made all things to all men, that he might by all means save some;
(1 Cor. 9.22.) and yet was never a sinful conformist to the manners and customs
of the vicious, though rich, mighty and noble, and therefore must be understood
accordingly: the same when he says "I please all men in all things (1 Cor.
10.33.) for though in matters of pure indifference no one was more condescending;
and in all such things he was pliable as a thread; yet, when truth and holiness
were concerned, he was firm as the rock and bold as the lion. Charity which
believes all things and hops all things (1 Cor. 13.7.) cannot believe or
hope any thing inconsistent herewith.

How unreasonable, arbitrary and cruel would it be for a man to argue from his
reading (Ephesians. 5.24.) "let the wives be subject to their own husbands in every
thing," that his wife was patiently to submit to every cruelty and to every
command, that he is pleased to lay her under, when intoxicated with wine, with
rage, or attachments to other women. As unreasonable as to argue, that there
were no disinterested christians but Timothy, when the apostle wrote (Phil.
2.21.) "for all seek their own things, not the things of Jesus Christ."

In the first epistle to Timothy (6.10.) to apostle tells us, "the love of
money is the root of all evil;" and yet we know, that there is much evil that
has nothing to do with the love of money, and does not grow upon that root. He
says in his letter to Titus (2.11.) that "the grace of God," viz. in the gospel
dispensation, " has appeared to all men," which must be understood as
intending men of all nations ranks and orders; for every individual man, even
myriads, had not been made acquainted with the gospel.

John tells us in the Revelation (5.13.) "and every creature which is in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and
all things that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing and honor and glory and
power be unto him that sits upon the throne and to the Lamb forever and
ever." Will a person of any sense suppose from hence, that every thing that was
before mute became vocal; and not rather, that all nature in different ways
concurred in this song of praise.

When we read, that every bond man and every freed man hid themselves from the
wrath of the Lamb (Rev. 6.15, 16.) we must except all the friends of the Lamb.
When the beast causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive a mark in their right hand or in their foreheads (Rev. 13.16.)
notwithstanding the words are so full and express we must exclude every one
whose faithfulness and attachments to Christ would not admit of their
complying. When Babylon becomes the hold of every foul spirit and a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird (Rev. 18.2.) we cannot suppose that foul
spirits, unclean and hateful birds are to be found in no other part of the
universe than Babylon: nor can we understand the phrase literally when it said
(verse 24.) in her was found the blood of all that were slain upon the earth.
When all the fouls are called upon to come and gather themselves together unto
the supper of the great God, that they might eat the flesh of all men (Rev
19.18.) both free and bond, both small and great, the flesh of the enemies of
God is all that can be meant. And when the foundations of the wall of the
heavenly Jerusalem are said to be garnished with every precious stone (Rev.
21.19.) the sense is no more than our translators apprehended and have
expressed by all manner of precious stones.

But as says Dr. Doddridge "it would be endless to enumerate the texts, where
common sense requires us to take the word all in this general manner."

We may fairly conclude, from this induction of particulars, that we are not
bound to admit, that no one whatsoever, let him be the most abandoned
profligate that ever existed, will miss of final salvation, because the apostle
has used the term ALL, and said "God will have ALL men to be saved."

But should we admit of Mr. White's interpretation, that all men means the
whole human race, not a single soul excepted yet his favorite doctrine could
not be supported by this text. He tells us indeed, "it is not said God would
have all to be saved by his good will, but that he authoritatively wills it:
wills it as a being of supreme, uncontrollable power, a being that will be
obeyed. It is a fixed, determined, immutable will, not transient, nor
revocable. Thus powerfully, and irresistibly does God will all men to be
saved." Boldly asserted! When a man is haranguing and has a point to carry,
there is nothing like declaring roundly and with the utmost confidence, without
discovering the least change of countenance or trepidation of voice, the story
is true, it is certainly so, let it be ever so contrary to reason, scripture or
facts; for he will find some, who will credit him upon it, even (...) who are
sensible and judicious in other respects; but, through weakness of intellectual
nerves, they suffer themselves to be stormed out of their senses, by the daring
assaults of desperadoes in religion.

However, not to be terrified by Mr. White's bold assertions, let us try the
truth of them; and their agreement with his next paragraph, wherein we read "as
he, i. e. God, wills the end, so does he will the necessary means leading to
it. In order to their being saved, he will have all men come to the knowledge
of the truth. No man is or can be sanctified or saved without the knowledge of
the truth; God wills therefore that this means of salvation shall pass upon
them." But the chaplain or his transcriber has failed to tell us where this
means of salvation -- the knowledge of the truth -- passes upon all men.

That person is past reasoning with, who will deny that the apostle by truth
here means the gospel. It is indisputable that not one half of the world is
christianized; and that, so continuing, it is morally impossible, they should
have the knowledge of the truth. But if the end is not to be obtained without
the necessary means, and the necessary means, do not take place -- if no man is
or can be sanctified or saved without the knowledge of the truth; and yet
millions live and die, from age age, without this knowledge, then it must
follow, that the will of that Being, who is said to will that ALL MEN come to
the knowledge of the truth, cannot mean that authoritative will, which is
accompanied with uncontrollable power and is ever obeyed. Seeing then that God
does as powerfully and irresistably will all men to come to the knowledge of
the truth, as to be saved; and that facts without number evidence, that all men
come not to the knowledge of the truth, we are reduced, by dire necessity, to
understand the divine will in the text for the approving and not the
determining and effecting will of God.

The apostle makes no difference between God's willing that all should be
saved, and his willing that all should come to the knowledge of the truth. Let
it also be noted, that the original is not, who wills to save all men, but
wills all men to be saved, the verb is passive and not active. Had it been
active, Mr. White's first text in proof of the certain salvation of all men
would have been far more to the purpose; as it is, he obtains no support from
it. Our translators were sensible of a material difference, between God's
willing to save all men and willing all men to be saved; and have hinted this
difference by rendering the passage will have all men to be saved. They would
have expressed the meaning of the apostle yet more fully, had they rendered it
would have all men to be saved, intending, by his good will: for,
notwithstanding, what the chaplain authoritatively pronounces, the apostle,
while he uses the original word for will, in the same tense and mood, not less
than thirty-nine times in his writings, in more than twenty nine places alludes
to the inclination of the mind and not the operating power of the will;
accordingly it is translated in twenty four Romans 1.13. -- 7.15, 16, 19, 20,
twice in the 19th ver. -- 11.25. -- 16.19. -- 1 Cor. 7.7, 32. -- 10.1, 20. --
11.3.12.1. -- 14.5. 2 Cor. 1, 8. -- 5.4. -- 12.20. twice. Gal. 3.2. -- 4.17.
Col. 2.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
instances by would, in one by disposed, 1 Cor. 10.27.
in a second by I had rather, 1 Cor. 14.19.
and in three others by desire. Gal. 4.9, -- 6.12, 13.
In the other ten places, Romans 9.18. twice. -- 13 3. 1 Cor. 4.21. -- 7.36,
39.14, 35, -- 16.7. 1 Timothy 2.4. -- 5.11.
where it is rendered will and wilt, it might be once and again more properly
would or would. It occurs only twice in the remaining epistles. James says (2
chapter 20) but will thou know O vain man, which is tantamount to -- but know thou
O vain man. John writes (3 ep. 13 v.) I will not.

We meet with it, in the historical books of the new testament, sixty one
times, fifty one of which it is translated will or wilt: the fifty one must be
reduced to forty one, for in ten places of Mark and Luke, Mark 1.41. -- 8.34.
-- 10.51. -- 14.12, 36. -- 15.9, Luke 5.13. -- 9.23. -- 18.41. -- 22.9.
we have only a repetition of what we meet with in six of Matthew. Matt. 8.3.
-- 16.24. -- 20.32. -- 26.17, 39. -- 27.17.
In twelve more, Matt. 13.28. -- 15.28. -- 17.4. -- 20.21. -- 27.21. Mark 6.25.
-- 15.12. Luke 19.14. John 5.6. Acts 7.28. -- 9.6. -- 25.9.
at least, out of the forty one, the allusion is evidently to the inclination,
pleasure or desire of the person or persons concerned.

The remaining number is twenty nine; Matt. 9.13. -- 11.14 -- 12.7 -- 15.32. --
19.17, 21. -- 20.14, 15. -- 21.29. -- 23.4. -- 26.15. -- 27.43. Luke 9.54. --
12.49. -- 13.31. John 5.21, 40 -- 6.67. -- 8.44 -- 9.27. -- 17.24. -- 21.22,
23. besides the six above specified at the mark.
and should the impartial reader consult them, he will probably be ready to
judge that in several of them no more is meant than the inclination.

As to the other ten of the sixty one, the original is translated would or
would, Matt. 12.38. Mark 10.35, 36. Luke 6.31. John 9.27. -- 12.21. -- 21.18.
desire or desires, Mark 9.35. Luke 5.39.
and lists. John 3.8.
Thus it appears, that not only in Paul's writings, but through the whole new
testament, the original word, in the same tense and mood, rendered will in the
text under consideration, alludes to the inclination of the mind, and not to
that operating power of the will for which the chaplain contendeth.

It may be objected, that however the original word alludes in common to the
inclination of the mind, as has been now observed, because that it is the will
of the creature that is concerned; yet that when the divine Being speaks or is
spoken of, it has another meaning: for, that as Mr. White says (p. 6.) "the
will of God does not rest in pitying men, and wishing it were better with them
-- no -- the will of God and his work are one. He wills nothing but he works
it." That "He is an omnipotent and wise agent and can never be resisted," so as
to be frustrated even when opposed, is readily granted: but that, when he is
said to will in the sacred writings, we are not always to understand such kind
of will as the chaplain maintains, has been shown from the fact, that all men
do not come to the knowledge of the truth, though he is said to will that they
should do it; and will be made further to appear, when it shall have been
proved below, that all men are not saved, for that individuals do really
perish. However before we enter upon that proof, let me point out the error of
Mr. White's assertions from other passages of scripture, which contain a flat
denial of them.

Our Savior, to silence the cavils of the pharisees at his eating with
publicans and sinners, tells them to go and learn what that means I will have
mercy and not sacrifice. (Matt 9.13.) And when they complained to him, that his
disciples did what was not lawful to do upon the sabbath, he answers them by
saying, "if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless (Matt. 12, 7.) The words
are a quotation from Hosea (6.6) There Jehovah says by the prophet, "for I
desired mercy and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than
burnt-offerings." Dr. Doddridge renders the Greek in Matthew, "I require mercy
and not sacrifice;" and then notes, "so the Greek evidently signifies, when it
expresses the will of a superior; and this the original Hebrew word imports,
which seems to answer to that modern phrase used by princes such is our
pleasure." The Septuagint translation varies somewhat from our Savior's
quotation, which is as the Hebrew "mercy and not sacrifice," whereas the other
is mercy rather than or before sacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather than
or before burnt-offerings." The Septuagint observing, that the subsequent
clause in the Hebrew determined the sense of the preceding, rendered both in
the same manner. The verb used by our Savior and the Septuagint is the same:
and his authority justifies the use of it as answering to the Hebrew original;
and the meaning of the passage in Hosea proves, that in the new testement it
intends I desire, prefer, take delight in, am pleased with, require, and the
like, whatever the chaplain or his transcriber may assert to the contrary.

One of the greatest Hebricians that this century has produced, Schultens,
makes to bend the primary notion of the Hebrew root in Hosea; from whence the
transition is easy to the subsequent secondary significations -- "to have a
ready, well-disposed, and cheerful inclination of will and affection; to be
well affected to; to favor; to delight in; to be willing; to choose;" which
are given as the common meaning of the word by Dr. Tailor in his Hebrew
Concordance. He has omitted mentioning to will, but cannot be thought to mean,
that it should be excluded; seeing, that the very first translation he gives,
is in the Latin for to will; and in this he agrees with Pagninus, Buxtorf,
Leigh, Opitius, Stock, and others, who had before interpreted the Hebrew root
in the like manner that he has done.

The Doctor in his preface remarks to the following purport, "The words and
phrases of the new testament are but the words and phrases of the old
translated into Greek. The same language runs through the whole, and is set in
such a variety of lights, that one part is well adapted to illustrate another.
To understand the meaning of the Spirit in the new, it is essentially necessary
that we understand its sense in the old testament. By carefully collating those
places of the sacred code where any word is used, you may judge what sense it
will, or will not bear. Which being once settled, there lies no appeal to any
other writings in the world; because there are no other books in all the world,
in the pure original Hebrew, but the books of the old testament. A judgment
therefore duly formed upon them must be absolutely decisive."

Let us proceed upon this plan, and attend to the issue. The Hebrew verb, the
sense of which has been given, is to be met with eighty four times in the old
testament, thirty nine of which it is asserted of or uttered by, the divine
Being. In sixteen out of these it is rendered delight, have delight, delighted,
delights, Numb. 14.8. 2 Samuel 15.26. -- 22.20. 1 Kings 10.9. 2 Chro. 9.8. Ps.
18.19. -- 22.8. -- 147.10. Is. 62.4. -- 65.12. -- 66.4. Jer. 9.24.
favourest, Ps. 41.11.
well pleased, Is. 42.21.
and have no pleasure, Ezekiel. 18.32 -- 33.11.
the negative being added; and that the true sense could not have been given,
but in these or words of similar meaning, is evident from the prepositions with
which the verb is connected in the original. In the other twenty three places
it is rendered pleased, please, has pleasure in, and have I any pleasure at
all; Judges 13.23. Ps 51.19. -- 115.3. -- 135.6. Is. 53.10.55.11. -- 56.4.
Jonah 1 14. Ps. 5.4. -- 35.27. Ezekiel. 18.23. twice, more literally in desiring
do I desire, but more elegantly have I any pleasure at all.
would and will; 1 Samuel 2.25. Job. 9.3. Pro. 21.1.
delights in and delight; Ps. 37 23. Micah 7.1^. Mal. 2 17. Is. 1.11.
desire, desired and desire Ps 4^.^. Hosea 6.6. Ps. 51.6, 16.


In the forty five places, where the Hebrew verb has a reference to the
creature, it is translated in like manner as when referring to the divine
Being, except in Job 40.17: in which it is moves. It is only will in Ruth
3.13: would in 1 Kings 13.33: and willing in 1 Chro. 28.9.

The Septuagint have translated the Hebrew, in forty out of the eighty four
places, by the Greek verb translated will in 1 Timothy 2.4; and in twenty of them,
where the divine Being is spoken of or speaks. 2 Samuel 15.26. 1 Kings 10.9. 2
Chro. 9.8. Ps. 5.4. -- 18.19. -- 22.8. -- 37.23. -- 40.6. -- 41.11, -- 51.16.
-- 115, 3 -- 135.6 -- 147.10. Prove. 21.1. Is. 55.11. -- 56.4. Ezekiel. 18.23.
twice, and v. 32. Hos. 6.6.
The introduction of the verb will into these several passages, instead of what
our translators have used, by such as please to make the experiment, must
sufficiently show the weakness of the chaplain, in laying that mighty stress
upon it, and crying out "the will of God and his work are one. He wills
nothing, but he works it" The generality of readers will probably be satisfied
with the following specimens.

David predicts the language, with which the enemies of our Savior reproached
him when upon the cross, saying "he trusted in the Lord, that he would deliver
him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him." Ps. 22.8.
The Septuagint render it in the present tense, so that the word is exactly the
same as in Timothy; and, what deserves observation, the very same with what the
sacred historian records. Matt. 27.43.
Let the English then be, "let him deliver him seeing he wills him." Add Mr.
White's paraphrase on the same word in Timothy, only changing it for him, and
read, "He, i.e. God, authoratatively wills him; wills him, as a Being of
supreme, uncontrollable power. It is a fixed, determined, immutable will, not
transient and revocable. The will of God and his work are one. He wills
nothing, but he works it." What a sweet sense this makes of the passage! Our
translators have avoided the absurdity by rendering it in the Evangelist, "let
him deliver him now, if he will have him," meaning will approve of him, or, to
comport with the Psalm, delights in him, which must be the sense, because of
the preposition that the Hebrew verb is there connected with, though it is
wanting both in the Septuagint translation and in Matthew.

The prophet Ezekiel furnishes us with the following remarkable passages. "Have
I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die; says the Lord God: and not
that he should return from his ways and live? For I have no pleasure in him
that dies, says the Lord." Ezekiel. 18.23, 32.
The Septuagint translation reads in English with the Greek verb rendered as in
Timothy, "shall I will with my will the death of the wicked, so much as, (or,
equally with) his turning from the evil way and his living? For I will not the
death of him that dies, says the Lord." The use of the Greek verb signifying
to will by the Septuagint, must be allowed to be just, from what has been
already observed.

Here it is evidently maintained, that the Lord wills the amendment of the
wicked rather than his death: And if so, it may be proposed to Mr. White's
transcriber, how comes it about, that as God wills authoritatively, with
supreme uncontrollable power, with a fixed, determined immutable will -- how
comes it about that as his will and work is one; and as he wills nothing, but
he works it; that the wicked does not turn from his evil way and live? What
hinders? He is an omnipotent and wise agent, he can never be effectually
resisted. The text and context, supposes, that in diverse instances the wicked
dies; and yet the wording of the text shows, that it is true of every wicked
man that the Lord wills his amendment rather than his death. It matters not
to the argument what this death is, whether it intends future punishments or
dying by national judgments. There is no other way of removing the absurdities
following upon Mr. White's mode of reasoning, but by admitting in opposition to
what he pretends, that when the will of God is spoken of, it often means his
benevolence or good will; his approving, and not his determining, effecting,
omnipotent will. The divine Being exercises a moral government over his
rational creatures. They have all a law written upon their hearts; to some he
has given a fuller and clearer revelation of his mind. By that He tells us,
what we are to do, and what we are to forbear. When we go contrary to his
directions we act wickedly; when we obey them we act righteously. It is his
will and pleasure that we should act righteously. He threatens us, if we do
not: He promises us benefits, if we do. His sacred oracles are written in the
language and dialect of these lower regions; and not, to us, in the
unintelligible dialect of the upper; being designed for mortals, and not for
angels. They speak after the manner of men, who cannot speak or conceive of the
divine Being above human abilities; and therefore, to excite suitable thoughts
and affections in them, distinctions are used concerning the Deity, and
passions ascribed to him, which do not really belong to his nature, and which,
to prevent mistakes, we are taught in other places are foreign to it, as
implying changeableness and imperfection. Were we to consider more, when
reading the scriptures, the divine Being as the moral Governor of the world,
publishing his will and pleasure to his reasonable creatures, we should the
more easily comprehend their meaning and design. It is the will and pleasure of
every kind sovereign on earth, that all his people may be good subjects, and
reap the benefit of it: and it is the will and pleasure of the King of kings,
that all his reasonable creatures should be faithful and obedient subjects, and
of consequence enjoy salvation.

It is not improbable, that when Paul wrote to Timothy, "who will have all men
to be saved," he had his eye to those gracious and encouraging declarations
contained in Ezekiel (chapter 18.23, 32. and chapter 33.11.) for his expression is
conformable thereunto: and that this is not a singular conjecture, is plain
from the reference made to this passage of Paul's, in the margin of some of our
English bibles.

The gospel considers all men as sinners, and is, in short, a PROCLAMATION from
the King of kings, promising pardon and grace to all who repent and believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the divine pleasure, that this PROCLAMATION should
be published far and wide, through this globe, to all nations, kindreds,
tongues and people; and that every one who hears it, should take the benefit of
it: and this is the sense, in which "God will have all men to be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth;" and let it be remembered, that it cannot
be said with justice, "of this will of his that it rests in pitying men, and
wishing it were better with them;" for, by his Son, He commanded the apostles
to go into all the world, and to preach the gospel to every human creature,
Mark 16.15.
without exception; and Paul was called to proclaim the glad tidings to the
Gentiles expressly: and had christian sovereigns understood the calls of
providence and of the scriptures, instead of having employed the fine arts of
navigation to the infamous purposes of discovering new countries for to plunder
and enslave the natives, they would have employed them in the glorious purpose
of spreading the divine Proclamation of pardon and grace through Jesus Christ,
to the everlasting salvation of all true penitents and believers, without
regard to their complexion, features, manners or customs.

Some may with me prefer the above explanation of Mr. White's first text; while
others choose to answer him by urging, that the words all men, do not
necessarily imply any more than all orders and sorts of men: for that the term
all, both before and after, must be understood in a limited sense. When the
apostle directs in the first verse, that prayer should be made for all men, he
could not mean for every individual, as christians were virtually prohibited by
that loving disciple John (1 John 5.16.) praying for those who had sinned the
sin unto death, i. e, had been guilty of the unpardonable sin against the holy
Ghost. Again, when (in v. 8th) he writes, "I will therefore that men pray every
where," he designs not in each, but in any place, without regarding its having
been, or continuing to be, holy or unholy, which agrees with what our Lord
taught the woman of Samaria (John 4.21 -- 24) in answer to her enquiry about
the proper place of worship. Now if all in the 10th and in the 8th verse must
have a confined meaning, why may it not have the like sense in the intermediate
space?

One or other of these interpretations must be allowed, or the scriptures are
at variance, and give an uncertain sound.

Now is the place, reserved in my own intention for replying to an answer that
may be given to the argument, drawn from all men's not coming to the knowledge
of the truth, in proof that all men are not saved.

It may be answered, that though millions live and die without the knowledge of
the truth, yet this means of salvation may pass upon them in another world.

The pamphlet does not assert it, in so many words; but the sensible and
careful reader will observe, that only some principles are published, that
others are concealed in consequences to be revealed when the favorable
opportunity offers. We may rest assured, that we are not masters of the whole
plan, while we stop short of Origen's full sentiment, who is pronounced by some
to have "turned even hell itself into a purgatory; and to have thought, that
not only wicked men, but the very, devils might be so purged in it, as to come
forth angels of light." Wake's Discourse on Purgatory, p. 3.


That the knowledge of the truth is attainable in the dark regions of hell,
will not appear incredible to those who believe, that a free intercourse is
maintained between the miserable inhabitants of it -- that many who have
prophesied in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in his name have cast out devils,
and in his name done many wonderful works will be publicly doomed in the day
of judgment to future punishments -- and that numbers are called to the
knowledge of the truth, who perish notwithstanding -- it will be well, if there
are no additions made to them, by the flattering and false hopes, that some
entertain of being at length for ever happy, in a distant though unknown
period, let their moral character here be what it may, from the unscriptural
persuasion, that there is actual salvation for all men. But though it should be
admitted, that the knowledge of the truth is attainable by all the damned in
hell, whether men or devils; yet there is not the least foundation in the
sacred oracles, for supposing, that such knowledge will prove saving to any of
them. It is evident, that the New Testament confines the Proclamation of pardon
and grace for all who repent and believe on Jesus, to the inhabitants of our
world; and hence they are assured, that if they believe not, they shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on them. John 3.36.
This is the current doctrine of scripture, so plain and intelligible, that he
who runs may read it, and that the wayfaring man though a fool cannot mistake
it -- unless he is a will-fool. It is addressed directly to sinners on earth,
and not to sufferers in hell; there is not the least intimation, that it will
ever be directed to the latter: the contrary is strongly asserted; for the
former are told, that if they believe not they shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on them. Will the wrath of God abide on them? Shall they
not see life? They then that will venture to contradict this doctrine, and to
teach men that the wrath of God will abide on them only for a certain period,
and that after such period they shall see life, though they have trodden under
foot the Son God, and have accounted the blood of the covenant an unholy thing,
and have done despite to the Spirit of grace -- such teachers, methinks, ought
to come invested with powers for working miracles greater than those wrought by
Jesus and his apostles, for these verily taught the reverse. The poet Milton
gives a far more scriptural account of hell than such teachers, when he cries
out, "Regions of sorrow! doleful shades! where peace
"And rest can never dwell! hope never comes,
"That comes to all: but torture without end
"Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
"With ever-burning sulphur unconsum'd!"


We may be told, that Peter writes, 1 Pet. 3.18 -- 20.
"Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, being put
to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison: which sometime were disobedient, when once
the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was
preparing." This passage has been greatly perplexed and tortured by designing
and interested theorists, whose business it was to support a favorite scheme.
Dr. Doddridge's translation is certainly a just one -- "Quickened by the
Spirit, by which (or whom) going forth he preached to the spirits in prison,
who were long since disobedient." -- The Spirit by whom our Lord was quickened
was the Spirit of God; this Spirit was granted to Noah, that preacher of
righteousness, by our Lord, who is therefore spoken of as going forth by him
and preaching to those spirits in prison, who were long since, or formerly
disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah.

Whether this interpretation be allowed or rejected, matters not to the case in
hand. Let persons maintain, if they will, that the passage refers to our Lords
descent into hell or limbus patrum, and to his preaching there; it does not
appear from it, that his preaching proved effectual for the salvation of any;
for Peter, at writing, speaks of the auditors as being still spirits in prison,
and makes no mention of any's returning with our Lord to a better place. His
saying, who were long since or formerly disobedient, does not argue that they
were not now disobedient; for if they were not now disobedient, they would
scarce be shut up in prison: but he alludes to that particular disobedience in
the day of their trial, when once the long suffering of God waited to see, what
would be the effect of Noah's preaching; and which disobedience proved the
occasion of their being cast into prison.

Paul was a most zealous indefatigable preacher; and it is not to be doubted,
but that he would readily have postponed going to heaven, on quitting the body,
and have visited the damned in hell, had there been the least glimmering hope
that he should be instrumental in saving a single soul out of that place of
torments; whereas whenever he mentions being absent from the body, he concludes
that he shall be present with the Lord. It is now above four thousand years
since the disobedient in the days of Noah were sent to the prison of hell; and
we have not yet had certain authentic intelligence of any one's having been
brought, by means of his torments, to godly repentance, and commenced an holy
person, and in consequence of such change obtained a removal to glory.

The Papists indeed assure us, upon their word and honor, that numbers have
gone to heaven from the limbus patrum and from purgatory; and in Cardinal
Bellarmin's time most of their divines taught, that the damned and the souls in
purgatory, are tormented in the same sire and in the same place: but they
distinguish between the damned and the souls in purgatory; the latter are
"penitent sinners, who departed this life in grace and charity, but
nevertheless indebted to the divine justice some pains, which they suffer in
the other life; pardoned as to the eternal guilt or pain, yet obnoxious to some
temporal penalty;" the damned are those abandoned wicked graceless spirits,
whose sins shall never be remitted: so that in this point the Papists keep
nearer to the scriptures than the ingenious Mr. White and his admirers.

Let us now proceed to the arguments in proof of there being such damned, whose
sins shall never be remitted, and who will never see and enjoy eternal life;
but shall have the wrath of God abiding on them.

The scriptures uniformly teach, that the moral characters of mankind are
formed and fixed in and by the present life; that their states are unalterably
determined at death; and that the time of probation is then at an end. The
admonitions, promises, threatenings and representations of our Lord and his
apostles evidently imply it.

Solomon's advice is -- "whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave, whither thou go;" Eccl. 9.10
by which he means to declare, that the present world is the stage whereupon we
are called to perform the parts assigned us by our Creator; and that we shall
not be allowed to perform them over again, in that invisible world to which we
are going. A greater than Solomon expresses the same sentiment, when he says,
"I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day; the night comes
when no man can work." John 9.4.
The last clause appears to be a general acknowledged truth applied to his own
particular case -- a truth holding forth this instruction, that the day of life
is the time of action; that the night of death closes the scene; and that we
shall be approved or rejected, as we have finished well or ill. In perfect
unison with these ideas, it is written, "to day, if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts as in the provocation. Take heed, brethren, lest there
be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God;
but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day." Heb. 3.7, 8, 12, 13.
"Now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation." 2 Cor. 6.2.
John the baptist, in his preaching, compares the national church of the Jews
to a threshing floor covered with wheat and chaff, and says of our Lord, "he
will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but he
will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire." Matt. 3.12.
The good are compared to wheat, the bad to chaff. The former are to be
gathered into a safe and secure place, the latter are to be destroyed -- not to
pass through a new and fiery trial, in order that they may be thereby turned
into wheat.

We read -- "God so loved the world, that He gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. John
3.16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned," Mark 16.16.
or condemned in a judicial way to future punishment. The last quotation was
spoken by our Lord, after his resurrection, a little before his ascension, and
when commissioning his apostles to preach the gospel to every human creature;
and so deserves special attention. It would be tedious to the reader, to
mention all the passages, where salvation or eternal life are promised to every
one who repents and believes on the Lord Jesus; and where it is threatened,
expressly or by manifest implication, that whosoever believes not shall not see
life, shall perish, shall be damned or condemned to future punishment:
Salvation and eternal life in such passages are evidently synonymous; and so
are not seeing life, perishing, being damned, or condemned. The former and the
latter are contrasted to each other as opposites. But what becomes of the
contrast, if the threatening only means, that unbelievers shall be condemned
and punished for a while, and after that shall be blessed with eternal life?
The first preachers of the gospel must have been thought egregious triflers or
worse, if, while they spoke as they did, they intended no more than this; and
had a reserved subterfuge, according to (...) the vilest miscreant that ever
went to the grave (...) at length be saved. Many persons, when they have
entertained a pleasing opinion, through an indolence of temper, will not be at
the pains of examining into the truth or falsehood of it. They had rather be
deluded by an agreeable dream, though to their future damage; than be awakened
to a sense of danger, time enough to escape the approaching evil. I would hope
better of some into whose hands this may fall; and therefore go on, and note,
that the most and best arguments of the pamphlet in behalf of the Restoration
of all mankind to final happiness are taken from the writings of the apostle
Paul. Let us examine whether the interpretation, given to the passages quoted
from him, does not contradict what he advances in other places; for if so,
such interpretation cannot be the true one. Paul tells the Romans, Romans 8.28 --
30.
that "all things work together for good to them that love God, to the called
according to his purpose;" and, in support of it, adds, "whom he did foreknow,
he did also predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son; moreover,
whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified." Not to enter into
dispute about the meaning of foreknowledge, predestination, and calling; the
passage connects these with being justified and glorified, and appropriates the
whole to certain individuals, to the exclusion of others -- to them that love
God, to the called according to his purpose. We may as well argue, that a part
is the whole; as that all are foreknown, all are predestined, all are called,
all are justified, and all are glorified -- or as that all are glorified and
restored to final happiness, though some only are foreknown, predestined,
called, and justified.

In his epistle to the Hebrews, he declares it impossible for those who were
once enlightened, and had tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the holy Ghost, and had tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come, should they apostatize, to be renewed again unto repentance;
and then represents their unhappy doom by the following illustration, "for the
earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it* and brings forth
herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God: but
that which bears thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned." Heb. 6.4 -- 8.
How puerile and impertinent is this illustration, if the end of the greatest
apostate is only to pass through a temporary burning, in order to his receiving
a blessing from God, and being made finally happy! He also warns them, saying,
"see that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not, who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven." Heb. 12.25.
Could it enter into the head of any believing sensible Jew, who recollected
how the refusers in the time of Moses were destroyed, that the apostle secretly
admitted, that should they turn away from him that spoke from heaven, they
would escape notwithstanding, and in length of time become the companions of
them that serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear.

When he writes to the Corinthians, "but with many of them God was not well
pleased; for they were overthrown in the wilderness;" he subjoins, "now these
things were our examples," and again a little lower, "now all these things
happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our admonition." 1
Cor. 10.5, 6, 11.
What was it that happened unto them? For their disobedience murmuring and
lusts, they were overthrown in the wilderness, they were destroyed of the
destroyer, and were never suffered to enter the promised land. But how are
these our examples, if after having given into the highest acts of
disobedience, indulged the basest lusts, and allowed ourselves in the most
indecent murmurings against the divine conduct, through life, we are admitted
into it? Upon Mr. White's principle, they were written in vain, and have no
admonition in them; for they do not prefigure the absolute and perpetual
exclusion of any from the heavenly Canaan, though the destruction of the Jews
in the wilderness was an absolute and perpetual exclusion of all such from the
earthly one. From the passages now quoted it is evident, that Paul was opposed
to the Restoration of all mankind to final happiness, whatever some inquisitors
may attempt forcing him to speak, by putting his expressions to the rack and
torture.

It remains, that we attend particularly to the great Prophet of the church,
whom if the christian professor will not hear, it is vain to think of calling
other evidence. Our Lord testified, that "strait is the gate and narrow is the
way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it." Matt. 7.14.
Others maintain, that, though this is true in reference to the direct road
unto life, yet there is another round about way leading from destruction,
which, the many, who for the present prefer the wide gate and the broad way,
will at last hit upon, so that all without exception shall have life. Could the
multitudes of common people, who listened to our Lord's sermon understand him
in this light? Or did he mean to impose upon their credulity? Or did he not
believe what he taught? each was impossible. But his parable of the rich man
and Lazarus will admit of no such gloss. In that he introduces Abraham as
saying to the rich man in hell, "betwixt us and you there is a great gulf
fixed; so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they
pass to us, that would come from thence." Luke 16.26.
Had Mr White's admirers the modesty that the poor tormented wretch had, they
would give up the point, upon receiving such an answer from heaven, uttered by
the father of the faithful, though they might like him imagine, that a
messenger from the invisible world would be more convincing, than Moses and the
prophets, with Jesus the evangelists and apostles. But they may plead, that
this was a parable and a fiction. True, it was so; and a proper vehicle to
convey instructions, after a striking and forcible manner never to be
forgotten, into the minds of the attentive audience. One of these instructions,
and which could not be mistaken, by them, unless they possessed Mr. White's
ingenuity, was, that if they were once cast into hell, they could never pass
from thence to heaven. This was a truth, or it was not. If it was not, but
artfully employed to terrify from bad practices, the character of our Savior
is impeached and his name blasphemed: he becomes a Machiavelian instructor, and
does evil that good may come of it: he deceives his hearers that he may
preserve them from vice. However, let Jesus be true, and every man a liar.
Whether he spoke plainly or in parables he taught the truth; and therefore the
wicked, whether rich or poor, learned or unlearned, when once cast into hell
shall never pass from thence to heaven.

In his answer Luke 20.35.
to the Sadducean objection against the resurrection, it is manifestly implied,
that all men would not be saved: for while he says, "they which shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that world" where they neither marry nor are given
in marriage, neither can die any more, but are equal unto the angels, and are
the children of God; he also teaches, that all will not be accounted worthy.

Upon another occasion our Lord declared, "he that shall blaspheme against the
holy Ghost has not forgiveness for ever, but is obnoxious to everlasting
condemnation" Mark 3.29.
(or damnation) according to the original. "The blasphemy against the holy
Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men; whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost
it shall not be forgiven him -- neither in this world, nor in that which is to
come." Matt. 12.31, 32.
How could our Lord have more expressly assured the Jews, that blasphemers
against the holy Ghost would remain perpetually unpardoned? He says positively
that "they shall not be forgiven;" and to give the greater weight to his words,
has a recourse to the proverbial expression by which it was usual to signify,
in the strongest terms possible, that things should never be -- "they shall not
be forgiven -- neither in this world, nor in that which is to come." According
to Mark he said also, in the same discourse, of such blasphemer, "he has not
forgiveness for ever, but is obnoxious to everlasting condemnation" (or
damnation.) We must then believe, that the guilt of such blasphemy will ever
remain unpardoned; and, if so, the blasphemer cannot be admitted into heaven.
If the repeated positive assertions of our Lord, though expressed in the most
forcible language, are not to be credited, where are we!

Can it be seriously said in answer to this argument, that "the blasphemer will
continue in hell, till by his sufferings he has fully satisfied for the
unpardonable sin; and (...) he will afterward upon a change of character remove
to heaven?" It may be replied, that then upon this removal he may go about
boasting among the glorified, that "he is less obliged to Christ than they, for
that his greatest sin was not pardoned for the sake of Christ, and that he
himself made a complete compensation for it without any abatement." But it may
be thought more to the purpose to observe, that if the blasphemer can by
suffering compensate for the sin against the holy Ghost, and yet continue to
exist in a capacity of being afterward for ever happy; then the sinner does
not, by the greatest sin he can possibly commit, forfeit his existence; for the
unpardonable sin is represented as the greatest possible.

But to come to the case of Judas, concerning whom, on account of his treason,
our Lord assures us, "it had been good for that man, if he had not been born."
Mat. 26.24.
This must necessarily imply, that the traitor will never be finally happy: for
if ever he was to enter upon eternal life, it was certainly good for him that
he was born into existence; though his sufferings prior to it, should have
continued for a period of as many millions of years as would be contained in a
line of figures from this paper to the sun, or even the most distant star; for
such a period of suffering would not bear so much proportion to eternal
happiness, as the unit one does in number to such a line of figures, or a
moment in time to such a period. Temporary punishment however protracted is
naught when compared with everlasting blessedness. The instance of Judas is
then in point, and decides the controversy, that there cannot be a "Restoration
of all mankind to final happiness;" because it would have been well for that
man if he had not been born.

Now let us try, whether the other texts, quoted in the pamphlet, will admit of
an interpretation agreeing with what has been already advanced: they must, or
there is a manifest opposition between different parts of scripture -- the more
easy and natural such interpretation, the more satisfactory it will prove. The
apostle writing to Timothy could not do otherwise than say "God our Savior,"
as he was their savior, even though no other than Paul and Timothy were saved;
and the extension of the pronoun our to all mankind is a violence, which though
too often practiced by, is notwithstanding a scandal to disputants. When in the
4th chapter 10 v. he styles God the Savior of all men; it is not in allusion to
spiritual, but temporal deliverance. We read (Judges 3.9) "the Lord raised up a
deliverer to the children of Israel;" and again (15 v.) "the Lord raised them
up a deliverer;" in the Hebrew it is a Savior, as noted in the margin of some
bibles: the Septuagint use the same word as in Timothy. Samuel tells the Jews
(1 Samuel 10.19) "ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out
of all your adversities and your tribulations." The Septuagint translate it,
"who himself is the Savior of you, out of all your evils and your
tribulations," employing the Greek word the apostle does: and this they do in
many other places, so that God the Savior, my Savior, our Savior, and the
Savior of Israel are very common, even when temporal deliverance is plainly
intended. In the beginning of the verse Paul writes, for the end of advancing
godliness ("for this thing therefore" in the original) we both labor and
suffer reproach; he then assigns the reason for their laboring and suffering
reproach, notwithstanding the dangers and fatigues attending them, and adds,
"because we trust in the living God, who is the Savior, preserver, protector,
or deliverer, of all men, especially of those that believe." The title answers
to that in Job 7.20. Preserver of men. Paul refers to God's providential
kindness, by which he preserves and defends all men, but more especially the
faithful.

We are told, "that all men, reprobate as well as elect, have one and the self
same God. The elect have not one God, and reprobate another; but one God in the
God of them both. To adopt the words in Malachy 2.10. " Have we not all one
father? Has not one God created us?" yea, the same good and kind and merciful
God and father made all. So then we see the blessed God stands in the same near
and tender relation to the whole human race." A noble discovery! But was it
designed to convince, or to confound the reader? Had not the zeal of the
publisher out ran his judgment, he never would have suffered so sophistical a
paragraph to have made its appearance. By way of answer I retort the argument.
God is the parent of the universe. Men and angels, Abraham and Judas, the
minutest insect and the most glorious Cherubim, the holiest Seraphim and the
impurest devil, Beelzebub and Gabriel have one and the self same God. The good
angel has not one God, and the bad angel another; but one God is the God of
them both. To adopt the words in Malachy, "Have we not all one father? has not
one God created us?" -- all whether stones or trees, insects, birds, beasts or
fishes, saints or sinners, angels or devils? yea, the same good and kind and
merciful God and father made all creatures. So then we see the blessed God
stands in the same near and tender relation to the whole creation." But will it
from hence follow, that he must make all equally happy in proportion to their
respective capacities? Or that he must not punish any who are disobedient and
rebellious? Or, that he is cruel and unmerciful should he prepare everlasting
fire for the devil and his angels; or should he consign to the same, the wicked
and impenitent among mankind? Will such doctrine agree with the words of
Isaiah? (27th 11 v.) "It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that
made them will show them no favor." If a people may be thus dealt with, when
universally abandoned, though there may be certain good characters among them
-- a Noah, a Daniel, a Job -- much more may the worst individuals.

What Mr. White observes of the one mediator between God and man, is as little
to the purpose, as his sophistical paragraph about the one God. Christ Jesus
mediates, not for the Jew or the Greek only, the circumcised or the
uncircumcised, the free or the bond, but for the whole human race without
exception, who embrace and comply with the gospel. And the value of his
atonement was such, that divine justice can acquit every one who repents and
believes, agreeable to the gospel-proclamation; therefore it is with propriety
said, "who gave himself a ransom for all:" but it does by no means follow, that
therefore in justice all men must be saved, or that the blood of Christ loses
its virtue. The virtue of Christ's blood was designed to save men in perfect
harmony with the divine holiness and justice, which require repentance and
faith, according to the established mode of redemption; while then it saves
each individual that repents and believes, it is not in any true sense lost,
though numbers perish through their own impenitence and unbelief: so that Mr.
White assigns a false motive for the apostle's adding -- to be testified in due
time -- neither do these words mean as he pretends, "that there shall be a
time, when, from the actual salvation of every individual (which though not
printed is evidently intended) it will be manifest that all men are ransomed
and bought by the blood of Christ:" the original is literally -- the testimony
in due time, or proper season -- and therefore admits of different easy
constructions without our being obliged to fly to this unscriptural one.

The reasoning that has been now used, to set the passage in 1 Timothy 2.6. in
its true light, and to correct the misconstruction put upon it in the pamphlet,
may be applied to 1 John 2.2. "If any man sin we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, but for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD." However Mr. White may
exclaim -- "A text so worded with a not only, and the Whole World looks as if
the Spirit had purposely consulted to obviate and prevent all clippings of it:"
yet it must be clipped of his comments; or the Spirit will not be consistent,
and teach the same doctrines in different parts of scripture, but contrary
ones. The apostle John wrote this epistle, as must be supposed, to believers
within certain limits. Under a sense of the sinful infirmities attending him
and those whom he addressed, he says, "who is the propitiation for our sins;"
but they were not the only believers who were thus privileged; the blessing was
common to all of that character, without any regard to their circumstances,
nation or place of abode; his benevolent heart glows with the thought, and in
an ecstasy of pleasure he adds, "and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
WHOLE WORLD," meaning believers whether Jews or Gentiles, every where over the
whole world. The propriety of the addition will be still more apparent, were
the persons addressed mostly Jews or very much so; for such might be still
tainted with the bigotry and pride of their nation, who held the best of the
uncircumcised Greeks, and much more Barbarians and Scythians, as unfit for
conversation and company; and could not bear the thought of their admission to
equal privileges with themselves in the Messiah's kingdom.

The ingenious Mr. White pursuing his subject, refers us to Romans 5. from the
15th to the 19th v. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift: for if
through the offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And
not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one
to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. For
if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ. Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment came upon all
men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon all men, unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

The passage is not without its intricacies; but upon examination will be found
not to favor Mr. White's scheme. The epistle was directed to believers,
beloved of God, called and holy. Paul sets himself, in the latter part of the
chapter, to "show that the calamities brought by the first Adam on his seed,
are repaired with glorious advantage to all who by faith become interested in
the second Adam;" as is observed by Dr. Doddridge; who in his note upon the
12th v. says "as this verse is an inference from the 11th, it seems evident
that believers only are spoken of; for it is plain from comparing the 9th,
10th, and 11th verses with the 1st, that it is only they, who are justified by
faith, who have peace with God, and who joy in him by Christ as having received
the reconciliation. And this obvious remark clears the following passage of
difficulties, which would be exceeding great, if it were to be considered
without regard to this connection, and which have in fact, misled many
commentators; who for want of attending to it, have plunged themselves and
their readers into great perplexity, and given a sense to the paragraph, of
which it is by no means capable." He afterward remarks, that the 12th, 18th
and 19th verses make one continued sentence, and that the intermediate verses
do undoubtedly come in as a parenthesis.

In the 14th v. Adam is styled the figure, or model of him who was to come,
viz, the Messiah or second Adam. Each is described as a public person or
federal head, to his respective seed or posterity -- herein they agreed; but
not in this (whatever Mr. White asserts) "that they each, by turns, represented
mankind." Neither do the words many and all, wherever they occur in this
passage, take in the whole human race: when connected with the first Adam they
take in all his seed; and when connected with the second Adam they take in all
his, but none other. Mr. White unwarily for himself admits the distinction
between the seed of the first and of the second Adam, while he speaks of "the
one sin of Adam's being charged upon all his seed, and the abundance of
Christ's righteousness being imputed to his seed." The seed of Adam includes
all mankind descending from him in the ordinary way; and the seed of Christ
intends the believing part of mankind, as is evident from this chapter and
other parts of scripture. Herein Adam and Christ agree, that they are public
persons; and that they convey important consequences to their particular
posterity; but they differ in several respects. Adam conveyed to his posterity,
sin and death; Christ conveyeth to his, righteousness and life. Nor is the
offense and the free gift exactly alike. " Through the offense of one, Adam,
the multitude of his posterity died; but the grace of God and the gift by grace
which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has much more abounded to the multitude of
his posterity, and that in two very important articles. In the first place, the
gift is not merely as the ruin that came upon us by one that sinned in respect
of the number of offenses in question; for the sentence of one offense passed
upon us to condemnation; but the free gift is effectual to our justification
from many offenses. Moreover, in the next place, if by one man's offense death
reigned by one over all his posterity; then they who thankfully and obediently
receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall much
more reign in life by the one restorer and recoverer of his seed, even Jesus
Christ; they shall by him be brought to a much nobler and more excellent life
than that from which Adam fell and which they lost in him." The agreement
between Adam and Christ in conveying important consequences (though the
consequences are extremely different) each to his particular posterity is
summarily state in the 18th and 19th verses, when the apostle resumes the
subject he had began in the 12th v, having finished his parenthesis. "
Therefore as by one offense the federal influence was to all men unto
condemnation, so also by one grand act of righteousness the federal influence
is to all men who receive and embrace it unto justification of life; for as by
the disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one,
i. e. of Christ, shall many be made righteous."

The above paraphrase is chiefly an abridgment of Dr. Doddridge's, with a few
small alterations.

The passage we have been considering appears to be written much after the
modern curt sentimental manner -- in broken, incomplete sentences -- to be
perfected by the contemplative mind of the knowing and judicious reader. But
not to evade the force of it as quoted in support of Universal Salvation. It is
pleaded -- "there is one offense upon all men to condemnation, and the
righteousness of one upon all men to justification;" and it may be urged "there
is an opposition between that condemnation which comes upon all men through the
offense of one, and that justification of life which comes upon all men by the
righteousness of one, i. e. of Christ; and therefore all men must be taken in
the same sense in both parts of the verse, and consequently must be extended to
all mankind." This states the argument rather stronger than is done by Mr.
White. "But it is not reasonable to suppose, that the terms of opposition have
any respect to the universal extent of condemnation and justification, for the
apostle's design is not to compare the number of those who shall be justified,
with that of those who are condemned by the fall of Adam; but to compare the
two heads together, Adam and Christ; and to show, that as we are liable to
condemnation by the one, so we obtain righteousness by the other." From what
was before noted it appears, that the terms all and many, when designed to
express the numbers benefited by Christ, as a federal head, comprehend his seed
only, and not all mankind; which may be farther argued from the nature of the
privileges with which such are benefited. They are of the highest importance,
nothing less than justification, or a judicial acquittal from the guilt of many
offenses, together with eternal life: and "it is so plain, that they are
appropriated to persons of a particular character, expressed (in the 17th v.)
by receiving the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, that it
is surprising any should have spoken of them as common to the whole human race.
And nothing is more evident, than that the original word for receive often
signifies being active in embracing a benefit proposed, or a person offering
himself under a character of importance." See Dr. Doddridge's note.


Mr. White admits, that none but those, who now lay hold on the gift of
righteousness, have the immediate benefit of it; but salves the difficulty, by
supposing that others will reap the benefit of it hereafter, and by pleading
that the word all must be taken as universally when justification through the
righteousness of Christ is spoken of, as when condemnation through the offense
of Adam.

This plea has been already answered; but he attempts to strengthen it by
saying, for all died in Adam and therefore all shall be made alive in Christ.
These words he quoted before, and inferred from them the resurrection of
believers and unbelievers: herein he was not singular: others have done the
same, but without attending sufficiently to the chapter from whence they are
taken; in which the apostle treats not, of the resurrection of the ungodly; but
only of Christ's and that of believers, as consequent upon his. When he writes
(1 Cor. 15.16 -- 20) "if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain: then they
which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. But now is Christ risen from
the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept;" it is evident that
he has his eye to believers, with respect to whom only Christ is the first
fruits; he is not the first fruits of them who come forth from their graves to
the resurrection of damnation. When Paul says therefore, "since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead; for as in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (v. 21, 22.) we must understand the
resurrection of the dead as referring only to the resurrection of pious
believers, and the all that are made alive as intending them: in which we are
confirmed by the following verses of the chapter: for "every man is raised in
his own order, Christ the first fruits, and afterward they that are Christ's,
at his coming:" by they that are Christ's is meant they that had fallen asleep
in Christ, or deceased christians. The apostle does not proceed to mention a
word about the resurrection of the ungodly: but when he comes to answer
objections against the doctrine of the resurrection asserts that the dead body
is raised in glory -- in power -- a spiritual body, in the image of Christ's
heavenly body, so that death is triumphantly swallowed up in victory: which
assertions can never be applied to them, who come forth from their graves to
the resurrection of damnation, and awake to shame and everlasting contempt.

The last quotation presented us from Mr. White, is, his remarks upon Ephesians. 1.9,
10; and Col. 1.20. The apostle writes to the Ephesians, "having made known unto
us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he has
purposed in himself," v. 9. The mystery spoken of is not, that the wicked part
of the creation, whether men or devils, should, with the holy part of it, be
reheaded in Christ; but that the benefits of the gospel were common to the
Gentiles with the Jews. "The calling of the Gentiles had been long a secret, of
which neither they nor the Jews had any conception, till revealed by the holy
Spirit to the Apostles." That this is meant by the mystery here, is evident
from the beginning of the 3d chapter to the 10th v. and it is called the
mystery of Christ (in the 4th v. of the 3d chapter and in Col. 4.3.) This was
the mystery for which the apostle was in bonds (Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3.) We may
say with Dr. Tailor (in his note upon Romans 5.18.) "the grand point in view is
the extensiveness of the grace of the gospel, in opposition to the narrow
principles of the Jews, who would have confined salvation within the pale of
their peculiarity." Had not Mr. White's prejudice diverted him from attending
to this important point, he would have found the key by which to have opened
the next words: but he first fixes an unscriptural sense upon the 10th verse,
and then tells us that is the mystery spoken of in the 9th. The calling of the
Gentiles to a full participation of similar privileges with the Jews was that
mystery, which was so ordered, "that in the dispensation of the fullness of
times, he (i. e. God) might reunite under one head all things in Christ, both
which are in heaven and which are on earth." Dr. Doddridge has the following
note on the last clause, containing the true sense of the verse. " Both in
heaven and earth is considered by some, as a Jewish phrase to express the whole
world; and Mr. Lock thinks it may be equivalent to Jews and Gentiles. But it
seems most reasonable to understand it, of bringing Angels as well as man under
the government of Christ. The original verb must, in its most literal
signification, express uniting again under one head. Both Angels and men were
at first in sweet and harmonious subjection to the Son of God, the great
Creator of both; but man having broke himself off from the society, the Son of
Man by his humiliation and sufferings recovers all who believe in him, and in
his human nature presides over the kingdom to which in the world of glory, they
and his angels belong. This interpretation presents us with a noble view," and
preserves the harmony of scripture doctrines, while Mr. White's makes them a
jumble of discords.

The church at Colosse consisted chiefly of Gentile converts, as did that at
Ephesus; and Paul's epistle to it was written as that to the Ephesians, when he
was in bonds. He takes special notice in both of that mystery of Christ, of
which we have been speaking; and in Col. 1.20. expresses the same sentiment we
have considered, with a small variation in words, "and (having made peace
through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile all things to himself, by
him, I say, whether they be things on earth or things in heaven." On which Dr.
Doddridge remarks, "Dr. Whitby would render it, by him to make all things
friendly in him, making peace between them by the blood of his cross; and I
apprehend, that to be the true sense, and the only sense in which things in
heaven can be said to be reconciled; when a breach commenced between man and
the blessed God, the angels, as faithful subjects, must join with him against
the rebellious creature, and be ready to act as enemies to him, while he
continued the enemy of God," but, upon that breach's being made up by the blood
of the cross, angels are reconciled to man.

Mr. White harps upon the comprehensive terms all things which he or his
extractor gives us in capitals. He tells us, "And when he, i. e. the apostle,
says, all things, it is manifest nothing is excepted. Had he not been bigoted,
he would have recollected, that though the word is things, the apostle intends
persons or rational beings; and that therefore many things may be excepted,
especially the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels, and the
worm that dies not, which are generally supposed to be in hell and not on
earth. There have been, and may be still, maggotty people, who have supposed
hell to be somewhere in or under the earth; but if the apostle had foreseen it,
he could not have taken a more effectual method to have prevented our
supposing, that such as were confined there would be united again, with the
rest of the creation, under one head in Christ Jesus; for though when he speaks
of heaven he uses a preposition whose general meaning is in, when he speaks of
earth he changes it to another which means on, upon, or above. Mr. White might
possibly have triumphed had the apostle said, "which are in heaven and which
are in earth;" and yet, as it is not granted by all, that hell is somewhere in
or under the earth, it might still have been maintained that the apostle ought
to have been more explicit, and after having said "which are in heaven and
which are in earth," should have added, "and which are in hell:" but for want
of this, all Mr. White's conclusion "there is nothing either in heaven or earth
which shall not finally be reconciled to God, and be reduced to a proper state
of subjection." is nothing more in support of Universal restoration to favor,
than if he had told us, in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
It may not be amiss to note, that the change of the preposition from in to on
is in both Ephesians and Colossians. It is needless to dwell upon the futility
of laying stress upon the term all, after what has been so fully proved above,
that it is often very far from including every individual.

-- "Thus much for the excellent Jeremiah White," at present: proceed we to
another writer upon the same subject of Salvation for all men; who, though not
honored as Mr. White with the epithet excellent, is certainly as extraordinary
an interpreter of the sacred oracles.

The apostle being led to speak of the resurrection of believers at the coming
of Christ (1 Cor. 15.23) without damping his present joyful feelings, arising
from the contemplation of a glorious resurrection, by staying to take notice of
the awful solemnities of the last judgment, springs forward in his views to the
consummation of the mediatorial scheme, and cries out, "then, or after that, the
end! when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God even the Father; when he shall
have put down all rule, and all authority, and power: for he must reign till he
has put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is
death. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he says, all things
are put under him, it is manifest, that he is excepted, which did put all
things under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the
Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all." But there is " a great deal to be done after the second
coming of Christ, for the accomplishment of which, a long period of time may be
requisite," before this end comes; as the day of judgment according to
scripture follows upon Christ's second advent. Before this end comes,
universal subjection to Christ shall take place; agreeable to the strong and
extensive terms that are used; from which our extraordinary interpreter infers,
that the universal subjection to Christ implies the total and absolute
destruction of sin, Satan and death, the second no less than the first, and the
reduction of the whole human race under a free and yet full subjection to the
government of God, so as to be the meet objects of his mercy, when he shall
finally take the kingdom into his own hands. He charges the common explanation
of the passage with giving us a poor, low idea of the final effect of Christ's
reign, in comparison of what he contends for. It may so, in the opinion of one,
who appears to be wise above what is written, and to leave the common
explanation, that he may force upon us an uncommon one, in order to serve a
purpose. To serve this purpose he unfairly introduces into the passage a
distinction that has nothing to do with it, the distinction between the first
and second death; and then very artfully endeavors to palm upon his reader,
the poorest and lowest of all ideas, even a false one, that the apostle spoke
of the second death as well as of the first, when he said, "the last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death:" whereas it is plain from the whole chapter, that
he speaks of that first corporeal death which is destroyed by the resurrection.
This death is the last enemy "that continues to hold in some sort the subjects
of Christ under its dominion;" and is the last to be totally and literally
destroyed; and its destruction commenceth upon the sounding of that trumpet
which announceth the coming of Christ to judgment. Now if this death is the
last enemy to be totally and literally destroyed, what becomes of our author's
scheme? For after its destruction follows that awful judgment which will
consign the devil and his angels and the ungodly race of mankind to the pains
of the second death; and thus the absolute destruction of sin, Satan and the
second death, as built upon this passage, is totally set aside, and numbers of
the sons of Adam will be justly confined for having been, and continuing to be,
REBELS against the government of God -- whether everlastingly confined in hell
remains to be enquired into.

The common explanation may be pronounced poor and low; but if the true one,
and according to the divine mind, it would argue more wisdom and piety to
withhold the epithets. It is not what we wish or fancy; but what the Lord
reveals that we are to receive for truth: and while professed believers in
scripture, as a revelation from heaven, we should be upon our guard, lest our
wishes and fancies should impose an uninspired sense upon it.

All rule, and all authority and power is put down, and all enemies are
subdued, and all things put under the feet of Christ, when they are either
brought into a willing and holy subjection to him, or are vanquished and
punished by him, so as fully to display his superiority and sovereignty over
them; and we are led to conceive of the latter rather than of the former, by
the terms "till he has put all enemies under his feet." The expression
inclines us to apprehend, that the persons in this state of subjection are
still enemies, who deserve to be trampled under foot; instead of true
penitents, reduced to a free and full subjection, meet objects of God's mercy,
and fit to enter upon the joys of heaven: and is, therefore, wholly subversive
of the author's design in quoting the passage.

He is certainly an uncommon genius, or he would never have thought of finding
in the first promise of a Savior, the doctrine of Salvation for all men. He
tells us that the words (in Genesis 3.15.) And I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; he shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel; are designed to convey the thought of that "
complete victory, which Christ, the seed of the woman, should gain over the
devil, there spoken of under the emblem of a serpent: for the words are
evidently an allusion to the way of destroying serpents, by striking their
head. To bruise a serpent's head is a phrase expressive of one and the same
thing with killing a serpent." One would imagine, that the next paragraph
should therefore have been, "Consequently, when it is said of Christ, that he
should bruise the serpent's head, the idea obviously and naturally communicated
by the words, is, that he shall destroy the devil," his very being, so that he
should not live any longer; but contrary to our author's own premises, it is,
"not his being, but that kingdom of his, which as a tempter, he has introduced
into the world, accompanied with sorrow and death:" and thus, according to our
author's reasoning, though the serpent means the devil; and though to bruise a
serpent's head, is a phrase expressive of one and the same thing with killing a
serpent, the devil himself is not to be destroyed, he is to escape; and the
stroke instead of killing him, is only to destroy the kingdom he has set up in
the world. But still, if our author is right; and " this first promise of God
fairly l^^ds us to look for the time when sin that work of the devil shall be
totally and absolutely destroyed by him who was born of a woman;" then either
the devil, or his devilism must be destroyed, and he be converted into a good
being, or sin still remains in the temper of the devil, and it is not "true
in event and fact, that SIN is totally destroyed, by a reduction of all men
under moral subjection to God," "and it ought (upon his own principles) to be
fairly and honestly owned (by him) that Christ has not bruised the serpent's
head, as it is declared that he should." What means our author by saying the
devil, that is, his kingdom? Is the devil and his kingdom one and the same, so
that the destruction of the latter is the destruction of the former? Then
indeed, he who destroys the building, destroys the builder.

But our author seems to think, that if the human race are all saved, then the
devil's kingdom will be destroyed. He has herein overlookt certain truths of
no small importance in the present case. Sin did not first begin, when Adam
fell in paradise; but in the blissful regions, when the angels deviated from
their first state of integrity and holiness, and for their thus sinning were
cast down to hell. One of these fallen angels, for some special reason, is
styled the devil and distinguished from his angels; and probably is the same
active and leading agent in wickedness that is meant by Beelzebub the prince of
devils. While the devil and his angels remain at enmity with God, retaining
their character as rebels against him, sin and lust still reign. If then, the
being of the devil is to be spared; and yet, sin, that work of the devil, must,
according to the first promise, be totally and absolutely, destroyed, by him
who was born of a woman; the words in Genesis are a promise of salvation to the
devil and his angels, no less than to Adam and his posterity. But that this
promise of salvation to them, should come in while the Deity was pronouncing a
curse upon the serpent, appears to me impossible!

Another text from the same writer, and the last which the extractor brings to
view, is recorded in Revelation 5.13. And every creature which is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, heard I saying, blessing and honor, and glory, and power, be unto
him that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever. The
interpretation given to this passage, is farther from the truth, by some
hundreds of years, than from the present moment to the end of time; and had our
extractor considered it duly, he would, for his own credit, have concealed it
from instead of bringing it to view. It has no manner of relation to
transactions beyond the day of judgment; it is a figurative representation
presented to John in vision, before the Lamb opened any one of the seals, of
that book wherein was written the future condition of the church at different
periods. The general opinion is, that John was banished to the isle of Patmos
in the reign of Domitian about the year 96; some place it earlier, none later.
The period connected with the opening of the first seal is thought by Dr.
Newton, bishop of Bristol, to have terminated with the life of the emperor
Nerva, A. D. 98. He supposes, that the banishment of John happened under Nero's
persecution; and that the period commenced with Vespasian and Titus in 70, when
Jerusalem was destroyed. Mr. Lowman reckons, that the period ended with the
first century. Dr. Isaac Chauncy, eldest son of a former president of Harvard
College, and pastor of a church in London, in a manuscript work upon the
Revelation, wrote about ninety years since, in my possession, interprets the
white horse, which appeared upon the opening of the first seal, as expressive
of that state of peace and tranquillity which the churches enjoyed soon after
John's having the vision, which he places in the reign of Domitian. He thinks
that the period from the opening of the first seal began about 98, and lasted
till the third persecution under Trajan. I know not of any who bring the
opening of the first seal so low down as the year of our Lord 100. The last
passage therefore which the extractor gives us, instead of relating to a
transaction to take place (no body can imagine when, upon the scheme of the
pamphlet) after the day of judgment, preceded an event that existed near upon
seventeen hundred years ago.

The extractor having given us from a number of writers, ( two only) some few
(doubtless the most weighty) of the many texts mentioned by them in favor of
Salvation for all men, exhibits a like extract from what they and others have
offered in answer to the objections brought against the doctrine.

The first he brings forward is Dr. Joseph Nicol Scott; for after he quitted
the ministry, he was a Doctor of Physic.

The Dr. has certainly been trepanned into the support of a scheme, to which
he was opposed. I shall state the case to the reader, and leave him to follow
it with his own remarks. The Dr. indeed preached and published against the
proper eternity of hell torments; but in the same discourses from whence the
quotations are made, he argues that -- "a great part of the texts which the
scripture-writers make use of, whereby to express future punishment, as to die,
to be destroyed, to reap corruption, to burn up, to consume, when applied to
the persons of men, are so far from implying a perpetual continuance of their
life, that, on the contrary, these terms (if literally understood) suppose,
that a period will be put to it. And should this death, or destruction be so
circumstanced, as not to admit of any after restoration, it may, for that
reason, be styled an everlasting destruction; and the means by which it is
performed, an everlasting or eternal fire. And, if this death or destruction,
be administered by way of punishment, for the same reason, that the death or
destruction are said to be eternal, so also may the punishment. When it is
affirmed, that the reprobate shall die, shall reap corruption, shall be burnt
up; and when the ideas of life, incorruptibility, indissolubility, are
constantly restrained to the good and virtuous part of mankind, as their
peculiar prerogative, will it not follow from hence, that to affirm the wicked
to be continued for ever alive, though in a state of miserable sensation, is
not only to affirm that which is not affirmed in scripture, but which in
reality, contradicts it, and renders the scripture-account of things
inconsistent with itself? I add, that, how true soever it is, that the common
catastrophe belongs to all the wicked, that they shall be destroyed, or, to
speak in the scripture-style, that the soul, which sins, it shall die: yet this
death or destruction, may admit of different degrees of misery, in proportion
to the different degrees of guilt."

"The strict and proper sense of the scripture threatening conveys the idea of a
true and proper death. Fire is a destructive element, and has a tendency to
consume the bodies that are cast into it; both the nature of it and the
scripture account oblige us to infer, that the wicked shall be consumed and
burnt up in it."

In the close of the second sermon on the subject of future misery, the Dr.
addresses the sinner thus, "Can thou, in cool reflection reconcile thyself to
the thought of being condemned by that all-righteous Judge, and, by his
impartial sentence, not only excluded from the future happiness, but also
consigned over to destruction, a destruction which (by supposition) will not be
reversed, an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power? Is thy passion of fear incapable of being moved by a
destruction so circumstanced as this? And where, besides that circumstance of
dissolution, which belongs to all bad men in common, each is given to
understand, that this death will be executed upon him, with that degree of
suffering, which is proportioned to his crimes."

However erroneous the Doctor's sentiments respecting future misery and other
matters might be deemed by many who had a personal knowledge of him; yet his
integrity, was unimpeached; and he cannot be supposed to have said as above, if
he favored or held with the doctrine of Salvation for all men; for his
reasoning is designed to prove, that the wicked will be so fully destroyed, as
after a certain period to have no further existence.

Notwithstanding the Doctor asserts, that "the term so commonly translated
eternal, everlasting, for ever and ever, does not from any force of the word,
imply what we mean by a strict and proper eternity; the original words, both in
the Hebrew and Greek, signify nothing more than an age, and in the plural ages,
either longer or shorter, definite or indefinite;" yet, from the above
quotations, one would be ready to imagine, he had some doubts, whether or no, a
strict and proper eternity was not intended, when the punishment and
destruction of the wicked and the means of effecting it are spoken of; or why
does he say, "if the destruction admits not of any after restoration it may be
styled an everlasting destruction and the means by which it is performed an
everlasting or eternal fire -- and that, if the destruction is administered by
way of punishment, for the same reason, that the death or destruction are said
to be eternal, so also may the punishment?" Why does the Dr. thus attempt to
prove, that there is a sense in which the term eternal, or everlasting, when
applied to the destruction and punishment of the wicked and the fire of hell,
may intend a strict and proper eternity, so be that the original does not mean
it in the places alluded to? Does not this amount almost to a yielding up the
point in dispute?

But to examine the assertion respecting the term, both in the Hebrew and
Greek, translated eternal, everlasting, for ever and ever; beginning with the
Hebrew gnolam, frequently printed in the European publications olam. Dr.
Tailor, who was intimate with Dr. Scott, and published his concordance many
years after the sermons of the latter were printed, expresses the same
sentiment on the word gnolam, roundly declaring, "It signifies eternity not
from the proper force of the word, but when the sense of the place, or the
nature of the subject, to which it is applied requires it; as God and his
attributes." If this is a just remark, it holds good in a much higher degree
with reference to all the other Hebrew terms The other Hebrew words are tamidh,
kedhem, netzahb, and gnadh.

Tamidh occurs one hundred and one times; but though translated always,
continually, perpetual, ever and evermore, does not even once include the idea
of proper eternity.

The true meaning of kedhem is antiquity; you meet with it forty and three
times. In Deuteronomy. 33.27. it is rendered eternal, the eternal God, instead of the
God of antiquity. In Ps. 55.19. of old, he that abides of old: so in Micah
5.2. whose goings forth have been from of old. In Hab. 1.12. everlasting, art
thou not from everlasting? In Pro. 8.23. in the plural ever, or ever the earth
was.

Netzahb out of forty five times is often translated for ever: but does not
necessarily imply proper eternity more than twice or thrice, unless we include
those places, where if that interpretation is allowed the scheme of Universal
Salvation must be of course demolished; and those also wherein it is asked
"will thou forget me for ever? will thou be angry for ever? will thou hide
thyself for ever?" and the like. It is not once joined with any name of God to
express his eternity.

Gnadh as a noun occurs twenty and eight times. Dr. Tailor would not admit,
that, in Is. 9.6. (in the original the father of eternity, translated the
everlasting father) it means proper eternity a part ante if applied to the
Lord Jesus; and then there are only six places where it must be understood of
proper eternity. It is joined with gnolam eighteen times, and once with the
plural gnolmee: thrice it precedes gnolam, but follows it fifteen times, and
gnolmee once. According to Aben Ezra, when following gnolam, it serves only as
a preposition and refers to the word gnolam sunk by an ellipsis; so that
legnolam vegnadh is a concise mode of speech or writing for legnolam vegnadh
gnolam. This remark of Aben Ezra appears just, as the abbreviation is mostly in
the Hebrew poesy (whose meter might require it) the song of Moses after the
destruction of Pharaoh, and the Psalms. Whether gnades Number. 24.20, 24. is to be
considered as the plural of the noun or as a preposition is hard to determine.
Balaam, instead of saying of Amalek or Eber, he shall perish for ever, might
only say, he shall perish until or onward, and there step, leaving imagination
to fill up the blank.


translated everlasting or eternal; so that of consequence there is not an
Hebrew word in the old testament, that in its strict and proper sense signifies
eternity or eternal -- which may be deemed a most extraordinary circumstance in
a divine revelation of that magnitude, and whose subject matter, in places, is
so peculiar as to require it. But possibly the candid reader, after having
weighed what is to be offered, may be ready to pronounce both the Doctors
greatly mistaken, and to believe, that the fact is, that the true and proper
force of the word gnolam, is, eternity or perpetuity, but that like the word
eternal in English it is, on occasion, used figuratively to express a longer or
shorter, a definite or indefinite duration, which is to be determined by the
sense of the place, and the nature of the subject to which it is applied.

Gnolam is to be met with for the first time in Genesis 3.22. In that and the
following verse, the Lord God proposes to send Adam (now that he has fallen
and is become mortal) forth from the garden of Eden, "lest he put forth his
hand, and take of the tree of life and eat, and live for ever" -- hope and
expect to live for ever. Gnolam, cannot here mean an age: for, as yet no age
had run out: and besides Adam was not to live it; whereas he lived an age
longer than any man else, should you deduct from those antediluvians who were
born into the world, only fifty years for their minority, It is evidently
contrasted to death or mortality, and threfore necessarily includes immortality
or perpetuity; and signifies expressly the same with our translation. This we
may pronounce the original signification of the Hebrew term. And such a sense
well agrees with the root from which it is derived, meaning to be hid,
concealed or secret: for most assuredly nothing is more hid, concealed, or
secret, with regard to finite beings, than eternity -- the eternal God only
excepted. Eternity, properly considered, is that only which is concealed from
the understandings of men and angels, and viewed by the divine mind alone.
Whether Hebrew was the language of Eden or not, Moses without doubt did express
the truth in the most proper and significant terms.

In support of what has been now advanced, let it be noted, that gnolam is used
as an epithet whereby to characterize the true God, and to distinguish him from
the false gods of idolaters. Some of the names by which He was spoken of, as
El, Elohim, Elohee, were given also to false deities and idols; and therefore
the term gnolam is once and again added when the true God is intended, in order
to mark him out by it; and the attribute, by that term ascribed to him, is
considered as being sufficiently descriptive, and what no other gods could
pretend to, their origin being of late date: But if the word gnolam, by its own
proper force, does not express that attribute, on the contrary gains that
special meaning from its connection, how can the application of it, to a name of
God common to false gods, describe the true God? The epithet in that case does
not describe the subject, but the subject the epithet; which is contrary to the
very design of epithets. When indeed the proper meaning of an epithet expresses
more than can belong to the subject, then the nature of the subject obliges us
to understand it figuratively: but this is widely different from its gaining a
meaning infinitely beyond what is proper to it, by being joined to a name of
deity not peculiar to the true God, and therefore not necessarily implying any
thing infinite or eternal in it. Let it also be observed, that the proper force
of a word may at length vary. The word may obtain through custom and common
consent a signification widely different from what it had when first used:
knave and villain are instances, each had formerly a good meaning, it is now
the reverse. The use to be made of the observation is, that could it be proved
that the original signification of gnolam was not strict and proper eternity,
contrary to the evidence above produced; yet it is plain from the manner in
which it is used, in order to mark out the true God, that it acquired and
possessed this as its true and proper sense, when the sacred oracles of the old
testament were written.

But to advert to the passages wherein it is used for eternity or to mark out
the eternity of God, and so to distinguish the true from every false god; after
having noted, that the Hebrew language through want of adjectives often makes
use of a noun; thus gnolam signifying eternity, is used for eternal or
everlasting in manner following, the god of eternity, for the everlasting or
eternal God; in many places it is translated by ever or evermore. JEHOVAH, one
of the peculiar names of the true God, is synonymous with the everlasting God;
and hence Abraham is said to have called upon the name of JEHOVAH the
everlasting God; Genesis 21.33.
and the everlasting God JEHOVAH, the creator of the ends of the earth is said
not to faint or be weary. Is. 40.28.
We read, "Thou O JEHOVAH, remainest for ever; Lam. 5.19.
Thou, JEHOVAH, art most High for evermore: Ps. 92.8.
Thou art from everlasting," -- 93.2.
and that JEHOVAH shall endure for ever. -- 9.7. -- 102.12.
JEHOVAH, though not named, is intended by him that lives for ever in Daniel
(12 chapter 7 v.) When He himself lifts up his hand to heaven and swears, the
form of the oath is "I live for ever." Deuteronomy. 32.40.
In order to express particularly his existence from eternity to eternity it is
said, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Ps. 90.2.
Instead of for ever and ever, as in our translation (1 Chro. 16.36 -- 29.10.)
it should be, according to the original, and as translated elsewhere (Ps. 41.13
-- 106.48.) "blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting."

We must understand the term gnolam in various other places as meaning
eternity; thus when we read, that Jehovah sits king for ever; that his
counsel stands for ever; that his glory shall endure for ever; that his mercy
endures for ever or is everlasting; that his truth endures for ever; that his
name endures for ever, and is from everlasting; that he keeps truth for
ever, reigns for ever and is an everlasting king. According to Aben Ezra, as
observed in a preceding note, it is meant to be repeated, in order to heighten
the expression, and is most justly rendered for ever and ever.

In the Chaldee dialect it retains the same meaning. Daniel cries out, "blessed
be the name of God from everlasting to everlasting." Dan. 2.20.
Nebuchadnezzar in his imperial proclamation to all people, nations and
languages, declares God's kingdom to be an everlasting kingdom, that his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, and that He lives for ever. -- 4.3, 34.
When Daniel's vision was explained to him, it was said of the most High, that
his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom -- 7.27,


Applied figuratively to those subjects that necessarily exclude eternity, it
frequently answers to the English terms ever and always when used in a relaxed
sense. Thus the Hebrew servant who had his ear bored was to serve his master
for ever; Ex. 21.6.
and the Jews were to observe certain ordinances and statutes for ever; --
12.14. -- 27.21, and many other places.
as long as possible, whilst the servants ability and the Mosaic dispensation
continued. But that gnolam when thus used does not properly mean the age of man
or a century (which are expressed by other words) is evident from the phrases,
throughout your generations by an ordinance for ever, and it shall be a statute
for ever throughout your generations. Ex. 12.14. Lev. 10.9.


We read, "notwithstanding the cities of the Levites may the Levites redeem at
any time," Lev. 25.32.
in the original gnolam, and the text is literally "the redemption-right shall
be ever or perpetually to the Levites," to be exercised at pleasure. When the
Psalmist says, "I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always," Ps.
119.112.
he means as long as possible. But when Job says, "I would not live always,"
Job 7.16.
the word might be rendered eternally: and what man of a similar character with
Job would not loath immortality in the present body and world? The word might
also have been rendered eternally in that passage, "and Jehovah said, my spirit
shall not always strive with man." Genesis 6.3 The original Jehovah has been given
in several quotations, instead of the English Lord, which last term relates to
dominion, whereas Jehovah expresses absolute existence. Here I cannot omit
mentioning my earnest wish, that whenever another American edition of the bible
is printed, it might be recommended by Congress, that Jehovah should be
retained in the English translation wherever found in the Original.


Gnolam may or must have the force of eternity in more than one hundred and
twenty, out of four hundred and twenty eight times that it occurs in the
singular number. It is designed more than fifty times to express the
continuance, of the covenant with Noah relative to the world's not being again
drowned -- of the covenant with Abraham and his seed -- of the covenant with
the Jewish nation -- and of those statutes ordinances and so on, which were to
be observed by that people while the Mosaic dispensation lasted. In other
places it intends a longer or shorter duration, and has a sense given it in
the translation suited to the connection. It occurs in the plural number only
nine times in the Chaldee and twelve in the Hebrew: It is plural in the Chaldee
when it is said, "O king live for ever" (Dan. 2.4 -- 3.9 -- 5.10 -- 6.6, 21.)
-- that, the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom, which shall not be ever
destroyed, but shall stand for ever (Dan. 2.44 twice) -- that the God of Daniel
is the living God and steadfast for ever (6.26.) that the saints shall possess
the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever (7.18.)

It is plural in the Hebrew when it is said, "I have surely built thee a
settled place to abide in for ever" (1 Kings 8.13. 2 Chro. 6.2.) "I will abide
in thy tabernacle for ever" (Ps. 61.4.) "I have considered the years of ancient
times. Will the Lord cast off for ever?" (Ps. 77.5, 7.) "Thy kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom" (Ps. 145.13. where the plural has the Hebrew for all
before it) "It has been already of old time" (Eccl. 1.10.) "In the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength" (Is. 26.4.) "Israel shall be saved with an
everlasting salvation, ye shall not be confounded world without end" (Is 45.17.
twice) "Awake O sword of the Lord as in the generations of old" (Is. 51.9.)
"Seventy weeks are determined to bring in everlasting righteousness" (Dan.
9.24.)


but it is plain that the sense is mostly sunk by means of it, to undefined
periods of duration instead of expressing eternity; in like manner as gods mean
less than God, for though there be gods many and lords many, to us there is but
one God, and one Lord.

Notwithstanding the number of places, in which gnolam must, from the nature of
the subjects to which it is joined, signify limited periods of duration, is
greater than where it means eternity; yet it is apprehended, that, if the
impartial enquirer after truth attends duly to what has been above advanced,
he will be convinced, that the original and continued literal import of the
term is strict and proper eternity, and that wherever it does not express
this, it is used figuratively.

Let us now see by what words gnolum is translated in the Greek. The Greek
translation of the bible is supposed to have been made at Alexandria about two
hundred and eighty four years before the birth of Christ, by seventy two of the
most learned Jews, who were the best skilled in the Hebrew and Greek languages:
for brevity they are usually called the Seventy, and the translation from them
the septuagint. The Hebrew term is always (half a score times only excepted)
rendered, by the Greek noun aion, or the adjective aionios formed out of it --
by the noun full as many again as by the adjective. The plural of the noun does
not occur so often in the septuagint, as the plural of gnolam in the Hebrew. In
fourteen places the adjective is plural being joined to nouns that are plural,
as generations, doors, paths, wastes, hills, ways and places. The Seventy, as
they must have attended to sense and not to sound, were of course led to use
the most expressive word or words in the Greek, as often as strict and proper
eternity was meant in the original; and yet, though there is no denying that
the Hebrew in numerous places intends strict and proper eternity, not more than
a single instance offers wherein they use any other term than aion or aionios:
that instance is in Deuteronomy 33.27. where mention is made of the everlasting arms
of the eternal God, which they render by a word that signifies always flowing
and so perpetual. The natural inference is that the Seventy were of opinion
that aion and aionios fully expressed strict and proper eternity, and that
neither any other single word nor any periphrasis was wanting in the case. It
is not strange, that they were of this opinion, when it is recollected that
Aristotle tells us that aion is derived from two words that mean always
existing. The etymology is perfectly easy, and does not labor as often happens
in matters of that kind, and is somewhat countenanced by the use that Homer
made, five hundred and sixty years before, of the same words, only altering the
last into the plural number, when speaking of his immortal gods.

Aristotle flourished only sixty years before the Septuagint translation was
made, and died within thirty eight of it; so that the Seventy might be fully
informed of his sentiment. His own abilities, and having been tutor to
Alexander the great, gave him an extensive character; and men of letters were
obliged, for their own credit, to seek after and consult his writings.

Alexander's conquests spread the Greek language, and it became common. Of
course, vast numbers, especially of the dispersed Jews being better acquainted
with the Greek than the Hebrew, the Septuagint came into general use, both
privately and in their synagogues; and so continued, until and long after the
days of our Savior and his apostles, when it was evidently in high esteem. Our
Lord's words in Matt. 15.9. "in vain do they worship me teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men," are the same with the septuagint in Is. 29.13. and
might be (though it becomes me not to say were) quoted by Matthew from that
translation. The Eunuch we must suppose used the septuagint, for the words of
the prophet Isaiah (53.7, 8.) which we are told (Acts 8.32, 33) he read, are
literally the same with it. The evangelists and apostles are thought to have
followed it often. Peter in his address to the men of Israel quotes the
Patriarch David speaking concerning the Messiah (Acts 2.25, 26, 27, 28) which
is given us in the words of the Greek translation, something different from the
Hebrew, though the sense is much the same. From the regard thus shown to the
Septuagint, it may be fairly concluded, that aion and aionios continued to
retain the sense in which they were first used by the Seventy as expressive of
strict and proper eternity; and in confirmation of their still answering to the
Hebrew gnolam let it be noted, that the Syriac version of the New Testament,
which was made in the most early times, uniformly renders them by the same term
gnolam.

Now let us search the New Testament for the sense of aion and aionios. "The
reader may, if he please, look into the Greek concordance, and he will there
find," that aion is to be met with thirty and three times in the Evangelists,
and aionios thirty. And are we to understand an eternity as implied or
intended, when our Lord said (to the fig tree) let no man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever -- he that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost has not
forgiveness for ever -- whosoever drinks of the water I shall give him, shall
not thirst for ever -- if any man eat of the bread which came down from heaven,
he shall live for ever; he that eats of this bread shall live for ever -- if
a man keep my saying he shall not see death for ever -- they shall not perish
for ever, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand -- whosoever believes in
me shall not die for ever" -- then the noun aion was rarely used by our Savior
in any other sense than as meaning eternity, unless when confined to a
different one by an adnoun or the subject he is treating upon. I have not added
his words, "the servant abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides
ever: and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever: and lo I am with you always unto the end of the world;" as it might be
disputed, whether more than a certain measure of time was intended in any of
these places. The meaning of the word is limited when he says, "it shall not
be forgiven in this world -- the cares of this world -- the harvest is the end
of the world -- so shall it be in the end of this world -- the children of this
world." There is no mistaking him when he says, "in the world to come, eternal
or everlasting life; and that world," in opposition to this world. In closing
that pattern of prayer he gave to his disciples, commonly called the Lord's
prayer, he uses the word in the plural number, "thine is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory for ever:" so did Gabriel, when it was told the Virgin
"he, i. e. Jesus, should reign over the house of Jacob for ever. Mary used it
in the singular, saying, "he has helped his servant Israel in remembrance of
his mercy for ever:" and so did Zacharias when he mentions the holy prophets
which had been since the world began; and Peter when he rashly told our
Savior, "thou shall not wash my feet for ever;" and the man cured of his
blindness when he confounded the Jewish Sanhedrim by declaring, " since the
world began it was not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born
blind." It matters not whether the Jews intended proper eternity, when they
took notice of their having heard out of the law that Christ abides for ever.
But when they said, "now we know that thou have a devil; Abraham is dead and
the prophets; and thou say, if a man keep my saying he shall not taste of
death for ever;" it is plain that they referred to and understood our Lord as
intending a continued perpetual existence, or immortality; and it must be
conceded, that the noun aion, as commonly used by our Savior without an adnoun
or special subject to confine its meaning, does contain in general the idea of
perpetuity, or strict and proper eternity.

Let us in like manner try the meaning of aionios. When the young ruler
inquired "good master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? -- When
the lawyer meant to try our Lord's skill in divinity by the same question --
When our Lord told Nicodemus that whosoever believes in the son should have
everlasting life; and John the baptist declared the same to his disciples --
When the woman of Samaria was informed that the water which Christ had to give,
would be a well of water springing up into everlasting life -- When the Jews
were directed to labor for the meat which endures unto everlasting life; and
were told, whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life --
When Peter said to our Lord, thou have the words of eternal life -- When Christ
tells us, that he gives unto his sheep eternal life; and speaking of the
Father's commandment to publish the gospel, says, and I know that his
commandment is life everlasting -- When he says, "thou have given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given
him; and this is life eternal (in the principle and will terminate in it) that
they might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent" --
can any other be intended by eternal life than a glorious immortality? The
adjective aionios is joined to life twenty five times, by Christ himself
nineteen, out of the thirty, and in all these places means eternal as including
strict and proper eternity, not to insist upon everlasting habitations (in Luke
16.9.) And yet, if we will give up our judgments to the disposal of certain
interpreters, in the four others, when joined by our Lord to fire, punishment
and damnation, we are to believe it means nothing more than a temporary
duration, the real length of which scarce one of them will undertake to tell
us. Such interpretations in direct violation of the general meaning of
scriptural words are calculated to promote deism, rather than christianity.
When revelation is so treated by its friends, no wonder that it is spurned by
its enemies.

The phrase of eternal or everlasting life is to be found in the Acts and
Epistles nineteen times, in sixteen of which it also means a glorious
immortality; another indeed might be added, for when John writes "ye know that
no murderer has eternal life abiding in him," he thereby designs that lively
faith and holy obedience with which a glorious immortality is connected as the
end thereof. The same apostle in two other places intends by it Jesus Christ.

The adjective aionios is used twenty and two times more in the Acts and
Epistles; four times in the plural, and eighteen in the singular number. In the
plural by Paul when he writes of the mystery, which was kept secret since the
world began; of the grace which was given in Christ Jesus before the world
began; and of that eternal life which God promised before the world began. As
our cause is not straitened for evidence, let it be admitted, that the idea of
eternity does not enter into any of these passages. But when he says, "the
things which are not seen are eternal," the connection and the apostolic
character oblige us to maintain, that strict and proper eternity is intended:
for these things which are not seen are opposed to those that are temporal --
temporary would have been a better word, as expressive of their insignificant
duration. It was also beneath the dignity of the great apostle of the Gentiles,
to look, in the sense he meant, at things which had a duration short of
eternity. As in this passage, he refers to a proper eternity, we must conclude
he does the same in that which immediately precedes, when he speaks of an
eternal weight of glory, and in that which follows, wherein we read of an house
not made with hands eternal in the heavens. It is most reasonable to believe
the like, when he writes of God's having given everlasting consolation -- when
he ascribes to the King of kings and Lord of lords honor and power everlasting
-- when he mentions, the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory;
Christ's becoming the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him;
the doctrine of eternal judgment; Christ's having obtained eternal redemption,
and his having offered up himself through the eternal Spirit; the promise of
the eternal inheritance, which they that are called receive; and the blood of
the everlasting covenant. Thus also when he speaks of the commandment of the
everlasting God: by which epithet he means rather to mark out the true God by
the attribute alluded to; than to express that the true God possessed that
attribute. But it is a false assertion, that "did we not know, before hand,
that eternity was an essential attribute of God, it could never be argued from
the application of this word to him." Indeed did we know, before hand, that it
was not an essential attribute of God, it could never be argued that it was,
from the application of this word to him: but the application of words may and
do convince of those truths respecting God, which we neither did nor could know
before hand, as every one must allow who believes christianity: for till words
convinced us we knew not, before hand, the love of God in providing a Savior,
nor the exceeding riches of his grace in pardoning the greatest of sinners. But
to return from this digression; and admit that the apostle is not to be
understood as meaning proper eternity, when he writes to Philemon "perhaps
Onesimus departed for a season, that thou should receive him for ever:"
however, methinks it is offering an amazing violence to his writings, and
taking an unwarrantable liberty with them, to say, that, because, in this last
mentioned place and three others, he might not mean proper eternity, therefore
he could not mean it, when he makes mention of everlasting destruction, though
in thirteen other places he uses the term to mark out a strict and proper
eternity. Peter speaks of eternal glory, and of the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and may be allowed to intend a proper eternity: but Jude is not to meet
with the like indulgence when he talks of Sodom and Gomorrha and the cities
about them, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, though it should be
observed, that by cities we are not to understand the buildings but the
citizens, as is evident from our Lord's declaring, that it should be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of judgment, than for that city
which would not hear the apostles. As the everlasting gospel in the Revelation
may possibly be so styled in a figurative sense, we shall not employ it in our
argument. It may suffice, that the adjective aionios is to be understood
fifteen times out of the twenty two, as referring to strict and proper eternity.

It appears from the preceding paragraphs, that the adjective aionios is joined
to life, one and forty times in the New Testament, and as often includes strict
and proper eternity, being used with that noun to express a glorious
immortality. What a paltry quotation is that then! "the bare force of the word
will not support us, in maintaining an endless duration with respect, either to
the happiness of the righteous, or the punishment of the wicked. We know the
righteous shall be happy for ever. And why! because they are said, in other
texts of scripture to be incorruptible, indissoluble, immortal, not to die any
more, and the like." Yes; and we should know it from the numerous declarations
made of their being to enjoy eternal life, and the like, were the other texts
of scripture wanting: for the enjoyment of eternal life, eternal salvation, and
an eternal weight of glory, as necessarily implies immortality, as life does
being. The original signifying indissoluble, and translated endless, is to be
found only in Heb. 7.16. and has no direct reference whatever to the righteous;
but relates to Christ alone, who is said to be made a priest not after the law
of a carnal commandment, but after or according to the power of an endless
life. It is a vain pretense of some, that the endless life intends that of
believers, which Christ by virtue of his priestly office confers upon them:
"for as Dr. Owen well observes, the comparison and opposition that is made
between the law of a carnal commandment, whereby Aaron was constituted a
priest, and the power of an endless life, whereby Christ was made so, do
evidence that the making of Christ such a priest as he is, was the effect of
this endless life: but how can Christ be made a priest according to the power
of that endless life which by virtue of his priestly office he confers on
others?" Such pretense makes the effect productive of the cause, and then the
cause productive of the effect; and forms as complete a circle as ever was
traveled by a Popish disputant. Our Savior says, "this is the bread which
comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die (John 6.50.)
and below (v. 58) he that eats of this bread shall live for ever, where aion
is used. Can the words, and not die mean more, or are they more expressive,
than the words shall live for ever? In answering the objection of the Sadducees
regarding the resurrection, he tells them, that they which shall be accounted
worthy to obtain that world and the resurrection from the dead (he means a
blessed resurrection because it is connected with worthiness) neither marry nor
are given in marriage, neither can they die any more (Luke 20.36.) but their
immortality is no more secured by that mode of expression, than if it had been,
they shall live for ever: it indeed leads to this thought, that, as they can
die no more, there is no occasion for marriage to supply the losses that death
would occasion. We read also (Rev. 21.4.) there shall be no more death. My
concordances do not furnish me with more places wherein the righteous are said
not to die any more.

The apostle Paul, treating of the resurrection of the righteous, writes
concerning the body, "it is sown in corruption it is raised in incorruption.
Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God: neither does corruption inherit incorruption. The dead shall be raised
incorruptible; and we shall be changed: for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality; so, when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass that saying, Death is swallowed up
in victory." (1 Cor. 15.42, 50, 52, 53, 54.) these assertions relate to the
body, and express the change it shall undergo, in order to that glorious
immortality intended by eternal life, and which passes upon the righteous, ere
they, in their complete persons, enter the heavenly regions. The Greek
translated immortality is applied to the righteous only twice. What is rendered
here incorruption is translated immortality in 2 Timothy 1.10 and Rom, 2.7. This
last place is a full proof that incorruption means less than eternal life; for
in it the apostle tells us, that, to them, who by patient continuance in well
doing seek for glory and honor and incorruption God will render eternal life.

And thus the reader may observe, that the righteous are not once said to be
indissoluble; that make the most of it, they are said, only thrice, not to die
any more; but twice to be immortal, and five times to be incorruptible; however
that incorruption is by the apostle Paul affirmed to be inferior to eternal
life. They who, after weighing what has been now mentioned, and the number of
times the adjective aionios -- eternal, is joined to life in the New Testament,
will pretend, that we could not know, that the righteous would be happy for
ever, but because they are said in other scriptures to be incorruptible
(indissoluble) immortal, not to die any more, and the like, are so
enthusiastically fond of their own dogma, as to be out of the reach of reason
with regard to the point in hand.

It remains that we examine the different meanings of the noun aion in the
Acts, Epistles and Revelation. But let it be first noted, that aion has
several significations, like a number of English words, with which if a person
is not well acquainted, he will blunder most egregiously in translating them
into another language: just as a notice who should translate the original in
Luke 16.8. "the children of this eternity," because that aion in other places
intends eternity; The schoolboy who, having been conversant with the Greek for
a while, would obstinately refuse to translate it world though confined to such
like signification by the adnoun this; or maintain that the sense must be the
same, the sound being the same, in all places, might probably be adjudged to
wholesome discipline. Ignorance in, or inattention to, the different meanings
of the same word in the Hebrew, has given rise to a most ridiculous
circumstance in the pictures of Moses, who is generally drawn with horns. We
are told (Ex 34.29.) that when he descended from mount Sinai the skin of his
face shone, the original means also a horn. In the vulgate edition of the old
testament, in use among the Roman Catholics and authorized by their Popes, it
is translated, his face was horned, and hence that ridiculous circumstance.

Aion, with other Greek words to confine its meaning, in nine places answers to
this world; in three to the present world; in one to the present evil world; in
one to the world to come; in one to since the world began; and in one to
according to (the age or manners of the age, or as in our translation) the
course of this world: in the last quotation aion is rendered the course, and
another word is used for the world.

We cannot suppose, that the apostle James, in that grand consultation which
was held at Jerusalem by the apostles, elders and whole christian church within
that city, respecting the liberties of the Gentile converts, meant any thing
short of "known from eternity unto God are all his works," it is pity therefore
that the original aion had not been so translated, instead of "known unto God
are all his works from the beginning of the world." Acts 15.18.


Paul wrote to the Corinthians, "if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat
no flesh for ever," this is more in the style of the apostle and suits the
English idiom as well as while the world stands. 1 Cor. 8.13.
When he says of the liberal man, "his righteousness remains for ever," 2
Cor. 9.9.
he may mean that the power and inclination of that his righteousness which
consists in dispersing abroad and giving to the poor, remains for ever, in
the preceding sense, while life lasts. In his epistle to the Hebrews* he
speaks of Christ's being a priest for ever, and consecrated for evermore* five
times; which in the opinion of numbers means only a certain unchangeable
duration unto the end of the time and works of the gospel; but they who
suppose, that the priesthood of Christ, after having put the saints into
possession of glory, will have a continued influence in the glorified state,
will plead that a strict and proper eternity is intended: without doubt the
apostle designed that when he applied to Christ a quotation (from Ps. 45.6, 7.)
in the words of the septuagint saying, "thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever," etc. and when he said that Christ continues ever.

Peter also meant a strict and proper eternity when he declared "the word of
God abides for ever;" and again "the word of the Lord endures for ever,"
which is no other than a quotation of Isaiah's assertion, "but the word of our
God shall stand for ever." He certainly meant it, when he closed his second
epistle with "to him, i.e. our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be glory, both
now and for the day (or term) of eternity," an unusual expression in the
original, and which is translated "both now and for ever." Surely it is
reasonable then to understand him as meaning strict and proper eternity, when
he writes of the ungodly "to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever."
The very same expression, in the original, that Jude makes use of concerning
them, though rendered somewhat different, "to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever."

When John writes, of the truth "and which shall be with us for ever;" it is
not so clear that he intends a proper eternity, as when he asserts, "he that
does the will of God abides for ever."

These are all the places in the Acts, Epistles and Revelation, in which aion
occurs in the singular number, excepting Ephesians. 3.21. where it precedes the
plural and helps to form one of the strongest expressions, which the devout
zeal of the apostle Paul could devise for glorifying God -- "unto him be glory
in the church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages world without end," as in
the English. Blackwall in his sacred classics, Vol. I. p. 64. 12mo.
says of this conclusion, "it defies any version to come any thing near it, and
commands our wonder." Dr. Doddridge pronounces it, "one of St. Paul's
self-invented and most expressive phrases;" and adds, " through all the
successions of an endless eternity, may come something near it; but even this
emphatical as it may seem, falls vastly short of the sublimity and spirit of
the Original."

The apostle uses the plural of aion five times in pronouncing the Creator,
God, blessed for ever, and for evermore; and in ascribing glory to him for
ever: and once in declaring, Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever. Toward the latter end of his epistle to the Hebrews he writes, "through
faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God:" and in the
beginning, that by his Son He made the worlds, which some would render, He
constituted the ages, meaning the dispensations of the church and world. When
he says to the Corinthians, "upon whom the ends of the world (ages) are come,"
he means upon whom the concluding age or last dispensation of God to mankind on
earth is come. In agreement herewith Dr. Doddridge has, "but now once for all
at the conclusion of the ages," instead of "but now once in the end of the
world, has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." Heb. 9.26.
There are interpreters of note, who would render "according to the eternal
purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord," Ephesians. 3.11.
according to that predisposition of the ages, or several dispensations which
he made in Christ Jesus: while others prefer the common translation as agreeing
most with the meaning of the original. When he mentions of the Ephesians that
they were quickened together with Christ and so on, that God "might in the ages
to come show the exceeding riches of his grace" he means finite periods: and
the like, when he writes to the Colossians of the mystery which had been hid
from ages and generations. But when he mentions, "the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world unto our glory;" 1 Cor. 2.7.
and "the mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God,"
Ephesians. 3.9.
he means more than our translation has expressed, even from eternity, or
eternal ages; the same as when he styles God the King of ages, which in our
translation is eternal. 1 Timothy 1.17.


It is frequent for writers, in certain cases to strengthen their expressions,
by what might otherwise be styled redundancies: the practice is not only
allowable, but oratorial. For ever intends to all eternity, and so does for
ever and ever; and for ever and ever, world without end, can intend no more:
but there is more force in the manner of one than the other. The sacred writers
use different forms to express the same meaning; and it is done also by one and
the same writer. Paul closes his doxologies with two plurals of aion in five
places, in each they are rendered for ever and ever. Peter does it twice. The
noun aion is used in no other way whatever in the Revelation of John, where the
plurals occur fourteen times. Our Lord uses them when he says, "I am he that
lives and was dead and behold I am alive for evermore:" and they are used,
when it is said, that he shall reign for ever and ever; and of the servants of
the Lamb in the New Jerusalem, that they shall reign for ever and ever: and
five times when it is asserted of God, that he lives for ever and ever. They
close doxologies three times. In each of these eleven instances strict and
proper eternity is intended: and yet truly all must be no evidence that strict
and proper eternity is intended in the remaining three, when it is said, "and
the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever; Rev. 14.11. --
and her smoke rose up for ever and ever; 19.3. --
and the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever. 20.1^.
The most mighty reasons ought to be produced for such liberties with the
phraseology of a sacred writer, which would not be otherwise allowed in the
case of a human author. Should it be urged, that the great whore, whose smoke
is said to rise up for ever and ever, is the same with spiritual Babylon, that
great city which makes all nations drink of the wine of its raging fornication,
and that the smoke of no city can go up for ever and ever, understanding strict
and proper eternity, because after a while it will be totally consumed: it is
answered, as has been observed with regard to Sodom and Gomorrha, that it is
not the buildings so much as the citizens that are intended: and besides, that
the great whore, Babylon and the beast are but different names for one and the
same community; and it is asserted of the beast and the false prophet that they
are in the lake of fire and brimstone, (when the closing scene has taken
place) where they shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever -- so
that, though the total destruction of the great city may be included, the
perpetual punishment of the profligate and wicked citizens is the main thing
intended, when it is said, "and her smoke rose up for ever and ever." The place
of torment to which they are consigned, is figuratively spoken of, as a lake of
fire and brimstone, in allusion probably to the kind of punishment by which
divine justice was glorified in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha and the
neighboring cities. The whole place might for some considerable time be a
burning lake, and when the combustibles were greatly exhausted might be
extinguished and filled with the waters of Jordan and other rivers, and form
that lake, which afterward took the name of the Dead Sea, or Lake of Sodom.
The blackness of darkness, by which Peter and Jude represent future torments,
may also be an allusion to that horrid darkness, with which the whole
atmosphere for a vast number of miles was probably filled, by the sulphurous
soot and smoke that ascended into it, and might hang over the cursed region,
for weeks or longer before it was dispersed, to awe and reform the inhabitants
of distant cities.

It has been falsely pleaded, that the Greek word aidios is more expressive of
proper eternity than aionios. The Seventy never once use it, even where they
could not but be persuaded that the Hebrew meant proper eternity; and in the
New Testament it is to be met with only twice, in Romans (1.20.) where God's
eternal power is mentioned, and in Jude (6.v.) when the fallen angels are said
to be reserved in everlasting chains.

After all that has been observed upon gnolam, aion and aionios, ought we not
to apprehend, that the Angel meant strict and proper eternity, not only when he
spoke to Daniel, of them that should awake to everlasting life, but also of
them that should awake to shame and everlasting contempt Dan. 12.2.
-- that John the baptist meant the like, when he says of wicked professors,
comparing them to chaff for their worthlessness, that Christ will burn them
with unquenchable fire, Mat. 3.12.
-- our Lord also when he speaks of sinners being cast into hell, where the
worm dies not and the fire is not quenched; Mark 9.43 -- 48.
of their departing into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels, and their going into everlasting punishment, while the righteous go
into life eternal; Mat. 25.41, 46.
and of the blasphemer against the holy Ghost being in danger of, or liable to
eternal damnation" Mark 3.29.
-- the apostle Paul when declaring, that the disobedient shall be punished at
the appearance of Christ with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
-- the apostles Peter and Jude when they assert, that for the ungodly the
blackness of darkness is reserved for ever; that the angels which kept not
their first estate are reserved in everlasting chains; and that the inhabitants
of Sodom and Gomorrha suffer the vengeance of eternal fire 2 Peter 2.17. Jude
6, 7, 13.
-- and the apostle John, when he says, "the smoke of their torment ascends
up for ever and ever; her smoke rose up for ever and ever; the devil, the beast
and the false prophet shall be tormented for ever and ever." Rev. 14.11. --
19.3. -- 20.10.


But notwithstanding the above reasoning upon the original words; and even
though mathematical demonstration could be given, that their literal import
implied what we mean by strict and proper eternity; yet, as they are often used
figuratively, they, who are set upon denying the real eternity of hell
torments, would maintain, that when applied to future punishments they are to
be understood figuratively; and would require other arguments to support the
doctrine they reject.

Let us see then what was the opinion of Jews and Gentiles respecting this
matter, in the times of our Savior and his apostles. Philo of Alexandria, the
historian and eminent for his learning, surnamed Judaeus from his being a Jew,
and who flourished about forty years after our Lord's birth, when Matthew is
supposed to have penned his gospel, says, "the punishment of the wicked person
is to live for ever dying, Mangey's edition of his works, vol. 2. p. 419.
and to be for ever in pains and griefs and calamities that never cease." Ditto
p 420. London 1742.
The original Greek translated to be for ever is peculiarly strong; we have no
English word to answer it, was one coined upon the occasion to eternalize might
be adopted. Dr. Scott writes "had the scripture said, in our modern style, that
the reprobate shall be ever dying, and yet never die, there might have been
some color of argument, and it might have been inferred, that, though a
never-ceasing-misery is not expressed in so many words, it is still, from the
scripture-phraseology, necessarily implied" Vol. 2.341, 342.
It will be noted by the reader, that Philo's expressions are almost the very
same with shall be ever dying, and yet never die, and therefore the latter is
not a modern but ancient style, nearly as old if not older than any part of the
New Testament; and though no part of it, yet is to be regarded as declaring the
sentiment of many of the first men among the Jews. And that this was the
sentiment of that sect which was had in the greatest repute by them, viz. the
Pharisees, is confirmed by Josephus who survived the destruction of Jerusalem,
and informs us, "the Pharisees held, that the souls of the wicked were to be
punished with perpetual punishments, and that there was appointed for them a
perpetual prison." Bell Jud i. 2. c. 8. 14. p. 1065. Ant. l. 18. 2. p. 793.
Hudson's edition Ox. 1720.
The word aidios, which he uses, must mean perpetual as expressive of proper
eternity; (...) gives an uncertain unintelligible sound, instead of informing
us what the Pharisees held. That this opinion, of theirs was not peculiar to
them or the Jews, is plain from what Ovid, who died sixteen years before our
Lord's crucifixion, says in his Ibis (lines 196, 197.)

Nec mortis poenas mors altera finiet hujus:
Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis.
Herein he declares that no future death shall put an end to the pains and
penalties of that death, to which the wicked shall be doomed; and that there
will be no last hour to such great evils. He was too debauched a libertine to
believe it for his own part, but he gives us the common notion of the day: as
does Seneca, who was murdered by Nero anno domini 65. when in his Hercules
Furens he makes Amphytrio ask Theseus advising him to refrain from human blood,
etc.

Certus inclusos tenet
Locus nocentes? utque fert fama, impios
Supplicia vinculis saeva perpetuis domant?
What! does some certain place confine the guilty? and, as common report says,
do dreadful punishments keep the wicked under in perpetual (or everlasting)
chains?

Collins in his Discourse of free thinking (p. 36) asserts "the evil of
superstition is now much increased, and men are under greater terrors and
uneasiness of mind, than Pagans of old possibly could be, when they thought
they hazarded less." Dr. Bentley, in his 21st Remark My acknowledgments are
here made to the Doctor's namesake at Cambridge, for having directed me to this
Remark in the College Library.
upon Collins, answers, "this manifestly shows, that he thinks eternal torments
were never imagined in the Pagan scheme, but were first introduced by
Christianity. Just contrary. The vulgar in Paganism universally believed them,
as his friend Lucretius Lucretius died, aged forty four, and fifty four years
before the birth of our Lord.
would have told him in express terms.

Nam, si certam finem esse viderent
Aerumuarum homines, aliqua ratione valerent
Relligionibus atque minis obsistere vatum:
Nuuc ratio nulla est restandi, nulla facultas;
Aeternas quoniam POENAS in morte timendum.
1 B l. 108. [For, if men could see there would be a certain end of their
miseries, they would by some means or other get rid of the religions and
threatenings of priests. At present there is no way, no power of standing out
against them; because, truly, eternal punishments at death are to be dreaded.]

It Is so false what our author lays down, that the Pagan religion gave less
uneasiness in life because they thought they hazarded less after death than we
christians think we do, that its certain they thought bad men hazarded as much
and good men obtained infinitely less."

A question arises, Did our Savior or his Apostles contradict this common
notion? Nothing of that kind appears from the New Testament; and the Papists
pretend not to have any thing of it among the arcana of oral traditions; for as
has been already noted, though they hold a purgatory, they admit that abandoned
wicked graceless spirits will be perpetually tormented. Had our Savior
thought, that the age was not ripe for the discovery of the non-eternity of
hell torments; and that it was prudent to let the vulgar opinion prevail, till
the remarkable out-pouring of the Spirit and the clearer instructions following
upon it, had prepared the way for that particular discovery; his character as
the great Prophet of the church might have been capable of a full vindication,
had he been silent upon the matter: but what will be thought, supposing the
opinion to have been absolutely false, should he be found to have spoken so as
to confirm the vulgar in their false opinion, and to have left his Apostles to
do the same?

Our Lord was far from sparing the Pharisees through fear of their resentment:
no design of conciliating their regards could induce him to countenance their
errors: when alone with his disciples we must conclude that he would be the
furthest from doing it; and yet we find by Mark, that in such a circumstance,
he appears to labor at impressing the minds of his followers with the idea,
that future punishments were really perpetual, "it is better for thee to enter
into life maimed than to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched:" and again,
"than to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched; where
their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched:" and the third time, "than
to be cast into hellfire; where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched." Matthew, in his abridged account of this matter, mentions only
hellfire and everlasting fire. Matt. 18.8, 9.
That the disciples might not slight the pains of hell they are compared to a
worm and to fire on account of the exquisite torment, that the gnawings of the
one and the burnings of the other produce upon living bodies; and not on
account of the destruction that either occasion to dead carcases that feel no
pain. That they might not imagine, these pains would end after a while, for as
much as a material worm dies and proper fire goes out, our Lord says, their
worm dies not and the fire is not quenched, and he repeats is again and again
-- the ascription of such perpetual qualities, to the worm and to the fire,
manifested also, that the worm and the fire were to be taken figuratively;
which must moreover appear with reference to the worm from hence, that a real
worm can live but a moment in the fire; and if the fire must be understood
metaphorically, there is equal or superior reason for supposing the same (...)
the worm. How little ground then had Dr. Scott to say, "as to that
construction, which some modern writers have put upon this worm, as though
(...) to the remorse of conscience, it requires no (...) than this, that it is
a mere arbitrary interpretation, that has no proof or warrant from the
scripture use of this phrase." Vol. 2. p. 352.
Would leisure and opportunity (...), probably it might be shown, that the
construction of some modern writers is the same with that of some ancient ones;
and that the Dr. has failed here, as much as before, in his modern style. But
to pronounce, "it requires no other reply than this, that it is a mere
arbitrary interpretation," is tantamount to telling us, that we must understand
it literally, which obliges us to embrace an absurdity; how much easier to
conceive it alludes to the gnawings of conscience! and how striking the
allusion! However, a careful judicious reader of Dr. Scott's sermons will
apprehend, that the Dr's head was strangely possessed with the notion that
hellfire was real and material; and that much of his reasoning against the
wicked's being eternally punished is built upon that notion -- a notion
evidently subverted by our Lords saying, that in the day of judgment the
accursed shall depart into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels. How material fire by any preparation can torment the devil and his
angels must exceed the comprehension of every mortal; if the accursed then are
to be punished in the same fire with them, we ought to understand the term fire
in a figurative sense, for that misery which the wrath of an offended God
kindles. But should we grant, that the bodies of the wicked will be consumed
and burnt up by the fire of hell, be it what it may, a difficulty still
remains, viz. (...) the spirits of such bodies be also consumed or burnt
(...) such fire in length of time, without any (...) act of the divine Being?
If they are mere (...) then it appears to me impossible: and as to (...)
struck out of existence by an annihilating (...) God the scripture appears to
be totally silent (...) the head. It may be urged in support of their being
totally destroyed, that John the baptist compares them to chaff, which fire
will, of course, burn up altogether. But it must be noted, that he uses the
comparison in accommodation to the other parts of the simile he has a recourse
to, while speaking of Christ, "whose fan, he says, is in his hand, and who will
thoroughly purge his floor." Dr. Doddridge in his note upon the place, says,
"as to the phrase of burning the chaff with unquenchable fire, Mr. Horberry has
observed with his usual accuracy of judgment ( Enquiry into the Duration of
future Punishment, I have enquired after, but have not been able to get a sight
of this author, and should be greatly obliged to any gentleman for the loan of
it,
Chapter 1. No. 1, 2.) that it is absolutely inconsistent with all views of the
Restoration of the wicked; and that however the phrase of being consumed like
chaff might seem to favor the doctrine of their annihilation (which,
nevertheless, it is certain no punishment of mind or body can of itself effect)
the epithet of unquenchable given to this fire is so far from proving it, that
it cannot by any easy and just interpretation be reconciled with it."

Our Lord compares "the kingdom of heaven to a net, that was cast into the sea,
and gathered of every kind; which when it was full, the fishermen drew to shore
and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. So
shall it be, says our Lord, at the end of the world; the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into the
furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." Mark 13.47, 48,
49.
The Dr. gives us this note upon it, "the word which we render bad, generally
signifies corrupt or putrid, and seems an allusion to the drawing up some dead
fish in a net with the living. Mr. Horberry justly observes, that this in the
strongest terms represents the hopeless state of sinners at last."

Our Lord did further confirm the opinion of the Pharisees respecting the
perpetuity of future torments, when, a few days before his crucifixion, he
closes his representation of the last judgment with saying, and these (the
accursed) shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
life eternal? It was impossible, after what he had taught them before, and
considering the known doctrine of the Pharisees, that his disciples could,
without a particular caution to direct them, apprehend, that the punishment of
the wicked might, or was to be of shorter duration than the life of the
righteous, the adjective applied to both being one and the same in the
original; and that eternal life was meant to express a glorious immortality,
and necessarily implied proper eternity has been already proved.

Thus it appears, that our Lord instead of contradicting, or even being silent
as to the common notion of the proper eternity of future punishment,
contributed by his very expressions; and the circumstances attending them, to
establish it. We may observe also, that the apostles after the miraculous
effusion of the holy Spirit, and their being fully instructed in the things of
religion, no where teach contrary to what the Pharisees held. Should it be
pleaded, that Paul makes use of the word destruction, which seems to imply the
being put out of existence; it is answered, that everlasting destruction
evidently means the same with everlasting punishment, which is styled
destruction, not in reference to the wicked's being struck out of existence,
but to the destruction of all his comforts, when, as the apostle teaches
elsewhere, God shall render to him, by Christ the Judge, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish. Considering the number of Gentile converts, and that
the gospel dispensation was designed for all people, had the apostles thought,
that future punishments were not properly eternal, and that the doctrine of
eternal punishments would be a grand obstacle to the propagating of
christianity, and that the contrary was a truth which it was profitable upon
the whole to proclaim most audibly, that every body might hear it, and not have
terrors proposed to them that exceed belief -- we must conclude that they would
have declared themselves freely and explicitly upon the head; whereas they
evidently join with their Lord in countenancing and establishing the common
opinion of the day, that future punishments were really everlasting. Indeed if
they are not strictly so, the use of the word everlasting or eternal, always
one and the same in the original (excepting the two places above mentioned
where aidios occurs) is, not to say worse, little less than trifling; the same
may be observed of the terms, that dies not and that is not quenched. When it
is said, that the worm dies not, that the fire is not quenched, that it is
everlasting, that the punishment is everlasting, and that the chains are
everlasting -- the ascription of these perpetual qualities is designed to
excite special terror; but what special terror is justly excited by their being
perpetual, if the party punished is wholly destroyed or after a while escapes
by a change of place. Perpetuity is nothing to the purpose, is of no avail at
all, when a total destruction is effected, or the sufferer has got out of hell
for ever.

The answer quoted (p. 22, 23.) to set aside the argument drawn from its being
said "their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched," is, in expressions
different, but in meaning the same with what Mr. Richardson gave above a
hundred years ago, viz. "fire may be said to be everlasting, when it does not
go out, till the combustible matter is consumed." To which it was replied,
that, "at this rate of arguing, his own beard might be called an everlasting
beard, as it was capable of growing while the nourishing matter lasted; and
that the flame of a farthing candle might be called an everlasting fire, since
it would last till the wick was spent."

The reader is desired likewise to recollect the scripture representation of
the closing scene, with which all human affairs finish. When the second advent
of our Lord commenceth, then is the hour in which all that are in their graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of
damnation, The quick and the dead are judged by him; and he renders to every
man according to his deeds. The period employed in this most solemn and
interesting transaction -- grand beyond description -- affecting beyond
conception -- is styled the day of judgment: but of how long continuance is
matter of uncertain conjecture, being reserved among the arcana of heaven. On
its ending, the accursed go away into everlasting punishment; and the righteous
into eternal life; answerable to the irreversible sentence of the upright
Judge. And thus all human affairs terminate, and are fixed -- the scene closes
-- and all expectation of a new state of probation, and of a new sentence is
set aside.

The pamphlet (p. 24.) speaks of hell as the next state, wherein, though "the
sufferings of the wicked will be exceedingly great in degree, as well as long
in duration," they are really under a merciful and gracious dispensation, as it
is, "in order that they may be the willing people of God." How far condemning
the wicked to suffer the punishments of hell, is placing them anew under a
merciful and gracious dispensation, let every one judge for himself! But when
it is added "nor will they be delivered from their suffering till this is
effected, i. e. till they are made the willing people of God" all expectation
of their being delivered is at an end; and the main objections against the
proper eternity of hell torments are virtually abandoned. If the wicked may be
punished in hell, till they become holy and are fit for heaven; then in case
they become not holy, God can consistently with his justice goodness and other
attributes, punish them everlastingly. Should they be thus everlastingly
punished, it is for sins committed in this world, or because of their
continuing to sin: if for the former, then they may be everlastingly punished
for temporary crimes: if for the latter, they are continued perpetually in a
state of suffering, without the divine Being's preventing it, through
benevolence, by striking them out of existence.

Let it be now noted, that it is morally impossible, that their sufferings in
hell should make them the willing people of God. In the worst of company, with
the devil and his angels, surrounded by accursed persons like themselves, and
not a single holy soul in the place, how can it be thought, that they will
learn to be holy! They go to the place of torments with fixed habits of
wickedness. Is it the nature of those punishments, which occasion wailing and
gnashing of teeth, to produce holy dispositions, full acquiescence in the
government of heaven, and love to God? Do such punishments in general take this
effect upon earth, that we may look for the like in hell; or is it not the very
reverse? From what we know by present experience, may we not fear that the
torments of hell will excite rage and rancour of heart, and lead on to the most
horrid blasphemies? The gentlemen, who hold the Salvation of all men, it is
judged, exclude all positive operation of the Almighty in effecting holy
dispositions, under the notion of its being inconsistent with moral agency: we
must not therefore admit of any such operation in hell; the damned then are
left to the full influence of their wicked habits, in a state that has a
natural tendency to strengthen them; so that we must despair of their ever
being made, by suffering, the willing people of God; or rather, of their being
induced, by their suffering, to make themselves so. However could we believe,
that it might happen with respect to many or the majority; yet should a single
soul remain possessed of wicked principles, and continue everlastingly in the
place of torments, the scheme of Universal Salvation is fallacious. Yea, should
any one of the fallen angels continue everlastingly there, then the chief
arguments, against the proper eternity of hell torments, would be thereby
proved to be futile. It might be asked, if the pains of hell are calculated to
produce holiness, how comes it to pass, that we have no intimation, that some
of the fallen angels, who know also what the loss of heaven means, have at
length by their sufferings learnt obedience, recovered their virtue and been
restored to happiness? What may be the opinion of the favorers of Universal
Salvation with regard to the wicked at death, whether they fall asleep, not to
awake till the day of judgment, or are conveyed to a place of punishment, may
not have been published as yet: but should the wicked go to hell upon dying,
agreeable to the representation made in the parable of the rich libertine, we
may conclude, that there is no hope of their being made the willing people of
God by their sufferings. They that will have died five thousand years before
the day of judgment, will be then condemned to the punishment of hell for the
wicked deeds done in the body: but if they had, within that period of
suffering, learnt to fear and love God, are we to suppose, they would be sent
again to hell, being already fit for heaven? It is more reasonable to think,
that they continue in their disembodied state, during the intermediate space
between death and judgment, impenitent, without undergoing a change of moral
character. Who will may believe, that it will be afterward effected, by their
suffering in bodies to which they have been united by the resurrection.

No other answer need be given to Dr. Hartley's assertion, that "it does not
appear from the writings of the most ancient fathers, that they construed the
texts that speak of the future punishment in the never-ending sense;" than that
Dr. Watts writes, "It is really an imposition upon unlearned readers to
pretend, that the doctrine which denies the eternity of the punishments of
hell, was the common sense of the primitive fathers, though it is granted that
Origin and some others might be of this opinion." Watts's World to come, Vol.
^. p. 320. Dr. Watts might word himself thus guardedly " might be of this
opinion" by reason of what some writers on the Controversy have noted, " that
Origin signalized himself by explaining the scripture, and confuting of
heresies; that whatever enemies he had while living, their hatred of him was
not grounded on heterodox, or singular, opinions laid to his charge, but took
its rise from envy at his growing reputation and usefulness; that the common
charge against him was not heard of till a long time after his death, when his
writings might be considerably interpolated and corrupted (as other ancient
writings were) that his books of Principles are extant only in a Latin
translation not to be depended upon, and those published by Huet, are commonly
supposed to be in several places corrupted; that his eight books against
Celsus, which he wrote in his old age, and are come down to us rather more pure
than any other of his works, contain nothing clearly favorable to the opinion
ascribed to him, but much that is inconsistent therewith." It has been much
questioned whether Origin and Clement of Alexandria did really and steadily
believe, that devils and damned men would be at length restored to the favor
of God. " Clement is charged with this by Le Clerc, and some few others. But
though he refers to Plato, as observing, that God inflicts no punishment but for
the good of his creatures, it is not deducible from any thing he says, that he
approved of this as true universally.


It has been already shown, that Origin and Clement were notorious for
introducing into the church the pagan philosophy and vain deceit, that Dr.
Hartley complains of, as what might prove introductory to the belief of the
absolute eternity of punishment: from whence it would rather follow, upon the
Dr's reasoning, that the denial of such absolute eternity, if truly imputed to
Origin and Clement, was owing to the pagan philosophy and vain deceit he
alludes to. It would have been much more to the purpose could the Dr. have
said, that the denial of this never-ending sense of future punishment in the
ancient creeds, shows that it was no original doctrine; but the mere omission
of this never-ending sense in such creeds, rather shows that it was an original
doctrine, instead of the contrary, and that it was generally admitted, and
therefore the insertion of it was needless.

The contents of the pamphlet entitled Salvation for, all Men etc. etc. have
been, it is hoped, fully and fairly canvassed. May it not be thought, that the
following reflections will occur to one or another upon the occasion?

The arguments brought to prove the proper eternity of hell torments, should
they not silence every objection, are sufficient to evince the wisdom and
prudence of not hazarding any thing on the possibility of the contrary doctrine.

No man of common sense and understanding can be justified in allowing himself
to live in vicious courses, and other than the scriptures prescribe, on the
per-adventure that everlasting punishment is no more than a figurative
expression for an indefinite time; and on the presumption of his learning to be
holy in hell among devils and damned spirits, should he omit doing it under all
the superior advantages attending the present state of probation.

But should it be doubted, whether future punishment is properly eternal; yet
the Salvation of all Men is a distinct subject, and may be absolutely false,
though the damned should not be always suffering. The evidence of scripture
against the Salvation of all Men is so full and express, that no dependence can
be had upon any doctrine of revelation, if not on that which teaches, that some
individuals will never be admitted to the enjoyment of everlasting happiness.
Whatever becomes of them, they will not be suffered to enter the heavenly
paradise; or the word of God, is, as the Papists tell us, a nose of wax that
may be formed into any shape, and requires an infallible interpreter; whom,
though they pretend to possess, they are not agreed in; it being a question
agitated among them, whether it is the Pope in his own person, or a general
council, or the church diffussive, or the Pope and a general council in
conjunction. It must be the height of folly therefore for a person to encourage
himself in any evil practice on earth, from the present ease, pleasure or
profit it may afford him, under an apprehension, that, after having suffered
for a longer or shorter period in hell, he shall remove to heaven, where his
happiness will be the better flavoured by reason of the miseries through which
he has passed. Must not a conduct of this kind evidence a greater lunacy, than
what subjects multitudes to confinement!

The pamphlet has a natural tendency, by holding forth a distant never ending
happiness to every one, though wicked in the highest possible degree, to
encourage the indulgence of passions, subversive of family and civil
government, and of the most destructive quality: and therefore is in itself
pernicious beyond expression, and more especially so at the present particular
time, wherein liberty has too universally degenerated into licentiousness.
Whether it has mended or injured the morals of individuals, and made them
better or worse husbands, parents, children, neighbors, citizens or
christians, is not below the attention of those that espouse it.

What can we think of those teachers, who, apprehending the doctrine of
Universal Salvation to be scriptural (notwithstanding the countenance our Lord
and his Apostles gave to the contrary) undertake to publish it, as from the
housetop, for a wholesome doctrine, though they have not the example of their
Lord and his apostles to warrant them? -- that they are not arrived at years of
discretion? or, that they have past them? If happily so grounded in the love of
virtue as to need no terrors, they might have considered more the bulk of
mankind, and in mercy to the present world have had their faith to themselves.


