PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY REVIVED, BY WILLIAM PENN.

ALSO, SELECT ESSAYS ON RELIGIOUS SUBJECTS, FROM THE WRITINGS OF ISAAC
PENINGTON.

PHILADELPHIA:

PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK. IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND
THIRD STREETS* M DCC LXXXIII.

PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY REVIVED, IN THE FAITH AND PRACTICE OF THE PEOPLE CALLED
QUAKERS.

WRITTEN IN TESTIMONY TO THE Present Dispensation of GOD through them, to the
World; that Prejudices may be removed, the Simple informed, the Well-inclined
encouraged, and the TRUTH, and its innocent FRIENDS rightly represented.

BY WILLIAM PENN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN
SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. MDCCLXXXIII.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
BY this short ensuing Treatise, thou will perceive the Subject of it, viz. The
Light of Christ in Man, as the Manifestation of God's Love for Man's Happiness.
Now, for as much as this is the Peculiar Testimony and Characteristick of the
People called Quakers; their Great Fundamental in Religion; That by which they
have been distinguished from other Professors of Christianity in their Time,
and to which they refer all People about Faith, Worship, and Practice, both in
their Ministry and Writings; that as the Fingers shoot out of the Hand, and the
Branches from the Body of the Tree; so True Religion, in all the Parts and
Articles of it, Springs from this Divine Principle in Man. And because the
Prejudices of some are very great against this People and their Way; and that
others, who love their Seriousness, and commend their good Life, are yet,
through Mistakes, or want of Enquiry, under Jealousy of their Un^oundness in
some Points of Faith; and that there are not a few in all Persuasions, which
desire earnestly to know and enjoy God in that Sensible Manner this People
speak of, and who seem to long after a State of Holiness and Acceptance with
God; but are under Doubts and D^spondings of their attaining it, from the Want
they find in themselves of inward Power to enable them, and are unacquainted
with this efficacious Agent, which God has given and appointed for their
Supply.

For these Reasons and Motives, know, Reader, I have taken in Hand to write
this small Tract, Of the Nature and Virtue of the Light of Christ within Man;
what, and where it is, and for what End, and therein of the Religion of the
People called Quakers; that, at the same Time, all People may be informed of
their true Character, and what true Religion is, and the Way to it, in this Age
of High Pretenses, and as deep Irreligion. That so the Merciful Visitation of
the God of Light and Love, (more especially to these Nations) both immediately
and instrumentally, for the Promotion of Piety, (which is Religion indeed) may
no longer be neglected by the Inhabitants thereof, but that they may come to
see and say, with Heart and Mouth, This is a Dispensation of Love and Life from
God to the World; and this poor People, that we have so much despised, and so
often trod upon, and treated as the Offscouring of the Earth, are the People
of God, and Children of the Most High. Bear with me, Reader, I know what I say,
and am not high-minded, but fear: For I write with Humility toward God, though
with Confidence toward thee. Not that thou should believe upon my Authority,
nothing less; for that is not to act upon Knowledge, but Trust; but that thou
should try and approve what I write: For that is all I ask, as well as all I
need for thy Conviction, and my own Justification. The Whole, indeed, being but
a Spiritual Experiment upon the Soul, and therefore seeks for no implicit
Credit, because it is Self-evident to them that will uprightly try it.

And when thou, Reader, shall come to be acquainted with this Principle, and
the plain and happy Teachings of it, thou will, with us, admire thou should
live so long a Stranger to that which was so near thee, and as much wonder that
other Folks should be so blind as not to see it, as formerly thou though^est us
singular for obeying it. The Day, I believe, is at Hand that will declare this
with an uncontrollable Authority, because it will be with an unquestionable
Evidence.

I have done, Reader, with this Preface, when I have told thee, First, That I
have stated the Principle, and opened, as God has enabled me, the Nature and
Virtue of it in Religion; wherein the common Doctrines and Articles of the
Christian Religion, are delivered and improved; and about which, I have
endeavored to express my self in plain and proper Terms, and not in
Figurative, Allegorical, or doubtful Phrases; That so I may leave no Room for
an equivocal or double Sense; but that the Truth of the Subject I treat upon,
may appear easily and evidently to every common Understanding. Next, I have
confirmed what I have writ, by Scripture, Reason, and the Effects of it upon so
great a People; whose uniform concurrence in the Experience and Practice
thereof, through all Times and Sufferings, since a People, challenge the Notice
and Regard of every Serious Reader. Thirdly, I have written briefly, that so it
might be every one's Money and Reading: And, Much in a little is best, when we
see daily that the richer People grow, the less Money or Time they have for God
or Religion: And perhaps those that would not buy a large Book, may find in
their Hearts to give away some of these for their Neighbor's Good, being
little and cheap. Be serious, Reader, be impartial, and then be as inquisitive
as thou can; and that for thine own Soul, as well as the Credit of this most
misunderstood and abused People: And the God and Father of Lights and Spirits,
so bless thine, in the perusal of this Short Treatise, that thou may receive
real Benefit (...) it, to His Glory, and thine own Comfort, which is the Desire
and End of him that wrote it; who is, in the Bonds of Christian Charity, very
much, and very ardently,

THY REAL FRIEND, WILLIAM PENN.

PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY REVIVED, etc.
CHAP. I.
1. Their Fundamental Principle. 2. The Nature of it. 3. Called by several
Names. 4. They refer all to this, as to Faith and Practice, Ministry and
Worship.

1. THAT which the People called Quakers lay down, as a main Fundamental in
Religion, is this, That God, through Christ, has placed a Principle in every
Man, to inform him of his Duty, and to enable him to do it; and that those that
live up to this Principle, are the People of God, and those that live in
disobedience to it, are not God's People, whatever Name they may bear, or
Profession they may make of Religion. This is their ancient, first, and
standing Testimony: With this they began, and this they bore, and do bear to
the World.

2. By this Principle they understand something that is Divine; and though in
Man, yet not of Man, but of God; and that it came from him, and leads to him
all those that will be led by it.

3. There are diverse Ways of Speaking they have been led to use, by which they
declare and express what this Principle is, about which I think fit to
Precaution the Reader, viz. They call it, The Light of Christ within Man, or,
Light within, which is their ancient, and most general and familiar Phrase,
also the John 1. 9.
Manifestation Romans 1. 19. Tit. 3, 4.
or Appearance of Christ, Acts 17. 28. 2 Peter 4.
the Romans 8. 6. 1 John 5. 10. 12,
Witness of God, the 1 Pet. 1. 23. 1 John* 3* 9*
Seed of God, the Matt. 13. 19. 23.
Seed of the Kingdom, Prove. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. and 8. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Wisdom, the Deuteronomy. 30. 12. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. P^* 119* 10
Word in the Heart, the Grace Tit* 2. 11, 12.
that appears to all Men, the 1 Cor. 12. 7.
Spirit given to every Man to profit with, the P^. 51. 6. Isa. 26. 2. Joh. 14. 6
Truth in the inward Parts, the Mat. 13. 33.
spiritual Leaven, that Leavens the whole Lump of Man: Which are many of them
Figurative Expressions, but all of them such as the Holy Ghost has used, and
which will be used in this Treatise, as they are most frequently in the
Writings and Ministry of this People. But that this Variety and Manner of
Expression may not occasion any Misapprehension or Confusion in the
Understanding of the Reader, I would have him know, that they always mean by
these Terms, or Denominations, not another, but the same Principle, before
mentioned: Which, as I said, though it be in Man, is not of Man, but of God,
and therefore Divine: And one in it self, though diversely expressed by the Holy
Men, according to the various Manifestations and Operations thereof.

4. It is to this Principle of Light, Life and Grace, that this People refer
all: For they say it is the great Agent in Religion; That, without which, there
is no Conviction, so no Conversion, or Regeneration; and consequently no
entering into the Kingdom of God. That is to say, there can be no true Sight of
Sin, nor Sorrow for it, and therefore no forsaking or overcoming of it, or
Remission or Justification from it. A necessary and powerful Principle indeed,
when neither Sanctification, nor Justification can be had without it. In short,
there is no becoming virtuous, holy and good, without this Principle; no
acceptance with God, nor Peace of Soul, but through it. But on the contrary,
that the Reason of so much Irreligion among Christians, so much Superstition,
instead of Devotion, and so much Profession without Enjoyment, and so little
Heart-Reformation, is, because People in Religion, Overlook this Principle, and
leave it behind them.

They will be religious without it, and Christians without it, though this be
the only Means of making them so indeed. So natural is it to Man, in his
degenerate State, to prefer Sacrifice before Obedience, and to make Prayers go
for Practice, and so flatter himself with hope, by ceremonial and bodily
Service, to excuse himself to God from the stricter Discipline of this
Principle in the Soul, which leads Man to take up the Cross, deny Self, and do
that which God requires of him: And that is every Man's true Religion, and
every such Man is truly religious: That is, He is holy, humble, patient, meek,
merciful, just, kind, and charitable; which they say, no Man can make himself;
but that this Principle will make all men so, that will embrace the Convictions
and Teachings of it, being the Root of all true Religion in Man, and the good
Seed from whence all good Fruits proceed. To sum up what they say upon the
Nature and Virtue of it, as Contents of that which follows, they declare that
this Principle is, First, Divine. Secondly, Universal. Thirdly, Efficacious: In
that it gives Man,

First, The Knowledge of God, and of himself, and therein a Sight of his Duty
and Disobedience to it.

Secondly, It begets a true Sense and Sorrow for Sin in those that seriously
regard the Convictions of it.

Thirdly, It enables them to forsake Sin, and sanctifies from it.

Fourthly, It applies God's Mercies in Christ for the Forgiveness of Sins that
are past, unto Justification, upon such sincere Repentance and Obedience.

Fifthly, It gives to the Faithful, Perseverance unto a perfect Man, and the
Assurance of Blessedness, World without End.

To the Truth of all which, they call in a threefold Evidence: First, The
Scriptures, which give an ample Witness, especially those of the New and better
Testament. Secondly, The reasonableness of it in itself. And Lastly, A general
Experience, in great Measure: But particularly, their own, made credible by the
good Fruits they have brought forth, and the Answer God has given to their
Ministry: Which, to impartial Observers, have commended the Principle, and
gives me Occasion to abstract their History, in diverse Particulars, for a
Conclusion to this little Treatise.

CHAP. II.
1. The Evidence of Scripture for this Principle, John 1. 4. 9. 2. Its
Divinity. 3. All Things created by it. 4. What it is to Man, as to Salvation.

1. I SHALL begin with the Evidence of the blessed Scriptures of Truth, for
this Divine Principle, and that under the Name of Light, the first and most
common Word used by them, to express and denominate this Principle by, as well
as most apt and proper in this dark State of the World.

John i. 1. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God.

Verse 3. All Things were made by him.

Verse 4. In him was Life, and that Life was the Light of Men.

Verse 9. That was the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into
the World.

2. I have begun with him, that began his History with him that was the
Beginning of the Creation of God; the most beloved Disciple, and longest Liver
of all the Apostles, and he, that for excellent Knowledge and Wisdom in
heavenly Things, is justly entitled John the Divine. He tells us first, what
he was in the Beginning, viz. The Word. In the Beginning was the Word.

And though that shows what the Word must be, yet he adds and explains, that
the Word was with God, and the Word was God; lest any should doubt of the
Divinity of the Word, or have lower Thoughts of him than he deserved. The Word
then, is Divine, and an apt Term it is, that the Evangelist styles him by,
since it is so great an Expression of the Wisdom and Power of God to Men.

3. All Things were made by Him. If so, he wants no Power. And if we were made
by him, we must be new made by him too, or we can never enjoy God. His Power
shows his Dignity, and that nothing can be too hard for such a Sufficiency as
made all Things, and without which nothing was made, that was made. As Man's
Maker must be his Husband, so his Creator must be his Redeemer also.

4. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. This is our Point. The
Evangelist first begins with the Nature and Being of the Word: From thence he
descends to the Works of the Word: And lastly, then he tells us, what the Word
is, with respect to Man above the rest of the Creation, viz. The Word was Life,
and the Life was the Light of Men. The Relation must be very near and intimate,
when the very Life of the Word (that was with God, and was God) is the Light of
Men: As if Men were next to the Word, and above all the rest of his Works; for
it is not said so of any other Creature.

Man cannot want Light then; no not a Divine Light: For if this be not Divine,
that is the Life of the Divine Word, there can be no such Thing at all as
Divine or Supernatural Light and Life. And the Text does not only prove the
Divinity of the Light, but the Universality of it also, because Man mentioned
in it, is Mankind: Which is yet more distinctly expressed in his 9th Verse.
That was the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World.
Implying, that he that lights not Mankind is not that true Light; and
therefore John was not that Light, but bore witness of him that was, who
lights every Man; to wit, the Word that took Flesh: So that both the Divine
Nature, and Universality of the Light of Christ within, are confirmed together.

CHAP. III.
1. How this Scripture is wrested. 2. That it is a Natural Light. 3. That it
lights not all. 4. That it is only the Doctrine and Life of Christ when in
the Flesh. All answered, and its Divinity and Universality proved.

1. BUT though there be no Passage or Proposition to be found in Holy
Scripture, in which Mankind is more interested, or that is more clearly laid
down by the Holy Ghost, than this I have produced, yet hardly has any Place
been more industriously wrested from its true and plain Sense: Especially since
this People have laid any Stress upon it, in Defense of their Testimony of the
Light within. Some will have it to be but a Natural Light, or a Part of Man's
Nature, though it be the very Life of the Word, by which the World was made;
and mentioned within those Verses, which only concern his Eternal Power and
Godhead. But because I would be understood, and treat of Things with all
plainness, I will open the Terms of the Objection as well as I can, and then
give my Answer to it.

2. If by Natural be meant a created Thing, as Man is, or any Thing that is
requisite to the Composition of Man, I deny it: The Text is expressly against
it; and says, the Light with which Man is lighted, is the Life of the Word,
which was with God, and was God. But if by Natural is only intended, that the
Light comes along with us into the World; or that we have it as sure as we are
born, or have Nature; and is the Light of our Nature, of our Minds and
Understandings, and is not the Result of any Revelation from without, as by
Angels or Men; then we mean and intend the same Thing. For it is natural to Man
to have a supernatural Light, and for the Creature to be lighted by an
uncreated Light, as is the Life of the creating Word. And did People but
consider the Constitution of Man, it would conduce much to preserve or deliver
them from any Dilemma upon this Account. For Man can be no more a Light to his
Mind, than he is to his Body: He has the Capacity of seeing Objects when he has
the Help of Light, but cannot be a Light to himself, by which to see them.
Wherefore as the Sun in the Firmament is the Light of the Body, and gives us
discerning in our temporal Affairs; so the Life of the Word is the glorious
Light and Sun of the Soul: Our intellectual Luminary, that informs our Mind,
and gives us true Judgment and Distinction about those Things that more
immediately concern our better, inward and eternal Man.

3. But others will have this Text read thus, not that the Word enlightens all
Mankind, but that all who are enlightened, are enlightened by him, thereby not
only narrowing and abusing the Text, but rendering God partial, and so severe
to his Creatures, as to leave the greatest Part of the World in Darkness,
without the Means or Opportunity of Salvation; though we are assured from the
Scriptures That John 1. 4. 9.
all have Light, that Christ is the Chapter 8. 12.
Light of the World, and that he Romans 5, 6.
died for all; yea, the 2 Cor. 5. 15.
Ungodly, and that God desires not the 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Death of any, but rather that all should Repent and come to the Knowledge of
the Truth and be saved; and Tit. 2. 11, 12.
that the Grace of God has appeared to all Men, etc.

4. There is a third Sort that will needs have it understood, not of any
Illumination by a Divine Light or Spirit in Man, but by the Doctrine Christ
preached, and the Life and Example he lived, and led in the World; and which
yet neither reached the thousandth Part of Mankind, nor can consist with what
the Apostle John intends in the Beginning of his History, which wholly relates
to what Christ was before he took Flesh, or at least, what he is to the Soul,
by his immediate Inshinings and Influences. It Is most true, Christ was, in a
Sense, the Light of the World, in that very Appearance, and shined forth by his
heavenly Doctrine, many admirable Miracles, and his Selfdenying Life and Death:
But still that hinders not, but that he was and is That spiritual Light, which
shines more or less, in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men. For as he
was a Light in his Life and Conversation, he was only a Light in a more
excellent Sense than he spoke of to his Disciples, when he said, Ye are the
Lights of the World. But Christ the Word enlightened them, and enlightens us,
and enlightens all Men that come into the World; which he could not be said to
do, if we only regard his personal and outward Appearance: For in that Sense it
is long since he was that Light, but in this he is continually so. In that
Respect he is remote, but in this Sense he is present and immediate, else we
should render the Text, That was the true Light which did lighten, instead of
which lights every Man that comes into the World. And that the Evangelist
might be so understood, as we speak, he refers to this as an Evidence of his
being the Messiah, and not John; for whom many People had much Reverence, for
Verse 8. he faith of John, He was not that Light, but was sent to bear Witness
of that Light: Now comes his Proof and our Testimony, That was the true Light
which lights every Man that comes into the World; which was not John, or any
else, but the Word that was with God, and was God. The Evangelist did not
describe him by his fasting forty Days, Job. 18. 5, 6, and 21. 17, and 25. 3
and 38. 5.
preaching so many Sermons, working so many Miracles, and living so holy a
Life; and, after all, so patiently suffering Death, (which yet Christ did)
thereby to prove him the Light of the World; Psalm 18. 28 and 27. 1. and 34. 5
and 36. 9 and 118. 27 and 119. 105.
but, says the Evangelist, That was the true Light, the Word in Flesh, the
Messiah, and not John, or any else, which lights every Man that comes into
the World. So that Christ is manifested and distinguished by giving Light: And
indeed so are all his Followers from other People, Prove. 13. 9. and 20. 20. 27,
and 24. 20.
by receiving and obeying it. There are many other Scriptures, of both
Testaments, that refer to the Light within; Isa. 2. 5 and 8. 20. and 42. 6. and
49. 6.
either expressly, or implicitly; which, for Brevity's Sake, I shall wave
reciting; but the Reader will find some Directions in the Margin, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
1 John 2. 8.
which will guide him to them.

CHAP. IV.
1. The Virtue of the Light within; it gives discerning. 2. It manifests God.
3. It gives Life to the Soul. 4. It is the apostolical Message. 5. Objection
answered about two Lights. 6. About natural and spiritual Light: Not two
Darknesses within, therefore not two Lights within. 7. The Apostle John answers
the Objection fully: The Light the same, 1 John ii. 8, 9.

1. THE third Thing, is the Virtue and Efficacy of this Light for the End for
which God has given it, viz. To lead and guide the Soul of Man to Blessedness.
In order to which, the first Thing it does in and for Man, is to give him a
true Sight or Discerning of himself: What he is, and what he does; that he may
see and know his own Condition, and what Judgment to make of himself, with
Respect to Religion and a future State: Of which, let us hear what the Word
himself faith, that cannot err, as John relates it. Chap. iii. 20, 21. For
every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, le^t
his Deeds should be reproved. But he that does Truth comes to the Light, that
his Deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. A most pregnant
Instance of the Virtue and Authority of the Light. First, It is that which Men
ought to Examine themselves by. Secondly, It gives a true Discerning betwixt
Good and Bad, what is of God, from what is not of God. And, Lastly, It is a
Judge, and condemns or acquitteth, reproves or comfort, the Soul of Man,
as he rejects or obeys it. That must needs be Divine and Efficacious, which is
able to discover to Man, what is of God, from what is not of God; and which
gives him a distinct Knowledge, in himself, of what is wrought in God, from
what is not wrought in God. By which it appears, that this Place does not only
regard the Discovery of Man and his Works, but, in some Measure, it manifests
God, and his Works also, which is yet something higher; for as much as it gives
the obedient Man a Discovery of what is wrought or performed by God's Power,
and after his Will, from what is the mere Workings of the Creature of himself.
If it could not manifest God, it could not tell Man what was God's Mind, nor
give him such a grounded Sense and Discerning of the Rise, Nature, and Tendency
of the Workings of his Mind or inward Man, as is both expressed and abundantly
implied in this Passage of our Savior. And if it reveals God, to be sure it
manifests Christ, that flows and comes from God. Who then would oppose or
slight this blessed Light?

2. But that this Light does manifest God, is yet Evident from Romans i. 19.
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in Men, for God has showed
it unto them. An universal Proposition; and we have the Apostle's Word for it,
who was One of a Thousand, and inspired on purpose to tell us the Truth: Let it
then have it is due Weight with us. If that which may be known of God is
manifest in Men, the People called Quakers cannot, certainly, be out of the Way
in preaching up the Light within, without which, nothing can be manifested to
the Mind of Man; as faith the same Apostle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. v. 13.
Whatsoever does make manifest is Light. Well then may they call this Light
within a Manifestation or Appearance of God, that shows in and to Man, all
that may be known of God. A Passage much like unto this, is that of the Prophet
Micah, Chap. vi. 8. God has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? God has showed thee, O Man! It is very emphatical. But
how has He showed him? Why by his Light in the Conscience, which the Wicked
rebel against, Job xxiv. 13. Who, for that Cause, know not the Ways, nor abide
in the Paths thereof: For its Way are Ways of pleasantness, and all its Paths
are Peace, to them that obey it.

3. But the Light gives the Light of Life, which is Eternal Life to them that
receive and obey it. Thus, says the blessed Savior of the World, John viii.
12. I am the Light of the World, he that follows me shall not abide in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. Now he is the Light of the World,
because he lights every Man that comes into the World, and they that obey
that Light obey him, and therefore have the Light of Life. That is, the Light
becomes eternal Life to the Soul: That as it is the Life of the Word, which is
the Light in Man, so it becomes the Life in Man, through his Obedience to it,
as his heavenly Light.

4. Farthermore, this Light was the very Ground of the apostolical Message, as
the beloved Disciple assures us. 1 John i. 5, 6, 7. This then is the Message,
which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, That God is Light, and in him
is no Darkness at all: If we say we have Fellowship with him, and walk in
Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth: But if we walk in the Light, as he is
in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all Sin. Which is so comprehensive of the virtue and
excellency of the Light, in Reference to Man, that there is little Need that
more should be said upon it; for as much as, First, It reveals God, and that
God himself is Light. Secondly, It discovers Darkness from Light, and that
there is no Fellowship between them. Thirdly, That Man ought to walk in the
Light. Fourthly, That it is the Way to obtain Forgiveness of Sin, and
Sanctification from it. Fifthly, That it is the Means to have Peace and
Fellowship with God and his People; his true Church, redeemed from the
Pollutions of the World:

5. Some, perhaps, may Object, as indeed it has been more than once objected
upon us, That this is another Light, not that Light wherewith every Man is
enlightened. But the same Apostle, in his Evangelical History, tells us, that
in the Word was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, and that that very
Light, that was the Life of the Word, was the true Light which lights every
Man that comes into the World, John i. 4. 9. Where is there so plain a Text to
be found against the Sufficiency, as well as Universality of the Light within;
or a plainer for any Article of Faith in the whole Book of God? Had the beloved
Disciple intended two Lights, in his Evangelical History, and his Epistles, to
be sure he would have noted to us his Distinction: But we read of none, and by
the Properties ascribed in each Writing, we have Reason to conclude he meant
the same.

6. But if any shall yet Object. That this is to be understood a spiritual
Light, and that ours is to be a Natural One, I shall desire them to do two
Things: First, To prove that a natural Light, as they phrase it, does manifest
God, other than as I have before explained and allowed: Since whatever is Part
of Man, in his Constitution, but especially in his Degeneracy from God, is so
far from yielding him the Knowledge of God, that it cannot rightly Reprove or
Discover that which offends him, without the Light we speak of: And it is
granted, that what we call Divine, and some, mistakenly, call natural Light,
can do both. Secondly, If this Light be natural, notwithstanding it does
manifest our Duty, and reprove our Disobedience to God, they would do well to
assign us some certain Medium, or Way, whereby we may truly discern and
distinguish between the Manifestations and Reproofs of the natural Light
within, from those of the Divine Light within, since they allow the
Manifestation of God, and Reproof of Evil, as well to the one, as to the other.
Let them give us but one Scripture that distinguishes between a natural and a
spiritual Light within. They may, with as much Reason, talk of a natural and
spiritual Darkness within. It is true, there is a natural proper Darkness, to
wit, the Night of the outward World; and there is a spiritual Darkness, viz.
The clouded and benighted Understandings of Men, through Disobedience to the
Light and Spirit of God: But let them affign us a Third, if they can. People
Use, indeed, to say, improperly, of blind Men, they are dark, we may call a
Natural or Idiot so, if we will: But where is there another Darkness of the
Understanding, in the Things of God? If they can, I say, find that, in and
about the Things of God, they do something.

Christ distinguished not between Darkness and Darkness, or Light and Light, in
an such Sense; nor did any of his Disciples: Yet both have frequently spoken of
Darkness and Light. What Difference, pray, does the Scripture put between
spiritual Darkness and Darkness, mentioned in these Places, Luke, i. 7. 9. Mat.
iv. 16. John i. 5. and iii. 19. and viii. 12. 31. 46. 1 These. v. 4. 1 John i.
6. Acts xxvi. 18. Romans xiii. 12. 2 Cor. vi. 14. 22. Ephesians. v. 8. Col. i. 13. Upon
the strictest Comparison of them I find none. It is all one spiritual Darkness.
Neither is there so much as one Scripture that affords us a Distinction between
Light within and Light within; or that there are really two Lights from God, in
Man, that regard Religion. Peruse Mat. iv. 16. Luke ii. 32. and xv. 8. John i.
4, 5, 7, 8, 9. and iii. 19* 20, 21. and viii. 12. Acts xxvi. 18. Romans xiii. 12.
2 Cor. iv. 6. and vi. 14. Ephesians. v. 8. 13. Col. i. 12. 1 Thessalonians. v. 5. 1 Timothy vi.
16. 1 Pet. ii. 9. 1 John i. 5. 7. and ii. 8. Rev. xxi. 23, 24. and xxii. 5. And
we believe the greatest Opposer, to our Assertion, will not be able to sever
Light from Light, or find out two Lights within, in the Passages here
mentioned, or any other, to direct Man in his Duty to God and his Neighbor:
And if he cannot, pray let him forbear his mean Thoughts and Words of the Light
of Christ within Man, as Man's Guide in Duty to God and Man. For as he must
yield to us, that the Light manifests Evil, and reproves for it, so does
Christ himself teach us of the Light, John iii. 20. For every one that does
Evil hates the Light, neither comes unto the Light, lest his Deeds should be
reproved. And the Apostle Paul plainly faith, Ephesians. v. 13. But all Things that
are reproved are made manifest by the Light; therefore there are not two
distinct Lights within, but one and the same manifesting, reproving, and
teaching Light within. And this the Apostle John, in his First Epistle, makes
plain, beyond all Exception, to all considerate People: First, In that he calls
God, Light, Chap. i. 5. Secondly, In that he puts no Medium, or Third Thing
between that Light, and Darkness, Verse 6. If we say we have Fellowship with
him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, etc. Intimating, that Men must walk either
in Light or Darkness, and not in a Third, or other State or Region. I am sure,
that which manifests and reproves Darkness, cannot be Darkness. This all Men
must confess.

7. And, as if the Apostle John would have anticipated their Objection, viz.
It Is true, your Light within reproves for Evil, but it is not therefore the
divine Light which leads into higher Things, and which comes by the Gospel; he
thus expresses himself, 1 John ii. 8, 9. The Darkness is past, and the true
Light now shines. He that ^aith he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is
in Darkness even until now; which is not another Light than that mentioned
before, Chap. i. For as Light is put there, in Opposition to Darkness, so Light
here, is put in Opposition to Darkness. And as the Darkness is the same, so
must the Light be the same. Wherefore we may plainly see, that it is not
another Light, than that which reproves a Man for hating his Brother, which
brings a Man into Fellowship with God, and to the Blood of cleansing, as the
next Verse speaks: Therefore that Light which reproves a Man for hating his
Brother, is of a divine and efficacious Nature. In short, that Light which is
opposite to, and reproves spiritual Darkness, in a Man and Woman, is a
spiritual Light; but such a Light is that which we confess, testify to, and
maintain: Therefore it is a spiritual Light. It is also worth our Notice, that
the Apostle uses the same Manner of Expression here, Chap. ii. 8. The true
Light shines, that he does in his Evangelical History, Chap. i. 9. That was
the true Light; intimating the same divine Word, or true Light now shines; and
that it is the same true Light in his Account, that reproves such as hate
their Brethren: Consequently, that Light that so reproves them, is the true
Light. And strange it is, that Christ and his Disciples, but especially his
beloved One, should so often make that very Light, which stoops to the lowest
Step of Immorality, and to the Reproof of the grossest Evil, to be no other
than the same divine Light, in a farther Degree of Manifestation, which brings
such as f^llow it to the Light of Life, to the Blood of cleansing, and to have
Fellowship with God, and one with another: Nay, not only so, but the Apostle
makes a Man's being a Child of God, to depend upon his answering of this Light
in a palpable and common Case, viz. Not hating of his Brother: And that yet any
should shut their Eyes so fast against beholding the Virtue of it, as to
conclude it a natural and insufficient Light, is both unscriptural and
unreasonable. Shall we slight it, because we come so easily by it, and it is so
familiar and domestic to us? Or make its being so common an Argument to
undervalue so inestimable a Mercy? What is more common than Light, and Air, and
Water? And should we therefore contemn them, or prize them? Prize them,
certainly, as what we cannot live, nor live comfortably without. The more
general the Mercy is, the greater, and therefore the greater Obligation upon
Man to live humbly and thankfully for it. And to those alone that do so, are
its divine Secrets revealed.

CHAP. V.
1. The Light the same with the Spirit. It is of God; proved by its Properties.
2. The Properties of the Spirit compared with those of the Light. 3. The Light
and Grace flow from the same Principle, proved by their agreeing Properties. 4.
An Objection answered. 5. Difference in Manifestation, or Operation, especially
in Gospel Times, but not in Principle, illustrated.

1. Obj. BUT some may say, We could willingly allow to the Spirit and Grace of
God, which seemed to be the peculiar Blessing of the New and Second Covenant,
and the Fruit of the coming of Christ, all that which you ascribe to the Light
within; but except it appeared to us that this Light were the same in Nature
with the Spirit and Grace of God, we cannot easily bring ourselves to believe
what you say in Favor of the Light within.

Answ. This Objection, at first Look, seems to carry Weight with it: But upon a
just and serious Review, it will appear to have more Words than Matter, Show
th^n Substance: Yet because it gives Occasion to solve Scruples, that may be
^^ung in the Way of the Simple, I shall attend it throughout. I say, then, if
it appear that the Properties, ascribed to the Light within* are the same with
those that are given to the Holy Spirit and Grace of God; and that those
several Terms or Epithets, are only to express the diverse Manifestations or
Operations of one and the same Principle, then it will not, it cannot, be
denied, but this Light within, is divine and efficacious, as we have asserted
it. Now, that it is of the same Nature with the Spirit and Grace of God, and
tends to the same End, which is to bring People to God, let the Properties of
the Light be compared with those of the Spirit and Grace of God. I say, they
are the same, in that, First, The Light proceeds from the One Word, and One
Life of that One Word, which was with God and was God, John i. 4. and i. 9.
Secondly, It is universal, it lights every Man. Thirdly, It gives the
Knowledge of God, and Fellowship with him. Romans i. 19. John iii. 21. 1 John i*
5, 6. Fourthly, It manifests and reproves Evil, John iii. 20. Ephesians. v. 13.
Fifthly, It is made the Rule and Guide of Christian Walking, Psalm xliii. 3.
John viii. 12. Ephesians. v. 13. 15. Sixthly, It is the Path for God's People to go
in, Psalm cxix. 105. Prove. iv. 18. Isaiah ii. 5. 1 John i. 7. Rev. 21. 24. And
the Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the Light (of the Lamb.)
Lastly, It is the Armor of the Children of God against Satan, Psalm xxvii. 1.
The Lord is my Light, whom shall I fear? Romans xiii. 12. Let us put on the
Armor of Light.

2. Now let all this be compared with the Properties of the Holy Spirit, and
their Agreement will be very manifest. First, It proceeds from God, because
it is the Spirit of God, Romans vi. 11. Secondly, It is universal. It strove with
the old World, Genesis vi. 3. Then to be sure with the new One: Every one has a
Measure of it given to profit withal, 1 Cor. xii. 7. Thirdly, It reveals God,
Job xxxii. 8. 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11. Fourthly, It reproves Sin, John xvi. 8.
Fifthly, It is a Rule and Guide for the Children of God to walk by, Romans viii.
14. Sixthly, It is also the Path they are to walk in, Romans viii. 1. Gal. v. 15.
Walk in the Spirit. Lastly, This is not all; It is likewise the spiritual
Weapon of a true Christian, Ephesians. vi. 17. Take the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God. After this, I hope none will deny that this Light and this
Spirit must be of one and the same Nature, that work one and the same Effect,
and tend evidently to one and the same holy End.

3. And what is said of the Light and Spirit, may also, very well be said of
the Light and Grace of God; in that, First, The Grace flows from Christ, the
Word, that took Flesh, as well as the Light; for as in him was Life, and that
Life the Light of Men, so he was full of Grace and Truth, and of his Fullness
have all we received, and Grace for Grace, John i. 4. 9. 14. 16. Secondly, It
is universal; both from this Text, and what the Apostle to Titus teaches; For
the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, Tit. ii.
11, 12. Thirdly, It manifests Evil, for if it teaches to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, it must needs detect them, and so says the Text. Fourthly, It
reveals Godliness, and consequently it must manifest God. Fifthly, It is an
Instructor and Guide; for, says the Apostle, It teaches to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World, and herein a Rule of Life, Tit. ii. 11, 12. Sixthly, It is, to all that
receive it, all that they can need or desire. 2 Cor. xii. 9. My Grace is
sufficient for thee. An High Testimony from Heaven, to the Power of this
teaching and saving Grace, under the strongest Temptations.

4. Obj. But there is little Mention made of the Spirit, and none of the Grace,
before Christ's Coming, and therefore the Spirit, as spoken of in the Writings
of the New Testament, and especially the Grace, must be another, and a nobler
Thing than the Light within.

Answ. By no Means another Thing, but another Name, from another Manifestation
or Operatio^^ (...) the same Principle. It is called Light from the Distinction
and Discerning it gives. L^^ ^^ere be Light, and there was Light, said God in
the Beginning of the old World; so there is first Light in the Beginning of the
new Creation of God in Man. It is called Spirit* because it gives Life, Sense,
Motion, and Vigor: And it is as often mentioned in the Writings of the Old as
New Testament; which every Reader may see, if he will but please to look into
his Scripture Concordance. Thus God's Spirit strove with the old World, Genesis
vi. 3. and with Israel in the Wilderness, N^h. ix. 30. And David asked, in the
Agony of his Soul, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Psalm. cxxxix. 7. and
the Prophets often felt it. It is s^iled Grace, not from its being another
Principle, but because it was a fuller Dispensation of the Virtue and Power of
the same divine Principle: And that being purely God's Favor and Mercy, and
not Man's Merit, is apply, and deservedly called the Grace, Favor, or
Good Will of God, to undeserving Man. The Wind does not always blow fresh, nor
Heaven send down its Rain freely, nor the Sun shine forth clearly; shall we
therefore say, it is not of the same Kind of Wind, Rain or Light, when it
blows, rains, or shines but a little, as when it blows, rains, or shines much?
It is certainly the same in Nature and Kind; and so is this blessed Principle,
under all its several Dispensations, Manifestations and Operations, for the
Benefit of Man's Soul, ever since the World began.

5. But this is most freely, humbly and thankfully acknowledged by us, That the
Dispensation of the Gospel, was the clearest, fullest, and noblest of all
other; both with Regard to the coming of Christ in the Flesh, and being our one
Holy O^^ering to God for Sin, through the eternal Spirit; and the breaking
forth of his Light, the E^^u^ion of his Spirit, and Appearance of his Grace in,
and to Man, in a more excellent Manner, after his Ascension. For though it was
not another Light, or Spirit, than that which he had given to Man in former
Ages, yet it was another and greater Measure; and that is the Privilege of the
Gospel above former Dispensations. What before shined but dimly, shines since
with great Glory. Then it appeared but darkly, 2 Cor. iii. 18.
but now with open Face. Types, Figures and shadows veiled its Appearances and
made them look low and faint; but in the Gospel Time, the Vail is rent, John i.
5. 17.
and the hidden Glory manifest. It was under the Law but as a Dew, or small
Rain, but under the Gospel, it may be said to be poured out upon Men: According
to that gracious and notable Promise of God, by the Prophet Joel, Joel ii. 28.
In the latter Days I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh. Thus we say
when it rains plentifully, look how it pours. So God augments his Light, Grace
and Spirit to these latter Days. They shall not have it sparingly, and by small
Drops, but fully and freely, and overflowing too. And thus Peter, that deep and
excellent Apostle, applies that Promise in Joel, on the Day of Pentecost, as
the Beginning of the Accomplishment of it. This is Grace, and Favor, and
Goodness indeed. And therefore well may this brighter Illumination, and greater
Effusion of the Spirit, be called Grace; for as the Coming of the Son excelled
that of the Servant, so did the Manifestation of the Light and Spirit of God,
since the Coming of Christ, excel that of the foregoing Dispensations; yet ever
sufficient to Salvation, to all those that walked in it. This is our Sense of
the Light, Spirit, and Grace of God: And by what is said, it is evident they
are One and the same Principle, and that he that has Light, need not want the
Spirit or Grace of God, if he will but receive it, in the Love of it: For the
very Principle, that is Light to show him, is also Spirit to quicken him, and
Grace to teach, help, and comfort him. It is sufficient in all Circumstances of
Life, to them that diligently mind and obey it.

CHAP. VI.
1. An Objection answered: All are not Good, though all are lighted. 2. Another
Objection answered, That Gospel Truths were known before Christ's Coming. 3.
Another: The Gentiles had the same Light, though not with those Advantages:
Proved from Scripture.

1. Obj. BUT some may yet say, If it be as you declare, how comes it, that all
who are enlightened, are not so good as they should be; Or, as you say, this
would make them?

Answ. Because People don't receive and obey it: All Men have Reason, but all
Men are not reasonable. Is it the Fault of the Grain, in the Granary, that it
yields no Increase, or of the Talent in the Napkin, that it is not improved? It
is plain a Talent was given; and as plain that it was improveable; both because
the like Talents were actually improved by others, and, That the just Judge
expected his Talent with Advantage; which else, to be sure, he would never have
done. Now when our Objectors will tell us, whose Fault it was the Talent was
not improved, we shall be ready to tell them, Why the unprofitable Servant was
not so good as he should have been. The blind must not blame the Sun, nor
Sinners tax the Grace of Insufficiency. It is Sin that darkens the Eye, and
hardens the Heart, and that hinders good Things from the Sons of Men. If we do
his Will, we shall know of his divine Doctrine, so Christ tells us. Men not
living to what they know, cannot blame God, that they know no more. The
unfruitfulness is in us, not in the Talent. 'Twere well indeed, that this were
laid to Heart. But, alas! Men are too apt to follow their sensual Appetites,
rather than their reasonable Mind, which renders them brutal instead of
rational. For the reasonable Part in Man, in his spiritual Part, and that
guided by the divine Logos, or Word, which, Tertullian interprets Reason in the
most excellent Sense, makes Man truly reasonable; and then it is that Man comes
to offer up himself to God a reasonable Sacrifice. Then a Man indeed; a
complete Man; such a Man as GOD made, when he made Man in his own Image, and
gave him Paradise for his Habitation.

2. Obj. But some yet object, If Mankind had always this Principle, how comes
it that GospelTruths were not so fully known before the Coming of Christ, to
those that were Obedient to it.

Answ. Because a Child is not a grown Man, nor the Beginning the End; and yet
he that is the Beginning, is also the End: The Principle is the same, though not
the Manifestation. As the World has many Steps and Periods of Time toward its
End, so has Man to his Perfection. They that are faithful to what they know of
the Dispensation of their own Day, shall hear the happy Welcome, of Well done,
good and faithful S^r^^nt. And yet many of God's People in those Days, had a
Prospect of the Glory of the latter Times, the Improvement of Religion, the
Happiness of the Church of God.

This we see in the Prophesy, Genesis xlix. 10.
of Jacob and Moses, concerning the Restoration of Israel by Christ. So David,
Deu. xviii. 15. 18.
in many of his excellent Psalms, expressing most sensible and extraordinary
Enjoyments, as well as Prophesies; particularly his 2, 15, 18, 22, 23, 25, 27,
32, 36, 37, 42, 43, 45, 51, 84, etc. The Prophets are full of it, and for that
Reason have their Name; particularly Isaiah, Chap. 2, 9, 11, 25, 28, 32, 35,
42, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 59, 60, 61, 63, 65, 66. Jeremiah also, Chap. 23,
30, 31, 33. Ezekiel, Chap. 20, 34, 36, 37. Daniel, Chap. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Hos^a Chap. 1, 3. Joel, Chap. 2, 3. Amos, Chap. 9. Micah, Chap. 4, 5.
Zachariah, Chap. 6, 8, 9. 11, 13, 14. Malachy, Chap. 3, 4. This was not another
Principle, though another Manifestation of the same Principle, nor was it
common, but particular and extraordinary in the Reason of it.

It was the same Spirit that came upon Moses, which came upon John the Baptist,
and it was also the same Spirit that came upon Gideon and Sampson, that fell
upon Peter and Paul; but it was not the same Dispensation of that Spirit. It
has been the Way of God, to visit and appear to Men, according to their States
and Conditions, and as they have been prepared to receive him, be it more
outwardly or inwardly, sensibly or spiritually. There is no Capacity too low,
or too high, for this divine Principle: For as it made and knows all, so it
reaches unto all People. It extends to the meanest, and the highest cannot
subsist without it. Which made David break forth in his Expostulations with
God, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
Presence? Psalm. cxxxix. 7, 8, 9, 10. Implying it was every where, though not
every where, not at every Time alike. If I go to Heaven, to Hell, or beyond the
Seas, even there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall hold me. That
is, there will this divine Word, this Light of Men, this Spirit of God, find
me* lead me, help me, and comfort me. For it is with me where ever I am, and
where ever I go, in one Respect or other; Prove. vi. 22. When thou go, it
shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; and when thou awakest,
it shall talk with thee: And I can no more get rid of it, if I would, than of
my self, or my own Nature; so present is it with me, and so close it sticks
unto me. Isa. xliii. 2. When thou passest through the Waters, I will be with
thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk
through the Fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the Flame kindle upon
thee. David knew it, and therefore had a great Value for it. In thy Light shall
we see Light, or we shall be enlightened by thy Light. Thou will light my
Candle; the Lord my God will lighten my Darkness. Again, The Lord is my Light,
whom shall I fear. It was his Armor against all Danger. It too^ Fear away from
him, and he was undaunted, because he was safe in the Way of it. Of the same
blessed Word he says elsewhere, It is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Lanthorn to my
Paths. In short, a Light to him in his Way to Blessedness.

3. Obj. But if the Jews had this Light, it does not follow that the Gentiles
had it also; but by your Doctrine all have it.

Answ. Yes, and it is the Glory of this Doctrine which we profess, that God's
Love is therein held forth to all. And besides the Texts cited in general, and
that are as full and positive as can be expressed, the Apostle is very
particular in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, Romans ii. 7 to 17.
That the Gentiles having not the Law, did by Nature the Things contained in
the Law, and were a Law unto themselves. That is, they had not an outward Law,
circumstanced as the Jews had; but they had the Work of the Law written in
their Hearts, and therefore might well be a Law to themselves, that had the Law
in themselves. And so had the Jews too, but then they had greater outward Helps
to quicken their Obedience to it; such as God afforded not unto any other
Nation: And therefore the Obedience of the Gentiles, or Uncircumcision, is said
to be by Nature, or naturally, because it was without those additional,
external, and extraordinary Ministries and Helps which the Jews had to provoke
them to Duty. Which is so far from le^^ening the obedient Gentiles, that it
exalts them in the Apostle's Judgment; because though they had less Advantages
than the Jews, yet the Work of the Law written in their Hearts, was made so
much the more evident by the good Life they lived in the World. He adds, their
Consciences bearing Witness (or as it may be rendered, witnessing with them)
and their Thoughts, mean while, accusing, or else excusing one another, in the
Day when God shall judge the Secrets of all Hearts by Jesus Christ, according
to my Gospel. Which presents us with four Things to our Point, and worth our
serious Reflection. First, That the Gentiles had the Law written in their
Hearts. Secondly, That their Conscience was an allowed Witness or Evidence
about Duty. Thirdly, That the Judgment made thereby shall be confirmed by the
Apostle's Gospel at the great Day, and therefore valid and irreversible.
Fourthly, That this could not be, if the Light of this Conscience were not a
divine and sufficient Light: For Conscience truly speaking, is no other than
the Sense a Man has, or Judgment he makes of his Duty to God, according to
the Understanding God gives him of his Will. And that no ^ll, but a true and
scriptural Use may be made of this Word Conscience, I limit it to Duty, and
that to a virtuous and holy Life, as the Apostle evidently does, about which we
cannot miss, or dispute; read Verses 7, 8, and 9. It was to that therefore the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ desired to be made manifest, for they dared
to stand the Judgment of Conscience, in Reference to the Doctrine they preached
and pressed upon Men. The beloved Disciple also makes it a Judge of Man's
present and future State, under the term Heart, 1 John iii. 21, 22.
For if our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and knows all
Things. Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward
God. Plain and strong Words: And what were they about, but whether we love God,
in Deed and in Truth: And how must that appear? Why, in Keeping his
Commandments, which is living up to what we know. And if any desire to satisfy
themselves farther of the Divinity of the Gentiles, let them read Plato,
Sene^a, Plutarch, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, and the Gentile
Wr^^ers. They will also find many of their Sayings, collected in the First Part
of a Book, called, The Christian Quaker, and compared with the Testimonies of
Scripture, not for their Authority, but agreeableness. In them they may discern
many excellent Truths, and taste great Love and Devotion to Virtue: A Fruit
that grows upon no Tree, but that of Life, in no Age or Nation. Some of the
most eminent Writers of the first Ages, such as Justin Martyr, Origin, Clemens
Alexandrinus, etc. bore them great Respect, and thought it no lessening to the
Reputation of Christianity, that it was defended in many Gentile Authors, as
well as that they used and urged them, to engage their Followers to the Faith,
as Paul did the Athenians with their own Poets.

CHAP. VII.
1. An Objection answered about the various Dispen^ations of God: The Principle
the same. 2. God's Work of a Piece, and Truth the same under diverse Shapes. 3.
The Reason of the Prevalency of Idolatry. 4. The Quaker's Testimony the best
Antidote against it, viz. Walking by a divine Principle in Man. 5. It was God's
End in all his Manifestations, that Man might be God's Image and Delight.

1. Obj. BUT it may be said, If it were one Principle, Why so many Modes and
Shapes of Religion, since the World began? For the Patriarchal, Mosaical, and
Christian, have their great Differences; to say nothing of what has befallen
the Christian, since the Publication of it to the World.

Answ. I know not how properly they may be called diverse Religions, that assert
the true God for the Object of Worship; the Lord Jesus Christ, for the only
Savior; and the Light, or Spirit of Christ, for the great Agent and Means of
Man's Conversion, and eternal Felicity, any more than Infancy, Youth, and
Manhood, make three Men, instead of three Growths or Periods of Time, of one
and the same Man. But passing that, the many Modes, or Ways of God's appearing
to Men, arise, as has been said, from the diverse States of Men, in all which,
it seems to have been his main Design to prevent Idolatry and Vice, by
directing their Minds to the true Object of Worship, and pressing Virtue and
Holiness. So that though mediately he spoke to the Patriarchs, mostly by Angels,
in the Fashion of Men, and by them to their Families, over and above the
Illumination in themselves; ^o to the Prophets, for the most Part, by the
Revelation of the Holy Ghost in them, and by them to the Jews; and since the
Gospel Dispensation, by his Son, both externally, by his coming in the Flesh,
and internally, by his spiritual Appearance in the Soul, as he is the great
Light of the World: Yet all its flowings mediately through others, have still
been from the same Principle, cooperating with the Manifestation of it
immediately in Man's own Particular.

2. This is of great Weight, for our Information and Encouragement, that God's
Work, in Reference to Man, is all of a Piece, and, in itself, lies in a narrow
Compass, and that his Eye has ever been upon the same Thing in all his
Dispensations, viz. to make Men truly good, by planting his holy Awe, and Fear
in their Hearts: Though he has condescended, for the Hardness and Darkness of
Men's Hearts, to approach, and spell out his holy Mind, to them, by low and
carnal Ways, as they may appear to our more enlightened Understandings:
Suffering Truth to put on diverse Sorts of Garments, the better to reach to the
low State of Men, to engage them from false Gods, and ill Lives; seeing them
sunk so much below their nobler Part, and what he made them, that, like brute
Beasts, they knew not their own Strength and Excellency.

3. And if we do but well consider the Reason of the prevalency of Idolatry,
upon the earlier and darker Times of the World, of which the Scripture is very
particular, Genesis 31. c. 35.
we shall find that it arises from this; Exodus 20.
that it is more sensual, and therefore calculated to please the Senses of Men;
Levit. 21.
being more outward or visible, Deuteronomy. 29, 30, 31, 32 chap.
or more in their own Power to perform, than one more spiritual in its Object.
Josh* 22, 23, 24 chapter
For as their Gods were the Workmanship of Men's Hands, they could not prefer
them, that being the Argument which did most of all gall their Worshippers, and
what of all Things, for that Reason, they were most willing to forget. But
their Incidency to Idolatry, and the Advantages it had upon the true Religion
with them, plainly came from this, That it was more outward and sensual: They
could see the Object of their Devotion, and had it in their Power to address it
when they would. It was more Fashionable too, as well as better accommodated to
their dark and too brutal State. And therefore it was that God, by many
A^^^ictions, and greater Deliverances, brought forth a People, to endear
himself to them, that they might remember the Hand that saved them, and worship
him, and him only; in order to root up Idolatry, and plant the Knowledge and
Fear of him, in their Minds, for an Example to other Nations. Whoever reads
D^ut^ron^mty, which is a Summary of the other Four Book^ of Moses, will find
the frequent and earnest Care and Concern of that good Man for Israel, about
this very Point; and how often that People ^^ipt and lapsed, notwithstanding
God's Love, Care and Patience over them, into the Idolatrous Customs of the
Nations about them. Diverse other Scriptures inform us also, especially those of
the Prophets, Isaiah 44 and 45. Psalm^ 37 and 115. and Jer. 10. where the Holy
Ghost confutes and rebukes the People, and mocks their Idols with a sort of
holy Disdain.

4. Now that which is farthest from Idolatry, and the best Antidote against it,
is the Principle we have laid down, and the more People's Minds are turned and
brought to it, and that they resolve their Faith, Worship, and Obedience into
the holy Illuminations and Power of it, the nearer they grow to the End of
their Creation, and consequently to their Creator. They are more spiritually
qualified, and become better fitted to worship God as he is: Who, as we are
told, by our Lord Jesus Christ, Is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit
and in Truth, and that they are such sort of Worshippers which God seeks to
worship him, in this Gospel-Day. The Hour comes, faith he, and now is. That
is, some now do so, but more shall. A plain Assertion in present, and a Promise
and Prophecy of the Increase of such Worshippers in future. Which shows a
Change intended from a ceremonial Worship, and State of the Church of God, to a
spiritual one. Thus the Text; But the Time comes, and now is, when true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. Which is as much
as to say, when the Worship of God shall be more inward than outward, and so
more suitable to the Nature of God, and the nobler Part of Man, his inside, or
his inward and better Man: For so those blessed Words import, in Spirit and in
Truth. In Spirit, that is, through the Power of the Spirit. In Truth, that is, in
Realities, not in Shadows, Ceremonies, or Formalities, but in Sincerity, with
and in Life, being divinely prepared and animated; which brings Man not only to
offer up right Worship, but also into Intimate Communion and Fellowship with
God, who is a Spirit.

5. And if it be duly weighed, it will appear, that God in all his
Manifestations of himself, has still come nearer and nearer to the Insides of
Men, that he might reach to their Understandings, and open their Hearts, and
give them a plainer and nearer Acquaintance with himself in Spirit: And then it
is that Man must seek and find the Knowledge of God for his eternal Happiness.
Indeed, all Things that are made show forth the Power and Wisdom of God, and
his Goodness too, to Mankind; and therefore many Men urge the Creation to
silence Atheistical Objections: But though all those Things show a God, yet Man
does it, above all the rest. He is the precious Stone of the Ring, and the most
glorious Jewel of the Globe; to whose reasonable Use, Service, and
Satisfaction, the whole seems to be made and dedicated. But God's Delight (by
whom Man was made, we are told by the Holy Ghost) is in the habitable Parts of
the Earth, with the Sons of Men, Prove. viii. 31. And with those that are
contrite in Spirit, Isa. lxvi. 1 And why is Man his Delight, but because Man
only, of all his Works, was of his Likeness. This is (...) intimate Relation of
Man to God: Somewhat nearer than ordinary; for of all other Beings, Man only
had the Honor of being his Image; and, by his Resemblance to God, as I may
say, came his Kindred with God and Knowledge of him. So that the nearest and
best Way for Man to know God, and be acquainted with him, is to seek him in
himself, in his Image; and, as he finds that, he comes to find and know God.
Now Man may be said to be God's Image in a double Respect. First, As he is of
an immortal Nature; and, next, as that Nature is endued with those Excellencies
in small, and proportionable to a Creature's Capacity, that are by Nature
infinitely and incomparably in his Creator. For Instance, Wisdom, Justice,
Mercy, Holiness, Patience, and the like. As Man becomes Holy, Just, Merciful,
Patient, etc. By the Copy he will know the Original, and by the Workmanship in
himself, he will be acquainted with the holy Workman. This, Reader, is the
Regeneration and New Creature we press, (Gal. vi. 15, 16.) and according to
this Rule, we say, Men ought to be Religious, and walk in this World. Man, as I
said just now, is a Composition of both Worlds; his Body is of this, his Soul
of the other World. The Body is as the Temple of the Soul, the Soul the Temple
of the Word, and the Word the Great Temple and Manifestation of God. By the
Body the Soul looks into and beholds this World, and by the Word it beholds
God, and the World that is without End. Much might be said of this Order of
Things, and their respective Excellencies, but I must be brief.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The Doctrines of Satisfaction and Justification owned and worded according
to Scripture. 2. What Constructions we cannot believe of them, and which is an
Abuse of them. 3. Christ owned a Sacrifice and a Mediator. 4. Justification
twofold, from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Power and Pollution of it. 5.
Exhortation to the Reader upon the whole.

1. Obj. THOUGH there be many good Things said, how Christ appears and works in
a Soul, to awaken, convince and convert it; yet you seem not particular enough
about the Death and Sufferings of Christ: And it is generally rumoured and
charged upon you by your Adversaries, that you have little Reverence to the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction to God for our Sins, and that you do not
Believe, That the active and passive Obedience of Christ, when he was in the
World, is the alone Ground of a Sinner's Justification before God.

Answ. The Doctrine of Satisfaction and Justification, truly understood, are
placed in so strict an Union, that the one is a necessary Consequence of the
other, and what we say of them, is what agrees with the Suftrage of Scripture,
and for the most Part in the Terms of it, always believing, that in Points
where there ^ arises any Difficulty, be it from the Obscurity of Expression,
mis-translation, or the Dust raised by the Heats of partial Writers, or nice
Critics, it is ever best to keep close to the Text, and maintain Charity in
the rest. I shall first speak negatively, what we do not own, which perhaps
has given Occasion to those who have been more hasty than wise, to judge us
defective, in our Belief of the Efficacy of the Death and Sufferings of Christ
to Justification: As,

2. First, We cannot believe that Christ is the Cause, but the Effect of God's
Love, according to the Testimony of the beloved Disciple, John, Chap. 3. God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son into the World, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

Secondly, We cannot say, God could not have taken another Way to have saved
Sinners, than by the Death and Sufferings of his Son, to satisfy his Justice,
or that Christ's Death and Sufferings were a strict and rigid Satisfaction for
that eternal Death and Misery due to Man for Sin and Transgression; for such a
Notion were to make God's Mercy little concerned in Man's Salvation; and indeed
we are at too great a Distance from his Infinite Wisdom and Power, to judge of
the Liberty or Necessity of his Actings.

Thirdly, We cannot say Jesus Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World,
(because he bore our Sins on his Cross, or because he was made Sin for us, who
knew no Sin) an Expression of great Levity and Unsoundness, yet often said by
great Preachers and Professors of Religion.

Fourthly, We cannot believe that Christ's Death and Sufferings so satisfies
God, or justifies Men, as that they are thereby accepted of God: They are
indeed thereby put into a State capable of being accepted of God, and through
the Obedience of Faith and Sanctification of the Spirit, are in a State of
Acceptance: For we can never think a Man justified before God, while
Self-condemned; or that any Man can be in Christ who is not a new Creature; or
that God looks upon Men otherwise than they are. We think it a State of
Presumption and not of Salvation, to call Jesus Lord, and not by the Work of
the Holy Ghost. Master, and he not yet Master of their Affections: Savior, and
they not saved by him from their Sins: Redeemer, and yet they not redeemed by
him from their Passion, Pride, Covetousness, Wantonness, Vanity, vain Ho^ours,
Friendships, and Glory of this World: Which were to deceive themselves; for God
will not be mocked, such as Men sow, such they must reap. And though Christ did
die for us, yet we must, by the Assistance of his Grace, work out our Salvation
with Fear and Trembling: As he died for Sin, so we must die to Sin, or we
cannot be said to be saved by the Death and Sufferings of Christ, or thoroughly
justified and accepted with God. Thus far negatively. Now, positively, what we
own as to Justification.

3. We do believe that Jesus Christ was our holy Sacrifice, Atonement, and
Propitiation; that he bore our Iniquities, and that by his Stripes we were
healed of the Wounds Adam gave us in his Fall; and that God is just in
forgiving true Penitents upon the Credit of that holy Offering Christ made of
himself to God for us; and that what he did and suffered, satisfied and pleased
God, and was for the Sake of fallen Man, that had displeased God: And that
through the Offering up of himself once for all, through the eternal Spirit, he
has for ever perfected those (in all Times) that were sanctified, who walked
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans viii. 1. Mark that.

4. In short, Justification consists of two Parts, or has a twofold
Consideration, viz. Justification from the Guilt of Sin, and Justification from
the Power and Pollution of Sin, and in this Sense Justification gives a Man a
full and clear Acceptance before God. For want of this latter Part it is, that
so many Souls, religiously inclined, are often under Doubts, Scruples, and
Despondencies, notwithstanding all that their Teachers tell them of the Extent
and Efficacy of the first Part of Justification. And it is too general an
Unhappiness among the Professors of Christianity, that they are apt to cloak
their own active and passive Disobedience with the active and passive Obedience
of Christ. The first Part of Justification, we do reverently and humbly
acknowledge, is only for the Sake of the Death and Sufferings of Christ:
Nothing can we do, though by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, being able to
cancel old Debts, or wipe out old Scores: It is the Power and Efficacy of that
propitiatory Offering, upon Faith and Repentance, that justifies us from the
Sins that are past; and it is the Power of Christ's Spirit in our Hearts, that
purifies and makes us acceptable before God. For 'till the Heart of Man is
purged from Sin, God will never accept of it. He reproves, rebukes and condemns
those that entertain Sin there, and therefore such cannot be said to be (...) a
justified State; Condemnation and Justification being Contraries: So that they
that hold themselves in a justified State by the active and passive Obedience
of Christ, while they are not actively and passively Obedient to the Spirit of
Christ Jesus, are under a strong and dangerous D^lusion; and for crying out
against this Sin-pleasing Imagination, not to say Doctrine, we are staged and
reproached as Deniers and Despisers of the Death and Sufferings of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But be it known to such, they add to Christ's Sufferings, and
crucify to themselves afresh the Son of God, and trample the Blood of the
Covenant under their Feet, that walk unholily under a Profession of
Justification; for God will not acquit the Guilty, nor justify the Disobedient
and Unfaithful. Such deceive themselves, and at the great and final Judgment
their Sentence will not be, Come ye Blessed, because it cannot be said to them,
Well done Good and Faithful, for they cannot be so esteemed that live and die
in a reproveable and condemnable State; but, God ye Cursed, etc.

5. Wherefore, O my Reader! Rest not thyself wholly satisfied with what Christ
has done for thee in his blessed Person without thee, but press to know his
Power and Kingdom within thee, that the strong Man, that has too long kept thy
House, may be bound, and his Goods spoiled, his Works destroyed, and Sin ended,
according to 1 John iii. 7. For which End, says that beloved Disciple, Christ
was manifested, that all Things may become new: New Heavens and new Earth, in
which Righteousness dwells. Thus thou will come to glorify God in thy Body and
in thy Spirit, which are his; and live to him and not to thyself. Thy Love,
Joy, Worship and Obedience; thy Life, Conversation, and Practice; thy Study,
Meditation, and Devotion, will be spiritual: For the Father and the Son will
make their Abo^e with thee, and Christ will manifest himself to thee; for the
Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him: And an holy Unction or
Anointing have all those, which leads them into all Truth, and they need not
the Teachings of Men. They are better taught, being instructed by the Divine
Oracle: No bare Hearsay, or Traditional Christians, but fresh and living
Witnesses: Those that have seen with their own Eyes, and heard with their own
Ears, and have handled with their own Hands, the Word of Life, in the diverse
Operations of it, to their Souls Salvation. In this they meet, in this they
preach, and in this they pray and praise: Behold the New Covenant fulfilled,
the Church and Worship of Christ, the great anointed of God, and the great
anointing of God, in his holy high Priesthood, and Offices in his Church!

CHAP. IX.
1. A Confession to Christ and his Work, both in Doing and Suffering. 2. That
ought not to make void our Belief and Testimony of his inward and spiritual
Appearance in the Soul. 3. What our Testimony is in the latter Respect: That it
is impossible to be Saved by Christ without us, while we reject his Work and
Power within us. 4. The Dispensation of Grace, in its Nature and Extent. 5. A
f^rther Acknowledgment to the Death and Sufferings of Christ. 6. The
Conclusion, showing our Adversari^s Unreasonableness.

1. AND lest any should say we are Equivocal in our Expressions, and Allegorize
away Christ's Appearance in the Flesh; meaning only thereby, our own Flesh; and
that as often as we mention him, we mean only a Mystery, or a Mystical Sense of
him, be it as to his Coming* Birth, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Mediation and Judgment; I would yet add, to preserve the
well-disposed from being staggered by such Suggestions, and to inform and
reclaim such as are under the Power and Prejudice of them, That, we do, we
bless God, religiously believe and confess, to the Glory of God the Father, and
the Honor of his dear and beloved Son, that, Jesus Christ, took our Nature
upon him, and was like unto us in all Things, Sin excepted: That he was born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor, was
Crucified, Dead, and Buried in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea; Rose again
the Third Day, and Ascended into Heaven, and sits on the Right Hand of God, in
the Power and Majesty of his Father; who will one Day judge the World by him,
even that Blessed Man, Christ Jesus, according to their Works.

2. But because we so believe, must we not believe what Christ said, He that is
with you shall be in you, John 14. I in them, and they in me, etc. Chap. 17.
When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, etc. Gal. The Mystery hid from
Ages, is Christ in the Gentiles the Hope of Glory, Col. 1. Unless Christ be in
you, ye are Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. Or must we be industriously represented
Deniers of Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and the holy Ends of it, in all the
Parts and Branches of his Doing and Suffering, only because we believe and
press the Necessity of believing, receiving and obeying his inward and
spiritual Appearance and Manifestation of himself, through his Light, Grace and
Spirit in the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women, to reprove, convict,
convert and change them? This we esteem hard and unrighteous Measure; nor would
our warm and sharp Adversaries be so dealt with by others: But to do as they
would be done to, is too often no Part of their Practice, whatever it be of
their Profession.

3. Yet we are very ready to declare to the whole World, that we cannot think
Men and Women can (...) by their Belief of the one* without the Sense and
Experience of the other; and that is what we oppose, and not his blessed
Manifestation in the Flesh. We say that he then overcame our common Enemy,
foiled him in the open Field, and in our Nature triumphed over him that had
overcome and triumphed over it in our Fore-father Adam and his Posterity: And
that as truly as Christ overcame him in our Nature, in his own Person, so, by
his divine Grace, being received and obeyed by us, he overcomes him in us: That
is, he detects the Enemy by his Light in the Conscience, and enables the
Creature to resist him, and all his Fiery Darts; and finally, so to Fight the
good Fight of Faith, as to overcome him, and lay hold on eternal Life.

4. And this is the Dispensation of Grace, which we declare has appeared to
all, more or less; teaching those that will receive it, to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World; looking for (which none else can justly do) the blessed Hope, and
glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, etc. Tit.
ii. 11, 12, 13. And as from the Teachings, Experience and Motion, of this Grace
we minister to others, so the very Drift of our Ministry is to turn People's
Minds to this Grace in themselves, that all of them may up and be doing, even
the good and acceptable Will of God, and work out their Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, and make their high and heavenly Calling and Election sure; which
none else can do, whatever be their Profession, Church and Character: For such
a^ Men sow they must reap; and his Servants we are whom we obey. Regeneration
we must know, or we cannot be Children of God, and Heirs of eternal Glory: And
to be born again, another Spirit and Principle must prevail, leaven, season,
and govern us, than either the Spirit of the World, or our own depraved
Spirits; and this can be no other Spirit than that which dwelt in Christ; for
unless that dwell in us, we can be none of his, Romans viii. 9. And this Spirit
begins in Conviction, and ends in Conversion and Perseverance; and the one
follows the other. Conversion being the Consequence of Convictions obeyed, and
Perseverance a natural Fruit of Conversion, and being born of God; for such Sin
not, because the Seed of God abides in them: John iii. 7, 8. But such, through
Faithfulness, conti^ue to the End, and obtain the Promise, even everlasting
Life.

5. But let my Reader take this along with him, that we do acknowledge that
Christ, through his holy doing and suffering, (for being a Son he learned
Obedience) has obtained Mercy of God his Father for Mankind, and that his
Obedience has an Influence to our Salvation, in all the Parts and Branches of
it, since thereby he became a Conqueror, and led Captivity captive, and
obtained Gifts for Men, with diverse great and precious Promises, that thereby
we might be Partakers of the divine Nature, having (first) escaped the
Corruption that is in the World, through Lust. I say, we do believe and
confess, that the active and passive Obedience of Christ Jesus affects our
Salvation throughout, as well from the Power and Pollution of Sin, as from the
Guilt, he being a Conqueror as well as a Sacrifice, and both through Suffering;
Yet they that reject his ^^vine Gift, so obtained, (and which he has given to
them, by which to see their Sin and the Sinfulness of it, and to repent and
turn away from it, and do so no more* and to wait upon God for daily Strength
to resist the fiery Darts of the Enemy, and to be comforted through the
Obedience of Faith in and to this divine Grace of the Son of God) such do not
please God, believe truly in God, nor are they in a State of true Christianity
and Salvation. Woman, said Christ, to the Samaritan at the Well, ^ads^ thou
known the Gift of God, and who it is that speaks to thee, etc. People know
not Christ, and God, whom to know is Life eternal, John 17. because they are
ignorant of the Gift of God, viz. a Measure of the Spirit of God that is given
to every one to profit with, 1 Cor. xii. 7. which reveals Christ and God to the
Soul, Chap. ii. Flesh and Blood cannot do it, Oxford and Cambridge cannot do
it, Tongues and Philosophy cannot do it: For they that by Wisdom knew not God,
had these Things for their Wisdom. They were strong, deep and a^curate in them;
but, alas! they were clouded, puffed up* and set farther off from the inward
and saving Knowledge of God, because they sought for it in them, and thought to
find God there. But the Key of David is another Thing, which shuts and no Man
opens, and opens and no Man shuts; and this Key have all they that receive the
Gift of God into their Hearts, and it opens to them the Knowledge of God and
themselves, and gives them a quite other Sight, Taste and Judgment of Things
than their Educational or Traditional Knowledge afforded them. This is the
Beginning of the New Creation of God, and thus it is we come to be new
Creatures.

And we are bold to declare, there is no other Wa^ like this, by which People
can come into Christ, or be true Christians, or receive the Advantage that
comes by the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore we say,
and upon good Authority, even that of our own Experience* as well as that of
the Scriptures of Truth, Christ will prove no Saving Sacrifice for them, that
refuse to obey him for their Example. They that reject the Gift, deny the Giver
instead of themselves for the Giver's Sake. O that People were wise, that they
would consider their latter End, and the Things that make for the Peace
thereof! Why should they perish in a vain Hope of Life, while Death reigns? Of
living with God, who live not to him, nor walk with him? Awake, thou that
sleep in thy Sin, or at best, in thy Self-righteousness! Awake, I say, and
Christ shall give thee Life! For he is the Lord from Heaven, the Quickening
Spirit, that quickens us, by his Spirit, if we do not resist it and quench it
by our Disobedience, but receive, love and obey it, in all the holy Leadings
and Teachings of it. Romans viii. 14, 15. To which Holy Spirit^^ commend my
Reader, that he may the better see where he is, and also come to the true
Belief and Advantage of the Doings and Sufferings of our dear and blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who saves from the Power and Pollution, as well as
Guilt of Sin, all those that hear his Knocks, and open the Door of their Hearts
to him, that he may come in and work a real and thorough Reformation in and for
them; and so the Benefit, Virtue and Efficacy o^ his Doings and Sufferings
without us, will come to be livingly and effectually applied and ^elt, and
Fellowship with Christ in his Death and Sufferings known, according to the
Doctrine of the Apostle; which, those that live in that which made him Suffer,
know not, though they profess to be saved by his Death and Sufferings. Much
more might be said as to this Matter, but I must be brief.

6. To conclude this Chapter, we wonder not that we should be mistaken,
mis-construed and misrepresented, in what we believe and do to Salvation,
since our Betters have been so treated in the Primitive Times. Nor indeed is it
only about Doctrines of Religion; for our Practice in Worship and Discipline
have had the same Success. But this is what I earnestly desire, that however
bold People are pleased to make with us, they would not deceive themselves in
the great Things of their own Salvation: That while they would seem to own all
to Christ, they are not found disowned of Christ in the last Day. Read the 7th
of Matthew: It is he that hears Christ, the great Word of God, and does what he
enjoins, what he commands, and by his blessed Example recommends, that is a
wise Builder, that has founded his House well, and built with good Materials,
and whose House will stand the last Shock and Judgment. For which Cause we are
often plain, close and earnest with People to consider, that Christ came not to
save them in, but from their Sins; and that they that think to discharge and
release themselves of his Yoke and Burden, his ^ross and Example, and secure
themselves, and Compliment Christ with his having done all for them (while he
has wrought little or nothing in them, nor they parted with any Thing for the
Love of him) will finally awake in a dreadful Surprise, at the Sound of the
last Trumpet, and at this sad and irrevocable Sentence, Depart from me ye
Workers of Iniquity, I know you not: Which terrible End may all timely avoid,
by hearkening to Wisdom's Voice, and turning at her Reproof, that she may lead
them in the Ways of Righteousness, and in the midst of the Paths of Judgment,
that their Souls may come to inherit Substance; even durable Riches and
Righteousness in the Kingdom of the Father, World without End.

CHAP. X.
1. Of the true Worship of God in what it stands. 2. Of the true Ministry, that
it is by Inspiration. 3. The Scripture plain in that Case. 4. Christ's
Ministers, true Witnesses, they speak what they know, not by Report. 5.
Christ's Ministers preach freely, it is one of their Marks.

1. AS the Lord wrought effectually, by his divine Grace, in the Hearts of this
People, so he thereby brought them to a divine Worship and Ministry; Christ's
Words they came to Experience, viz. That God was a Spirit, and that he would
therefore be worshipped in the Spirit, and in the Truth, and that such
Worshippers the Father would seek to worship him. For, bowing to the
Convictions of the Spirit in themselves, in their daily Course of Living, by
which they were taught to eschew that which was made manifest to them to be
Evil, and to do that which was Good, they, in their assembling together, sat
down, and waited for the Preparation of this Holy Spirit, both to let them see
their States and Conditions before the Lord, and to worship him acceptably; and
as they were sensible of Wants, or Shortness, or Infirmities, so in the Secret
of their own Hearts, Prayer would spring to God, through Jesus Christ, to help,
assist and supply: But they did not dare to awake their Beloved before his
Time; or approach the Throne of the King of Glory, till he held out his
Scepter; or take Thought what they should say, or after their own or other
Men's studied Words and Forms, for this were to offer strange Fire; to pray,
but not by the Spirit; to ask, but not in the Name, that is, in the Power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who prayed, as well as spoke, like one having Authority,
that is, Power, a divine Energy and Force to reach and pierce the Heavens,
which he gives to all that obey his Light, Grace and Spirit, in their solemn
Waitings upon him. So that it is this People's Principle, that Fire must come
from Heaven; Life and Power from God to enable the Soul to pour out itself
acceptably before him. And when a Coal from his Holy Altar touches our Lips,
then can we pray and praise him as we ought to do. And as this is our
Principle, and that according to Scripture, so it is, blessed be God, our
Experience and Practice: And therefore it is we are separated from the Worships
of Men, under their several Forms, because they do not found it in the
Operation, Motion and Assistance of the Spirit of Christ, but the Appointment,
Invention and Framing of Man, both as to Matter, Words and Time. We do not
dissent it* our own Wills, and we dare not comply against his that has called
us, and brought us to his own spiritual Worship; in Obedience to whom we are
what we are, in our Separation from the diverse Ways of Worship in the World.

2. And as our Worship stands in the Operation of the Spirit and Truth in our
inward Parts, as before expressed, so does our Ministry. For as the holy
Testimonies of the Servants of God of old, were from the Operation of his
blessed Spirit, so must those of his Servants be in every Age, and that which
has not the Spirit of Christ for its Spring and Source, is of Man, and not of
Christ. Christian Ministers are to minister what they receive: This is
Scripture; now that which we receive is not our own, less another Man's, but
the Lord's: So that we are not only not to steal from our Neighbors, but we
are not to study nor speak our own Words. If we are not to study what we are to
say before Magistrates for ourselves, less are we to study what we are to say
for and from God to the People. We are to minister, as the Oracles of God; if
so, then must we receive from Christ, God's great Oracle, what we are to
minister. And if we are to minister what we receive, then not what we study,
collect, and beat out of our own Brains, for that is not the Mind of Christ,
but our Imaginations, and this will not profit the People.

3. This was recommended to the Corinthians by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
that they should speak as they were moved, or as any Thing was revealed to
them, by the Spirit, for the Edification of the Church; for, says he, Ye may
all prophesy; that is, ye may all preach to Edification, as any Thing is
revealed to you* for the good of others, and as the Spirit gives Utterance.
And if the Spirit must give Christ's Ministers their Utterance, then those that
are his are careful not to utter any Thing in his Name to the People, without
his Spirit; and by good Consequence, they that go before the true Guide, and
utter Words without the Knowledge of the Mind of the Spirit, are none of
Christ's Ministers: Such, certainly, run, and God has not sent them, and they
cannot profit the People. And indeed, how should they, when it is impossible
that mere Man, with all his Parts, Arts and Acquirements, can turn People from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, which is the very End
and Work of the Gospel Ministry. It must be inspired Men, Men gifted by God,
taught and influenced by his heavenly Spirit, that can be qualified for so
great, so inward, and so spiritual a Work.

4. Ministers of Christ are his Witnesses, and the Credit of a Witness is, that
he has heard* seen or handled: And thus the beloved Disciple states the Truth
and Authority of their Mission and Ministry; 1 John i. 1. 3. That which we have
heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon and our
Hands have handled, that declare we unto you, that your Fellowship may be with
us, and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
I say, if Christ's Ministers are his Witnesses, they must know what they speak;
that is, they must have experienced, and passed through those States and
Conditions, they preach of, and practically know those Truths they declare of
to the People, or they come not in by the Door, but over the Wall, and are
Thieves and Robbers. He that has the Key of David comes in at the Door, Christ
Jesus, and has his Admission and Approbation from him, anointed by him, the
alone High Priest of the Gospel Dispensation. He it is that Breathes, and lays
his Hands upon his own Ministers; he anoints them, and recruits their Cruse,
and renews their Horn with Oil, that they may have it fresh and fresh, for
every Occasion and Service he calls them to, and engages them in.

5. Nor is this all, but as they receive freely, freely they give: They do not
teach for Hire, Divine for Money, nor preach for Gifts or Rewards. It was
Christ's holy Command to his Ministers to give freely, and it is our Practice.
And truly we cannot but admire that this should be made a Fault, and that
preaching for Hire should not be seen to be one; yea, a Mark of false Prophets,
when it has been so frequently and severely cried out upon, by the true
Prophets of God in former Times. I would not be Uncharitable, but the Guilty
are desired to call to Mind, who it was that offered Money to be made a
Minister, and what it was for; if not to get Money and make a Trade or
Livelihood by it; and what Answer he met with from the Apostle Peter, Acts
viii. 18, 19, 20. The Lord touch the Hearts of those that are giving Money to
be made Ministers, in order to live by their Preaching, that they may see what
Ground it is they build upon, and repent, and turn to the Lord, that they may
find Mercy, and become living Witnesses of his Power and Goodness in their own
Souls; so may they be enabled to tell others What God has done for them, which
is the Root and Ground of the true Ministry; and this Ministry it is that God
does bless. I could say much on this Subject, but let what has been said
suffice at this Time, only I cannot but observe, that where any Religion has a
strong Temptation of Gain to induce Men to be Ministers, there is great Danger
of their running faster to that Calling, than becomes a true Gospel-Minister.

1. Obj. But does not this Sort of Ministry, and Worship, tend to make People
careless, and to raise spiritual Pride in others, may it not give an Occasion
to great Mischief and Irreligion?

Answ. By no Means, for when People are of Age, they, of Right, expect their
Inheritances; and the End of all Words is to bring People to the great Word,
and then the Promise of God is accomplished, They shall be all taught of me,
from the least to the greatest, and in Righteousness (pray mark that) they
shall be established, and great shall be their Peace. To this of the
evangelical Prophet, the beloved Disciple agrees, and gives a full Answer to
the Objection: These Things have I written unto you, concerning them that
seduce you: But the Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you,
and ye need not that any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you,
of all Things, and is Truth, and is no Lie: And even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him. In which, Three Things are observable, 1 st. That he writ
his Epistle upon an extraordinary Occasion, viz. to prevent their Delusion.
2dly. That he asserts a nearer and superior Minister than himself, viz. the
Anointing or Grace they had received; and that not only in that particular
Exigency, but in all Cases that might attend them. 3 dly. That if they did but
take Heed to the Teachings of it, they would have no Need of Man's Directions,
or Fear of his Seducings. At least of no Ministry that comes not from the Power
of the Anointing: Though I rather take the Apostle in the highest Sense of the
Words: Thus also the Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians. But as touching
Brotherly Love, ye need not that I write unto you: For ye yourselves are taught
of God to love one another. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 9. But Helps are useful, and a great
Blessing, if from God, such was John the Baptist's; but remember he pointed all
to Christ, 1 John i. 26. Lo the Lamb of God! I baptize you with Water, but he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, Matt. iii. 11. And so the
true Ministry does. And while People are sensual, and under such an Eclipse, by
the Interposition of Sin and Satan, God is pleased to send forth his
enlightening Servants to awaken and turn them from the Darkness to the Light in
themselves, that, through Obedience to it, they may come to be Children of the
Light, John xii. 36. And have their Fellowship one with another in it, and an
Inheritance at last, with the Saints in Light for ever.

And as it is the Way God has taken to call and gather People* so a living and
holy Ministry is of great Advantage to watch over, and build up the Young, and
comfort and establish the feeble and simple Ones. But still I say, the more
inward, the less outward: The more People come to be taught immediately of God,
by the Light of his Word and Spirit in their Hearts, the less Need of outward
Means, read Isa. xvi. 19, 20. Which is held by all to be a Gospel Promise, and
the Sun and Moon there are generally understood to mean the external Means in
the Church. Compare them with John i. 13. Romans i. 19. 1 Cor. ii. 11. 15. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 9. 1 John ii. 20. 27. Rev. xxi. 22, 23, 24. All which Places prove
what we assert of the Sufficiency and glorious Privilege of inward and
spiritual Teachings. And most certainly, as Men grow in Grace, and know the
Anointing of the Word in themselves, the Dispensation will be less in Words
(though in Words) and more in Life; and preaching will in great Measure be
turned into praising, and the worship of God, more into walking with, than
^alking of God: For that is Worship indeed, that bows to his Will at all Times,
and in all Places: The truest, the highest Worship, Man is capable of in this
World. And it is that Conformity that gives Communion, and there is no
Fellowship with God, no Light of his Countenance to be enjoyed, no Peace and
Assurance to be had, farther than their Obedience to his Will, and a
Faithfulness to his Word, according to the Manifestation of the Light thereof
in the Heart.

I say, this is the truest and highest State of Worship; for Set Days and
Places, with all the Solemnity of them, were most in Request in the weakest
Dispensation. Altars, Arks and Temples, Sabbaths and Festivals, etc. are not to
be found in the Writings of the New Testament. There, every Day is alike, and
every Place is alike; but if there were a Dedication, let it be to the Lord.
Romans xiv. 5, 6, 7, 8, 17.
Thus the Apostle, but ^he plainly shows a State beyond it, for to live (with
him) was Christ, 1 Cor. viii. 6.
and to die was Gain; for the Life he lived, Col. ii. 16. 17.
was by the Faith of the Son of God, and therefore it was not he that lived,
but Christ that lived in him; that is, Phil. i. 21. Gal. ii. 20.
that ruled, conducted, and bore Sway in him, which is the true Christian Life,
the Supersensual Life; the Life of Conversion and Regeneration; to which all
the Dispensations of God, and Ministry of his Servants have ever tended, as the
Consummation of God's Work for Man's Happiness. Here every Man is a Temple, and
every Family a Church, and every Place, a Meeting Place, and every Visit a
Meeting. And yet a little while and it shall be so yet more and more; and a
People the Lord is now preparing to enter into this Sabbath or Degree of Rest.

Not that we would be thought to undervalue public and solemn Meetings: we have
them all over the Nation where the Lord has called us. Yea, though but two or
three of us be in a Corner of a Country, we meet, as the Apostle exhorted the
Saints of his Time, and reproved such as neglected to assemble themselves. But
yet show we unto thee, O Reader, a more excellent Way of Worship: For many may
come to those Meetings, and go away carnal, dead and dry; but the Worshippers
in Spirit and in Truth, whose Hearts bow, whose Minds adore the eternal God,
that is a Spirit, in and by his Spirit, such as conform to his Will, and walk
with him in a spiritual Life, they are the true, constant, living and
acceptable Worshippers; whether it be in Meetings or out of Meetings; and as
with such, all outward Assemblies are greatly comfortable, so also do we meet
for a public Testimony of Religion and Worship, and for the Edification and
Encouragement of those that are yet young in the Truth, and to call and gather
others to the Knowledge of it, who are yet going astray; and blessed be God, it
is not in Vain, since many are thereby added to the Church, that we hope and
believe shall be saved.

CHAP. XI.
1. Against Tithes. 2. Against all Swearing. 3. Against War among Christians.
4. Against the Salutations of the Times. 5. And for Plainness of Speech. 6.
Against Mixt-Marriages. 7. And for plainness in Apparel, etc. No Sports and
Pastimes after the Manner of this World. 8. Of observing Days. 9. Of Care of
Poor, Peace and Conversation.

1. AND as God has been pleased to call us from an human Ministry, so we cannot
for Conscience Sake support and maintain it, and upon that Score, and not out
of Humor or Covetousness, we refuse to pay Tithes, or suchlike pretended
Dues, concerning which, many Books have been writ in our Defense: We cannot
support what we cannot approve, but have a Testimony against; for thereby we
should be found Inconsistent with ourselves.

2. We dare not Swear, because Christ forbids it. Mat. v. 34. 37. and James,
his true Follower. It is needless as well as Evil* for the Reason of swearing
being Untruth, that Men's Yea was not Yea. Swearing was used to awe Men to
Truth Speaking, and to give others Satisfaction, that what was sworn, was true.
But the true Christians Yea being Yea, the End of an Oath is answered, and
therefore the Use of it is needless, superfluous and comes of Evil. The
Apostle James taught the same Doctrine, and the Primitive Christians practiced
it, as may be seen in the Book of Martyrs; as also the earliest and best of the
Reformers.

3. We also believe, that War ought to cease, among the Followers of the Lamb
Christ Jesus, who taught his Disciples to forgive and love their Enemies, and
not to War against them, and kill them; and that therefore the Weapons of his
true Followers are not carnal but spiritual; yea mighty, through God, to cut
down Sin and Wickedness, and dethrone him that is the Author thereof. And as
this is the most Christian, so the most rational Way; Love and Persuasion
having more Force than Weapons of War. Nor would the worst of Men easily be
brought to hurt those that they really think love them. It is that Love and
Patience must in the End have the Victory.

4. We dare not give worldly Honor, or use the frequent and modish Salutations
of the Times, seeing plainly, that Vanity, Pride, and Ostentation, belong to
them. Christ also forbad them in his Day, and made the Love of them a Mark of
Declension from the Simplicity of purer Times; and his Disciples, and their
Followers, were observed to have obeyed their Master's Pr^cept. It is not to
distinguish ourselves a Party, or out of Pride, ^ll-breeding or Humor, but in
Obedience to the Sight and Sense we have received from the Spirit of Christ, of
the evil Rise and Tendency thereof.

5. For the same Reason we have returned to the first Plainness of Speech, viz.
Thou and Thee, to a single Person, which though Men give no other to God, they
will hardly endure it from us. It has been a great Test upon Pride, and shown
the blind and weak Insides of many. This also is out of pure Conscience,
whatever People may think or say of us for it. We may be despised, and have
been so often, yea, very evilly entreated, but we are now better known, and
People better informed. In short, it is also both Scripture and Grammar, and we
have Propriety of Speech for it, as well as Peace in it.

6. We cannot allow of mixed Marriages, that is, to join with such as are not
of our Society; but oppose and disown them, if at any Time any of our
Profession so grossly err from the Rule of their Communion; yet restore them
upon sincere Repentance, but not disjoin them. The Book I writ of the Rise and
Progress of the People called Quakers, is more full and express herein.

7. Plainness in Apparel and Furniture, is another Testimony peculiar to us, in
the Degree we have bore it to the World: As also few Words, and being at a
Word. Likewise Temperance in Food, and Abstinence from the Recreations and
Pastimes of the World: All which we have been taught, by the Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be according to Godliness; and therefore we have long exhorted
all, that their Moderation may be known unto all Men, for that the Lord was at
Hand, to enter into Judgment with us for every Intemperance or Excess; and
herein we hope we have been no ill Examples, or Scandal unto any that have a
due Consideration of Things.

8. We cannot, in Conscience to God, observe Holy Days, (so called) the public
Fasts and Feasts, because of their human Institution and Ordination, and that,
they have not a divine Warr^^t, but are appointed in the Will of Man.

9. Lastly, We have been led by this good Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
which I have treated in this Discourse, according to Primitive Practice, to
have a due Care over one another, for the Preservation of the whole Society, in
a Conversation more suitable to their holy Profession.

First, In Respect to a strict Walking both toward those that are without, and
those that are within; that their Conversation in the World, and walking in and
toward the Church, may be blameless. That as they may be strict in the one, so
they may be faithful in the other.

Secondly, That Collections be made to supply the Wants of the Poor, and that
Care be taken of Widows and Orphans, and such as are helpless, as well in
Counsel as about Substance.

Thirdly, That all such as are intended to marry, if they have Parents, or are
under the Direction of Guardians or Trustees, are obliged, first, to declare to
them their Intention, and have their Consent before they propose it to one
another, and the Meeting they relate to, who are also careful to examine their
Clearness, and being satisfied with it, they are by them allowed to solemnize
their Marriage in a public Select Meeting, for that Purpose appointed, and not
otherwise: Whereby all Clandestine and Indirect Marriages are prevented among
us.

Fourthly, And to the End that this good Order may be observed, for the Comfort
and Edification of the Society, in the Ways of Truth and Soberness; Select
Meetings (of Care and Business) are fixed in all Parts, where we inhabit, which
are held Monthly, and which resolve into Quarterly Meetings, and those into one
Yearly Meeting, for our better Communication one with another, in those Things
that maintain Piety and Charity; that God* who by his Grace, has called us to
be a People, to his Praise, may have it from us, through his beloved Son, and
our ever-blessed and only Redeemer, Jesus Christ, for he is worthy, worthy, Now
and Ever. Amen.

Thus, Reader, thou have the Character of the People called Quakers, in their
Doctrine, Worship, Ministry, Practice and Discipline: Compare it with
Scripture, and Primitive Example, and we hope thou will find, that this short
Discourse has, in good Measure, answered the Title of it, viz.

Primitive Christianity revived, in the Principles and Practice of the People
called Quakers.

FINIS.
SELECT PIECES ON RELIGIOUS SUBJECTS, FIRST PUBLISHED ABOUT THE MIDDLE OF THE
LAST CENTURY.

BY ISAAC PENINGTON.

LONDON, PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. M DCC LXXXIII.

PREFACE.
THE author of the following pieces lived and wrote about the middle of the
last century, when the nation was involved in the calamities of a civil war,
and when all human security of property or life was exceedingly precarious: but
a nobler warfare occupied his mind, and that in the early part of his life; a
warfare against every thing that had a tendency to captivate the heart; to bind
it to the earth, and earthly pursuits; to estrange his soul from God, and
deprive it of an habitation amongst the sons of the Most High. He fought this
good fight, and was enabled to overcome through many and deep sufferings, and
inherits, we doubt not, the crown of immortal life.

During the course of a long and laborious life, it was his endeavor to awaken
others to a sense of their highest interests; and being himself thoroughly
persuaded, by experience, of the dangers that attend us in this state of
probation, of the need we have of help from above, and the certainty of its
being afforded to those who truly seek it; he ceased not to call unto others,
and to tell them what God had done for his soul, and would do for all who
looked in good earnest for a better country.

Though the present age, it is to be feared, is too generally estranged from
considerations of this nature; yet there is a desire raised in the hearts of
many, of different persuasions, after the things that make for their peace. To
such, we doubt not, the following treatises will be acceptable, as therein they
will meet with much instruction, caution, and encouragement.

As our author was indefatigable in promoting the great cause of truth and
righteousness, he wrote much, either as particular or general causes occurred.
After his decease his works were collected, and published, first, in one volume
folio, and lately in two volumes quarto. These, however, are all dispersed, and
a new edition has been desired, for general benefit, by many serious people. In
the mean time it was thought, that if a few tracts were selected and published
by themselves* they would afford an opportunity to many of judging of the
nature of this author's writings, previous to a new edition of his works which
is intended to be published.

AN EPISTLE TO ALL SERIOUS PROFESSORS OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION: WHEREIN
A BRIEF TOUCH of my Knowledge, Sense, Belief, and Experience concerning the
Godhead, the Offering up of the Lord JESUS CHRIST in his Body on the Tr^e, as a
Propitiatory Sacrifice to the FATHER, and the Imputation of his Righteousness
to those who believe in his Name and Power, is nakedly laid before them;
wherein I am not alone, but one with those who have so learned and experienced
the same in the Leadings and Light of his HOLY SPIRIT.

Written in Love to them, that they might have the better Understanding of us,
as to these Things, and might not think otherwise either of us, or of the Truth
of our GOD, which we bear witness to, than there is Cause, to their own Hurt
and Prejudice.

ISAAC PENINGTON.

AN EPISTLE TO ALL SERIOUS PROFESSORS, etc.
FRIENDS,
AFTER it pleased the Lord to touch my heart with the sense of his truth, and
to manifest unto me the principle of his life, in the demonstration and power
of his own Spirit, insomuch as I could reason, dispute, consider about it no
longer, but was fully satisfied concerning it; I say, after this, the love of
God sprang in me toward you, and pure desires and breathings unto him, that ye
also might have the way cast up before you, and might so walk therein, as to
come to partake of the same mercy and salvation. How I have mourned before the
Lord for you, and desired that the stumbling blocks might be removed from you,
and that ye might so seek as to obtain (not in that wisdom and disputing mind,
which still is shut out; but in that meekness, humility, and fear which gives
entrance) the Lord God knows. Yea, the desires in me after you are still
living; who knows but the Lord may at length hear* and with his key so open
your hearts, and so anoint your eyes with his eye salve, that ye may see,
acknowledge, believe in, and receive the beloved of your souls, even as he now
appears, after the long night of darkness, a comforter of the drooping spirits
of his people, with the pure light of life, wherein the redeemed house of Jacob
(who sat in darkness, and in the valley of the shadow of death, mourning after
him) now in Holy rejoicing, and pure joy of spirit, walk before him? Oh! the
Lord God visit you, and break in upon you, as he has done upon us, and cause
you to set to your seals also, as we could not but do, that this is He whom all
our days we waited for, and longed after. And now there are two or three things
in my heart to open to you, how it is with me in reference to them; for indeed
I have not been taught to deny any testimony the scriptures hold forth,
concerning the Lord Jesus, or any of his appearances, but am taught by the Lord
more certainly and fully to own and acknowledge them.

The first is concerning the Godhead, which we own as the scriptures express
it, and as we have the sensible, experimental knowledge of it. In which, There
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Spirit; and these three are one, 1 John v. 7. This I believe from my heart, and
have infallible demonstrations of; for I know three, and feel three in spirit,
even an eternal Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which are but one eternal God.
And I feel them also one, and have fellowship with them (through the tender
mercy of the Lord) in their life, and in their redeeming power. And here I lie
low before the Lord in the sensible life, not desiring to know and comprehend
notionally, but to feel the thing inwardly, truly, sensibly, and effectually;
yea, indeed, this is to me far beyond what I formerly knew notionally
concerning them, and I cannot but invite others hither.

Now consider seriously, if a man from his heart believe thus concerning the
eternal Power and Godhead; that the Father is God, the Word God, the Holy
Spirit God, and that these are one eternal God, waiting so to know God, and to
be subject to him accordingly; is not this man in a right frame of heart
toward the Lord in this respect? Indeed, friends, we do know God sensibly and
experimentally to be a Father, Word, and Spirit, and we worship the Father in
the Son by his own Spirit, and here meet with the seal of acceptance with him.
Nor would we contend with you about your crimes in this respect, but that ye
provoke us thereunto, in laying to our charge as if we denied the thing;
whereas we do not, nor can deny the expressions which the scripture uses, nor
our own sense and experience concerning the thing. I pray let this suffice, and
let us all strive to know God (and his Son Jesus Christ) in his life, spirit,
and power, wherein is unity and true demonstration; and not contend about such
expressions concerning things, as are beside the scriptures. For would not ye
yourselves think it hard (I mean such of you as read the scriptures seriously,
desiring to understand and observe what is written therein) to have a belief of
things imposed on you otherwise than is there written, and otherwise than ye
have the sense, knowledge, and experience of them from the Lord?

The second is concerning the offering of the Lord Jesus Christ, without the
gates of Jerusalem. I do exceedingly honor and esteem that offering, believing
it had relation to the sins of the whole world, and was a propitiatory
sacrifice to the Father therefore. And surely he that is redeemed out of the
world up to God by Christ, cannot deny that Christ was his ransom, and that he
was bought with a price, and therefore is to glorify God with his body and
spirit, which are God's, 1 Cor. vi. 20. And, faith the apostle Peter, Ye know
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from
your vain conversation, etc. but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. i. 18, 19. who so offered himself
up to God through the eternal spirit, Heb. ix. 14. This we do own singly and
nakedly, as in the sight of the Lord; though I must confess we do not lay the
whole stress upon that which is outward and visible (though we truly and fully
acknowledge it in its place), but upon that which is inward and invisible; upon
the inward life, the inward power, the spirit within; knowing and experiencing
daily, that that is it which does the work. The outward flesh is not the meat
indeed, nor the outward blood the drink indeed; but it is the spirit, the life,
the substance, which the birth that is born of the spirit feeds upon and lives
by. Oh! consider seriously, and wait on the Lord, rightly to understand that
scripture, John vi. 63. It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh pro^iteth
nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.
What does this scripture lay the stress upon? Is it not upon the quickening
spirit, and the words which the quickening spirit speaks to the soul, which
are living, and give life to those that hear them? "Hear, and your soul shall
live!" Hear his voice who gives life, and your souls shall live by him; but
can any one live without hearing the voice of him, who alone is able to quicken
and raise the soul from death, and out of the grave of sin?

The third thing is concerning the imputation of Christ's righteousness, to
such as believe in his name and power which we have felt, witnessed, and own to
be thus.

God visits men by the light and power of his Holy Spirit, in their dead and
dark estate, even while they are ungodly. Now, they that feel life, and in the
quickenings of life, by the faith which comes from life, turn to the light and
power which visits them, by this faith in the power, they are in measure
transplanted out of the unholy root, into the holy root, where they partake of
the nature and virtue of the true olive tree; and the mercy of the Lord in and
through his Son Jesus Christ, is spread over them, and their iniquities are
pardoned, and their transgressions done away for his name sake, and they are
reckoned by God, not as in the old root and unholy nature, but that whereon
they lay hold by faith, and are in union with, they are reckoned by in the eye
of the Lord; and they are accepted and beloved in him in whom they are found,
by him who transplanted them there, and ingra^ted them thereinto. So that
Christ is really theirs, and they his; and what he did for them in his body of
flesh is become theirs, and they have the benefit, and reap the sweet fruits of
it. And if they sin afterward, they have an advocate who pleads their cause
with the Father, and who breathes livingly upon them again, and quickens faith
in them, and gives them to turn from that which ran after them* and overtook
them and de^iled them. So that in this state of true faith in, and union with,
the Son, the fountain is felt set open for sin and for uncleanness, which daily
washes away the pollutions and stains of the m^nd, which it is liable to in
the traveling state.

But now to every faith this does not belong, but to the faith only which flows
from the power of the endless life, and which stands in the power. The faith
which is from the power is precious, having a precious nature and virtue in it,
and very precious effects flow from it. For it is the substance of things hoped
for; it is of a pure nature, which has dominion, and gives dominion over the
wicked one. There is no overcoming of the saints here; for as it came from the
power, so it stands near the power, and engages the power of life against the
enemy, and so is still too hard for him. For he that resists the enemy in the
true faith, still overcomes him, and makes him fly, James iv. 7. But that
belief on Christ, and applying his righteousness, which is not of this faith,
nor in the true light of life, but according to the creature's apprehensions
concerning things, that is not of the same nature with this, nor has the same
virtue, nor produces the same effects; but notwithstanding such a believing
and hoping, men are still in their sins, and they are not washed away from them
by the blood of Christ* nor remitted or covered by the spirit of the Lord. And
oh! that men were wary, and did take heed in this matter, that they might not
miss of true pardon from the Lord, and so find their sins bound by him, in the
days of his refreshing others!

For there is a state, wherein there is an imputation of Christ's righteousness
to persons reached to by the power of the Lord, and coming up out of the
ungodly state, and so a real bringing into the righteousness. For in the true
growth the soul daily grows more and more out of its own righteousness, out of
the dark, corrupt image, into the righteousness of Christ, and into his pure
image. Thus Christ is formed in the hearts of them that truly believe, daily
more and more; they receiving him as an heavenly leaven, and giving up to be
leavened by him are changed daily more and more into the newness of spirit,
even until they become a new lump, even a lump wholly leavened, so that old
things are passed away* and all things become new; that is, not of old Adam any
more, but all of God in Christ, all of the new nature and spirit, which is all
of it righteous in the sight of God. Now this it is all should labor for and
seek after, even the kingdom of God and his righteousness, to find an entrance
ministered to them into the everlasting kingdom, and the righteousness thereof,
that they might really put off the old man with his affections and lusts, and
put on the new man; the new man's nature, the new man's image, the new man's
spirit, the new man's righteousness, the new man's holiness; that they might
have the wedding garment on to be married to Christ in, and might be as a bride
prepared for the bridegroom. Oh! it is precious for any one to feel his soul in
this state! And who would not travail and wrestle, and strive and watch, and
pray and wait, that he might be thus fitted by the spirit of the Lord for his
Son Jesus Christ? For, friends, there is a coming under grace, under grace's
wing, and out of shame and confusion because of sin, into the glory which is in
the pure image; and there is a being changed from grace to grace, and from
glory to glory, by the spirit and power of the Lord. Oh! that such as take upon
them the profession of Christianity, might feel the power, and wait upon the
power, and know what it is to believe in the power, and live in the power; for
without this, the oppressed state of Christianity is but dead, and dry, and
cold, not having the true living sap and warmth in it. There are great deceits
in the world about these things, but he that knows the truth, as it is in
Jesus, who was visited by the power, gathered to the power, and abides in the
power, he has that with him which anoints his eye and heart, and strengthens
them against the most subtle devices and deceits of the transforming spirit.
But whoever he be that professes Christianity, and is not here, he is not
safe, but the enemy has ways of bewitching and deluding him, which he has not
wherewith effectually to withstand and avoid.

Now having nakedly expressed these things unto you, as they are in my heart,
there is a question lies before me to propound to you, which deserves your
serious consideration of, and ability to answer in the sight of the Lord, which
is this:

QUEST. Do ye rightly, truly, and fully (as the Lord requires of you) know,
esteem, and honor the Son? Do ye own him as God has revealed him in the
spirits of his children, since the apostasy? Do ye feel him as an horn of
salvation lifted up there? Do ye find and experience him revealed within by the
Father, as the seed of the woman, bruising the head of the serpent? Oh! this is
precious knowledge, and the right way of truly knowing him as he came from the
Father, lived in obedience to him, suffered for the sins of the whole world,
ascended again to the Father, and now sits with him in glory! For, indeed, it
is the chief thing, and that whereon the soul's rest depends, to know and feel
him near. Oh! that we were one here (I mean in the inward sense and
acknowledgment of the Lord Jesus Christ), and we should soon be one in the
other also!

For we, who are reproachfully by many called QUAKERS, are (for the most part)
a people who have much and long sought after the Lord, and after the
experimental knowledge of those truths, which are testified of and related in
the holy scriptures. We sought not after a new Christ, or a new spirit, or new
doctrines concerning Christ or his spirit; but to know Christ, so as to receive
life from him, and to live to him in the life and spirit received from him;
this has been the single aim and desire of our souls. And if men could with
patience consider what we hold forth, and wait till God open their
understandings, they would not lay such blame upon us, as they do in many
respects, but find that we reverence the scriptures, believing and holding
concerning the things of God according as is there expressed, from a true
understanding received from the Lord, and in the true light and guidance of his
spirit. There is another question springs in my heart unto you, I beseech you
consider of it seriously, perhaps there may be a blessing to you in it.

QUEST. Do ye rightly and weightily consider and embrace that counsel of
Christ, Matt. vi. 33. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness?" Do ye mind what Christ likens the kingdom to! Even a grain of
mustard seed, a pearl hid in a field, a little leaven, a lost piece of silver,
etc. Do ye know, and are ye acquainted with that little thing which is like
unto these? And do ye really and rightly seek after it? Do ye seek it where it
is to be found? Do ye know the place where it is hid? And do ye take the right
way to buy and purchase it? How is that? Why, not by outward observation, ^aith
Christ, but by inward sweeping the house; by keeping the eye upon it, and
sweeping out the rubbish that covers it, this is the way to find it, purchase
and possess it. Oh! that ye could all learn thus, and be thus excercised by the
spirit of the Lord daily. Surely they that thus seek shall find, and they that
thus ask shall have, and they that thus knock, to them the everlasting kingdom
shall be opened.

For mark the difference between the state of the law and gospel. The law was a
shadow of good things to come. The gospel is a state of enjoyment of the good
things shadowed out under the law. The law was a type of the kingdom, of the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, which is set up under the gospel. In John's day
the kingdom was at hand; but in the day of Christ's power the kingdom is come.
Under the law there was a tabernacle pitched by man; but under the gospel the
true tabernacle and temple is witnessed, which God pitcheth, and not man; and
the holy, spiritual, heavenly sacrifices, and the living covenant, whereof
Christ is the mediator, and the law written in the heart, and the spirit of the
Lord put within; so that his presence is as really witnessed inwardly, in that
which is truly his tabernacle and temple now, as ever it was witnessed
outwardly, in his outward tabernacle and temple under the law. Oh! that
Christians might not have the name only, but might be in the life and in the
power, wherein these things are felt and experienced; for indeed the wonders of
the Lord are seen in his temple, and his name is praised there, Selah. There he
breaks the shield and the bow, the spear and the battle, Selah. There the enemy
is overcome; the holy victory that brings him under, issues out thence,
Selah. There the well is opened, and the Philistine nature has power to stop
it no more, Selah. There the treasury of life and wisdom, and the riches of
God's goodness are made manifest for ever.

Truly, friends, I have not lost any thing that ever I had, or acknowledged of
God in the days of my former profession, by believing in the light which God
has now revealed in me, but have it still with me, and in greater clearness
and plainness, and fuller demonstration than I then had it; but that of the
flesh which mixed with it, and hindered it from being rightly serviceable to
the Lord, and fully comfortable to me, that the Lord has been removing by his
searching light, and by the demonstration of his spirit and power. And if, at
length, after all my deep and long misery, the Lord has given me to meet with
and enjoy that which is truly excellent (among those whom men despise) I could
heartily wish for you, that ye also might meet with and enjoy the same, without
passing through that misery and bitter anguish, and distress of spirit, through
which the Lord led me thereto. The Lord preserve his people, by the arm of his
mighty power, which he has stretched out for them, and whereby he has
gathered them to himself. And those which are not yet of this sold, oh! that it
would please him to seek them out, and bring them home also; that the Lord may
be one, and his name one amongst us, and that which divides and scatters
from the living truth, might be scattered and brought to naught every where, in
all who would be one, and desire to serve God, with one consent, in that which
is true and pure. Amen.

SOME DIRECTIONS TO THE PANTING SOUL,
Which has been long traveling in the Letter, but has not yet been
acquainted with the Power, nor hardly so much as entered into the Ministration
of endless Life (which is the Ministration of the GOSPEL), that it may feel the
Spring, and come to drink there of the living Waters.
MATT. xi. 28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light.


SOME sweet meditations sprang in my heart concerning this portion of
scripture; with breathings of spirit for, and rollings of bowels toward, those
"that labor, and are heavy laden," which I find drawings to communicate.

1. In the gospel (which is the power of God unto salvation) is the soul's
rest. It is the doctrine of the kingdom, wherein is life, joy, peace, and
everlasting rest to the soul in God. The law had the shadow of the good things
to come; but under it was not the possession of the good things themselves but
only a laboring after them, and a mourning and load because of the want of
them: but in the gospel is the substance, the enjoyment; life and immortality
are there brought to light, and an entrance ministered into the everlasting
kingdom, where they are selt, possessed, and enjoyed. "The kingdom of heaven is
at hand," says the Forerunner: it is come, ^aith the Messiah: and in it there
is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the pure spirit of life.

2. It is the will of the King of Saints, that his people should enjoy the rest
and peace of his gospel. He would not have them always laboring and heavy
^aden, as under the law; but he would have their souls feel and enjoy the ^ase,
the liberty, the sweetness, the pure power and eternal rest of his life. The
spirit of the Lord was upon him to preach glad tidings to the meek, liberty to
the captives, life to the dead, the opening of the prison to the prisoner of
hope, the binding up of the brokenhearted, the pouring in of oil upon the
wounded: and he would have the souls of his people enjoy that which he came to
bring them.

3. Christ has plainly pointed out the path of his rest to every weary panting
(...), which he that walks in cannot miss of. He has made the way plain in
the gospel, so plain, that the way-fairing man, though a fool, yet keeping to
the light of the Gospel, cannot ^rr therein, or miss of the blessed rest
thereof. How is it? Why "come unto me; take my yoke upon you, and learn of me."
He that walks in this path cannot miss of it: the rest is at the end of it,
nay, the rest is in it: "he that believes enters into the rest." The true
faith, the faith which stands in the power, and which is given to the birth
which is born from above, is the substance of the rest hoped for, and there is
a true taste and some enjoyment of it given to him that truly believes.

4. The rest was once felt and enjoyed, when the gospel was known in power.
Believers, in the first day of the gospel, before the night overtook that
glorious dispensation, found "peace and joy in believing;" yea, they could
rejoice in the Lord always. They felt the power and the life, which stood over
all the powers of darkness, and brought good to them out of every affliction,
an^ out of every temptation, and out of every distress: so that standing in the
life, and in the power which had quickened them, and was present with them,
they could "count it all joy when they fell into manifold temptations," knowing
the advantage which would accrue to them thereby, and possessing their souls in
the pure patience, till God wrought it out for them. They had an entrance
ministered to them into the everlasting kingdom* they received the kingdom which
could not be shaken, and in it had fellowship with the Father, and with the
Son, and in the eternal light the blood ran in their vessels, which cleansed
them, and kept them pure; and they sat down with Christ in the heavenly places*
even every one in the particular mansion which God had built in them by his
spirit. The fear of the living God (...) put in their hearts; the spirit of the
Lord was within them, and there his law was written, and read in the spirit,
and the treasures of his kingdom were opened by the key of David in the hand of
the spirit; and their souls had true satisfaction and rest in measure, and were
traveling on toward the fullness.

5. There is no rest to the soul to be enjoyed in the gospel from under the
yoke. This stands eternally: that which yokes down that which would be at ease
and liberty out of the life, that is the soul's true rest; there is no other:
and under the yoke it is enjoyed, and not otherwise; only when that which is to
be yoked down is consumed and destroyed, it is then no longer a yoke, but
perfect liberty. But the same thing which is the liberty is the yoke: and under
the yoke, the sweetness, the ease, the lightsomeness, the safe possession or
the life is enjoyed. Mark this therefore diligently: the yoke is not one thing,
and the liberty another; but one and the same. The power of God, the life
ever-lasting, the pure light, the divine nature, is a yoke to the transgressing
nature; but it is the ease, the pleasure, the rest, the peace, the joy, the
natural center of that which is born of God.

Now to the soul that has felt breathings toward the Lord formerly, and in
whom there are yet any true breathings left after his living presence, and
after the feeling of his eternal virtue in the heart, I have this to say: Where
art thou? Art thou in thy soul's rest? Do thou feel the virtue and power of
the gospel? Do thou feel the ease which comes from the living arm, to the
heart which is joined to it in the light of the gospel? Is thy laboring for
life in a good degree at an end? And do^t thou feel the life and power flowing
in upon thee from the free fountain? Is the load really taken off from thy
back? ^^st thou find the captive redeemed and set free from the power of sin,
and the captivity broken, and he which led thee captive from the life and from
the eternal power, now led captive by the life, and by the redeeming power,
which is eternal? Have thou found this, or have thou missed of it? Let thine
heart answer. Ah! do not imagine and talk away the rest and salvation of thy
^oul. The gospel-state is a state of substance, a state of enjoying the life, a
state of feeling the presence and power of the Lord in his pure Holy Spirit, a
state of binding up, a state of healing, a state of knowing the Lord, and
walking with him in the light of his own spirit. It begins in a sweet powerful
touch of life, and there is a growth in the life (in the power, in the divine
virtue, in the rest, peace, and satisfaction of the soul in God) to be
administered and waited for daily. Now art thou here, in the living power, in
the divine life, joined to the spring of life, drawing water of life out of the
well of life with joy? Or art thou dry, dead, barren, sapless, or at best but
unsatisfiedly mourning after what thou want?

Well, ye that are dry, dead, barren, as it were without the living God (that
know not the shining of his sun, nor the descending of his dews from on high on
his tender plants, nor the care, diligence, and circumspection of the
husbandman over his husbandry), oh! wait for the quickening virtue, for the
visitations of the dayspring from on high! that ye may be quickened again to
God, that ye may find his life visiting you, his spirit breathing upon you,
that the seed of Jacob may be raised in you to travel out of this barren state,
even out of this land of darkness, and from under the shadow of death, to the
land where life lives and flourishes, and daily distribu^^th plentiful
nourishment and refreshment to all its offspring, who are taught to wait for
it, and to seed on it in the holy place, out of the sight of the eye of the
fleshly wisdom.

And ye who are still gasping after the living God, on whom the breathings of
life still abide; who remain unsatisfied inwardly for want of the presence of
the Lord, and whose hearts still mourn and lament deeply after him, oh!
consider what is the matter, that ye have mourned so long, and sought so long,
and yet to this day are at a distance from the thing ye have mourned for and
sought after!

"Strait is the gate, narrow is the way, that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it." The way of unbelief is broad, yea, the way of belief is broad
also. It is easy for a man so to believe concerning Christ, or in Christ (as
his heart may call it) as to miss of the nature of the true faith, and of the
sweet and blessed effects which accompany it. It is easy likewise to miss the
yoke (to take up a wrong yoke, in the self-will, self-wisdom,
self-interpretation of scriptures), or easy starting aside from the true yoke;
but it is hard coming under the yoke of the life, and hard abiding under it.
Again, it is easy mis-learning: a man may so read, and so hear, as that he may
be always learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth; never come to
the truth as it is received and held in Jesus; but may so get and hold the
knowledge of the truth, as man in his wisdom may get and hold it from the
letter. And if a man thus miss the way, how can he attain the end? If a man
begin not in the true faith, in the living faith, how can he attain the rest
which the true faith alone leads to? If a man miss of the yoke, or abide not
constantly under the yoke, how can he meet with the true ease and rest which is
in it, and which it alone can administer? If a man learn not the truth aright
of the true teacher, how can he ever reap the effects of the true knowledge?
Ah! poor hearts! it is not enough to have breathings after God, nor to be very
diligent and industrious, either in outward ordinances, or inward exercises of
spirit; but the way of the gospel must be cast up by God, and the soul led into
it by him, and daily preserved by him, and must walk in the path which is
proper for it to walk in, or it may mourn and cry all its days, and never meet
with that enjoyment of God, and satisfaction in God, which it waits for, and
cries after. It is one thing to mourn after a gospel-state, but another thing
to be brought into it by the power. With my heart I own those that mourn after
and feel the want of God, wherever they are; but this I know certainly, that
they can never come to the enjoyment of him, but in that living path which the
scriptures testify of to be in him who is the life, and which his spirit is now
found manifestly leading into. Blessed be his name.

QUEST. But how may my poor soul, that has long mourned, and groaned, and been
sick of love after my beloved, but could never attain to the satisfactory
enjoyment of him, come to walk in his path, that so I may meet with, and lie
down in, the power of life and salvation which the gospel holds forth to the
true believer, and which I have been long sensible of the deep want of?

ANSW. Thou that would enjoy thy beloved, and feel the rest of his gospel,
and walk in that path which leads thereto, wait to learn of the spirit these
things following:

1. Know what it is that is to walk in the path of life, and indeed is alone
capable of walking therein. It is that which groans, and which mourns; that
which is begotten of God in thee. The path of life is for the seed of life. The
true knowledge of the way, with the walking in the way, is reserved for God's
child, for God's traveller. Therefore keep in the regeneration, keep in the
birth; be no more than God has made thee. Give over thine own willing; give
over thi^e own running; give over thine own desiring to know or to be any
thing, and sink down to the seed which God sows in the heart, and let that grow
in thee, and be in thee, and br^^the in thee, and act in thee, and thou shall
find, by sweet experience, that the Lord knows that, and loves and owns that,
and will lead it to the inheritance of life, which is its portion. And as thou
take up the cross to thyself, and suffer that to overspread and become a
yoke over th^e, thou shall become renewed, and enjoy life, and the everlasting
inheritance in that.

2. Know in what light it is to walk, which is in the light of the spirit.
There the child is begotten (not in Satan's darkness, or highest transformings
into the likeness of light, which is but darkness; nor in the light of man's
wisdom, searching knowledge or comprehension) and there it walks: in that light
it fetches every step and motion toward the land of life; therefore hold no
knowledge out of the spirit. If any knowledge concerning the things of God be
held out of the freshness of the spirit, it presently proves dead and
unprofitable. The spiritual Israel cannot travel without a spirit of light;
which light is eternal and incomprehensible, and cannot be held by man's
spirit, but shines fresh i^ the renewed spirit every day, and so is daily
gathering it more and more inward into itself, comprehending it in itself, and
preserving it in its own purity, clearness, and brightness. Oh! this is it has
undone many, even catching at light from the spirit, transplanting the image of
the divine things into the earthly principle, and there holding of them in the
earthly part, growing wise by them there, and making use of them from thence as
man sees good, and not seeing a necessity of depending on the spirit for fresh
light and life every day to every spiritual motion. Thus the traveller soon
comes to lose the true path, and instead thereof travels on in a road of his
own wisdom's forming: and so though he seems to himself to make a large
progress, yet makes no true progress at all, but is exceedingly run out aside
in a by-way; all which ground he must traverse back again, ere he can come to
the truth of his former state, or proceed in the true travel.

3. Know and keep to the power, which alone began any true work in the heart,
which alone also can preserve it, and which alone can carry it on. Christ was
made a priest, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power
of an endless life: and every sacrificer under him (which every true believer
is) is so made by the same power. The powers of darkness are continually at
hand, which nothing can stand its ground against (much less walk on safely)
without being in that power which is above them. The first coming to Christ
must be in the power of the Father's drawing: and no believing afterward is of
the true nature, nor will avail the soul in its progress and travels toward
life, but what abides in, and goes forth in, the same power. So the taking up
the yoke, and drawing in it, must be by the power of the new life; and so must
the disciple's learning be. As the master teaches in the power of the spirit
the things which alone can be seen with the new eye, heard with the new ear,
and received into the new heart; so the scholar must learn and receive his
lessons of life in the same power. Let any disciple of Christ be from under the
shadow of the power, believe out of the power, walk out of the power, act out
of the power, he is from that wherein his life stands, and wherein alone is his
preservation; and ah! how liable is he then to falls, bruises, snares, and
temptations of the enemy.

4. Watch against the selfish wisdom, in every step of thy growth, and in every
spiritual motion, that that come not between thee and thy life; that that
deceive thee not with a likeness, a shadow, making it appear more pleasing to
the eye than the substance. Every step of thy way it will be laying baits for
thee; and it is easy for deceit to enter thee at any time, and for that wisdom
to get up in thee under an appearance of spiritual wisdom, unless the Lord
tenderly and powerfully preserve thee: and if it prevail, it will lead thee
from the path of the true wisdom; it will cozen thee with a false faith,
instead of the true faith; with false praying, instead of the breathings of the
true child; with diligence and zeal in thy false way, instead of the true zeal
and diligence; yea, it will hurry thee on in the path of error, shutting that
eye in thee which should see, and hardening thine heart against thy
bosom-friend. And being thus deceived, thou may be as zealous in thy age and
generation against the truth, as the Jews were in theirs: and as certainly as
they put Christ to death, and persecuted his apostles, though they cried up the
former prophets, so certainly thou (under this deceit) can not but act
against the present dispensation and appearance of Christ's spirit, and would
persecute either the prophets, apostles, or Christ himself, were it their
present day now so to appear as formerly they did.

5. Let nothing judge in thee (concerning thine own heart, or concerning
others, or concerning any way or truth of God) but only the begotten of God in
the heart. Let the light in which thou art begotten to God, and which shines
upon his begotten, be the only judge in thee, and then thou can not err in
judgment. Be not hasty, be not forward in judgment; keep back to the life,
still waiting for the appearance and openings of the life. A few steps fetched
in the life and power of God are much safer and sweeter than an hasty progress
in the hasty forward spirit.

Indeed this is the true religion, to feel God beginning the work, and to wait
on him for his carrying it on. The feeling of God's spirit beginning somewhat
in the heart, the heart's waiting on him for more of his spirit, and walking on
with him in his spirit, as he pleases to quicken, lead, draw, and strengthen;
this is the spiritual and true religion: and there is no duty or ordinance of
the gospel out of the spirit; but it is easy crying up and observing the
likeness of any of them out of the spirit, into which observance a strange
spirit easily enters; and then that which was of God in the heart soon withers,
and a contrary building is raised, and the state of the heart changed. Oh! wait
on the Lord, that he may give you to understand these things; for the apostasy
from God is very deep, and more provoking among the Protestants than among the
Papists; yea, most of all provoking where it is most inward and spiritual.

Q^^ST. But how may I know and keep to the begotten of God, and to the light
and power of the Lord, and keep down the fleshly wisdom and comprehension
concerning the things of God?

ANSW. When God begets life in the heart, there is a savor of it in thy
vessel, and a secret living warmth and virtue, which the heart in some measure
feels, whereby it is known. Lie low in the fear of the Most High, that this
leaven may grow and increase in thee. This is the leaven of the kingdom; this
is it which must change thy heart and nature, and make thy vessel (which
perhaps has been long and much corrupted) fit to receive the treasure of the
kingdom. Now while the savor is upon thee, while the virtue of the life is
fresh in thee, thou find some strength toward God, with some little taste
and discerning of the things of his kingdom. Know thy weakness, and go not
beyond thy measure; but in what thou have received bow before the fullness,
worship God in that, and be patient in what he exercises thee withal, waiting
for more from him. And when the night comes upon thee, and thou perhaps art at
a loss, missing the favor and presence of the life, and not knowing how to
come by it again, be patient and still, and thou will find breathings after a
fresh visitation, and a meek humble, broken spirit before the Lord. Thou will
see thou can do nothing to recover his presence again; nay, thou can not so
much as wait for him, or breathe after him, without his help; but he is nigh to
the poor, nigh to the broken, nigh to the distressed, nigh to the helpless. Oh!
do not with thy fleshly cries and roarings think to awaken thy beloved before
his season; but in the night of distress, feel after somewhat which may quiet
and stay thy heart till the next springing of the day. The sun will arise,
which will scatter the clouds; and he is near thee who will give thee to hope
that thou shall yet see God, and find again the quickenings and leadings of his
spirit. And in the day of his power thou will find strength to walk with him;
yea, in the day of thy weakness his grace will be sufficient for thee; and he
will nurture thee up in his life by his pure spirit, causing thee to grow under
his shadow; and he will be teaching thee to live, and to speak, and to move and
act from the principle, and within the compass of his light and life eternal.
Only be not wise to catch the notions of things into the earthly part, where
the moth can corrupt, and where the thief can break through and steal; but know
the divine treasury, where all the things of life are treasured up by the
spirit, and handed forth to the living child with fresh life, according to its
need of them. And thus thy heart being kept close to God, and thy spiritual
senses continually exercised about the things of God, it will be easy to thee
to know the shepherd's voice, and to distinguish the sound of the spirit in
thine own heart: and that which tries spirits and motions in thine own heart,
will also give thee the discerning of truth and error abroad, even of the
spirit of God, and the spirit of Satan in others; so that thou will be able to
try not only words, but spirits, becoming acquainted with the anointing, which
savours all things, and will give thee to judge, not by the words, but by the
power: for thou thyself being in the power, in the anointing, in the savor, it
will become natural to thee to feel, to taste, to know, and unite with what is
one with thy life, what comes from the same spirit in others, and to turn from
the contrary. And thus thy life, thy growth, thy path will be sweet, safe,
clear, certain, demonstrative in the spirit, and past all reasonings of flesh
and blood, either in thyself or others. The beginning of life eternal is in an
higher principle than man can come at. Man's wisdom and knowledge of the things
of God is but brutish before it. As thou come into that principle, abidest
and growest in that principle, thou art beyond man's judgment, and art able to
judge man, and fathom his whole course as with a span; but are quite out of his
reach in the lowest of thy motions, thoughts, or actions; I mean such as flow
from, and are comprehended in, the life.

CONCERNING The WORSHIP of the LIVING GOD, Which he teaches ISRAEL, his
People, Who know him to be the Only True God, and the Worship which he teaches
them, to be the Only True Spiritual WORSHIP.
BECAUSE the worship of God is a weighty thing, and there have been (and still
are) so many errors about it, and the errors therein are of such dangerous
consequence, both in relation to men's eternal state hereafter, and to their
right constitution, peace, and welfare in this world; and because I have had
deep experience concerning the worship of God from a child, having traveled in
spirit with my God for the right knowledge thereof, and in singleness of heart
given up unto him, according as he has taught and led my poor, needy,
depending soul; I say, therefore is it on my heart, to answer some few
questions concerning the worship of God, for the service of such as both desire
and need instruction therein.

QUEST. 1. Who is the worshipper, the acceptable worshipper in the sight of
God? Or whom has God chosen out, to hold forth his worship in the sight of the
world, since he rejected the Jews with their worship?

That God has appointed a chosen people to worship him, that I presuppose;
though, if need were, the proof thereof might be ready at hand. It is not every
man that would thrust himself upon the Lord, whom the Lord will accept; but the
Father seeks such to worship him, John iv. 23. There is a capacity to be
found in man, to make him a worshipper; even such a capacity, as may enable him
to perform that worship which God requires of him. Now this is the thing to be
enquired into; What this capacity is, and who are the persons that are found in
this capacity?

ANSW. The worshipper in the times of the gospel, the worshipper under the New
Testament is he that is born of God. He that is drawn out of the dark spirit of
this world, and formed anew in the light of God's spirit. He that is a Jew
inward, he that has the uncircumcision of his heart cut off by the power of
God; this is the worshipper, whom "the Father seeks to worship him." This is
the sort of worshippers God chose, when he cast off the Jews. God did not choose
any one nation, or many nations, instead of that one which he cast off; but he
sent his apostles and ministers among all nations, to gather a spiritual seed,
instead of the natural. And these alone are capable of setting up, and holding
forth, his spiritual worship unto the world, and to provoke them to wait for,
and press toward the capacity of coming into the same spiritual worship with
them.

QUEST. 2. Which is the place of worship?

ANSW. The only place of worship in the New Testament, is where the spiritual
worshippers meet together. The place is spiritual. As the worship is spiritual,
so is the place where it is to be offered. It has a spiritual consideration;
not outward, as under the law. It is to be offered in the spirit; that is the
place. Where does my soul offer its private worship to God? Has it relation to
any ^utward place? Or is it in the building which God (...) reared up in my
heart by his spirit? Which building stands in, and is comprehended in, his
spirit. And I can offer his public worship in no other place, but in a
building of the same nature, in an house built of more of the same stones. This
then is the way of worshipping in the true light; diverse living stones meeting
together, every one retiring in spirit into the living name, into the power
which begat them, they all meet in one and the same place, in one and the same
power, in one and the same fountain of life; and here they bow down to the
Father of life, offering up living sacrifices to him, and receiving the bread
and water of life from him, and feeding in the rich pastures of his infinite
fullness. In the holy city, in the living temple which is built by God, of the
stone which all other builders refuse, is the place of worship of the living
God, where the true Jews meet to offer up their spirits, souls, and bodies, a
living sacrifice to the Father of life; and where they meet with such a
glorious presence and power of the Father, as none but the true Jews were ever
acquainted with.

QUEST. 3. What is the worship, or what are the sacrifices, which the true
worshippers offer up to God in this holy place?

ANSW. The gifts of his spirit. These they offer up, and nothing else. The
breathings which the Father gives into the heart of the child, they are
breathed back unto him in the same spirit of life* in the living sense, in the
quickening power. Nothing of man's wisdom, nothing of man's invention, nothing
according to man's will, nothing that would please the flesh, or seem glorious
in its eye, is offered up here* but the ^xhor^ations, or directions, or
reproofs that spring up in God's light, in God's wisdom, they are given (...)
in the le^dings, and by the guidance of his spirit, and they reach to the
hearts of those, to whom he pleases to direct them. And this is the ground of
such meltings, and breakings, and convictions of soul (and suchlike inward
operations) as are frequently found in such assemblies. For the living God is
there, and the dread of his power overspreads the hearts of such, as are
gathered into and assembled in his name; and the life springs in the earthen
vessels, and the savor is precious to all that have their spiritual senses.

QUEST. 4. What is the season of offering up these gifts?

ANSW. The seasons of the true worship stand in the will of God. They are
gifts, and the time of them stands in the will of the giver. Prayer is a gift.
A man cannot pray when he will; but he is to watch and to wait, when the Father
will kindle in him living breathings toward himself. So the word of God
(whether of exhortation or instruction) is a gift, which is to be waited for,
and then to be given forth in the life and strength of that spirit which
causes it to spring. Indeed it is an hard matter either to speak the word of
the Lord, or to hear the word of the Lord. A man may easily speak what he
invents, and another may easily hear and judge of such words; but to speak the
word of life, requires the tongue of the learned in the language of God's
spirit; and to hear the word of life, requires a quickened ear: and to know the
times and seasons of the spirit, requires both being begotten of the spirit,
and being acquainted with it.

QUEST. 5. Was this the worship of the former Christians in the apostles days?

ANSW. Search the scriptures. Were not they come to the New Jerusalem? And
where did they offer their sacrifices? Did they offer them in the Old
Jerusalem, or at Samaria* or the mountain where the fathers worshipped? Or did
they not rather offer them at the Mount Sion, to which they were come; where
the male of the flock (even the Lamb without spot) is known, and the blood of
sprinkling felt? Heb. xii. 22, 23, 24. and 1 Pet. ii. 5. Oh! read! read in the
life of God! the nature of the things themselves; and do not feed upon your own
imaginations, or the imaginations of any other men concerning them. Sweet is
our God; his living presence is exceedingly nourishing to the soul; precious is
his power felt in the heart; it is no less than life eternal to worship him in
his spirit. Oh! let not the enemy of the soul cheat your souls any longer of
the precious things of his kingdom, with husky and dry food instead thereof,
which only gratifieth the earthly part, but nourishes not the immortal life.

QUEST. 6. How came the worship of God to be transformed and changed so from
the living power into such dead formal ways, as generally worshippers in the
world are found in?

ANSW. The enemy has done this, by God's permission. The Lord was pleased to
suffer him thus far to prevail against the truth; even to get into the form of
it, and there to beget men into the form, and then deny and turn against the
power. And this is the way of antichrist in kingdoms and nations, even to set
up a formal way of worship, and by it to fight against the true power.

QUEST. 7. How long has this been done, and how long is it yet to last?

ANSW. From antichrist's beginning, all the time of his reign, until his
overthrow. The formal way of religion will never be overturned, nor the power
of religion find place in the earth, but there will be still countenancing of
formal ways of worship, and turning head against the power and life of the
spirit, until antichrist's time come to an end, and the Lord consume him by the
spirit of his mouth, and destroy him by the brightness of his coming.

QUEST. 8. When shall this be?

ANSW. The Lord is about this work. He has already raised up that, which has
not been raised up for many generations; and the Lord has forely smote down
the spirit of antichrist in many hearts already; and he is fetching a great and
universal blow at him; at which stroke. when it comes from the throne of God,
the nations shall tremble before him; and it will be as honorable to wait for
the movings of his spirit, and to worship him alone therein, as it is now
reproachful.

THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL OF Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, AND THE BLESSED EFFECTS
thereof, testified to from Experience.

By ISAAC PENINGTON.

The darkness is past, and the true light now shines.

1 JOHN ii. 8. Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee: for behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross
darkness the people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee.

ISAI. lx. 1, 2. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his
glory. PSALM. cii. 16. (indeed he does so). THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL OF Our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, AND THE BLESSED EFFECTS thereof, testified to from Experience.
THE blessed message which the apostles (who were sent by Christ to preach the
gospel) heard of Christ, and were to declare to others, was, That God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John i. 5.

The end of Christ's sending them with this message was, that thereby,
preaching it in the evidence and demonstration of God's Spirit, they might open
men's eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them which are sanctified by faith that is in him, Acts xxvi. 18.

Now the eye of the mind being opened, and the mind turned from the darkness
within to the light within, and from Satan's power to the power of God, which
is revealed in the light, the soul in the light comes to see (over the
darkness, and Satan who darkened it) the things of God and his kingdom, as they
are revealed in the light, which makes them manifest.

As, First, It sees him, who is the rock, the holy foundation of God, the holy
foundation of life in the soul; the living stone, by which all the other living
stones are made alive, and they are taught of God to come to him as to a living
stone, and so are built upon him, and become God's building and new creation in
him, 1 Pet. ii. 5. 2 Cor. v. 17. And here, in this light, none can miss of the
true coming, hearing the voice of the Father, and being drawn and taught by him
to come to the Son, John vi. 44, 45.

Secondly, Here the true Jew's state, the state of the inward Jew, and the
inward circumcision, and the true worship (even the worship of the Father in
spirit and in truth) is known. For the Jew inward is a child of light, begotten
in the light, redeemed out of darkness, and dwells and walks in the light, as
God is in the light, 1 John i. 7. And the circumcision is not a fleshly act;
but the cutting off that which is fleshly from the mind by the spirit and power
of Christ. And the gospel worship, or the worship of the Jew inward, is the
worshipping of God in the newness of the life of his Son.

Thirdly, Here is the true repentance from the dead nature and dead works,
which no man can attain to of himself; but is God's gift through his Son, whom
God has appointed to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and
forgiveness of of sins, Acts v. 31. I say here, that repentance is known,
waited for, and received. For not to men in the darkness, and loving the
darkness, is the true (...) given; but to them that are turned to the light, to
them is repentance given unto life, Acts xi. 18. compared with chap. xxvi. 17,
18.

Fourthly, Here the true faith, the precious gift of faith is received, whereby
men believe in him who gives life, and receive life from him. And this is the
faith which gives access to God, and gives victory over the world, and that
which is contrary to God: the faith which is given in the light does so; but
the faith which men have in the darkness does not so.

Fifthly, Here the cross of Christ is known, which is an inward, living,
spiritual thing, effectually crucifying that man that takes it up, and daily
bears it, to all that is earthly and sinful; and then the pure seed and life of
Christ springs up in his earth, over the world, and every worldly thing, Gal.
vi. 14.

Sixthly, Here the pure love springs in the heart, both to him that begets, and
to him that is begotten. In the light there is nothing but love; but in the
darkness there is no true love to be found; but the very love that is found
there, is of the nature of enmity. It is the light of truth that purifieth the
heart to the love unfeigned, 1 Pet. i. 22. Deuteronomy. xxx. 6.

Seventhly, Here the Lamb's patience and meekness is experienced, and the soul
adorned with it. The Lamb is the light of the world, and they that are made
lambs by him partake of his sweet and meek nature, learning of him to be meek
and lowly in heart, and so have that patience and meekness from him, which no
other can attain to, Matt. xi. 29.

Eighthly, In the light the precious promises are fulfilled and partaken of;
which make them who partake of them, and in whom they are fulfilled, partakers
of the divine nature; for the divine nature is not partaken of in the darkness,
but in him who is light. Man (who is darkness) cannot partake of the promises
which belong to the children of light; but when, by the operation of God's
power, his state and nature is changed, and he is now no more darkness, but
light in the Lord, then the promises which were made to the children of light
he comes to have a share in, Ephesians. v. 8. 2 Pet. i. 4.

Lastly* In the light the holy anointing is received, the voice of Christ
heard, and the new everlasting covenant, even the sure mercies of David, made
with the soul, Isa. lv. iii. The law of the new covenant (even the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus) written in the mind, and the holy fear of the
new covenant, which cleanses and keeps clean, put in the heart, and the
blessed spirit of the Father given and received, which gives to those that
receive it power to become the sons of God, causing them to walk in his ways,
and to keep his statutes and judgments, and to do them. Oh! blessed
dispensation of life and holy power, which the Lord has caused to break forth
among a despised people in these latter days! Oh! that the sons of men would
hear and understand this precious loving kindness of the Lord, and put their
trust under the shadow of his wings, and know what it is to be satisfied with
the fatness of his spiritual gospel-house, and to drink of the river of his
pleasures, and in his light to see light, Psalm. xxxvi. 7, 8, 9.

This opened in me this morning, in love and compassion toward the Papists. My
bowels have often rolled over them, and been pained concerning them, to see how
they are closed and shut up as to the true sense and understanding of things of
this nature. Oh! that they would prize the day of their visitation, that they
might hear the sound of life both from others, and also in their own hearts,
and the saving arm of the Lord might be inwardly revealed to them, and they
effectually redeemed thereby!

I am no disdainer of Papists, or any sort of Protestants, may, not of Turks or
Jews; but a mourner because of their several mistakes, and a breather to the
God of my life for tender mercy toward them all.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND in this light the true church, the gospel church, the New Testament church
is known; which is a church of the children of light, a building built in the
light, which church is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. i. 1. In whom they are built together for the habitation of God, through
the spirit, Ephesians. ii. 22. Yea, in whom all the building, fitly framed
together, grows into an holy temple in the Lord. ver. 21. (for the Lord
frames them fitly together into a spiritual and holy building). And all that
are here gathered out of the darkness into the light, who walk in the light,
and abide in the light, are built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, ver. 20. And are
no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God, ver. 19.

The gospel church is the spiritual house of Jacob, which walk in the light of
the Lord, Isa. ii. 5. who go up to the mountain of the Lord (to that which is
revealed to be the mountain of God in the last days, even spiritual Mount Sion,
Heb. xii. 22.), to the house of the God of Jacob, where he teaches his
spiritual people, the inward Jews, of his ways, and they learn to walk in his
paths: for out of this Sion shall go forth the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus (in the days of the gospel) and the word of the Lord from this
Jerusalem, ver. 2, 3. For Jerusalem, which is above, is free, which is the
mother of all the children which are born of God's spirit, Gal. iv. 26. John
iii. 6. And she being the mother of them all, nourishes them all with the word
of life, which goes forth from her; and all her children know and justify her
their mother, Matt. xi. 19. Oh! that all, both Papists and Protestants, knew
this true mother church, this mother of all the living, of whom none but the
living are born, and who nourishes all the living, and none else, with the law
and word of eternal life!

And if they knew the true church, the church which is of the true Jews, the
church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, and did live and
walk in the light of the Lamb, and follow the leader, the Shepherd of Israel,
and faithful bishop of the soul, who overseeth and takes care of the soul,
they would learn, and come to know and experience these things following:

First, The dwelling-places of Mount Sion, and her assemblies, and God's
creating upon every of them a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night, which is the defense upon all the glory that the Lord
brings forth among his spiritual church and people, Isai. iv. 5.

Secondly, They would know the land of the inward Jews, and spiritual Judah,
and the song sung therein, because of the strong city which the Lord builds
there, and the salvation which he appoints for walls and bulwarks about it; and
would see and know how none but the inward Jews, the inwardly circumcised and
sanctified, even the righteous nation that keeps the truth, can enter by the
gates into that city, Isai. xxvi. 1, 2. And they that dwell in that city, whose
minds are stayed on the Lord, and who trust in him* (...) Lord will keep in
perfect peace, ver. 3. Then Jerusalem is a quiet habitation indeed, and the
resting and feeding-places in it are sure, Isai. xxxii. 18. and chap. xxxiii.
15. 20.

Thirdly, They would know the feast of fat things, which the Lord of hosts
makes to all people that are here; to all people that come up to, and dwell on,
his holy mountain, and serve and worship him in spirit and truth. The Lord of
hosts makes such a feast as no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter
into the heart of man to conceive what it is, but only by the spirit of God;
even a feast of fat things, even a feast of spiritual fat things, a feast of
wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well
refined, Isai. xxv. 6. They that are turned to the light, and follow Christ the
light, shall not abide in darkness, but have the light of life, John viii. 12.
Shall be translated out of the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of the dear
Son, and they shall sup with Christ, and he with them, and both together drink
of the fruit of the vine of life, new in the Father's kingdom.

Fourthly, They shall infallibly know here, in this light which shines on God's
holy mountain, the destroying or swallowing up of the face of the covering cast
over all people, and the veil spread over all nations, Isai. xxv. 7. For the
veil is cast over and spread in the darkness; but is done away and swallowed up
in Christ the light: for the veil is done away in him, 2 Cor. iii. 14. And all
that are in Christ, in his spirit, in the light and liberty thereof, behold as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord, ver. 17, 18.

Lastly, Here the king of righteousness's highway is known, even the way of
holiness, which the unclean cannot pass over; but the sanctified in the light
to walk in; and the wayfaring men here, though fools, do not err in, Isai.
xxxv. 8. For they that are taught of God in the new covenant, and follow the
leading of his blessed spirit, do not err.

Oh! that the true church were known, which is now come and coming out of the
wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, who led and leads out thence, into her
own land of life and glory, where her light shines, and she arises and
stands upon her feet before the Lord, and the glory of the Lord shines upon
her, and covers her! Happy is the eye that ^eeth this, and the soul that has a
share in it!

A FEW EXPERIENCES CONCERNING SOME OF THE WEIGHTY THINGS RELATING TO GOD's
EVERLASTING KINGDOM.

Given forth in true and tender Love, for the Help of any such of the Race of
the true Travelers as may stand in need thereof.

BY ISAAC PENINGTON.

THE PREFACE.
IT has pleased the Lord to unseal and open the fountain of life in the midst
of his heritage, so that in his light do they see light, and in his life do
they reap and enjoy life. And the precious promises are fulfilled in the midst
of them, of sending the Comforter, and pouring out of the Holy Spirit, so that
he that believes, out of his belly do flow rivers of living water. Yea, the
Lord has a vineyard, which he keeps night and day (lest any hurt it), and
waters every moment. Oh! the streams of life, the streams of love, the
streams of grace, the streams of mercy, the streams of peace, the streams of
joy and consolation, which flow from him into the bosoms of his children!
Indeed grace, and mercy, and peace are multiplied from God our Father, in and
through the Lord Jesus Christ daily, insomuch as that saying of Christ to his
disciples (John xiv. 26, 27.) is now fulfilled, I say not that I will pray the
Father for you; for the Father himself loves you, etc. The Father, in his
love, has brought us to the Son; and the Son, in the same love, has brought
us back to the Father; and now the love slows from the Father in and through
the Son, most naturally and abundantly. And where the heart is circumcised, and
much forgiven, there love returns back most truly and abundantly; so that the
Lord our God, in the Lord Jesus Christ, is loved with all the heart, and with
all the soul, and nothing is thought too good to sacrifice to him, nor nothing
too much to suffer for him. Oh! the pure love that springs and flows between
the heavenly Father and the spiritual child! The best love that is to be found
in this world (in the men of the world) is not worthy to be a shadow of it. God
is love, and his children are of him, and partake of, and dwell in, the same
love; though the enmity, and highest wisdom of this world, know them not; as it
never could know the children of the true wisdom.

Now from this fountain do not only issue springs and streams of life to
refresh our own hearts; but testimonies concerning the life which we feel and
partake of, and concerning our travels from the dark land through the valley of
tears (where he that gave us life was our well) toward our resting place.

These also spring up in us for the sakes of others; of which nature are the
things which follow, in this little treatise. For not for my own sake only did
they spring up in me, but to signify to others of the mercy the Lord has shown
me, and the way wherein he has led me, and what he has given me to taste of
and experience in the way; which will answer every true palate, every palate
that is seasoned with life, and with true experience. And having received them
from the Lord for this very end, to hold them forth to others, in love and in
tenderness of spirit my heart is freely given up to him therein; not aiming at
any thing thereby, but his glory singly, and the good of such souls to whom he
shall please to extend favor and show mercy, in opening the heavenly mystery
of life and salvation.

I have often said in my heart, Who has begotten me there? Who would have said
that Sarah should have given children suck? My wound was deep, and seemed
incurable; but blessed be the Lord, who has made known to me the physician of
value, for whom no disease is too hard, but he is able to cure every sickness,
and to relieve and rescue all that are captived and oppressed by the devil,
that come unto him, and wait upon him, in the way of his righteous judgments
and most tender mercies. For after all my religion and deep exercises, and
inward experiences and knowledge, I came to such a loss of what I once had,
that I sensibly felt I knew not the Lord, and lay continually groaning and
mourning after him, and deeply afflicted for want of him. Oh! the pure, living,
and precious life, and sweet presence of my God, that my soul wanted! insomuch
as my moisture was turned into the drought of summer, and my bones grown dry
and withered! But at length the Lord, in his goodness (Oh! blessed for ever be
his name!) breathed upon the dry bones, and I felt life enter from him into me,
and the days of deep sorrow and distress were at length forgotten, because a
heavenly birth was at length conceived and brougth forth. And now where is the
sackcloth? Where are the ashes? Oh! there is beauty in life, instead of the
ashes in the state without life; and the garment of praise, instead of the
spirit of heaviness! O glory, glory, to the binder up of the bruised and broken
ones, to the Redeemer of the captives, to the repairer of the breaches, to the
builder up of the wasted and desolate ones! Glory to his tender mercy, glory to
his grace, glory to his love, glory to his wisdom, glory to his power, for ever
and ever. Amen.

A FEW EXPERIENCES, etc.
I.
A faithful Testimony concerning the true and pure Way of Life; with Breathings
for such as have Desires after it, and yet are Strangers to it.
THIS has been the cry of my soul from my childhood, even after holiness,
after the presence of the Lord, after union with him, after the nature and
image of his Son, after a separation from what was contrary to him, and a being
brought forth in the power of his life.

Now, blessed be the Lord, that is revealed which answers the cry; which so far
as my soul comes to partake of, it is refreshed and satisfied with the supply
of that, which it thirsted and cried after.

And all that have felt the true cry, Oh! that they might also be taught of
God, and learn aright how to wait upon him, and to walk humbly and in fear
before him, that nothing might come between them and the cry of their souls;
but they might be led by him into the enjoyment and possession of that, which
the true birth (which is born of the Spirit, and is Spirit) naturally longs
after.

Now truly there is no other way to life and satisfaction, than by believing in
that power, and following that power, which raised Christ from the dead; for
that is to work the work in all that are saved. To feel this power revealed
within, to have the mind turned to this power, to follow this power in the
regenerating work and path, is the way to partake of its virtue, and to
experience the redemption which is thereby and therefrom.

And he that is born of the spirit, and has his eye opened by the spirit, and
daily exercised thereby; he knows the spirit, and is acquainted with his
stirrings and movings, and taught of God to distinguish them from the evil
spirit, its stirrings and movings; and so does not quench the spirit of God,
nor grieve it when it moves; nor give way to the other spirit, when it moves
and allures.

Now the spirit of deceit allures and guides men not so much by outward rules,
as by an inward evil nature, and by the law of sin and death. So the spirit of
truth leads into truth, by the newness and power of its own life revealed in
the heart, by the pure instinct of life within, and by the law of God written
in the nature of a new creature, which is nearer than words without. For God
blots out of the hearts of his what Satan had written there, and writes by the
finger of his spirit what he would have the new birth read there; and indeed
there is a kingdom of life, of righteousness, of true peace, and joy, yea, of
the holy power and wisdom of the Most High, for his children (which are born of
his spirit, and spring up of the immortal seed) to read.

Oh! why should m^ns eyes be closed, and their hearts hardened against the
truth! Why should they cry up Christ in words, and cry out against his life and
power where it is revealed! Is this to kiss the Son? Can such choose (who are
guilty of this) but perish in the way of their souls travels? And how many must
needs perish in their resisting the power of truth, and precious testimony of
God's Holy Spirit (in this our day) tending to their rescue and salvation from
that which captivates and destroys?

Christ came to destroy sin, he having received power from his Father so to do.
He knows it to be of a destroying nature, and that it will destroy the soul,
where it is not by the power of life consumed and destroyed in the soul. Oh!
most precious to us is that visitation of truth, light, life, and power, which
searches out and discovers sin to the very root, and also destroys it! Oh!
glorious is that axe of the Lord Jesus Christ which is laid to the root of the
corrupt tree, and is daily hewing at and cutting it down, that it might cumber
the ground no more; but that the heart might become good earth, sanctified
earth, circumcised by the Lord to bring forth good fruit, good grapes, a good
increase of the good seed of life, to the good husbandman, who is worthy to
reap, even in this world, the grace and mercy, love and goodness, wisdom and
power, etc. which he plentifully sows in the spirits of his daily. Glory to
his name over all for ever, who has exalted, exalts, and will exalt, that
which the several sorts of high\ professors, in their wisdom, trample upon and
despise.

II.
Concerning the perfecting God's Work in the Heart.
IS it not the will of God that his people and children should be sanctified
throughout, in soul, in body, in spirit?

Is it not the will of Christ that his disciples should be perfect, as their
heavenly Father is perfect?

Did he not bid them pray, Thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth, as it
is in heaven? And would he never have them believe and expect that it should be
done in earth, as it is in heaven?

Does not he who has the true, pure, living hope (which anchors within the
veil) purify himself, even as He is pure?

Is not this the way to enjoy the promises of God's holy presence (who
tabernacleth in his people that are cleansed and sanctified) to cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's
fear? Will God dwell in an unholy temple? Will he dwell where sin dwells? He
may indeed to such, when at any time they are tender, and truly melted before
him, be to them as a wayfaring man that tarries for a night; but he will not
take up his abode there, walk there, ^up there, and give them to ^up with him.

Has not Christ received all power both in heaven and earth from his Father?
Is not this the end of receiving his power, to bring down the soul's enemies,
and to purify and sanctify his church, that it may be without spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing? Is he not the captain of our salvation, anointed to fight
the battles of the Lord? Where is the fight? Where is the strong man to be
found, cast out, his goods spoiled, and the house emptied of him, and all that
belongs to him? Is not Christ the author of faith, the finisher of faith; and
does not he carry on the work of faith with power? And what is the work of
faith? Is it not to fight with, and overcome sin; to be too hard for the enemy
at all his weapons? Is there not a whole armor of light, life, and salvation
prepared? What is it prepared for? Is it not that the children of light should
be wholly armed with it? Were there never any wholly armed with it; or can the
enemy prevail on those that are wholly armed with it? Are those that are armed
with it afraid of the enemy, his power, his snares, his wiles? Or are they bold
in the faith, following on, in the spiritual battles, him who rides before
them, conquering, and to conquer?

Oh! that men's eyes were opened by the Lord! then might they see the glory of
truth, in the pure light which shines from God's holy mountain; and such dark
doctrines of the night (which tend to the dishonor of Christ, his power, and
love, and to the upholding of the enemy's kingdom) would pass away, and prevail
no more in the hearts of any that truly fear the Lord; but they would quietly
wait and hope for his salvation, that by the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, they might be made free from the law of sin and death, and not
always be subject thereto! For all whom the Son makes free, they are free
indeed; and being made free by him, may serve God in freedom of spirit, without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of their lives.
And then they know the power and virtue of the new covenant, and the defense
which is thereby, where the wing of the Almighty overshadows, and his salvation
(revealed therein) is experienced for a sufficient wall and bulwark against the
enemy.

III.
Concerning the true Christ, how it may be certainly and infallibly known which
is he.
WHILE people were in expectation, and mused in their hearts concerning John,
whether he were the Christ or no, John answers the case, and tells them how
they might discern and know the true Christ. It is not he that baptizeth with
water, but (...) that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. He "whose
fan is in his hand," wherewith he comes thoroughly to purge his floor,
gathering the wheat into his garner, and burning the chaff with fire
unquenchable. Now he that knows him that does this work, and experienceth him
doing this work in him, does he not know Christ? Oh! is it not precious to be
baptized by him whom God has appointed to baptize? Oh! the fan, the precious
fan, wherewith Christ (who is the power and wisdom of God) separates the
precious from the vile, ^evers the wheat and the chaff, gathers the wheat into
the precious treasury, and lets out the unquenchable fire upon the chaff! "Our
God is a consuming fire," faith the apostle. To what is he a consuming fire? Is
it not to the cha^fy, earthy, drossy nature in men and women? Why, bring the
chaff near to the fire, will it not burn up? And then (as that is burnt up and
consumed) that which is pure, that which is upright, that which is tender, that
which is born of God, can dwell with, and delight in, the devouring fire, and
everlasting burnings. For God is not terrible to the child which is born of
him, to him who is brought forth in the image and spirit of his Son; but to the
transgressing nature, to the seed of evil doers, which are naturally inclined
to do evil, and every day doing evil, he is terrible for evermore. Oh! blessed
are they who believe in that power, and experience that power near, which
raised Christ from the dead, and are baptized with his baptism! They have
access to God: for so the true Jews have been inwardly cleansed and kept clean;
but the unclean, who have only a notion of Christ's blood, and of his
righteousness, but are not washed thereby, nor clothed therewith, nor ever
know what it was to put off the filthy garment, and to put on the white
raiment, they may pray in their own wills and spirits; but they know not what
it is to draw nigh to God in the spirit and life of his Son, and so are yet to
learn what it is to pray to the Father in the name of Christ. For none truly
knew Christ, but they who truly know and are led by his infallible spirit. They
that have not the spirit of Christ, are none of his; and they that have his
spirit, have that which is insallible. It is one thing to have words spoken
concerning Christ, or formerly by Christ; another thing to have the infallible
spirit itself; to be infallibly born of the spirit, and brought up in the light
and life of the spirit, that he may certainly know the Shepherd's voice from
the voice of every strange spirit.

IV.
Some QUERIES to such as affirm the Scriptures to be the only Rule, and deny
the Spirit, the Seed of the Kingdom, the new Covenant, the holy Leaven of Life,
the Law written in the Heart, to be the Rule of the Children of the new
Covenant.
QUERY 1. HOW are the scriptures the rule; or which of the scriptures are the
rule? Are the whole scriptures the rule, from the beginning of Genesis to the
Revelations? Or are some parts of them the rule, some others not? If some parts
of them be the rule, and some not, which parts are the rule, and which are not
the rule? As to instance, in the book of Job; his friends spoke many words
concerning God, which were not so right as Job's, Job xlii. And also Job
himself, in some of his words and speeches, darkened counsel by words without
knowledge, as he himself confessed, Job xlii. 3. Now which of Job's friends
words are the rule, and which not; and which of Job's words are the rule, and
which not?

QUERY 2. Moses was the minister of the old covenant (for he ministered to the
Jews the old covenant, which was glorious in its day); but he was not the
minister of the new covenant. Now the new covenant, and ministration thereof,
exceeds the old in glory. The writing of the law inwardly in the tables of the
heart, is a more glorious ministration than the writing of it outwardly in
tables of stone. Now were Moses's words to the Jews under the old covenant
intended by God to be the rule of the children of light under the new covenant?
Shall the words of that ministration, which was to pass away, be the rule of
the children of that ministration which is to abide for ever?

QUERY 3. Did Moses say, that when Christ came, my words which I speak or write
shall be your rule, or part of your rule? Or did he not rather say, When God
raised up that prophet, him shall ye hear in all things? Is there any one that
is truly a sheep, who is not so made by him who gives life to the soul? And
after he is made alive, and knows the shepherd's voice, is he not to hear his
voice for ever, who gives life eternal, and who leads into the pastures of
life, and to the pure still waters, all that hear his voice, and follow him?
Read John xiv. 3, 4. and Acts iii. 22. and consider.

QUERY 4. Was not John as great, if not greater than Moses? Had ever any the
honor, besides him, to be the immediate forerunner and preparer of the way,
and to point to the Lamb of God as he did? And yet was not he to decrease in
his ministry (it being not the gospel ministration of the spirit and power, as
Christ's was) and Christ to increase in his gospel-ministration? Is not the
least in the kingdom greater than John? And are not all that are quickened by
Christ, and follow him, led by him into the kingdom? And who can give the rule
of life in the kingdom, but the king thereof? In the last days does not the
Lord speak to his people by his Son? And is not he faithful in all his house,
as a Son, to give the law and rule of life to them in Christ?

QUERY 5. Are not all that are soldiers and subjects under Christ to follow
him, their Lord and Captain, whithersoever he goes or rules? How can they know
whither he goes or rules, but by an inward eye and ear fixed upon, and open to
him? So that when once they know his spirit (the voice of his spirit, as his
true sheep do), his movings, his drawings, his leadings, his going before, is
their rule to follow. And they are not to grieve or quench his spirit, in
drawing back from any thing that he leads and draws them to.

QUERY 6. Is not Christ the way, the truth, the life; the living way, the
living truth? Is not the living way the rule to them that live? Is not the
truth itself the rule of all that are true? What should rule and guide the
spiritual man, that is born of the spirit, but the wisdom of the spirit, but
the oracle of God manifested in his temple and sanctuary? That which is born of
the spirit, is spirit, in which the spirit is to dwell; and he in whom he
dwells is to be ruled by him.

QUERY 7. What is that which the apostle calls the rule, Gal. vi. 15, 16. which
if a man walk according to, peace will be upon him? Is it not the word, power,
and wisdom of God? Does not he that walks according to that, walk in the
newness of the spirit? Does not he that walks out of that, walk in the
oldness of the letter at the best? Does not he that believes according to
that, hops according to that, prays according to that; I say, does not he
believe, hope, and pray according to the rule? Does not he that believes,
hops, prays otherwise (though ever so zealously and affectionately), yet,
at best, can any better be said of it, but that it is but in the oldness of the
letter, and so is not in the right way which God requires in the
gospel covenant?

QUERY 8. Is not the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus the law of the
new covenant? And is not that the rule to the children of the new covenant? Is
not the truth which makes free, the way and rule to them who are made free by
it? Is the letter, or the spirit, the rule under the ministration of the
spirit? Let that which is sensible, and which feels and knows the truth and way
of life (as it is in Jesus) answer. Men may search the scriptures, and yet not
come to Christ for life; and men may get descriptions and a knowledge of things
out of the scriptures, and yet not receive from him the rule of the new life.

V.
Concerning the Light, wherewith Christ the Life enlighteneth every Man.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men. And the light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.

JOHN i. 4, 5.
WHAT is the darkness which comprehends not the light? Is it not man in the
unregenerate state? "Ye were darkness," faith the apostle, speaking concerning
them as they had been in that state.

Now it pleases the Lord, that in this darkness his pure light should shine,
to gather man out of the darkness. For unless light should shine on man in his
dark state, he could never be gathered out of it; but he that is turned to the
light, and follows it, cannot abide in the darkness; but comes into that
which gathers and preserves the mind out of it.

But of what nature is this light, which s^ineth in man in his dark state? It
is of a living nature* it is light which flows from life; it is light which
has life in it; it is the life of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Word eternal,
which is the light of men. And he who comes to the true understanding, may
thereby distinguish it from all other lights whatsoever.

There is a vast difference between it, and the reason and understanding of a
man: for the natural man, with his understanding, is dead; but this is living,
and powerfully operating in man, as it finds entrance, and as his mind is
joined to it. He that is dead, indeed, knows it not; but he that is alive unto
God, feels the virtue of it. This light is above all gathered knowledge
whatsoever, and above all descriptions of things whatsoever: for it is the
thing itself, even of the nature of him from whom it flows. A man may get a
notion from this into his mind, which he may retain the dead knowledge of, yea,
his notion may quickly be dead in them; but he that dwells in the thing itself,
knows that, and dwells in that which never dies.

VI.
A few Words further concerning Perfection.
WHAT was the intent of God in commending Job to Satan for a perfect and
upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil? Was it not to represent him
as a person whom he could not make any breach upon, or prevail upon to sin?
Thou have been ranging up and down the earth, tempting many, defiling many;
what say thou to my servant Job, Satan, is not he perfect? Is not he upright
to me in his heart, and all his ways? Can thou make any breach upon him?

What says Satan hereto? Does he object any sin against Job? He is the accuser
of the brethren; and if he have wherewith to accuse, he will not fail to lay it
to their charge, even before the throne of God. But what has he to say against
Job? What can he object (either against his uprightness, or against his
perfection) to the Lord? Oh! says he, thou have set an hedge about him. He
serves thee indeed perfectly and uprightly; I confess I have nothing to lay to
his charge: but does he serve thee for naught? But take away thy hedge, suffer
me to winnow him, and thou shall quickly see I shall have somewhat to lay to
his charge, and that no small matter neither: for do but take away thy blessing
from him, wherewith thou have so abundantly blessed him, and he will soon curse
thee to thy face.

Well, the Lord gives him leave to try if he can stain Job's uprightness and
perfection: and now begins the trial, whether the Devil's temptations shall
bring him to sin, or the fear of the Lord prevail to preserve him from sin.

First, the Devil has power to touch all he has; which he soon does.

What does this produce? Does he sin against the Lord, does he murmur, does he
blaspheme, as the Devil had said? No; he fell on the ground and worshipped,
acknowledging all to be the Lord's, and blessing his name. So that, in all this
fore affliction, he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, Job i. 20, 21, 22.

But the commendation which God had given him, of being a perfect and upright
man, fearing God and eschewing evil, still remains and stands good against
Satan, chap. ii. 3.

Satan gets leave to try him yet f^rther, insinuating against him, that if he
may have liberty to smi^e his body, he shall easily prevail upon him to sin;
not being able at present to bring in any plea against his perfection and
uprightness, against his fearing God and eschewing evil. But this has the same
success with the former; for he could not bring Job to sin with his lips, ver.
10.

Now mind, Can any man, that has his heart made upright by the Lord, keep that
integrity, and sin? Is not every sin a departing from the purity, from the
integrity? Was not every transgression against the first covenant, out of the
first covenant, even a departing from the limits of it? Is not every
transgression of the second covenant a departing out of the limits of the
second covenant? He that abides in Christ, does he sin? Can he sin? Does not
he that sins depart out of his light, out of his life, out of his power, into
the darkness, into the death, into the temptation of the enemy? Is it not
promised, I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from
me: while the fear which God puts into the heart abides there, can that man
sin? Does not the pure fear cleanse the heart, and keep it clean, that the
conscience may be void of offense, both toward God and man? Is the conscience
void of offense, where sin is committed either against God or man? When the
blood flows in the pure light, does it not wash? Does it not wash clean? Does
it not make whiter than the snow? When sin is entered into afterward, and
committed again, does it not defile? Oh! read in the true sense, in the true
experience, with the true understanding, which God gives.

VII.
Concerning Imputation of Righteousness.
THE scripture says, that Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him
for righteousness; and that so it shall be also to all that believe as he did,
even in the same power which he believed in, Romans iv. 23, 24.

Now thus we witness the thing: our minds being turned from sin, and turned to
the pure gift of God, that works a change in us. Herein we feel faith spring
up, which fastens our spirits to the power of life; and then we feel that (in
the power of life) flow upon our spirits, which washes away our sin; and all
that is done in this holy and righteouss faith, is of the holy, righteous life
and power, and accepted with the Lord; and that which condemns sin in us, never
condemns any work which is wrought in God, but justifies it. So that the root
of sin, with all that flows from it, is condemned by the righteous principle of
life; but the root of holiness* with all that flows from it, is justified. And
this is our righteousness, even Christ the holy power of life who condemns and
casts out sin: and it is great joy to any of us to feel the root of sin struck
at, and condemned by his power, and him casting sin out of us, and the root of
righteousness growing up in us, and bearing us, and causing us to bring forth
fruit to God. And here we sensibly find we have right to the scriptures, to the
promises, to all that Christ did and suffered for us, and witness the
propitiation by and through him, and bless God for all the dispensations of
life, wherein he ^ath appeared to the children of men in any age, which were
all glorious and excellent in their season; but the dispensation of the spirit
is the standing dispensation, which excels in glory, which Christ, in the days
of his flesh, pointed his disciples to wait for, which his going away was to
make way for. This dispensation was revealed and set up before the apostasy
from the life and spirit of the apostles, and is again revealed and set up in
power and great glory, after the long night of apostasy; blessed be the name of
the Lord for ever. For the darkness is already passed away from many spirits,
and the true light again shines. Glory in the highest to the God of life and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

VIII.
Concerning Justification and Sanctification, some Things which it has pleased
the Lord, in his tender Mercy, to give me to experience.
First, THAT it is the same Christ, the same spirit, the same life, the same
wisdom, the same power, the same goodness, love and mercy, the same water, the
same blood, which both justifies and sanctifies.

Secondly, That justification and sanctification go hand in hand together.
There is none justified, but he that is in measure sanctified: and there is
none sanctified, but he that is in measure justified. For God justifies by a
rule (by the new covenant, and according to the law thereof); and men receive
and partake of justification, according as they are brought into, and kept
within, the compass of the rule. For God acted of old toward, and justified,
the children of the old covenant according to the law thereof; and the children
of the new covenant are justified, and partake of justification, according to
the law thereof.

Thirdly, That justification and sanctification are both of and through grace.
It is so in the beginning, and it is so all along Through grace ye are saved,
faith the apostle. The whole work of salvation is begun and carried on through
grace. It is through that God visits and reaches to the soul, with his
quickening virtue and power. He regenerates also thereby; through that he
justifies; through that he sanctifies, etc. So that as the work goes on by
grace, grace is to be ascribed to him that does the work, from his very laying
the foundation, and fastening the soul thereupon, to his very laying on of the
top stone.

Fourthly, Though justification and sanctification be of God's grace and mercy
in Christ; yet this does not exclude faith: but they are also through faith,
and not without it. God does not justify man in the unbelieving state, in the
dead state, in his abiding there; but in the coming out of it, in the repenting
and turning from the dead works to the living God, and in believing in him: and
so he also sanctifies him.

Fifthly, Faith and obedience are of the same nature, and always go together.
So that wherever there is faith, there is obedience likewise; and wherever
there is obedience, there is faith. Obedience flows from faith, and cannot be
without it; for the very nature and virtue of faith is in it. And faith is
obedience. For this is the commandment of God, that the soul believe on him
(and in his appearances) whom he has sent to save: and this believing is
obedience unto him that commands it. And this faith and this obedience is holy
and just in God's sight, and through it (but not without it); and thus the soul
is both justified and sanctified.

Sixthly, That the works of faith, the works of the new life, are not the works
of the law, the works of the old covenant; nor are excluded justification, as
the works of the old covenant are. For I have found the Lord, who has
condemned and excluded all my doings, which ever I have been able to do of
myself, still justify and accept what his spirit and holy power has done in
me. They are not of the same nature in themselves; nor are they so accounted of
in the eye of the Lord. For the Lord distinguishes between root and root: and
when springs from the holy root, he justifies as holy* and what arises from
the unholy root, he condemns as unholy.

Seventhly, That by the law of faith all boasting is excluded, in the whole
work both of justification and sanctification. What is the law of faith? Is not
its law to receive all from the Son, to do all in the Son; to quit self, and
its own ability, and to perform all in the newness of the spirit, in the
ability which is of God, given and continued in and through his grace and mercy
to the soul in the Lord Jesus Christ? All the veins of life, all the streams of
the new covenant run here. Here is no boasting of the creature; here can be no
boasting: for all its ability and strength is shut out; and that which is given
of God to it, is all and does all. Yet every Jew here has praise of God. His
faith is commended, his love is commended, his faithfulness is commended, his
zeal for the Lord, his obedience to the Lord, his patience in sufferings is
commended, etc. But the praise and honor of all redounds not to his flesh, but
to the spirit and grace of God in him; so that here flesh is laid low, and kept
in the dust for ever, and God alone exalted in this day of his pure power in
the heart. He that truly believes, enters into rest. How into rest? From
what does he rest? Why, from his own works? From the works of the flesh, from
the works of the old covenant, from the works that arises from his own ability,
from the works wherein he can never be justified with the gospel-justification.
But does he cease from the works of faith? Does he cease from the labor of
love? Does he cease from obedience to any thing that God requires? Nay, then,
surely he rather begins to work and labor in the vineyard; and his labor
is in not in vain in the Lord.

IX.
Concerning Faith.
Several Things I have experienced, both concerning the Nature, Virtue, and
Operations of it; some whereof (as I feel them spring up livingly in my Heart)
I may mention at this time.


First, THIS I have often experienced, that it is an hard thing truly and
rightly to believe. It is an easy matter to believe notions concerning God, and
concerning Christ: but to believe in God, to believe in Christ, to believe
(...) him that raised up Jesus, to believe in the light, life, and power, which
flows from Jesus; this is the gift of Christ Jesus.

Secondly, I have experienced this also, that faith is God's gift, and that it
flows from the power of his life.

There is first a quickening, first a touching of the heart by the holy, pure
power of the Lord; and when a man is touched and quickened, then in, and by^
and through the virtue which flows into him, he can believe in that which
touches and quickens him.

Thirdly, That faith never stands in a man's own power, but always in the
virtue and power of the life of the Son. So that he that will believe aright,
must wait to feel the life of the Son revealed in him, and faith flowing
therefrom: for the true belief springs from the life of the holy root; and from
the flowing up and springing up of that life, faith receives its nourishment
and daily virtue.

Fourthly, I have observed this in my travels, that the earthly wisdom, and
notions therefrom, got into the mind, and held in the mind, out of the sense of
life, are a great le^t to faith: for these strengthen and nourish that in man,
which is to be weakened and die; that life, and the birth of life, may be all
in all in the heart. Man is to die, man is to be ceased from; his
understanding, his wisdom, is to be brought to naught. But after it has had a
stroke and wound from God's Holy Spirit and power (even in the very wound which
tends to death) yet it will be getting life again, getting its deadly wound
healed, and nourishing its life by notions concerning that life and power,
which in measure flew it. And thus the Jew outward has his life in the
outwardness of knowledge, in the outwardness of the law, in the letter which
kills* the relation and outward knowledge of things kills and deadeneth
more and more, unless man come into the inward life and virtue, and daily feel
them quickened there. If ye live in the spirit, walk in the spirit, said the
apostle. A man cannot live in an outwardness of knowledge concerning the spirit
and power of the endless life; but he that would truly live, must live in the
spirit itself; and he that would rightly walk on in his way, must walk in the
spirit wherein he received life, and wherein he that abides lives before the
Lord.

Fifthly, This I have also observed, that all notional faith, wherein is not
the living virtue (as concerning Christ, his sufferings, death, resurrection,
^s^^nsion, intercession; and concerning justification by him, etc.) the enemy
will let the soul alone with, and let him enjoy a kind of peace in; but his war
is desperately against the true faith, against faith in the true power, against
faith in the light of life. O how many sore and sharp assaults does he make,
against the faith which receives its virtue from God, and causes the soul to
live to God? And how sore is it with the soul, when faith is weak, and the
enemy comes on against it with the strength of his assaults and temptations.
Lord, increase our faith, said the sensible disciples.

Sixthly, It is a precious thing to feel faith quickened by God, and helped by
God against the enemy. For the enemy cannot prevail against the soul; but the
soul, through the virtue and power of life, prevails over the enemy in the
faith. And this is the great work of a Christian, not only to wrestle and
fight, but to learn so to wrestle, and so to sight, as to overcome.

Seventhly, That in the pure fear (not that which is taught by the precepts of
men, but which God puts into the heart) faith has its strength, and exercises
its strength.

O who knows the preciousness of this fear!

The power of faith, the power of life, the power of salvation and everlasting
preservation is (...) in it. Therefore says the Lord (when he (...) of
providing for his children in the new covenant, that they shall abide with him
for ever, and not depart any more from him as the children of the old covenant
did) I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me. And
when the angel preached the everlasting gospel, how did he preach it? Fear God,
and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, etc. Rev. xiv.
When the pure fear is felt, when that which is contrary to God is judged, then
the gospel is known, and the work thereof experienced in the heart. And how
easy is it, when the pure fear is felt, to distrust and deny one's self, and
trust in the Lord! O how weak are the reasonings and imaginations then, and how
strong is the power which scatters them, and lifts up the head over them!

Now it concerns every one deeply to consider, of what nature his faith is, and
what virtue is in it, and what it can do in and through the power of the Lord
for him, how it fetches in the true living ^ourishment every day, how it
delivers the soul, and gives it victory over that, which faith was appointed to
deliver from. For he, who through the faith overcomes that which is contrary
to God, shall inherit; and he that fights the good fight of faith shall
overcome; but he that overcomes not his enemies, which stand in his way, shall
be sure to be hindered by them from attaining to his journey's end.

X.
Concerning Obedience, some Experiences also.
First, TRUE obedience, gospel-obedience, flows from the life, flows from the
living faith. If I could obey in all things that God requires of me, yet that
would not satisfy me, unless I felt my obedience flow from the birth of his
life in me. My Father does all in me, says Christ. This was Christ's comfort:
and to feel Christ do all in the soul, is the comfort of every one that truly
believes in him.

Secondly True obedience, gospel-obedience, is natural to the birth which is
born of God. It is unnatural to the flesh, to man's wisdom, to ^eny himself,
and take up the cross* but it is natural to the birth which is born of God's
Spirit. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and it is natural to it to
be conversant in, and exercised about that which is spiritual.

Thirdly, That honoring and pleasing, and answering the will of the Lord, is
the proper aim of the truly obedient. O how do they delight to do the will! "I
have meat," says Christ, "that ye know not of." To do the will was his meat
and drink: and it is meat and drink to all that are of his nature and spirit.
If I should never have any other reward, but the pleasure of obedience, yet I
could not but say and testify, that in answering the law of the pure life, in
keeping the holy statutes and commandments of God's Spirit, there is great
reward. But yet there is a crown also, and a reaping after this life, of every
thing that is sown to the Spirit; and the crown is weighty, and everlastingly
glorious.

Fourthly, Gospel-obedience is exceeding necessary in and to the gospel-state.
Mark; the Lamb is the leader: and can any be saved by him, (...) they that
follow him? When Christ calls out of the world, must not the soul (...) to him,
who is the Shepherd? And must not the sheep daily learn to know his voice, and
follow him; even still they come to be acquainted with every moving, drawing,
and leading of his spirit, and so come to follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes? Mark; what a weight Christ lays upon doing. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them. Why, then the disciple cannot come to happiness,
but in the doing, in the obeying of the will of Christ, his Lord and Master.
And he that hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a
wise man, that built his house on a rock. But the pretended believer, without
doing the will, is the foolish builder, whose building will not stand. Again,
says Christ, As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; continue ye in
my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have
kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.

The disciples, whom he most dearly loved, must keep his commandments, if they
will continue in his love. And his apostles taught the same, even the working
out of the salvation, and the purifying of the heart through the obedience of
the truth. For mark; there is a covenant of life, a way of life* and how can
life be reaped, how can the work of life go on, but in subjection and obedience
thereto?

Oh! blessed is he, who meets with the power of life, which enables to obey,
and who is obedient and subject to that power. For he that truly believes in
Christ, is turned by him to his light, and to the power of his Father; and the
peace, growth, joy, blessedness, etc. is witnessed in subjection thereto.

XI.
Concerning the Cross of Christ.
THIS I have experienced concerning the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; that it
is an inward and spiritual thing, producing inward and spiritual effects in the
mind; and that this is it, even that which s^ays the enmity in the mind, and
crucifies to the world and the affections thereof. God forbid, said the
apostle, that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

Now mark; that which ^s contrary to the world, and crucifies to the world,
that is the cross. The cross has this power, and nothing else; and so there is
nothing else to glory in. The flesh lu^teth against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; and these are contrary one to the other. Mind, here is the
cross: the Spirit which is contrary to the flesh, which mortifies the flesh,
through the obedience whereof the flesh is crucified. If ye, through the
Spirit, mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Whatsoever is of and in
the Spirit, is contrary to the flesh. The light of the Spirit is contrary to
the darkness of the flesh. The holiness of the Spirit is contrary to the
unholiness of the corrupt heart. The life of the Spirit is contrary to the life
(or rather death) that is in sin. The power of the Spirit is contrary to the
power that is in Satan, and his kingdom. The wisdom of God is contrary, and a
foolish thing, to the wisdom of man. Yea, the new creature, which springs from
God's Holy Spirit, is contrary, and death to the old. Now he that comes hither,
out of his own wisdom, out of his own will, out of his own thoughts, out of his
own reasonings, and comes to a discerning of God's Spirit, and to the feeling
of his begetting of life in his heart, and his stirrings and movings in the
life which he has begotten; and waits here, and receives counsel here; he is
taught to deny himself, and to join to and take up that, by which Christ daily
crosses and subdueth in him that which is contrary to God.

And here is the light of faith, and the good travel under the cross, whereby
the holy journey is gone, and the enemies (which rise up to oppose in the way)
vanquished and overcome. For here is the power revealed, the preserving power,
the leading power, the conquering power of him, who rides on conquering and to
conquer his spiritual enemies in the hearts of his children, who know his
voice, and are subject to him; who daily denying themselves, and taking up his
cross, follow him. Woe is to them that are at ease in Zion, under any thing
that is contrary to God; but blessings are upon them whose dwelling is under
the cross, and who know no ease, but what it allows. It will make truth, life,
holiness, righteousness, faith, obedience, meekness, patience, love, separation
from sin, communion with the Lord, and all the fruits of the Spirit, as natural
to them in the renewed state, as ever sin was in the corrupt state. And in that
state they shall be able to say with Paul, who once complained of his
captivity, and that he did what he hated; yet after he had known the power of
the cross, and was crucified with Christ, he could then do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth; yea, then, being a conqueror, having overcome the
enemies which stood in his way, he could do all things through Christ that
strengthened him. The cause of so many complaints and bowings down the head,
and going mourning because of the prevailings of the enemy, through
temptations, sin, and corruption, is because the cross of Christ, which is the
power of God (which is his ordinance against the strength of the enemy) is
either not known, or not taken up. And this is the reason that many that make a
fair show for a while, yet afterward come to nothing (but are like untimely
figs, or like corn upon the house tops, which hastily springs up, and
withers) because they either never rightly learn, or keep not the cross. For
that alone has power from God to bring down, and keep down, that which is
contrary to him. So that from under the cross of Christ, there is no wit^^ssing
salvation or preservation from the Lord; but out of the limits of the cross,
the enemy has power to recover and bring back under his dominion again. And
whosoever in his travels leaves the cross behind him, does draw back unto
perdition, and not travel on, in the living faith and newness of obedience,
toward the salvation of the soul.

XII.
Concerning the Mystery of Life, and the Mystery of the Fellowship which is
therein.
GOD is hid from man, as he lies in his sinful and fallen state; and no man can
find or know him, but as he pleases to reveal himself by his own blessed
Spirit. And Christ, being God's image, there is no knowing or confessing him,
or right calling him Lord, but in and by the same Spirit, 1 Cor. xii. 3. When
he appeared in the days of his flesh, flesh and blood could not reveal him, but
only the Father. And he is the same today as he was yesterday. He is not to be
known now, but in the same Spirit; in his own grace and truth, in a measure of
his own life. The dead cannot know him: they only know him, who are his sheep,
who are quickened and made alive by him. And this life is a mystery: none can
understand it, but they that partake of it. Can a man that is naturally dead,
know what the life of nature means? No more can a man that is spiritually dead,
know what the life of the Spirit means. The natural man may get the words that
came from life, and cry up them, and speak great words of the same of wisdom,
and of her children; but the thing itself is hid from them all. Oh! it is a
strait gate, at which the birth enters, at which none else can enter. The wise
and prudent knowers and searchers after the flesh (and of the scriptures, as
they can put meanings upon them and comprehend them) are shut out in every age;
but there is a babe born o^ naked truth, born of the pure simplicity, admitted
by God, while men disdain and despise it.

And the fellowship of the saints is in the life, and in the light, which is
this mystery. The fellowship is not outward, but inward. All they that meet
together in the outward place, are not in the fellowship or worship; but only
they that meet together in the inward life and spirit. They that worship the
Father, must worship him in spirit and truth. Look, there is the worship, there
are the worshippers; they that are in the spirit, in the truth; they that meet
in the spirit, in the truth, meet together in the one spiritual place, as I may
call it. And so we own no man after the flesh, no man according to the
appearance; but, in the righteous judgment of the spirit, those only who are of
the spirit. Indeed we are tender, where there is the least beginning of the
work of God in any heart; yea, where there is but so much as a conviction of
the understanding; but men are not presently of us, who own our principle in
words or outward appearance, but only such as are inwardly changed thereby in
the heart. It is true, persons may walk among us, and afterward go o^t from
us, who were never of us (as it was in the apostles days) that were never in
the fellowship of life with us, whom we could never own in the sight of the
Lord, as being born of him; though we were willing to wait and watch for their
good, that they might come to witness the true birth. Now from such come the
offenses, even from the falling off of such as never were truly ingrafted, and
also from the slips of such who are not watchful to that which preserves. And
woe is to the world, because of the offenses which cannot but come. For they
which are to be approved in the sight of the Lord, must not somewhat or other
happen to make them manifest? And when they are made manifest, the world's eye
is offended, and is apt to think hardly of, and reproach the truth itself,
because of them. Blessed is the eye which sees into the mystery, into the life
itself, where there is no offense. Truth is one and the same for ever.

XIII.
Concerning judging according to the Appearance, and judging righteous
Judgment. Judge not according to the Appearance (said Christ) but judge
righteous Judgment, John vii. 24.
WHAT is it to judge according to the appearance? and what is it to judge
righteous judgment? I shall speak what I have experienced, having been deeply
exercised about this thing. Mark then;

The holy spirit of life breaths upon the heart; and, by it; breathing and
working there, he quickens and b^gets life, John iii. 8. And (...) which is
begotten and (...) of him, is begotten and born in his nature, and so is of the
^ame nature with him: as verse the 6th of that chapter.

Now to that which is born of the spirit, the spirit is the leader, the
preserver, the supporter, the comforter, the daily quickener. He can do nothing
without the spirit, without the present life and power of him that begat him:
so that all the judgment which the birth of life has, is from, and of, and in,
the Holy Spirit of the Father.

And here is true judgment, both concerning righteousness, and against all
unrighteousness; so that to keep the life, keep to the spirit, keep to the
birth, keep to the power, then is the wisdom and righteous judgment of God
revealed: but any that go out of this, and measure without this, they measure
in the unrighteousness; and though they search the scriptures, and think in
themselves they measure from the scriptures, yet they are mistaken, and measure
but from their own knowledge and apprehensions upon the scriptures, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, when they seemed to conclude, upon searching the
scriptures, that Christ could not be the Messiah, John vii. 52. "Search and
look" (said they) "for out of Galilee arises no prophet." How then can this
Galilean be he? See by the scriptures, if this can be the Christ.

It is said of Christ, He shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, nor
reprove after the hearing of his ears, but with righteousness shall he judge,
etc. I^ai. xi. 3, 4. Christ judged righteous judgment. How came he to judge so?
Why; he judged in and with the spirit. He kept to the spirit's judgment. The
spirit of the Lord rested upon him, and made him quick of understanding in the
fear of the Lord, ver. 2, 3. And no man (...) aright concerning the things of
God, but in and by the same spirit* ^ow shall I know whether my duties be
right, my prayers right, my ways right, my worship right, my faith right, my
hope of the right kind, my knowledge and understanding of the scriptures right?
etc. Why; there is none but one can determine. He who begets life, knows
whether that which is in thee be from his life; and whether that which thou
offerest to him, be truly living or no: and when the Lord separates the living
from the dead, what will remain in many that make great professions at this day?

I would have no man mistaken about these things; I know many are deeply
mistaken, as their own hearts will one day acknowledge, when the Lord shall
make manifest to them, how they have called evil good, and good evil; and put
darkness for light, and light for darkness. Indeed it is just as it was in the
days of Christ's appearing outwardly in a body of flesh. The same life, the
same spirit, is denied now as was then. Then the Jews cried up Christ to come;
but they then spiritually saw him not. They saw the flesh (or outward form) but
they saw not him who dwelt in that flesh. And though the world of Christians
now acknowledge Christ is come, and did appear, yet neither do they know him
who did appear, but deny his life, his spirit, his virtue, his power, which is
revealed in this day of his love and goodness to the eyes of the children of
the true wisdom. Oh! let not flesh judge: be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord, and cease judging, for he is arisen to judge. He is judge in the midst of
his people, and he will judge the heathen also.

And every one bring this near. Wait to feel flesh judged in thee, and brought
down in thee, that it may not judge in thee; but spirit and life may be
exalted, and sit upon the throne in thy heart: and when life is exalted, and
does begin to judge, Oh! take heed of hearkening to the flesh, of letting in
the judgment of flesh afterward, lest the spirit be grieved and quenched! For
the wisdom of the flesh is near, and will be striving to get in and recover its
seat again; and if the watch be not singly kept to God's Holy Spirit, somewhat
else will be judging in thee, which will judge according to the appearance of
things to thy mind, and so thou will miss of the true and righteous judgment of
God's Spirit.

XIV.
A Question answered about knowing God's Spirit.
QUEST. HOW shall I know God's Spirit? How shall I know the motions thereof?
How may I know whether the faith and hope in my heart be from him? Whether my
prayers and desires arise thence? etc.

ANSW. No man of himself, or by any way lie of himself can take, can know God's
Spirit: there must first be a capacity given before any man can know the Spirit
of the Lord; his life, his power, must first be felt, and somewhat quickened,
somewhat formed by him, somewhat begotten of him, which is Spirit, and this can
know him. Now, man in this may know him, but out of this can never know him.
Therefore this is the great skill, and diligence, and wisdom of a Christian, to
keep to this, to wait for this to have his eye toward the pure spring of
wisdom, that, when it springs, he may discern and receive it; and when that
which is of a contrary nature springs, he may discern it under all its
deceitful appearances, and turn from it. For out of the heart are the issues
both of life and death. There is all manner of deceivableness of
unrighteousness in the unrighteous nature, in the unrighteous spirit; and if
the watch be not diligently kept, it is easy to be deceived at any time: but
the true seed, the holy seed, the living seed, the elect seed, the immortal
seed, is never deceived. O! blessed are they who have their eyes opened and
kept open in it, to discern the mystery of godliness and the mystery of
iniquity, that they may be preserved safe in the one, out of the reach of the
other!

XV.
Some Queries concerning the Seed of the Kingdom, in which the Kingdom itself
is contained, (as the Nature and Substance of Things is contained in the Seed
thereof) And out of which it springs up and arises in the Heart.
QUERY 1. WHAT is that seed which is spoken of, 1 John iii. 9. which remains
in those that are born of God, and preserves out of sin those that are led by
it and comprehended in it? Is i^ not the seed of the kingdom?

QUERY 2. Do not the natural herbs and flowers, the natural plants and trees,
grow from a natural seed? Do not the spiritual plants, the spiritual trees, the
trees of righteousness, grow from the seed of righteousness?

QUERY 3. Was it not the great doctrine of Christ to preach the kingdom? and
how did he preach it? Did he not preach it as a seed, as a grain of
mustard seed? And did he not liken this spiritual seed to leaven, to a precious
pearl, to treasure hid in a field, to a piece of silver lost, etc. Oh! how
happy is he who knows and enjoys the thing itself which Christ preached! All
the prophets prophesied concerning him; and when he came, this was his
doctrine, that men should mind this, look after this, purchase this, possess
this, feel this planted and grow up in them, and themselves ingrafted into and
growing up in it.

QUERY. 4. Can any man be born of God, and not born of this seed? Can any man
be born of this seed, and not be born of God?

QUERY 5. How does grace and truth come by Jesus Christ? Does it not grow up
from this seed? Can it grow up any other way in any heart?

QUERY 6. Is not salvation felt and witnessed in every heart (of those that are
in any measure redeemed) as this seed grows up and overshadows them? Was not
this the salvation ready to be revealed in the last time, 1 Pet. i. 10. whereof
the apostle Peter himself was made a partaker? Chap* v. 10. In the law were the
shadows of good things to come; but in the gospel the substance, the seed
itself, is revealed.

QUERY 7. Is it not the right beginning in religion to begin in the spirit? And
can any begin in the spirit, but he that begins in and with the seed of the
kingdom?

QUERY 8. Is it not the main and chief thing in religion to know this seed, to
feel this seed, to be joined to this seed, and abide in this seed?

QUERY 9. Is not all that flows from this seed true and certain? Is not the
knowledge certain here? the faith here? the love here? the peace here? the joy
here? the righteousness here? From this true root, can there grow or shoot
forth any thing but that which is true? Oh! every breathing here is from pure
life, and precious in the eye of the Father. Is there any certainty elsewhere?
Oh! when the Lord appears, will he not disown all the religion and worship
which is not of this growth?

QUERY 10. But some may say, How may I know this seed, and how may I be joined
to it?

ANSW. In the quickening life may thou know it, and no where else. Did
thou ever feel that which quickened thy heart toward the Lord? Therein and
thereby, at that time, thou may feel an eye and heart opened, which can truly
see and know somewhat of God: and, keeping thy eye to the quickening power of
God, as that stirs, moves, and operates, in thee and upon thee, thou may
know again and know more.

Therefore eye the power which quickens, and eye the seed which it ^eveals and
raises in thee, and wait to feel the power subjecting thee to the seed, that
thou may come under it, and it may come over thee, and press down in thee
all that is contrary to its pure nature.

And as thou come hither, thou will find that which death has no power over;
and, as thou abidest there, thou shall find it to have no power over thee. For,
of a truth, in the holy covenant of life and peace, death never had nor can
have power; but he who abides in him who is the covenant, who is the shepherd,
who is the love, who is the wisdom and power of God, witnesses there a sure
defense and strong tower, where salvation is for a wall and bulwark against the
enemy.

There are many sorts of talkers concerning the thing, but there are few
travelers into it; but he alone who is a true traveller into it, and takes up
his rest there, certainly knows and can truly witness what is to be found
there. And this is the reason that so many (who seem great and experienced
knowers) cannot receive our testimony, because they know neither the seed nor
its voice, concerning which and whereby we testify. But wisdom is justified of
her children; and they that know the voice of the shepherd, know his present
appearance in this our day, which is contrary to the wisdom and knowledge of
all other seeds and births whatsoever. "He that has an ear to hear, let him
hear;" but he that has not the true ear, cannot hear the true t^^^imony,
though it should ever so often be declared unto him. But blessed is he that
knows, and stumbles not at the appearances of the seed and power of life in his
own heart, but is turned from the darkness to the light there, and from the
power of Satan to the manifestation of God's spirit there. For the end of words
(even of Christ's own directions in the days of his flesh) is to turn men to
the holy life and power from whence the words came; and thither man is to
travel, and therein to enter, waiting on the Lord, in the way of his judgments
and tender mercies, to witness a translation from darkness to light, and from
the kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of the dear Son; which kingdom is at
first but as a grain of mustard seed, and must be s^ known and so received.

And now let every serious heart examine concerning himself. Do thou know the
kingdom? Is the seed grown in thee? Does it overspread thee? Art thou in it as
in a kingdom? Do thou feel it overshadowing thee? Art thou in unity with it?
Does it speak peace to thee from the Lord? Is the wall of partition broken down
in thee? Is there of twain made one new man? Do thou feel that which is
contrary to Christ, subdued in thee by his power, and his holy nature, life,
and spirit, reigning over it? Can thou read that scripture sensibly and
experimentally, If ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live?

Ah! how miserably do men talk of Christ, the power of God, and miss of the
effect and work of his power in them!

Faith is a powerful thing, it gives victory, (true faith gives victory) it
scatters that which stands between, and gives real access to God, and lets in
his pure, fresh, living virtue upon the heart.

Love is a powerful thing, it constrains to obedience: and the heart that is
circumcised to love the Lord God, Oh! how does life flow from him into it!

Oh! away with empty notions, and come to the ministration of the spirit, where
the knowledge is living, the faith victorious, the love pure and undefiled, the
worship truly spiritual, even flowing from, and comprehended in, the life and
virtue of the spirit. Oh! that all that truly breathe after the Lord might be
gathered hither, found here, and dwell here. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT to the EXPERIENCES.
PERSONS that have had some true touches of life, and true breathings after the
Lord, yet not having their eye rightly fixed upon him, nor discerning from
whence those came, easily lose the true sense of life, and another ^irth of
another nature springs up in them instead t^ereof. This was it we generally
wanted in the ^ay of our former profession, even the discerning of that, and
fixing upon that which begat life in us; through want whereof many of the most
tenderhearted came to a loss, whom the Lord at length showed mercy to,
manifesting to them the light of their eyes, and the stay of their souls. Now
to all that have been gathered hither by the Lord, life has been renewed; and
their former experiences, of the Lord and his goodness to them in the Lord
Jesus Christ, restored again with advantage. And here they sensibly see, and
daily experience, that nothing is of their own works, but all of grace and
mercy in and through Christ, in whom they are created unto good works, which
God before ordained that we should walk in them. And here the glory is
revealed; the glory of life, the glory of peace with the Lord, the glory of
righteousness in and through his Son, the glory of victory over the soul's
enemies, and of leading captivity captive, and treading upon the necks of
kings, even of mighty lusts, which mightily prevailed over and oppressed the
soul, before the captain of our salvation appeared in the power and authority
of his own spirit. But, blessed be the Lord, there is not only this glory
revealed, but there is a defense over the glory; for there is that revealed
which is able to defend it, and does de^end it, in the hearts of many, and in
the living assemblies which have been gathered by God's holy power; which holy
power (which gathered) daily quickens and overshadows, and is a rock unto, and
will be so for ever, even to all that abide with him in his holy covenant; but
out of the limits of that into which God gathers, and wherein and whereby he
preserves, there is no defense to any. The cursed thing, the unclean thing, the
earthly spirit, the earthly mind and wisdom, the Lord has excluded, and it is
(...) be excluded out of his camp for evermore, that the inward Israel may be
kept holy to the Lord, and may serve and worship the Lord in the beauty of the
inward holiness; as the outward Israel was outwardly to be, and to do, in that
outward ministration of the shadows of the gospel state.

XVI.
Some QUERIES concerning the Time and Work of Reformation.
QUERY 1. WHAT did the time of reformation and substance (spoken of Heb. ix.
10.) signify and point at in relation to the mystery? Was it not for the
bringing in of the gospel; the day of Christ's spirit and power; the day of his
inward renewing and reforming; the day of his taking his fan into his hand to
purge his floor; the laying his axe to the root of the corrupt tree, that he
may destroy the works of the Devil in men's hearts, casting down and plucking
up what his heavenly Father has not planted there? When he comes as a
re^iner's fire, and fuller's soap, to purify the sons of Levi, as gold and
silver is purged, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness: is not this the time of reformation?

QUERY 2. Who is the reformer? Is it not the Lord Jesus Christ? Does not he
create anew? Does not he blot out the old image, and form into a new lump? For
if any man be in Christ, there is a renewing there; a new building there; yea,
old things are passed away there; there is nothing in him but what is new. He
is faithful, in all his house, inwardly to judge, condemn, crucify, subdue,
destroy whatsoever is contrary to the nature and spirit of his Father, and to
form and build up the spirits of his, in that which is new and pure.

QUERY 3. How, or by what, does Christ reform? Is it not by his spirit and
power, by the light thereof, by the life thereof, by the virtue thereof? For
nothing can change and reform the heart, but that which is more powerful than
him who corrupts it.

QUERY 4. Where does Christ reform and newcreate? Is it not in the new
covenant; in the faith and obedience thereof? Does he not, by the laws thereof,
break and di^anul the laws of the old covenant, and make void the covenant of
hell and death; and so make an everlasting covenant of life and peace; even an
holy, pure, living agreement, between God his Father, and the ^ouls of his?
Thus by his light he overcomes darkness; by his life he overcomes, chains down,
subdues, and destroys, that which is impure, breaking the bond of sin and
iniquity, and letting the oppressed go free from under it. Thus he manifests
himself to be the Savior by his holy anointing, breaking the yoke of the
oppressor, Isai. x. 27.

QUERY 5. Whom does Christ reform? Are they not those who take his yoke upon
them, and learn of him? Are they not those who are turned to the light of his
spirit, inwardly made manifest; turned from the darkness, walking no more
therein, but in his pure light? They that own his inward appearance in their
hearts, and turn, from the enmity there, to him, receiving his light, his law,
his life, his spirit, them does he exercise daily, and is daily reforming their
hearts and ways thereby. But if any man receives not his light, his life, his
spirit within, such an one is none of his; and he may reform himself as much as
he can, but he knows not yet the day of the true reformation.

QUERY 6. How are they to walk whom Christ has begun to reform? Is it not in
that light, in that spirit, in that covenant, in that grace, wherein and
whereby he has in some measure reformed them? Is it not in the newness of the
spirit, and in the newness of the law thereof? Here Christ walked before the
Father in all well-pleasing ( Lo, I come; I delight to do thy will, O my God;
yea, thy law is within my heart said he, Psalm. xl. 7, 8.) and here all his are
also to walk, 1 John ii. 6. For indeed there is no pleasing the Father, or
Christ our Lord and master, out of the virtue, life, and newness of his own
spirit.

QUERY 7. What was the glory that was to follow the sufferings of Christ,
spoken of, 1 Pet. i. 11? Was it not the glory of his inward reformation in the
hearts of the children of the new covenant? Does not Christ give of his grace
in the gospel? And does not his grace make a glorious change? Does not he give
of his spirit to his children? And does not his spirit change from sin, from
shame, into holiness, into true beauty, into the heavenly glory, and so from
glory to glory, translating more and more into the glory? Does not Christ
appear gloriously in the hearts of his, and in the assemblies of his, who meet
together in his name, and wait upon him in that which is pure and living of
him? And is there not a covering, or defense of the wing of the Almighty, upon
the glory? Isa. iv. 5.

QUERY 8. Was not this glory brought forth in the days of the apostles? Was not
great grace then upon them all? (I mean such as received and held the truth in
the love of it.) Did they not witness the peace which passes man's
understanding? Had they not received the holy and spiritual understanding from
him that is true; and were they not in him that is true? Did they not know
victory and dominion over sin and death? Did not the little babes witness
pardon of sin, and know him who preserves from sin? Had not the young men
overcome the wicked one; and were not the elders strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might? Were they not come to the spiritual Sion, and heavenly
Jerusalem; and did they not walk in the light of the Lamb, and of the holy
city, before God the Judge of all? There is no man, in these our days, can so
much as conceive the glory of that state, but he that has tasted of a measure
thereof.

QUERY 9. Was not this glory eclipsed, and did not a great darkness come over
it, hiding it from the sons of men, so that for ages and generations they knew
not the true spirit, the true light, the true life, the everlasting covenant,
the holy gospel, the true church, the man-child, etc. but these, with many
other heavenly mysteries, have been hid from their eyes.

QUERY 10. What has got up since these have been hid? Have not the shadows of
the night took place, and overspread the Christian state, instead of the light
of the day? Has not antichrist got up, and a false church appeared; that which
has been render, and begotten of God, s^ibbed, bowed down, curbed, and
persecuted, and false devotion and worship set up instead of the true?

QUERY 11. Must not antichrist be destroyed, the false church judged, the true
church come out of the wilderness into which she ^led, the man-child appear
again, conquering and to conquer all which has risen up from the spirit of
darkness since the first breaking forth of the gospel? And is not the gospel to
be preached again to them that dwell on earth; even to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people? Rev xiv. 6.

Now who is wise to understand the appearance of the Lord, and the beginning of
these things, which is in a way contrary to man's wisdom? and so he that will
discern them, must come out from following of the man's own spirit, nature, and
wisdom in himself, into the sense and leadings of him who gives the true
eyesight. The appearance of the Lord is inward and spiritual, and he must have
an inward and spiritual eye who discerns it. It was said of old, by mockers
and scoffers, Where is the promise of his coming? For all things continue as
they were from the beginning. The same spirit will say so still; and yet, to
that eye which the Lord has opened, he is already come inwardly, spiritually,
in his own pure eternal life and power; and the precious effects of his coming
are made manifest in many hearts; blessed be his name. Yea, he is further to
appear in glory and pure brightness; and so we wait further for his appearance,
both in our own hearts, and in the hearts of the children of men. We have met
with our beloved; our God, whom we waited for, has appeared. The Son of
righteousness has arisen, with healing under his wings, and we have felt
virtue and healing from him, and cannot but rejoice and testify of his
salvation.

And what further manifestations of himself he has yet to give forth, we are
sure to partake of, being formed by him in spirit, and found in that wherein he
appears, and from whence his glory shines. Oh! that all that love the Lord
Jesus Christ in any measure of sincerity, did know the way of the gospel, which
is in the spirit, light, life, and power, which is eternal, even in the grace
and truth which is in him! And his kingdom, which is spiritual, and not of this
world, cannot be shaken by this world (nor his Mount Sion removed;) but is able
to shake all nations and kingdoms that kiss not the Son, but oppose him.
Blessed are they who are turned to the light of his spirit, and who therein
kiss and obey him.

II.
Some QUERIES concerning the Spirit of Christ, or the Spirit of the Father (it
being one and the same Spirit) for those who take themselves to be Christians,
and under the Gospel Dispensation, to consider and examine themselves by, that
they may not be deceived, either concerning their present Estate here, or the
eternal Estate of their Souls hereafter; seeing the Apostle so expressly says,
If any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans viii.
QUERY 1. DO thou know the Holy Spirit of the Father? Thou may have read
somewhat concerning it, and have apprehensions in thy mind about it; but do
thou truly know what it is by its inward appearances and operations in thine
own heart?

QUERY 2. Have thou received God's Holy Spirit into thy heart? Have thou let in
Christ's Spirit, when he has knocked at the door of thy heart, and received
him? For he that is a true child, most naturally breaths and cries for the
Father's Spirit* and the Father also most naturally gives his Spirit to them
that truly and rightly ask it of him, Luke xi. 13, and thou must thankfully
receive the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, when the Father gives him.

QUERY 3. Does the Spirit of Christ dwell in thee? Has the stronger man cast
the strong man out of thee, and taken possession of thy heart, and does he
dwell therein? Then thou may truly say, that thou art built up by God an
habitation for him in the Spirit. Then thou art washed and cleansed by him from
thy filthiness; and lusts or vain thoughts do not lodge in thee. For the Holy
Spirit of Christ will not dwell where such things lodge; but come out from
among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you, and be a father to you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
faith the Lord Almighty, in whom I will dwell and walk, 2 Cor. vi. 15, 16, 17.

QUERY 4. Does God's Spirit lead thee into all truth that thou need know and
walk in? Art thou a true child, depending upon, and guided by, the Spirit of
the Father? Can^t thou not see thy way, but as he makes it known to thee? Art
thou a follower of the spotless Lamb, in the same Spirit wherein he walked? If
it be thus with thee, then thou art a child of God indeed.

QUERY 5. Do thou live in the Spirit? Do thou feel the Spirit of God to be
a fountain of life, from whence life springs up into thee daily? Do thou
witness that scripture fulfilled in thee, "He that believes on me," as the
scripture has said, "out of his belly shall slow rivers of living water?" Have
thou received the living water from Christ? And is that living water become a
well of life (...) ^hee*

QUERY 6. Do thou walk in the Spirit, in the life thereof, in the newness
thereof springing up in thy heart? Do thou know the difference between
walking in the oldnes^ of the (...) and in the newness of the Spirit?

QUERY 7. Did thou ever learn of the Father to know Christ? And did thou
ever learn of Christ to know the Father? And has the Father indeed revealed
the Son to thee, and the Son indeed revealed the Father to thee? Or art thou
yet only in the dead and dry notions, or barren comprehensions about these
things?

QUERY 8. Do thou know how the letter kills, and how the Spirit quickneth
and makes alive? And art thou made alive by the Spirit, and born of the
heavenly water and Spirit, and so become spiritual as the scripture testifies?
That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

QUERY 9. Art thou come under the ministration of the Spirit? Do thou know
what the ministration of the Spirit is? Or do thou only know what the letter
says concerning the ministration of the Spirit, but art altogether ignorant of
the ministration itself?

QUERY 10. Do thou know what the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus
means? Have thou ever received this law; the law of the new covenant; the holy
law of life written in thy heart by the singer of God's Spirit? For the same
Spirit that wrote the law of the letter in tables of stone, writes the law of
the Spirit in the fleshly tables of the heart.

QUERY 11. Do thou not grieve the Holy Spirit* nor quench it, nor despise the
prophesyings thereon in thine own heart? For Christ is a King, a Priest, a
Prophet; and he ministers in his sanctuary, in his temple (which the holy
renewed heart is,) in and by his Spirit.

QUERY 12. Do thou know what the anointing is? Art thou anointed therewith?
And does thy whole ability lie therein, insomuch as that thou art daily
sensible thou can not do any thing of thyself, but still find God working
in thee, both to will and to do that which is right in his eyes, of his own
good pleasure?

QUERY 13. Did thy religion begin in the Spirit? In the living ministration of
the new covenant? Did thy knowledge begin so; to wit, in feeling God opening
thy heart by his Spirit, and giving thee the understanding whereby thou
might know him? Did thy faith begin in his power, and does it stand in the
same power to this day? Oh! that men were ^^nsible what is the right religion,
and of the inward appearance of God's holy arm and power, which alone can
redeem, and save the soul out of the hands of its enemies?

QUERY 14. Does thy worship stand in the Spirit, and inward life of truth in
thy heart? Art thou such a worshipper as the Father has sought out and made
so? Or art thou a worshipper of thine own or other men's making? And do thou
keep within the limits of the living and spiritual worship, and not transgress
the law thereof?

Oh! who would be mistaken and deceived about such weighty things as these, of
so great necessity and concern? Who would miss of God's Spirit, and of the law
and covenant of life in Christ Jesus, and be only in a dream concerning these
things, without the true, demonstrative knowledge, possession, and enjoyment of
them?

III.
Of the true Way (the Way of Holiness, the Way of Life,) and of the true
Teaching and Knowledge.
CHRIST is the way, the only way to the Father; there is not another. Now every
one that will truly know Christ, and come to Christ, must learn of the Father.
It is written in the prophets, All thy children shall be taught of the Lord;
every one therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me,
said Christ. Here are two things necessary for every one that would come to
Christ. One is hearing of the Father; the other is, learning that which he
t^acheth. For though a man do hear the living voice of the Father, yet if he do
not learn and keep the instruction of life received from him, he may be drawn
aside before he come to the Son. But he whose ears are opened to hear the
voice, and who feels the instruction of life from the Father, to go to him in
whom he has placed life; here the Spirit of the Father secretly draws in the
inward of a man's mind and spirit, from that which is really dead, to that
which is truly living.

Now, when a man is come to the Son, in whom the Father has placed the fullness
of life, then he shall witness him to be the way to the Father, and he will
teach him daily of the Father. And here is the state of true subjection to the
Son experienced, whom the soul must hear, and of whom he is to learn in all
things; who discovers the inward darkness in man's mind, and breaks down that
in him which is contrary to God, having a daily cross ready for that which is
to be crucified in him, whereby he shall die daily to himself. And as he dies
to himself, Christ will reveal himself more and more in him, and he shall feel
the pure seed of life springing more and more up in him, and living in him, and
he in it; in and through which he shall come more and more into union and
fellowship with the Father of spirits, and the whole living body of his church
and people.

But now, to learn of the Father to come to the Son, and to learn of the Son to
know the Father, and to walk in newness of spirit before him (and not in an old
dead knowledge and fleshly understanding,) these are great mysteries, which
none can learn by a literal conception and comprehension of things, but as they
are quickened, and their minds and understandings opened, and kept open, by the
Lord. Therefore this is the great skill and true wisdom, to know the Shepherd
and his voice; and his manner of appearing, and to what he appears; which is to
his own sheep, to the true birth. And his way and manner of appearing to that
birth, is by visiting and reaching to it by his power opening it, thereby
giving it to see, hear, and understand; but shutting up himself from the
contrary nature, wisdom, and spirit in all men.

There is somewhat which makes a fair show in the fleshly part, as if it were
of God; but God knows what and who are his. Now it is for the true children,
that the milk of the word, and the bread of life is; and them the Lord is still
gracious to, and hears all the desires and breathings of their hearts; them
he preserves and visits in Egypt, and also brings out thence. Them he
leads through the wilderness, dividing the Red Sea before them; before them
also he divides Jordan (the river of judgment,) causing them to pass through
it also, that they may enter into the Holy Land. And their lot he defends in
the Holy Land, in their subjection to the spirit and law of life which rules
there. But the contrary birth falls short by the way, and cannot enter into,
nor abide in, that which is pure and living of God.

Now in the lowly seed the whole mystery of life is learned, by those that come
thither, and wait there, growing up into him who is the head; but no lesson of
life, and of the truth as it is in Jesus, is learned out of it. Oh! how careful
had men need be to know this seed in themselves, and to witness its daily
springing up and growth in them.

IV.
Concerning Separation from the Spirit and Ways of the World.
THERE is a necessity of separation from the spirit, ways, and worships of the
world, by those that will be the Lord's people. The Jews outward were to be a
separated people from all other people (from their gods, from their worships)
if they would enjoy the favor of the Lord, and the blessings of the good land.
God had separated them from all other nations, and they were not to mingle with
them; neither in their worship, nor marriages, etc. So the Jews inward, who are
God's gathering of spiritual worshippers, out of every nation, kindred, tongue,
and people, are to be a separated and holy people to the Lord. For when God
cast off the Jews, he sought out worshippers in their stead, even for a
spiritual nation and holy people of inward Jews, instead of that outward
people, outward place of worship, and outward land, which he ca^t off. Now
those whom God seeks to be the new, inward, and spiritual worshippers (instead
of the literal and outward,) must come out of all other ways and gatherings,
upon the many mountains, to the mountain of the Lord's house, and to the place
of his gathering: the command is express, Come out from among them, and be ye
separate; and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, etc. 2 Cor.
vi. It is true, I seek you for worshippers, and I call you to the gospel-fea^t
of fat things, and I will receive you if ye come; but ye must first come out
from among all the false ways and false worshippers, and depart from, and not
so much as touch, that which is unclean (the unclean spirit, his unclean ways
and worshippers,) and then I will receive you, and own you as my sons and
daughters, and be a Father to you; not else. Mark now; The Jews outward, in
their day, must be separate from all the Heathen outward, if they would be
judged and owned by God for true worshippers according to the law. The
primitive Chris^^ans were to separate from both Heathen and Jews too (even
their temple, priests, and ordinances, which were once of God) if they would be
worshippers, true worshippers under the gospel, worshippers of God's seeking.
And the Christians, after the antichristian corruption and darkness, must come
out of Babylon; that is, out of all forms of religion, and buildings out of the
life and power (for that is Babylon, the city of confusion, which is built out
of, stands out of, and practices out of, the order and unity of the Spirit,)
if they will be found worshippers in the day of restoration; after the long
darkness of the apostasy, they must not worship the (...) (nor worship God, as
the beast teaches and requires; for in so worshipping, God is not worshipped,
but the beast*) nor bear his name, nor receive his mark, either on their
forehead or right hand, nor be of the number of his name. Now the command is as
express to come out of Babylon; that is, to separate from all antichristian
ways and worships; as ever it was to separate from the Heathen and Jews; and
there is no being a true worshipper in God's sight, but in the true way of
separation from all false worshippers, who worship in forms and appearances of
godliness, out of the life and power.

Now, oh! how precious it is to feel God's seeking, God's gathering, God's
separating, God's teaching, leading, drawing into the truth, and true way of
worship! For there are self-separations, which are out of the true spirit,
life, and power. Yea, God may begin the separation, and another wisdom may step
in, and carry it on, out of the limits of the sweet, innocent spirit, life, and
power. Oh! blessed is he who is separated by the Lord from all that is not of
him! But he that is but sensual, and has not the spirit, but only by a literal
knowledge separateth himself, he differs from others but in the outward form
and appearance of godliness; but is one in nature and ground with those whom he
separateth from. Thus the Papists, and all pretended Christians (of the same
spirit) who feel not the true Spirit, power, and life, are but one in the
ground, how great soever their difference outwardly seem. And those that
separate further and further (even to the utmost extent outwardly, or in the
way of appearance) being not separated by the Lord from that nature and spirit
wherein the enmity lodges, they are still inhabitants of one and the same city
(for the city of Babylon is very large) and daughters of one and the same
mother, even of the wisdom which is from beneath; which wisdom, in its highest
exaltation, is far beneath the nature and true excellency of the pure and
heavenly wisdom, even in its lowest and most contemptible appearance. Oh!
blessed is the religion, the worship, the separation, the fear of the Most High
God, the faith, the knowledge, which begins in the spirit and power (even in
the evidence and demonstration of God's own Spirit,) and which stands and
abides therein! For herein are the children of light distinguished, and kept
distinct (by God Almighty, who has made the difference) from all the children
of darkness.

1671. About the 12th month. By ISAAC PENINGTON, Prisoner for the testimony of
truth at Reading-gaol.

THE END.
The following BOOKS are printed and to be sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in
Market-street, between Second and Third-streets, Philadelphia.
The original and present State of Man, briefly considered; wherein is shown,
The Nature of his Fall, and the Necessity, Means, and Manner of his
Restoration, through the Sacrifice of Christ, and the sensible Operation of
that divine Principle of Grace and Truth, held forth to the World by the People
called Quakers, by Joseph Phipps.

Some Account of the Life and Gospel Labors of William Reckitt, late of
Lincolnshire in Great Britain. Also, Memoirs of the Life, Religious Experiences
and Gospel Labors of James Gough, late of Dublin, deceased. Bound together.

Works of that faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, John Woolman, late of
Mount-Holly in New Jersey, containing his Journal and other Writings.

Fruits of Retirement: or Miscellaneous Poems, moral and divine; being
Contemplations, Letters, etc. by Mary Mollineux.

The Plain Path to Christian Perfection, showing that we are to seek for
Reconciliation and Union with God, solely by renouncing ourselves, denying the
World, and following our blessed Savior in the Regeneration. Translated from
the Frenc^*

The History of the Life of Thomas Ellwood: or an Account of his Birth,
Education* etc. with diverse Observations on his Life and Manners when a Youth;
and how he came to be convinced of the Truth; with his many Sufferings and
Services for the same.

Primitive Christianity revived, in the Faith and Practi^e of the People called
Quakers. Written in Testimony to the present Dispensation of God through them,
to the World; that Prejudices may be removed, the Simple informed, the
Well-inclined encouraged, and the TRUTH, and its innocent FRIENDS rightly
represented, by William Penn.

Memoirs of the Life of John Roberts, alias Hayward.

Seven Discourses and three Prayers, with an Epistle to Friends in Tortola, by
Samuel Fothergill.

Grounds of a Holy Life, by Hugh Turford.

Fruits of a Father's Love; being William Penn's Advice to his Children,
relating to their Civil and Religious Conduct.

He has also for Sale:

Writing Paper of different Sizes and Qualities, in large or small Quantities;
Parchment; Quills; Ink-Powder; Sealing-Wax; Wafers. Blank Account Books;
Bibles; Testaments; Dilworth's, Benezet's and Pierce's Spelling-Books; Primers;
Buchanan's regular English Syntax; Bachmair's Grammar for learning German;
Schoolmaster's Assistant, and Sundry other Books and Stationary.


