AN ORATION DELIVERED JULY 4th, 1783.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 4th, 1783, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON; IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY Doctor JOHN WARREN.

HIC DIES VERE MIHI FESTUS ATRAS EXIMET CURAS.

Q Horat. (...) Carm. L 3. Ode 14. NIL ORITURUM ALIAS, NIL ORTUM TALE FATENTES.

Ibid. Lib. 2 Epist. 1. BOSTON: (Commonwealth of MASSACHSET^S) PRINTED BY JOHN
GILL, IN Court-Street.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON.
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting assembled, July 5,
1783.
VOTED, That John Scollay, Esquire Harbottle Dorr, Esquire Mr. Thomas Greenough,
Ezekiel Price, Esquire Capt. William Mackay, Tuthill Hubbart Esquire and David
Jeffries, Esquire, the Selectmen* be a Committee to wait on Doctor JOHN WARREN, and
in the Name of the Town, to thank him for the Learned and Elegant ORATION
delivered by him Yesterday at the Request of the Town, upon the Anniversary of
the Independence of the United States of America, in which, according to the
Intention of the Town, he considered the Feelings, Manner and Principles which
led to this great National Event, and to request of him a Copy thereof for the
Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

Gentlemen!
ON Condition that the Honesty of my Intentions and the warmth of my Feelings
on the Important Event, which was the Subject of this Oration may be admitted
to atone for the Imperfections of the Performance, I deliver a Copy of it for
the Press.

I am with the greatest Respect, Your Obedient Servant, JOHN WARREN.

AN ORATION.
FATHERS, BRETHREN, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS!
TO mark with accuracy and precision, the principles from which the great and
important transactions on the theater of the political world originate, is an
indespensable duty, not only of legislators, but of every subject of a free
State; fraught with the most instructive lessons on the passions that actuate
the human breast, the inquiry is amply adapted to the purpose of regulating the
social concerns of life.

THE laws and penalties by which subjects are compelled to promote the general
interests of a community, should ever be instituted with a special reference to
these principles, and the greatest perfection of human government consists in
the judiciousness of this application.

THE constitution or frame of government in a republican State, is
circumscribed by Barriers, which the ambitious or designing cannot easily
remove, without giving the alarm to those whose privileges might be infringed
by the innovation; but that the principle of administration may be grossly
corrupted, that the people may be abused, and enslaved under the best of
constitutions, is a truth to which the annals of the world may be adduced to
bear a melancholy attestation.

So silently have the advances of arbitary power been made. that a community
has often been upon the verge of misery and servitude, whilst all was calm and
tranquil in the State.

To revert to first principles is so essentially requsite to public happiness
and safety, that Polybius has laid it down as an incontrovertible axiom, that
every State must decline more or less rapidly, in proportion as she recedes
from the principles on which she was founded. Polyb. Hist. Lib. 6 P. 618.


THAT virtue is the true principle of republican governments Aristotle thinks
there is not any one virtue belonging to the subjects of a despotic government.

Polit. Lib. 1.
has been sufficiently proved by the ablest writers on the subject, and, that
whereas other forms of government may be supported without her, yet that in
this she is absolutely necessary to their existence.

A GENERAL prevalence of that love for our country which teaches us to esteem
it glorious to die in her defense, is the only means of perpetuating the
enjoyment of that liberty and security, for the support of which all government
was originally intended.

LAWS and punishments are but the ensigns of human depravity, to render them as
few as the public safety will admit, is the study of every wise, humane
legislature. A multiplicity of rigorous penal laws is not only incompatible
with the liberty of a free state, but even repugnant to human nature.

Montesquieu.
The happy influences of this noble passion, by precluding the necessity of a
multiplicity of Laws will free a People from those spectacles of misery and
horror, which the penalties annexed to the breach of them must inevitably
create.

THE contempt of dangers, and of death, when liberty was the purchase, has been
the means of elevating to the highest pitch of glory, those famed Republics of
antiquity, which later ages have considered as the models of political
perfection; instructed from early infancy to deem themselves the property of
the State, they were ever ready to sacrifice their concerns to her interests;
"dear to us (says the eloquent Cicero) dear to us are our Parents, dear are our
Children, our Neighbors and Associates, but above all things, dear is our
Country Cicero de Offic.
;" the Injuries that are done to an individual are limited, those to a
community may involve millions in destruction.

"IT is impossible not to love a patriot, it is only loving him who loves us,
Gordon's Sallust. P. 41.
-- it is impossible not to be charmed with the influences of those divine
sentiments, which induced the brave Decii to devote themselves to certain
Death, that they might ensure the Roman armies victory and glory.

THE celebrated story of the two Carthaginian brethren, who consented to be
buried alive, to increase the boundaries of their Country, shows us to what an
enthusiastic height this virtue may be carried.

AMONGST the Spartans, to return from the field of battle with or upon their
shields, was equally glorious, and subject of joy and acclamation; to escape
without them, an indelible mark of infamy and disgrace.

FROM public spirit proceeds almost every other virtue. The man who willingly
would die to save his Country, would surely sacrifice his fortune and
possessions, to secure her peace and happiness. The noble examples of frugality
which were exhibited in the conduct of the Spartan governors, who began the
reformation of the state, by delivering up their own private property, to
convince the citizens that their intentions were sincere, is a proof how much
it may be made to triumph over avarice and selfishness.

THE Thebans, under the matchless Epaminondas, when they were deserted by their
allies, and reduced to the greatest extremities, were by the wise example of
their general, and frequent skirmishes with the enemy, inspired with a spirit
of enterprise and bravery, which at length enabled them to vanquish thrice
their number of Lacedemonian troops, and having slain their general, to march
in hostile array to the very gates of Sparta.

THESE are the principles which have more or less animated the subjects of
every state, that has arrived to any considerable degree of opulence and
grandeur, and it is of the greatest use to observe how others have gradually
crept into governments, and suppressed, or eradicated the public virtue of a
people.

ALAS! to what amounts the summit of all human greatness! Sparta, the nurse of
heroes and legislators, Athens, the seat of arts and sciences, Carthage the
mart of all the trading nations, and even Rome, the haughty mistress of the
world, have all long since been levelled with the dust! of all the states and
cities of the globe that have experienced the like catastrophe, scarce can we
mention one that has not met her ruin, in a forgetfulness of those fundamental
principles on which her happiness depended.

So nearly is the most prosperous condition of a people, allied to decay and
ruin, that even this flattering appearance conceals the seeds, that finally
must produce her destruction. It was the victory over the Persians, obtained in
the straits of Thalamis that corrupted the Republic of Athens, and the defeat
of the Athenians ruined the Republic of Syracuse.

Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, V. 1 P. 163.


THE object of public virtue, is to secure the liberties of the community, a
security of liberty admits of every man's pursuing, without molestation, the
measures most likely to increase his ease, and to place him in a state of
independent affluence, nothing is more conducive to these ends than a free and
unlimited commerce, the encouragement of which is undoubtedly the duty of the
Commonwealth, and the feelings of humanity are, in a general sense, highly
interested in the prosecution of it.

COMMERCIAL intercourse and connection have perhaps contributed more toward
checking the effusion of blood, than all the obligations of morality and
religion, in their usual state of debility, could ever have effected. Peace is
the natural effect of Trade.

Montesquieu II. P. 2.
The ideas of conquest and destruction amongst the ancients, were commonly
comprehended under the same term, and torrents of human blood have been shed to
gratify a spirit of revenge; in latter times the views of almost every powerful
nation with whom civilization has been the effect of trade, have been directed
to the support of that political balance, upon which this intercourse depends.

IN the quarrel between the Swedes and Danes, a short time previous to the
restoration of Charles the second of England, and again in the reign of William
the third, the Dutch and the English sent their fleets into the Baltic, to
prevent those inconveniences that would have resulted to the commerce of the
maritime powers, had either of those kingdoms been destroyed, and the same
thing has taken place in the general wars against France. Vide present state of
Europe, P. 24.


CONSIDERED then as an instrument for lessening the calamities of war, humanity
must ever exult in the countenance given to trade; the immediate effect of it,
when extensive, is usually an augmentation of wealth, but as it is generally
impossible for every subject to acquire a great degree of opulence, the riches
of the state become accumulated in the coffers of a few; Luxury is always
proportional to the inequality of fortune.

Montesquieu, I. P. 137.
the passions of the great almost invariably extend to the body of the people,
who to gratify an abounded thirst for gain, are ready to sacrifice every other
blessing to that, which in any degree, furnishes them with the means of
imitating their superiors; bribery and venality, the grand engines of slavery,
have been called in to the assistance of the aspiring nobles, who, in this
case, never fail to make the deluded people pay them the full price of their
prostitution.

THIS accession of power, acquired by the consent of the people themselves,
enables their governors to assume the reins of absolute control, to burst all
the bonds of social obligation, and finally to extort by violence, what
formerly they were obliged to purchase; accustomed to a habit of sloth and
idleness, the subjects are rendered too effeminate to apply themselves to labor
and fatigue, or if they do it, are soon discouraged by the rapaciousness of
their rulers, a spirit of faction and uneasiness becomes generally prevalent;
impressed with that awful respect with which the trappings of wealth
universally inspire a people that have been accustomed to view it as the
measure of human felicity, they are too pusillanimous to relieve themselves
from their burden by an united effort of the whole, China the richest and most
populous commercial empire of the universe, was subdued by a handful of poor
Tartars.

Montague on Republics, 377.
and the only object of intestine commotion, is the plunder of the rich, that
they may sell the acquisition to the highest bidder; insurrections of this kind
are most commonly easily suppressed, and farther impositions are forever the
consequence.

THE extortion exercised on the earnings of the labourer is an effectual check
upon the pursuit of agriculture; Countries are not cultivated in proportion to
their fertility but to their liberty.

Montesq. Spirit of Laws, V. 1. P. 388.
Population, universally in a great measure proportionable thereto, being by
this means limited, and discouraged, the number of subjects, the real source of
strength and support, daily diminishes, 'till at length they fall an easy prey
to the first Despot, whether foreign or domestic, who offers them the yoke; --
Such is the fatal operation of luxury, almost invariably the consequence of
unbounded wealth. The Spaniards, since the discovery of the American mines,
have been incessantly declining.

Montesq. Spirit of Laws, V. 1. P. 64.


THE Carthaginians, says Montague, On Republics, P. 339.
stand single upon the records of history, the only people in the universe upon
whom immense wealth has never been able to work its usual effects; but even in
this instance it may perhaps reasonably be questioned, whether the factions
that prevented the illustrious Hannibal from entering the gates of Rome, whilst
he had filled that city with terror and dismay, were not the effect of
opulence, and loss of public virtue. The introduction of wealth in the Roman
republic, is dated at the conquest of Antiochus the great, and the era of
corruption from the same memorable period; what sluices of depravity and misery
did they not open in the state! That senate which once resembled an assembly of
Kings, whose rigid faith had rendered them the objects of universal veneration
whilst frugality and patriotism were held in estimation, can now meanly stoop
to avail themselves of a quibble in the terms of a treaty, to destroy a City
they had pledged their honor to preserve; that senate from which a single
deputy had once caused a mighty monarch to tremble and obey, and barely by the
motion of his cane, obliged him, at the head of a victorious army, to resign
his conquest, can now condescend to flatter the vilest passions, and bear to be
insulted with the most humiliating usage without daring to murmur or complain.

THE unparalled usurpations of Sylla, Marius, and Caesar are but variegated
forms, in which are exhibited, the baneful effects of that adulatory
submission, with which a base, degenerate, and corrupted people have become the
instruments of tyranny and murder; the bloody proscriptions and licensed
executions of those pests of the human race, which have disgraced the Roman
name, were generally accompanied with the thanks of the Senate. Jugurtha, that
infamous Numidian Prince, who ungratefully murdered the children of his
benafactor, in this corrupted age of the Republic, secures himself from the
punishment due to his crimes by bribing his Judges, and by the same means
enables himself to enter the Roman camp, and make that army whose force he once
had dreaded, submit to pass the yoke, the most ignominious punishment that
could have been inflicted.

THE Roman Provinces would never so generally have submitted to the impositions
of their rapacious governors, had not the minds of the people been prepared for
them by their participation in the manners of the citizens.

WHEN once a State has arrived to this extreme degree of corruption, nothing
short of a miracle can wrest it from destruction; luxury and venality become a
branch of education, and as nothing can operate so strongly on the minds of
youth, as examples set by parental authority, The surest way of instilling into
children a love for their country* is, for parents to set the example.

Montesq. Spirit of Laws, V. 1. P. 49.
the evil becomes ingraffed into the opinions of the people; whilst the Spartan
Republic retained her virtue, she was free and invincible, she made the mighty
army of the Persian monarch flee before her, and with three hundred soldiers
stopped the march of more than three millions of men, with the exception only
of a single man they died in the contest, with their arms in their hands, and a
magnificent monument was erected to their memory, with an inscription that
comprehends the finest eulogium, "Go traveller and tell at Lacedemon, that we
died here in defense of her sacred laws." -- Philopaemen, the general of the
Achaeans, was so fully persuaded that the only means of reducing this brave
people to subjection and dependence, was to eradicate the principle of public
virtue, that he attempted it, by endeavoring to change the manner of their
education. The people will never fail to pursue right measures for the security
of their liberties, if they are but rightly informed; and it is a pleasing
consideration that the means of education, and the pr^m^^ion of the sciences,
are so generally the objects of public attention in these rising confederated
states.
A change was afterward effected, a taste for luxury inculcated, Athens
subjected to her arms, her spoils and riches seized with greediness, corruption
ensued, and ruin closed the drama.

WE are charmed with the noble exertions of the United Provinces in their
opposition to despotic government, yet how soon are we astonished to see that
brave people in the greatest danger of a total subjection from that passion for
commerce, which by attracting their whole attention, and confining their views
to the objects of gain, induced them, that they might not be interrupted in
their favorite pursuits, to confide in foreign mercenaries for their defense
and protection; Vide Sir William Temple's observations upon the United
Provinces of the Netherlands, P. 261.
such was the general depravity of morals at one unhappy period of the
Republic, that their excellent Stadtholder, the Prince of Orange and Nassau,
exhibited the most brilliant virtues, to little other purpose than to convince
himself and the world, that loss of public virtue is an infalliable mark of
real, or approaching declension. Present state of Europe, P. 500.


THE Republic of Venice, which for twelve centuries has maintained her freedom
and independence, and which has been independently a match for the whole
Ottoman Power, has preserved herself solely by her wise maxims of Legislation,
founded on the first principles of her government.

THE thirteen independent cantons of Switzerland, preserved from slavery by
resistance to tyranny, retain the same unchangeable character for simplicity,
honesty, frugality, and modesty, with which they first set out They have no
corrupt or corrupting court, no blood sucking placemen, no standing army, the
ready instruments of tyranny, no ambition for conquest, no luxury, no citadels
against invasion, and against liberty, their mountains are their
fortifications, and every householder is a Soldier ready to fight for his
country.

Political Disquisitions, III.410. Quot. Voltaire.
. It would be endless to enumerate all the instances that might be offered, of
the miseries and wretchedness that have been heaped upon mankind, by a general
adoption of the contrary qualities, we need but advert to the history of that
nation, whose extreme degeneracy, has induced them to acquiesce in those
enormous impositions, which a braver people have resisted, at the hazard of
their lives and fortunes, and even to become the willing tools for enforcing a
servile subjection, upon those, whom they were bound by ties of blood, to love
and succor.

THAT we may learn wisdom by the misfortunes of others, that by tracing the
operation of those causes which have proved ruinous to so many states and
kingdoms, we may escape the rocks and quicksands on which they have been
shipwrecked, it may be useful to take a cursory retrospect of the motives and
opinions, which have effected the dismemberment of a very large and valuable
part of the British dominions, and thereby deprived them of a principal source
of strength and greatness; under a constitution which has ever been the boast
of Englishmen, we have seen a most shameful prostitution of wealth to the
purposes of bribery and corruption, with a view still farther to augment that
opulence of individuals, which when exorbitant, must always be injurious to the
common interest The great increase of our commerce after the peace of Utrecht,
brought in a vast accession of wealth; and that wealth revived; and gradually
diffused that luxury through the whole nation, which had laid dormant during
the warlike reigns of William and Ann; to this universal luxury, and to this
only, we must impute the amazing progress of corruption which seized the very
vitals of our constitution.

Montague on Republics, P. 376.
.

WE have seen the members of a House of Commons, which was once the bulwark of
the nation, and the palladium of Liberty, availing themselves of the meanest
artifices for securing a seat, because it enabled them to gratify their
favorite passions; and shame to human nature! We have seen a people, once famed
for honesty and temperance, intoxicated at the gambols of an election, and
stupidly selling their suffrages for representatives in Parliament!

THE whole business of government had become an affair of trade and
calculation, the representative who expended his property for the purchase of a
vote, was sure to make his profits, by the sale of his influence for the
support of ministerial prodigality, or absolute domination; and to extend the
security with which the members might plunder the people and trample on their
rights, the prolongation of their parliaments to a term of time sufficient to
inveterate their power, was at length adopted, for the purpose of riveting
those chains which an undue influence in elections had previously forged Vide
Political Disquisitions, passim.
.

RELIGIOUS tyranny had forced from the unnatural bosom of a parent, a race of
hardy sons, who chose rather to dwell in the deserts of America with the savage
natives, than in the splendid habitations of more savage men.

SCARCELY had these persecuted fugitives breathed from the fatigues of a
dangerous voyage, when behold the cruel hand of power stretched over the
atlantic to distress them in their new possessions! Having found a rude
uncultivated soil, inadequate to the supply of the conveniences of life, they
attempted those arts of which they stood immediately in need Vide Abbe Raynal's
history of British settlements, V.II.
; a prohibition of the manufactures necessary to cloth them in these then
inhospitable wilds was early threatened, and though they were afterward
permitted, yet it was under the most humiliating restrictions It ever was, and
ever would have been the policy of Great Britain, had this country continued
under her government, as much as possible to suppress our manufactures. -- One
of her writers, speaking of the colonies, says, they will certainly set up
those manufactures with which we now supply them, and thereby deprive us of
those advantages, we are entitled to reap from their establishment, but it is
to be hoped the Parliament of England will keep a watchful eye over our
plantations, in regard to a matter of such important concernment to this
kingdom.

Postlethwayt's Dict. of Commerce, Article Colonies.
.

FROM a principle of avarice and the most unjustifiable partiality in prejudice
of these infant settlements, all commercial communication between them was
forbidden, the importation of mercantile articles was laid under the heaviest
restraints, none were to be freighted, not even the produce of foreign
countries, from any other than British ports, and all exportations were finally
to terminate in Britain.

THE manifest object of these measures, was to enrich some crouching favorites
at home, 'till at length, plunged into debt, even in the midst of success and
conquest, by the rapaciousness of an insatiable ministry, and a general
corruption of manners, every sinew was strained amongst their domestic subjects
for the acquisition of a large revenue, but this resource having been found
insufficient for the purpose, the expenses of the war, out of which they had
just emerged, were made the pretext for levying taxes on the unrepresented
subjects of America; the first requisition for the supply of an army was too
readily submited to, and the subsequent acts, which have led to that war, in
which these states have been called upon to contend for every thing dear in
life, are too recent to be yet forgotten by you my fellow citizens, on whom the
vengeance they were designed to execute has so largely fallen.

THE mild voice of supplication and petition had in vain assailed the royal
ear, the blood of your fellow-countrymen was wantonly shed on the memorable
plains of Lexington, you flew to arms and made your last appeal to Heaven.

NEVER did an enthusiastic ardor in the cause of an injured country blaze forth
with such resistless fury, never did patriotic virtue shine out with such
transcendent luster, as on that solemn day! scarcely was there to be seen a
peasant through the land "whose bosom beat not in his country's cause." Angels
must have delighted in the sight! A wide extended country, roused into action
at the first flash of arms, and pouring forth her thousands of virtuous yeomen
to avenge the blood of their slaughtered brethren on the unprincipled
aggressors! Quickly they fled from merited destruction, and fleeing, shed their
blood, an immolation to the beloved manes of those who fell the early martyrs
to this glorious cause; you then convinced deluded Britons, that bravery was
not the growth of any one peculiar spot or soil Nothing more strikingly
demonstrates the folly of a commander, than his really undervaluing the prowess
of an enemy. Fabius thought highly of the abilities of Hannibal and made his
dispositions accordingly.
.

THE enterprise it is true was bold and daring! The nations of the world stood
still, astonished at the desperate blow! The brave alone are capable of noble
actions; Defenseless, and unfurnished with the means of war, you placed your
confidence in that God of armies who approves the struggles of the oppressed,
and relying on the honest feelings of the heart for your success, you ventured
to contend with veteran armies, and to defy the formidable power of a nation
accustomed to success and conquest.

YOUR Guardian Genius patronized your cause, presided in your counsels,
inspired you with intrepidity and wisdom, and mysteriously infatuated the
British chiefs; protected in the days of weakness and of danger, by the
concealment of your real wants, the boasted wisdom of your crafty foe was
baffled and confounded.

THROUGH all the various fortunes of the field, you persevered with an
undaunted front, and whilst your coasts were swarming with fleets, full
freighted with the choicest legions of the enemy, a force that would have
stiffened with despair a less determined people, you dared to pass the
irrevocable decree, that forever cut asunder the ties that bound you to a cruel
parent, assumed your rank amongst the nations of the world, and instituted a
new Epoch in the annals of your country; with solemn oaths, you pledged your
sacred honor, to die united in defense of your much injured rights, or live in
virtuous possession of peace, of liberty and safety. -- The generations yet
unborn shall read with rapture that distinguished page, whereon in capitals
shall stand recorded, the important transaction of that day, and celebrate to
the latest ages of this republic, the anniversary of that resolution of the
American Congress, which gave the rights of sovereignty and independence to
these United States.

LONG may they retain that spirit of union which has enabled them to withstand
the mighty force of Britain, and never be persuaded, through the artifice of
their enemies, to violate the articles of that confederation to which they owe
their liberty; should ever the constitutional authority of the legal
representative body of the nation be annihilated, the bond of union will be
dissolved, and we shall be reduced to the greatest hazard of misery and
subjection When Rome had arrived to her highest pitch of grandeur, it was the
associations formed behind the Danube and the Rhine, associations formed by the
terror of her arms, that enabled the Barbarians to resist her.

Montesq. Sp. of Laws, V. 1. P. 184. The Canaanites were destroyed by reason
they were petty Monarchies, that had no union, nor confederacy for their common
defense.

Ibid V. 1. P. 185.
.

BY means of their union, the states, alone and unassisted, have vanquished a
numerous army of brave and veteran troops, and led their chief a captive to
your capital. -- As long as time shall last the noble example you have set the
world shall be produced, to show what wonders may be done by men united, and
determined to be free Twelve brave men, under the conduct of Cleomenes* broke
loose from their prison, spread horror and destruction through one of the most
populous cities in the universe, and not finding the inhabitants courageous
enough to oppose them, they unanimously perished by their own hands.

Plutarch. Vit Cleom. P. 822.
.

YOUR virtue has supplied the place of wealth in the prosecution of the war;
the taxes that have been levied, have generally been submitted to with
cheerfulness, and in a free state, where the people themselves are the
assessors, so far were they from being considered as a grievance, that you
wisely esteemed them as the symptoms of virtue, because they ever evince that
the safety of the public is the supreme object of attention. It is a general
rule that taxes may be heavier in proportion to the liberty of the subject, and
that there is a necessity for diminishing them in proportion to the increase of
slavery

Montesquieu, V. 1. P. 305. How much these States enjoy advantages superior to
Great Britain, with respect to the payment of their public debt, is
sufficiently obvious.




NOR shall the powerful aids of a magnanimous Ally be suffered here to pass
unnoticed; the generous terms on which assistance and support were granted,
shall leave impressions of esteem and friendship which time and age shall not
be able to efface Queen Elizabeth of England offered her favor, protection and
assistance to the United Provinces, whilst they were contending for their
liberties, and the grateful remembrance of her friendship was frequently in the
months of all sorts of people, and still continues to the present day. Vide Sir
William Temples history of the United Provinces. P. 68.
. Under the conduct of One It greatly redounds to the honor of these states,
as well as that of their great General, that whilst the British have four or
five times changed their commander in chief, the same has continued at the head
of the American forces through the whole war; has this been the case, because
amongst our enemies it was more difficult to find a virtuous man, or because
the government under which they held their places was more factious and
corrupt? The long continuance of the hannibalic war, in which the Carthaginians
maintained their ground above 16 years against the whole force of the Romans,
is imputed to the annual change of Generals amongst the latter, whilst the
former were constantly commanded by the same extraordinary man.
illustrious General, the brave allied armies have together contended for the
rights of human nature, have mingled blood, conquered a formidable host of
chosen troops, and laid the British Standard at your feet The British Standards
taken by the allied armies at York and Gloucester; were presented at the feet of
Congress.
.

AT length, ye favored Sons of freedom, THE GLORIOUS WORK IS DONE Vide last
paragraph of the Oration, delivered March 5th, 1775, on the anniversary of the
Boston massacre.
! Heralds of Peace proclaim the joyful tidings! Let the remotest corners of the
globe resound with acclamations of applause, 'till even the inanimate creation
shall join the concert, and dance to more sublime than Orphean strains! Genius
of liberty rejoice, for Heaven has opened a new asylum to your long persecuted
sons! Rejoice ye inhabitants of this chosen land! Let songs of joy dwell long
upon your thankful tongues, and notes of gratitude to Heaven be raised on ten
thousand strings, 'till angels catch the sound, and echo back, Peace and good
will to men! Had I a thousand tongues, and all the eloquence of Cicero or
Demosthenes, too feeble were my accents, too small my energy for this
transporting theme!

WHAT miseries and tortures have we not escaped! Go search the the records of
tyranny and usurpation, and learn the insolence forever consequent on the
suppression of insurrections in the behalf of violated rights! Agis, the brave
reformer of the Spartan manners, was condemned by the tyrant who owed his life
to him, to die an ignominious death for an unsuccessful opposition to the
torrent of vice which had overwhelmed that republic; a fond and anxious mother
presented at the door of his prison, a petition, that her son might be indulged
with a hearing before the people; the unfeeling minister of cruelty had already
perpetrated the execrable deed, and sneeringly replied, no farther injury
should be done him; he then introduced her to the apartment where laid the body
of her murdered son, with that of her aged mother who had attended her;
sensible that his misfortunes were the consequence of lenity carried to a
degree that rendered it impolicy, she could not forbear kissing the bloody
corpse, and uttering aloud the sentiments of her soul; in the midst of this
affecting scene, that would have extorted pity from a savage breast, the
ruffian, exasperated at these effusions of grief, as expressing her
justification of his conduct, rushed on the distracted mother, and plunged his
dagger in her breast!

THE history of that brave I cannot here forbear mentioning to the honor of
this people, the recovery of whole liberty has in its circumstances been so
nearly connected with that of our own, the most astonishing act of bravery
perhaps ever exhibited, an army; under Donogh having been greatly reduced by
previous actions, was under a necessity of engaging the king of Ossory, with a
vast superiority in the number of his troops; The sick and wounded insisted on
accompanying their General to the field; after many fruitless efforts to
disuade them from this resolution, it was agreed, that they should be tied to
stakes drove in to the ground, that they might be supported, and in their weak
state prevented from falling; an effective man was placed on each side; the
mangled soldiers having tented their wounds with moss, were placed at their
stations, began to brandish their swords, and prepare for the desperate combat,
a fight however that struck such horror into the minds of the enemy, that they
unanimously refused to fight them!

Winne's History of Ireland, V. 1. P. 177.
and honest nation, whose spirited exertions have lately extricated them from
that subjection and dependence, to which the arms and artifice of a
neighboring kingdom had reduced them, sufficiently evinces, that resistance to
arbitrary power, needs but the name of rebellion, to furnish out a pretext for
every form of violence and cruelty; often have the scaffolds smoked with gore
poured from the veins of patriots and of heroes, and the destroying sword of
despotism been drunk with the richest blood of a community!

HAD conquest crowned the efforts of our enemies* numbers of our worthy
patriots, had now been bleeding under the vindictive hand of a successful foe,
and we perhaps in mine^ or dungeons, been dragging out a life of wretchedness,
and weeping in silence, over the memory of those, to whom were justly due, the
applause and gratitude of every friend to liberty and virtue.

WHAT a contrast to this frightful picture does the joyfulness of the occasion
which has this day assembled us together, exhibit to our view! Many of these
illustrious freemen now meet us here, and mingle tears of joy and gratitude
with ours!

THOUSANDS of brave, deserving members of society, have fallen an untimely prey
to the poisonous exhalations of a prison, and filthy guardships, have been the
charnel houses of our brethren; confined within those dreadful regions of
horror and despair, where no refreshing breezes ever entered, the tainted
element itself was charged with pestilence and death! You who have seen the
helpless victim of a merciless disease, groaning under the agonies of a
relentless fever, can tell what epithets to use in the description of the
tortures they endured; their tongues were parched with raging heat! Their
boiling blood scalded the very veins in which it circulated -- and did ye then,
ye ministers of wrath, supply a single cup of water to refresh their thirsty
souls? Verily, ye unworthy offspring of a christian land, inasmuch as ye did it
not to one of these, ye did it not to him who shortly will avenge the cause of
innocence.

BUT smiling peace returns, and death and carnage shall prevail no more to
swell the number of the slain; we wish not Britons, too severely to upbraid
you, we only mean to hold you up as an example to the world, from which the
best of lessons may be learnt.

-- LET us however contemplate those unfictitious scenes of misery and
distress, which an arduous struggle for our liberties have cost us; let us
remember the principles that produced the opposition, as well as those that
gave occasion for it, and then if we can tamely bear to see our liberties
destroyed, let us flee, quickly flee, from these yet hallowed shores, nor dare
pollute the land which holds our fathers tombs A chief of the Canadians to whom
an European nation proposed their ceding their patrimony, replied, We were born
upon this land, our fathers were buried here, can we say to our fathers bones,
rise up and come with us into a foreign land?

Voltaire Philosophy of History, Chap. 7.
.

A TIME of tranquillity and peace is often a season of the greatest danger When
once a state has struggled through many and great difficulties, and emerged at
last to freedom and wealth, men begin to sink gradually into luxury, and to
grow more dissolute in their morals.

Montague on Republics, P. 362.
, because it is too apt to involve a general opinion of perfect security. The
Roman state, whilst Carthage stood her rival, retained her virtue, Carthage was
destroyed, and Rome became corrupt Baron de Montesquieu speaking of Carthage
and Rome says, they were alarmed and strengthened by each other, strange that
the greater security those states enjoyed, the more like stagnated waters they
were subject to corruption! V. 1.164.
; unless we are properly apprized of, and duly armed against this evil, the
United States will one day experience a similar fate.

TRANSPORTED from a distant clime, less friendly to its nurture, you have
planted here the stately Tree of Liberty, and live to see it flourish! But
whilst you pluck the fruit from the bending branches, remember that its roots
were watered with your blood! Remember the price at which you purchased it,
"nor barter liberty for gold."

GO search the vaults, where lay enshrined the relics of your martyred
fellow-citizens, and from their dust receive a lesson on the value of your
freedom! When virtue fails, when luxury and corruption shall undermine the
pillars of the state, and threaten a total loss of liberty and patriotism, then
solemnly repair to those sacred repositories of the dead, and if you can,
return and spo^^ away your rights.

WHEN you forget the value of your freedom, read over the history that recounts
the wounds from which your country bled peruse the picture which brings back to
your imaginations, i^ the lively colors of undisguised truth, the wild,
distracted feeling of your hearts! -- But if your happy lot has been not to
have felt the pangs of a convulsive separation from friend or kindred, lear^
them of those that have. --

BEHOLD the hoary head of age, descending to the grave with sorrow and despair;
pleased with enchanting prospects, in a so^ with whom his very soul was bound
together, a son who promised to have been the stay and staff of his defenseless
years, the ^^od old man insensibly declined along the path of life, and
scarcely felt the weight of three score years and ten -- the deadly shaft
pierced through the bosom of his hopes, and doomed him to breathe out the
residue of life in solitude and wretchedness. --

OBSERVE the Youth whose parent, guardian, and protector, just at the time when
the faculties of reason were beginning to put forth their buds, and court the
fostering hand of culture, snatched from their dutiful embraces, and all the
endearing ties of life. --

BUT, if suspicions of a counterfeited grief, you seek an instance where sorrow
cannot be feigned, go follow her whose ^^reaming eyes, distracted mein, and
bursting heart, announce the pangs that nature feels, in the sudden and violent
dissolution of the nearest and most dear connection --

I might proceed -- but permit me here to draw the sable veil, and leave to
your imaginations to suggest the rest -- but stay -- forbear, nor longer mourn
for those who have no cause for tears. --

"Glory with all her lamps shall burn
"To watch the warrior's sleeping clay,
"'Till the last trump shall raise his urn,
"To share the triumphs of the day."
IF to latest ages we retain the spirit which gave our INDEPENDENCE birth; if
taught by the fatal evils that have subverted so many mighty states, we learn
to sacrifice our dearest interests in our country's cause, enjoin upon our
children a solemn veneration for her laws, as next to adoration of their God,
the great concern of man, and seal the precept with our last expiring breath,
these STARS, that even now enlighten half the world, shall shine a glorious
constellation in this western hemisphere, 'till stars and suns shall shine no
more, and all the kingdoms of this globe shall vanish like a scroll.

ERRATA.
PAGE 7. line 3 for means read mean. P. 11. l. 16. for abounded r. unbounded.
P. 16. l. 13. for infalliable r. infallible.

FINIS.

