SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE SITUATION, DISPOSITION, AND CHARACTER OF THE INDIAN
NATIVES OF THIS CONTINENT.

I will declare the Decree: The LORD has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this
Day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession.

PSALM ii. 7. Open thy Mouth for the Dumb, in the Cause of all such as are
appointed to Destruction.

PROVE. xxxi. 8. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
MARKET-STREET.

M DCC LXXXIV.

PREFACE.
THE writer of the following sheets has thrown together a few facts, to obviate
some mistakes which have been embraced, respecting the Natives of this land; he
neither wishes to flatter those of his own color by acknowledging that they
are superior to the tawney Indian; otherwise than as they excel him in acts of
benesicence and of an imitation of the the great Author of the Christian
Religion; whose name they have assumed; nor to exalt the character of the poor
untutored Indian, at the expense of truth, by over-rating their chastity, their
love of justice, and hospitality; particularly in their affectionate reception
of our Ancestors on their first settlement of Pennsylvania; nor to say more in
their favor than is supported by the concurrent testimonies of historians of
various religious professions and different nations.

Neither is it intended to justify these people in any of their acts of
cruelty: The motives which have induced the writer to engage in this
publication are superior to party views; an apprehension of duty, and universal
good will to mankind. And if the Indian is represented to have been oppressed
and injured, it is not to provoke a spirit of retaliation, nor to excite a
discontent, but to state to the view of the public, wherein they have been
aggrieved; and wherein they have been culpable, that the people of these states
may see they have not been free from blame, in hopes that a more candid and
indulgent consideration of their situation may excite in us humanity and
tenderness.

Be not offended therefore if the Indian is represented as a rational being as
well as ourselves, if having an immortal soul, capable of receiving the
refining influence of our holy religion, it is that he may be allowed to dwell
in safety, and rejoice in the opportunity, which a return of peace, may afford
to instruct him in the knowledge of the true God.

If doubts should remain, whether the Indians are, indeed susceptible of those
religious impressions as here mentioned; the reader is referred to the several
accounts of the successful labors of the pious Thomas Mayew, John Elliott, and
others in New England, published by themselves; and also a publication of a
more late date, by David Brainard, of New Jersey who resided among them several
years, entitled, Mirabila Dei inter Indicos: Or the Rise and Progress of a
remarkable Work of Grace amongst a Number of Indians, in the Provinces of
New Jersey and Pennsylvania.

SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE INDIAN NATIVES OF THIS CONTINENT.
SITUATE as we are on this Continent with very extensive frontiers, bordering
upon a vast wilderness, inhabited by the native Indians, it becomes a subject
worthy the most serious attention of every friend of mankind, every lover of
his country, to be truly informed what is the situation and disposition of that
people, so far as it may have an influence upon our duty as Christians, and our
peace and safety as members of Civil Society: And that we may not make a rash
estimate of our own importance, or of the incapacity of those people for
religious improvement, the following observations and quotations are
recommended to the serious perusal of every reader, as they give a view of the
opinions of some of the early settlers, of different denominations, in this
continent.

The first settlers of Pennsylvania, who had full opportunities of being
acquainted with the nature and disposition of the Natives, and who made it a
principal point to observe strict justice in all their transactions with them,
have left us very favorable memorials of the long continued kindness they
experienced from these people: the great disadvantages to which their ignorance
and roving temper subjected them, our forefathers thought it their duty to
endeavor to draw them from, by exemplary acts of benevolence and instruction;
which pious practice has since been successfully pursued, by several well
disposed persons in New England, New Jersey, and elsewhere: several of whom
have transmitted satisfactory accounts of their labors.

From these publications as well as from the remembrance of some yet living, it
is evident, that the natural disposition of the Indians has generally been to
show kindness to the Europeans, in their early settlements; and that their
mental powers are equally with our own capable of improvement; that the
apparent difference in them, as well as in the Black People and us, arises
principally from the advantages of our education, and manner of life.

Some writers have represented Indians as naturally ferocious, treacherous, and
ungrateful, and endeavored to establish this character of them, from some
particular transaction which has happened on special occasions: but no
conclusion of their original character should be drawn from instances in which
they have been provoked, to a degree of fury and vengeance, by unjust and cruel
treatment from European Aggressors; of which most histories of the first
settlements on this continent furnish instances, and which writers have
endeavored to color and vindicate, by reprobating the character of those poor
people.

It is a matter of fact, proved by most Historical Accounts of the trade
carried on with the Indians at our first acquaintance with them, as well as in
the first settlements made on this continent, that they generally manifested
themselves to be kind, hospitable and generous to the Europeans, so long as
they were treated with justice and humanity; but when the adventurers from a
thirst of gain, over reached the Natives, and they faw some of their friends
and relations treacherously entrapped and carried away to be sold for slaves,
Amongst the many instances of this kind which might be given, that are recorded
by different authors, the following is most striking, viz. One Hunt, an early
trader with the Indians of New England, after a prosperous trade with the
Natives, enticed between 20 or 30 on board his vessel, and contrary to the
public faith, clapped them under hatches, and sold them to the Spaniards at
Malaga; but the Indians resented it, and revenged themselves on the next
English that came on the coast. Neal's History of New England, page 21.
themselves injuriously treated and driven from their native possessions, what
could be expected but that such a sordid conduct in the Europeans, would
produce a change of disposition in the Indians. The early settlers of
New Jersey have always confirmed the testimony of the Pennsylvanians, with
respect to the good usage they met with from the Indians. The writer of the
History of that Province informs us, page 440, That, for almost a century, the
Natives had all along maintained an intercourse of great cordiality and
friendship with the inhabitants.

It is well known that the Indians' deportment to each other is peaceable and
inoffensive; esteeming sudden anger unbecoming and ignominious; they seldom
differ with their neighbor, or do them any harm or injury, except when
intoxicated by strong liquor, of which they are fond, to an enormous degree:
this is the general character given of Indians, by all impartial writers.

The noted French author Charlevoix, who appears to have been deep in his
inquiries into their manners and disposition, in his long travels from Quebec,
through the lakes and down the Mississipi to Florida, informs, That with a mein
and appearance altogether savage; and with manners and customs which favor the
greatest barbarity, the Indians enjoy all the advantages of society. At first
view, says he, one would imagine them without form of government, law or
subordination, and subject to the wildest caprice; nevertheless, they rarely
deviate from certain maxims and usages founded on good sense alone, which holds
the place of law, and supplies in some sort, the want of legal authority. Human
Nature, even in its rudest state, is possessed of a strong sense of right and
wrong; a pure principle which is not confined to any name or form, but diffuses
itself as universally as the sun; it is That light which enlightens every man
coming into the world. John i. 9. All those who vield to its impressions are
brethren in the full extent of the expression, however differing in other
respects.
Reason alone is capable of retaining them in a kind of subordination; not the
less effectual, toward the end proposed, for being entirely voluntary. They
manifest much stability in the engagements they have solemnly entered upon;
patient in affliction, as well as in their submission to what they apprehend to
be the appointment of Providence; in all which they manifest a nobleness of
soul, and constancy of mind, at which we rarely arrive with all our Philosophy
and Religion. As they are neither slaves to ambition, nor interest; the two
passions which have so much weakened in us those sentiments of humanity, which
the kind Author of Nature has engraven in the human heart, and kindled those of
covetousness, which are as yet generally unknown amongst them.

Is it not notorious that they are generally kinder to us than we are to them?
There is scarce an instance occurs, but that they treat every white man, who
comes amongst them, with respect; which is not the case from us to them.

Their modest conduct to women who have been captured by them, is certainly
worthy of commendation, much exceeding what would be expected, in like cases,
from the lower class amongst ourselves.

It is also acknowledged by all impartial persons, who have been conversant
with Indians, that they have generally manifested a faithfulness to the
engagements they have entered into for the safety of any person they have
undertaken to protect, far exceeding that to be found amongst the generality of
white people; as also in the performance of those covenants which they have
confirmed by giving belts of wampum.

Charlevoix farther observes, That whoever insinuates himself in their esteem,
will sind them sufficiently docile to do any thing he desires; but that this is
not easily gained, as they generally give it to merit only, of which they are
as good judges as most amongst us. He adds, that these good dispositions are
very much eclipsed by the cruelty they sometimes exercise upon such of their
enemies, whom they have devoted to death; as well as the right they almost
universally claim to private revenge. They consider it as a point of honor to
avenge injuries done to their friends, particularly the death of a relation;
blood for blood, death for death, can only satisfy the surviving friends of the
injured party. Something of the same law of retaliation was usual amongst the
ancient Jews and Romans.

From this principle, as well as from the high notions they have of military
glory, the young Indians sometimes suddenly pursue violent measures, contrary
to the mind of their elders.

It is, says the same Author, a feeling experience of the Christian Religion,
which alone is able to perfect their good qualities, and correct that which is
wrong in them; this is common to them with other men; but what is peculiar to
them is, that they bring fewer obstacles to this improvement, after, through the
operation of grace, they have once began to believe in the great truths of the
gospel.

The good disposition of the more southern Indians is sensibly set forth by De
las Casas, Bishop of Chapia, who spent much time and labor in endeavoring to
preserve the Indians of New-Spain, from the grievous oppression they labored
under, in his representation to the King and Council of Spain, which, with
little variation, may well be applied to the natives of most parts of the
continent. He says, I was one of the first who went to America, neither
curiosity nor interest prompted me to undertake so long and dangerous a voyage;
the saving the souls of the Heathens was my sole object. Why was I not
permitted, even at the expense of my blood, to ransom so many thousands of
souls who fell unhappy victims to avarice or lust. -- It is said, that
barbarous executions were necessary to punish or check the rebellion of the
Americans; but to whom was this owing? did not those people receive the
Spaniards who first came amongst them, with gentleness and humanity? did they
not show more joy, in proportion, in lavishing treasure upon them, than the
Spaniards did greediness in receiving it? -- but our avarice was not yet
satisfied -- though they gave up to us their land and their riches, we would take
from them their wives, their children, and their liberty. -- To blacken these
unhappy people, their enemies assert, that they are scarce human creatures --
but it is we ought to blush for having been less men, and more barbarous than
they. -- They are represented as a stupid people, addicted to vice; -- but have
they not contracted most of their vices from the examples of Christians? And as
to those vices peculiar to themselves, have not the Christians quickly exceeded
them therein? Nevertheless it must be granted, that the Indians still remain
untainted with many vices, usual amongst the Europeans; such as ambition,
blasphemy, treachery, and many like monsters, which have not yet took place
with them; they have scarce an idea of them, so that, in effect, all the
advantage we can claim, is to have more elevated notions of things, and our
faculties more unfolded, and more cultivated than theirs. -- Don't let us
slatter our corruptions, nor voluntarily blind ourselves; all nations are
equally free: one nation has no right to infringe upon the freedom of another:
let us do toward those people, as we would have them to have done to us, if
they had landed upon our shore, with the same superiority of strength. And,
indeed, why should not things be equal on both sides. How long has the right of
the strongest been allowed to be the balance of justice. What part of the
Gospel gives a sanction to such a doctrine. In what part of the whole earth did
the Apostles and first promulgators of the Gospel, ever claim a right over the
lives, the freedom, or the substance of the Gentiles. What a strange method
this of propagating the Gospel, that holy law of grace, which from being slaves
to satan, initiates us into the freedom of the children of God.

To this pious Bishop's testimony, may be added that of Page Dup^^^, in his
History of Louisiana, who during a residence of sixteen years, appears to have
been careful in his enquiries, relating to the nature and disposition of those
several nations seated in a space of 1500 miles on both sides the Mississipi,
with some of whom he was intimately conversant, whom he represents as generally
endowed with good sense, kindness and moderation. He tells us, That upon an
acquaintance with the Indians, he was convinced that it is wrong to denominate
them Savages, as they are capable of making a good use of their reason, and
their sentiments are just; that they have a degree of prudence, faithfulness
and generosity, exceeding that of nations who would be offended at being
compared with them.

No people, he says, are more hospitable and free than the Indians; hence they
might be esteemed an happy people, if that happiness was not impeded by their
passionate fondness for spirituous liquors, and the foolish notion they hold in
common, with many professing Christians, of gaining reputation and esteem, by
their prowess in war: both which potent evils, have from views of policy or
interest, been much encouraged by their European neighbors."

From him, as also from some other authors, we learn that some of these nations
appear but little inclined to war, and there are others who absolutely refuse
to take any part therein, but patiently bear the hardships which the violence
of other Indians subjects them to; of which good disposition we have had
instances amongst ourselves in the case of the Moravian Indians.

Dupratz observes upon the whole, That there needs but prudence and good sense,
to persuade the Indians to what is reasonable, and to preserve their friendship
without interruption. He adds, We may safely affirm that the differences we
have had with them, have been more owing to us than to them. When they are
treated insolently or oppressively, they have no less sensibility of injuries
than others. If those who have occasion to live among them, will have
sentiments of humanity, they will meet in them with men.

Many more authors might be quoted, declarative of the commendable qualities
which have appeared in the Indians, whilst uncorrupted by an intercourse with
the Europeans, and which is still the case in the disposition of those nations
situated at a distance from us. Note, In a late History of the British
Dominions in North America, printed in 1773, p. 219, the Author speaking of the
Natives, says, The nearer the Indians of Canada are viewed, the more good
qualities are discovered in them; for most of the principles which serve to
regulate their conduct; the general maxims by which they govern themselves; and
the essential parts of their character, discover nothing of the barbarian. Of
the Five Nation Indians, M. Delapoterie. a French Author, (wherein he very much
agrees with Cadwalader Colden, late president of New York) in his account of
those Indians, says, They are thought by a common mistake, to be mere
barbarians, always thirsting for human blood; but their true character is very
different: they are indeed the fiercest and most formidable people in
North America; and at the same time, as politic and judicious, as well can be
conceived, which appears from the management of all the affairs they transact,
not only with the French and English, but likewise with almost all the Indian
Nations of this vast continent.

Speaking of the Cherokees, and other Southern Indians, page 157, he says,
These Indians look upon the end of life, to be living happily; and for this
purpose, their whole customs are calculated to prevent avarice, which they
think imbitters life; and nothing is a more severe reflection amongst them,
than to say, That a man loves his own. To prevent the rise and propagation of
such a vice, upon the death of any Indian, they burn all that belongs to the
deceased, that there may be no temptation for the parent to hoard up a
superfluity of arms, and domestic conveniences for his children. They
strengthen this custom, by a superstition, that it is agreeable to the soul of
the deceased, to burn all they leave, and that affliction follow those who use
any of their goods. They cultivate no more land than is necessary for their
plentiful subsistence, and hospitality to strangers.


This particularly appears from accounts left us by Jonathan Carver, who from
the year 1766, to the year 1768, inclusive, visited several Nations west of the
river Mississipi, and the upper lakes. Speaking of the general temper of the
Indians situate in those parts, he tells us, They are extremely liberal to each
other, and supply the deficiencies of their friends, with any superfluity of
their own -- That governed by the plain and equitable laws of Nature, every one
is remarked solely according to his deserts; and their equality, condition,
manners and privileges, with that constant sociable familiarity which prevails
through every Indian Nation, animates them with a pure and truly patriotic
spirit, that tends to the general good of the Society to which they belong. The
Indians, he says, are not without some sense of Religion, such as proves that
they worship the great Creator, with a degree of purity unknown to nations who
have greater opportunities of improvement.

That the pleas of Indians for making war, are in general more rational and
just, than such as are brought by Europeans, in vindication of their
proceedings. To secure the rights of hunting -- to maintain the liberty of
passing through their accustomed tracts, and to guard those lands which they
consider, from a long tenure, as their own, against any infringment, are the
general causes of those dissensions which so often break out between the Indian
Nations. He agrees with Charlevoix, that the Indians feel injuries with
exquisite sensibility; whence they pursue vegeance with unremitting ardour.

Whilst in the Indian Country, he was instrumental in preventing the Chipeways
and Nadowessis Indians from prosecuting the war, which had during a course of
40 years, subsisted between them. This, the old Indians told him, they had long
wished to put an end to; but that their endeavors were frustrated by the young
warriors, of either nation, who could not restrain their ardour when they met.
They said they should be happy, if some chief of the same pacific disposition
as himself, and who possessed an equal degree of resolution and coolness, would
settle in the country between the two nations; for by the interference of such
a person, an accommodation, which, on their part, they sincerely desired might
be brought about. From this circumstance, as well as what Duprat and others
observe of the peaceable disposition of some of the Indians, we may well
conclude, that susceptible as those untutored people are, to the dictates of
reason, if the professors of Christianity had, by a proper use of that superior
knowledge they were favored with, honestly labored, through Divine help, to
acquaint them with the nature and precepts of the Gospel; to make them sensible
of that universal brotherhood that loving, meek, forgiving spirit, which the
precepts and example of our Savior call for, it would have been a matter of
the greatest joy both to them and us; but the reverse has happened, except in a
few particular instances; the different denominations of Christians have rather
added fresh fuel to this false fire, by inciting the poor Natives, when it has
suited their political purpose, to violence amongst themselves, and to become
parties in the wars they have waged one against another.

A disposition to misrepresent and blacken the Indians, in order to justify, or
palliate the practice of unjust and cruel measures toward them, has
particularly appeared in the affecting case of those Indians, denominated
Moravian Indians, settled on the Muskingum, a branch of the Ohio; who have, of
late, deeply suffered on account of what they thought the peaceable spirit of
the Gospel required of them. A true representation of the state and disposition
of those Indians, as well as an account of this deplorable transaction, drawn
from the account given by the survivors, appears necessary, as well to rescue
those innocent sufferers from the odium which has been so unjustly cast upon
them, as to prevent strangers, who may come amongst us, from forming such
erroneous ideas of the Natives, as may have an influence upon the welfare of
both them, and the White People.

The first gathering of those Indians into a good degree of civil and religious
order, was about 30 years ago, by means of one of them, named Papunhank. The
place of their residence at that time, was at Whihaloosing, on the Susquehanna,
about 200 miles from Philadelphia. In the conversation they had with some
serious people, in a visit to that city, about the year 1756, at a time when
the province was distressed by the Indian war, they appeared to have a feeling
sense of that inward change of heart which the Gospel requires, and declared
their particular disapprobation of war, and fixed resolution to take no part
therein; apprehending it to be displeasing to the Great Being, who, as one of
them expressed it, Did not make men to destroy men; but to love and assist each
other. They held a conference with the Governor, in which they informed him,
That they remembered the old friendship which subsisted between their
Forefathers and ours; that they were great lovers of peace, and had not taken
any part in the war.

They delivered three white prisoners which they had recovered from the other
Indians. They desired that no strong drink should be given them, nor be sent to
their town. The speaker, Papunhank, appeared serious, as under a sense of the
Divine Presence, and concluded with a solemn prayer, with which the whole
audience seemed much affected.

About 13 years past, these Indians meeting with difficulty, from an increase
of White Settlers near them, by which spirituous liquors were brought to their
towns; they removed to the Muskingum, a branch of the Ohio. In their
perigrination thither, they were accompanied by some of the Moravians, who have
long resided with them, and by their careful attention, both to their civil and
religious concerns, never leaving them, even in the times of their greatest
danger and difficulty, a near and steady connection between them took place.

During the late troubles, these Indians adhering to the principles they had
long professed, absolutely refused to take any part in the war, notwithstanding
the threats and repeated abuses they received on that account from other
tribes, particularly those parties which passed through their towns, in their way
to our frontiers; whom they sometimes dissuaded from their hostile intentions,
and prevailed upon to go back again; or warned the inhabitants of their danger.
This humane conduct being considered as obstructive to the hostile proceedings
of the Tribes at war, was at length made the pretense of carrying them off.
Accordingly, on the 4th of August, 1781, a string of Wampum was sent by the
Chief of the Wyondats, who resided at Sandusky, with a message, letting them
know, He was coming with a number of warriors; but biding them be not afraid,
for he was their friend. In a few days after, 220 warriors arrived, when
calling a council of the head men of the three Moravian towns, they acquainted
them they were come to take them away; rendering it for a reason, That they,
and their Indians, were a great obstruction to them in their war-path. They
returned them this answer: That it was impossible for them to remove at that
time, and leave their corn behind them, lest they and their children should
perish with hunger in the wilderness. To this, the Chief of the Wyondats, at
first, seemed to attend; but being instigated by some white men in their
company, they persisted in their resolution; and after killing many of the
cattle and hogs, ripping up their bedding, and committing many other outrages,
on the 28th of August, and September, forced them from their three towns, in
all between 3 and 400 persons; who, after a tedious journey in the wilderness,
arrived at a branch of Sandusky creek, where the body of them were ordered to
remain. Some of their principal men were sent to Major Arent Schuyler De
Peyster, the English Commander at fort Detroit, who commended them, as a
peaceable people, and exhorted them to remain such; but added, That many
complaints had been made of them; that they had given intelligence to his
enemies, etc. he had sent for them; but that his instructions had been
exceeded, in the ill-treatment they had received; that however he would provide
for them. Thus the matter rested till the spring, 1782, when these Moravian
Indians finding corn scarce and dear at Sandusky, desired liberty to return to
their settlements, to fetch some of their corn, of which they had lest above
200 acres standing; which when granted, many of them went, among whom were
several widows with their children, some of whom had been subjected to such
extreme want, as to eat the carcases of the dead cattle and horses.

When the people at and about the Monongahela, understood a number of Indians
were at the Moravian towns, they gave out, that the intention of those people
was, to fall upon the back inhabitants, which ought to be prevented. Whereupon
about 160 men got together, and swimming their horses over the Ohio, came
suddenly upon the chief Moravian town. The first person who appeared, they shot
at and wounded, when coming up to him, they found he was an half Indian, son to
John Bull, one of the Moravians, by an Indian woman, to whom he is regularly
married; they killed and scalped him, and proceeded to the town. The Moravian
Indians, who were mostly in the fields pulling corn, did not run off, as many
of them might, if they had been conscious of any offense; but came of their own
accord, into the town, at the call of the white people, who at first, expressed
friendship to them; but soon after, violently seized and bound them, when the
Helpers, These are Indians who assist the missionaries in keeping good order
amongst their people, and upon occasion, give public exhortations.
of whom there were five of the most respectable, in the company, and others
exhorted the younger, to submission and patience; telling them, they thought
their troubles in this world, would soon be at an end, and they would be with
their Savior. They then sung and prayed together, till they were led out, one
after the other, and inhumanly slaughtered; first the men, and then the women.
Two boys, who made their escape, related these particulars. One of them lay in
the heap of the dead, in a house, and was scalped; but recovering his senses,
escaped: the other, who had hid himself under the floor, was an eyewitness of
this tragic scene, and saw the blood of the slain running in a stream. These
Indians before being bound, were so little apprehensive of being charged with
guilt, that they informed the White People, that more of their brethren were at
another town to which they accompanied them; who in like manner fell a
sacrifice with them, to the barbarity of the whites. The dead bodies were
afterward burned with the houses. Before their death, they were also obliged
to show in what part of the woods they had concealed their effects, when the
other Indians (as before mentioned) took them away.

Those at the third town having some intelligence of what passed, made their
escape. One of the Helpers, who escaped relates, That in a conference they had
with the other Helpers, when they considered what they should do in case of an
attack, either from the Americans, or the Indians, who had taken part with the
English, some of whom charged them of having, through the intelligence they gave
to the Virginians, been the occasion of the slaughter of their brethren, at
Goschaching; the result of their conference was, Not to go away, nevertheless
to leave each one to act according to the feeling of his own heart. He added,
That there was so much love amongst them, that he had never felt the like
before. This is a summary of this dreadful transaction, as it is given by the
principle leader of those that remain.

The Account, as it stands in the Pennsylvania Gazette, of April 17th, 1782,
after giving an account of the incursions of the Indians, adds, That the people
being greatly alarmed, and having received intelligence that the Indian towns,
on the Muskingum, had not moved as they had been told -- a number of men
properly provided, collected and rendevoused on the Ohio, opposite the Mingo
Bottom, with a design to surprise the above towns -- 160 men swam the river,
and proceeded to the towns on the Muskingum, where the Indians had collected a
large quantity of provisions to supply their war-parties. They arrived at the
town in the night, undiscovered, attacked the Indians in their cabbins, and so
completely surprised them, that they killed and scalped upwards of 90, but a
few making their escape, about 40 of which were warriors, the rest old women
and children. About 80 horses fell into their hands, which they loaded with the
plunder, the greatest part furrs and skins; and returned to the Ohio, without
the loss of one man.

It is alleged, in vindication of this deliberate massacre, that 40 of those
Indians were warriors, preparing to attack our frontiers; but this assertion
contradicts it self: for had it been the case, it is not likely they would have
brought their wives, with the widows, and 34 children, who were slain with
them, or have suffered them with themselves, to be thus murdered, without
making the least resistance, or hurt to their murderers.

Soon after the death of these Indians, about 500 men, probably encouraged by
this easy conquest assembled at the old Mingos on the west side of the Ohio,
and being equipped, on horseback, set on for Sandusky, where the remaining part
of the Moravian Indians resided, in order to destroy that settlement, and other
Indian towns in those parts; but the Wyandots, and other Indians, having some
knowledge of their approach, met them near Sandusky, when an engagement ensued,
in which some of the assailants were killed, and several taken prisoners,
amongst whom was the Commander Col. Crawford, and his son-in-law. The Col. the
Indians put to a cruel death, and killed the other, with other prisoners.

Doubtless the cruelty exercised on the Col. and the death of the prisoners
taken at Sandusky, was, in a great measure, owing to the murder of the
peaceable Moravian Indians, at which they expressed much displeasure.

This grievous transaction appears in a yet more afflictive point of view, when
it is considered, that though many threats had been thrown out against those
Indians, both by the English and Americans, As the Wyondat King in his Speech
told them, My cousins, you Christian Indians, in Gnadenhutten, Shoenbrun and
Salem. I am concerned on your account, as I see you live in a dangerous
situation. Two mighty and angry Gods stand opposite to each other, with their
mouths wide open, and you stand between them and are in danger of being crushed
by the one or the other of them, or both, and crombled with their teeth. To
which the Christian Indians answered, Uncle, etc. etc. you Shawanees our
Nephews -- We have hitherto not seen our situation so dangerous as not to stay
here. We live in peace with all mankind, and have nothing to do with the war.
We desire and request no more, than that we may be permitted to live in peace
and quiet -- We will preserve your words and consider them -- and sand you,
Uncle, an answer.
yet they took no step for their security, trusting in the care of Heaven, and
the protection of the government, under which they had lived many years with
due submission. But such is the corrupting nature of war, that it gradually
hardens the heart, to a fearful degree of insensibility. Yet surely a time of
rousing must come, when, if not given up to obduracy, equal to their delusion,
the blood of these innocent people will be heavy upon all concerned in the
shedding of it.

We cry out against Indian cruelty; but is any thing which Indians have done,
(all circumstances considered) more inconsistent with justice, reason, and
humanity, than the murder of those Moravian Indians; a peaceable, innocent
people, whose conduct, even when under the scalping-knife, evidenced a
dependence on Divine Help for support, as much becoming Christians, as their
sufferings in support of their religious principles, and their fidelity to the
government had before manifested them to be our special friends.

In vindication of this barbarous transaction, endeavors have been used, to
make us believe, that the whole race of Indians are a people prone to every
vice, and destitute of every virtue; and without a capacity for improvement.
What is this but blasphemously to arraign the wisdom of our Creator, and
insinuate, that the existence He has given them, is incompatible with his moral
government of the world. But this must be admitted to make way for the proposal
of endeavoring the universal extirpation of Indians from the face of the
earth. Such, alas! is the manner in which too many of the pretended followers,
of the meek and suffering Savior of the world, would fulfill the prophecy
concerning him, That he shall have the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost Parts of the earth for his possession. And who himself declared, That
he came not to destroy mens' lives, but to save them; and when fainting in his
last agony, under mockery and derision, conceived at once a prayer, and an
apology for his murderers: Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.
Now so far as we know the prevailance of this spirit of love and forgiveness,
over the pride and warth of our hearts, so far are we the disciples and
followers of Christ; and so far only, can we truly pray for, and witness the
coming of His kingdom: and on the other hand, so far as we are subject to a
vindictive and unforgiving spirit, so far we are in a state of alienation from
God, and reprobate concerning a true faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, which
works only by love, to the purifying of the heart from every disposition of a
contrary nature. Was this distinction always observed in our religious
discriminations of mankind, we should get through abundance of frivolous and
superficial prejudices which divide the Christian World, and be convinced, that
it is not the color of our skins, out ward circumstances or profession, but
the state and temper of the mind and will, which makes us Jews or Gentiles;
Christians or Heathens; Elect or Reprobate, in the sight of God. That this
change of heart is the sure effect of the coming of Christ's kingdom, was
evidenced in many of those Indians, whose case is here represented; who, by
yielding to the operations of Divine Grace, were brought to an entire
reformation of mind and manners. That savage ferocity, with all those dazzling
notions of honor, to be gained from the destruction of mankind, so natural to
the fallen sons of Adam, have gradually melted away in these Indians, into a
frame of meekness, humility and love, which supported them in that lamb-like
submission, under that remarkable succession of trials and afflictions which
was permitted to attend them; whereby many of them are at length put beyond the
reach of enmity.

We are told by a late Author, who appears zealous for the extirpation of all
Indians, That for a keg of whiskey, you might induce any Indian to murder his
wife, children and best friend. That this is not a just character of Indians,
all, who are acquainted with that people, can testify: yet there are,
doubtless, ill-disposed people amongst them, as well as amongst us, who under
the dreadful power of strong drink, (which has an uncommon bad effect on them)
may be led into the greatest enormities. Nevertheless, as has been mentioned,
impartial men, who from good views, have visited or resided with them,
represent them in a very different light: as Charlevoix, and other French and
Spanish Authors: John Elliott, Thomas Mayew; John Sergeant, in New England;
David Brainard and others in the Jerseys; and more lately the Moravians in
different parts. These have spent much time and labor for the civil and
religious improvement of the Natives, in which they all expressed satisfaction
and comfort.

And it is worthy of peculiar notice, that in the wars the Indians have waged
upon our frontiers, there has scarce been an instance of any of those Indians,
who had made a serious profession of the Christian Religion, having been
concerned in the barbarous eruptions against us. Neal, p. 30, 2d. vol. says,
There is one thing which deserves to be taken notice of; that is, the unshaken
fidelity of the Indian Converts, during the whole course of the war, whom
neither persuasion nor threatenings of their countrymen, could draw from their
allegiance to the English. The government had a watchful eye upon them at
first, and the mob being incensed against Indians, could hardly be restrained
from sacrificing the Converts to their fury. The same Author observes, That the
government was so well satisfied with the fidelity of the Indians, that instead
of disarming them, as was desired, the Indians on Martha's Vineyard, who were
twenty to one in number to the White People, continued so faithful to their
engagements, that they were supplied with all sorts of ammunition, and the
defense of the Island committed to their care; and so faithful were they to
their trust, that all people that landed upon the Island, during the course of
the war, were, without distinction, brought before the Governor.


These have generally put themselves under the protection of their several
governments; as former instances in New England, and the instance of the
Moravian Indians, both in the former, and late war, will undoubtedly evince.

The people of Pennsylvania, and New-Jerseys, as has been already noted, have
had full opportunity to experience the good disposition and kindness of the
Indians, so long as they were treated with justice and humanity, as
particularly appears from the many striking instances of probity, gratitude and
beneficence, on record, at a time when the disparity of their numbers was so
great, that they might have easily destroyed the settlers, had they been so
minded. But so far were they from molesting them, that they were rather as
nursing fathers to them; granting them ample room for settlements; freely
assisting them with the means of living, at easy rates; manifesting, through a
long course of years, a strict care and fidelity in observing their treaties,
and fulfilling their other engagements; which there is the greatest reason to
conclude would still be the case, in every part of the continent, if the same
equitable and kind measures were pursued.

Upon the whole, it is a matter of undoubted persuasion, with impartial people,
who have been conversant with Indians, that if their dipositions and natural
powers are duly considered, they will be found to be equally with our own,
capable of improvement in knowledge and virtue, and that the apparent
difference between us and them, is chiefly owing to our different ways of life,
and different ideas of what is necessary and desirable, and the advantage of
education, which puts it in our power to gloss over our own conduct, however
evil; and to set theirs, however defensible, in the most odious point of light.

Much of their blamable conduct, now complained of, is certainly imputable to a
long continued train of fraudulent and corrupt practices, in our intercourse
with them, especially, the fatal introduction of strong drink, of which they
have often complained, At the treaty at Carlisle, in 1753, the Indians say, The
Rum ruins us. We beg you would prevent its coming in such quantities. We desire
it may be forbidden, and none sold in the Indian country; but that if the
Indians will have any, they may go amongst the Inhabitants, and deal with them.
When these Whiskey traders come, they bring 30 or 40 Kegs, and put them before
us, and make us drink, and get all the skins that should go to pay the debts we
have contracted, for goods bought of the fair trader; and by this means, we not
only ruin ourselves, but them too. The wicked whiskey sellers, when they have
once got the Indians in liquor, make them sell their very clothes from their
backs. In short, if this practice be continued, we must be inevitably ruined.
We most earnestly, therefore, beseech you to remedy it.

We find an early record, in the History of New Jersey to the credit of the
people of that day, That at a conference they held with the Indians, where 8
Kings or Chiefs were present, the speaker expressed himself to the following
effect: Strong liquors were sold to us by the Sweeds and by the Dutch; these
people had no eyes, they did not see it was hurtful to us; that it made us mad.
We know it is hurtful to us. Nevertheless, if people will sell it to us, we are
so in love with it, that we cannot forbear; but now there is a people come to
live amongst us, that have eyes; they see it to be for our hurt; they are
willing to deny themselves the profit, for our good. These people have eyes, we
are glad such a people are come, we must put it down by mutual consent. We give
these 4 belts of wampum -- to be a witness of this agreement we make with you;
and would have you tell it to your children.


and desired it might not be brought amongst them, by which instead of allaying
the ferment of corrupt nature, by a good example, and the good instruction,
which our superior knowledge would enable us to give them, too many have been
instrumental in working them up to a state of distraction, which when it has
burst forth in vengeance upon ourselves, is made a pretense for destroying
them, as though they were wholly the aggressors.

That Indians may be tempted or provoked to the perpetration of great evils, by
the intemperate love and use of strong liquors, is easily conceived; but
whether they, who, to gratify the cravings of sordid avarice, furnish them with
the intoxicating potion, and then take advantage of their situation, to impose
upon them, and tempt them to evil, are not principally accountable, for the
crimes they commit, and their consequences, is not a query worthy of their most
awful consideration.

Had the views of the inhabitants of the colonies, been more just and wise, and
their conduct toward the Natives regulated by a benevolence worthy of the
Christian Name, every reasonable purpose of settling in their country, might
have been fully accomplished, and they at the same time become, generally, as
well civilized, as those few who were under the care of the Moravians, at the
Muskingum.

The accounts of the wicked policy and cruelties exercised by the Spaniards
upon their Indians, we read with horror, without considering how far ourselves
are in a degree guilty of something of the same.

How many peaceable Indians, residing amongst us, have formerly as well as
lately, been murdered, with impunity, to satisfy the rage of angry men, though
under the protection of the law, without any atonement being made. At the
Conestogo Manor, Lancaster town, and several otherinstances.


What destruction both of Indians and others, through a violent insringement on
what they apprehended to be their rights. What dreadful havoc has the desire
of gain made amongst them, by the sale of spirituous liquors, etc. etc. Surely
this must be accounted for, when an inquisition for blood takes place. Indeed
interest, as well as duty, should induce the people, in general, to endeavor
the bringing the Indians off from those false habits and prejudices, which are
as obstructive to their own happiness, as they are dangerous to ours.

To what degree of distress, a few Indians can reduce a country, let the Annals
of New England testify, particularly by the long and distressing wars with the
Eastern Tribes, D. Neal, speaking of the occasion of this war with the Eastern
Indians, 2d. vol. page 24, says, "That the Europeans cheated the Natives in the
most open and barefaced manner imaginable, and treated them like slaves. The
Indians were not insensible of this usage; but were afraid to do themselves
justice, till they heared that all New England was involved in a bloody war,
when they plainly told the English, they would bear their insults no longer."
who upon the making a peace with them, were found to be so small a number,
that it occasioned the celebrated Cotton Mather, to take up the following
lamentation: Surely we had smitten the whole army of the Indians, that fought
against us, twenty-three years ago, from one end of the land to the other; only
there were left a few wounded amongst them in the east, and now they have risen
up, every man, and have set the whole country on fire. Certainly a more
humbling matter cannot be related. Moreover, is it not a very humbling thing,
that when about an hundred Indians durst begin a war upon all these populous
colonies, an army of a thousand English raised, must not kill one of them all,
but instead thereof, more of our soldiers perished by sickness and hardships,
than we had enemies in the world. Our God has humbled us. Is it not a very
humbling thing, that when the number of our enemies afterward increasing, yet
an handful of them should, for so many summers together, continue our
unconquered spoilers, and put us to such vast charges, that if we would have
bought them for an hundred pounds a head, we should have made a saving bargain
of it. Our God has humbled us. Hutchinson, vol. 2, p. 4, says, "The province of
Massachusetts, in the course of sixty years, has been at greater expense, and
has lost more of its inhabitants, than all the other colonies upon the
continent"


What an instructive lesson may the rulers of government, and the people,
gather from this pathetic lamentation; how ought it to induce us diligently to
labor for the maintenance of Peace and Friendship with all our Indian
neighbors.

How ought we to look up to God, the common Father of the family of mankind,
requesting he would enable us to sow the seeds of Benevolence and Mercy,
carefully avoiding those of War and Destruction. Ibid. page 307. "Every person
almost, in the two colonies, had lost a relation or near friend."


It was, very probably, the want of such a care in the people of New England,
particularly in the lamentable destruction of the Pequot Indians, though
perpetrated many years before, which produced the grievous crop of calamity and
distress here complained of; for however time and changes may veil past
transactions, and remove them from sight, and the remembrance of men, yet they
will remain, as present, in the view of Divine Purity; and whilst unrepented
of, will, though covered, as with dirt and dross, remain as engraven on a rock,
which when the overflowing stream prevails, and that time of general inquiry,
comes, when secret things shall be revealed, will appear as a testimony against
transgressors.

The Annals of New England informs us, that the first settlers met with kind
treatment from the Natives, even when they were few, and so sickly, that in the
first winter, one half of their number died.

Hutchinson, observes, That the Natives showed courtesy to the English, at
their first arrival; were hospitable, and made such as would cat their food,
welcome to it, and readily instructed them in the planting and cultivating the
Indian Corn. Some of the English who lost themselves in the woods, and must
otherwise have perished with famine, they relieved and conducted home.

It was about fifteen years after, when the settlement on the Connecticut
river, was making speedy advances toward the country of the Pequots, that
differences arose between those Indians and the English; some traders were
killed, whether through the fault of the Indians, or White People, is uncertain,
as each blamed the other; the Indians, however, showed a great desire to
maintain peace between them and the English, for which purpose Neal observes,
They twice sent deputies to Boston, with presents, which might with patience
and forbearance, through the blessing of God, have been improved; but the English
insisting on the delivery of the persons concerned, which the Indians delaying
to comply with, perhaps for want of power, the English fell upon them, slew
several, firing their wigwams, and spoiling their corn, etc. which enraged the
Indians to such a degree, that, giving up their endeavors for peace, they
attacked the fort on Connecticut river; slew several persons; and carried away
two maidens, who were afterward returned. Upon this, the different New England
governments concluded to unite their forces, to destroy those Indians; which
was so effectually done, that Captain Underhill, who was a principal Commander
in that expedition, in his book entitled News from America, page 2, tells us,
Those Indians, the Pequots, were drove out of their country, and slain, by the
sword, to the number of fifteen hundred souls, in the space of two months or
less; so as their country is fully subdued, and fallen into the hands of the
English.

Hutchinson says, This was the first action between the English and Indians;
the policy, as wellus the morality of which, he observes, may well be
questioned. And he adds, The Indians have ever shown great barbarity to their
English captives; the English, in too many instances, have retaliated it. This
has only enraged them the more. Besides, to destroy women and children, for the
barbarity of their husbands, cannot be casily justified. Many of the captives
were sent to Bermudas, and sold for slaves. Neal, page 23, observes, relating
to those Pequot Indians, "That they made a noble stand against the united force
of New England, and would certainly have defended their country against the
encroachment of the English, if the Narragansets, their inveterate enemies, had
not assisted the English to destroy them".


This account of the destruction of the Pequot Indians, is by no means intended
as a reflection on the people of New England; sensible, that it is now long
since many amongst them, have been foremost in furnishing instances of the
blessing attendant on the extension of friendly measures, and a commendable
care for the civil and religious welfare of the Indians; as well as they have
of late years, shown an examplary and praiseworthy concern for doing justice to
the oppressed Africans: but only for this necessary purpose, that the dreadful
experience of former times, may be, as instructive cautions in our future
transactions with our Indian neighbors, in the several settlements now likely
to be made on lands belonging to them, or claimed by them. Indeed we cannot be
too weighty in considering how we lay our foundation for future happiness or
misery; as our Savior's declaration will be verified often, in time, and
certainly in eternity: That as we sow we shall reap; and with that measure we
meet, it shall be measured to us again. And although the children are not
accountable for the iniquity of their fathers; yet where the children are
basking and rejoicing in the ease and plenty they enjoy through the sins of their
fathers, as is peculiarly the case of those, who are possessed of estates
procured by hard measures toward Indians, or through the oppression of the
Negroes; these as they rejoice in those possessions, which the SIN has
produced, cannot expect otherwise than, to be partakers in the PLAGUE.

Upon the whole, if the peace and safety of the inhabitants of our wide
extended frontiers; the lives and welfare of so many innocent and helpless
people, depends on the maintenance of a friendly intercourse with our Indian
neighbors, what greater instances of patriotism, of love to God and mankind,
can be shown, than to promote, to the utmost of our power, not only the
civilization of these uncultivated people, whom Providence has, as it were,
cast under our care; but also their establishment, in a pious and virtuous
life. On the other hand, what greater injury can be done to our country, than
to diffuse, amongst the thoughtless part of the people, a disposition, and
promote a conduct, tending not only to deprive us of the advantage, which a
friendly intercourse with them may produce; As it is expected that measures are
now taking to procure a free communication with the Indian Country, whereby an
extensive trade with the Natives will probably take place, and which, under
proper regulation, may prove very beneficial, or the contrary, if left to the
management of the Traders, who have generally no other view but gain. Is it not
an object worthy the peculiar notice of the different Legislatures, that a
special guard be had against the evil consequences which will certainly attend,
if an effectual restraint is not laid on the introduction of spirituous
liquors, and other abuse, amongst the Indians.
but by raising their enmity and wrath, expose the country to those grievous
calamities, which an Indian war often has, and will again, undoubtedly produce.

APPENDIX.
IN an historical account of General Boquet's expedition against the Ohio
Indians, published under his inspection, in 1765, we meet with a list of the
fighting men of the different Indian nations of the northern and southern
districts of North America, amounting to fifty-six thousand, five hundred and
eighty, consisting, chiefly, of such Indians as the French were connected with
in Canada and Louisiana.

This account we are there told may be depended upon, so far as matters of this
kind can be brought near the truth, being given by a French trader of
considerable note, who had resided many years amongst the Indians.

The publisher of that account, a person of reputation, now in this city, who
has for many years made matters relating to Indians his particular study, tells
us, "That so large a number of fighting men may startle us a first sight; but
the account seems no where exaggerated, excepting only that the Calawba nation
(mentioned in the list to be 150 gun-men) is now almost extinct.

In some nations which we are acquainted with, the account falls, even short of
their numbers; and some others do not appear to be mentioned at all, or at
least not by any name known to us: Such for instance, are the lower Creeks, of
whom we have a list, according to their towns. In this list their warriors or
gun-men are 1180, and their inhabitants about 6000. Thus a comparative judgment
may be formed of the nations abovementioned; the number of whose inhabitants
will (in this proportion to the warriors, viz. five to one) be about 283000."

From the above account of the number of Indians known to us, besides those we
are unacquainted with, how important must it appear, to every sensible feeling
mind, that a friendly intercourse be maintained with them as well from our duty
as Christians, as the great advantage which would arise from a well regulated
trade; and the dreadful distress and sufferings, which a disagreement with them
might bring upon so vast a number of helpless people, on our long extended
frontiers. To those who profess that peaceable principle, which implies a full
reliance upon the Divine protection, the number, or apparent power of any
adversaries is of little weight. But it is to be observed, these are quotations
from authors, not of the same peaceable profession, and are therefore
considered as proper to inform those readers, who, not grounded in this
peaceable uniting principle, are of contrary sentiments, of the necessity they
are under, even as prudent men, upou their own principles, to conciliate the
friendship of the natives.

The common assertion, that if friendly and pacific measures were alone
pursued, the property of those so disposed, would become a prey to every
invader. But this assertion cannot be allowed as valid, except we believe that
"the Lord has forsaken the earth;" Ezekiel. ix 19. but, "if the Lord reigns,"
Ps. lxliii. 1. and "we fear his name, he will be a wall of fire round about
us." Zach. ii. 5.

And whatever suffering is permitted to come upon any, on account of their
fidelity to what they may think their duty requires, in the support of that
peaceable government of Christ, the increase of which, we are told by the
prophet I saiah, there is to be no end; as in the case of the Moravian Indians,
it will be but as a deliverance from their troubles in this world, and of a
more exceeding weight of glory, in that which is to come.




In the history of the British dominions in North America, already mentioned,
2d. vol. page 68, we meet with the following instructive observation: "The
perpetual mereasing generations of Europeans, in America, may supply numbers
that must in the end wear out these poor Indian inhabitants from their Country;
but we shall pay dear, both in blood and treasure, in the mean while, for our
injustice.

Our frontiers, from the nature of advancing settlements dispersed along the
branchings of the upper parts of our rivers, and scattered in the disunited
valleys, amidst the mountains, must be always unguarded and defenseless against
the incursions of Indians. -- The farmer driven from his little cultured lot,
in the woods, is lost: The Indian in the woods, is every where at home; every
bush, every thicket, is a camp to the Indian; from whence, at the very moment
when he is sure of his blow, he can rush upon his prey. In short, our frontier
settlements must ever lie at the mercy of the savages; and a settler is the
natural prey to an Indian, whose sole occupation is war and hunting.

To countries circumstanced as our colonies are, an Indian is the most dreadful
of enemies. For in a war with Indians, no force whatever, can defend our
frontiers from being a constant wretched scene of conflagrations, and of the
most shocking murders. Whereas on the contrary, our temporary expeditions
against the Indians, even if successful, can do them little harm. Every article
of their property is portable, which they always carry with them; and it is no
great matter of distress to an Indian, to be driven from his dwelling ground,
who finds a home in the first place he sits down upon."

FINIS.

