THE Mercenary Match.

THE MERCENARY MATCH, A TRAGEDY.

BY BARNA BIDWELL.

CHARACTERISTICS.

THY country's happiness is trusted to thy care -- O happy country, blessed
UNITED STATES!

MR. WORTHY. My life is nothing but a scene of woe -- How often have I wished
the gordian knot of matrimony were again untied! -- For MRS. JENSON -- Vashti
like, must be adored, or else -- Farewell to all domestic ease -- I Am almost
weary of her -- She must and shall submit.

MR. JENSON. God knows I am, at heart, a friend to none on earth, except my own
beloved self -- I Have sworn his ruin, ever since her father gave her to his
rival arms -- My plan succeeds -- Yet what a wretch I am, to triumph thus, at
the misfortunes of my fellow men! -- It Is truly devilish, I confess it is --
Well, well, I Will think of it another time.

MAJ. SHAPELY. I long to wear the shining crown of fame -- And yet, I wish I
could have lived contented here -- I shall be ruined, after all.

MR. LYNDALL. This is the consequence of being bribed, to murder honest people
in their sleep!

CAPTAIN. I gave my hand, though nature held my heart -- His (...) never
harmonize with mine -- Good heavens! How complaisant the MAJOR is! -- I wish I
were his bride -- It makes me curse my fate -- I Am wronged, neglected and
despised -- O cruel husband! O unfeeling man! -- He has debased himself, to
ruin me -- My cruel father too -- But he is gone, and all are gone -- I Have not
a friend on earth -- Alas! I am undone -- Detested wretch! Prove false himself,
th^n lay that charge on me! -- I Will be his death, or (...) myself.

MRS. JENSON. NEW HAVEN: Printed by MEIGS, BOWEN and DANA, In CHAPEL-STREET.

PROLOGUE.
GOOD friends, who come to hear and see the play,
Our Author bids me just appear and say,
The characters which he unfolds to view,
Are not sublime, although he thinks them true.
He wakes no Grecian here from his tomb,
Or slumbering patriot of imperial Rome;
He calls no Gallic Prince or British lord,
To walk the stage, and wield the tragic sword*
Employs no Washington to aid his plan,
Or faithless Arnold -- that disgrace to man: --
But shows the miseries of a man and wife,
A simple circumstance of common life.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
MR. WORTHY, a Member of Congress. MR. JENSON, appointed a foreign
Commissioner. MAJOR SHAPELY, an intriguing Gallant. MR. LYNDALL, a Merchant of
Boston. CAPTAIN, CONSTABLE, SAILOR, NEIGHBOR, etc.
WOMEN.
MRS. JENSON. BETTY, her Attendant.
SCENE, BOSTON.

THE MERCENARY MATCH.
ACT I.
SCENE, a garden. Mrs. Jenson, alone. ONCE more, my soul, released from sleep,
And all the horrors of terrific dreams,
I rise before the Sun; and here alone,
Amidst this garden's solitary walks,
Await the earliest beam, that from the east,
May come, to usher in approaching day:
Thrice hapless day to me! For now the year,
Revolving thrice, has rolled the seasons round;
Since, in obedience to my father's will,
I yielded to the matrimonial yoke.
At each return of this unhappy day,
The sun (methinks) should be overspread with clouds,
And sympathizing nature robbed in black.
Little, ah! little did I then conceive
The ills that haunt a mercenary match.
I envy now the homeless vagabond,
Who begs her daily bread from door to door;
For surely she is blessed with sweet content:
While, in the harness of a nuptial vow,
I drag along the heavy lead of life,
Joined with a partner, whom my soul detests.
Unthinking maid! Why did my tongue consent,
To change my name, my fortune and my all?
Against my own desire, I gave my hand,
(Oh! let oblivion blast the painful thought!)
I gave my hand, though nature held my heart.
Thence I begin the era of my woes.
Had I then known, what torments would ensue,
I should (unnatural thought) I should have dared
His most indignant wrath. Relentless fire,
What had I done, to forfeit thy regard?
How could thou trifle with thy daughter's life,
And bid me wed despair? Sure, 'twas unkind.
Yet, gracious heaven, forgive the cruel deed!
And shall not I? Yes, O my father, now
No more my guide, since death has closed thine eyes,
And laid thee mouldering in the silent grave;
Though, when alive, thy pretense was my dread,
Repose in peace: No more I fear thy rage.
I will not violate thy sacred dust,
Or call thy slumbering memory into mind:
Adieu to all my pleasing dreams of bliss,
And hope, that sweetness life's insipid cup.
The gall of sorrow tinctures all my life,
And grief embitters even the bitterest dregs.
My fate is fixed, beyond redress. [Weeps.]
Betty enters. What! Whence is this?
Why, Betty, dare you come, without command,
To interrupt my morning thoughts?
Bet. I come, through fear that thou art ill,
To walk abroad, at such an early hour.

Mrs. J. My, more than maid -- my ever-constant friend,
Such kind attention claims my gratitude.

Bet. Thy looks and voice,
Thy bursting sighs and overflowing tears,
Confirm the tidings, that my fears foretold.
Art thou not faint? It seems to me, thou art.

Mrs. J. Aye, faint indeed.


Bet. I am afraid,
Those fits of faintness, which thou often have,
On sudden shocks, are coming on again.
Shall I not run, and fetch thy cordial drops? [Going.]

Mrs. J. Stay, Betty, stay, 'twould be to no effect,
If all the Atlantic ocean were refined
To cordials, and administered to me;
It could not, for a moment, ease my pain.

Bet. What shall we do? I fear the consequence,
For several days thou have appeared unwell.

Mrs. J. I Will tell you, honest Betty, once for all;
I Am sick at heart, though otherwise in health.

Bet. How great must be that grief,
Which spreads this lowering cloud upon thy brow!

Mrs. J. Ah! great indeed -- too great to be endured!
My sun of joy has long withdrawn from view;
While hope, which wanes and waxes, like the moon,
And never shines, but with a borrowed light,
Reflected faintly from some distant good --
Even glimmering hope is totally eclipsed,
And every star of comfort disappears.
In vain you will strive, to cheer my gloomy thoughts:
For still the darkest shades of midnight are
No more than twilight, to this night of woe.

Bet. Pray, gentle lady, stifle these complaints!
Though melancholy overspreads thy soul,
And reigns in darkness there; yet day will rise,
More pleasing, for this antecedent gloom.

Mrs. J. I wish it may; but cannot believe it will.


Bet. It surely must. Come, wake to cheerful thoughts,
And yield no more to leaden grief; for, see!
The sun peeps over yonder eastern hill,
And heaves his head majestic up to view.

Mrs. J. These eyes have been so long suffus'd with tears,
The sun affects my fight, as through a mist,
And gives but little pleasure to my sense.

Bet. Thy tears have flowed too long:
Come, condescend to brighten up those eyes.
Since nature all around thee smiles,
Why will thou not partake the spreading joy?

Mrs. J. O that such thoughts could bury up my pains!
But all attempts, like these, though meant for good,
Can only stir the coals of discontent;
And serve, to heat again, with sevenfold rage,
The glowing passion, that enflames my breast.
It Is true, all nature smiles, and thus proclaims
Her joy: Yet smiling thus, in joyful mood,
She only mocks at my extreme distress.

Bet. Indulgent made in, will thou always live,
Among thy friends, thus pensive and forlorn?
I Have scarcely seen a smile upon thy face,
Since the completion of thy bridal day.
I am a witness to thy discontent,
As once I shared in thy delightful scenes:
Thy virgin checks then wore a smiling blush;
Contentment sparkled from those jetty eyes,
And every word bespoke a mind at ease.

Mrs. J. Those days are past, and will no more return.


Bet. Yet other days succeed, and why not other joys?
Does marriage always throw a damp on I so,
Or is this plague peculiar to thyself?

Mrs. J. I cannot tell:
Of this, however, I am well assured;
It is a source of wretchedness to me.

Bet. Were not the thought too bold,
I would desire to know the cause of this.

Mrs. J. If you have not already guest it out.
'Twill give me pleasure to inform you now.
I love to tell the story of my woe,
To vent my sorrows, and unload my heart;
It seems to sooth my grief, when any one
Will listen to the undissembled tale.
Know then, my husband is this mighty cause;
And it is not in the compass of my power,
To hide my hatred of the man.

Bet. Thy father said,
Though thou dislik'dst his person at the first,
That time would pour the balm of love,
Into thy mind, and heal the festering wound.

Mrs. J. He promised, as you say; but all in vain.
For three long, tedious years have rolled away,
And yet I hate him still; yea (what is worse)
I hate him more and more, at every thought.

Bet. How can thou hate so excellent a man?
He certainly is kind.

Mrs. J. Yes, he is kind enough.


Bet. His person and complexion are not bad.


Mrs. J. I don't object to him, in that respect.


Bet. His fortune is above the reach of want,
Although beneath the aim of envy.

Mrs. J. I don't complain of that.


Bet. His reputation stands as fair,
As yonder cloudless sun, that chears the day.
All ranks of people venerate his name;
The public too of late have honored him,
With an appointment to the court of France,
Which he is now preparing to attend --

Mrs. J. And will, I doubt not, faithfully discharge.
I own, I cannot dislike his character:
But there is something in the whole of him,
Discordant with the wishes of my soul.
His passions never harmonize with mine.
Some secret jarr, I cannot tell what, prevails,
To disconcert the music of our lives.
I could esteem him, as a worthy friend,
An honored father, or an uncle dear:
But, as the social partner of my life,
I cannot approve of him.

Bet. Softly, good madam, lest he overhear:
For he is coming in at yonder gate.
Shall I retire?

Mrs. J. You may.


Betty retires, and Mr. Jenson enters. Mr. J. What does my dear abroad,
So early in the day?

Mrs. J. I watch the progress of this pleasant morn.


Mr. J. Delightful prospect! How it fills the mind,
With sentiments of joyful gratitude!
For every thing conspires, to give delight.
Dread winter lately bound the earth with ice, --
In howling tempests swept along our coasts,
Benumb'll the limbs, and chilled the thoughts of men,
In short, froze up each genial source of joy:
Now breathing spring, with milder gales succeeds, --
Dissolves the hoary frost, -- spreads over the fields
A curious carpet (wrought in nature's loom)
Of chearing green, diversified with flowers;
And bids the year unfold her stores to man.
Now night, which wraps one half the earth in gloom
Has rolled her shadows over to the west.
Alternate day pursuing night around,
Comes laughing from the east, arrayed in light,
Invites the flocks to play, the birds to sing,
And drowsy mortals to arise from sleep.
Now pleasure greets the soul, through every sense.
Enjoy, my fair, the beauties of the spring,
And all the fragrance of the lovely morn:
But I must hasten hence, at duty's call.

Mrs. J. Why hence, so soon?


Mr. J. To settle our affairs,
Before I leave the town: For I must soon
Embark for France.

Mrs. J. Does thy commission specify the time,
When thou must fail?

Mr. J. No; not the very day.
I wait till Mr. Worthy shall arrive,
With my instructions from the States.

Mrs. J. How long, before he will return?


Mr. J. Sometime this week he is expected back:
Meanwhile I make provision for my voyage.

Mrs. J. Two years, thou will be gone.
And where am I to spend these two long years?

Mr. J. In this, thy native town; or, if thou choose,
To prave the dangers of the boisterous deep,
And visit Europe's shores, thou will be free,
To act according to thy choice.

Mrs. J. It Is fairly offered. I will see my friends,
To take their counsel, in this new affair;
And afterward inform thee of my choice.

Mr. J. I can desire no more.


Mr. Jenson goes out. Mrs. J. What shall I do? I cannot stay behind,
To be the common wonder of the town,
For not attending him. And yet, alas!
I dare not venture on the rolling waves,
And trust my life to rude, insulting winds. --
Whom shall I see, of all my intimates,
To get the best advice? -- I know not whom --
Oh! Major Shapely -- I will send for him,
Who from my lover has become my friend;
He keeps his lodgings in the adjoining house;
To him I may unbosom all my mind,
And freely reckon over my numerous pains:
Though this is but a wretched privilege.
Oh! could I quit the hated name of wife,
Once more to know the joys of single life;
I would not change conditions with a queen,
Or try again the matrimonial scene.

The END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, Major Shapely's apartment. Major Shapely, alone. I EASILY can guess,
Why Lyndall asks, this interview with me:
For he has been so long my humble fool,
Employed to carry on my secret schemes,
Imagining meantime that he and I
Were both pursuing his immediate good,
He Is almost weary of the endless game.
If he should come, as I am sure he will,
My chief concern will be, to bolster up
His fainting hopes, and seem, if possible,
Devoted wholly to his private cause;
Since I have no where else to go for cash.
I Will do my best. Mr. Lyndall enters.
Well met my friend.
Lynd. Not very well, I fear. There Is nothing well,
Of late, for me. I thought 'twould happen thus;
And yet I blindly followed your advice:
This is the curse of those, who seek applause!

Shap. Pray, Sir, be calm; and --

Lynd. Calm, Sir!
Don't preach up calmness any more to me.
I will not hear a word of what you say.
Intriguing knave, I have been calm too long;
And lost my fortune, by the means.

Shap. Say rather, thou have lost thy reason.


Lynd. Insulting charge!
Will you upbraid me then, before my face,
For foolishly obeying you?

Shap. My soul! Can there be such ingratitude in man!
If my endeavors to promote thy good,
Without the least advantage to myself,
Deserve no better recompense, than this,
(Be witness heaven and earth!) I never more
Will venture in the service of a friend.

Lynd. You ought to serve your friend,
When you have undertaken.

Shap. It is unwise, I find, to undertake;
Since nothing but reproaches are my pay.
By this ungrateful treatment I am taught
An useful lesson for my future life.
Henceforth I Will never patronise another's cause:
But self shall be the pole star of my aim.

Lynd. Be not too rash, left you repent.


Shap. Already I have reason to repent,
That I have been so much attached to thee.

Lynd. Attached to me! Why did you then betray
And disappoint my expectations?

Shap. I never have betrayed
Or disappointed them

Lynd. Did you not promise me that place,
Which Mr. Jenson has obtained?

Shap. No farther, Sir, than was within my power.
From motives of unfeigned love to thee,
I undertook indeed on thy behalf,
And urged thy suit to Mr. Worthy's ear.
Yet, though there seemed a prospect of success,
Our rival just obtained the prize.

Lynd. I wish I could have lived contented here,
And never entertained a thought of fame.

Shap. Whence that desponding wish my friend?
Because thou have been baffled once,
Will thou supinely throw aside thine arms,
And yield thyself a prisoner to despair?
I should disdain to have it known, that thou,
For whom I have so often banished sleep,
To tend the solitary lamp of care;
And spent whole days of hurry and fatigue;
That thou, dear Sir, -- I blush to name the thought*
That thou, alas! were such a child.

Lynd. What can I do, when fortune is my foe?
It Is downright madness to resist our fate.

Shap. It Is downright folly to submit to fear:
Be brave, I say. Let slaves and cowards drudge,
Like reptiles, struggling in the dust, to crawl
Along the bye-paths of a humble life.
The great and noble walk, with heads erect,
In honor's open road to fame.

Lynd. But never find an end.


Shap. That Is very true;
The road of honor is without an end.

Lynd. Ave, that is a great discouragement to me:
Why should I run a race, when time and strength
Will never suffer me to reach the goal?

Shap. The pleasure is a sure and great reward.


Lynd. My own expereince gives sufficient proof
Of your mistake. Deprest with dull fatigue,
I curse the giddy chase.

Shap. Thou have but just set out;
And starting always is a painful step,
Though afterward there is nothing but delight.
Since thou can boast of an aspiring soul,
I Am sure, a whole infinity of fame
Will animate thee to pursue the course.

Lynd. Although the thought of glory is sublime,
My doubts and fears block up the way.

Shap. Those obstacles are only in thyself.
Let generous courage once possess thy breast,
And they will vanish, like a morning dream:
For courage elevates the towering soul,
And builds a bridge over every obstacle
But fear. This bore great ALEXANDER's train,
Upon their march through Asia's conquered realms,
To his imperial throne, amidst the shouts
Of victory and war. Upon the same,
The mighty CAESAR stood, and waved his flag
Of joy and triumph over the trembling world.
And this, even now, supports a WASHINGTON,
With all the weight of fame, that mortal men
Can heap upon a single character.

Lynd. I long to wear the shining crown of fame:
But still the toil and danger that attend,
Deter me from the bold attempt.

Shap. Will thou desert thy standard first thyself,
While I, a free auxiliar in thy cause,
Sustain the enterprise alone?
Ungrateful wretch! Go, muffle up in sloth,
And pine away, with indolent despair.
Thou fear "the toil and danger that attend."
These are designed to season our delights;
They serve as sauce for milder happiness;
Without them, we could have no taste for ease,
Or relish for enjoyments of the world.

Lynd. It Is my misfortune --

Shap. I know misfortune is the common lot;
Yet, why complain? We cannot change our state.
Come, enter in the list of fame.

Lynd. Methinks I would,
If I could entertain the faintest hopes
Of a commission to the court of France.
Alas! How wild and vain is such a thought!
My rival has secured it to himself.

Shap. He has possession of the post, it is true;
But may be easily removed*

Lynd. How? Is there any prospect left?


Shap. If I have any judgment to discern,
Believe me, Sir, thy prospect yet is fair.

Lynd. Pray, let me know the way.
'Twill give me fresh delight, if after all,
My purposes be carried to effect.
Do tell me how -- I wish I may suceed;
Yet how I cannot, for my life, conceive.
Say, is he not confirmed?

Shap. In some degree, but may be thence removed.
A single chance assigned that place to him;
Another chance may turn him out again.
It Is easy to discover some mistake
Sufficient to support a formal charge
Against the execution of his trust;
And having him recalled, step in thyself.

Lynd. That will be glorious, if that can be done;
But how shall I discover this mistake?

Shap. Thou art acquainted with his common life,
Can thou not find his private faults?
The best of men have some unguarded part.

Lynd. I am not intimate enough with him,
To trace his secret plans. There should be one
Employed as spy among his family.

Shap. Well, Sir, there may be such an one,
For he must leave a steward of his house.
Now find some friend, on whom thou can rely,
And recommend the same to him.

Lynd. I have no friend, beside yourself,
To whom I can, with safety, trust my thoughts!
And I am quite ashamed to trouble you.

Shap. Foh! Sir, the trouble is a trifling thing,
When borne by friendship.

Lynd. If you will favor me, in this attempt,
I Will amply recompense your pains.

Shap. Good Sir, I serve thee not for him.
Thou know I always glory in thy good;
Nor do I cover any recompense:
But only hope to merit thy regard*
I do no more, dear Sir, than I should wish
To have another person do for me.
If I had such a cause, as thine, at stake,
I should undoubtedly desire the help
Of some approved friend.

Lynd. Do you engage?


Shap. With all my soul, I do.


Lynd. I thank you for your friendly zeal;
And will accordingly apply to him.

Shap. Don't intimate our aim.


Lynd. I Will see to that.
My own self-interest is too much concerned,
To suffer any want of care from me.
Can I assist in any other way?

Shap. A thousand ways.


Lynd. Name one, the best of them;
And let me try my skill.

Shap. Spread ill reports about the man,
To alienate the people's hearts from him.

Lynd. What ill report?


Shap. Why, any one,
That is allied to probability.
He is at variance with his wife: Take that;
And represent him spiritless and weak,
Indulging her and under her control.

Lynd. I Will go and try it once.


Mr. Lyndall goes out. Shap. My plan succeeds. He still remains my dupe.
He Will introduce me to his rival's house,
Where I intend indeed to act the spy,
But on my own account, instead of his,
I mean to carve a portion first for me;
And afterward let others help themselves.
How? -- That Is the query -- Let me think. [Looks at his watch.] It Is time,
For me to wait on Mrs. Jenson -- Well --
I am to pave a way in her esteem,
To introduce my subsequent designs.

SCENE changes to Mrs. Jenson's apartment. Mrs. Jenson and Maj. Shapely enter.
Shap. With pleasure, madam, I attend thy call,
And beg to be indulged with thy request.

Mrs. J. First, Sir, receive my thanks,
For thy respect and friendly complaisance.
Next please to favor me with thy advice,
About a place of residence for me,
While Mr. Jenson shall be gone to France.

Shap. What place does he appoint?


Mrs. J. He gives me leave to go with him,
Or tarry here in Boston -- as I please.

Shap. Which do thou choose, to honor Gallia's court;
Or let Bostonians share thy company?

Mrs. J. I choose to hear thy sentiment.
It is of serious consequence to me;
If therefore thou will quit thy compliments,
And counsel me in plain sincerity,
Thou will indulge the wishes of a friend.

Shap. Upon my word, I mean no compliment*
But, soldier-like, pronounce the simple truth.
Thou honour'st me, by asking my advice:
And I should be ungrateful, to deny
The small degree of aid, I can afford.
To what do other friends advise?

Mrs. J. I Have not applied to any body else:
For I would rather first consult with thee,
Whom I have ever found to be my friend.

Shap. What I have ever been, I still remain.
So far as confidence may be reposed
In me, depend on my sincere re^^rd.

Mrs. J. Then pray, consider my important case.


Shap. It is a most important case.
Thy happiness and life perhaps are hung
Upon the single hinge of one resolve.
The term of the commission is, I think,
About two years.

Mrs. J. Precisely two.


Shap. The trouble of a voyage is great;
To tarry here, will also give thee pain:
These inconveniences thou must expect --

Mrs. J. See! Mr Jenson comes.


Shap. [Aside.] (I must, of consequence, retire,
Some other way, that I may shun his sight.)
I Will visit thee another time.

[Maj. Shapely goes out at one door, and Mr. Jenson comes in at another.] Mr.
J. Have thou determined yet,
Respecting the proposals, that I made.

Mrs. J. Not fully, Sir. I have not yet had time,
To weigh the probable events of both.
Hard is my lot, and always will be hard!

Mr. J. That foolish thought will make it harder still.


Mrs. J. Ungenerous man! What, may I not complain?
I must and will, in spite of thee.

Mr. J. Complaint will only aggravate thy grief.


Mrs. J. Well, let it aggravate, I bear it all;
And it is the only comfort of my life,
Whatever it may seem to thee.

Mr. J. A wretched comfort, I should think.


Mrs. J. It Is all I have, as wretched as it is.


Mr. J. My dear, this does no good.
We must endure the ills, we cannot remove.

Mrs. J. That is the cause of my complaint.
If I could shake these evils off, be sure,
I would not stand, and peevishly complain*
But I am burdened, with a weight of woe,
Which, like a mountain, sinks me down to grief.

Mr. J. What would thou have me do, for thee?


Mrs. J. For me?


Mr. J. For thee, my love.
Declare thy wish; and swift as passing winds,
I Will haste to see the thing performed.

Mrs. J. I have no wish.


Mr. J. Respecting any thing, I care not what;
But speak thy pleasure; and it shall be done.

Mrs. J. I have no special wish, I say.


Mr. J. Who shall be left in charge with our accounts?
Come, tell me, who?

Mrs. J. Some honest man;
Just whom thou please to appoint.

Mr. J. Oh! Don't refuse thy choice.


Mr. Lyndall enters. Mr. J. Good day, my friend!


Lynd. A happy day to thee. I am informed,
Thou art about to leave America,
For Europe's famous climes.

Mr. J. Thy information speaks the truth.


Lynd. And who will have the management
Of thy domestic cares?

Mr. J. No person is engaged.
If there is any one, whom thou have tried,
And proved to be an honest, skilful man,
Be good enough, to mention him.

Lynd. There Is Major Shapely, Sir,

Mr. J. I have already thought of him.


Lynd. Him I can recommend,
As one, who is acquainted with the world;
And I have found him an unfailing friend,
A person of fidelity and trust.

Mrs. J. I always thought the same of him.


Mr. J. Would he be willing to engage?


Lynd. Yes, I believe he would.


Mr. J. What do thou think of him, my dear?


Mrs. J. I don't object to him.


Mr. J. I Will see the gentleman,
And offer him the trust.

Lynd. Shall I acquaint him, Sir, with thy desires?


Mr. J. Do, Sir, with compliments from me;
And let us know his mind.

Lynd. Perhaps he will be disposed to come himself,
And let thee know.

Mr. J. I shall be glad to wait upon him here.


Mr. Lyndall goes out. Mrs. J. I hope he will accept.


Mr. J. By that I judge,
Thou have determined to remain at home.

Mrs. J. I Have not determined either way;
But now revolve the matter in my mind.

Mr. J. Do let me urge thee to conclude.
Our time is short, and calls for quick dispatch.

Mrs. J. Permit me, therefore, to retire,
For more convenient exercise of thought.

Mr. J. Go, with my wishes for thy good.
Mrs. Jenson goes out. She is exceedingly disturbed.
Major Shapely enters. You Are welcome, Major Shapely, to my house,
And more than welcome, if thou will comply
With my request, by Mr. Lyndall's hand.

Shap. I readily comply.


Mr. J. A generous recompense awaits thy care,
Together with a title to my thanks.

Shap. How soon shall I be needed here?


Mr. J. Immediately.
I Will give thee my accounts, this very hour.
Excuse me, Sir; I Will soon return.

Shap. Proceed according to thy wish.
Mr. Jenson goes out. Now every thing is coming right again.
I Have gained admission to his house and heart.
'Twill not be hard to raise a civil war
Between this ill-match'd pair; which must be done.
I Have sworn their final ruin, ever since
Her father gave her to his rival arms.
I cannot endure the thought of my repulse;
It spurs my spirits on, to seek revenge.
Thus far, I have succeeded pretty well:
He thinks me honest, faithful and discreet;
And she believes me her unshaken friend.
GOD knows, I am, at heart, a friend to none
On earth, except my own beloved self.
Who does not love himself, and his concerns?
Let me consider -- How shall I proceed? --
The place of her abode is not agreed upon --
That is the plan -- There Is room enough for ill.
That little bubble, trifling as it seems,
Shall be fermented to a blustering storm.
This day, she has solicited my aid.
I felt the throbing pulse of her design,
And learnt from thence her mental state of health.
I Am next to give a potion of advice,
In which I can dissolve an amorous pill,
And mix a little sweetening flattery,
To make it suit the palate of her pride.
Thus, in compliance with my secret will,
I am prepared with instruments for ill.
If fortune kindly favor my design,
The lovely Jenson may at length be mine.

The END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, Mr. Jenson's house. Mr. Jenson and Major Shapely. Shap. IN consequence
of thy command,
I have procured those articles.

Mr. J. It Is well; and where are they deposited?


Shap. In store, all ready to be put on board.


Mr. J. The preparation for my voyage succeeds,
According to my wish. Did nothing else
Retard my progress, or perplex my mind,
I should be soon in readiness to sail.

Shap. What is there else?
Does any obstacle impede thy way?

Mr. J. The circumstances of my family
Affect my soul, with great uneasiness,
And quite embarrass my designs.

Shap. Thou art afraid, to leave them here with me:
I know, I have not merited the trust.

Mr. J. No; that is not the ground of my concern.
If Mrs. Jenson would declare her choice,
Either to go with me, or tarry here,
I might prepare accordingly for her:
But it disturbs and disconcerts my schemes,
To be in doubt, respecting that affair.

Shap. Have thou then offered her a choice;

Mr. J. I have; and begged of her to choose.


Shap. Sure, that was fair.


Mr. J. And yet she utterly declines.


Shap. Perhaps she has not yet had time enough,
To form a prudent choice.

Mr. J. She asks no longer time;
But seems determined not to choose at all.

Shap. What reason does she urge,
To justify, or rather to excuse,
Her unaccountable behavior?

Mr. J. Instead of justifying it,
She is forever muttering out complaints,
Of her unhappy life.

Shap. She cannot blame thee, for that which heaven ordains.


Mr. J. She does; however strange it may appear.
And calls me the destroyer of her bliss.

Shap. Oh shocking! Can thou bear it all?
The senseless, stupid creature well deserves
To be despised by all the human race.
Condemn a tender husband, for the leave
Of choosing for herself -- then add complaints!

Mr. J. I Am nearly weary of her, I confess.


Shap. Nearly weary of her! It Is enough
To blast the patience of another Job.
I wonder thou endurest her, a day.

Mr. J. Alas! I am inured to her camplaints.


Shap. Inured to them! I am amazed.
She has been long complaining, I perceive.

Mr. J. Incessantly, since first we joined our hands.


Shap. Indeed! It seems impossible.


Mr. J. It is the truth.


Shap. I doubt it not. Pray, pardon me.
I don't dispute the truth of what thou say,
Though this, at first, appears incredible.
How can thou live with her? A fine help-meet,
As ever walked, since Eve involved the world
In guilt, and misery and cruel death!

Mr. J. Oh I Am the most unhappy man on earth.
My life is nothing but a scene of woe.
Whenever I approach, her forehead low'rs,
With sullen scowls, as hideous as the grave.
And then her tongue -- Oh! Who can calmly sit
Beneath a woman's scolding tongue?

Shap. No man of sense and sentiment:
For nature is abused, when ladies scold.
Let men, upon occasion, fret and rage;
Their natural roughness gives them some excuse:
But angry passions misbecome the fair,
Composed throughout of nature's finest parts;
Whose lovely forms are beauty's masterpiece;
Whose features are an emblem of the sex,
And show the proper temper of their mind.

Mr. J. No more, dear Sir. no more!
I know the force of female exellence;
Not less I know their follies and their faults;
For Mrs. Jenson is the sum of all,
A true epitome of woman kind.
Her charm (...) universal and complete:
But Vashti-like, she must be still adored,
Or else -- farewell to all domestic peace!
For she will set the keenest edge of spleen
Upon the adverse incidents of life,
And change a paradise of social joy,
Into a hell of bickering and rage.
How often have I wished the gordian knot
Of matrimony were again untied!

Shap. I wonder other people have not heard
Of your domestic strife.

Mr. J. They have;
I am become a proverb in the streets.
I heard a man observing to his friend,
"'It Is base for one of Mr. Jenson's rank,
"To be so tamely governed by his wife."

Shap. My sorrow! has it come to this?


Mr. J. To this, it has.
His words were sharper than a two-edged sword;
I feel them still; they pierced my foolish heart,
And left a sting behind.

Shap. So I believe. I wish that were the end:
But thou must rule thy house, or (mark my word)
The ruin of thy public character
Will be as sure, as death.

Mr. J. How rule my house?
I Have used uncommon lenity with her,
In all our intercourse.

Shap. That seems to be reason of her scorn;
Thou wast in fault. 'Twas best to be severe.

Mr. J. I hoped to win her by indulgent means.


Shap. The consequence too sadly proves,
That such indulgence only tempted her,
To run a greater length of wilfulness.
Thy kind civility increased her pride,
As cultivation helps a weed to grow.

Mr. J. I wish, I had begun to use the curb,
Before her pride had gained maturity.

Shap. It is not yet too late.


Mr. J. How may her stubborn soul be swayed?


Shap. How? There Is no difficulty, in the case:
For woman is as weak as proud.
Pride has its origin in impotence.
Apply a little opposition to her will;
And, though her rage may bluster up a while,
The storm will very soon subside.

Mr. J. Do thou imagine she may thus be ruled,
By gentle exercise of government?

Shap. Perhaps her stubbornness has grown so strong,
As to require a little longer time,
Or harder trial of authority;
However she will gladly yield.

Mr. J. I am almost persuaded to attempt
Her subjugation: -- But I hate the task.

Shap. It will be worse, if longer left undone.


Mr. J. It Is true.


Shap. Nay more, it will become impossible.


Mr. J. I know it will, in time.


Shap. Besides, a lucky opportunity
Invites thee to begin, without delay.
Her backwardness to pitch upon a place
Of residence, affords a fair pretense.

Mr. J. A happy opportunity enough.
If I begin with her, I shall have need
Of thy assistance and advice.

Shap. My self and service are at thy command.
But don't let her, by any means, suspect,
That any body is concerned with thee;
She ought to think the undertaking thine.

Mr. J. She ought, indeed, and shall I am resolved,
To hazard one experiment. Mr. Jeason goes out.

Shap. How much more easy it is,
To raise dissension, than to settle peace!
The seeds of discord are so deeply sown,
In every corner of the human heart,
A little culture maturates their growth,
And presently the bitter fruits appear.
Such is the case of this unhappy match.
A house divided so against itself,
Most surely cannot stand. Then let it fall.
What need I care? It will not fall on me.
Yet what a wretch I am, to triumph thus,
In the misfortunes of my fellow men!
It Is truly devilish; I confess, it is.
I would not undertake it for the world,
Unless it were, to benefit myself.
Oh! no; I don't wish any harm to them.
Well, well; I Will think of this another time.
At present I must prosecute my plan,
Which, I perceive, begins to operate.
Her spirits are sublime, and scorn restraint,
Which he has undertaken to impose;
They Will blaze, as quick as powder touched with fire.
Mr. Lyndall enters. Hah! Lyndall? Yes -- I welcome thee again.
Thy presence always gives me joy.

Lynd. Your complaisance demands my thanks.


Shap. How does thy courage stand today?


Lynd. Faith! it is but just above the freezing point.


Shap. It has been quite below.


Lynd. And will be there again,
For any thing I see, to keep it up.

Shap. Come, come, no more of that. Thou art a man.


Lynd. I humbly hope to be esteemed a man.


Shap. Then act according to that character,
And leave the spleen to whimsical old maids.

Lynd. I scorn a splenetic despondency,
As much as you, or any other man:
And notwithstanding all, I dread --

Shap. Aye, that is the very thing, that will
Unwind the whole contrivance of thy cause.
Thou dread'st the trouble of the enterprise,
Though I endure the greatest share.

Lynd. You censure me too soon.


Shap. Forgive my fault; it is the effect of love
Sometimes, I own, my zeal to honor thee
Induces me to unbecoming (...):
But, if sincerity has any worth.
Thou will not judge the less, but (...) thy friend.

Lynd. Your friendship is the (...) of my hopes,
And has, as it deserves, my hearty thanks.

Shap. My wishes claim no more.
This approbation is a full reward
For all my care of thy important cause.
And as I would in future merit it,
Permit me to renew my sacred trust.
[Kneels] Upon the honor of a Gentleman,
Upon a Christian's everlasting faith,
And on the credit of a Soldier's word,
(Let heaven be witness to this solemn oath!)
My hands, my head and heart shall all be thine.

Lynd. Amidst the numerous evils of my life,
My disappointments, losses and defeats,
(Thanks to the star, that ruled my natal hour!)
I have a friend, in whom I can confide.

Shap. Thy confidence has fan'd the spark of love,
That warmed, before, the center of my heart.
An ardour of benevolence will spread,
Through all the future actions of my life.
In any office, thou may now command
The wishes and endeavors of thy friend.

Lynd. The office, which you now sustain,
At present wholly occupies my mind.
But, I Am afraid you never will succeed.

Shap. On what foundation do thou build thy fear?


Lynd. Upon my former disappointments.


Shap. This fear of thine denotes a prudent mind,
And proves its author provident and wise;
But (trust a friend) it has no solid ground.
Thou have been disappointed, I allow;
Which circumstance should not dishearten thee*
For numerous thousands of the human kind,
Beneath some sudden shock of adverse fate,
Has trembled, with a momentary fear,
Which only roused their native fortitude,
To persevere, and finally succeed.

Lynd. With your assistance, I will persevere,
Even let the consequence be what it may.

Shap. It Is nobly said. Thou reasonest like a man.
Thy brave resolve, at least, deserves success;
It will support my spirits, while I strive,
To learn the movements of thy rival's schemes.

Lynd. Since you are now admitted to his house,
I hope there will be some discovery.

Shap. Most probably there will:
For I have frequent opportunities
Of joining freely in discourse with him.

Lynd. When was the last?


Shap. An hour is not elapsed, since he was here.


Lynd. And when will be the next?


Shap. I judged by what he said,
He would return, before this time.
I narrowly observe his common talk,
From which I trust to gain his thoughts.

Lynd. Is not that person he, who walks this way?


Shap. Yes; that is he.
I Will found him with my utmost skill:
Do thou go out of sight a little while,
'Till he shall have performed his business here,
And then step in again.

Lynd. I Will do as you advise.


Mr. Lyndall retires, and Mr. Jenson enters. Shap. So soon returned! Well! How
does discipline
Appear to suit her ladyship?

Mr. J. Suit? Bless my stars!
She scolded, stormed and thundered out her threats,
As if she meant to crush the universe,
About my ears.

Shap. Such conduct is, by no means, strange.


Mr. J. I find it operates,
According to thy prophecy.

Shap. She will undoubtedly be worse awhile*
For government; the stubborn always are.
It Is well thou have begun to conquer her,
Before her temper is too obstinate
To bend to any rule.

Mr. J. It is a task.


Shap. Aye, that is true, it is indeed a task.
Her folly renders it a needful one,
In order for a quiet life.

Mr. J. A quiet life is all I have in view.


Shap. A motive worthy of a gentleman!
Thy manly resolution is too great
To quit this necessary discipline,
Without accomplishing the end.

Mr. J. I will endeavor to proceed.


Shap. To yield would be unsafe;
Because 'twould give a sanction to her pride.
Nor will thou think it wise to slack the rein;
Lest she acquire new strength by thy delay.

Mr. J. How may I best prevent her insolence,
And bring the matter to a speedy close?

Shap. By setting every thing against her will.
If she has any ornament of worth,
It may be wrested from her, if thou please,
To teach her due submission to her lord.
But my affection caries me too far:
I ought to know my place, and not advise.

Mr. J. Let me reflect -- what can I take away?
She wears a diamond necklace.

Shap. A happy circumstance.


Mr. J. She has my picture too in miniature.


Shap. Well, that is more lucky still.


Mr. J. I Will sieze upon them both.


Shap. Do this at different times,
'Twould tend perhaps to mortify her pride,
If thou should seemingly intend to sell,
Or give away those things.

Mr. J. I like the plan; she must and shall submit.
Meanwhile my other necessary cares
Demand me first another way. [Mr. Jenson goes out]

Shap. To be deprived of all her ornaments,
Will cut her tender feelings to the quick;
And then will be my time to win her heart.
This is a project, that will never fail,
If I can open Lyndall's purse again.
The fool, I see, is coming in. Mr. Lyndall enters.
I heartily rejoice with thee, my friend.

Lynd. For what?


Shap. The noble prospect that unfolds to view,
Respecting thy affairs.

Lynd. What now? Have you discovered any thing.


Shap. I have performed a grand discovery,
Which makes my heart exult for joy
Within the progress of a few more months,
I hope, dear sir (if nothing interfere)
To see thee mounted on a prince's seat,
Dispensing orders to submissive crowds.

Lynd. A prince's seat! What, I a prince?
You rally me, I doubt.

Sh. Let me be called a fool and knave,
Or (what is worse) a coward, through the world;
Nay, let my tongue become a hiffing snake,
My head make food for dogs and filthy crows,
And Shapely be a term of infamy,
If this be not my real sentiment.

Lynd. A prince? How grand the sound of prince?
Then you shall be the next in dignity.
I Will not forget your kindness; no, not I:
For that would ill-become a generous prince.
I am surprised.

Sh. Not more than I. It is thy just desert.
Since thou have sown the seeds of industry,
Now reap an ample harvest of renown.

Lynd. My soul stands tip-toe at the thought:

Sh. My friends will shout, huzza! for joy;
And thou (however modesty may blush)
Even thou will feel a secret joy, to wield
The sword of Justice over guilty heads;
To poize the doubtful scale of Equity,
And hold out Mercy's scepter in thy hand,
With pardon for the poor and penitent.

Lynd. Who could have thought it? You shall be my friend
I Will grant you any thing you ask,
I Will obtain success. Do tell me all,
That I may hang no longer in suspense.

Sh. I must be very brief.
Among the incidents of our discourse,
I fortunately found a secret way,
That led me to the very cabinet
Of his designs; where I have formed a scheme,
To take his conduct in a fatal snare.
I have not leisure to relate the whole.

Lynd. O wondrous man!
I wish I could contrive like you.

Shap. Be resolute and bravely persevere;
For that is the only method to be great.

Lynd. I will be resolute. Away, my fears,
Be gone; I Have no more use for you.

Shap. I honor thy intent.
And I have need of persevering zeal:
For there is yet some difficulty.

Lynd. Not great, I would believe.


Shap. Not very great.
It Is this; I cannot, at once, discharge my trust,
As manager of Mr. Jenson's house
(Which must be done, or I shall be dismissed)
And execute this plan of mine.

Lynd. Where shall we find a deputy.
I Am confident some person may be found;
Nay shall be found, and that this afternoon. --
It is not prudent, I suppose, for me,
To be immediately concerned.

Shap. By no means, lest our purpose be revealed.
There is a friend of mine, who may be gained,
For suitable reward.

Lynd. Engage him, Sir; and I will pay his price.
Here, take this purse of gold.

Shap. A generous sum!


Lynd. If necessary, you may draw for more.


Shap. There possibly may be a call for more;
But this, at present, is enough.

Lynd. Take what is best; but let it not be known.


Shap. Aye, that is well observed.
The secret must be kept, and well thou know,
A secret is a dangerous, slippery thing:
Just like a prisoner immured in goal,
It peaks through blushing cheeks and conscious eyes,
As through the windows of a prison hall;
And if the tongue but just unlock the door,
Away the secret glides, as quick as light,
And can no more be caught. Be cautious then,
To hold the secret in thy breast.

Lynd. All necessary caution shall be used,
So far as my ability extends.

Shap. I have no doubt of it.
If thou will nobly scorn unmanly fear,
The object of thy wishes will appear:
Fame's loudest trumpet will declare thy name,
And listening rumor echo back to fame.

The END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE Mr. Jenson's house. Major Shapeley and Mrs. Jenson. Mrs. J. I NEVER
entertained
The most exalted sentiments of him:
But this abuse has quite astonished me.
He has destroyed my happiness.

Shap. With what pretense?
There is some motive, that induces him.

Mrs. J. To make me wretched, seems his only aim.


Shap. It cannot be. The most abandoned wretch,
Who ever brought disgrace upon mankind,
Never wished to wrong a virtuous character,
For nothing, but the sake of doing wrong.
He doubtless has some secret views.

Mrs. J. I cannot imagine what.


Shap. Nor I. His conduct is a paradox to me.


Mrs. J. I shudder at the event.
Could I be set at liberty from him --
Yet, Oh! my wishes are completely vain.

Shap. Four years ago thou did not think of this;
Then merit seemed to have a just reward;
Amanda's name was full in every mouth.
Whenever thou wast pleased to walk abroad,
Both young and old rose up and bowed to thee.
At every window, stood the sparkling beans,
And rival beauties stole an envious glance.
Youth, love and cheerfulness composed thy train;
Fame ran before, the herald of thy steps;
Pale envy gazed, and sighed, then shut her eyes;
While malice shook her head, and turned away,
At thy approach.

Mrs. J. O spare me, spare me, Sir:
Nor urge my feelings, with so keen a sting.
I was Amanda blooming, fair and gay.
Extolling youth and talkative old age
Fed me with praise, until it made me sick.
Poor foolish girl! I fondly thought that life
Would always flow in such a gentle stream.
But, ah! Amanda is no more my name;
Nor this the greatest change, that I sustain.
I scarcely know myself.

Shap. Thy change is great.
I Would freely spend my life, on thy account,
To turn the wheel of fortune back again.

Mrs, J, I Am wronged, neglected and despised.


Shap. I feel thy wrongs,
And heartily condole with thee.

Mrs. J, I am undone, alas! I am undone.


Shap. Oh! Don't dear lady, don't lament.


Mrs. J. Did thou, one moment, feel, what I endure,
The hidden pain, that rankles in this breast --
Thou would not chide my tears. Thy heart would melt.

Shap. I pity thee with all my soul.


Mrs. J. Ah! wretched me!
The poor remains of what Amanda was!
Where are my charms, my once-admired charms?
Where have my friends and fawning lovers fled?
Farewell, my schemes of love and happiness!
And ye, my lovers and my friends, farewell!
I give you back your broken promises.
Farewell the amorous glance, and humble bow!
Adieu to chearing songs, to festive mirth,
To social smiles, that spread from face to face,
To visits, gay assemblies, brilliant balls,
And all the glory of the world, adieu!
I take my mournful leave of thee, O world;
Thy beauty's faded; thy delights are cold:
Farewell, farewell, thou empty, flattering world!
Begone, with all thy fair, inviting scenes!
Farewell, contented thoughts, and quiet rest!
And, did not fear forbid the tragic deed,
I Would bid a long, a last adieu to life.
But nature shrinks, and cries, forbear.

Shap. Obey her kind command.


Mrs. J. For what intent?


Shap. To live.


Mrs. J. To bear this tedious load of misery.


Shap. If borne with fortitude,
It may, perhaps, grow less.

Mrs. J. But that is improbable.


Shap. I hope not quite.


Mrs. J. It is, and more;
It Is utterly impossible.

Shap. I own thy prospect is somewhat obscured.


Mrs. J. It Is darker than Egyptian night.
My ills increase with every closing day;
No one can tell me what will be their end.
A secret dread of something yet reserved,
Behind the curtain of mysterious fate,
Reproves my restless thoughts, for looking back.
O for some prophet's fate-unfolding hand,
To draw aside the intervening veil,
That I might peep into the unseen world,
And view the secrets of futurity!
O blind futurity! disclose thy scenes,
To let me see my fate!

Shap. It might not be so well, to know thy fate.


Mrs. J. It Is possible; but yet I want to know.


Shap. As much of it depends
On Mr. Jenson's life, examine him;
Survey his actions, with a cautious eye:
These cannot fail to intimate his thoughts,
Let them be good or bad. But think than good.
A man must not be sentenced for a crime
(Especially so black a crime at this)
Without sufficient evidence of guilt.
Esteem him honest, as I hope he is;
And be inclined to find him free from blame:
For otherwise, a life of wretchedness
Will be thy certain lot. Pray think of that.
I don't believe he can be such a wretch,
As thy suspicion prophecies of him;
He knows thy worth and loves thy charms too well.
But satisfy thyself, and doubt no more.

Mrs. J. Thou speak wisely, for my good.


Shap. I speak the language of sincerity.
This is my best advice.

Mrs. J. I Am bound to love and thank thee, for thy zeal.
I Will watch him, every moment, night and day.
Will thou be kind enough do the same?

Shap. At thy desire, I will. It is my joy,
To aid the virtuous struggling in distress.
However, this must be concealed from him,
Or I shall not be able to assist.

Mrs. J. It shall not reach the notice of his eyes.
Or ears, or even his thoughts from me.

Shap. I beg to take my leave of thee;
For business calls.

Maj. Shapely goes out. Mrs. J. How complaisant this Major Shapely is!
His company is like the rising sun;
It drives away the tedious night of grief.
He is a most accomplished gentleman,
Designed no doubt, to bless some happy bride.
I wish to Heaven, that I might be the one!
Yet fortune always mocks my, fruitless wish:
Accursed fortune, that destroyed my hopes,
And bound me to the only man, I hate.
O cruel husband! O unfeeling man!
Can he, with pleasure, sport at my distress?
The Major doubts has same secret view.
What secret view? No other view than base --
It Is so -- Vile wretch! -- The Major seems alarmed --
Some scandalous design to ruin me!
Why did I not mistrust his crime before!
We never lived in love, like man and wife;
Nor did we marry, for the sake of love.
It Is plain, he meant to be a plague to me.
Thank fortune, Major Shapely is my friend! --
Deceitful villain! break his marriage vows?
Yield his affection to a prostitute?
Just Heaven heap curses on the wretch's head,
And blast his name! Perfidious man!
If this be true, his death will not avail,
To satisfy my angry appetite.

Major Shapely enters. Mrs. J. Thou have returned with speed.


Shap. I Am here and there and every where,
As necessary business urges me.

Mrs. J. Do thou believe, that he is true?


Shap. Who?


Mrs. J. Mr. Jenson,

Shap. That he is true?


Mrs. J. Aye, true to wedlock.


Shap. Why, yes; I hope he is.


Mrs. J. Hope! So do I; but do thou think he is?


Shap. Sometimes I do. I Have many thoughts of him.


Mrs. J. Do speak thy sentiments.


Shap. I dare not: If I should,
They would not satisfy thy mind.

Mrs. J. I must be satisfied.


Shap. Then mark him, and his talk.
If he be false 'twill certainly appear.

Mrs. J. I will observe him, with the utmost care.


Mrs. Jenson goes out. Shap. She Will find him false enough, I warrant her.
Her jealous mind is happily prepared,
For him to take away her furniture.
Faith! this will work: And so will Lyndall's fright.
I love to swell him up, with airy thoughts,
And, by the alternate help of hope and fear,
To blow the bubble round to any point,
Where either interest or my sport directs.

Mr. Lyndall enters. Lynd. I say, I shall be ruined after all.


Shap. Don't be a child,
Because a little danger threatens us.

Lynd. He will discover us, we may be sure;
We cant prevent it, by the best of means:
But notwithstanding all your promises,
I shall be brought to punishment.

Shap. My safety is embarked with thine;
I cant escape the storm, that shipwrecks thee.

Lynd. Aye, you are right, I don't complain of you.
I have almost a mind, to run away,
Or move into the country, and forget
I ever stood a candidate for fame;
There is so much uncertainty!

Shap. Uncertainty!
That ought to warm thy diligence,
Instead of freezing up thy active zeal.
I grant that honor is uncertain; so is life.
Thou do not cease, however, to provide,
For days, for weeks, and months and years to come.
I pray thee, be consistent with thyself;
Perform thy part, and let the event alone.

Lynd. I must acknowledge that is best.


Shap. It is not only best, but safest too:
For cowardice unhinges all our strength;
It makes the fancy easily transform
A molehill trifle to a mountain toil;
It bids us flee for life when none pursues,
And hide from danger right in danger's way,
Then cry, to let our hiding place be known.
Be brave, be manly and thou will be great.
What need of fear?

Lynd. Because he views me with suspicious eyes.


Shap. It Is not impossible to shut the eyes
Of his suspicion, close as solid gold.

Lynd. Then I shall feel secure.
O blessed security!

Shap. Although it is possible,
It will create expense.

Lynd. I value not expense, to make me safe.
I would not have another fright, like this,
For all the gold and silver of Peru.

Shap. Aye, safety is to be preferred to gold.


Lynd. But how shall I dispose of one,
To make the other sure?

Shap. The way is plain:
For gold does any thing, and every thing;
It makes the Lawyer plead, the Parson preach,
The Merchant trade, the Doctor tend the sick,
And Politicians oil the wheels of state:
For this, the Servant waits, the Soldier fights,
The Father sweats, to turn the rugged glebe,
Mechanics toil, and Sailors tempt the seas.
This fills the hungry mouth with drink and meat,
And clothes the shivering back against the cold --
Nay, money answers all demands, but death;
And therefore cannot fail to make us safe.

Lynd. The consequence is fairly drawn --
I don't know what to do, or how to turn.
The profits of my trade are all consumed.

Shap. Thy cash is lent on loan,
And will return, with interest ten per cent.

Lynd. Well, I shall make or break. I Will fell my stock,
And keep it all for read use. Mr. Lyndall goes out.

Shap. I cannot but laugh, to think how I (...) raised
This fellow's expectations, step by step,
Upon the ladder of an empty fame,
So high above his real character,
The giddy prospect fairly turns his head.
I have his fortune at my own command,
And that is all I wish.

Betty enters. Bet. I hope I don't disturb you, Major Shapel^

Shap. No, Betty, not at all. [Writing]
Well, how do family affairs go on?

Bet. Why, Mr. Jenson and his lady are (...) talk,
Concerning their intended voyage.

Shap. Your mistress, I observe,
Is very sorrowful of late.

Bet. I know she is.


Shap. Extremely sorrowful -- I pity her:
For she deserves a more propitious fate.
She is the sweetest flower of all her sex,
And fit to match with any emperor.
I Would freely risk my life, to give her peace;
And think her favor a sufficient pay.
It seems impossible for any man,
Although his heart were made of solid flint,
To be regardless of her excellence. --
I must be gone, a minute, to the store. goes out.

Bet. I Will tell my mistress, what he says of her.


Mrs. Jenson enters. Mrs. J. I shall not go to France.


Bet. I Am glad of that.


Mrs. J. Where is the Major?


Bet. Stepped over to the store. He will rejoice --

Mrs J. He Will soon return, I trust.


Bet. Yes, very soon.
The Major pities thee, as much as I,
And speaks of thee, with rapture and concern.
Look! There he comes. I leave thee.

Maj. Shapely enters, and Betty retires. Mrs. J. Thy fears,
Respecting Mr. Jenson's base design,
Have proved too true.

Shap. What evidence appears?


Mrs. J. He Is robbed me of my property.
He gave me (just before our wedding day)
A diamond neck-lace: This he has re^^^m'd.

Shap. I was convinced he would betray himself.


Mrs. J. It was an ornament,
For which I had a singular regard.

Shap. He has some other use for it.
Alas! It is a melancholy truth,
That husbands should descend to such abuse:
For, look through nature's various family,
In every rank, beneath the human race,
The males as much excel the other half,
In beauty, as in strength; and yet are kind.
The social Dove consoles his partner's care;
The Swallow feeds and tends and chears his mate;
The Robbin watches over his sweeting's life,
Affording her protection and support;
And every one, according to his kind,
Acknowledges and honors nature's law:
But the reverse obtains among mankind:
Here beauty crowns the female sex alone;
Yet faithless men -- How painful is the thought! --
Yet men are faithless, changing and unkind:
Thy husband is a witness to this truth.

Mrs. J. Detested wretch! He ought to loose his head.
I prized the lace too highly, I believe;
And I shall never have another.

Shap. Yes, I have one, which shall be thine,
If that can satisfy thy loss.

Mrs. J. Thou art extremely kind.


Shap. With thy permission, I will go*
And bring it here to thee.

Mrs. J. I have no reason to object.
Maj. Shapely goes out. Good God! How kind! It makes me curse my fate.
I wish I could invent some happy way,
To banish Mr. Jenson from my sight,
And let this courteous Major take his place.

Maj. Shapely returns. Shap. Take this small present, as a pledge
Of my respect.

Mrs. J. I thank thee from my heart.


Shap. Were all the universe within my power,
It should be freely thine.

Mrs. J. Words cannot express my gratitude.
A lovely neck-lace, rich and elegant!

Shap. On thy account,
I wish it worth a golden world.

Mrs. J. It is at much superior to the one,
My husband lately robbed me of, as that
Was better than a string of beads.

Shap. 'Twas robbery indeed, or something worse.


Mrs. J. What worse?


Shap. Aye, that is the mystery.


Mrs. J. It is no mystery to me.


Shap. It is, in some degree, revealed.


Mrs. J. It Is plain enough; I want no stronger proof.
Revenge alone --

Shap. Hark! Somebody is coming in.


Mrs. J. No doubt it is he.
I would much rather see a ghost.

Shap. I Will go aside.


Mrs. J. Do step into the closet there;
And take the key, to be secure.

Shap. I will obey.


Mrs. J. He brings some insult, I suppose.


Shap. Take notice. He may throw some further light
Upon his dark design.

Maj. Shapely goes into the closet, and Mr. Jenson enters. Mr. J. Since thou
disdain'st my company,
In violation of our nuptial oath,
Restore my picture back to me.

Mrs. J. Most readily [Giving it to him] I would not have it here.


Mr. J. Some other person may esteem it more.


Mr. Jenson goes out. Mrs. J. Some other person! Oh! I Will be his death,
Or die myself. [Maj. Shapely reenters.] Did thou observe?

Shap. Observe! The secret's out,
As plain as open day.

Mrs. J. The wretch shall die.


Shap. He merits death.


Mrs. J. A hundred deaths, he does.
Prove false himself! Then lay that charge on me
Destruction smite him dead, upon the spot!

Shap. It Is villainous.


Mrs. J. It Is worse, a thousand times.
A common villain is a saint to him.
Oh, what a monster of iniquity!
Prove false to wedlock! Cursed child of guilt,
Some lewd infernal, shaped in human guise,
To bring disgrace upon mankind and me!

Shap. I am ashamed to own him as a man.


Mrs. J. A villain, false as Beelzebub!
Charge me with violation of my oath!

Shap. His conduct is a striking test of guilt:
He could not harbor such a thought of thee,
Unless it were familiar to himself.

Mrs. J. God knows that North is not so far from South,
As such a purpose from my heart;
Yet he, a monster, throws his crime on me,
And plunders me, to deck a prostitute --
Some other person -- fit for him, I hope --
A scolding fury, ugly as the grave,
As cross as death, and black as his desires;
And she, forsooth! must have my ornaments.
Let them be snakes and vipers in her hands,
To poison her and him! O perjured wretch!
He has debased himself, to injure me.
Despise him, curse him, help me kill the knave,
And bury him a mile within the earth,
Or sink him to the bottom of the sea.
O that I were a man! He should not live
Another day: This night should be his last.

Shap. Shall I be executioner for thee?


Mrs. J. Yes; seize the villain, while his crime is warm,
And hang him, burn him, drown him -- any thing,
So matter what; but stop his guilty breath.

Shap. At thy command, I Will take away his life.


Mrs. J. Quick let him die. He Is wronged and ruined me.
He never had a single spark of love:
I thought he never had, and now it is plain.
Why did I marry him against my choice?
I was a fool, a silly, thoughtless fool;
My cruel father too -- But he is gone,
And all are gone: I Have not a friend on earth.

Shap. Yes, I Am thy friend.


Mrs. J. Heaven be thy recompense!
Befriend me still. My husband is my foe --
My husband? No, it surely cannot be:
That tender title is no longer his;
I am no more his wife. The tie's desolv'd --
I here renounce his name, with solemn oath,
To be revenged.

Shap. May I, kind lady, hope to have that place,
In thy esteem, which he has forfeited?

Mrs. J. In gratitude for all thy kindnesses,
And from the warnest sentiments of love,
My honored friend, thou may.

Shap. Immortal happiness be thy reward!
Let Heaven, dear love, attest our (...) vows;
And here be pleased to take this miniature,
Which is my representative, to show,
That I devote my heart to thee alone.

Mrs. J. My heart it solely thine. Accept this ring,
And let it be a token of my love.

Shap. O may I be the blessing of thy life!


Mrs. J. And I remain thy ever-faithful wife!
My happiness is now at length complete:
For past distress, makes present joy more sweet.

Shap. The sun never shone on such a day as this,
That seals my title to consummate bliss.

The END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE, Mr. Jenson's house. Major Shapely and Mrs. Jenson. Shap. BEFORE
tomorrow's dawn,
His vessel will be moving under sail;
And ever the sun ascend half way to noon,
Leave Boston harbor, if the wind prove fair.
I Have hired the Captain and a private hand
(Two trusty fellows, whom we need not fear)
To help us kill the man.

Mrs. J. How is the business to be done?


Shap. We are to smother him asleep,
If slumber close his drowsy eyes; if not,
Some other measure is to be pursued.

Mrs. J. I shudder at the horrid scene.


Shap. It is a horrid scene, be sure;
But it is a momentary one.

Mrs. J. And how to be concealed?


Shap. The Captain will attend to that;
He will, in silence, carry him away,
To be entombed amidst the roaring waves;
Then represent him fallen overboard.

Mrs. J. A good device! But is this Captain firm?


Shap. As firm as fate.


Mrs. J. I wish the bloody business were performed.


Shap. An hour or two will bring the end;
All things are ready for the deed.
Let us anticipate our future state,
When smiling love shall lead at hand in hand,
Over blooming regions of connubial joy;
Then, lovely fait-one, then -- God speed the day! --
Oh! Then adieu to groans and tears and sighs,
We'll trip along the flowery vale of life,
And sing and dance and sport away our cares.

Mrs. J. Blessed period of my life!
I see it, as a distant eminence:
But thorns and briars fill the space between.

Shap. Waste not a thought on that:
The period soon will come, to bless our eyes.
Fly, lingering moments, swiftly urge your flight,
To bear away the intervening time;
Then drop your wings, descend, and walk with us.
What scenes of dalliance open to our view!
Love makes a paradise on earth. [Sings.]
When Adam, in the days of yore,
Enjoyed all nature's ample store,
In Eden's blisful seat,
Amidst that solitary state,
He wanted nothimg but a mate,
To render him complete.

Mrs. J. A pretty song! You have a lovely voice;
A charming voice you have; It pleases me.

Shap. And me no less, because it pleases you.


Mrs. J. How sweet is music to the mourning soul!


Shap. As sweet as honey, and as pure as light.
When, through the portal of the listening ear,
Soft music enters and salutes the soul,
It soon dispels the frowning cloud of care,
Bids faded melancholy yield a smile,
And sorrow wipe away the starting tear.

Mrs. J. I love to hear your voice.
Have you no other song?

Shap. Another verse of this.


Mrs. J. Well, let me hear the whole.


Shap. With all my heart. Sings again.
As Adam then, without his bride,
Though bless with every thing beside,
Was restless, while alone:
So now in wedlock let us share
Of social bliss and mutual core,
And Eden is our own.

Mrs. J. Most happily performed! I thank you, Sir.


Shap. No thanks, my dear;
Reward me rather with a kiss.

Mrs. J. Dear Sir! [kisses her.] You are too complaisant.


Shap. You have too many charms.
Were I as fickle as the changing wind,
I should forever be entirely yours;
For I Am the happiest man alive.

Mrs. J. I should be happy, if this night were past.


Shap. Pray, think of that no more. 'Twill soon be gone.


Mrs. J. I strive to banish it, but cannot;
It hangs upon my mind.

Shap. Be not concerned; The hours are on the wing;
And I must bring the Captain near at hand.

Mrs. J. May safety be your guide.
Major Shapely goes out. Lord! How the Major talks and sings!
His very nature is brim full of love.
What happy hours I could enjoy with him,
If this long night were numbered with the past!
I wonder Mr. Jenson don't return;
And yet the fatal moment is too nigh.
It is a pity I have gone so far;
A real pity: But I cannot go back;
And therefore -- Hold -- Who comes? It Is he, I think --
Who else? -- It sounds like Mr. Worthy's voice.
I Will stand aside, and hear their talk.

Mrs. Jenson goes into a closet; and Messrs. Worthy and Jenson enter conversing
together. Worcester. Thou will remit intelligence
Of thy success.

Mr. J. By every opportunity, I will.


Worcester. Thy country's happiness
Is trusted to thy care -- A weighty trust!

Mr. J. I feel its weight.


Worcester. O happy country! Blessed UNITED STATES

Mr. J. As great in arts of peace, as martial deeds

Worcester. The storm of war, that hovered over our shores
And threatened ruin, is dispersed and gone.

Mr. J. The glorious sunshine of reviving peace
Breaks out, to cheer this land of liberty.

Worcester. These are the works of our Almighty Friend;
Thanks to his name, that I behold this day.

Mr. J. He rules and reigns: Let all the earth rejoice.


Worcester. The world is his. By his supreme command,
Day follows Night, and Night succeeds to Day.

Mr. J. Week after Week appears, and passes on.


Worcester. Swift Months pursue declining Months around.


Mr. J. Cold Winter melts, before the Summer's heat;

Worcester. And Summer shrinks, before the Winter's cold.


Mr. J. Years tread the steps of antecedent Years.


Worcester. One Generation rush across the stage;
And others closely follow, at their heels.

Mr. J. One Empire lifts its head, looks round, then falls;
And other Empires rise upon its back.

Worcester. The whirling Earth revokes upon itself.


Mr. J. The circling Planets, wheel about the Sun.


Worcester. Whole solar systems round their center move:

Mr. J. And that, with others, round one common point.


Worcester. Thus spreads the motion, through immensity.


Mr. J. The harmony of nature thus is formed.


Worcester. He moves and governs these revolving worlds.


Mr. J. He holds the universe within his hand.


Worcester. He is our GOD.


Mr. J. JEHOVAH is his name.


Worcester. May he preserve these rising States from harm!


Mr. J. May he enlarge their strength and happiness!


Worcester. God crown thy foreign labors with success!


Mr. J. God give you peace and unity at home.


Worcester. Adieu, my friend;

Mr. J. Respected Sir, adieu. Mr. Worthy retires.
My papers are conveyed on board;
It two o'clock I am to go myself.
See, it is now a little after twelve.
Two hours almost I have for sleep. Retires.
Mrs. Jenson enters. He Is gone. I cannot envy his repose.
(...)! He don't at all suspect,
What mischief we intend against his life.
It seems too much, altough he is a knave --
A monstrous knave, to violate his truth,
And afterward insult my misery.
Nay, he is justly doomed to suffer death;
This night is proper for the work. -- How dark!
How still and melancholy too it is!
I tremble at myself -- What noise is that? --
The Major's lonely steps: -- Yes, sure it is.
Major Shapely enters. But where is your Captain and his Hand?

Shap. Without the door.
Has Mr. Jenson gone to sleep?

Mrs. J. He has retired to rest.


Shap. It happens well. Goes out again.


Mrs. J. Now, now, the bloody moment has arrived.


Enter Major Shapely, Captain and Sailor. Capt. We come prepared to execute
revenge.


Shap. Come, let us take a bitter, gentlemen,
To fit us for this bitter work.

Mrs. J. Ah! Bitter in the highest sense.


Sail. By Paddy, we will make it sweet enough.


Capt. A glass of bitters would not be amiss.


Sail. He is no sailor, upon my soul, who cannot unfill his glass, in time of
need.


Shap. Security to our attempt. Pretends to drink.


Capt. Faith, that is what we want.


Sail. Zounds! Give me security, and I will meet the devil, face to face, any
day.


Capt. Both silence and security
To our attempt.

Sail. Come, Sir,
A flowing glass,
And a pretty lass, is a sailor's toast.

Shap. Aye, and a soldier's too.
Are all your weapons ready?

Capt. Mine are,

Sail. And mine, by Jove.


Shap. Now, to the work.


Capt. We are completely manned. Lead on:
For you are pilot in this voyage.

Shap. Assist us, all ye gloomy powers of night!


Mrs. J. Do kill him quick.


Sail. He dies, as quick as a flash of lightning.


Mrs. J. Remember to prevent his groans.


Major Shapely, Captain and Sailor go out. Mrs. J. A trying time! Kind heaven
deliver me!
Oh, impious prayer! How dare I lift mine eyes,
To follow my petitions up to heaven,
For blessing on a murderer? Ah me!
Where shall I go? Whence can I seek defense?
My grief! What awful shadows hang around!
A murderous scene! and is this murder then?
No, it is justce -- nothing more -- Why not?
Destracting thought! [groaning within.] Alas! That frightful sound!
It is his groan. [groaning a second time.] Again! Mercy on me!
Yet hark -- how my heart beats! -- Be hushed -- no more --
It Is done. He is dispatched. -- How? What dispach'd?
Where am I? [starting up.] Where has Major Shapely? gone?
Ten thousand horrors fill this lonely place:
It seems to me like some enchauned ground.
Am I awake, or is this all a dream?
Major Shapely enters. Ah? There he comes. How tall and pale he looks!

Shap. My dear!


Mrs. J. Who calls?


Shap. I: Don't you know my voice?


Mrs. J. Oh! Yes; what news?


Shap. All Is well. The traitor is no more.


Mrs. J. Was he awake?


Shap. At first we thought him fast asleep;
And crept along to smother him in bed:
But he began to stir, and raise himself;
Then we russh'd on. This dagger --

Mrs. J. That instrument of death;
Look, how it drops with blood!

Shap. It met his rising breast;
And, urged with fury, pierced him through and through.

Mrs. J. Poor man! I heard him shriek.


Shap. He shrieked indeed;
And, falling faintly back upon the bed,
Exclaimed, O Shapely! Is it thou?

Mrs. J. My fears were true;
Such accents indistinctly reached mine ears.

Shap. I feared he would have waked the family.


Mrs. J. Tremendous sight! How did he look?


Shap. He looked so tenderly at me,
His anguish fixed a dagger in my soul.
I tried to speak: But horror froze my tongue;
A chilling tremor ran through every nerve.
In spite of all my pride, I burst in tears.

Mrs. J. 'Twould force a tear from cruelty itself.


Shap. With eyes rolled back, he groaned a second time;
And, wildly struggling in the pangs of death,
Discharged at me his vital breath.

Mrs. J. Don't tell me any more: 'Twill make me faint.


Shap. It was too much for me. I turned aside --
[Hollowing within.] What means that hideous cry?

Mrs. J. Mercy protect me!


Shap. The men are drunk; I am afraid,
Their poison has begun to operate.
[ Goes to the door, and opening it, Betty rushes in.] Hah! [starting back.]
What Is the matter here?
Are you distracted?

Bet. They Have murdered Mr. Jenson in his bed.


Mrs. J. Why Betty!


Shap. For shame, be still. You are asleep.


Bet. I wish I were: But this has startled me awake.


Shap. Not more than half, as I am here alive.
Your senses are perhaps awake; but still
Your reason and your judgment are asleep,
Or you would never prattle thus.

Bet. Come then yourself, and be convinced.


The Sailor enters. Sail. There stop that bawling wench, or she will run us all
aground.


Bet. Oh, murder!


Shap. Silence.


Bet. I must not, will not hold my peace.
Help, ho! murder! murder!

Sail. Let Us kill the strumpet.


Bet. What! kill me too?


[ Runs out doors and the Sailor after her.] Shap. No, fetch her back. Be
cautious.
Confusion take her! She will raise the town.

Mrs. J. Cannot we hide?


Shap. Where?


Mrs. J. I know no place.


Shap. There is none.


Mrs. J. Dear me! What shall we do?


Shap. Deny the fact,
And charge it on the sailors.

The Sailor enters, leading in Betty muffled. Sail. She hollowed, murder! once
or twice, as if the devil swelled her voice.


Shap. Did any body hear her?


Sail. The Lord can tell, much better than I can.
Now, by Saint Patrick, you shall die.

Mrs. J. No, hold; don't injure her.


Sail. Where then shall I stow her?


Mrs. J. No matter where.


Shap. See her well muffled first,
Then shut her in the closet there.

A Neighbor enters with a light. Neigh. What is the cause of this alarm?
Is any body murdered?

Shap. It is a false alarm. No hurt is done.


Neigh. It has awaked the town, at any rate.


Shap. I Am sorry. 'Twas an accident.
We Have a distracted person -- There she fit: --
Who just now happened to get off her chains,
And run out screaming, through the streets,
Like Bediam. That is all. Pray hasten back,
And stop the horrid cry, before it spread.

Neigh. There Is something more;
What means that dagger in your hand?

Shap. What this? Raising it up.


Neigh. Hah! Bloody too?


The Captain looks in. Capt. I Have bound him up.


Neigh. What? Bound up whom?


Capt. Heavens! Who art thou?


Neigh. There Is murder here, I say.


Enter Mr. Worthy, Officers and Attendants. Worcester. Who Is murdered is this house?


Mrs. J. Defend me, Major Shapely;
Do let me lean upon thine arm. Swoons.

Shap. For God's sake, let me call the Doctor in.


Attempts to go out. Neigh. He is a knave,

Worcester. Then stop him, Officer, and store them all.


Capt. You (...) upon your death.


Sail. Stand off, I say, stand off from me, or by my life, I Will give you a
broadside that will sink you to the ground.


Worcester. Fear not his threats.


Off. Resign yourselves, or take the consequence.


Shap. O guilt!
I cannot fight; (...) something (...) to my arm. Submits.

Capt. Then yield, you heartless coward, and be hanged,
I Will fight no more in your defense.

Sail. Nor I, by George, I Will see you drowned in fire and brimstone first.


Officer and others sieze Shapely, Captain and Sailor. Bet. [Let loose.]
They Have killed my master.


Runs to Mrs. Jenson, Worcester. Who have?


Shap. Those cursed Sailors.


Capt. Ungrateful dog!
He hired us to assist. We did no more.

Bet. Unhappy woman! See, she has at fit.


Worcester. Bind all the rascals fast.
My God! Is this in (...)?

Mrs. J. [Reviving.] O Major Shapely! Where art thou? Faints again.


Shap. My dear, I cannot afford thee any aid;
Endeavors are in vain: Our all is loss.

Worcester. Where is this victim of their murderous guilt?


Bet. In that room, there.


Mr. Worthy and others go out. Mrs. J. [Reviving.] Murder my husband!


Shap. Don't mind it, dear.


Mrs. J. I must. It haunts my guilty thoughts.
Destruction! Oh! What furies hover round,
In haste to snatch me to the horrid pit,
Which yawns, and frightens back my flattering soul!
Yet nature sinks -- Death pulls me down a main --
Oh! Oh! I leap eternal precipice.
Adieu. [dies.]

Bet. Her dying gasp! See, she is gone.


Shap. I Will follow her. Attempts to stab himself.


Off. Hold, villain. Are you not disarmed?
Wrests his dagger from him. There, wait your proper time.

Shap. Not suffer me to die a soldier's death?


Off. No, you shall be reserved,
To grace a rope, on gallows hill.

Shap. There is no remedy; I must submit.
Disgraceful death, and something worse beyond!
That thought lights up damnation in my breast;
Hell stares me in the face, with all its pains.
Oh, darkness and despair!

Capt. Now say, the sailors did the crime.


Shap. I lied.
I am a liar, coward, murderer,
And any thing, the worst you can invent.
I Have murdered you, as well as him.

Capt. No, not so bad, for I am yet alive.


Shap. But death is planted in your blood.
You drank a poisoned dram, that I had mixed,
Lest you hereafter should divulge the fact:

Sail. And I too?


Shap. Both alike.


Sail. Am I then poisoned?


Shap. To death, you are.


Sail. Certainly? What, by that glass of bitters?


Shap. That very glass.


Capt. O murder heaped on murder's head!
This is the consequence of being bribed,
To strangle other people in their sleep.
A sense of that at once disarms my tongue,
Which else would curse you, to the lowest hell --
Don't roll those guilty, snakish eyes this way;
You scatter poison with your very looks.

Sail. Methinks, I feel it working in my veins,
Like spiders crawling over all my flesh.

Capt. Pray, give me leave to crush that viper's head.


Off. No, let the hangman do his work.


Capt. As quick as possible:
For, like a hateful, poison-sucking toad,
This villain has attracted all the guilt,
Within a hundred miles; and hanging him
Will purge the land.

Shap. Oh, horror, guilt and death!


Capt. Rejoice, O honest world! rejoice,
When this adept in villainy is dead:
But blush, ye monsters of the lower realms,
To see yourselves out-devil'd by a man.

Enter Mr. Worthy, and Attendants bringing in Mr. Jenson's body. Worcester. Here lay
him down.
See Mrr Jenson's mangled corpse.

Shap. And here behold the wretch, who mangled him.


Worcester. Inhuman act!
Look how his garments are besmeared with blood,
Still streaming from his wound! Observe his eyes --
Not those bright stars, that lately sparkled there;
But glassy balls, rolled up in stupid glare.
I Will gently close his lids. -- There, sleep, my friend,
Poor bleeding, murdered friend, repose in death.
Those cheeks, which ^^^ely bloomed with youthful smiles,
Are nothing now, alas! but ghastly clods,
Death sets in triumph on his withered face.
That tongue, which ably plead his country's cause,
Is stiff? And all his limbs refuse to move.
How will his friends and country mourn his death,
A private, and no less a public loss!
Just mounting to the stage of public life,
Seized by a murderer's hand, and plunged in death!

Shap. 'Twas I who murdered him.


Worcester. Thou child of darkness!
Why did thou perpetrate the hellish deed?

Shap. To satiate my desires.
The love of happiness has been my bane;
For this, through peaceful calms and storms of strife,
I Have traveled round the globe of human life;
At length, my race of villainy is run,
My guilt completed and my journey done.
Farewell, sweet hope! expected bliss, farewell!
Come, dire despair, thou blackest imp of hell,
With all the plagues, that form thy cursed train,
Remorse and envy, jealousy and pain;
Come, from the realms of misery below,
And take me down to everlasting woe.

The END of the FIFTH ACT.
EPILOGUE.
TO generous souls, whose sentiments are right*
The exercise of candor gives delight*
But other persons, of a different make,
Rejoice to find and censure a mistake.
As every audience is composed of these,
This evening's play must consequently please:
For here are faults of almost every name,
That candor can forgive, or censure blome.
Ye critics, then, and patrons of the stage.
The just resiners of the present age,
Who fill, adorn and dignify these seats,
Pray, grant this savor, which your friend entreats;
Be good enough our foibles to excuse,
Indulge the boldness of a youthful muse,
And thus declare to each unbiased mind,
That skilful judges are most freely kind.
FINIS.

