THE AMERICAN Bloody Register: CONTAINING A true and complete HISTORY of the
LIVES, LAST WORDS, and DYING CONFESSIONS of three of the most noted CRIMINALS
(...) America, viz. RICHARD BARRICK and JOHN SULLIVAN, HIGHWAY ROBBERS.
TOGETHER WITH THE DYING CONFESSION OF ALEXANDER WHITE. A MURDERER and PIRATE,
Who were executed at CAMBRIDGE, (NEW ENGLAND) on THURSDAY, November 18, 1784.

(...) to be wise from others Harms.
And you shall do full well"
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by E. RUSSELL At his Office (...) MDCCLXXXIV.

IF Encouragement is given to this REGISTER, the other Numbers will contain
(with the Assistance of several Gentlemen of the Cloth and Bar) a select and
judicious Collection of all the most remarkable Trials for Murder, Treason,
Rape, Sodomy, Highway Robbery, Piracy, House-breaking, Perjury, Forgery, and
other Crimes and Misdemeanors committed in ENGLAND and AMERICA; from 1760 to
1784 inclusive. Also the LIVES, LAST WORDS and DYING CONFESSIONS of all the
most noted CRIMINALS that can be obtained.

The SECOND EDITION of BICKERSTAFF's true and genuine BOSTON ALMANAC for the
Year of our REDEMPTION 1785, is now selling by the PRINTER, either by the
thousand, groce, or lesser, quantity, containing a great variety of
entertaining matter in prose and verse -- The Public may rely on the
correctness of the Courts in this Almanac, (they having been carefully revised
by a Gentleman learned in the law) notwithstanding the false and ungenerous
assertion of a PRINTER to the contrary. Large allowance to Travelling-Traders,
Country-Shopkeepers and others who purchase by the quantity.

If a Thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die; there shall no
Blood be shed for him. MOSES.
skull and cross-bones See and fear and do no more so wickedly.

BLOODY REGISTER, etc.
THE LIFE and DYING CONFESSION of RICHARD BARRICK, HIGHWAY ROBBER.
I RICHARD BARRICK, was born in Ireland, in the month of February, in the year
1763, and brought up in the Foundling-Hospital: I never could read nor write.
At ten years of age I went as apprentice to James Saunders, a Silk-weaver in
Spittlefield Parish, lived with my master about three years, but he starved and
froze me almost to death, for which I left him, and roved through the streets,
and frequently stole small things from shop-windows.

I WENT to Saltpeter Bank and joined a gang of thieves. We stole from many
people for the space of a year; when I was taken up for stealing a
handkerchief, and carried before the Lord Mayor of London, who sent me to goal.
I was tried and found not innocent; was complimented with thirteen stripes,
which is Continental colors, signifying, that I should be honored in America
with the Hibernian coat of arms, i. e. two sticks rampant, one couchant, a
string pendant, and an Irishman at the end of it.

I JOINED my old gang again, and continued picking pockets for one year, and
then was taken up and committed to goal, and lay there eleven weeks for trial;
then tried and found guilty. They told me they would pardon me if I would enter
on board one of his Majesty's ships; this I consented to, but made my escape
before I got to the ship. I returned back to Saltpeter Bank, where I joined my
old companions in iniquity; went on picking pockets for six months, and was
apprehended on suspicion of robbery, and was sent on board a vessel in which I
came to New York

THEN I deserted and went to Long Island, and lived with Mr. Volentine
Williams; I left him and lived with Mr. Kirk, fifteen months, intending to
learn Paper-Making. During this time I was as honest as the times would allow.
I left Mr. Kirk, and went to Horse-Neck, intending to return to the place from
whence I came, and follow my old trade of Basket-Making.

SOON after this, I and my comrades went to Long Island, with an intent to rob
James Ulits; but the weather being very severe, we turned back. On our return,
we met with a British vessel which we boarded, and carried her into Stanford.
We then went back to Mr. Ulit's in the night, and told him he must get up, for
his brother's child was very sick -- He supposing us to be robbers, called for
his firelock: We then forced in at the windows, and demanded his money. He said
he had none; but his wife asked us how much we wanted? I answered one hundred
pounds, Mr. Ulit went down cellar with a light in his hand, and we followed
him; he took a horn from under a hogshead, which contained one hundred and
ninety odd guineas. He then attempted to count out our hundred pound which we
demanded; but we told him that as he made some resistance at first, we would
take all he had. He then gave us another horn, which contained about forty
guineas: Then he gave us a number of dollars. We went out of the house, but
soon concluded that if he had so many guineas, it was more than probable he had
some other sort of gold; therefore we went back and demanded the remainder.
Then he gave us another horn, containing thirty two half joes. We also took his
plate and clothing, to the value of one hundred dollars. We ordered him to
give us some liqour; he obeyed us. Then we went back to our boat unmolested,
and gave the man who took care of the boat two guineas.

AFTER this we went to Copt-Island, where we divided our booty.

FROM thence we went to Greenwich, and tarried there until our money grew
short: Then we went over to Long Island, to the house of one Allberson where we
knocked at the door and demanded a light: We then demanded his money: He gave
us money and plate to the amount of two hundred dollars: We eat and drank in
his house, and then ordered him to keep the matter secret for three weeks,
which I have reason to think he was fool enough comply with. After dividing the
booty, I returned to Stanford, and tarried there until my money grew short.

I AND my comrades went to Long- Island, and ordered one Peter Sniffing to open
his door, which he did; we then made a civil demand upon him, which was, Give
us all your money; he said he had none. (Take notice that as Sniffing knew me,
I did not enter the house:) After his refusal one of our gang came out to me
for advice: I told him to flash a pistol in Sniffing's face, and then he would
comply; but this had not the desired effect; for Sniffing had two pistols and
other weapons: However, we disarmed and robbed him of money and clothing.

WE went from there to Cow-Neck, and attacked the house of Mr. John Mitchel;
his wife saw us coming, upon which she blew out the candles and barred the
doors: We ordered him to open the door, which he refused; then we burst the
door open with a stone. One of Mitchel's family fired at us and wounded one of
our gang. Mitchel fell upon the wounded man who cried for mercy. We retired a
little way and held consultation: Our leader said that one man was wounded and
should not be left behind; then we made the second attack upon the house, but
was obliged to retreat again; then we made the third attack, upon which they
left the room: We then brought off the wounded man, who (like a true christian)
begged us to retaliate upon Mitchel, as he was unable to do it himself. All we
took from the house was the firearms: Then we went to our boat; one of our
party said he wanted some retaliation; that one returned back and met Mitchel's
son at the door, whom he instantly shot dead. After he had shot the young man
he said he had got satisfaction in behalf of his wounded partner. We made the
best of our way to the boat and went to New-Rochel, where we was hailed by the
guard: We told them we had a man wounded by the Refugees. We ran away from the
guard, leaving our boat and all behind except our firearms.

WE went to Greenwich and gave relief to our wounded partner; there I parted
with my comrades. From thence I went to New Haven, intending to get some
employment. I got no work there, and went to Norwich -- No employment there, I
returned to Greenwich, where I met with the wounded man, in company with a well
man. The well man went with me to Long Island. We intended to rob the house of
Mr. Titus; but a guard being kept at his house, we hid in a swamp, and went
from thence to Sand's-Point.

AFTER this I and others broke open the house of Mr. James Mots, and took from
him fifty guineas, besides plate and clothing, to the amount of two hundred
pounds. We went to Greenwich and divided the booty: Then we parted and met
again in a fortnight. Then we went to the house of Mr. John Sands on
Long Island. Mr. Sands let us in, I demanded his money: He denied having any. I
made search and sound fourteen dollars, one silver spoon, twenty-three guineas
and one half joe, together with clothing and plate, to the amount of ten
pounds. Then (...) made off, but was pursued so close that one of our party was
taken. We rescued him; but the pursuers pressed so hard upon us, that they took
two more of our party, and brought them to trial; but they availed themselves
of a stratagem, and told a false story; for they told the pursuers that they
were not in our gang; but were endeavoring to take us prisoners. I escaped
myself and kept concealed some time. I hid in a hollow rock. After this I went
to Hog-Island, in company with other sinners: We robed one Mr. Ledlow of six
dollars and a watch, and a quantity of clothing. We returned to Greenwich,
from thence to Heton's-Neck; There we broke open a house and robbed the master
of one hundred and sixty dollars, and clothing to the amount of thirty dollars.

AFTER that we went to Greenwich; and from thence to Long Island, and broke
open Mr. Allberson's house, and robbed him of twenty-four dollars. (It may not
be amiss to notice here, that I had robbed this man once before.) The next
night we went into the house of one Mr. Parsons, and demanded his money; but
there being fifteen or sixteen folks in the house, we could not collect them
all together. The man of the house went on the roof and sounded an alarm. We
went into the chamber and found an iron chest, but could not break it open, nor
get it cut of the room: The neighbors raised a party who fired upon us; but we
made our escape.

AFTER this we went to Long Island and were discovered; therefore we hid
ourselves several days. Then we went with an intent to rob one Henry Post, but
were discovered, and ran into the woods. We went to a house that right and
demanded a supper; they gave us one.

SOON after this we set out for New York, but were taken and carried before a
British Colonel and examined; they asked my name, and told me they wanted to
catch Barrick: (They did not know I was the man.) I told them my name was
Richard Willis. The Colonel ordered a party to escort me out of the lines; but
unluckily for me we met with a party of about twenty. They asked our party if
they had got Barrick? The answer was, They, had not: but one of their party
knew me and called me by my right name, and says, Now we have you we will keep
you. Then they bound me and kept me in that situation almost five weeks.

THE people I had robbed came to see me, to know whether, they could swear to
me out of the whole gang. There were but two of the spectators could swear to
me, viz. Allberson and Robbins.

[ For the remainder of BARRICK's Life, (which contains a series of heinous
crimes perpetrated in (...) New York, Hartford, New Haven, (...) the vendues
and on Winter-Hill) we (...) to the Second Number of our REGISTER, (...) we
shall publish immediately. In the same Number we shall publish the remarkble
conversion of Alexander (...) the Pirate; as we could not possibly procure the
copy (...) enough for this Publication -- In the subsequent Numbers will also
be published the remarkable lives and dying confessions of a number of pirates,
murderers, highway robbers, house-breakers, etc. which can be obtained from
England and America. We acknowledge the receipt of the remarkable trial, life
and dying behavior of Earl Ferrers, convicted in England for murder; and the
trial, life, and dying confession of William Corbett, who was born at
Portsmouth, in New Hampshire; who was also convicted in, England of the most
atrocious and cruel murder of a man and his wife; for which he was executed and
has body afterward hung in chains, as a warning to others to avoid the crime.]

THE LIFE AND DYING CONFESSION OF JOHN SULLIVAN.

Let him that stole steal no more. PAUL.

Printed and Sold at E. RUSSELL'S Office.

In the Press at Printing-Office hereof, and in a few Days will be published,
A A excellent SERMON, entitled, "Paradise promised by a dying SAVIOR, to the
penitent Thief on the Cross." Delivered at Cambridge, on Thursday the
Eighteenth of November, immediately preceding the Execution of ALEXANDER
WHITE, RICHARD BARRICK and JOHN SULLIVAN, the former for Piracy, the latter for
Highway Robbery. With an APPENDIX, exhibiting some Account of their
Conversation and Behavior in Prison, etc.

By TIMOTHY HILLIARD, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Cambridge.

The WAGES of SIN is DEATH. THE LIFE and DYING CONFESSION OF JOHN SULLIVAN,
HIGHWAY ROBBER.
I JOHN SULLIVAN, was born in Ireland in the town of Limrick, and was eighteen
years old last April. I shall minute down my crimes in the order I committed
them.

CRIME I. I inlisted as a soldier in the British service in the year 1777, and
took five pounds bounty; the Captain's name was Thomas, of the thirty-sixth
regiment. Went to Bristol, in order to join the army, but deserted.

CRIME 2. Went to Wales with an intent to inlist the second time, but altered
my mind and entered on board the Saris frigate, in the King's service, bound to
New York: I staid on board ^^ar three weeks, and then deserted. I went to
Long Island, and there was pressed on board a vessel, staid on board eleven
weeks and then deserted.

CRIME 3. I entered on board a sloop bound to New York, but hawl'sd in at
Lovd's-Neck: When I landed I was discovered and pursued by the Doctor of my
former vessel; he was on horseback, and drove me into the water, but was
obliged to come on shore and surrender; I then received thirty-nine lashes.

CRIME 4. The same night I deserted and swam to another vessel commanded by one
Kelley: The master and I combined together, and stole the vessel, carried her
into Stonington and sold her: I received about three hundred dollars for my
share.

CRIME 5. From Stonington I went to New London, and entered on board a
privateer John Buckley commander: tarried on board three months; took some
prizes. I then entered on board another privateer, commanded by James
Woodworth; after a months cruise was taken by the British and carried into
New York, and put on board the guardship, where remained three days, and then
was put on board the Lesophe, where I remained 11 weeks: I came to
Staten-Island where I deserted. I went from thence to Marrineck where I was
hailed by a small party, and ordered to stand: I had a firelock with me and
fired on them, but they took me prisoner, and carried me to Horse-Neck, where
Col. Camfield commanded; the Colonel examined me and gave me a pass to go to
Stanford, where I became acquainted with Barrick, who is condemned to die with
me.

CRIME 6. In August one thousand seven hundred and eighty two, I happened in
company with a young lad; he and I laid down to take rest. After he got to
sleep I searched his pockets and stole one guinea and one crown. After this I
entered on board a whale-boat with the person I stole the money from, we went a
cruise and came into Stonington, where I was accused of stealing the guinea and
crown, but denied it: They searched me and found the money tied up in the tail
of my shirt; they cut off my shirt-tail and left me. I went to Col. Davenport
and he gave me a pass to go to New London: I there entered on board a privateer
commanded by Isaac Wherar. We went about eight days cruise, and by distress of
weather got dismasted: Our vessel being a wreck and unable to defend ourselves,
we were taken by a British vessel and carried to Bermudas. I then engaged with
the Captain who took me prisoner to go to sea with him. I took twenty dollars
bounty. I never went on board after I received the money and clothes; but rode
off on my ten toes and left them.

CRIME 7. I went about seven miles to a place called Cole-Lane, and engaged to
go on board a privateer, took twenty-four dollars from the Captain and then bid
them good night. I next went to St. Georges; there I entered on board another
privateer, Capt. Hall commander, and took twenty-four dollars bounty: We went
five weeks cruise and returned to Bermudas. Being destitute of all things, I
endeavored to help myself to that which Solomon says will answer all things;
and knowing that one Gutheridge kept a store there, I took a partner with me
and broke open his store, where we found a barrel of dollars; we took our
pockets and hats full, then went to a place called Salt-Kittles and changed the
silver for gold.

CRIME 8. Three weeks after this. I entered on board Capt. Vezey, bound to St.
Thomas's: Peace being proclaimed I went to North Carolina. I went from thence
to Portsmouth, where I went to work three weeks: Then I and my partner broke
open a store in the daytime and took out twenty-four half-joes an some silver;
my comrade was taken up on suspicion and carried before a Justice, but made his
escape; and as was not suspected, was sent to catch him. I followed on until I
overtook him, and he and I contrived the matter between us, so that he gave me
his shoes and buckles to carry, and tell the injured people, that I pursued him
so close that he was obliged to drop his shoes and buckles and for this piece
of villainy they rewarded (what they falsely called) my fidelity with two
dollars.

CRIME 9. I then went to Baltimore and entered on board a pilot-boat and went
to Philadelphia: Then went from thence to New York. I then entered myself on
board a transport bound to Scotland I suspected there was money on board, nor
was my suspicion groundless, for I and one more found a chest, and breaking it
open took out forty pounds: Then made our escape to New York.

CRIME 9. Soon after this I got a new comrade, and we broke open a shop and
took out the value of a hundred pounds in money and watches. I then went to
Newbury-Port, where I entered on board Capt. Wheelwright bound for the
West Indies: When I arrived there I went into a trader's shop and took to the
value of forty pounds, in goods. Soon after this I took another comrade and
walking out we met a man in the road: We told him we wanted some money, and
some we would have; the man gave us three crowns. After this I returned to
Boston.

CRIME 10. On Friday night before Commencement, Barrick and I went to Roxbury
with an intent to rob any person, but we were disappointed. The next Monday
night we went upon the old errand but no booty. Soon after this we went to
Winter-Hill, and there we fell in with one Mr. Baldwin. Barrack, and I stopped
said Baldwin, and robbed him of his watch and money. I took the watch out of
Baldwin's pocket, but Poor was the man that abused and gave him heavy blows.
For this last crime I am to suffer death. -- These are the most capital crimes
I have committed, and I sincerely wish that others may avoid the rock I have
split upon.

JOHN SULLIVAN.
Compiled from the Prisoner's mouth by ELISHA BREWER,
of East-Sudbury. Transcribed by WILLIAM BILLINGS,
of Boston. Attest, ISAAC BRADISH, Jailer.

Thy BROTHER'S BLOOD cries unto ME from the Ground. THE CONFESSION OF
ALEXANDER WHITE, PIRATE.
THIS is to give satisfaction to all enquiring Friends, that I ALEXANDER WHITE,
was born in Ireland, in the County of Tyrone, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and sixty-two, and was brought up in said place, and got
what education my Parents thought necessary. After I grew up, my mind being
inclined to see strange countries against my Parent's will. I took my departure
from Ireland, and went to England and bound myself apprentice to learn the
Mariner's art, and served my Master faithfully until it pleased him to give up
my indentures.

I STILL followed the occupation of a Mariner, and improved my education 'till
I thought myself fit to take the command of a vessel. I have been through many
scenes of life, and always endeavored to support the character of an honest
man, and I believe I was harmless to any body but myself. It is needless for me
to give an account how I spent my life; for I have been in many parts of the
world, but never did any thing that would cause me to blush or be ashamed
before I transacted this heinous crime that I am to suffer for.

If you are desirous to know what this temptation did arise from; with shame I
will endeavor to inform you: At first when I met with Capt. White it was in
Philadelphia. My money being almost spent I agreed to go to Nova Scotia with
him. Accordingly we pursued our intended voyage as far as New York, and there
we took on board our cargo, and came to a place called Cow-Harbour, in
Long Island, and there tarried some days and took on board the passenger John
Vail, and sailed quickly from thence.

MY mind being very uneasy on account of a young lady who I proposed to marry,
and only the want of money prevented our being married. Being below her degree,
and being ashamed to own my necessity, prolonged our being joined in wedlock.
But Love began to burn my poor and wounded heart; and being resolved to go
through any difficulty that might impede us, I intended to take the life of my
fellow creature; one evening seeing a good opportunity, I took up an ax, and
with it struck Capt. White over board, and attempted to murder the passenger
also; but when I found I could not accomplish my purpose, surrendered myself a
prisoner.

I WAS confined for some time. Toward morning we fell in with a vessel, who
carried me into Plymouth as a prisoner, and remained there for a considerable
time, which I spent in anguish, imploring mercy from GOD, for the crime I had
committed. Then I was sent to Cambridge, and condemned to die by my own
confession: And, agreeable to my inclination, (choosing rather to die than to
live.) Time would fail me to give a particular account of this affair; but this
is the truth that I have set forth, which I declare as a dying criminal.

ALEXANDER WHITE.
Compiled from the Prisoner's mouth by ELISHA BREWER
, of East-Sudbury. Transcribed by WILLIAM BILLINGS
, of Boston. Attest, ISAAC BRADISH, Jailer.

For a concise and accurate Account of the behavior and conversation of the
Prisoners (particularly of White the Pirate) while in prison and in their last
moments; also a pathetic and affectionate Address to the Prisoners we must
refer our Rreaders to Number II of this REGITER, or to the APPENDIX of an (...)
SERMON, preached at their Execution by the Reverend Mr. HILLIARD, of Cambridge,
who attended them during their Confinement -- We should have readily gratified
our (...) the above interesting particulars but it was (...) as the copy was
handed to us but a (...) Publication. We shall endeavor (on (...) to this
infant Work) to furnish Number (...) with an elegant copperplate engraving,
executed by an ingenious Artist]

Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish. Why should thou die before
thy Time? SOLOMON.


