THE MEDICAL POCKETBOOK; FOR THOSE WHO ARE, AND FOR ALL WHO WISH, TO BE,
PHYSCIANS.

PRICE ONE DOLLAR.

THE MEDICAL POCKETBOOK; FOR THOSE WHO ARE, AND FOR ALL WHO WISH, TO BE,
PHYSICIANS.

Containing a short but plain ACCOUNT of the SYMPTOMS, CAUSES, and METHODS of
CURE, of the DISEASES incident to the HUMAN BODY:

Including such as require SURGICAL TREATMENT: Together with the VIRTUES, and
DOSES, of MEDICINAL COMPOSITIONS, and SIMPLES.

Extracted from the best AUTHORS, And digested into ALPHABETICAL ORDER.

BY JOHN ELLIOT, M. D.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY ROBERT BELL, IN Third-Street, M, DCC, LXXXIV.

TO SIR JOHN PRINGLE, BART. PHYSICIAN TO THEIR MAJESTY'S; FELLOW OF THE ROYAL
COLLEGES of PHYSICIANS AT LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

AND OF THE ROYAL SOCIETIES OF LONDON AND PARIS, etc. etc.

THIS WORK IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,

BY HIS FAITHFUL AND DEVOTED HUMBLE SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.
Newman-street, Aug. 12, 1782.
PREFACE.
THE advantages of a publication of this kind to the practitioner in medicine,
are it is presumed, too obvious to need enumeration; I shall, therefore, only
premise a few necessary observations relative to the work itself.

I. The doses of medicines etc. are set down as for adults; and therefore, the
prescriber will easily vary them for other ages. For example, children of two
years old may, in general, take about a third part of the doses for adults; or
a little more; and so in proportion for other ages, the constitution being also
considered.

II. Where it could conveniently be done, I have mentioned the intervals at
which the medicines are to be repeated: but these may be varied at the
prescriber's discretion. For brevity's sake I have in many places, used the
word frequently; by which I would have it understood, that every three, four,
six, eight, etc. hours are meant, according to the exigency of the case.

III. When any particular indication is to be answered, the classes, as
cathartics, diuretics, astringents etc. may be referred to; under which heads,
as many of the compositions and simples as were judged necessary, are arranged.

IV. The limits assigned to the work would not admit of formulae; nor do I
think them by any means necessary. The doses of all the articles usually
administered are set down; and I will not suppose, that there is any medical
practitioner, who cannot give directions for making them into draughts,
boluses, or other forms that may be required. The vehicles should be either
perfectly innocent, as pure water, simple syrup etc. or of similar virtues with
the medicines to be given. And if two articles of the same virtues, cathartics
for example, are employed, it scarce need be mentioned, that the dose of each
must be proportionably less. It may be added, that ingredients of a volatile
nature should be given in a liquid form, lest their virtues exhale; very
nauseous ones should, if convenient, be given in the form of pills or boluses.

V. In the alphabet I have, for the most part, made use of English names; or at
least have referred from those where technical terms are employed.

This work was drawn up originally for my own use, and in the course of
practice, I have found it very convenient to refer to occasionally. It was the
opinion of those medical Gentlemen who saw the Manuscript that it would be
equally useful to others, and this was my motive for making it public.

If this work assist the practitioner's memory in matters already known, at
least till he has leisure to consult larger works, where necessary, my design
is answered.

JOHN ELLIOT.

THE MEDICAL POCKETBOOK; FOR THOSE WHO ARE, AND FOR ALL, WHO WISH, TO BE,
PHYSICIANS.
ABORTION.
SYMPTOMS. Pain in the back, loins, and lower part of the belly; shiverings; a
flux of blood from the womb; nausea, anxiety, palpitation of the heart,
syncope, an opening and moisture of the os tincae. Most commonly happens
between the second and fourth months of pregnancy, though it may occur later.
It may be occasioned by frights, falls, strong emetics or cathartics, or by any
violent commotion of body or mind.

TREATMENT. Bleeding is necessary if the pulse will bear it. The medicines
should be of the tonic and sedative kind, as tinct. rosar. or decoct. cort.
with tinct. theb. The body should be kept lax with clysters, or otherwise; the
diet light broths, and the like; and the patient should be kept very still and
quiet in bed.

If, nevertheless, abortion follow, discontinue the corroborants, and give
spermaceti medicines with tinct. theb. etc. as after childbirth.

ABSCESS.
TREATMENT. Common abscesses may be treated by bringing them forward with
proper cataplasms, and when ripe, opening, digesting, and cicatrizing. Avoid
evacuations during the suppuration, unless inflammation require. See also Boil,
Phlegmon, and Ulcer.

ABSORBENTS.
(Of acidity) Creta, magnesia, crabs eyes, coral, and all the testaceous
powders; dose one scruple, or half a dram several times in a day. Also in
like manner, sal tart. or, absinth. v. gr. sal ammon. vol. v. gr. diluted.

AETHIOPS MINERAL.
Alterative, vermifuge; dose from one scruple to half a dram. Twice a day.

AGARIC.
Outwardly applied stops haemorrhages; strewed on chancres, it sometimes drives
them away.

AGUE.
SYMPTOMS. The fit begins with cold shiverings; a small quick pulse; pain in
the back and head; nausea. To these succeed great heat and fever, which
terminate in sweats. The urine during the fit, pale, clear, and without
sediment; but in the interval, turbid, with a copious sediment of a reddish
color.

In the Quotidian Ague, the fit returns once in a day.

In the Tertian, every other day.

In the Quartan, the intermission is of two whole days.

TREATMENT. First give an emetic, and afterward a gentle cathartic. If the
intermissions are not regular, saline febrifuges should be administered till
that objection is removed; then give the bark, in substance, one dram, every
two hours during the intermission, adding tinct. theb. or other astringent if
it run off by stool. If the stomach will not bear the powder, give it in
decoction, infusion, or the extract in pills. Pulv. fl. chamaem. chalybs. rad.
serp. virg. elix. vitr. acid, or the like, may be added according to
circumstances. The repetitions may be less frequent after the fit has been
missed once or twice. Vitr. caerul. gr. ss. dissolved in one ounce of proof
spirit, and given before the fit, had succeeded in some desperate cases.

ALKALINES.
Sal tart. sal. absinth. sal vol. ammon. sal c. c. vol. from v. gr. to one
scruple. Sp. vol. am. sp. sal ammon. sp. C. C. from xv. drops to one dram.
See also Absorbents. To be given occasionally to destroy acidities in the
stomach, etc.

ALUM.
Astringent, from iv. gr. to half a scruple. Externally astringent and cooling.

ALOES.
Cathartic and anthelmintic from half a scruple to half a dram. Emmenagogue
from v. to x. gr. Twice a day. Externally applied Vulnerary.

ALTERATIVES.
See the preparations of mercury and antimony. Any medicine that works a cure
gradually, by correcting the patient's habit of body, may be called an
alterative.

ANASARCA.
See Dropsy.

ANEURISM. Or an enlargement of an Artery. (known by its pulsation.)
TREATMENT. Bleeding, and proper evacuations; with low spare diet. Lead may be
bound down pretty tight on the part. If these fail, recourse must be had to the
operation of tying it above and below the tumor.

ANGINA GANGRENOSA, Or putrid sore Throat.
SYMPTOMS. Giddiness in the head, alternate heat and cold, and at length, after
some hours, constant great heat: sometimes vomiting or purging; pains in the
head; eyes inflamed and watery, as in the measles; anxiety, faintness, sore
throat, with florid color; or else, a broad irregular spot, of a pale white
color surrounded with red. On the second or third day the face, neck, breast,
and hands swelled, and as if erysipelatous; an efflorescence of many small red
pimples sometimes appears on the arms and other parts. The throat sloughs,
ulcerates, and is very painful. Offensive taste and delirium toward night.

TREATMENT. Avoid bleeding and evacuation, gentle sudorifics excepted; and
purging should be checked. Give first a gentle emetic, then medicines with
contrayerva and conf. cardiac; or decoction of bark. Gargle or rather syringe
the throat with decoct. pect. cum rad. contray. to which, vinegar, myrrh, and
honey of roses may be added. If the sloughs do not separate, touch them with a
rag dipped in a mixture of mel. egypt. one dram, and two ounces of the
preceding gargle; or gargle with water acidulated with sp. of salt. To restore
the patient give bark and elix. vitrioli, with proper strengthening diet.

ANISEEDS.
Carminative from iv. gr. to xv. or in infusion to iv. ounces.

ANODYNES.
Opium crude or extract, from on fourth of a gr. to two gr. tinct. theb. from
x. drops to xl. or more, sir. e mecon. from one dram to half an ounce, elix.
pareg. from xx. gr. to a dram and a half, there. andr. and cons. dam. from
half a scruple to a dram, philon. Land. from half a scruple to half a dram.

ANTHELMINTICS.
See Worms.

ST. ANTHONEY's FIRE.
See Erysipelas.

ANTIMONY prepared.
Alterative from v. gr. to half a dram. Twice a day.

ANTISPASMODICS.
See Musk and its Julep. Opiates, and the nervous medicines.

APHTHAE.
See Thrush, and Fever Aphthose.

APOPLEXY.
SYMPTOMS. A sudden privation of sensation, and voluntary motion. The face red
and bloated; the mouth commonly open; the pulse strong and quick, especially at
first; respiration strong, and attended with snorting.

TREATMENT. Bleed freely, and apply cupping-glasses to the head, neck, or
between the shoulders; strong clysters and cathartics; blisters should be
applied to the back and legs, and sinapisms to the feet. Medicines of the warm
nervous kind, as castor, valerian, camphire, assafoetida, and volatile salts,
should frequently be administered.

Authors distinguish between a sanguineous and pituitous apoplexy: The first
arising from a turgidness of the vessels of the brain; the last, from serous
matter in the ventricles. In the latter case, emetics of the antimonial kind
are serviceable, though often hurtful in the former, bleeding should also be
prescribed with caution in the latter. A soft, mild, and opening regimen is
prescribed for patients subject to the sanguineous, and a contrary one, with
exercise, for such as are recovered from a pituitous apoplexy.

APPETITE Canine.
TREATMENT. If an acid in the stomach be the cause, vomit, and give testaceous
powders, magnesia, or alcalis. If worms, give anthelmintics. If it be natural,
or proceed from other causes, oils, fat meats, and broths, milk, and flour diet
will be proper. Also opiates; smoking tobacco is likewise of service.

APPETITE. Loss of.
TREATMENT If the stomach be foul, give a gentle emetic of ipecacuanha; and if
necessary, a gentle cathartic also. If it proceed from relaxation, the bitters,
chalybeates, or bark, with or without clix. vitriol. If acidity and wind
abound, join sal absinth. with the bitters. Sena, rhubarb, tart. solubil. or
other laxatives, may occasionally be employed if necessary.

ASCITES.
See Dropsy.

ASSAFOETIDA.
See Gum.

ASTHMA.
SYMPTOMS. A difficulty of breathing, attended with wheezing; it returns at
intervals; is preceded by disinclination to motion, loss of appetite,
oppression, flatulency, and frequent eructations. At length the cheeks become
red, the eyes prominent, and there is such an anxiety and sense of suffocation,
that the patient can only breathe in an erect posture, and can scarce speak or
expectorate. If he happen to sleep he snores much; at the height of the fit is
desirous of cool free air; sweats about the neck and forehead; coughs up a
little frothy matter with great difficulty; no fever, pulse extremely small and
weak; urine pale and copious; as the fit abates, an expectoration of mucus; the
urine becomes higher colored, and deposits a copious sediment.

TREATMENT. During the fit bleed, if age or weakness do not forbid; blister
between the shoulders, or at the pit of the stomach; the body should be opened
with gentle cathartics; then give the pectorals and expectorants, joined, if
necessary, with antispasmodics and sedatives.

ASTRINGENTS.
Alum from iij. gr. to xij. pulv. e succin. c. from v. gr. to one scrup.
tinct. rosar. from one ounce to two, elix. vitrioli acid. from x. drops to xx.
vitriol. alb. from ij. gr. to v. colcothar. from iij. gr. to half a scruple,
sacch. saturn. from one quarter of a gr. to one gr. See also Corroborants. For
the bowels in purgings, etc. extr. lign. campech. from v. gr. to one scruple,
alum, elect. e scord. from half a scruple to a dram and a half, rhab.
torrefact from v. gr. to xv. Ripe acid fruits, as currants, sloes, etc. are
also good.

ATROPHY.
SYMPTOMS. A nervous consumption, or wasting of the body; without fever, or
other hectic symptoms.

TREATMENT. This must be varied according to the cause. If the appetite and
digestion be bad, give a gentle puke, and afterward the bitters with steel. If
scrophulous, the steel with bark. If worms be the cause, anthelmintics. If lues
venerea, mercurials and decoct. sarsaparil. If hysterics or hypochondriacs,
join chalybeates with pil. gummos, or other medicines of this class. If profuse
evacuation, as fluor albus, the bark, chalybeate waters, sarsaparilla, and
exercise. If attended with scurvy, the scorbutic juices, vegetable acids, and
bark. If asthmatic symptoms appear, the squill preparations, or other pectorals
and antispasmodics, and blisters. Diet, however, must assist medicine in the
cure; which, where nothing forbids, should be of the soft, nutritive, and
strengthening kind, and easy of digestion; as milk, calves feet, and other
jellies, etc.

ATTENUANTS.
Alcalis (which see.) Chalybeates. See Flor. Mart. and Deobstruents,
Mercurials, see Calomel, etc.

BALSAM of Capivi.
Corroborant, diuretic, from x. drops to xxx.

BALSAM of Guaiacum.
From xx. drops to one dram, for rheumatic complaints, foulness of skin,
gleets, etc.

BALSAM Lucatellus's.
From one scruple to a dram, for dysenteries, or coughs.

BALSAM of Sulphur.
From iv. drops to one scruple, for coughs and asthmatic complaints.

BALSAM of Peru.
From iv. drops to xv. for nervous complaints and headaches, gonorrhoeas,
asthmas, etc.

BALSAM of Tolu.
From v. gr. to a scruple, for coughs, etc.

BALSAM Traumatic.
From x. drops to xxx. for inward wounds, bruises, or coughs; externally for
cuts.

BARK.
Febrifuge, corroborant, stomachic, antiseptic, from one scruple to a dram,
several times in a day, decoction, or extract in proportion.

BARK of Pomegrantes.
Astringent, stomachic, in decoction, from one ounce to two, Frequently.

BARK of Lemons and Oranges.
Stomachic, in infusion, from one ounce to two. Twice a day.

BAULAUSTINE. Flowers.
Astringent, from half a scruple to half a dram, or in docoction.

BEARING DOWN.
See Procidentia, and Prolapsus.

BENJAMIN.
From iv. gr. to xv. as a pectoral and asthmatic.

BITES and STINGS of venomous animals.
TREATMENT. To those of small insects, as gnats, bugs, wasps, etc. apply spt.
C. C. milk, oil, honey, or vinegar; to that of the viper, its own fat, spt. C.
C. or ol. amygd. foment, poultice, and bleed, if inflammation require; and give
milk inwardly, with theriaca, sal C. C. or other antidote. For the
rattlesnake's bite, give a spoonful or two of juice of plantain or horehound,
and apply a tobacco leaf steeped in rum to the part.

BLADDER inflamed.
SYMPTOMS. Acute burning pain, and tension in the part; with fever, frequent
inclination to go to stool, and constant desire to make water.

TREATMENT. As directed for kidneys inflamed.

BLEEDING external.
Apply the styptics mentioned under that word. Bleed at the arm, purge and give
cooling medicines if necessary.

BLEEDING at the Nose.
TREAT as in Bleeding external; vinegar, or other styptic, may also be snuffed
up the nostrils, or cotton plugs, dipped in them put up.

BLIGHT.
See Erysipelas.

BLOOD, Spitting of, or Hoemoptoe.
SYMPTOMS. A cough and short respiration attend. If the blood coughed up appear
florid, liquid, and frothy, especially if the patient be consumptive, it argues
a rupture of some vessel in the lungs; is attended with pain, if occasioned by
a fall, or bruise.

TREATMENT. Bleeding, laxatives, and styptics; as tinct. rosar. tinct. styptic,
alum, bark, bals. traumat. pulv. e succin. with nitre, and occasionally an
opiate; the feet bathed in warm water; a slender cooling diet, and no exercise.

BLOOD, Vomiting of.
SYMPTOMS. There is no cough when the blood comes from the stomach; a sense of
weight and oppression precede the vomiting; the stomach is often distended; the
blood of a darker color than in an haemoptoe.

TREATMENT. As in the preceding case; small doses of vitr. vitid. calcin. are
efficacious in this, and also in a rupture of a vessel in the intestines, and a
consequent discharge of blood by stool.

BOILS.
TREATMENT. They are to be ripened with proper poultices or cataplasms; opened,
digested with basilicon, etc. and healed with cerat. epulot. or the like. If
fungous flesh appear, take it down with red precipitate, or other proper
escharotic. Alteratives and edulcorants, with corroborants, if necessary,
should be given internally.

BORAX.
Emmenagogue, diuretic, from v. to x. gr. Externally to aphthae.

BREASTS inflamed.
SYMPTOMS. A few days after delivery the breasts sometimes feel uneasy, or
painful, and swell, the milk stagnating.

TREATMENT. Gentle purges and cooling diaphoretics. Apply diachylum plasters,
or empl. saponac. warm cloths, or the like, to the parts, and to the axillae.
If inflammation, foment and poultice with bread and milk. If supuration,
continue to poultice, and let it break of itself; after which, digest with
poultices or otherwise, and cicatrize.

If fever appear during the inflammation, treat it as directed for fever (milk.)

If the breasts are merely hard, fomentations, poultices, and oil rubbed over
them, are best.

BRUISES.
See Contusions.

BUBO.
See Veneral Disease and Abscess.

BURNS.
See Scalds.

CACHEXY.
See Dropsy.

TREATMENT. Sal diureticus, squills, or other diuretics; chathartics; then
chalybeates, bark, etc. with proper exercise.

CAELIAC PASSION.
SYMPTOMS. A purging or discharge of aliment indigested, and somewhat like
chyle, with wasting of the body.

TREATMENT. An emetic; stomachic, binding and warm strengthing remedies; as
bitters, spec. arom. philon. Land. extr. lig. camp. opium, elect. e scord.
creta, etc. with proper diet.

CALAMINE.
In collyriums for inflamed eyes; and in ointment as a cicatrizer.

CALAMUS.
Aromatic, from v. gr. to xv.

CALOMEL.
See Mercury.

CAMPHIRE.
Diaphoretic, diuretic, antispasmodic, from iij. gr. to half a dram or more.

CANCER.
SYMPTOMS. A round unequal tumor, of a livid color, surrounded with varicose
vessels, and seated in the glandular parts of the body. Some cancers are fixed,
others moveable; some pale, others red and inflamed; sometimes they remain
harmless for years, at others they increase hastily; ulcerate, and discharge a
foetid sanious ichor, and soon prove mortal.

TREATMENT. Bleeding; in case of inflammation, cooling laxatives; salt water,
extract. cicutae, magnesia, soap or the like, in small doses as alteratives.
Externally, apply lint only if the tumor break. Hemlock fomentations have been
found serviceable, as has also the herb called clivers. Calmness of mind and
proper regimen must be observed; but extirpation with the knife, where it can
be done, is the only certain remedy. For Cancer in the womb, see Womb.

CANTHARIDES.
Analeptic, diuretic, from half a gr. to two gr.

CARAWAYS.
Carminative, from iij. gr. to half a scruple, or in infusion.

CARDAMOMS.
Carminative, from iij. gr. to half a scruple.

CARDIALGIA.
See Heart-burn.

CARMINATIVES.
Sem. cardam, anisi and carui, from iij. gr. to half a dram, Ol. carui,
anisi, anethi, and juniperi, from one drop to iij. Philonium from half a
scruple to one scruple. Spec. arom. from four gr. to half a scruple. Tinct.
cardam, or aromat. from ten drops to one dram.

CARUNCLES.
See Urine.

CARUS.
TREATMENT. As in the apoplexy, of which this is only a slighter degree.

CASTOR.
Nervous, antispasmodic, emmenagogue, from four gr. to a scruple.

CATARRH.
See Cough.

CATHARTICS.
Jalap from xv. gr. to half a dram. Sal Glaub. from half an ounce to one
ounce and a half. Aloes from half a scruple to one scruple. Pil. extract.
colocynth. from one scruple to two. elect. e scam. from one dram to two.
Pulv. e scammon. c. from one scruple to two, Extract cath. from xv. gr. to half
a dram, Colocynth from halt a scruple to xxv. gr. Rhubarb from one scruple ^o
two. Infusion of senae from two ounces to four. Tinct sacrae, senae, and
rhubarb from one ounce to three. Gamboge, and scammony from half a scruple to
one scruple.

CEPHALICS.
Spt. lav. c. or spirit vol. arom. from ten drops to xl. ether a few drops,
also externally to the temples. See Nervous, and Headache.

CHALK.
Absorbent, cardialgic from one scruple to one dram.

CHALYBS. Prepared.
Deobstruent, tonic, from two gr. to half a scruple,

CHAMOMILE flowers.
Stomachic, corroborant, from v. gr. to one scruple, or in infusion.

CHICKEN-POX
See Pox.

CHILBLAINS.
If they are not broke, bathe them with sp. vin. camph. sp. terebinth, urine,
brine, melted salt butter, or rub them with snow. If they break, dress them
with warm digestives, and afterward with cerat. epulotic.

CHILDBIRTH.
If there be a profuse discharge of the lochia, give cooling medicines. If a
puerperal or milk fever, treat them as under those articles. After delivery and
the after birth, spermaceti, with gentle opiates; and if necessary, castor, or
other uterine remedy.

CHINA Root.
Alterative, antivenereal, antiscorbutic, in decoction like sarsaparilla.

CHLOROSIS.
See Menses.

CHOLERA MORBUS.
SYMPTOMS. Violent vomiting and looseness, from bile abounding in the stomach
and bowels; sharp pains, gripings, and flatulency; thirst, heat, anxiety, pulse
quick and unequal; cold sweats, and at length syncope, and coldness in the
extremities. Chiefly attacks young persons, and in the summer and autumn.

TREATMENT. Large and frequent draughts of chicken broth, to the quantity of a
gallon or two; and clysters of the same should be continually injected. If the
vomiting continue, give an infusion of oat bread, toasted brown, in water;
afterward cinnamon water, conf. card. elect. e scord. or the like, with tinct.
theb. An emetic may be proper, as also ripe fruit, etc. See Colic bilious.

CINNABAR of Antimony.
Alterative, vermifuge, from iij. gr. to on e scruple.

CINNAMON.
Astringent, carminative, aromatic, from iij. gr. to half a scruple, or in
infusion.

COLCOTHAR.
Astringent, styptic, corroborant, from iij. to viij. gr. Also externally to
haemorrhages.

COLD and COUGH.
SYMPTOMS well known. In phlegmatic habits, the cough is moist, and in the
hypochondriac and scorbutic, dry.

TREATMENT. Gentle and regular warmth; bleeding, if nothing forbid; and
especially if a fever, or a pain in the breast, etc. arise. Oily, or spermaceti
medicines, or other pectorals, with opiates. If costive, proper laxative, and
if the stomach be loaded with phlegm, an emetic; where greasy medicine
disagree, give pil. de styra^e, pulv. e trag. with squills, mucilag.
cydonlozenges of liquorice, etc. Blisters are very efficacious, as are also
gentle sudorific, repeatedly taken; with diluents and saline febrifuges, when
the perspiration is obstructed, and fever appear.

COLIC, Bilious.
SYMPTOMS. An acute pain, and obstruction in the intestines; accompanied with a
vomiting of yellow or greenish bile. A bitter taste in the mouth, with great
heat. The pain sometimes fixed about the region of the navel, sometimes all
over the abdomen, at other times shifting from one part to another. A pulsation
and cold are likewise felt in the belly. Urine little or none. Frequently
hoarseness, with thirst and fever. Most prevalent in summer.

TREATMENT. Bleed, and give an emetic, with a large quantity of inf. flor. chapter
or the like, to work it off; then give cathartics (pills chiefly, or ol.
ricini) with opium, and opening emollient clysters. If these fail, p^t the
patient into the warm bath. If the vomiting continue, saline draughts with
tinct. theb. Pills of half a gr. or a grain of crude opium are most powerful in
removing pain and spasm; and enable the cathartics to take the better effect.

COLIC, Hysteric.
SYMPTOMS. This is a disease to which women of lax and gross habits, and of
irritable dispositions chiefly are subject. It begins with violent pain in the
region of the Stomach, mnch green and yellow matter is vomited, and great
lowness of spirits succeeds; the pain goes off in a day or two, and frequently
returns again in a few weeks with equal violence. Sometimes it is attended with
jaundice, which in a few days goes off.

TREATMENT. Avoid bleeding and purging, unless plethora or costiveness
indicate; clear the stomach with warm water, chamomile tea, etc. then give a
carminative antispasmodic, with opium; (as castor, conf. card. philon. conf.
paulin.) which may be occasionally repeated. Recruit the strength with bark
bitters, air, exercise, chalybeates, etc. This disorder in men is called the
Hypochondriac Colic, and should be treated in like manner.

COLIC Inflammatory, or inflammation of the bowels.
SYMPTOMS. A vehement, burning fixed pain is felt in the parts most affected,
with heat of the whole body, quick pulse, loss of strength, anxiety aad
restlessness.

TREATMENT. Bleed largely, and repeat it if necessary, and the pulse will bear
it; procure stools with soft mild cathartics, as ol. ricini, oily mixtures with
manna, and tart. solub. or the like; or if these will not stay, with pills of
extract. cath. and opium; emollient clysters should be frequently given, and
soft emollient liquids drank; the bowels should be fomented, bladders of water,
bags of salt, or oats heated, the skins of animals just killed applied to the
part; and the warm bath should be prescribed if these prove ineffectual. In
case of violent vomiting, give the saline draughts in the act of effervescence;
and the pain and spasm, if violent, may be abated with pills of crude opium;
blisters may be applied to the part affected; the fumes of tobacco thrown up
the fundament in case all other cathartics fail; or give quicksilver.

COLIC Nervous, called also the Devonshire Colic, Colic of Poictiers, dry
Gripes, and the dry Belly-ach.
SYMPTOMS. Begins with a sense of weight or pain at the pit of the stomach,
attended with loss of appetite, yellowishness in the countenance, a slight
nausea, and costiveness; a vomiting of acrid slime, and green bile succeed; the
pain often descends to the navel, shooting from thence to each side, with great
violence; the intestines seem drawn to the spint, with convulsive spasms; the
pain continues without remission for several hours together; pulse as in
health; no fever, but rather lowness; when at length the pain abates, an odd
tingling is felt along the spina dorsi, which extending to the legs and arms,
they become weak and paralytic.

TREATMENT. Vomit several times with warm chamomile tea, then give opium in
pills or otherwise, as also by clyster; the pain and tension being removed by
these, give gentle cathartics, such as ol. ricini, infus. sen. with salts, and
the like; laxative clysters may also be prescribed; bleed, if the pulse be
high; stool being procured, an anodyne, carminative, and antispasmodic may be
given, as camphire, valerian, castor, conf. card. or the like, with opium. If
the pain return, have recourse again to opium pills; if paralytic symptoms come
on, embrocate the limbs and spine with lin. vol. camphorat. or other warm
liniment. If convulsions, give musk with opium. After the disorder, bark, with
bitters and rhubarb, should be ordered; together with a light, but nutritive
diet. Flannel may also be worn round the waist.

Painters and glaziers, who are subject to this disorder on account of the lead
used in their work, rely on burnt gin, which I have seen them take with
surprising success.

COLIC Stone, or Nephritis.
SYMPTOMS. The colic which sometimes arises from the stone, may be known from
the other kinds by the following signs; There is a fixed pain in the kidney,
which is propogated to the genitals; stools afford present relief in other
colics, but not in this; after eating the pain is increased in others, but
lessened in this; in others the urine is thicker in the beginning than
afterward, but in this, it is at first clear and thin, and afterward lets
fall gravel or other sediment.

TREATMENT. Turpentine clysters are given with good effect; the pil. sapon. or
other nephritic anodyne; care being also taken to keep the body open. But for
more on this head, see the article STONE.

COLIC Wind.
SYMPTOMS. A wandering pain in the bowels, with rumblings, which abate on the
expulsion of air; the pain is not increased by pressure; thirst not
extraordinary; and the pulse but little disturbed.

TREATMENT. Bleed if the patient can bear it; stools must be procured by saline
or other cathartics, and emollient clysters; previous to which, an emetic may
also be given if judged necessary; and fomentations, or bladders of hot water
may be applied to the belly; as may likewise anodyne, spirituous, and aromatic
carbrocation, as bals. anodyne, with ol. menth. or the like. A passage being
procured, carminatives joined with opium may be administered; as philon. Land.
or the like.

COLICA meconialis.
See Meconium.

COLOCYNTH.
Cathartic, from x. gr. to a scruple.

COMA.
See Carus.

CONFECTION. Alkermes.
Cordial, from one scruple to a dram.

CONFECTION Cordial.
Carminative, cordial, from half a scruple to two scruples.

CONFECTION. Damocrat.
Alexipharmic, anodyne, from half a scruple to two scruples.

CONFECTION Paulins.
Anodyne, nervous, from half a scruple to one scruple.

CONSUMPTION Nervous.
See Atrophy.

CONSUMPTION Pulmonary, or Phthises.
SYMPTOMS. Habitual fever; wasting of all parts of the body; dry cough; quick
small pulse; moderate heat; lassitude; faintness; night sweats; flying pains
and stitches; uneasiness about the diaphragm and breasts; the expectorated
matter purulent; sometimes bloody and offensive, with white round lumps. If the
symptoms are violent, a spitting of blood soon follows, which is thin, florid.
and frothy; but it afterward becomes paler, and the discharge changes at
length into pus. Ulcers, or tubercles in the lungs, are the cause

TREATMENT. Small repeated bleedings; blisters kept open, and s^tons; gum
ammon. myrrh. or bals. Peruv. with nitre, and elix. pareg. or pil. e styrac. at
night; decoct. cort. may be given twice a day with good effect. While tubercles
are forming, with fever and inflammation, avoid heating medicines, and give
cooling febrifuges; if little or no fever, chalybeates are very efficacious; in
spitting of blood, bleed and give tinct. rosar. tinct. styptic, or the like,
and keep the body gently open. For sweats, give elix. vitr. acid. or if that
disagree, the pearl julep; very gentle vomits of ipecacuanha may be given twice
a week, if nothing forbid, to promote expectoration; change of air and gentle
exercise are good; the diet should be light, mild, and nutritive; as jellies,
broths, milk, butter milk, etc. Dr. Simmon's excellent treatise on this subject
may be consulted.

CONTRAYERVA.
Alexipharmic, from v. gr. to a scruple.

CONTUSIONS.
TREATMENT. Bathe the part with vinegar, lin. sapon. lin. vol. spt. mindereri,
or arquebusade; and if necessary, apply a poultice of oatmeal and vinegar If
there be inflammation, bleed, and purge, use emollient fomentations and
cataplasms. If suppuration appear, apply proper topical remedies to forward it,
and treat as in abscesses.

CONVULSIONS.
SYMPTOMS. Involuntary contractions or spasms of the muscles, and consequent
motions of the parts which they serve. Children are most subject to this
complaint, and women of delicate constituions.

TREATMENT. If a plethora be indicated, bleed; if otherwise avoid it; blisters,
laxatives, and emollient clysters, if nothing forbid, the nervous and
antispasmodic medicines, as assafoetida, castor, camphire, musk, volatile
salts, with opium, if necessary. If the bowels are convulsed, opium may be
added to the clysters also. The parts may be rubbed externally with bals. anod.
and lin. vol. or other warm anodyne embrocation: free air should be allowed to
the patient.

In children, this complaint often proceeds from an acid in the primae viae;
magnesia is then proper. Worms may also occasion it, anthelmintics are in this
case to be given; blisters, and anodynes, given with caution, are good.

CORAL pp.
Absorbent, from one scruple to one dram.

CORALLINE.
Anthelmintic, from half a scruple to half a dram.

CORNS.
Cover them with mucilage, or other plaster, after bathing them in warm water,
and paring them as much as convenient away. Large easy shoes should be worn,
and a little cotton may be laid over them, to prevent their being rubbed or
pressed.

CORROBORANTS.
See Bark, and its preparation; see also Tonics.

COUGH, Hooping.
SYMPTOMS. It affects children, who, by reason that the phlegm is difficult of
expectoration, strain violently to bring it up; with a whooping noise, till
they are almost suffocated and convulsed.

TREATMENT. If inflammatory symptoms, or fever appear, bleed; give oxymel
vomi^s, or rather small doses of ipecac. or tart. emet. to bring up the phlegm.
Keep the body rather lax; and prescribe tinct. fulig. or other antispasmodic;
gentle sedatives of sir. e mecon. are efficacious; blisters, gentle sudorifics,
and a spare, thin, but nourishing diet. Bark may be given, with castor, to
support the patient's strength. But change of air, frequently repeated,
sometimes does wonders in these cases.

CRABS CLAWS,
Absorbent, from one scruple to one dram.

CRABS EYES,
Absorbent, from one scruple to one dram.

CREAM OF TARTAR
Aperient, cooling, from half a dram to half an ounce, or more; or made into
whey, or infusion.

CUTANEOUS DISEASES.
See the articles Itch, Scurvy, and Tetters.

CUTS.
Apply bals. traumatic, afterward dress with some mild digestive, and then
cicatrize. If an artery be wounded, it must be taken up, or the sponge tent
applied. See Wounds.

DANCE, St. Vitus's.
SYMPTOMS. Convulsions of the legs, arms, and head; inarticulate speech, and
lolling out of the tongue; drawing one leg after another, like an idiot; with
variety of odd and ridiculous gestures. Chiefly affects the youthful.

TREATMENT. Emetics, cathartics, pulv. rad. valor. in large quantities; bark,
chalybeates, sea bathing, electricity, millepedes, and aethiops mineral, have
been of use, blisters and bleeding, if judged necessary. If worms are the
cause, give anthelmintics.

DEAFNESS.
TREATMENT. If it proceed from hardened wax, syringe the ears, and drop in ol.
amygd. If the wax be deficient, ol. amygd. with a little ol. rorismar, or the
like. If cold be the cause, warmth, the remedies used against colds, and
syringing with some warm soft liquid. If it be nervous, give the nervous
medicines, bark, etc. and apply blisters. Electricity has been found useful. If
inflammation, bleed, purge, blister, foment, poultice, and prescribe the
pediluvia. If there be ulcers, use injections, with tinct. myrrh, honey, etc.
If insects are in the ear, fill the meatus with warm oil or water, or throw in
the fumes of tobacco.

DECOCTION, Pectoral.
ad libitum.

DECOCTION, White.
Absorbent and astringent, ad libitum.

DELIVERY.
See Childbirth.

DENTITION.
See Teething.

DEOBSTRUENTS.
Pil. ecphractic from half a scruple to a scruple. Sal martis from ij. to vi.
gr. Calomel from ij. to v. gr. See also Menses, Savine, Castor, Hellebore.
Elix. Myrrh, etc.

DIABETES.
See Urine.

DIAPHORETICS.
See Sudorifics.

DIARRHOEA.
SYMPTOMS. A purging, without much sickness or pain; succeeded by loss of
appetite; and sometimes nausea, fever, with weak pulse, dry skin, and thirst.

TREATMENT. If it proceed from any thing offensive in the bowels, give rhubarb
first, either in powder or in tincture; and afterward astringents and
absorbents, as jul. e cret. elect. e scord. extr. lig. campech. pulv. e bolo,
etc. with or without opium as you see necessary. Starch glysters, with opium,
elect. e scord. etc. and bleeding, if necessary, may be prescribed If weakness
of the bowels and indigestion occasion the complaint the bitters, bark, or
chalybeates. If obstructed perspiration, gentle sudorifics should be
interposed. Sometimes a purging is an effort of nature, to relieve the
constitution from offending matters, or it is critical. You must be careful to
distinguish in these causes, as checking the purging may be followed by a
fever, or other bad consequences. In diarrhoeas, vegetables and acessent diet
should be refrained from; decoct. alb. is best for common drink, and rice
victuals for food. When purgings proceed from a putrescent cause, ripe fruits
and antiseptics are proper.

DIURETICS.
Sal diuretic from one scruple to two. Camphire from iij. gr. to half a
scruple. Ol. junip. from ij. gr. to five. Rad. scil. from iij. gr. to ten. Spt.
terebinth. from ten drops to twenty. Spt. nitre dulcified from half a dram to
a dram. Mucilag. gum arab. ad libit. tinct. canthar. from ten to thirty gr.

DROPSY.
SYMPTOMS. A collection of water or serum in some part of the body. Before the
disorder is perfectly formed it is called Cachexy; when the lymph is
accumulated in the cellular membrane it is called Anasarca, or Leacophlegmatia;
when there is a collection of water in the abdomen, it is termed Ascites; if in
the brain, Hydrocephalus; if in the breast, Hydrops pectoris; if in the womb,
Hydrop. Uteri; and if in the scrotum, Hydrocele.

In common dropsies the legs usually swell, and a dent or pit remains for some
time after pressing the flesh with the finger: the appetite abates; the face
either bloats or becomes thin and pale; little urine is made; thirst, slow
fever, shortness of breath, lassitude and heaviness; these symptoms obtain
especially in the anasarca and ascites. In the hydrocephalus, convulsions,
squinting, shunning the light, opening of the sutures, and vomiting of bile,
commonly attend, especially if the disease be far advanced.

TREATMENT In the Anasarca and Ascites, purges with Jalap, scammony, calomel,
gamboge, elaterium, or the like, twice or thrice a week. Tinct. cupri, tinct.
cantharid. sal diuretic. or sal absinth. with bitter infusion. Emetics and
sudorifics, blisters and scarifications, prescribed with due caution, have
often good effect, otherwise, they may do harm. Bark may be given if the
strength flag, or consumptive symptoms appear. Weak liquids of all kinds used
to be avoided, but are now allowed freely with success, especially after the
drastic purges. In this complaint bread is generally ordered to be toasted, and
flesh to be baked, roasted, or broiled. Smoking is of great use, and mustard
seeds taken whole have often good effect.

If the disorder arises from the too copious use of weak liquids, or
obstructed perspiration, sudorifics are much to be depended upon. If from
drunkenness, riding on horseback and the use of wine, or rather geneva diluted
with water, in moderate quantity, will be useful. If from a consumptive
tendency, diuretics, joined with corroborants. If after great loss of blood, or
from tedious fevers, cathartics should not be used too freely, but chalybeate
bitters should be chiefly relied on. In the Ascites, tapping must be performed,
if the methods above recommended fail.

In Dropsy of the breast, diuretics are chiefly to be employed, cathartics only
occasionally. Blisters applied below the breast, and even on the thighs or legs
and kept open, are also very effectual.

In the Hydrocephalus internus, a salivation excited by mercury has of late
been recommended; purges may be given, and medicines of the carminative and
antispasmodic kind. Blisters, setons, and issues should also be prescribed.

In the Dropsy of the womb, emetics, stimulating clysters, and occasionally
cathartics; diuretic, attenuant, and resolvent medicines should be given; and
fomentations and vapor baths advised.

In the Hydrocele, let out the water with the trochar at the bottom part of the
scrotum; but when water is contained in the cellular membrane, treat it as an
Anasarca.

DRY GRIPES, or, Dry-belly-ach.
See COLIC Nervous.

DYSENTERY, or Bloody flux.
SYMPTOMS. A discharge of mucus, blood, and purulent matter by stool; violent
gripings; pain in the loins, and anus; tenesmus, and fever.

TREATMENT. A rhubarb, or other gentle purge, and after proper evacuation,
julep e cret. with spermaceti and an opiate. Bleed, if you find it necessary;
and give starch clysters with opium and astringents; bolusses of beeswax and
spermaceti, or bals. locat. with electuary of scordium are efficacious. Small
doses (a grain or two) of ipecac. have often succeeded; as has also vitrum
antim. cerat. in doses of five grains, with some opiate, occasionally repeated.
Sudorifics are sometimes of use, by promoting a determination to the surface of
the body. Emollient fomentations, and balsamic clysters with opium, will best
remove the tenesmus.

The diet as in the diarrhoea. Milk with mutton suet boiled in it, and the fat
afterward taken off, is esteemed excellent.

DYSURIA.
See Urine.

EAR-ACH.
See Deafness.

EARTH, Japan.
Astringent, from half a scruple to half a dram.

ELATERIUM.
Cathartic in dropsies, from j. to iij. gr.

ELECTUARY of Bayberries.
Half an ounce in Clysters.

ELECTUARY Lenitive, or of Cassia.
Laxative, from ij drachms to half an ounce.

ELECTUARY of Scammony.
Cathartic, antirheumatic from j. to ij. drachms.

ELECTUARY of Scordium.
Astringent, from half a dram to one and a half. also sudorific.

ELIXIR. of Aloes.
Deobstruent, opening, vermisuge from xv. drops to a dram.

ELIXIR of Myrrh compound.
Emmenagogue, from v. drops. to half a dram.

ELIXIR Paregoric.
Asthmatic, anodyne from xx. drops to a dram and a half.

ELIXIR of Vitriol. acid.
Corroborant, from vj. to xx. drops.

EMMENAGOGUES.
See Deobstruents.

EMETICS.
Pulv. ipecac. from half a scruple to half a dram. Vin. ipac. from one ounce
to two. Tart. emet. from j. to iij. gr. Vin. antim. from ij. drachms to half an
ounce. Vitriol. alb. from half a scruple to a scruple.

EMPYEMA.
SYMPTOMS An enlargement of the cavity of the Thorax, and oedematous foulness
of the skin, and flesh of one side thereof; dry cough, and difficult breathing:
It arises from matter formed, and lying loose in the thorax.

TREATMENT, may be much like that prescribed in the Vomica. Medicines which
promote absorption, and blisters may also be useful. But letting out the
matter, where it can be conveniently done, is the best cure.

EMULSION, Common.
Diuretic, ad libitum.

EPILEPSY.
SYMPTOMS. Languid pulse, pale countenance, and afterward great pain in the
head, with stupor and drowsiness, sometimes precede the fit; though often it
comes on without these previous symptoms. The patient falls down suddenly,
gnashes the teeth, froths at the mouth, uses many disagreeable gesticulations
and distortions, and sometimes discharges involuntarily by stool and urine.

TREATMENT. If the vessels are full, bleed; emetics and laxatives are proper;
warm, nervous, and attenuating remedies, as castor, valerian, assafoetida,
cinnabar, viscus quercin. ol. animal, sal c. c. etc. should be directed.
Blisters kept open, and setons are very serviceable; flowers of zinc have
succeeded well, a gr. or two at a dose once or twice a day. To restore the
strength and prevent returns, the bark, or other corroborant, and the cold
bath, with proper diet, air, and exercise.

ERYSIPELAS.
SYMPTOMS. The usual precursory symptoms of a fever; the face, or other parts
affected, inflamed; with scurf, pimples, and blisters; heat, redness, itching
and smarting; drowsiness and difficulty of breathing commonly attend.

TREATMENT. Bleed, and give proper lenitives, and cooling diaphoretic
febrifuges. Blisters, and cordial sudorifics, as camphire, contrayerva. etc. if
low pulse and malignancy require. The parts may be bathed with softening
fomentations, milk, etc.

ESCHAROTICS.
Merc. corrosiv. ruber, vitriol. caerul. the caustics, alumin. ust.
verdigrease, etc.

ETHIOPS.
See AEthiops.

EXTRACT of Bark.
Corroborant, etc. from v. gr. to j. scruple.

EXTRACT Cathartic.
From xv. gr. to ij. scruples.

EXTRACT of Chamomile, or of Centian.
Stomachic, from v. gr. to half a scruple.

EXTRACT of Guiacum.
From half a scruple to half a dram. Alterative, antirheumatic, antivenereal.

EXTRACT of black Hellebore.
Deobstruent, opening, from v gr. to half a scruple.

EXTRACT of Hemlock.
Deobstruent, alterative, etc. from v. gr. to one scruple.

EXTRACT of Jalap.
Cathartic, from half a scruple to one scruple.

EXTRACT of Logwood.
Astringent, from v. to xv. gr.

EXTRACT of Saturn.
Externally, cooling, astringent, etc. diluted.

EXTRACT of Savine.
Emmenagogue, from v. gr. to half a scruple.

EXTRACT Thebaic.
Anodyne, from half a gr. to two grains.

EYES inflamed, or Ophthalmia.
Inflammation of the outward coats of the eye, attended with pricking pain,
heat, pulsation, redness, swelling, and scalding tears.

TREATMENT. Bleed, purge, apply leeches to the temples, and blister the back or
behind the ears; cooling febrifuges may also be given; direct collyriums, with
vitr. alb. sacch. saturn. or alum; or if astringents disagree, warm milk,
decoction of mallow leaves in milk or water, or other emollient fomentation; or
poultice of milk and bread, and bathe the feet in warm water. If it arises
from mere weakness of the vessels, astringent collyriums, or alum curd; and
bark, or other tonics, may be given internally. If Nervous, join valerian,
castor, or the like, with the bark. If Scorbutic, or other humors attend,
perpetual blisters or setons, with mercurial, or other proper alteratives. If
Tubercles in the eye are the cause, anoint them with ung. caerul. and give
small doses of calomel till they disperse.

For watery Eyes, gentle cathartics and alteratives, and wash them with brandy
and water.

For specks in the eye, blew lap. call. sugar, os saepiae, tutty, white vitriol
with sugar, or the like, through a small tube into the eye; or drop in
solutions of white vitriol, sacch. saturn. etc.

FALLING SICKNESS.
See Epilepsy.

FEBRIFUGES.
Nitre from v. gr. to a scruple. Saline draughts. Vin. antimon. from v. gr. to
xx. Tart. emet. from one fourth to half a gr. Bark in the intermissions, from
half a dram to a dram, every three hours, decoction, or extract in
proportion. See Sudorifics, etc.

FENNEL.
Carminative, diuretic from iij. gr. to xv. or in infusion.

FEVER Apthose, or the Thrush Fever in adults.
SYMPTOMS. Fever, with ulcerations or apthae; distinguishable from the putrid
sore throat by the whiteness of the sloughs, by the edges not being red, and by
these being no shining redness over the fauces.

TREATMENT. Febrifuges, bark, and antiseptics; blisters if necessary. Proper
laxatives, and detergent gargles. Vitrum antimon. cerat. has been found useful.
Borax, alum, or spt. vitriol, when mixed in small quantity with honey, are good
to touch the apthae with. See also Thrush.

FEVER Erysipelatous.
See Erysipelas.

FEVER Inflammatory.
SYMPTOMS. Shivering, followed by heat, and quick pulse; nausea, anxiety,
restlessness, white and dry tongue, thirst, and sometimes pain in the head and
back.

TREATMENT. If there be fullness of vessels, bleed; give proper laxatives, and
if the stomach be foul, an emetic; saline febrifuges, with small doses of vin.
antim. or tart. emetic. and if diaphoresis be wanted, add contrayerva. If
delirious, blister, and give julep e camph. If colliquative sweats, the dococt.
cott. with or without elix. vitriol. If spasm and catching of the tendons, with
low pulse, blister the arms and legs, and apply stimulating plasters to the
feet, first bathing them with warm water. If hiccups, jul. e mosch.

While the pulse is high, and inflammatory symptoms continue, the
antiphlogistic treatment, cooling febrifuges, acids, and gentle aperients are
proper. But care must be taken not bring the patient too low, else he will want
strength to carry him through the disease. Gentle opiates may be ordered at
night occasionally in case of restlessness. If the pulse sink, he should be
supported with proper cordials. Costiveness should be avoided, and even a
purging should be checked with caution, being generally either critical, or at
least salutary. The present and past symptoms compared, will best direct the
treatment in fevers. Diluting acidulated liquids are proper; the food may be
panada, gruels, puddings, and chicken broth, with bread, but no flesh. Food or
liquids particularly longed for should be given. Care should be taken to avoid
too great heat and impure air.

FEVER Intermittent,
See Ague.

FEVER Miliary.
SYMPTOMS. Shivering, heat. lowness of spirits, oppression about the
praecordia, sighing. On the third or fourth day the eruption (preceded by a
profuse sweat of a sourish smell, with tingling or pricking sensation) appears,
chiefly on the neck, breast, and back; of little bladders resembling millet
seeds, (from whence the fever is denominated) which are either white or red,
according to the color of the liquid they contain, and sometimes both sorts.
The eruption being out, the symptoms usually abate; the urine, which before was
pale, becomes higher colored The eruptions commonly dry up in about seven
days, and the skin peels off.

TREATMENT. Bleed, if nothing forbid; and give saline febrifuges, accompanied
with laxatives and diaphoretics, as the symptoms may require. If delirum
appear, blister; if low nervous symptoms, give proper cordials; if putrid ones
and petechiae, the bark; if aphthae, gargles with tinct. myrrh, tinct. rosar.
mel. or the like. Acidulated liquids, fruits, etc. should be given in this
disease, the air kept pure, and the room not too hot.

FEVER Milk.
It arises about the third or fourth day after delivery, with swelling of the
breasts, and pain shooting toward the axillae; the breasts are sometimes hard,
hot, and inflamed; generally continues a day or too, then terminates in copious
sweats and discharge of urine.

TREATMENT. Bleed, if the inflammation be great; keep the body open, and let
the breasts be frequently drawn. In case of hardness or inflammation, emollient
fomentations and poultices.

FEVERS mixed,
Are those wherein the symptoms of inflammatory, nervous, putrid, and other
fevers, are more or less blended together; and must therefore be treated
according to their appearances.

FEVER puerperal.
SYMPTOMS. Begins in two or three days after delivery, with the usual febrile
symptoms; and arises from an inflammation of the omentum and intestines; pain
in the fore part of the head, flushing in the face, short breath, suppression
of the lochia.

TREATMENT. In case of costiveness, emollient clysters; and if necessary,
gentle cathartics; then mild diaphoretics, as saline draughts with vin. antim.
and proper diluents.

FEVER putrid or malignant.
SYMPTOMS. A giddiness precedes the attack; then burning heat, sudden loss of
strength, heaviness, lowness of spirits, watching, pulse weak, low, and
unequal; anxiety, oppression at the praecordia, nausea, vomiting, noise in the
ears, delirium, coma, catching of the tendons, a black dry tongue, and thin
crude urine. Petechiae often appear on the fourth, fifth, and seventh days.

TREATMENT. Avoid bleeding, unless the pulse indicate its necessity; give small
doses of tart. emet, or pulv. jacobin. with julep. e camph. and if necessary,
rhubarb, or other gentle laxative should be occasionally interposed.
Antiseptics, the bark, and cordials are proper; as are also blisters. Opiates
should be cautiously administered, and purgings, unless critical, should be
checked. Sinapisms to the feet are proper in case of stupor; antispasmodics and
jul. e mosch. in case of convulsive symptoms, or hiccups. The liquids drank
should be acidulated; fruit may be allowed, as may also wine; the air in the
room should be kept as pure as possible, and not too warm; vinegar should be
sprinkled on the floor. Picking the bedclothes in this disease is a bad symptom.

FEVER remittent, (Simple)
SYMPTOMS. The remittent fever differs from the continual and intermittent, in
that after a certain number of hours it remits, or abates, but does not go off.
It is also called the autumnal remitting Fever, the bilious Fever, the marsh
Fever, and the camp Fever.

Usually comes on suddenly, with debility, lowness of spirits, chilliness, and
other febrile symptoms; the hands tremble; countenance pale or yellowish; skin
dry, breathing difficult, and pulse small and quick; great nausea succeeds.
Vomiting of bile, and sometimes discharge of it by stool; tongue becomes foul,
delirium follows, moisture on the face, and at length on the other parts, when
the remission follows. As the disorder increases the remissions are less, and
at length become scarcely perceptible; the mouth, teeth, and lips, covered with
a black crust; tongue very dry and stiff, so that the patient's voice can
hardly be heard.

TREATMENT. Bleed not but with great precaution; an emetic is sometimes proper;
the body should be opened if necessary; then give saline febrifuges, to bring
on regular intermissions; this done, prescribe the bark copiously, as directed
for the ague.

FEVER, scarlet. (Simple.)
SYMPTOMS. the usual precursory symptoms of a fever, viz. Shivering, heat, etc.
then an efflorescence of a scarlet color appears all over the skin, but does
not rise above the surface; with heat, dryness, and itching. In three or four
days it disappears, and the cuticle comes off in branny scales.

TREATMENT. Cooling saline febrifuges, with gentle laxatives and diaphoretics,
if necessary.

FEVER, scarlet, (Malignant.)
SYMPTOMS. Chilliness, languor, sickness, oppression, succeeded by heat,
nausea, vomiting, sore throat, quick pulse, and difficult breathing; the
tonsils inflamed and ulcerated. On the third day the efflorescence appears.

TREATMENT. Saline febrifuges, joined occasionally with contrayerva, or other
gentle diaphoretic; blisters to the back and throat; bleed and purge with great
caution. If costiveness, clysters are best; and if inflammatory symptoms,
cupping or leeches; if a putrid tendency appears, the bark, with rad. serp.
virg. or rattlesnake root; tinct. theb. or tinct. cinnam. may be added if it
purges; gargles of tinct. myrrh, tinct. rosar. mel, spt. salis, or the like,
which should be injected with a syringe.

FEVER, slow or nervous.
SYMPTOMS Shiverings, lassitude, weariness, sighing, pale desponding looks,
great anxiety, depression of spirits, pain and giddiness of the head, white
tongue (sometimes red) with a yellow or brownish list running along the middle
of it, but no thirst: nausea, difficulty of breathing, pulse weak, quick, and
unequal; urine limpid and pale; pain and coldness in the back part of the head,
drowsiness. These symptoms are all worse toward night; if a delirium, not
violent, but a muttering to themselves; sometimes miliary eruptions and sweats
appear, but seldom afford relief.

TREATMENT. Gentle cordial diaphoretics; previous to which, an emetic, if
nothing forbids. Costiveness should be removed by gentle laxatives; bleeding
should be refrained from, unless urgent symptoms indicate; blisters; if an
intermission appears, the bark; if convulsions, musk with castor or other
antispasmodics; if apthae, gargles, with tinct. myrrh, honey, tinct. rosar.
decoct. cort. alum, or the like; and in case of much phlegm, oxymel scillit or
ipecac. to bring it up. Care should be taken after the fever, to restore the
patient by proper nutritious diet, chalybeate waters, bark, etc.

FEVER, Worm.
See Worms

FEVERFEW.
(In posset drink) sudorific.

FLOODING.
See Menses and Blood.

FLOWERS Balaustine.
Astringent, from v. to xx. gr.

FLOWERS of Benjamin.
Pectoral, asthmatic, from ij. gr. to vj.

FLOWERS of Rosemary and Lavender.
Cephalic, in infusion from ij. ounces to iv.

FLOWERS Rose.
Astringent, from v. gr. to one scruple, or in infusion.

FLOWERS of Steel.
Deobstruent, corroborant, attenuating, from ji. gr. to viij.

FLOWERS of Sulphur.
Alterative, pectoral, opening, from j. scruple to ij. drachms.

FLOWERS. of Zinc.
Antiepileptic from half a gr. to ji. emetic; outwardly, cooling and drying.

FLUOR ALBUS.
SYMPTOMS. A flux of thin matter from the vagina, of a transparent or white
color, sometimes tinctured with yellow or green; sometimes it is sharp and
corroding, with a foetid smell, especially when of long continuance.

TREATMENT. An emetic will generally be proper at first; then give olibanum,
bals. copaiv. pulv. e succin. bark or the like. In phlegmatic constitutions,
chalybeates, alum, or white vitriol; the extract cicut. is often of great use;
strengthening plasters may be applied to the back and loins, astringent
injection used, and a light, but strengthening and nutritive diet, with little
exercise.

FLUX. Bloody.
See Dysentery.

FRACTURES.
TREATMENT. Replace the ends or pieces of the bone so as to be in their natural
situation; and keep them in that posture by proper compresses, splints,
bandages, etc. but not too tight; and vinegar may be poured on them. If there
be great inflammation or tumor, bleed, and use other proper methods to remove
them before you attempt reduction. If there be loose fragments or splinters
which hinder the extension and reduction, or cause irritation, remove them by
proper incisions, or otherwise. The limb, or part, must, be kept still; proper
diet must be ordered; the callus will be formed in a month or two, according to
the bone injured, etc.

If the fracture be of a desperate kind, or mortification comes on which cannot
be got under, amputation is necessary; the joint should be cautiously moved at
times to prevent stiffness; the medical treatment should be regulated according
to the symptoms that arise.

FUROR UTERINUS.
SYMPTOMS. Melancholy, taciturnity, redness of the face, lascivious looks,
irregular hysteric symptoms, as crying, laughing, etc. and at length, an
immoderate desire of coition, accompanied with libidinous speeches and
gestures. It is peculiar to the female sex, and proceeds from an abundance and
acrimony of the fluids secreted in the pudenda.

TREATMENT. Bleeding, and cooling purges; nitre; or refrigerant, diuretic, and
diluting liquids; anodynes and thin diet.

GALANGALES.
Aromatic, stomachic from four gr. to half a scruple.

GALBANUM.
Nervous, antispasmodic, from v. gr. to a scruple or externally in plasters

GALLS.
Astringent from ij gr. to vj. or more; or outwardly in liniments for the
piles, etc.

GAMBOGE.
Cathartic, from v. gr. to a scruple.

GANGRENE.
SYMPTOMS. In some cases, when a part is violently inflamed, the inflammation
and pain suddenly disappear; the integuments turn pale, blue, livid, or
blackish; the skin becomes flaccid and pitting, with bladders filled with
yellow or reddish ichor; and this is termed Gangrene.

TREATMENT. Scarify and foment the parts with fotus comm. and spt. vin. camph.
apply poultices of oatmeal and beer, and give cordial medicines. with plenty of
bark.

GARLIC.
Expectorant, diuretic, emmenagogue, a chive or two at a dose, or in infusion.

GENTIAN.
Stomachic, see Infusion (bitter.)

GINGER.
Cordial, aromatic, carminative, from j. to v. gr. or in infusion.

GLEET.
See Venereal Disease; but if it does not proceed from that cause, the same
treatment will be proper, viz. Corroborants, as bark, olibanum, alum, elix.
vitriol. bals. capiv. etc. and if necessary, astringent injections and the cold
bath.

GONORRHOEA. Simple.
See Gleet.

GONORRHOEA Virulent.
See Venereal Disease.

GOUT.
SYMPTOMS. An acute pain in the joints, particularly of the feet. It is called
regular when seated in the extremities, returns at stated periods, and
gradually declines. Irregular, when the fits are uncertain and frequent, when
the symptoms vary, and when the disease attacks the stomach, head, or other
internal parts; chiefly affects the membranes, tendons, and ligaments; the pain
like that of a dislocated bone, with a sensation as if warm water was poured on
the part, succeeded by chilliness and slight fever: a breathing sweat comes on
at the end of the fit, and the part swells; the fit returns at intervals till
the gouty matter is spent: the longer the intervals the more severe the fit,
but the symptoms are too well known, to need further enumeration in a work of
this nature.

TREATMENT. Cordials are best during the fit; the body should not be costive;
opiates may be occasionally given; the part should be wrapped in flannel, and
relaxing or other topical applications, as the case may require; a temperate
diet, exercise, friction, and the Bath waters; some have ventured to blister
the part with success.

GRAVEL.
See Stone.

GUAIACUM Gum.
See Gum.

GUAIACUM Wood.
Alterative, antirheumatic, antivenereal, in decoction, as Sarsaparilla.

GUM Ammoniac.
Pectoral, antispasmodic, from iv. gr. to a scruple See Lac.

GUM Arabic.
Diuretic, emollient, in decoction ad libitum,

GUM Guaiacum.
Antirheumatic, alterative, antivenereal, from one gr. to a scruple

GUM Elemi.
Externally in digestives.

GUM Tragacanth.
As Gum arabic.

GUTTA SERRENA.
SYMPTOMS. A blindness, though the eyes seem perfectly unaffected, the cause
bring in the retina, or optic nerve.

TREATMENT. Blisters to the head, back, or behind the ears; bleeding, if
nothing forbids; valerian, castor, assafoetida, cinnabar, bark, volatile salts,
millepedes, rosemary, or other nervous and atteuuant remedies. Calomel, or
chalybeates, if obstruction be the cause; emetics and cathartics
discretionally: sternutatories should also be used.

HAEMORRHAGE external.
Apply bals. traumat. cobweb, dry lint, flour, agaric, alumn, or the vitriolic
styptics; if an artery is injured, take it up, or apply the sponge tent.

HAEMORRHAGE internal.
See Blood.

HAEMORRHOIDS.
See Piles.

HARTSHORN, Burnt.
Astringent, absorbent, from j. scruple to j. dram. See Decoction, white.

HARTSHORN Shavings.
In jelly, corroborant, nutritive.

HEADACHE.
TREATMENT. If occasioned by plethora, use the pediluvium; bleed or cup, and
purge: and if by viscid blood, give attenuants also; if by a foul stomach, an
emetic; if by costiveness, purges; if it be nervous, castor, valerian, bark,
spt. lav. c. spt. vol. arom. assafoetida; blister the back; and bathe the
temples; forehead, etc. with ether or spt. sal ammon. with a little roch alum
in it; if weak stomach, give bitters or other stomachics, Head-achs may arise
from various other causes, which, when known, will indicate proper remedies.

HEART-BURN.
The common heart-burn, proceeding from acidity irritating the upper orifice of
the stomach, magnesia chalk, tabellae, cardial. spt. vol. arom. or weak
solutions of (...) absinth. remove it for the time; but to cure it, the
stomachic corroborants must be given.

Heart-burn may be occasioned by corroding humors of other kinds, and will not
therefore be eased by alkalis; emetics, with plenty of chamomile tea or other
liquid, to cleanse the stomach, are here proper; cathartics may also be useful,
and these may be followed by stomachics; but water with gum arabic dissolved in
it will give occasional relief. Worms will also sometimes occasion this
complaint; vermifuges are then proper.

HELLEBORE, Black.
Deobstruent, attenuant, alterative, from v. gr. to half a scruple or more. See
its Tincture and Extract.

HELLEBORE, White.
Emetic from v. grains to half a scruple, sternutatory.

HEMICRANIA.
See Headache.

HEMIPLEGIA.
See Palsy.

HEMLOCK.
See its extract. In fomentations discutient and resolvent.

HEPATITIS.
See Liver.

HERNIA, or Rupture.
TREATMENT. Return the intestines, if practicable, and confine it with a proper
truss; costiveness must be avoided, as must likewise violent exercise,
drunkenness, etc.

HERNIA Humoralis.
See Testicles

HICCOUGH, or Hiccup.
The common hiccup are usually removed by drinking a draught of any weak
liquid, by holding the breath, and sometimes by swallowing dry bread,

For the hiccup or singultus, which come on in the last stages of fever, etc.
give julep. e mosch. or musk in substance, in large doses; volatile salt,
castor, or the like; to which opium may be discretionally added. When it is a
primary disease, sternutatories and emetics; and emp. stom. applied to the
scrob. cordis have been useful,

HIERA PICRA.
Cathartic, deobstruent, from half a scruple to a scruple or more. See Tinct.
Sacra.

HONEY.
Pectoral, detergent.

HONEY, Egyptain.
Detergent, destroys fungous flesh.

HONEY, of Hellebore.
^metic, cathartic from j. dram to half an ounce.

HONEY of Roses.
Detergent. astringent.

HOOPING COUGH.
See Cough.

HORSERADISH.
Diuretic, deobstruent, ad libitum, or infused in water, wine, or spirit from
j. ounce and a half to three ounces.

HYDROCELE,
See Dropsy.

HYDROCEPHALUS,
See Dropsy.

HYDROPHOBIA.
It is of more consequence here to describe the symptoms in the dog than those
of the patient. We may know the dog to be mad by his dull heavy look,
endeavoring to hide himself; seldom or ever barking; angry and snarls at
strangers, but fawns on his owner; refuses all food, droops, hangs down his
ears and tail, and often lays down as if going to sleep; this is the first
stage.

He now begins to breathe quick and heavy, shoots out his tongue, slavers, and
froths at the mouth; looks half asleep; flies suddenly at bystanders; runs
forward in a curve line; at length he knows not his owner, his eyes become
thick and dim, and water runs from them; tongue of a lead color; grows weak
and faint; often falls down, then rises; and attempts to fly at something;
grows mad and furious; the nearer to this state, the more dangerous the bite.

If the state of the dog cannot be obtained, he may be known to have been mad,
or the disorder may be known to be this by the following effects, which will
come on sooner or later: The bitten part begins to be painful, wandering pains
comes on gradually, with heaviness and uneasiness; disturbed sleep, frightful
dreams, startings, spasms, sighing, anxiety, love of solitude, pains shoot from
the bitten part up to the throat, with straightness, sensation of choking, and
horror or dread at sight of water or other liquids, which is a sufficient
characteristic of the disease.

TREATMENT. Cut out the bitten part immediately, which is the only certain
cure: cupping-glasses should then be applied; cauterize and wash it daily with
salt water, or ung. caerul fort, keeping it open with escarotics; bleed, if the
vessels be full; vomit with merc. emet. flav. give mosch. to xvi. gr. cinnabar
half a scruple (to which camphire and pil. sapon. to vii. gr. may be added) at
night, and a purge the next morning; bathe in the sea, or cold bath, and give a
sudorific; repeat these for a week daily, and three or four times at the next
full and change of the moon.

Ung. caerul. mit. applied externally, and turbith mineral given inwardly, so
as to raise a salivation for several weeks, are said to be efficacious, The
usual remedy known is now the Ormskirk medicine, but this has failed in a
variety of cases.

HYPOCHONDRIASIS.
SYMPTOMS are generally low spiritedness, (the disorder being chiefly in the
imagination) heaviness, oppression, and despondency: yet at times uncommon
cheerfulness and flow of spirits; timidity, anxiety, fear, dread of dying,
short cough, difficult breath, flatulency, pale urine, pains in the head, odd
fancies, spasms.

TREATMENT. Bark, and other tonics; nervous antispasmodics as castor, valerian,
assafoetida, etc. attenuants, as volatile salts and spirits; bitters and
chalybeats if no fever; emetics, aperients, opiates, issues, and blisters
discretionally: the cold bath and chalybeate waters, food light and easy of
digestion, cheerful company, and gentle exercise.

HYSTERIA.
In women, are similar to the hypochondriacs in men, but usually more violent,
and attended with convulsive fits; which usually come on with oppression at the
breast, difficult breathing, a sense of something rising in the throat, which
seems to threaten suffocation: convulsive motions; frothing at the mouth;
laughing, and sometimes crying. May be known from a mere syncope by the pulse
and breathing continuing, whereas in a syncope they are not perceptible; it
also comes on gradually, but a syncope more suddenly; in that, the fit is of
short continuance, in this, usually much longer: with a color in the face,
which is not the case in a syncope.

TREATMENT of the disorder itself, as in the hypochondriasis. In the fit
volatile foetids, singed feathers, etc. may be applied to the nostrils; and
cold water and volatile foetids given. The feet and legs may be placed in warm
water; the pure cold air should be freely admitted; cold water may be sprinkled
on the face and breast; and if a plethora be indicated, bleed; otherwise
cautiously avoid it. In this disease, particular attention should be given to
the state of the menses, etc.

This disease appears often under a variety of forms; for a more particular
account than can here be given. Sydenham, and other authors may be consulted.

HYSTERITIS, or Inflammation of the Womb.
See Womb.

JALAP. Cathartic from xv. gr. to half a dram.

JAUNDICE.
SYMPTOMS. Yellowness of the whole skin, but chiefly the whites of the eyes;
the urine also yellow; lassitude, inactivity, anxiety, sickness, oppression and
difficult breathing, pain at the stomach, costiveness, hard, white, or gray
stools, and bitter taste in the mouth.

TREATMENT. If the vessels be very full, bleed; then vomit, purge, and give
medicines with soap; to which may occasionally be added, rhubarb, aloes,
chalybeates or squills. Saline draughts if fever; opiates in case of pain;
gentle emetics may be occasionally repeated, and the body should be kept open.
Chalybeate waters, or water or cider with a red hot iron quenched in it, may be
used as common drink; gentle exercise, air, and cheerful company.

ILIAC PASSION.
SYMPTOMS. Acute pains in the bowels, oppression at the stomach, tension of the
belly, vomiting of bile, and sometimes of ^aeces, great thirst and heat.

TREATMENT as in the Inflammatory Colic, of which this is only a more violent
kind.

INCRASSANTS, Bark, and other Tonics, which see.

INFLAMMATION Superficial.
See Phlegmon.

INFLAMMATION of the Bowels.
See Colic and Iliac Passion.

INFLAMMATION of other parts.
See the respective Parts.

INFUSION Bitter.
Stomachic, corroborant, from an ounce and a half to iij. ounces, twice a day.

INFUSION Bitter, Purging.
Stomachic, corroborant, and opening; dose from an ounce and a half to iij.
ounces, twice a day.

INFUSION of Sena.
Purging from ij. to iv. ounces.

INFUSION of Sena, with Lemons. Ditto.

IPECACUANHA.
Emetic from half a scruple to half a dram; Sudorific from half a gr. to iij.
grains with opium. Also in dysenteries.

IRON.
See Chalybs and its Preparation.

ISINGLASS. Corroborant, nutritive, in jellies.

ISSUES, to cut.
Pinch up the skin and fat with the thumb and forefinger, and divide them with
a lancet so as to admit a pea; or you may apply a small blister or caustic on
the part. The peace which it is afterward dressed with may be smeated with
basilicon or ung. ad vesic. if necessary; and dipped in blue vitriol water if
fungus appear. The pea may be secured with adhesive plaster; if the issue
inflame, dress with ung. alb. etc. or bleed or purge.

ITCH.
SYMPTOMS. An eruption in the form of small pimples or pustules, chiefly about
the joints, wrist, hams, the bend of the arms, the waist, and between the
fingers; the pimples generally hard at first, afterward watery, especially if
rubbed or otherwise inflamed. An itching, which is greatest when warm, or in
bed; it is also infectious.

TREATMENT. Anoint with sulph. viv. and axung. caerul. or white precipitate and
pomatum; hellebore, or sal ammoniac may occasionally be added; or wash with a
weak solution of merc. c^rros. sub a decoction of white hellebore root, or
strong aq. veg. min. with salt. A quicksilver girdle may be worn but sulphur is
the most safe and certain; fl. sulph. may be given inwardly; bleed and purge
first, in case of inflammation or costiveness.

JUICES, Scorbutic. From ij. to vj. ounces, twice a day.

JULEP of Camphire.
Diaphoretic, febrifuge, antispasmodic, diuretic, from j. ounce to iij. ounces,
every four, six, eight, or twelve hours.

JULEP of Chalk.
Absorbent, and in diarrhoeas, from one ounce and half to iij. ounces, often.

JULEP of Musk.
Antispasmodic, (in singultus) from one ounce to three ounces frequently.

JUNIPER Berries,
Carminative, diuretic, in decoction, or infusion, ad libitum.

KERMES
See confection and Syrup.

KERMES Mineral.
Alterative from half a gr. to iij. Grains, twice a day.

KIBES.
See Chilblains.

KIDNEYS, inflammation of.
SYMPTOMS. Burning pain in the kidney, or kidneys; vomiting, eructations, the
thigh feels numb, pain in the groin, ilium, and te^^icle of the same side;
frequent, but small discharges of urine, which is red and high colored, yet
limpid and watery in the height of the disease.

TREATMENT. Bleed; open the body with cathartics and clysters; give emoilient
diuretics, with plenty of emuls. comm. or the like, for common drink; warm
bathing; opiates may be admitted in case of violent pain.

If the pain abate, leaving behind a sense of weight, with frequent shiverings,
followed by heat, and whitish turbid urine, it denotes suppuration, bals.
capiv. with nitre, and rhubarb, or other balsamic diuretics. The pain suddenly
remitting, with cold sweats, intermitting pulse, hiccup, foetid urine, and
suppression of that discharge, are signs of mortification.

KING's EVIL.
See Scrophula.

LABDANUM. Used in warm plasters.

LABOR
See Childbirth.

LAC AMMONIACUM.
Asthmatic, antispasmodic from j. ounce to iij.

LAC, Tincture of. Dentifrice.

LAVENDER Infusion of. Cephalic, nervous.

LEAD. Externally desiccative, repellent.

LEMON juice.
Cooling, antiseptic from j. dr. to half an ounce.

LEMON pecl.
Stomachic, in infusion from j. ounce to iij.

LETHARGY.
This may be considered only as a lesser degree of Apoplexy, and should be
treated accordingly. The chief symptoms are sleep, or great drowsiness.

LEY or LIXIVIUM of Soap.
Antacid, diuretic, lithontriptic, from x. drops to one dram, twice a day.

LEY or LIXIVIUM of Tartar.
Antacid, diuretic, from xv. drops to j. dram.

LIENTERY.
In this disease the aliment is discharged with but little alteration, and the
body wastes. The Treatment as in the Cael^a. Passion.

LIME. See Water.

LINIMENT Arcoeus's. Digestive, incarnative.

LINIMENT Mercurial.
See Ointment Mercurial.

LINIMENT Saponaceous. Discutient, strengthening.

LINIMENT Volatile. Discutient, resolvent, repellent.

LINIMENT White. Healing, softening.

LINIMENTUM Tripharmacum. Drying, healing.

LINSEED Infusion of. Pectoral, diuretic.

LITHONTRIPTICS.
Lix. sapon. from x. drops to one dram, Soap from half a dram, to ij.
drachms. Sal. ammon. vol. from v. gr. to xv. Spt. sal marin. from x. drops to
xx. or more. Lime water (oystershell) ad libit.

LIVER inflamed.
SYMPTOMS. Great pain in the part, shooting up toward the throat and shoulder;
vomiting, dry cough, lassitude, fever, tension of the hypochondrium; eyes,
skin, and urine sometimes yellow; costiveness, difficulty of breathing.

TREATMENT. Bleed as largely as the pulse will bear; blister the part, purge,
give cooling febrifuges and diuretics; direct cooling emollient clysters,
fomentations, and poultices and pediluvia.

If a tumor appear, forward and open it, if nothing forbid.

In the East Indies they cure this disease by salivation, bleeding and purging
being premised.

If a Scirrhus succeed, soap, rhubarb, mercurials, and chalybeates will be
proper.

LOCHIA.
See Childbirth

LOCKED JAW.
SYMPTOMS. A rigid contraction of the muscles which raise the lower jaw, whence
the jaws continue violently closed, with great pain.

TREATMENT. The best remedy is large and repeated doses of opium. Blisters,
purges, clysters, and antispasmodics may also be prescribed.

LOGWOOD, Infusiou of.
Astringent from two ounces to four. See Extract.

LOTION, Soap.
For cutaneous deformities.

LUES VENEREA.
See Venereal Disease.

LUMBAGO.
A kind of rheumatism in the loins or small of the back, without any nephritic
symptoms. Antirheumatic remedies prove most efficacious. See Rheumatism.
Strengthening or stimulating plasters, or even blisters to the part, are also
useful.

LUXATIONS.
TREATMENT. Extend the limb or part, so that the head of the bone may be free
from obstacles; then reduce the bone into its natural situation, and apply
proper bandages, not too tight, to keep it so till the ligaments have recovered
their tone. If there be inflammation, bleed, give laxatives and cooling
remedies, foment and poultice. Rest and proper diet should be advised.

MADNESS.
The symptoms are too well known to need enumeration. Emetics, ^athartics,
blisters, occasional bleeding, antispasmodics, opiates, and low diet. These may
be varied according to the nature of the complaint (that is, whether it be
Melancholy or the contrary) and to the symptoms that arise in either.

MAGNESIA.
Antacid, cardialgic, opening, from one scruple to two drachms.

MEASLES.
SYMPTOMS. Chilliness, shivering, pain in the head, fever, sickness, and
sometimes vomiting; cough, heaviness, swelling and inflammation of the eyes,
and discharge of water humor from them, and also from the nostrils. The third
or fourth day, an eruption like flea-bites appears in the face, neck, and
breast, and soon after in the body and limbs; they rise above the skin, but do
not suppurate. The fever and other symptoms do not, as in the Smallpox, etc.
abate on the appearance of the eruption, which continues about three days, then
dries away, the skin peeling off; but the other symptoms remain and even
increase, especially the cough, which is also attended generally with
difficulty of breating, and oppression at the breast.

TREATMENT. Cooling and aperient febrifuges; gentle diaphoretics, if necessary;
bleeding, if nothing forbid; pectorals for the cough; opiates occasionally at
night; blister, if the cough be obstinate; and bathe the feet in warm water.
Gentle physic should be given as soon as the eruption disappears.

It has been proposed to inoculate the Measles, but Dr. Simmons, in his
dissertation de Rubeola, observes, that the different attempts in this way,
hitherto have proved ineffectual; Dr. Home's experiments, as related in his
Medical Facts, not having been found to answer when repeated by others.

MECONIUM retention of, in Infants; (called also Colica Meconialis.)
TREATMENT. Give magnesia or sir. ros. with ol. ricini, or ol. amygd. ol.
anisi, or other oil in case of wind, and if necessary, emollient clysters. If
purging, give creta, or other absorbents, etc. If vomiting, sir. e mecon. given
with caution in small doses.

MENSES, immoderate flux of.
TREATMENT. Tinct. rosar. tinct. styptic, alum, bark, pulv. e succin. with
opiates. In desperate cases, small doses of vitriol. caerul. or tinct. saturn.
but with great caution* Bleeding, aperients, astringent fomentations to the
part, as vinegar, alum, or the like; rest, and proper mild diet.

MENSES obstructed.
TREATMENT. In phlegmatic habits, purge with tinct. sacra. pil. rufi or other
aloetics, and give chalybeates. In plethoric habits, bleed, avoid chalybeates,
and give pulv. e myrrh. with castor, or the like, with tinct. melampodii,
aloes, oil or extract of savine, pennyroyal and the like. Bathing the feet,
fomenting the belly, and sitting over the steams of hot water are good in both
habits; attenuants in case of viscid blood; emetics are often efficacious, as
are sometimes small doses of mercurials; exercise, and if the appetite be
vitiated, proper stomachics. Of late, electricity has been found efficacious in
cases of this sort, by drawing sparks, and sending gentle shocks through the
pelvis.

MERCURIAL Pills.
See Pill.

MERCURIAL Plaster; Ointment, etc.
See Plaster and Ointment.

MERCURIUS dulcis. (Calomel.)
Alterative, antivenereal from one gr. to v. omni nocte. (Also vermifuge,
deobstruent, and for salivation) Cathartic from v. gr. to 15.

MERCURY Alkalized.
Alterative, Vermifuge from v. gr. to half a dram, twice a day.

MERCURY Calcined.
Alterative, antivenereal from half a gr. to ij. at night.

MERCURY Corrosive Sublimate.
Alterative, antivenereal from one sixth to j. grain, twice a day.

MERCURY Red corrosive. Escharotic.

MERCURY precipitate White. Antipsoric, etc. in liniments.

MERCURY Emetic, Yellow. From ij. to iv. gr.

MEZERION.
Antivenereal, alterative, in decoction, dose from ij. drachms to iv.

MILIARY Fever.
See Fever.

MILK Fever.
See Fever.

MILLEPEDES.
Diuretic, attenuant, deobstruent, number ij. to v. or more alive; or in
powder. from iij. gr. to xv.

MISCARRIAGE.
See Abortion.

MITHRIDATE.
Alexipharmi^, anodyne, from j. scruple to a dram and a half.

MORTIFICATION.
See Sphacelus.

MUSK. An ispasmodic, iij. gr. or more.
See Julep.

MYRRH.
Deobstruent, antispasmodic, from iij. to to xij. grains.

NEPHRITICS.
Gum arabic ad libitum. Spt. nitr. dull. from xx. drops to j. dram, Sal
diureticus from half a scruple to a dram, opiates.. See Diuretics

NEPHRITIS.
See Kidneys.

NERVOUS Complaints. See Hypochondriac and Hysteric Diseases.
The class of medicines called Nervous, with corroborants, air, and proper
regimen, are most useful in these cases.

NERVOUS Fever.
See Fever.

NERVOUS Medicines.
Pil. gum, from v. gr. to one scruple. Assafoetida, and the other gums in like
doses. See also Bark, the Chalybeates, Cephalics, Tonics, and antispasmodics,

NIPPLES sore.
TREATMENT. Apply oil of wax, cream mucilage of gum Arabic, ung. alb. suet, or
the like, If they are moist, ung. alb. with some drying powder, as starch, bol.
armen. etc.

NITRE.
Cooling febrifuge, diuretic from v. grains to a scruple.

OIL of Almonds Opening, pectoral; outwardly, softening relaxing.

-- Olives Opening, pectoral; outwardly, softening relaxing.

OILS Essential.
The virtues of the plants they are drawn from, in doses from j. drop to iij.
on sugar, or otherwise.

OILS by Decoction and Infusion.
Softening and relaxing externally applied.

OIL of Palm.
Outwardly for cramps, weaknesses of nerves, and chilblains.

OIL of Wax. Externally to chaps, etc.

OINTMENT Basilicon. Digestive.

OINTMENT of Elder. Cooling, emollient.

-- Marshmallows. Cooling, emollient.

OINTMENT of Gum Elemi. Digestive, incarnative.

OINTMENT Mercurial.
For salivation; repellent, discutient, for the itch, vermin, etc.

OINTMENT of Precipitate. For the itch, etc.

-- Sulphur. For the itch, etc.

OINTMENT Saturnine. Drying, repellent.

OINTMENT of Tar. For scald heads, digestive etc.

OINTMENT of Tutty. For the eyes.

OINTMENT White. Healing, softening, cooling.

OLIBANUM. Corroborant from v. gr. to a scruple.

OPIUM, Anodyne, antispasmodic, etc. from one fourth of a grain to ij. grains.

OPOPONAX. Nervous, antispasmodic, from v. gr. to xv.

ORANGE Juice, As lemon, but weaker.

-- Peel, As lemon, but weaker.

OXYMEL Simple. Antiseptic, ^^^oling, detergent.

OXYMEL of Squills. Expectorant, diuretic, from half a dram to j. dram,
Emetic from ij drachms to an ounce.

OYSTER-SHELLS Absorbent from xx. gr. to j. dram.

OYSTER-SHELLS calcined. (Their water) Lithontriptic iv. ounces, or more.

PALPITATION of the heart.
TREATMENT. In proper constitutions bleed repeatedly; but where the disorder
proceed^ from relaxation, the bark and corroborants. The nervous Tribe, musk,
volatile salts, etc. are good; as are also blisters.

PALSY, or PARALYSIS.
SYMPTOMS. A loss or diminution of the motion or feeling, or both, of some part
or parts of the body. If it happen to all the parts below the head, it is
called Paraplegia; if to one side of the body Hemiplegia; and if to a
particular part Paralysis.

TREATMENT. Emetics, blisters kept open, and strong clysters; nervous,
attenuating, and stimulating medicines, as valerian, castor, mustard, sal c. c.
horseradish, etc. and mustard or other warm stimulating application rubbed
into the parts; and to that part of the spine, from whence the nerves serving
the part issue. Electricity and dry frictions are good, as are also chalybeate,
and Bath or Bristol waters.

PEARLS. Absorbent from j. scruple to a dram.

PECTORALS.
Elix. pareg, from half a dram to j. dram. Pulv. e tragae. c. from j.
scruple to a dram. Pil. de styrace from v. gr. to a scruple. Oxymel,
scillitic. to half a dram. Troch. bechic, decoct. pect. Ad libitum.

PEEL
See Bark.

PERIPNEUMONY, or Inflammation of the Lungs.
SYMPTOMS. Difficult breathing, with oppression and seeming load at the breast;
the breath hot, cough, fever, redness in the face, pulse sometimes hardly
perceptible, but after bleeding, strong but unequal. Differs from a Pleurisy in
the cough being (...) pain less acute, no^ the pulse so strong.

TREATMENT. Bleed repeatedly if necessary; and give nitre, with spermace^i, or
ol. amygd. sal c. c. gentle antimonials or the like. Cooling emollient clysters
are useful, as are also blistering and copping.

PERIPNEUMOMY, Bastard.
SYMPTOMS. Heat and cold alternately; pain and giddiness of the head, when the
cough is most troublesome; vomiting; quick, difficult breathing, and wheezing;
pain of the breast; urine tu^oid, with red sediment. Differs from a true
Peripneumony, in having neither extraordinary heat, pain, thirst, or fever; and
by its usually seizing those of a relaxed and gross habit; prevailing most in
moist soggy weather contrary to the other.

TREATMENT. Bleed not, unless the pulse be very full, and comatose symptoms
appear; blisters, emetics, laxatives, emollient clysters, attenu^nts and
diluents; pectorals for the cough, and opiates if necessary.

PHILONIUM London.
Carminative, anodyne from half a scruple to half a dram.

PHLEGMON, or superficial Inflammation.
SYMPTOMS. Heat, pain, tension, redness, and throbbing in the part, fever; that
part proceeding to suppuration or solution, gangrene, or scirrhus.

TREATMENT. Remove any perceivable external cause; bleed, purge, and give
diaphoretic febrifuges; apply emollient fomentations and poultices to the part.
If matter form, cease evacuation, and forward the suppuration; when ripe, open
the abscess and digest it off. If gangrene appear, treat as directed under that
article.

PHRENSY, Phrenitis, or Inflammation of the Brain.
SYMPTOMS. Constant delirium and fever, difficult breathing, violent pain in
the head; redness of eyes and face; pulse quick, hard, and small; tongue black
and dry, urine thin and transparent, sudden startings, picking the bed clothes.
Known from a common fever, etc. by the delirium preceding the fever.

TREATMENT. Bleed largely; stimulating clysters, blisters, the pediluvium, and
sinapisms to the feet; spirituous embrocations to the head, (...) shaved.
Nitre, sal c. c. or other attenuants, purges, and diluents; promoting the
haemorrhoidal flux is of great use.

PHTHYSIS
See Consumption.

PHYMOSIS and PARAPHYMOSIS.
SYMPTOMS. The first is a closing of the prepuce over the glans penis, so as
not to be drawn back; the last, a constriction of it behind the glans, so as
not to be drawn forward over it.

TREATMENT. Foment, poultice, bleed, and purge; vomit if necessary; and give
cooling febrifuges. If these fail proper incisions must be made.

PILES, or painful Tumors in the Anus or rectum.
TREATMENT. Bleed, if necessary, and give sulphur, or aethiops mineral, nitre,
and elect. lenitiv. opiates if they are very painful; and if they are external,
foment them with warm emollient liquors, or anoint them with ung. samb. or the
like; if they bleed much, apply gentle astringents; if much swelled and
inflamed, scarify, or apply leeches to them. Bals. sulph. is very proper to
apply to the Piles, and the ung. caerul. has also been found useful. They may
more expeditiously be driven away by liniments made of powder of galls, or
sugar of lead, or by washing them with solutions of white or blue vitriol. But
as the haemorrhoidal discharge is generally salutary, caution must be used in
repelling them.

PILL Aromatic.
Aperient from half a dracm to a dram, antirheumatic, deobstruent, from v.
grains to xij. twice a day.

PILL Colocynth.
Cathartic from j. scruple to ji.

PILL Ecphractic.
Emmenagogue from v. gr. to half a dram twice a day.

PILL Gummous.
Hysteric, nervous, etc. from v. gr. to half a dram twice a day.

PILL Mercurial.
Alterative, antivenereal from v. gr. to j. scruple, every night.

PILL Rufus's.
Deobstruent from v. gr. to j. scruple, twice a day. Opening, from j. scruple,
to half a dram.

PILL Soap.
Diuretic, icteric, anodyne from v. gr. to j. scruple.

PILL Storax.
Pectoral, anodyne from iv. gr. to j. scruple, at night.

PILL Squill.
Asthmatic, pectoral, diuretic from v. gr, to xij.

PIMPLES.
TREATMENT. Wash them with a solution of s^cch. saturn. or vitriol. alb. If
these fail, try spt. vin. camph. a solution of sal tartari, or white
precipitate mixed with pomatum. If they proceed from foul blood or a scorubutic
cause (as it is termed) treat them with alteratives, as directed for the Land
Scurvey; with now and then a cooling purge.

PLAGUE.
SYMPTOMS. Shivering; pain in the head, back, and stomach; sickness and
vomiting; despondency, anxiety, difficult breathing, wildness of countenance,
high fever, faintings, hiccups, and catching of the tendons. Tumors at length
appear in the groin, armpits: or behind the ears; and then the fever abates,
but returns if the tumors sink. Foetid breath and sweat; livid spots,
sometimes broad, and suddenly disappearing. Carbuncles arise in the worst state
of the disease, which seldom suppurate kindly, but appear as red fiery circles;
are small tumors with corrupted flesh underneath, and are attended with great
itching. The symptoms, however, vary according to the constitution and state of
the air, but these are the most general.

TREATMENT. The tumors are critical, and should be encouraged by ripening
cataplasms and proper cordials; the carbuncles should be poulticed with
cataplasm e cymino, or the like; and if they appear gangrenous, scarify, and
dress them with ol. terebi^th, and hot digestives, as in Mortifications.

The disease itself should be treated with diaphoretics, antiseptics, cordials,
antiphlogistics, or other remedies, according to the symptoms; but in general,
camphire, nitre, snake root, bark, etc. an emetic being first given, seem most
eligible in this dreadful disorder.

N. B. The vapor generated by nitre, especially it the deflagration be mode
with odoriferous ingredients, is said to prevent infection

PLASTER Common. Healing, drying.

PLASTER Common, with Gums. suppurative.

PLASTER Mercurial. Discutient, resolvent.

PLASTER Mucilage. Softening, and for corns.

PLASTER Red Lead. Drying, healing.

PLASTER Soap. Resolvent.

PLEURISY.
SYMPTOMS. Chilliness, shivering, succeeded by heat, thirst, and restlessness;
a violent acute pain on one side rear the ribs, extending toward the shoulder
blades, back, and breast; worst when the affected side is lain on. Difficult
breathing, redness of the cheeks, nausea, and dry cough, the matter spit up, if
any, yellowish or bloody.

TREATMENT as in the Peripneumony; but repeated bleeding, laxatives, and
cooling attenuants, as sal c. c. with nitre are chiefly to be relied on.

POISONS.
TREATMENT. When these are taken, if the time has been but short, give a strong
emetic of white or blue vitriol, drinking plentifully of warm water to wash the
stomach; oily clysters should also be given repeatedly, as should likewise
cathartics. If corrosive sublimate was the poison, give solution of any fixed
alcaline salt. If opium, or other narcotic, give acids (^s vinegar) with water
or broth; apply blisters; and if necessary, bleed. Care must be taken to
continue these operations a sufficient time; afterward the stomach and bowels
should be healed with proper balsamic remedies, broths, etc.

POMEGRANATE SHELL.
See Bark.

The juice cooling, antiseptic.

POPPIES.
See Syrup of Poppies.

POWDER of Amber. compound.
Astringent, corroborant, from viij. gr. to half a dram, twice a day.

POWDER Antil^ssus.
For bite of mad dog one dram and a half, every morning.

POWDER of Arum root, compound.
Stomachic, antirheumatic from one scruple to one dram twice a day.

POWDER Bezoardic
Absorbent, alexipharmic from one scruple to a dram at night.

POWDER of Bole. compound
Astringent, from half a scruple to half a dram, twice a day.

POWDER of Cerusse, compound.
Cooling and astringent, in collyriums for the eyes.

POWDER of Contrayerva compound.
Sudorific from one scruple to a dram.

POWDER of crabs claws, compound.
Absorbent, febrifuge, from one scruple to a dram, frequently.

POWDER to promote delivery.
(...) from one scruple to a dram

POWDER of Scammony compound.
Cathartic from one scruple to two.

POWDER of Sena, compound.
Cathartic from half a dram to a dram or more.

POWDER of Tin.
Vermifuge from one scruple to a dram twice a day.

POWDER of Tragacanth, compound.
Pectoral from j. scruple to a dram, frequently.

POX.
See Venereal Disease.

POX, Chicken; or SWINE Pox.
SYMPTOMS. Chilliness, heat, and the usual precursory symptoms of fever; but
milder than in the small pox. The eruption appears about the third day. They
rise like the smallpox, but may be known from them by the matter being more
like water than pus, by little vesicles, or bladders filled with water, on the
top of such pustules as are whole; and by their turning about the fifth day;
which the small pox does not till at least the seventh; and they leave no marks
behind them

TREATMENT Cooling febrifuges, as nitre, with magnesia, antimonials, pulv.
contray. and saline draughts, etc. and diluents; and afterward two or three
purges.

The Swine Pox is only a larger sort of Chicken Pox

POX Small.
See Small Pox.

PROCIDENTIA, vel PROLAPSUS ANY. or bearing down of the Rectum.
TREATMENT. Corroborants, as bark, tinct. rosar. etc. Laxatives, clysters, and
aperients, if costive: clysters of tinct. rosar. or other bracers, and a proper
bandage; chalybeates and cold bathing. N. B. if there be inflammation,
emollient fomentations and poultices. The part should be gently reduced, and
kept up with a bandage; rest and an horizontal posture are proper. Prolapsus
Uteri. TREATMENT as in the preceding case. ^essaries are also proper to be worm.

PUERPERAL Fever.
See Fever.

PUTRID Fever.
See Fever.

QUICKSILVER
Vermifuge, opening, from half an ounce to two or more, in the morning.

QUINSY.
SYMPTOMS. Inflammation of the throat; with pain, great heat, tumor, redness,
difficulty in swallowing, and fever. The uvula sometimes relaxed and inflamed;
the face red.

TREATMENT. Bleed largely, or according to exigency; open the body; blisters to
the back, and near the part; gargle with spt. sal ammon. and decoct. pect.
strong of the former; poultice the part with bread and milk, to which camphire
may be added, and the volatile liniment may also be applied. If it suppurate,
cease to evacuate; and inhale emollient steams. When ripe open the abscess;
afterward gargle with tinct. rosar. and tinct. myrrh.

RATTLE SNAKE ROOT.
Diaphoretic, antiseptic, from v gr. to a scruple. Also in antiseptic gargles.

RESIN of Aloes.
Cathartic one scruple, or more. Deobstruent, from v. gr. to half a scruple.

RESIN of Bark.
Corroborant, febrifuge, etc. from v. gr. to a scruple.

RESIN of Guaiacum
Antirheumatic, Alterative, deobstruent from v. gr. to xv.

RESIN of Jalap

RESIN of Scammony
Cathartic from v. gr. to a scruple.

RHEUMATISM Acute.
SYMPTOMS. Rigor, shivering, fever, thirst, costiveness, wandering gnawing
pains, with swelling and redness in the part affected, the pain worse toward
night and in bed.

TREATMENT. Bleeding; Medicines with sal c. c, nitre, camphire, guaicum,
antimonials, or the like; laxatives, and opiates occasionally. The part may be
rubbed with lin. sapon. camphire, and oil; lin. vol. etc. Warm fomentations are
good; the part may be covered with flannel, diluents should be freely given,
and a diaphoresis kept up. When the urine deposits a copious sediment the bark
may be given: it may be joined with some of the above, and opium may be
occasionally added.

RHEUMATISM chronic.
Differs from the acute, in that it is not attended with fever or inflammation
in the part; and chiefly attacks those advanced in life, contrary to the other.

TREATMENT. If necessary bleed, and purge with elect. e scammon. sena, etc.
Pulv. doveri, or other anodyne sudorific, may be given. Calomel, in small
doses, with vin. antim. has been found efficacious; as has likewise kermes
mineral, with camphire, about three grains of each. Bark and sarsaparilla are
given by some; but gum guaiacum with volatile salts, the guaiacum with an
opiate, or sal c. c. with nitre, and julep e camph. according to circumstances,
are generally successful. Warm embrocations to the part, and flannel are also
serviceable; cold bathing, where not improper on other accounts; a flannel
shirt worn next the skin, is a good preventive of a return.

N. B. Mustard has been effectual, taken inwardly, and rubbed into the part.
Electricity, Friction and exercise of the part, are useful.

RHUBARB. Cathartic from j. scruple to j. dram. Stomachic from iv. grains to
half a scruple.

RHUBARB toasted. Astringent from half a scruple to j. scruple.

RICKETS.
SYMPTOMS. The head large, the fontanelle keeps long open, the face full and
florid, the joints knotty, and the bones protuberant, causing incurvation and
distortion; the ribs protuberate. and become crooked; the belly swells; cough
and pulmonary disorders succeed. The child (for children only are the subjects
of this complaint) moves weakly, and waddles; usually appears about the eighth
month, and continues till the sixth year; arises from bad nursing; the
understanding is very early.

TREATMENT. Cold bathing; friction; bathing the back with spirituous
embrocations, or warm balsamic liniments; strengthening plasters; gentle
vomits of ipecacuanha; and purges with rhubarb and aethiops mineral; bark,
chalybeates, air and exercise.

RINGWORMS.
See Tetters.

ROB of Elder. Pectoral, opening from j. dram to iij.

ROSES, Red. Astringent from v. gr. to half a dr.
See Tincture

ROSEMARY. Cephalic, Carminative, etc. in infusion.

RUE.
In infusion against fits and spasmodic complaints; also alexipharmic and
antipestilential; juice in clysters, vermifuge.

RUPTURES. See Hernia.

SAFFRON. Cordial from iij. gr. to a scruple, or in infusion.

SAGAPENUM. Nervous, hysteric, etc, from v. gr. to a scruple, twice a day.

SALT, alkaline fixed. (As sal absinth, sal tartar etc.) antacid, attenuant,
diuretic, from iij. gr, to xv.

SALT, alkaline volatile. (As sal c. c. sal ammon. vol. etc.) antacid,
attenuant, diaphoretic, from iij. gr. to xv.

SALT of Amber Aperient, diuretic, hysteric from iv. gr. to a scr.

SALT, Ammoniac. Diuretic, febrifuge, attenuant, diaphoretic, from v. gr. to a
scruple, or more.

SALT. Cathartic (As Glauber's, Epsom, Rochelle etc. from half an ounce to ij.
ounces)

SALT Diuretic Attenuant from j. scruple, to ij. drachms. Aperient from ij.
drachms to half an ounce.

SALT of Steel. Attenuant, deobstruent from ij. gr. to half a scruple.

SARSAPARILLA.
Alterative, antivenereal, in decoction (from ij. ounces to ij. lb.) from iv.
ounces to half a lb. twice a day.

SASSAFRAS.
Alterative, antiscorbutic, etc. dose as in Sarsaparilla.

SAVIN. Emmenagogue, in infusion, from ij. ounces to iv.

SCALDS, or Burns.
TREATMENT. Apply ol. linis. igne alone, or with spermaceti or wax dissolved in
it; aq. veg. min. is also good; afterward cerat. epulot, or other cicatrizer.
If inflammation render it necessary, bleed and purge.

SCALD-HEAD.
TREATMENT. Rub the part with ointments made of sulphur, pitch, ung. nicotian,
or the like: the ung. caerul. has been used with success; bathing with salt
water, and give mercurials, antimonials, or other alteratives; blisters kept
open, and issues are proper.

SCAMMONY. Cathartic, from half a scruple to a scruple.

SCARLET Fever.
See Fever.

SCHIRRUS, or hardened Glands.
TREATMENT. Endeavor to disperse it by mercurial unction, ext. cicutae, or
mercurials, with sarsaparilla, etc. and occasional purges. If it incline to
suppurate, treat it as directed in abscesses, etc. If it neither disperse nor
suppurate, extirpation is the only cure, where it can be done; otherwise treat
it with coolers, and occasional anodynes.

SCIATICA.
SYMPTOMS. A fixed pain in the hip, like the rheumatism. Called also the Hip
Gout and Ischias.

TREATMENT as in Lumbago.

SCORDIUM. Astringent.
See its Preparations.

SCROPHULA.
SYMPTOMS. Schirrous unequal tumors, which do not readily suppurate; affecting
the glandular parts, but chiefly on the sides of the neck.

TREATMENT. Purge occasionally with jalap. and calomel; and give alteratives,
as calomel, with sulph. aur. ant. aeth. antimon. or some other; millepedes are
good; spong. ust. with rhubarb; sea water internally before suppuration, and
the bark and sea bathing after they soften; exercise is good; gross and high
seasoned diet must be avoided; vegetable acids, especially Sevile oranges, are
proper.

SCURVY.
SYMPTOMS. Heaviness, lassitude, low spirits, offensive breath, tender gums,
sallow bloated conntenance, haemorrhages from the nose and mouth, difficult
breathing, swelling of the legs, yellow purple, or livid spots on the skin;
tumors in the limbs; contraction of the tendons of the ham; other symptoms
occur, but they differ in different subjects, as do likewise those
abovementioned; and the disease is in general sufficiently known. It is
however, distinguished into Sea and Land Scurvy.

TREATMENT. In the Sea Scurvy, the juices are disposed to putridity from the
use of animal food, and moist air; antiseptics therefore will be proper, as
vegetables, vegetable acids, fruit, cider, etc. infusion of malt, in defect of
these or liquors made of molasses or sugar. Bark, and elix. vitr. acid. are
good. Liquids impregnated with fixed air for common drink, and wholesome air.

The Land Scurvy, (improperly so called) is rather a cutaneous disease; scurfy
or scabby eruptions appear, either partially, or more universally; often with
itching and heat.

The antimonial alteratives, with gentle mercurials, are often efficacious; aq.
calcis composit. succ. scorbutic, or the like, may be used with them. Cream of
tartar and flowers of sulphur are good. The parts may be anointed with
saturnine liniments, with a little white precipitate if necessary.

SCURVY GRASS.
Antiscorbutic, the juice or infusion from ij. ounces to iv. twice a day.

SENEKA.
See Rattlesnake-root.

SENNA. Cathartic from j. dram to iij. or in infusion.

SETON, to make.
Pinch up the skin and fat with the finger and thumb, and run a proper needle
through it, armed with a skain of silk or thread smeared with digestive
ointment; which must be shifted a little every day, so as to keep both orifices
running.

SHINGLES.
See Tetters.

SINGULTUS.
See Hiccups.

SKIN, diseases of.
See Cutaneous Diseases.

SLATE, Irish.
An internal vulnerary and astringent, from j. dram to ij. in spruce beer.

SMALLPOX.
SYMPTOMS. Chilliness, shivering, heat, pain in the head and back, sickness and
pain at the stomach, and sometimes vomiting; fever, costiveness, convulsive
fits sometimes in children, which is a good symptom. On the third or fourth day
the eruption appears, like flea-bites, in the face, breast, arms, body, and
feet successively; pains and soreness in the throat. The eruption being
completed, the fever goes off or abates. The eruptions fill, or maturate like
boils, and the skin between them is also red; the eyelids, face, hands, and
feet, swell successively; the pocks from red, grow whitish and smooth in the
body, and yellow and rough in the face, full of a white matter. About the
seventh day from the eruption, (sometimes the ninth) they dry, or turn as it is
called, and scale off, leaving red marks, and sometimes pits behind.

TREATMENT. If the pulse be full and strong at the beginning, bleed; and if
necessary, or the period be sufficiently early, purge, and give an emetic.
During the eruptive fever, cooling febrifuges, with laxatives, or clysters
occasionally; but if the symptoms require it (as low pulse, etc.) gentle
cordials and diaphoretics. After the eruption, little is generally required but
a gentle anodyne at night, proper diluents, and if necessary, opening clysters,
etc. If purging come on, check it with caution; if delirium or fever, apply
blisters; and if the pock sink, give bark, with proper diaphoretics and
cordials; especially if malignant or putrid symptoms, or petechiae appear. Spt.
vitrioli dulcis is also good in these cases, as are sinapisms to the feet.

In the confluent kind, all the symtoms are worse than in the distinct. The
eruption makes its appearance a day or two later, and does not come to its
height till the eleventh or fourteenth day after; the fever also continues
after the eruption appears, and a salivation comes on, which must by no means
be checked. The patient requires to be supported more in this case than in the
other; care, however, must be taken in both kinds to avoid too much heat, or a
heating regimen; and pure, and even cool air, where no objection appears, is
salutary. If the pustules are opened, and the matter let out, so much the
better; especially if danger of their sinking or striking in appear. Purging is
esteemed proper after this disease.

To inoculate for the Small Pox, take a little matter from a pustule, after the
eruptive fever, on the point of a lancet, and insert it in the arm (by making a
small puncture or two) between the true and scarf skin, which may afterward be
pressed down with the slat side of the lancet. Three or four days afterward
the punctures appear inflamed; in about three days more the precursory symptoms
come on, and at length the eruption.

Previous to the inoculation, a mercurial purge or two may be administered, if
the patient is of a full or gross habit; and he should also be restrained to a
milk and farinaceous or vegetable diet, avoiding especially high seasoned food.
It is found best to keep him out of bed, and even now and then in the cold air.
The symptoms are generally so favorable, that little assistance is required
from medicine, except a few mercurial purges after the disorder goes off.

SOAP.
Diuretic, icteric, lithontriptic, attenuant from one scruple to ij. drachms
twice a day.

SOAP Leys.
See Lixivium.

SORE THROAT, putrid.
See Angina maligna.

SPASMS,
See Convulsions.

SPECIES Aromatic. from v. gr. to xv.

SPECIES of Scordium. Astringent from v. gr. to j. scruple

SPERMACETI.
Pectoral, balsamic, vulnerary from one scruple to a dram. Externally
healing, softening.

SPHACELUS, or complete Mortification.
SYMPTOMS. This succeeds a Gangrene (which see) if it cannot be stopped; the part
loses all sensation, and yields an intolerable smell.

TREATMENT as in Gangrene. When the separation is advanced, amputate the limb,
or cut out the part, if it can be done with safety; persisting in the use of
the bark, etc. till a complete digestion is procured.

SPIRIT of Hartshorn.
Attenuant, cordial, sudorific from x. drops to lx.

SPIRIT Minder^rus's.
Attenuant, cooling, diaphoretic from two drachms to half an ounce.

SPIRIT of Nitre, Sweet.
Diuretic, febrifuge, carminative from x. drops to half a dram.

SPIRIT of Turpentine. Diuretic, etc. from x. drops to xl.

SPIRIT of Vitriol, acid, Cooling, astringent, antiseptic, antalkaline, from v.
drops to xx.

SPIRIT of Vitriol, sweet. Febrifuge, diuretic, etc. from v. drops to xx.

SPIRIT Volatile aromatic. As spirit of Hartshorn; also cephalic.

SPIRIT Volatile foetid. Antispasmodic, etc, from x drops to xxx.

SPLEEN.
See Hypochondriacal and Hysteric Diseases.

SPRAINS.
See Strains.

SQUILLS
Pectoral, diuretic from iij. gr. to viij. Emetic from half a scruple to a
scruple.

STEEL, Rust of. Deobstruent, attenuant, tonic, fr. v. gr. to half a scruple.
See its preparations.

STINGS, Venomous.
TREATMENT as in Bites.

STOMACH, Inflammation of.
SYMPTOMS. Heat, pulsation, and acute pain in the part, which is increased by
swallowing, tension at the pit of the stomach; anxiety; retching; hiccup;
small, weak, intermitting pulse,

TREATMENT. Bleeding, emollient liquids, and clysters; fomentations; gentle
opiates; blisters; mucilage of gum arabic; with small doses of nitre
occasionally.

STOMACH, pain in.
See Heart-burn.

STONE AND GRAVEL
SYMPTOMS. Pain in the back and loins, or the region of the bladder; nausea;
vomiting; strangury; sometimes bloody urine; costiveness; retraction of the
testicle of the affected side; numbness down the thigh and leg; the pain in the
kidneys abates when the calculus is got into the bladder, and the urine becomes
turbid.

TREATMENT. Bleed, if no objection appear; draughts with ol. amygd. and large
quantities of gum arabic, with manna and (...) added occasionally. Pil. sapon.
good as an anodyne at night. As solvents, the lixiv. sapon. from x. to xxx. or
lx. drops in veal broth twice in a day. Soap, oyster-shells, and limewater are
also good; and in some cases, the sal vol. c. c. or spt. sal marin. Water
impregnated with fixed air, has been found a solvent in some cases; as has
also spt. nitr. dulcis, the fol. uvae ursi, the live millipedes, and decoction,
or oil of Juniper. In violent fits of the disorder, the semicupium is good; and
clysters with V^^ice turpentine, or spirit of turpentine, and opium. In nausea
and vomiting, the saline draughts, with tinct. theb. and care should be taken
to keep the body properly open with cathartics of the cooling saline kind, or
rather with manna, ol. ricini. and inf. senae, or other mild purge. Emuls. com.
decoct. rad. alth. or the like, may be used freely as common drink. (See also
Colic.)

STORAX.
Pectoral, vulnerary from v. gr. to a scruple

STRAINS.
If internal, give spermaceti, bals. traumat. or Irish slate, with spruce beer.
If outward, apply lin. sapon. vinegar, lin. vol. or arquebusade. If there be
inflammation, foment and poultice, bleed and purge.

STRANGURY.
SYMPTOMS. A difficulty of making water, attended with heat or scalding; often
proceeds from blisters.

TREATMENT. Give emuls. com. or mucilage of gum arabic freely. If these fail,
boluses of camphire and opium. See also Urine.

STYPTICS internal.
Tinct. styptic. from j. dram to half an ounce. Tinct. rosar. from j. ounce,
to ij. Elix. vitr. acid from x drops to xx.

External, alum, colcotnat, aq. vitriol caerul. sacc. saturni. vitriol virid,
flour, cobweb, dry lint, fur of hat, agaric, bals. traumatic.

SUGAR of Lead. Externally cooling, astringent.

SULPHUR Flowers. Pectoral, alterative, aperient from j. scruple to ij. drachms.

SULPHUR precipitated. Ditto.

SULPHUR of Antimony, precipitated. Alterative from half a gr. to ij. grains.

SWINE-POX.
See Pox.

SYRUP of Buckthorn. Cathartic from j. ounce, to iij.

SYRUP of Kermes. Cordial from half a dram to ij. drachms.

SYRUP of Squills. Pectoral, diuretic from half a dr. to ij. dr.

SYRUP of white Poppies. Anodyne from j. dram to half an ounce.

TABES DORSALIS.
SYMPTOMS. A wasting of the whole body, attended with fever, but no spitting
nor cough, by which it is known from a Phthysis. A collection of matter in some
part of the body is usually the cause, but particularly attends the
inflammation of a schirrous gland.

TREATMENT. If it arise from a schirrous liver, soap, and mild chalybeates. If
the schirrus, or abscess be external, open or extirpate. The bark is often
proper in these cases, as is also myrrh with nitre. The body must be kept
properly open; but purgings should be checked. Gentle exercise, wholesome air,
and proper mild diet, with the use of asses milk, and the like, are often of
much service.

TAMARINDS. Cooling, antiseptic, ad libit.

TARTAR, Cream of
Ditto. Also opening from ij. drachms, to half an ounces.

TARTAR Emetic.
From j. gr. to iv. Febrifuge, diaphoretic from one fourth of a grain, to j.
grain.

TARTAR vitriolated.
Aperient, febrifuge, etc. from half a dram to ij. drachms.

TEETHING.
SYMPTOMS. Inflammation and swelling of the gums, and flavering, Fever, and
sometimes convulsions.

TREATMENT. Cooling febrifuges in case of fever: the body should be kept gently
open. If convulsions arise, give tinct. fulig. and carminatives, or ol. anisi.
with magnesia. If a rash appear, Gascoign's powder, or pulv. contray. c. with
nitre, are usually given. If a cough, spermaceti, or other balsamic pectoral;
leeches and blisters may be applied if necessary: and if the disorder is
violent, the gums should be lanced.

TENESMUS.
SYMPTOMS. Frequent, or even continual inclination to go to stool, without
occasion, or being able to void any. Arising from the abrasion of mucus, etc.
from the rectum and anus.

TREATMENT. Clysters, with mutton broth and opium; or with starch oil, and
elect. e scord. or wih spermaceti, suet or the like. Bals. locat. or spermaceti
with tinct. theb may also be given inwardly.

TESTICLES inflamed.
TREATMENT. Bleed, purge and even vomit, if necessary, in order to cause
revulsion. Warm emollient fomentations and poultices are usually reccommended;
but Dr. Simmons, in his ingenious practical treatise on the Gonorrhaea
recommends cold applications to the part, as being much more efficacious.

Febrifuges and gentle diaphoretics, with an anodyne at night, are good. If
matter form, open and let it out. The testicles should be suspended, and the
patient kept as much as possible in an horizontal posture.

TETANUS.
SYMPTOMS. A rigid and painful contraction of the muscles of the neck, and
trunk of the body, drawing it backwards or forwards in a curve, with
convulsions.

TREATMENT. Give large doses of musk and opium, keeping the body open with ol.
ricini, or other proper purge. The warm bath, emollient fomentations and
spirituous embrocations to the parts. Sal. c. c. and the nervous medicines are
good; and clysters with turpentine and opium. After the disorder, give bark, or
other restoratives.

TETTERS.
TREATMENT. They may be touched with ink, a weak solution of green or white
vitriol, sacch. saturn. sal tartari, or sublimate. If these prove too violent,
softening and cooling liniments, or cream. Ung. caerul. mit. spt. vin. camph.
or liniments with white precipitate are good. Sometimes alteratives of the
mercurial and antimonial kind, or cooling febrifuges and purges, and necessary.

Pimples, Ringworms, Shingles, Grubs, Freckles. And other like cutaneous
complaints, also give way to some of the above methods.

THROAT, sore.
TREATMENT. A common inflammatory sore throat, proceeding form cold, etc. gives
way to bleeding, cooling purges, gentle sudorifics, acidulated gargles, and
lin. vol. applied outwardly. If necessary, blisters may be applied behind the
ears. If there are ulcers, bleeding and purging are generally improper; warm,
but mild and antiseptic diaphoretics, as rad. serp. virg. conf. damocrat,
cortex, sal. c. c. contrayerva, etc. with detergent gargles, composed of tinct.
myrrh, honey, etc. or the tinct. rosar^ Blisters if necessary; and if much
fever, proper cooling febrifuges. See also Angina and Quincy.

THRUSH.
SYMPTOMS. Little ulcers in the mouth and throat, of a white or yellowish
color. Frequent in children.

TREATMENT. Keep the body gently open with magnesia or rhubarb; give the saline
mixture, with pulv e chapter Cancr. or contrayerva c. and touch the ulcers now and
then with sir. moror. and borax, or with alum, bol. arm. and honey, tinct.
rosar. etc. See also Fever Aphthose, Fever Miliary, Angina Maligna, and
Venereal Disease.

TIN Filings.
Vermifuge from half a dram to ij. drachms.

TIN pulverized. Ditto.

TINCTURE of Antimony.
Deobstruent, diuretic, diaphoretic from x. drops to lx. Emetic from ij.
draehms, or more.

TINCTURE aromatic. From j. dram to ij. drachms.

TINCTURE of Bark. Corroborant, febrifuge from j. dram to half an ounce.

TINCTURE of Bark, volatile. Ditto from half a dram to j. dram.

TINCTURE, bitter. Stomachic from j. dram to ij.

TINCTURE of Cantharides. Diuretic, corroborant from x. drops to xxx. or more.

TINCTURE of Castor. Nervous from half a dram to ij. drachms.

TINCTURE of Cinnamon. Astringent, cordial from j. dram to ij. drachms.

TINCTURE Foetid.

-- of Soot. Antispasmodic, etc. from xx. drops to j. dram.

TINCTURE of Guaiacum, volatile. Antirheumatic, etc. from xx. drops to j.
dram or more.

TINCTURE of black Hellebore. Deobstruent, aperient from half a dram to ij.
drachms.

TINCTURE of Jalap. Cathartic from ij. drachms to vj.

TINCTURE of Japan Earth. Astringent from j. dram to ij. drachms.

TINCTURE of Myrrh. Deobstruent, antiseptic from xv. drops to j. dram.

TINCTURE of Rhubarb. Opening from half an ounce to ij. ounces. Stomachic, etc.
from j. dram to iij. drachms.

TINCTURA Sacra. Opening from j. ounce to ij. ounces. Deobstruent from ij
drachms to half an ounce.

TINCTURE Saturnine. Astringent, antiphthisical, from xx. drops to xxx. drops.

TINCTURE of Sena. Opening and carminative from j. ounce to iij. ounces.

TINCTURE of Snakeroot. Alexipharmic, stomachic, etc. from half a dram to ij.
drachms.

TINCTURE of Flowers of Steel. Deobstruent, corroborant, etc. from x. drops to
half a dram.

TINCTURE of Steel with spt. of Salt. Ditto, from v. drops to xx. drops.

TINCTURE, Styptic, From j. dram to half an ounce.

TINCTURE, Thebaic. Anodyne, etc. from v. grains to j. dram.

TINCTURE of Valerian. Nervous from j. dram to half an ounce.

TINCTURE of Valerian, volatile. From xx. drops to lx.

TONICS.
Bark from j. scruple to j. dram, see also its preparations. Elix. vitriol
from v. drops to xx. Vin. chalyb. from half a dram, to half an ounce. See
also Corroborants.

TOOTHACHE.
TREATMENT. If hollow or decayed, apply bals. traumatic, ol. caryoph. origan.
vel guaiaci, upon cotton to the part; or pills with camphire and opium, or rad.
pyrethri. Some burn the nerve with ol. vitriol, aqua fortis, or an hot iron; or
touch the Antihelix with the latter. If there be inflammation, bleeding,
purging, and blisters behind the ears. If it proceed from Cold or Rheumatism,
treat it as directed for those complaints.

TREACLE, Venice. Alexipharmic, sudorific, etc. from half a dram to j. dram.

TREMORS.
TREATMENT as in Nervous Complaints and Palsy.

TROCHES pectoral Ad Libitum.

-- Heart burn. Ad libitum.

TROCHES of Japan Earth.

-- of Squills.

-- of Sulphur.

-- of Vipers.

-- of Nitre.

Virtues as the respective simples, only in double or treble doses.

TUMORS Encysted.
Try to disperse them with mercurial unction or plaster, or friction; or if
these fail, hemlock fomentations and poultices, and give ext. cicut. or
mercurials, with sarsaparilla, etc. and occasional purges. If you cannot
disperse them, endeavor at suppuration; if that fail, extirpation, where it
can be done, is the only cure.

TURPENTINES.
Diuretic, detergent, strengthening from j. scruple to j. dram.

TUTTY.
Externally in collyriums for the eyes; cooling, astringent.

TYMPANY.
A collection of wind or air in the intestines, particularly the colon, by
which they become violently distended. It sometimes arises from checking a
diarrhoea, or from the imprudent use of bark in intermittents.

TREATMENT. If fever and full pulse, bleed; keep the body open with gentle
laxatives, joined with aromatics; but refrain from strong purges, and from
carminatives not joined with proper aperients. The belly should be frequently
rubbed, and swathed with flannel. Exercise is good; gentle corroborants, as
flor. chamaem, with small doses of chalybeates joined with aromatics, are also
very proper.

VALERIAN.
Nervous, antispasmodic, etc. from half a scruple to half a dram, twice a day.

VARIX, or Enlargement of a Vein.
TREATMENT. Keep it compressed with proper bandages, and if necessary, bleed
and evacuate. If these fail treat it as in the operation from Aneurism.

VENEREAL Disease.
SYMPTOMS. A few days after an impure coition, a titillation about the glans
penis; heat and pricking pain in making water; then a discharge of matter from
the urethra, at first whitish, and in small quantity; afterward yellow or
green or even reddish, and more copious. If it be suffered to proceed,
inflammation and excoriation follow; painful erection or chordee. Sometimes
phymosis (or an inability of drawing the skin back over the glans.)
paraphymosis, (or an inability of drawing the skin forward so as to cover the
glans,) swelling of the testicles, chancres, bubors, scabby eruptions,
nocturnal pains, nodes, carious bones, ulcers in the throat and nose, etc.

TREATMENT, In the beginning, bleed, if nothing forbid; and give a cooling
purge, a small dose of calomel, merc. calcinat. or other proper mercurial,
every night; and nitre, with gum arabic, and some gentle lenitive, several
times in the day; repeating the purge occasionally. If these are not judged
sufficient, a small quantity of ung. caerul. fort. may be rubbed into the thigh
or leg every night. The parts should be kept clean by washing them with warm
milk and water. This course should be persisted in till the virulence is
subdued, afterward a few cooling purges; and bals. capiv. with astringent, or
other injection^, if gleet or ulcer remain, will usually be sufficient.

Buboes are generally advised to be dispersed with ung. caerul. fort. but if
they are advanced, they should be brought forward by proper suppuratives,
opened and digested thoroughly off, which is usually attended with the most
salutary effects. Abscesses in perinaeo, should, if possible, be dispersed.

Chancres may be anointed with ung. caerul. fort. after washing them with aq.
phagedaenic. For the Hernia Humoralis see T^^ticles. see also Phymosis.

When the disorder is a Confirmed Lues, we should either salivate, or at least
keep the blood for some time highly charged with mercury; for either of which
purposes calomel, or merc. calcinat. etc. should be given inwardly; and half a
dram or a dram of ung. caerul. fort. rubbed every night into the thighs. In
short, the whole dependence must be on mercury for destroying the virulency,
other remedies being only had recourse to occasionally, according to the
symptoms that arise. Thus, inflammatory symptoms are to be removed by bleeding,
purging or other proper medicines; ulcers, abscesses, etc. should be treated as
required in such cases; but the disease which is the cause of these should be
principally attended to, and when that is subdued by a proper mercurial course,
the other symptoms will either disappear, or may be removed by requisite
methods. A Gleet, for example, will sometimes remain after the disorder is
cured; and must be treated with corroborants, and, if necessary, astringent
injections; the cold bath, and a strengthening diet.

VERDIGRIS.
Externally detergent, good against fungous flesh.

VERTIGO.
SYMPTOMS. Objects, though at rest, seem to turn round; dimness of sight, and
fear of falling.

TREATMENT. Bleed in the jugular, and cup in the back part of the head;
blisters kept open; a vomit and laxatives; then the nervous medicines, as pil.
gum castor, sal c. c. etc. and chalybeate waters.

VINEGAR.
Cooling, antalkaline, antiseptic from j. dram to half an ounce.

VINEGAR distilled. Ditto.

VINEGAR Litharge.
Cooling, astringent, externally.

VINEGAR of Squills.
Pectoral, diuretic, deobstruent from x. drops to j. dram.

VIPERS.
Nutritive, corroborant, as food or in broth.

VIPERS Fat.
Externally for bites of vipers, also opthalmic.

VITRIOL, Blue.
Escharotic externally. Also emetic from half a scruple to j. scruple.
Corroborant from one fourth of a grain, to j. grain.

VITRIOL, Green.
As salt of steel

VITRIOL, White.
Emetic to j. scruple. Astringent from iij. grains to half a scruple.
Externally cooling, astringent.

ULCERS.
TREATMENT. Dress them with proper digestives, and if they are fungous, apply
an escharotic; if foul, mix red precipitate with the digestive, or use the mel.
AEgyptiacum, or tinct. myrrhae; or else wash with aq. phagedaen. or the like.
Dry lint alone, in some cases, is good. If callous, cut or eat away the
callosity. If the bone be carious, either scrape it, or make small perforations
to promote exfoliation; or dress with lint, either dry, or wetted with tinct.
myrrhae. If humors abound, give proper alteratives and purges; and if
putridity appear, the bark and elixir of vitriol.

VOMICA, or Abscess in the Lungs.
SYMPTOMS. It is sometimes a consequence of pleurisy; cough, difficult
breathing, even after the pain which preceded it g^^s off; slight shiverings,
followed by heat; a quick weak pulse; hectic fever; wasting of the body; the
patient cannot lie down but on the side affected.

TREATMENT. Gentle medicines of the turpentine kind, balsamics and diuretics,
steams of hot water, with bals. Tolu, benzoin. and received into the lungs;
occasional laxatives, bleeding if inflammation, soft balsamic food, and gentle
exercise.

VOMITING.
TREATMENT. If it arise from foulness of stomach (as bile, acidity, etc.) a
vomit will be useful; and afterward, if necessary, a rhubarb purge; and
stomachics, magnesia, opiates, etc. according to circumstances. If from spasms,
the saline draughts, and proper opiates; medicines of the nervous class, joined
with laxatives; and, if necessary, a blister to the back. If from inflammation,
bleeding, cooling diluents and febrifuges, as the saline draughts, with proper
laxatives; and anodynes at discretion. If from weakness of the stomach, bark,
bitters, or other corroborants; premising a vomit if judged necessary.
Chalybeate waters are also proper. If the stomach be sore, as it is termed, the
bals. traumat. spermaceti, or other balsamics, are good. In vomitings, the best
form of medicine is pills. Vomitings are often symptomatic, as in fits of the
gravel, pregnancy, etc. the original disorder, must in those cases, claim the
chief attention.

VOMITING of Blood. See Blood.

URINE bloody,
The treatment may be similar to that prescribed for the Diabetes.

URINE, profuse Discharge of, or Diabetes
TREATMENT. As this complaint arises from a relaxed state of the sphincter of
the bladder, it must be cured by proper corroborant remedies, as bark, tinct.
rosar. tinct. stypt. elix. vitriol, alum, bitters, and the like. Tinct.
canthar. has been found efficacious, as has also vitriol caerul. in doses of
half a grain, twice in a day. Exercise, and light, but strengthening diet, are
also proper.

URINE, Suppression of.
Called Ischuria, if total; Strangury, if but in part; and Disury, if the
latter be attended with heat; and are usually occasioned by inflammation or
spasms on the neck of the bladder, in consequence of blisters, or some other
cause.

TREATMENT. Medicines with ol. amygd. and plenty of gum arabic, with opiates or
camphire, if necessary. The body should be kept open with gentle laxatives, and
emollient clysters; if necessary, bleed, foment the belly, and advise the warm
bath. If caruncles in the urethra are the cause, bougies, introduced with
proper caution, are serviceable.

UTERUS inflamed, etc.
See Womb.

WARTS.
Touch them with some caustic or escharotic daily, paring off first the decayed
part; or cut them off with scissars, and touch the roots with blue vitriol, or
the like. If it can conveniently be done, tie round the bottom a fine hair, or
silk thread, and it will die away. The juice of celadine, or spurge rubbed over
them, are esteemed good.

WATER Horseradish.
Diuretic, deobstruent from ij. drachms to half an ounce.

WATER Lime, simple. -- compound.
Alterative, antiscorbutic, antacid from four ounces or more.

WATER Phaged^enic To wash foul ulcers.

WATER Sapphirine. Detergent, astringent.

WATER'S simple, distilled.
The virtues of their respective plants, etc. from ij. ounces to iv.

WATERS, Spirituous, distilled.
The virtues of their respective ingredients from ij. drachms to j. ounce. Also
cordial.

WATER, sulphurated. Pectoral, cooling, etc. from half a dram to ij. drachms.

WATER, Tar. Alterative, deobstruent, corroborant from iv. ounces to half a lb.
twice a day.

WATER Vitriolic, camphorated, Opthalmic.

WATER, Vitriol blue. Externally styptic.

WAX.
Balsamic, antidysenteric; externally healing.

WHEY, Alum.
Astringent from iv. ounces, twice a day. Externally astringent, cooling.

WHEY Scorbutic^
From iv ounces to half a lb. twice a day.

WHITES.
See Fluor albus.

WHITLOW.
TREATMENT similar to that directed for Boils and Abscesses.

WINE aloetic, alkaline.
Deobstruent, attenuant from j. dram to iij. drachms.

WINE antimonial.
Emetic from ij. drachms to half an ounce. Diaphoretic, diuretic, febrifuge
from x. drops to lx.

WINE bitter.
Stomachic from j. dram to iij. twice a day.

WINE Ipecacuanha.
Emetic from j. ounce to ij. ounces and a half.

WINE of Millepedes
Diuretic, attenuant, deobstruent from j. dram to iij. twice a day.

WINE, Saffron.
Cordial from ij. drachms to half an ounce.

WINE, Steel.
Deobstruent corroborant from half a dram to iij. drachms twice a day.

WINE, Viper.
Strengthening from ij. drachms to an ounce.

WOMB inflamed.
SYMPTOMS. Pulsation, pain. heat, and tumor in the part; fever, costiveness,
pain on going to stool, and difficulty of making water.

TREATMENT. Bleeding, laxatives, emollient clysters, cooling febrifuges,
diluting liquors, fomentations and poultices, etc. as in other inflammations.
(See Stomach, Bladder, Kidneys, etc.)

If a Cancer succeed, it must be palliated with gentle anodynes, occasional
bleeding and laxatives; and proper detergent, or other injections.

WORMS.
SYMPTOMS. Itching of the nose and anus; hunger, with ravenous appetite;
nausea; and gnawing pain in the stomach or intestines; foetid breath; grinding
of the teeth, and moaning in sleep; intermitting weak pulse, and hectic fever;
faintings, and sometimes convulsive fits; paleness; wasting of the flesh. But
there are several kinds of worms. Itching about the anus, with tenesmus, are
signs of ascarides, or small thread worms. Sudden gripings about the navel,
denote the common round worms. Gnawing pains in the stomach, and voraciousness,
the maw worms. And a weight in the belly, like the rolling of a ball, the
taeni, or tape worm,

TREATMENT. Tin filings, with rhubarb, or other proper aperient; sem. santon.
calomel, aethiops, or other mercurials, every night; with a purge now and then.
Indian pink roo^ half a scruple in powder, or coralline. Theinfusion of
bears-foot leaves is esteemed good; cabbage-tree bark has also been
recommended. Aloes, wormwood, rue, savine, especially in clysters; and for the
ascarides, the fumes of tobacco thrown up the rectum; for the tape worm, the
male fern root, j. dram every hour for three times, and presently after a
strong drastic mercurial purge. See Dr. Simmons's ingenious pamphlet on the
subject. Corroborants are proper after a course of anthelmintic medicines.

WORMWOOD.
In clysters, vermifuge.

WORMWOOD in Infusion.
Stomachic, externally in fomentations discutient.

WORM Seed.
Vermifuge from v. grains to j. scruple, or more in infusion.

WOUNDS.
TREATMENT. Remove extraneous substances; and, if the wound be simple, close
the lips with slips of sticking plaster, or the stitch if necessary; and apply
lint, either dry, or in case of bleeding, wetted with bals. traumatic, etc. If
necessary, bleed and purge; or give cordials etc. according to circumstances.
Dress with some mild digestive or defensative; and if fungous flesh appear, use
escharotics, afterward cicatrize.

If there be loss of flesh, defend the part from the air with proper, mild,
vulnerary dressings, while nature supplies the loss. In other respects (the
suture excepted) proceed as above. If an artery or vein be wounded or divided,
apply styptics, ligatures, etc. according to circumstances. If a nerve be
divided in part (as violent pain, convulsions, and delirium will indicate)
divide it entirely; as must also be the case with a tendon or artery in like
circumstances. If there be fever, bleed, purge, and give cooling febrifuges;
and if inflammation, apply emollient poultices and fomentations. If the patient
is low and the wound does not go on kindly, bark, or other proper cordial and
strengthening medicines, with suitable diet, should be prescribed.

TABULA ostendens, qua proportione simplicia medicamenta purgantia, narcotica,
et mercurialia, in compositis, quibus occurrunt, continentur.
A Table showing in what proportion, the simple purging, narcotic, and
mercurial medicines, are contained in those compounds of which they make a
part. Pulvis e bolo compositus cum opio in gr. 45. continet Opii gr. 1. Pulvis
e scammonio compositus in gr. 7. continet Scammoni gr. 4. Pulvis e fena
compositus in gr. 21. continent Senae gr. 8. Crystallorum tartari gr. 8.
Scammonii gr. 2. Pulvis e succino compositus in gr. 40. continet Opii gr. 1.
Species e scordio cum opio in gr. 45. continent Opii gr. 1. Pilulae ex
colocynthide simpliciores, in half a dram. continent fere Scammonii half a
scruple, Colocynthidis half a scruple. Pilulae ex colocynthide cum aloe in half
a dram. continent fere Aloes gr. 8. Scammonii gr. 8. Colocynthidis gr. 4.
Pilulae mercuriales in gr. 28. continent Argenti vivi gr. 15. Pilulae
saponaceae in half a scruple. continent fere Opii gr. 1. Pilulae e styrace in
5. gr. and 4-5ths. continent Opii gr. 1. Electarium e scammonio in 1 ounce and
half. continet Scammonii gr. 15. Electarium e scordio in iij drs. continet Opii
gr. 1. Confectio paulina in gr. 32. continet Opii gr. 1. Mithridatium, sive
confectio Damocratis in half an ounce. continet Opii gr. 1. Philonium
Londinense in gr. 36. continet Opii gr. 1. Theriaca Andromachi in gr. 75.
continet Opii gr. 1.

In Emplastro ex ammoniaco cum mercurio Argentum vivum est totius pars fere
quinta.

In Emplastro communi cum mercurio Argentum vivum est totius pars fere quinta.

In Unguento caeruleo fortiori Argentum vivum est totius pars fere tertia.

In Unguento caeruleo mitiori Argentum vivum est totius pars fere quinta.

In Cerato mercuriali Argentum vivum est totius pars fere quinta.

THE END.
New and Old, Medical, Surgical, and Chemical Works, lately imported, and now
selling at BELL's BOOK-STORE, near St. Paul's Church in Third-Street,
Philadelphia; With the lowest Price printed to each Book.
1 ALEXANDER's Experimental Enquiry concerning the Causes which have been
generally reported to produce Putrid Diseases, two dollars. 2 Aitken's Essays
on Important Subjects in Surgery, two dollars. 3 Aitken's Description of
Double-Shot Firearms one dollar. 4 Aitken's Conspectus Rei Chirurgicae, half a
dollar. 5 Anatomical Dialogues, a Breviary of Anatomy, two dollars. 6 Eight
Anatomical Tables of the Human Body, containing the Principal Parts of the
Skeleton and Muscles represented in the Large Tables of Albinus. To which are
added concise explanations, by John Innes, late Dissector to Dr. Monro. three
dollars. 7 Arbuthnot on Aliments, with Rules of Diet, two dollars. 8 Allen on
the whole Practice of Physic 2 vols. three dollars. 9 Alexander's Essays on
Antiseptics, on the Doses and Effects of Medicines, on Diuretics and
Sudorifics, dollar and a half. 10 Armstrong's Poem on the Economy of Love, a
quarter dollar. 11 Aristotle's Masterpiece with Direct. for Midwives, one dol.
12 Aristotle's Works complete in four parts, three dollars. 13 Advice to People
concerning Health, by Tissot, two dollars. 14 Avis au Peuple sur sa sante, par
Tissot, one dollar and a half. 15 Astruc on the Diseases of Women, 3 vols. six
dollars. 16 Des Maladies Veneriennes par Astruc, 3 vols. four dollars. 17
Anatomia, per Bartholinus, cum Figuris, two dollars. 18 Art of Curing the
Venereal Disease, by ^legny, two dollars. 19 Alchymy taken out of the fountain
of Nature; to which are added a treatise of sulphur, and the nine books on the
Nature of Things, by Paracelsus, two dollars. 20 Art of Chemistry from the
French of Thibaut, two dollars. 21 Anatomy, with Cuts by Cheselden, two
dollars. 22 Aristotle's Last Legacy, and Masterpiece, two dollars. 23 Anatomy
by Monro, one dollar and a half. 24 Armament. Chirurgicum cum Fig. per
Scultetus, two dollars 25 Philosophical and Chemical Analysis of Antimony, with
the Natural history of Chocolate; etc, etc. two dollars. 26 Art of Surgery,
with Anatomy, by Handley, two dollars. 27 Anatomy of the Brain with Cuts by
Ridley, two dollars. 28 Art of Healing by Surgeon Freke, dollar and a half. 29
Aphorisms of Sanctorius, with Keil's Medicina Statica, and Quincy's
Medico-Physical Essays on -- I. Agues. II. Fevers, III. An Elastic Fiber. IV.
The Gout, V. The Leprosy, VI. Kings Evil. VII. The Venereal Disease, two
dollars. 30 Aphorisms of Hippocrates in Greek and Latin, one dollar. 31 Anatomy
of the Human Body, by Winslow, 2 vols. four dol. 32 Anatomy of Human Bodies, by
Gibson, dollar and a half. 33 Anatomico -- Practica, de Lienosis, et Historiae
Humani Sanguinis, per Boil, etc. etc. one dollar. 34 Aristoteles de Anima, de
Longitudine et Brevitate Vitae, et de Poetica, etc, etc. two dollars. 35 Art of
Distillation, with the Furnaces and Vessels, and the Anatomy of Gold and
Silver, by Dr. French two dol. 36 Adversaria, Anatomica Omnia, per Morgagni,
four dollars. 37 Aristotle de Anima, Greek and Latin with a Comment, one
dollar. 38 Anatomy with Cuts, by Veslingus, and Culpepper, two dolls. 39
Arbuthnot on the Rules of Diet, dollar and a half. 40 BERKENHOUT's
Pharmacopoeia Medici, dollar and a half. 41 Bell's System of Surgery, three
dollars. 42 Bell on the Theory and Management of Ulcers: with a Dissertation on
White Swellings of the Joints, and an Essay on the Chirurgical Treatment of
inflammation and its Consequences, three dollars. 43 Bisset on the Medical
Constitution of Britain, with a Narrative of the Throat Distemper, and the
Miliary Fever, likewise, Observations on the Effects of some Anthelmintics, two
dollars. 44 Brunonis's Elementa Medicinae, two dollars. 45 Boerhaave's
Aphorisms, dollar and a half. 46 Borthwick on the extraction of the Chystalline
Lens of the Eye, half a dollar. 47 Burrow^ Practical Essay on Cancers, one
dollar. 48 Birch on the efficacy of Electricity in Female obstructions, one
dollar. 49 Buchan's Family Physician, or, Domestic Medicine; Being a Treatise
on the Prevention, and Cure of Diseases by Regimen and simple Medicines, with a
Dispensatory, and a complete Index, for the use of Families. N. B. This is a
New Edition, with great Additions, and Improvements, by its original Author,
the celebrated Doctor Buchan, reprinted in Philadelphia, for the use of the
American States at the small price of two dollars. 50 Browne's Religion of a
Physician, one dollar. 51 Boyle's 500 Receipts of choice and safe Remedies, one
dollar. 52 Barry on Digestion, and discharges of the Body, two dollars. 53
Brooke's Practice of Physic, 2 vols. four dollars. 54 Le Brigandage de la
Medicine, avec Chirurgie, et Pharmacie, 4 vols. four dollars. 55 Aphorisms, per
Boerhaave, one dollar. 56 Institutiones, per Boerhaave, one dollar. 57 Boil on
the Final Causes of Natural things, one dollar. 58 Bickerton's Accurate
Disquisitions in Physic, one dollar. 59 Boerhaave's Elements of Chemistry,
with Cuts and explanations; also useful Notes, by Strother, two dollars. 60
Bate's Dispensatory, in English, by Salmon, two dollars. 61 Boerhaave's
Chemistry, with Cuts, 2 vols. six dollars. 62 Lord Bacon on the
Sweating-Sickness Examined, in reply to G. Thomson, etc, by H. Stubbe of
Warwick, one dol. 63 Biggs on the Vanity of the Craft of Physic, one dollar.
64 Bonet's Guide to Physicians, six dollars. 65 Bacon's Natural History, three
dollars. 66 Bacon on the Advancement of Learning, and the Partitions of
Science, three dollars. 67 Brown on Vulgar Errors with his other Works, three
dollars 68 CULLEN's First Lines of the Practice of Physic, 3 vols. eight
dollars. 69 Cullen's First Lines, 3 vols in one, five dollars. 70 Cullen's
Synopsis Nosologiae Methodicae, 2 vols. five dollars. 71 Cullen's Lectures on
the Materia Medica, comprehending, a knowledge of all the Substances employed
in Preventing, or Curing Diseases, six dollars. 72 Cullen's Letter to Lord
Cathcart, concerning the Recovery of Persons Drowned, and seemingly dead, half
a dollar. 73 Cleghorn on the Diseases of Minorca, two dollars. 74 Caverhill on
the Cause and Cure of the Gout, dollar and a half 75 Cadogan on the Gout, one
dollar. 76 Clare on the Cure of Abscesses by Caustic, and on Wounds and Ulcers,
etc. one dollar 77 Cotunnius on the Nervous Sciatica, or Nervous Hip Gout,
dollar and a half. 78 Curry on the Nature of Fevers; on the Causes of their
becoming so frequently Mortal; and on the means to prevent it, one dollar. 79
Commentaries upon Boerhaave's Aphorisms, concerning the Knowledge and Cure of
Diseases, by Baron Van Swieten, 18 vols thirty dollars. 80 Commentaries upon
Boerhaave by Van Swieten, vols. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, and 14, Eleven
volumes, sixteen dollars. 81 Commentaries by Van Swieten, vol. 2, 3, 4, three
volumes, containing, the greatest part, which relates to Surgery, in this much
esteemed Work, six dollars. 82 Commentaria in Hermannii Boerhaave Aphorismos,
de Cognoscendis et Curandis Morbis, per Van Swieten, 4 vols. Quarto. twenty
dollars. 83 Case of Mademoiselle de Mascranny who sues for a dissolution of her
Marriage with the Marquis de Gesvres on Account of Impotency, two dollars. 84
Culpepper's Directory for Midwives, two dollars. 85 Culpepper's English
Physician, Enlarged with 369 Medicines, two dollars. 86 Cheyne on Curing the
Diseases of the Body, and mind, two dol. 87 Cheyne on the Gout, and on
Bath-Waters, two dollars. 88 Cheyne's Cure of Nervous Distempers, or the
English Malady, two dollars. 89 Cheyne on Regimen, with five Discourses,
Medical, Moral, and Philosophical, serving to illustrate Medicine, two dollars.
90 Came on the Venereal Disease, and its Consequences, two dol. 91 Cockburn's
Nature, and Cure of a Virulent Gonorrhoea, two dollars. 92 Cockburn's Nature,
and Cure of Loosenesss, dollar and a half. 93 Cockburn on the Cure of Sea
Diseases, with an Essay on Bleeding in Fevers, two dollars. 94 Cornaro and
Lessius on Health and Long Life, one dollar. 95 A. Corn. Celsi Medicina, 2
vols. three dollars. 96 -- one dollar. 97 Culppeper's School of Physic. two
dollars. 98 Traite de Chymie, 2 vols. one dollar and a half. 99 Commentaria de
Sanitate Tuenda, per Lom. et Celsus, one d. 100 Medicinales Observationes, per
Lommius, one dollar. Colborne's English Dispensatory, containing the Medicinal
Virtues of all the Simples now in Use, etc. two dollars. Cullen's Lectures on
the Materia Medica, six dollars. 101 DOUGLAS on the Hydrocele, two dollars 102
Douglas on the Muscles, with the Blood Vessels and Nerves, two dollars 103
Dawson's Cases in the Acute Rheumatism, and the Gout, with Remarks and
Treatment three dollars. 104 Dobson's Medical Commentary on Fixed Air, two
dollars. 105 Duncan's Medical Cases and Observations, three dollars 106
Duncan's Medical Commentaries, for the Years 1781 -- 82. exhibiting a concise
View of the latest and most important Discoveries in Medicine and Medical
Philosophy, three dollars. 107 Duncan's Elements of Therapeutics: or First
Principles of the Practice of Physic, 2 vols. three dollars 108 Duncan's Heads
of Lectures on the Theory and Practice of Medicine, dollar and a half. 109
Duncan's Address to the Students in Physic, one third of a dollar. 110 Duncan's
Life of Doctor A. Monro, half a dollar 111 Dawson's Account of a safe and
efficacious Medicine for Diseases in the Eyes and-Eye-Lids, half a dollar. 112
Duncan De Laudibus Harveii, one third of a dollar 113 Diseases of Children and
their Remedies, from the Swedish of Baron Rosen Von Rosenstein, by Sparrman,
three d. 114 Diseases of Infants and Children, one dollar. 115 Douglas's
Description of the Muscles, two dollars. 116 Dialogues de la Sante, two thirds
of a dollar. 117 Dissertations concerning Sense, and the Imagination, with an
Essay on Consciousness, dollar and one third. 118 Duncan on the first Prin. of
the Practice of Physic, 2 vols. two d. 119 Du Verney of the Organ of hearing:
containing, the Structure, the uses, and the Diseases of all the Parts of the
Ear, one dollar and a half. 120 Dissertation sur les Vapeurs, qui nous
arrivent, one dollar. 121 Ductus Lacrymales Novi -- Ductus Salivalia -- Via
Sanguinis -- etc. per Bianchius, Vater, et Folius, one dollar. 122
Dissertationes Medicae, per Pitcairn, one dollar. 123 ELLIOT's Medical
Pocketbook; for those who are; and for all who wish, to be, Physicians.
Containing a short but plain Account of the Symptoms, Causes, and methods of
Cure of the Diseases incident to the Human Body: Including such as require
Surgical Treatment; together with the Virtues, and Doses, of Medicinal
Compositions, and Simples. Extracted from the best Authors, and digested into
Alphabetical Order. one dollar. 124 Else on the Hydrocele, one dollar. 125 Easy
Way to Prolong Life, in 2 parts, one dollar and one third. 126 Emmenologia, or
the Courses, by Dr. Friend, dol. and a third. 127 Elementorum Physiologiae
Medicae, per Hamberger. one dol. 128 Experimenta circa varias res naturales,
per Redi, et Kircher, one dollar. 129 Etmullerus's Complete System of the
Theory and Practice of Physic, both Physical, and Surgical, two dollars. 130
FORDYCE's Elements of the Practice of Physic, containing, the Natural History
of the Human Body; With the History and Methods of Treating Fevers, and
internal Inflammations, two dollars and a half. 131 Foster on the Principles
and Practice of Midwifery, two dollars and a half. 132 Fuller on the power of
Exercise, one dollar and a third 133 Fothergill's Rules for the preservation of
Health, one dollar. 134 Foster's Essay on Hospitals, half a dollar. 135 The
Experienced English Farrier, with the Nature and Virtues of Simples, two
dollars. 136 The Citizen and Countryman's Experienced Farrier, by Markham,
Jefferies, Rational Quakers, and Discreet Indians, two dollars. 137 Knowledge
of the Horse, and of Riding, by Astley, half a d. 138 Gentleman's Complete
Jockey, one dollar. 139 Notable Things, concerning Horses, and other Cattle,
one d. 140 Farriery, by Surgeon Bartlett, one dollar. 141 Franklin's
Experiments and Observations on Electricity. With Knight on the principles of
Attraction and Repulsion, three dollars. 142 Obras Medico-Chirurgicas, de
Madama Fouquet, three doll. 143 Fall coner on Mineral and Bath-Waters, two
dollars. 144 Falck's Medical Instructor for Seamen, two dollars. 145 GREGORY's
Conspectus Medicinae Theoreticae, 2 vols. five dollars. 146 Gilchrist on the
Use of Sea Voyages in Medicine, and particularly in a Consumption, two dollars
and a half. 147 Gellert's Metallurgic Chemistry, being a System of Mineralogy
in general, and of all the Arts arising from this Science, three dollars. 148
Gregory de Morbis Caeli Mutatione Medendis, one dollar. 149 Grant on the Nature
and Progress of Fevers, two dollars. 150 Galen's Art of Physic, by Culpepper,
one dollar. 151 De Salis Cathartici Amari Natura, per Grew, half a dollar. 152
The Works of the highly Experienced, and famous Chemist, John Rudolph Glauber;
containing great Variety of choice Secrets in Medicine, and Alchymy, in the
working of Metallic Mines, and the separation of Metals, also the improvement
of Barren-Land, and the Fruits of the Earth, twelve dollars. 153 HOME's
Clinical Experiments, Histories, and Dissections, three dollars. 154 Hamilton's
Elements of the Practice of Midwifery, three dols. 155 Haller's First Lines of
Physiology, four dollars. 156 The same in Latin, three dollars. 157 Hill's
Cases in Surgery, particularly, of Cancers and of Disorders of the Head from
external violence, dollar and a half. 158 Heisteri, Compendium Anatomicum, one
dollar. 159 Harveii Exercitationes Anatomicae, one dollar. 160 Hopson's Essay
on Fire, one dollar. 161 Hippocrates, on the preservation of Health, one
dollar, 162 Haller on the Irritable Parts of Animals, one dollar. 163 Head of
Doctor Cullen, two dollars. 164 Head of Doctor Monro, two dollars. 165 Huxham
on Fevers, two dollars. 166 Holland on the Nature, and Cure of the Smallpox,
two dol. 167 Houston's Travels in Asia, Africa, America and Europe, two d. A
Continuation of this Catalogue will be published on Monday next.
183 Hales's Statical Experiments, on the Sap in Vegetables, Analysis of the
Air, with the Natural History of Vegetation Volume the First, two dollars. 184
Hales on Ventilators for Mines, Jails, Ships, etc. and for preserving all sorts
of Grain from Weevels etc. three d. 185 Hydrostatical Paradoxes, made out by
Experiments by the Honorable Robert Boil, one dollar. 186 Hominis Brutique
Animalis, Exortus, per Everard, one dollar. 187 Historia Naturalis de Ventis
etc. per Bacon, one dollar. 188 Haller's Physiology, 2 vols. four dollars. 189
Primae Lineae Phisilogiae in usum Praelectionum, per Haller two dollars and a
half. 190 Hartman's Family Physician, with Secrets, two dollars. 191 Health
Restored, in 12 Conversations, between the Heart and the Stomach, after a
luxurious Banquet, etc. one d. 192 Heister's General System of Surgery, eight
dollars. 193 Heister's Medical, Surgical, and Anatomical Cases and
Observations, eight dollars. 194 G. H. Velschii Hecatosteae. II. Observationes
Physico Medicae ad Illustrem Societatem Naturae Curiosorum in Germania; cum
Dissertatio Medico Philosophica AEgagropilis, two dollars. 195 Sir Hans Sloan's
Voyage to Madeira, Barbados, Navis, St. Christophers, and Jamaica, with the
Natural History of the Herbs and Trees, Four-Footed Beasts, Fishes, Birds,
Insects, and Reptiles, of Jamaica. Illustrated with the Figures of the Things
described, as large as the Life, on elegant Copper Plates, 2 vols. thirty two
dollars. 196 JONES's Inquiry into the State of Medicine, on the Principles of
Inductive Philosophy, with Practical Cases and Observations, three dollars. 197
Duncan's Letter to Jones, on the Case of Isaacson, half a dol. 198 Jackson on
Sympathy in general, and on Febrile Sympathy, two dollars. 199 Jones's System
of Surgery, from the best Surgical Writers, with Van Swieten on the Cure of
Diseases, two dol. 200 KIRKLAND's Inquiry into the present State of Medical
Surgery, three dollars. 201 Kisses in English Verse, From the Bas^a, of Joannes
Secundus Nicolaius of the Hague, dollar and half. 202 King on Hot and Cold
bathing, two dollars. 203 Kirkpatrick's Sea-Piece, a Narrative, Philosophic and
Descriptive Poem, two dollars. 204 LESLIE's Philosophical Inquiry into the
Cause of Animal Heat, with Incidental Observations, two dol. 205 Lewis's New
Dispensatory, three dollars. 206 Lewis's Experimental History of the Materia
Medica, six dol. 207 Lind on the Scurvy, two dollars. 208 Lind's Health of
Seamen, and on Fevers, and Infect. two d. 209 Lind on Fevers and infection, one
dollar. 210 Laboratory, or School of Arts, by Smith, 2 vols. four dollars. 211
Lemery's Course of Chemistry, two dollars. 212 Linden's three Letters on Mining
and Smelting, two dollars. 213 Le Clerc's Complete Surgeon, 2 vols. three
dollars. 214 Lind on Diseases in Hot Climates, two dollars. 215 Lemery on all
Sorts of Foods, one dollar. 216 Lemery's Collection of Receipes, and
Observations, one dol. 217 De L'Usage des Passions, par Senault, one dollar.
218 Lithologica cum Ob. et Fig. per Groenevelt, one dollar. 219 Lewis's
Edinburgh Dispensatory, with Notes on the Materia Medica, two dollars. 220
Letters to the Ladies on Health, and Beauty, one dollar. 221 Le Grand Cordial,
per Sir Walter Raleigh, one dollar. 222 Langrish's Modern Theory and Practice
of Physic according to the Laws of Nature, and Animal Economy, two dol. 223
Letters on Iceland, containing Observations by Banks, Solander, Lind, and Von
Troil, two dollars. 224 Long Livers: a curious History of such Persons of both
Sexes who have lived several Ages, and grown Young again: With the rare Secret
of Rejuvenescency of Arnol^^s de Villa Nova, and a great many approved and
invaluable Rules to prolong Life: As also, how to prepare the Universal
Medicire. By Eugenius Philalethes, F. R. S. two dollars. 225 MOSS on the
Management of Children, and Lying-In Women, three dollars. 226 Macquer's
Elements of Chemistry, 2 vols. five dollars. 227 Macquer's Elements of
Chemistry, 2 vols in one, four dollars. 228 Milman of the Scurvy, and of Putrid
Fevers, with a view of Putrid Diseases, two dollars. 229 Monro's whole Works,
in Quarto, ten dollars. 230 Monro's Anatomy, with his Comparative Anatomy, two
dollars and a half. 231 Monro's Comparative Anatomy, one dollar. 232 Monro on
the Inoculation of Smallpox, half a dollar 233 Monro and others, on
West-India-Diseases, three dollars. 234 Monro on the Army Diseases, three
dollars. 235 Medical Review of Foreign Works, containing an Account with
Extracts of all the New Books published on Natural History, Botany, Materia
Medica, Chemistry, Anatomy, Surgery, Midwifery, and the Practice of Physic, in
every Part of the Continent of Europe; together with Intelligence of New and
Interesting Discoveries to 1780, four dollars. 236 Mead on the Diseases
mentioned in Scripture, dollar and half. 237 Martyr's Memoirs of the Royal
Academy at Paris, ^ vols. four dollars. 238 Mead's Mechanical Account of
Poisons, one dollar. 239 Mackenzie on the Preservation of Health, two dollars.
240 Monro on the Dropsy, and its different Species, two dollars. 241 Mead on
the Small Pox, and Measles, two dollars. 242 Means of improving Medical
knowledge, by Hillary, two d. 243 Medical and Philosophical Commentaries, by a
Society in Edinburgh, volume the first, two dollars. 244 Mills Essay on the
Weather, with the Shepherd of Banbury's Rules for judging of its Changes,
dollar and a half. 245 Medical Essays, and Observations, by a Society in
Edinburgh, 5 vols. five dollars. 246 Manuel des Dames de Charity, one dollar.
247 Mead's Medical Works: a new Edition, three dollars. 248 Macbride's Essays
on the Scurvy, etc. two dollars. 249 Meteors, a Description of all kinds of
Meteors, and their causes, half a dollar. 250 Morgagni on the Seats and Causes
of Disease Investigated by Anatomy, 3 vols. twenty four dollars. 251 NATURE
Displayed, in English, 2 vols. two dollars. 252 Le Spectacle de la Nature etc.
4 vols. six dollars. 253 Natural History of the Fossils of England, by Woodw.
two d. 254 Natural History of the Passions, one dollar. 255 Natural History of
Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorset and Somersetshire, by Theophilus Botanista, one
dollar. 256 Nollet's Lectures in Experimental Philosophy, dollar and half. 257
Neuman's Chemical Works, Abridged and Methodised, to which are also added,
large Additions. containing the later Discoveries and Improvements made in
Chemistry and the Arts depending thereon, by William Lewis, M.B.F.R.S. 2 vols.
six dollars. 258 Friend's Chemical Lectures: in which almost all the Operations
of Chemistry, are reduced to their true Principles, and the Laws of Nature,
dollar and a half. 259 OBSERVATIONS sur le Grossesse et L'Accouchement des
Femmes, par Mauriceau, 2 Tom. six dollars. 260 Observations sur le Grossesse et
L'Accouchement des Femmes, part Mauriceau, Tome second, three dollars. 261
Observationes Medicinales, per Lommius, one dollar. 262 Observationes Medicae,
per Tulpius, one dollar. 263 De Occultis Naturae Miraculis, per Lemnius, one
dollar. 264 PHARMACOPOEIA Edinburgensis, 1783, two dollars. 265 Physical and
Literary Essays, and Observations, Read before the Philosophical Society in
Edinburgh, 3 vols. nine d. 266 Paxton's Directory for the Study and Practice of
Physic, dollar and a half. 267 Practical Physician for Travelers, by Sea and
Land, d. and h. 268 Pharmacopoeia Bateana, half a dollar. 269 Pharmacopoeia
Extemp^ranea, per Thomas Fuller, half a d. 270 Pa^e de Anatomy de la Tote, et
la Method curative des Plays, et Fractures de la Tete human, one dollar.
271 Pathologiae Cerebri et Nervosi Generis Specimen, one dol. 272 Pirotechnia,
Li Diece Libri Della Pirotechnia, Nelliquali si tratta non solo la diversita
delle minere, ma ancho quanto si ricer ca alla prattica di esse; e di quanto
s'appartiene all'arte della fusione over getto de me talli, e d'ogni altra cosa
a questa somigliante. Composti Perilis. Vannuccio Biringuccio, nobile Senese,
three d. 273 Pharmacopoeia Spagitica, etc. etc. per Poterus, two dollars. 274
Pinaeus de Virginitatis Notis, graviditate, et Partu, one dol. 275 Pointer's
Rational Account of the Weather, to which is added, the Cause of the Aurora
Borealis, dollar and half. 276 Paracelsus on the Sublime Mysteries of Nature,
one dollar. 277 Pharmacopee de Bauderon, avec les remarques, de Francois
Verney, two dollars. 278 Elementa Phisiologiae Corporis Humani, per Haller,
Tomus Quartus, Cerebrum, Nervi, Musculi, three dollars. 279 The Plague, and all
Pestilential Infections, considered, by Brown, Bradley, Mead, Hodges, etc. two
dollars. 280 Polygraphic Dictionary, the whole Body of Arts regularly Digested,
with Cuts, 2 vols. six dollars. 281 ROBINSON on the Spleen, Vapors, etc. two
dollars. 282 Rouppe on the Diseases of Seamen, two dollars. 283 Russell on
Diseases of the Glands, etc. two dollars. 284 Richteri Observe. Chirurgicae, one
dollar. 285 Rymer's Introduction to the Study of Pathology on a Natural Plan:
Containing an Essay on Fevers, etc. dollar and one third. 286 Russel on the Use
of Sea Water in Diseases of the Glands, on Mineral, Pyrmont, Spa and Seltzer
Waters, two d. 287 Rowley's Treatise on the Diseases of the Eyes, two dollars.
288 Randall's Semi-Virgilian Husbandry, deduced from various Experiments, with
the Philosophy of Agriculture, two d. 289 Reid and Mihles's Surgery, two
dollars. 290 Read's Practice of Surgery, two dollars. 291 Rutty's Methodical
Synopsis of Mineral Waters, comprehending the most celebrated Medicinal Waters,
both cold and hot, eight dollars. 292 SMELLIE's Midwifery, with 40 Plates and
Explanations 3 vols. nine dollars. 293 Smellies Midwifery, with 40 Plates and
Explanations, 3 volumes six dollars. 294 Smellie's Set of 40 Plates with
Explanations, and an Abridgment of the Practice of Midwifery, two dollars. 295
Smellie's Thesaurus Medicus; Being a Selection of the best Medical Theseses,
that have been published at Edinburgh, 2 vols. six dollars. 296 Sharpe's
Operations in Surgery, two dollars and a half. 297 Storck on Hemlock, two
dollars. 298 Senac de Febribus two dollars. 299 Shebbeare's Practice of Physic,
founded on principles in Physiology and Pathology, 2 vols four dollars. 300
Sydenham Opera universa Medica, dollar and a half. 301 Shaw's Practice of
Physic, with the Causes and Cures of all the Diseases Incident to the Human
Body, 2 v. four d. 302 Secrets et Remedes eprouver, par L'Abbe Rousseau, one
dol. 303 Strothr's Essay on sickness and Health, two dollars. 304 Secrets del
Reverendo D. Alessio Piemontese one dollar. 305 Shaw's Edinburgh Dispensatory,
two dollars. 306 Salmon's London Dispensatory, two dollars. 307 Dispensatory,
by Bates, Shipton, etc. two dollars, 308 Pharmacopee de Bauderon, one dollar.
309 Ladies Dispensatory, or every Woman her own Physi. two d. 310 Pharmacopoeia
Edinburgensis, one dollar. 311 Phylaxa Medicina, a Cabinet of choice Medicines
for common Use, by Salmon one dollar. 312 Smith's complete Body of Distilling,
two dollars. 313 Smith on the Nature and Circulation of Blood, and the Effects
and Uses of Blood-Letting, one dollar. 314 Doctor Short's Discourse on Tea,
Sugar, Milk, made Wines, Spirits, Punch, Tobacco, etc. two dollars. 315
Salmon's Botanologia, The English Herbal a History of Plants, and Flowers, with
Figures, sixteen dollars. 316 TISSOT's Advice for Health, three dollars 317
Tissot on Fevers, two dollars. 318 Tissot on the Small Pox, Dropsy, and Nervous
Cholic, two d. 319 Tissot on Onanism, with the Method of Cure, two dollars. 320
Turner's Art of Surgery, 2 vols. four dollars. 321 Tournefort's Materia Medica,
a Description of Simple Medicines, their Uses, Virtues, etc. Also the Nature
and Use of Mineral Waters, two dollars. 322 Transnatural Philosophy, or
Metaphysics; Demonstrating the Essences and Operations of all Beings whatever,
which gives the Principles to all other Sciences, by J. S. two d. 323 Turner's
Dissertation on the Venereal Disease, two dollars. 324 Turner's Ancient
Physician's Legacy, two dollars. 325 Turner's Discourse concerning Fevers, two
dollars. 326 Templeman's Remarks on Physics, Anatomy, Surgery, Chemistry,
Botany, and Medicine, two dollars. 327 Town on Diseases in the West Indies,
two dollars. 328 UNCERTAINTY of the Signs of Death, and Danger of precipitate
Interments, with Instances of Persons who have returned to Life in their
Coffins, with Copperplates one dollar. 329 Voyage de L'Isle de Ceylon par Knox,
2 Tom. two dollars. 330 Van Swieten on the Cure of Diseases to which is added
the Nature and Treatment of Gun shot Wounds, by John Rauby Esquire; Surgeon
General to the British Army. Likewise, some brief Directions, to be observed by
Sea Surgeons in Engagements. Also preventions of the Scurvy at Sea, by William
Northcote, Surgeon many Years in the Sea-Service. Also, Dr. Jones's Plaint
concise practical Remarks on the Treatment of Wounds and Fractures; being a
comprehensive System of Surgery, from the best English Surgical Writers, two
dollars. 331 Van Helmont, and Doctor Charleton's Ternary of Paradoxes, the
Magnetic Cure of Wounds, the Nativity of Tartar in Wine, and the Image of God
in Man, two dollars. 332 Ortus Medicinae, per Van Helmont, three dollars. 333
WILSON's Medical Researches into the Nature and Origin of Hysterics in the
Female Constitution, etc. two dollars and a half. 334 Wilson of the Influence
of Climate on Vegetable and Animal Bodies, two dollars. 335 Warner's Full and
Plain Account of the Gout, two dollars. 336 The same Book, on dollar. 337
Withers on the Abuse of Medicine -- Of Blood-Letting -- Emetics and Purgatives
-- Sudorifics -- Stimulants -- Sedatives and Tonics two dollars. 338 Withers on
Chronic Weakness, dollar and a half. 339 Webster's Medicinae Praxeos Systema, 3
vols. five dollars. 340 Whytt on the Dropsy in the Brain, two dollars. 341
Whytt on Nervous Disorders, three dollars. 342 Whytt on Vital Motion, etc. two
dollars. 343 Whytt on the Virtues of Lime Water, dollar and a half. 344 Whytt's
Observations on the Nature, Causes and Cure of Nervous and Hysteric Disorders,
three dollars. 345 Whytt's Medical Works, complete, eight dollars. 346 Warners
Cases in Surgery, with Operations and Remarks, two dollars. 347 Wiseman's
Surgical Treatise on Tumors, Ulcers, King's Evil, Wounds, Fractures, Luca
Venerea etc, 2 vols. four dollars 348 Wonders of Nature and Art, being an
Account of whatever is most Curious and remarkable throughout the World, in
Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, and Buildings, with Cuts, 4 vols. six dollars
349 Waters of Hampstead Wells, Directions for drinking of, one d. 350 Warner's
Description of the Human Eye, dollar and a half. 351 Warner's full and plain
Account of the Gout, one dollar 352 Woodall on the Surgeon's complete chest,
and the contents thereof, four dollars.
New, and Old, Miscellaneous Works, now on Sale at BELL's BOOK-STORE in
Third-Street, Philadelphia. With the Selling PRICE Printed to each Book.
353 ATHENIAN Oracle, being an entire Collection of valuable Questions and
Answers in Arts, Sciences and Entertainment, intermixed with many Cases in
Divinity, History, Philosophy, Mathematics, Love, and other curious Matters;
Likewise, the History of the Athenian Society, an Essay upon Learning, and the
Supplement to the Athenian Oracle, 4 vols. ten dollars. 354 Athenian Sport,
containing, 2000 Paradaxes merrily argued to Amuse, Divert, and Instruct
Mankind, three dollars. 355 Arabian Nights Entertainments consisting, of one
Thousand and one Stories, told by the Sultaness of the Indies, to divert the
Sultan from a Bloody Vow which he had made, to marry a Lady every Day, and have
her cut off next morning to avenge himself for the Disloyalty of his first
Sultaness, 4 vols. four dollars. 356 Adventurer by Hawkesworth, 4 vols. in two,
three dollars. 357 Advice to Ladies, with Fables, one dollar. 368 Adventures of
a Rupee, half a dollar. 369 Adventures of a Rupee, one dollar. 360 Blair's
Sermons, 2 vols. the eighth Edition in two Years, 1783 five dollars. 361
Boyer's French and English Grammar, one dollar. 362 Boyer's French and English,
with the English and French Dictionary, 2 vols. ten dollars. 363 Bailey's
English Dictionary, two dollars and a half. 365 Baron Haller's Letters to his
Daughter, on the Truths of the Christian Religion, one dollar. 366 Cecilia,
Memoirs of an Heiress, by Miss Burney, 5. vols. five dollars. 367 Collection of
the most esteemed Farces, and Entertainment performed on the British Stage, 4
vols. six dollars. 368 Catt's Sermons, 2 vols. four dollars, 1782. 369 The
Critic a Tragedy, Rehearsed A New Work, by Sheridan, Author of the much
celebrated School for Scandal, half a dol. 370 Chambaud on the Art of speaking
French, two dollars. 371 Chambaud's Fables in French, one dollar. 372
Chambaud's Rudiments of the French, one dollar. 373 Chesterfield's
Miscellaneous Works 3 vols. six dollars. 374 Chapone's Letters on the Mind, one
dollar. 375 Chapone's Miscellaneous Pieces, one dollar. 376 Coombe Wood, a New
Novel, 2 vols. two dollars, 377 Culture of the Heart, in Loose Hints upon
Education, by Henry Home Lord Kames, two dollars. 378 Evelina, the History of a
Young Lady's Entrance into the World, by Miss Burney, 3 vols. four dollars. 379
Ferguson's History of the Progress and Termination of the Roman Republic, 3
vols. twenty dollars. 380 Gibbon's on the Fall of the Roman Emp. 6 vols. twelve
dol. 381 Garrick's Dramatic Works, 2 vols. three dollars. 382 Garrick's Life by
Davies, 2 vols. three dollars. 383 History of the War in America, by an
Englishman, three d. 384 History of the War in America, by a Scotsman, two
dollars. 385 History of the War in American, by an American, 2 v. four dol. 386
Hope's Leveller's Cursory Thoughts, two dollars. 387 Junius's Letters, 2 vols.
in one, two dollars and a half. 388 Incas of Peru, by Marmontel, 2 vols. three
dollars. 389 Kinsman of Mahomet in the Seraglios, 2 vols. three dollars. 390
Lessons in Elocution by Scott, one dollar. 391 Moore's Travels complete 4 vols
in two, four dollars. 392 Man in the Moon, by the Man of the People, 2 vols two
dol. 393 Macfarlane Concerning the Poor, three dollars. 394 Mirror, a
Periodical Work, by the Man of Feeling, 3 v. four d. 395 Maclaurin on
Remarkable Criminal Cases, nine dollars. 396 New Travels in America, by Abbe
Robin, two thirds of a d. 397 Paris Depicted, by an English Limner, one dollar.
398 Raynal's Philosophical and Political History of the Settlements and Trade
of the Europeans in the East and West Indies, 6 vols. nine dollars. 399
Stuart's New History of Scotland, 2 vols nine dollars. 400 The Theater of
Education, from the French of the Countess de Genlis, 3 vols. three dollars.
401 Thomson's Tables of Interest, two dollars. 402 Universal Short Hand, by
which any Person, from a few Weeks Practice, may become able to keep Pace with
any Public Speaker, and carry off Verbatim, whatever may be delivered, whether
on Philosophy, Law, Physic or Divinity. two dollars. 403 Watson's History of
Philip the Third, eight dollars. 404 Adventures of the Pupil of Pleasure, 2
vols. two dollars. 405 Voyage fait, par M. de la Condamine, a L'Equateur par
Order du Roi, pour la Mesure de trois premiers degres du Meridien, dans
L'Hemisphere Austral, avec les planches et Figures -- Un Ouvrage excellent, et
tres rare en L'Amerique, 2 Tom. eight dollars. 406 Melmoth on the Sublime of
Scripture, 2 vols. two dollars. 407 Cook's Last Voyage, the Voyage in which he
was killed, 2 vols. two dollars.

