A LETTER FROM PHOCION TO THE CONSIDERATE CITIZENS OF NEW YORK, On the Politics
of the Day.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL LOUDON. M.DCC.LXXXIV.

A LETTER, etc.
WHILE not only every personal artifice is employed by a few heated and
inconsiderate spirits, to practice upon the passions of the people, but the
public papers are made the channel of the most inflammatory and pernicious
doctrines, tending to the subversion of all private security and genuine
liberty; it would be culpable in those who understand and value the true
interests of the community to be silent spectators. It is, however, a common
observation, that men, bent upon mischief, are more active in the pursuit of
their object, than those who aim at doing good. Hence it is in the present
moment, we see the most industrious efforts to violate, the constitution of
this state, to trample upon the rights of the subject, and to chicane or
infringe the most solemn obligations of treaty; while dispassionate and upright
men almost totally neglect the means of counteracting these dangerous attempts.
A sense of duty alone calls forth the observations which will be submitted to
the good sense of the people in this paper, from one who has more inclination
than leisure to serve them; and who has had too deep a share in the common
exertions in this revolution, to be willing to see its fruits blasted by the
violence of rash or unprincipled men, without at least protesting against their
designs.

The persons alluded to, pretend to appeal to the spirit of Whiggism, while
they endeavor to put in motion all the furious and dark passions of the human
mind. The spirit of Whiggism, is generous, humane, beneficent and just. These
men inculcate revenge, cruelty, persecution, and perfidy. The spirit of
Whiggism cherishes legal liberty, holds the rights of every individual sacred,
condemns or punishes no man without regular trial and conviction of some crime
declared by antecedent laws, reprobates equally the punishment of the citizen
by arbitrary acts of legislature, as by the lawless combinations of
unauthorised individuals: -- While these men are advocates for expelling a
large number of their fellow-citizens unheard, untried; or if they cannot
effect this, are for disfranchising them, in the face of the constitution,
without the judgment of their peers, and contrary to the law of the land.

The 13th article of the constitution declares, that no member of this state
shall be disfranchised or defrauded of any of the rights or privileges sacred
to the subjects of this state by the constitution, unless by the law of the
land or the judgment of his peers. If we enquire what is meant by the law of
the land, the best commentators will tell us, that it means due process of law,
that is, by indictment or presentment of good and lawful men, Coke upon Magna
Charta, Chap. 29, Page 50.
and trial and conviction in consequence.

It is true, that in England, on extraordinary occasions, attainders for high
treason, by act of parliament have been practiced, but many of the ablest
advocates for civil liberty have condemned this practice, and it has commonly
been exercised with great caution upon individuals only by name, never against
general descriptions of men. The sense of our constitution on this practice, we
may gather from the 41st article, where all attainders, other than for crimes
committed during the late war, are forbidden.

If there had been no treaty in the way, the legislature might, by name, have
attainted particular persons of high treason for crimes committed during the
war, but independent of the treaty it could not, and cannot, without tyranny,
disfranchise or punish whole classes of citizens by general discriptions,
without trial and conviction of offenses known by laws previously established
declaring the offense and prescribing the penalty.

This is a dictate of natural justice, and a fundamental principle of law and
liberty.

Nothing is more common than for a free people, in times of heat and violence,
to gratify momentary passions, by letting into the government, principles and
precedents which afterward prove fatal to themselves. Of this kind is the
doctrine of disqualification, disfranchisement and banishment by acts of
legislature. The dangerous consequences of this power are manifest. If the
legislature can disfranchise any number of citizens at pleasure by general
descriptions, it may soon confine all the votes to a small number of partisans,
and establish an aristocracy or an oligarchy; if it may banish at discretion
all those whom particular circumstances render obnoxious, without hearing or
trial, no man can be safe, nor know when he may be the innocent victim of a
prevailing faction. The name of liberty applied to such a government would be a
mockery of common sense.

The English Whigs, after the revolution, from an overweening dread of popery
and the Pretender, from triennial, voted the parliament septennial. -- They
have been trying ever since to undo this false step in vain, and are repenting
the effects of their folly in the overgrown power of the new family. Some
imprudent Whigs among us, from resentment to those who have taken the opposite
side, (and many of them from worse motives) would corrupt the principles of our
government, and furnish precedents for future usurpations on the rights of the
community.

Let the people beware of such Counselors. -- However, a few designing men may
rise in consequence, and advance their private interests by such expedients,
the people, at large, are sure to be the losers in the event whenever they
suffer a departure from the rules of general and equal justice, or from the
true principles of universal liberty.

These men, not only overleap the barriers of the constitution without remorse,
but they advise us to become the scorn of nations, by violating the solemn
engagements of the United States. They endeavor to mould the Treaty with
Great Britain, into such form as pleases them, and to make it mean any thing or
nothing as suits their views. -- They tell us, that all the stipulations, with
respect to the Tories, are merely that Congress will recommend, and the States
may comply or not as they please.

But let any man of sense and candor read the Treaty, and it will speak for
itself. The fifth article is indeed recommendatory; but the sixth is as
positive as words can make it. There shall be no future confiscations made, nor
prosecutions commenced against any person or persons, for, or by reason of the
part which he or they may have taken in the present war, and no person shall,
on that account, suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person,
liberty, or property.

As to the restoration of confiscated property which is the subject of the
fifth article, the states may restore or not as they think proper, because
Congress engage only to recommend; but there is not a word about recommendation
in the 6th article.

Quotations are made from the debates in Parliament to prove that the whole is
understood as recommendatory; but the expressions in those quotations, turn
altogether upon those persons who have been actually proscribed and their
property confiscated; they have no relation to those who come under the sixth
article, or who might be the objects of future prosecution or punishment. And
to this it may be added, that it is absurd and inadmissible in fair reasoning,
to combat the plain and authentic language of solemn treaty by loose recitals
of debates in newspapers.

The sound and ingenuous construction of the two articles taken collectively,
is this -- that where the property of any persons, other than those who have
been in arms against the United States, had been actually confiscated and
themselves proscribed, there Congress are to recommend a restoration of
estates, rights and properties; and with respect to those who had been in arms,
they are to recommend permission for them to remain a twelve month in the
country to solicit a like restoration: But with respect to all those who were
not in this situation, and who had not already been the objects of confiscation
and banishment, they were to be absolutely secured from all future injury to
person, liberty or property.

To say that this exemption from positive injury, does not imply a right to
live among us as citizens, is a pitiful sophistry; it is to say that the
banishment of a person from his country, connexions and resources (one of the
greatest punishments that can befall a man) is no punishment at all.

The meaning of the word liberty has been contested. Its true sense must be the
enjoyment of the common privileges of subjects under the same government. There
is no middle line of just construction between this sense and a mere exemption
from personal imprisonment! If the last were adopted, the stipulation would
become nugatory; and by depriving those who are the subjects of it, of the
protection of government, it would amount to a virtual confiscation and
banishment; for they could not have the benefit of the laws against those who
should be aggressors.

Should it be said that they may receive protection without being admitted to a
full enjoyment of the privileges of citizens, this must be either matter of
right under the treaty, or matter of grace in the government. If the latter,
the government may refuse it, and then the objection presents itself, that the
treaty would by this construction be virtually defeated; if matter of right,
then it follows that more is intended by the word liberty, than a mere
exemption from imprisonment, and where shall the line be drawn -- not a
capricious and arbitrary line, but one warranted by rational and legal
construction?

To say that by espousing the cause of Great Britain they became aliens, and
that it will satisfy the treaty to allow them the same protection to which
aliens are entitled -- is to admit that subjects may at pleasure renounce their
allegiance to the state of which they are members, and devote themselves to a
foreign jurisdiction; a principle contrary to law and subversive of government.
But even this will not satisfy the treaty; for aliens cannot hold real property
under our government* and if they are aliens, all their real estates belong to
the public. This will be to all intents and purposes, a confiscation of
property. But this is not all, how does it appear that the persons who are thus
to be stripped of their citizenship, have been guilty of such an adherence to
the enemy, as in legal contemplation amounts to a crime. Their merely remaining
in their possessions under the power of the conqueror does not imply this; but
is executed by the laws and customs of all civilized nations. To adjudge them
culpable, they must be first tried and convicted; and this the treaty forbids.
These are the difficulties involved, by recurring to subtle and evasive instead
of simple and candid construction, which will teach us that the stipulations in
the treaty, amount to an amnesty and act of oblivion.

There is a very simple and conclusive point of view in which this subject may
be placed. No citizen can be deprived of any right which the citizens in
general are entitled to, unless forfeited by some offense. It has been seen
that the regular and constitutional mode of ascertaining whether this
forfeiture has been incurred, is by legal process, trial and conviction. This
ex vi termini, supposes prosecution. Now consistent with the treaty there can
be no future prosecution for any thing done on account of the war. Can we then
do by act of legislature, what the treaty disables us from doing by due course
of law? This would be to imitate the Roman General, who having promised
Antiochus to restore half his vessels, caused them to be sawed in two before
their delivery; or the Plataeae, who having promised the Thebans to restore
their prisoners, had them first put to death and returned them dead.

Such fraudulent subterfuges are justly considered more odious than an open and
avowed violation of treaty.

When these posture-masters in logic are driven from this first ground of the
meaning of the treaty; they are forced to that of attacking the right of
Congress to make such a stipulation, and arraigning the impudence of
Great Britain in attempting to make terms for our own subjects. But here as
every where else, they are only successful in betraying their narrowness and
ignorance.

Does not the act of confederation place the exclusive right of war and peace
in the United States in Congress? Have they not the sole power of making
treaties with foreign nations? Are not these among the first rights of
sovereignty, and does not the delegation of them to the general confederacy, so
far abridge the sovereignty of each particular state? Would not a different
doctrine involve the contradiction of imperium in imperio? What reasonable
limits can be assigned to these prerogatives of the union, other than the
general safety and the fundamentals of the constitution? Can it be said that a
treaty for arresting the future operation of positive acts of legislature, and
which has indeed no other effect than that of a pardon for past offenses
committed against these acts, is an attack upon the fundamentals of the state
constitutions? Can it be denied that the peace which was made, taken
collectively, was manifestly for the general good; that it was even favorable
to the solid interests of this country, beyond the expectation of the most
sanguine? If this cannot be denied; and none can deny it who know either the
value of the objects gained by the treaty, or the necessity these states were
under at the time of making peace? -- It follows that Congress and their
Ministers acted wisely in making the treaty which has been made; and it follows
from this, that these states are bound by it, and ought religiously to observe
it.

The uti possiedetis, each party to hold what it possesses, is the point from
which nations set out in framing a treaty of peace; if one side gives up a part
of its acquisitions, the other side renders an equivalent in some other way.
What is the equivalent given to Great Britain for all the important concessions
she has made. She has rendered the capital of this state and its large
dependencies. She is to surrender our immensely valuable posts on the frontier,
and to yield to us a vast tract of western territory, with one half of the
Lakes, by which we shall command almost the whole furr trade; she renounces to
us her claim to the navigation of the Mississippi, and admits us a share in the
fisheries, even on better terms than we formerly enjoyed it. As she was in
possession by right of war of all these objects, whatever may have been our
original pretensions to them, they are by the laws of nations to be considered
as so much given up on her part: and what do we give in return? We stipulate
that there shall be no future injury to her adherents among us. How
insignificant the equivalent in comparison with the acquisition! A man of sense
would be ashamed to compare them: A man of honesty, not intoxicated with
passion, would blush to lisp a question of the obligation to observe the
stipulation on our part.

If it be said that Great Britain has only restored to us what she had unjustly
taken from us, and that therefore we are not bound to make compensation -- This
admits of several answers -- First, That the fact is not true, for she has
ceded to us a large tract of country to which we had even no plausible claim:
Secondly, That however the principle of the objection might have been proper to
prevent our promising an equivalent, it comes too late after the promise has
been made: Thirdly, That as to the external effects of war, the voluntary law
of nations knows no distinction between the justice or injustice of the
quarrel: but in the treaty of peace puts the contracting parties upon an equal
footing: which is a necessary consequence of the independence of nations* for
as they acknowledge no common judge, if in concluding peace both parties were
not to stand upon the same ground of right, there never could be an adjustment
of differences or an end of war. This is a settled principle.

Let us examine the pretext upon which it is disputed. Congress, say our
political jugglers, have no right to meddle with our internal police. They
would be puzzled to tell what they mean by the expression. The truth is, it has
no definite meaning; for it is impossible for Congress to do a single act which
will not directly or indirectly affect the internal police of every state. When
in order to procure privileges of commerce to the citizens of these states in
foreign countries, they stipulate a reciprocity of privileges here, does not
such an admission of the subjects of foreign countries to certain rights within
these states operate, immediately upon their internal police? And were this not
done, would not the power of making commercial treaties vested in Congress,
become a mere nullity? In short if nothing was to be done by Congress that
would affect our internal police, in the large sense in which it has been
taken, would not all the powers of the confederation be annihilated and the
union dissolved?

But say they again, such a thing was never heard of as an indemnity for
traitorous subjects stipulated in a treaty of peace. History will inform them
that it is a stipulation often made. Two examples shall be cited: The treaty of
Munster which put an end to the differences between Spain and the United
Provinces, after the revolution of those provinces: The treaty concluded in
1738, between the Empire, France, Spain, Poland, and several other powers,
called the Christian peace. The war which preceded this treaty was one of the
most complicated in which Europe had been engaged; the succession to the
Spanish Monarchy, and the right to the throne of Poland had been included in
it, Stanislaus having been obliged to abdicate the crown. Different parts of
the nations concerned had taken opposite sides. Many of the German Princes had
been in arms against the Empire to which they owed obedience: This treaty not
only mutually stipulates indemnity to the subjects of the respective powers,
but even restitution of property and offices. The Emperor, who contracted in
behalf of the Empire, has much less extensive powers as head of the Empire,
than Congress as representative of the United States.

But let it be admitted that Congress had no right to enter into this article
-- Do not equity and prudence strongly urge the several states to comply with
it? We have in part enjoyed the benefit of the treaty; in consequence of which,
we of this state are now in possession of our capital; and this implies an
obligation in conscience, to perform what is to be performed on our part -- But
there is a consideration which will perhaps have more force with men, who seem
to be superior to conscientious obligations; it is that the British are still
in possession of our frontier posts, which they may keep in spite of us; and
that they may essentially exclude us from the fisheries if they are so
disposed. Breach of treaty on our part will be a just ground for breaking it on
theirs. The treaty must stand or fall together. The wilful breach of a single
article annuls the whole Vatel, Book 4, Chapter 4, 47. Grotius, Book 3, Chapter 19, 14.
. Congress are appointed by the constitution to manage our foreign concerns.
The nations with whom they contract are to suppose they understand their own
powers and will not exceed them. If they do it in any instance, and we think it
proper to disavow the act, it will be no apology to those with whom they
contract that they had exceeded their authority. One side cannot be bound
unless the obligation is reciprocal.

Suppose then Great Britain should be induced to refuse a further compliance
with the treaty, in consequence of a breach of it on our part, what situation
should we be in? Can we renew the war to compel a compliance* We know, and all
the world knows, it is out of our power? Will those who have heretofore
assisted us take our part? Their affairs require peace as well as ours, and
they will not think themselves bound to undertake an unjust war to regain to us
rights which we have forfeited by a childish levity and a wanton contempt of
public faith.

We should then have sacrificed important interests to the little vindictive
selfish mean passions of a few. To say nothing of the loss of territory, of the
disadvantage to the whole commerce of the union, by obstructions in the
fisheries; this state would loose an annual profit of more than L. 50,000
Sterling, from the furr trade.

But not to insist on possible inconveniences, there is a certain evil which
attends our intemperance, a loss of character in Europe. Our Ministers write
that our conduct, hitherto, in this respect, has done us infinite injury, and
has exhibited us in the light of a people, destitute of government, on whose
engagements of course no dependence can be placed.

The men who are at the head of the party which contends for disqualification
and expulsion, endeavor to inlist a number of people on their side by holding
out motives of private advantage to them. To the trader they say, you will be
overborne by the large capitals of the Tory merchants; to the Mechanic, your
business will be less profitable, your wages less considerable by the
interference of Tory workmen. A man, the least acquainted with trade, will
indeed laugh at such suggestion. He will know, that every merchant or trader
has an interest in the aggregate mass of capital or stock in trade; that what
he himself wants in capital, he must make up in credit; that unless there are
others who possess large capitals, this credit cannot be had, and that in the
diminution of the general capital of the State, commerce will decline, and his
own prospects of profit will diminish.

These arguments, if they were understood, would be conclusive with the
Mechanic: -- There is already employment enough for all the workmen in the
city, and wages are sufficiently high. If you could raise them by expelling
those who have remained in the city, and whom you consider as rivals, the
extravagant price of wages would have two effects; it would draw persons to
settle here, not only from other parts of this State, but from the neighboring
States: -- Those classes of the community who are to employ you, will make a
great many shifts rather than pay the exorbitant prices you demand; a man will
wear his old clothes so much longer before he gets a new suit; he will buy
imported shoes cheap rather than those made here at so dear a rate: -- The
owner of a house will defer the repairs as long as possible; he will only have
those which are absolutely necessary made; he will not attend to elegant
improvement, and the like will happen in other branches. These circumstances
will give you less employment, and in a very little time bring back your wages
to what they now are, and even sink them lower. But this is not all: You are
not required merely to expel your rival mechanics, but you must drive away the
rich merchants and others who are called Tories, to please your leaders, who
will persuade you they are dangerous to your liberty (though in fact they only
mean their own consequence.) By this conduct you will drive away the principal
part of those who have the means of becoming large undertakers. The Carpenters
and Masons in particular, must be content with patching up the houses already
built and building little huts upon the vacant lots, instead of having
profitable and durable employment in erecting large and elegant edifices.

There is a certain proportion or level in all the departments of industry. It
is folly to think to raise any of them, and keep them long above their natural
height. By attempting to do it the economy of the political machine is
disturbed, and till things return to their proper state, the society at large
suffers. The only object of concern with an industrious artisan, as such, ought
to be, that that there may be plenty of money in the community, and a brisk
commerce to give it circulation and activity. All attempts at profit, through
the medium of monopoly or violence, will be as fallacious as they are culpable.

But say some, to suffer these wealthy disaffected men to remain among us, will
be dangerous to our liberties; enemies to our government, they will be always
endeavoring to undermine it and bring us back to the subjection of
Great Britain. The safest reliance of every government is on men's interests.
This is a principle of human nature, on which all political speculation to be
just, must be founded. Make it the interest of those citizens, who, during the
revolution, were opposed to us to be friends to the new government, by
affording them not only protection, but a participation in its privileges, and
they will undoubtedly become its friends. The apprehension of returning under
the dominion of Great Britain is chimerical; if there is any way to bring it
about, the measures of those men, against whose conduct these remarks are
aimed, lead directly to it. A disorderly or a violent government may disgust
the best citizens, and make the body of the people tired of their Independence.

The embarrassed and exhausted state of Great Britain, and the political system
of Europe, render it impossible for her ever to reacquire the dominion of this
country -- Her former partisans must be convinced of this, and abandon her
cause as desperate. They will never be mad enough to risk their fortunes a
second time in the hopeless attempt of restoring her authority; nor will they
have any inclination to do it, if they are allowed to be happy under the
government of the society in which they live. To make it practicable, if they
should be so disposed, they must not only get the government of this state, but
of the United States into their hands. To suppose this possible, is to suppose
that a majority of the numbers, property and abilities of the United States has
been and is in opposition to the revolution. Its success is a clear proof that
this has not been the case; and every man of information among us, knows the
contrary. -- The supposition itself would show the absurdity, of expelling a
small number from the city, which would constitute so insignificant a
proportion of the whole, as without diminishing their influence, would only
increase their disposition to do mischief. The policy in this case would be
evident, of appealing to their interests rather than to their fears.

Nothing can be more ridiculous than the idea of expelling a few from this city
and neighborhood, while there are numbers in different parts of this and other
states, who must necessarily partake in our governments, and who can never
expect to be the objects of animadversion or exclusion. It is confirming many
in their enmity and prejudices against the state, to indulge our enmity and
prejudices against a few.

The idea of suffering the Tories to live among us under disqualifications, is
equally mischievous and absurd. It is necessitating a large body of citizens in
the state to continue enemies to the government, ready, at all times, in a
moment of commotion, to throw their weight into that seal which meditates a
change whether favorable or unfavourable to public liberty.

Viewing the subject in every possible light, there is not a single interest of
the community but dictates moderation rather than violence. That honesty is
still the best policy; that justice and moderation are the surest supports of
every government, are maxims, which however they may be called trite, at all
times true, though too seldom regarded, but rarely neglected with impunity.
Were the people of America, with one voice, to ask, What shall we do to
perpetuate our liberties and secure our happiness? The answer would be, "govern
well" and you have nothing to fear either from internal disaffection or
external hostility. Abuse not the power you possess, and you need never
apprehend its diminution or loss. But if you make a wanton use of it, if you
furnish another example, that despotism may debase the government of the many
as well as the few, you like all others that have acted the same part, will
experience that licentiousness is the forerunner to slavery.

How wise was that policy of Augustus, who after conquering his enemies, when
the papers of Brutus were brought to him, which would have disclosed all his
secret associates, immediately ordered them to be burnt. He would not even know
his enemies, that they might cease to hate when they had nothing to fear.

How laudable was the example of Elizabeth, who when she was transfered from
the prison to the throne, fell upon her knees and thanking Heaven, for the
deliverance it had granted her, from her bloody persecutors; dismissed her
resentment. "This act of pious gratitude says the historian, seems to have been
the last circumstance in which she remembered any past injuries and hardships.
With a prudence and magnanimity truly laudable, she buried all offenses in
oblivion, and received with affability even those, who had acted with the
greatest virulence against her." She did more -- she retained many of the
opposite party in her councils.

The reigns of these two sovereigns, are among the most illustrious in history.
Their moderation gave a stability to their government, which nothing else could
have affected. This was the secret of uniting all parties.

These sentiments are delivered to you in the frankness of conscious integrity,
by one who feels that solicitude for the good of the community which the
zealots, whose opinions he encounters profess, by one who pursues not as they
do, the honor or emoluments of his country, by one who, though he has had, in
the course of the Revolution, a very confidential share in the public councils,
civil and military, and has as often, at least, met danger in the common cause
as any of those who now assume to be the guardians of the public liberty, asks
no other reward of his countrymen, than to be heard without prejudice for their
own interest.

PHOCION.
P. S. While the writer hopes the sentiments of this letter will meet the
approbation of discreet and honest men, he thinks it necessary to apologize for
the hasty and incorrect manner. Perhaps too, expressions of too much asperity
have been employed against those who take the lead in the principles which are
here opposed; and feelings of indignation against the pernicious tendency of
their measures, have not admitted sufficient allowances for for what is, in
some instances, an honest, though mistaken, zeal. Though the writer entertains
the worst opinion of the motives of many of them, he believes there are some
who act from principle.




