REASONS FOR QUITTING THE METHODIST SOCIETY; BEING A DEFENSE OF BARCLAY's
APOLOGY. IN ANSWER TO A PRINTED LETTER TO A PERSON JOINED WITH THE PEOPLE
called QUAKERS. In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

BY JOHN HELTON.

THE THIRD EDITION, CORRECTED.

Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

1 Thessalonians. v. 2. DUBLIN: PRINTED. PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK,
IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. MDCCLXXXIV.

REASONS FOR QUITTING The Methodist Society, IN ANWER TO A Printed Letter, etc.
MY friend's letter needs no apology. And as it is an apostolic injunction, Be
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you, 1 Pet. iii. 15.
I wish to do it, with meekness and fear.

It is asked, What are your reasons for quitting the Methodist connection? As I
have been repeatedly called upon by a number of persons in different parts of
the kingdom, it seems necessary to give one general answer to these questions,
which I hope may not only prove acceptable, but also beneficial to my friends.
My principal inducement therefore, in the publication of this letter, and my
apology for troubling the public with it, are, that I think I owe it as a duty
to my friends to myself, and above all, that truth requires it.


And, Have you read a letter to a person joined with the people called Quakers?

To the first question, I reply, I had many reasons, which will sufficiently
appear in my answer to the second query: And therefore, as I intend no
reflection on a religious Society, many of whom I much esteem, I shall only
observe in general on this head, that having about a year since met with
Barclay's Apology, I was fully convinced, that the principles, worship and
discipline of the people called Quakers, The purity and Gospel simplicity of
their principles, worship and discipline, I found my heart united to, before I
was acquainted with any of that religious society; and concluded, that if they,
as a people, walked agreeably thereto, they were burning and shining lights.
were more consonant to scripture, reason, and to my own feelings, than those
of the Society to which I was united. Indeed, I then saw the cause of the many
painful feelings, with which I had been for years exercised, as many of my
sentiments coincided with theirs, though I knew it not, being carried away with
the vulgar opinion of the erroneousness of their principles, etc. And as I
believe, this is the state of many well-disposed minds; I wish that people of
all denominations would not take things upon trust, or on the authority of any
man, or men; but simply turn their minds to the Divine Teacher, in their own
breast, even to the Lord Jesus, who is the Life and Light of Men, as well as
constantly search the Scriptures; for I am persuaded, that numbers so implicity
believe all they hear, that it may be said they have no creed of their own,

To the second question, I answer, I have repeatedly, and carefully perused
that letter, and shall give my friend a few free remarks thereon.

But it may be necessary to premise, that on the first superficial view, it
struck me as something plausible; and I believe it has had the same effect on a
certain class of readers, who either cannot, or will not look beyond the
surface of things. This may account for its being deemed unanswerable. But
looking into it a second and third time, it became less and less formidable;
for as I more attentively considered the objections, and discovered the fallacy
of the arguments, some difficulties, which rested on my mind, were removed: On
a close inspection, it appeared, that eight out of fifteen of Barclay's
propositions, were granted to be agreeable to scripture; and these eight
propositions, which the objector allows, do not 'differ from Christianity,'
contain the fundamental doctrines of the Gospel. More narrowly looking into
those to which he has objected, I found reason to conclude, that he now sees
things more clearly, and has therefore changed his mind with regard to the
seventh proposition on Justification, and the tenth on Women's preaching. My
reasons, I expect, will be sufficiently clear, when they shall be given in
their proper place.

As to the fifteenth proposition, respecting conformity to the world, he agrees
with Barclay in some things; and how he can prove that his denying flattering
titles to be given to men, makes a difference between Quakerism and
Christianity, is a mystery indeed. However, this I am certain of, that if
Barclay was mistaken in some particulars objected to, his mistakes are
harmless, being on the safe side, and such as do not hinder those who hold
them, according to the objector's own words, from being Real Christians; men
who have the mind that was in Christ. The objector's words are always enclosed
in single inverted commas.


I conclude therefore, that eleven out of the fifteen propositions, have
nothing different from Christianity in them. Let us then calmly consider the
reprobated ones, weighing the arguments which are brought to prove that they
'manifestly differ from Christianity;' and in doing this, let us follow the
objector step by step, entering more minutely into the particulars we have just
glanced over.

The first objection, [P. 4.] is against the latter part of Barclay's second
proposition, in which he treats of immediate revelation. The sentence objected
to is this, Yet these revelations are not to be subjected to the examinations
of the scriptures as a touchstone.

To which the writer of that letter replies Here there is a difference between
Quakerism and Christianity. The Scriptures are the touchstone, whereby
Christians examine all [real or supposed] revelations, In all cases they appeal
to the law, and to the testimony, and try every Spirit thereby.

I answer. Whatever manifest difference between Quakerism and Christianity,
some people may see in Barclay's Apology, it is easy to see, there is a
manifest injury done him, by a mutilated quotation, which quite alters the
sense of that passage, and makes him speak a language, which both he and his
friends disavow.

He is here represented as delivering and consequently the people called
Quakers as holding a tenet, which must fix a stigma on them, as though they
slighted the Scriptures, and refused to have their doctrines and practices
tried by them. I will give Barclay's own words, and then my friend may judge
how fairly he has been quoted, and whether there is just ground to charge him
with under-rating the scriptures. His words are, Yet from hence it will not
follow, That these revelations are to be subjected to the examination, either
of the outward testimony of the Scriptures, or of the natural reason of man, as
to a more noble or certain touchstone.

Was it designed, or only an oversight, to leave out almost half the sentence,
especially the words "more noble or certain?" If it was only an oversight, it
is highly blameable; for the omission alters the sense of the passage. It is
very obvious, Barclay's meaning is, that however excellent the scriptures are,
yet they must be considered as inferior to the Holy Spirit, by which they were
dictated. And he is particularly careful, while he contends for the doctrine of
inspiration, to guard against the abuse of it, by saying, These divine, inward
revelations, neither do, nor even can contradict the outward letter of
scripture, or right and sound reason. And as this sentnece was not only joined
with, but precisely fixes the sense of that objected to, I marvel that it could
be overlooked.

2. I am far from being satisfied with what is brought as a proof of Barclay's
error. The objector says, In all cases they appeal to the law and to the
testimony.

I could not help applying to this way of proving things, what a witty author
says, Clergymen generally set out with begging the question. This is exactly
the case, in taking for granted, that the law and the Testimony always mean the
letter of scripture. No surely; for the scriptures speak of the law written in
the heart, Room. ii. 15.
informing us of its accusing, or else excusing; they very frequently treat of
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans viii. 2.
the word of God and sure testimony, Rev. xix. 10, 13.
testifying of him, that he is the inward life and light of men. John i. 4.
The true light to the poor Gentile world, who are not so highly favored as we
are with the letter of scripture: The true light to the poor Papists, who, by
designing men, are forbid the use of them: And the true light to multitudes,
who through bodily infirmities, etc. are deprived of the outward testimony of
scripture. Yet all these have the Law written in their hearts; Jesus being that
glorious, universal, saving light, which lights every man that comes into
the World. John i. 9.


3. I think it must clearly appear, to every enlightened, unprejudiced mind,
that in this article, R. Barclay is far sounder in the Christian faith, than
the objector. For the latter, in affirming, 'The scriptures 'are the
touchstone, whereby all Christians examine all revelations,' seems to me to
renounce this glorious Gospel promise and privilege, When the Spirit of truth
is come, he will guide you into all truth. John xvi. 13.
That they are a touchstone, is fully subscribed to, but that they are the only
touchstone, is denied, as it derogates from the office of the Holy Spirit,
which is not only given to, but is to abide with the disciples of Christ, to
the end of the world. Matt. xxviii. 20.


4. That 'the Scriptures are' not the touchstone to examine all revelations, I
prove thus.

Holy men of old, who walked with God, Genesis v. 22.
were frequently favored with immediate revelations; yet these men had not the
letter of scripture: And if the scriptures are the touchstone to examine all
(real or supposed) revelations, I should be glad to know, as they were
destitute of this touchstone, how they distinguished the one from the other? I
take it for granted, that they had the same Holy Spirit, which Barclay pleads
for as the peculiar privilege of Christians, it being promised under the Gospel
dispensation, They shall be all taught of God. John vi. 45.


5. That The scriptures are the touchstone to examine all revelations, cannot
be true, for they declare instances, wherein they could be no touchstone at all.

Philip had a revelation to join himself to the Ethiopian, who was reading in
his chariot. Acts viii. 29.


Paul and Timothy had a revelation not to preach the word (at that time) in
Asia, being forbidden of the Holy Ghost. Acts xvi. 6.
They had a second revelation not to go to Bythinia, the spirit not suffering
them. Acts xvi. ^
In short, (to pass by many instances of this kind) they had a third revelation
to go to Macedonia Acts xvi. 10.
But if the scriptures are the touchstone to examine all revelations, what
scripture could they turn to, capable of satisfying them in any of these
particulars?

6. We may bring the matter nearer to ourselves. There is a variety of cases,
which we may be called to act in, respecting which, although we may earnestly
desire to know the will of God, the scriptures may be quite silent. Let me
select a single instance, that of the Ministry. Pray what Scripture can satisfy
a man, "That he is inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost," When any person offers
himself to the Bishop, to be a Minister of the Church of England, he asks him,
Do you Believe that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to this office? He
answers, "I trust I am." Were this really the case with all who are styled
Ministers, we might reasonably expect to see a speedy and happy change take
place amongst men.
to that important office? It will not do to say he has gifts; for I presume,
that many have gifts, [if by gifts we understand man's natural and acquired
abilities,] who are not called to that important work. And the question is not
respecting qualifications, but singly this, whether any scripture can fully
satisfy a man thus exercised, that what he feels in his mind, is a 'real, and
not a supposed revelation?'

There is something that looks like an objection to the third proposition,
which, I confess, gives the objector the appearance of one disposed to find
fault. However, he answers his own objection, when he says, If by these words
be only meant, that the spirit is our first and principal leader. Here is no
difference between Quakerism and Christianity!

I ask how is it possible to understand Barclay in any other sense? And, is it
not surprising that the objector should bring in an if, and seem at a loss for
his meaning, when in the same sentence, he quotes Barclay's words? "The spirit
is our first and principal leader." I wish therefore, that instead of playing
upon words, he had given a necessary caution against a common, but dangerous
error, amongst those called spiritual people, of making the scriptures
supersede the necessity of the holy spirit, which our divine Master promised to
all his followers, when he said, But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. John xiv
^^^.
And which exactly corresponds with what the beloved disciple John testifies to
have been experienced by those, whom he addressed in these ever memorable
words, Ye have an unction from the holy One; and ye need not that any man teach
you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things. 1 John ii. 10.17.
A glorious and comfortable truth! which, when experimentally known, will lead
to the highest estimation of the scriptures, as they not only testify of the
great love of Christ, in what he has done and suffered for sinners, but also as
they give a true testimony of his redeeming power, which these have witnessed
in their own hearts. And without this living knowledge of the heart, however
men may idolize the scripture, it is to them a sealed book, and a dead letter;
which is strikingly set forth in these words, The letter kills, but the
spirit gives life. 2 Cor. iii. 6.


I have dwelt the longer on this subject, on account of its great importance,
and because numbers of professors, are not only ignorant of it as an
experimental truth, but strangers to it even in theory. And I am constrained to
say, I know not any religious society, except the people called Quakers, that
bears a scriptural testimony to the doctrine of immediate divine inspiration.
It is true, the established church daily prays for, and others preach, and talk
much about it; but when they come to the point, some laugh at all who make
pretensions of this kind, and others charge them with manifestly differing from
Christianity.

The third objection is brought against the seventh proposition, which treats
on justification, of which the objector says, Here is a wide difference between
Quakerism and Christianity. This is flat justification by works. And adds, The
ground of this mistake, is the not understanding the meaning of the word
justification.

To which I reply,

1. That Barclay uses the word in a sound, proper sense, for, being made just;
which implies the remission of sins, as well as the renewal of the mind, and as
these cannot be separated in the experience of Christians, they are always
connected in the scriptures. The Apostle Paul, speaking of the wonderful change
wrought on some persons of the most abandoned characters, says, And such were
some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 1. Cor. vi. 11.


And it is worthy to be remarked, that the term justification is most commonly
used for being made just, as in these words, For he that is dead, is freed (Gr.
justified) from sin. Romans vi. 7.
I apprehend the reason why it is so frequently used in this sense in
scripture, as well as by Barclay, is because it is less liable to be abused.

2. The mistaken sense in which some understand the term justification, as
implying an imputation of righteousness, without the implantation thereof,
arises from the absurd idea which men form of the supreme Majesty; gloomy minds
representing to themselves, and setting him forth to others, as an implacable
Being, full of vindictive wrath, even against such as have not only been
convinced of, but earnestly desire to forsake the evil of their ways. So that
for want of just conceptions of the divine Being, and properly adverting to
what the scriptures uniformly declare, God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; John iii. 16.
and not clearly understanding that Christ's coming into the world was not the
cause, but the effect of God's great love to all men, our gracious Creator is
set forth in an unamiable light, stripped of his divine perfections; and on this
false foundation, a superstructure raised, which, I think, is subversive of
holiness, in heart and life.

3. But I must do justice to the objector, by saying, he has publicly
confessed, that he formerly leaned too much to Calvinism, with respect to the
doctrine of justification, and has therefore openly asserted, We are every
moment pleasing or displeasing to God, according to the whole of our inward
tempers, and outward conduct.

If I mistake not, this exactly coincides with Barclay, and is agreeable to
sound doctrine, 2 Timothy iv. 3.
as well as to the divine testimony, which every man has in his own breast.

4. As there is a common, but very unjust charge brought against the people
called Quakers, by some who are ignorant of, as well as by others, who, I fear,
designedly misrepresent their principles, That they deny the fall of man, and
err in the nature and cause of our justification; this seems to be a proper
place to clear up these points, which I shall attempt to do, by making an
extract from Barclay's Apology, hoping it will fully satisfy every unprejudiced
mind, respecting these important subjects.

Treating of justification, he says, [page 202 I earnestly entreat, that all
sensible, well-disposed persons, would carefully read over Barclay's Apology,
for the people called Quakers; and I am persuaded they will not only be highly
entertained, but much profited, by one of the most rational, masterly, as well
as scriptural performances, of any perhaps, on such subjects, in the English
language. It manifests the beautiful uniformity and true gospel simplicity of
the doctrines, worship, and discipline of that people, free from all the carnal
inventions of men; and also contains a full answer to every objection brought
against them. At the same time it may be discovered, that many striking
sentiments, with which some late authors have enriched their works, were
borrowed from the Apology.
]

First, We renounce all natural power and ability, to bring us out of our lost
and fallen condition; and confess, that as of ourselves we are able to do
nothing that is good; so neither can we procure remission of sins, or
justification by any act of our own, so as to merit or draw it as a debt from
God due to us; but we acknowledge all to be of and from his love, which is the
original and fundamental cause of our acceptance.

Secondly, God manifested this love toward us in the sending of his beloved
Son the Lord Jesus Christ into the world, John. iv. 9.
who gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet
smelling savor; Ephesians. v. 2.
and having made peace by the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all
things unto himself; Col. i. 20.
and by the eternal spirit offered himself without spot unto God, Heb. ix. 14.
and suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. 1 Pet.
iii. 18.


Thirdly, For as much as all men have sinned, Romans iii. 23.
therefore all have need of this Savior, to remove the wrath of God from them,
due to their offenses: In this respect he is truly said to have borne in his
own body, the iniquities of us all; Isa. liii. 6.
and therefore is the one Mediator between God and men; 1 ^^m. ii. 5.
so that our former sins stand not in our way, being, by virtue of his most
satisfactory sacrifice, removed and pardoned. Neither do we think that
remission of sins is to be expected, sought, or obtained any other way, or by
any works or sacrifice whatsoever. So then, Christ by his death and sufferings,
when we were enemies, reconciled us to God, Romans v. 10.
God is willing to forgive us our iniquities, and to accept us; as is well
expressed by the Apostle Paul, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Cor. v. 19.


We consider then, our redemption in a twofold respect, both which in their own
nature are perfect, though in their application the one is not, nor can be,
without respect to the other.

The first is the redemption performed by Christ, in his crucified body without
us: the other is the redemption wrought by Christ within us; which no less
properly is accounted redemption than the former. The first then, is that
whereby a man, as he stands in the fall, is put into a capacity of salvation,
and has conveyed unto him a measure of that power, spirit, and grace, that was
in Christ Jesus; which, as the free gift of God, is able to counter-balance,
overcome and root out the evil seed, wherewith we are naturally leavened.

The second is that, whereby we witness his pure and perfect redemption in
ourselves, purifying and redeeming us from the power of corruption, and
bringing us into unity, favor, and friendship with God. By the first of these
two, we that were lost in Adam; plunged into the bitter and corrupt seed,
unable of ourselves to do any good thing, but naturally united to evil, forward
and propense to all iniquity, servants and slaves to the power and spirit of
darkness, are, notwithstanding all this, so far reconciled to God, by the death
of his Son, Romans v. 10.
that we are put into a capacity of salvation, having the glad tidings of the
gospel of peace offered unto us in Christ Jesus.

By the second, we witness this capacity "brought into act, whereby receiving
the light, spirit and grace of Christ revealed in us, we possess a real, inward
redemption from the power and nature of sin; and so come to be truly redeemed,
justified, made righteous, and to a spiritual union with God." Thus he gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity. Tit. ii. 14.
And thus we know him and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his sufferings, being made conformable to his death. Phil. iii. 10.


Hence may clearly appear what a manifest misrepresentation it is, to charge
the people called Quakers with denying the fall of man, and his recovery by
Christ. And they equally injure them, who assert, that they hold 'Justification
by works,' when they ascribe the whole of man's redemption to the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The fourth objection to the tenth proposition, which treats of the ministry
is, that in suffering women to preach, 'There is a manifest difference between
Quakerism and Christianity.' And to support this charge, there are two texts of
scripture produced, which are the only ones that seem to serve the purpose; but
that they are not used in their true signification, I hope fully to
demonstrate. For

1. First, that the silence which the Apostle enjoins, is, not asking questions
in the church, is evident from a great variety of particulars, as well as from
the context. Please to read the chapter, and mark the connection. The Apostle
had been treating of the gift of tongues, and of persons prophesying one after
another. There is reason to conclude, that in these public assemblies, there
were people of different nations, as was the case on the day of Pentecost, and
that one Minister had the gift of one tongue, and a second of another, in the
same diversity, that they had the other miraculous gifts. For, that they all
had not an universal knowledge of all languages, is clear from the Apostle
Paul's words, I speak with tongues more than you all. 1 Cor. xiv. 18
How reasonable then is this conclusion, that there were a few inquisitive
women in the assembly, who, not understanding what the preacher was then
delivering, but prompted by curiosity, [perhaps from a better motive] might
have asked questions, to the interruption of the speaker and auditory?
Therofore the Apostle gives this admonition, Let your women [Gr. wives] keep
silence, and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home,
for it is a shame for them to speak [that is to ask questions] in the church.
verse 34, 35.
The injunction, for wives to ask their husbands at home, clearly shows that
the prohibition was not a general one, and that it must be confined to asking
questions; for what had asking their husbands at home to do with their
preaching? It seems a reflection on an inspired writer, to suppose he wrote so
inconclusively. I think, therefore, that the exposition I have given, is easy
and natural, does no violence to any part of the passage, and prevents one
scripture from militating against another.

2. If this Since the publication of the first edition,
I have seen the judicious J. Locke's paraphrase on the Epistles, and was
pleased to find, that he has given the same exposition on this passage.

In his comment on 1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35. He says, As to your women, let them keep
silence in your assemblies, for it is not permitted them to discourse there,
that does no way suit their state of subjection. But if they have a mind to
have any thing explained to them, that passes in the Church, let them, for
their information, ask their husbands at home; for it is a shame for women to
discourse and debate with men publicly in the Church.

comment be rejected, how shall we reconcile the following scriptures with the
common interpretation of that passage? And it shall come to pass, that I will
pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall
prophesy. Joel ii. 28.
Philip had four daughters who prophesied. Acts xxi. 9
The Apostle Paul respectfully mentions several women who labored with him in
the Gospel; Phil. iv. 3.
and one he expressly styles a minister of a particular church: I commend unto
you, Phebe our sister, a servant [Gr. Minister] of the church of Cenchrea. Romans
xvi. 1.
Nay, if he forbids women to preach, how shall we reconcile the Apostle with
himself? For he gives as particular directions, respecting the manner of
women's prophesying, as he does of the men's. Every man praying or prophesying,
having his head covered, dishonoreth his head. But every woman that prays, or
prophesyeth with her head uncovered, dishonoreth her head. 1 Cor. xi. 4, 5.
I would ask, why such particular directions about the mode of women's
prophesying, if it be unlawful for them to speak in the church?

3. To these striking, and I think unanswerable scriptures, the objector only
proposes a very harmless question. 'But how do you prove, that prophesying in
any of these places means preaching?'

I answer, This is an easy way of getting free from difficulties; for, if I
mistake not, the proof lay at his own door; and before he drew the hasty
conclusion, Here is a manifest difference between Quakerism and Christianity,
he should have proved that prophesying in any of these places does not mean
preaching.

4. But as the whole is rested on this single point, I shall attempt to prove,
that prophesying generally means preaching, and that in those places we are
more particularly concerned in, it has no other signification.

And, First, The apostle has joined praying and prophesying together; and as
praying in public assemblies, (for of such he was treating) is universally
allowed to be a part, and indeed a very principal part of the ministerial
office; and women did exercise this part of the ministerial function, in being
the mouth of the people to God; we have here, at least, a presumptive proof,
that prophesying means preaching; and, I think, a demonstration, that the
speaking in the church, which the apostle reproves in women, must be wholly
confined to asking questions; otherwise it would be a prohibition against their
praying, as well as preaching. For how could women pray in public, if it were a
shame for them to speak in the Church, in the sense wherein it is generally
understood?

Secondly, The apostle when he uses the word, precisely fixes the meaning
thereof. He that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort. He that prophesies, edifieth the church. 1 Cor. xiv.
3, 4.
For ye may all prophesy, one by one, (that is, all who were qualified for, and
called to the ministry) that all may learn, and all may be comforted. 1 Cor.
xiv. 31.
All may learn from those who prophesied; and women did prophesy; therefore
women were teachers, by whom the church was exhorted, edified and comforted.

In this common acceptance we frequently find the word prophecy used in the
Old and New Testament. Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet; that is shall
speak unto Pharaoh. Exodus vii. 1, 2.
Judas and Silas, being Prophets, exhorted the brethren with many words. Acts.
xv. 32.
Anna the prophetess, coming into the temple, gave thanks unto the Lord, and
spoke of him (Christ) to all them who looked for redemption in Israel. Luke ii.
38.
Zachariah prophesied, saying Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has
visited, and redeemed his people. Luke i. 67.
In all these places, prophesying has no other meaning than preaching; and
among these preachers, we have a female. And that there was nothing of an
extraordinary nature in the prophesying, which the apostle treats of throughout
the whole chapter we have been considering, may be learned from the close of
it; for the church was to judge of what was delivered. Let the prophets speak,
two or three; and let the others judge. 1 Cor. xiv. 29.


Thirdly, Should it be granted, that it does not mean preaching, it makes the
case worse; for then it must have been something greater, as the apostle
informs us: Greater is he that prophesies, than he that speaks with tongues.
1 Cor. xiv. 5.
And he exhorts them, Desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy. 1
Cor. xiv. 1.
Hereby signifying, that prophesying was above all the miraculous gifts, which
abounded in that church. So that there is but this alternative, if they are not
allowed to be ordinary, then we make them extraordinary ministers.

Some persons, when they have been closely pressed, have sought for refuge, by
granting that these women, who prophesied, were called to an extraordinary
work; which, I think, is giving up the whole point at once, as it grants more
than is contended for. And hence we may infer, according to the well
established rule, He that is called to a greater, may be called to an inferior
work.

Besides, should it be granted, that prophesying means foretelling things to
come, an insurmountable difficulty yet remains; for, if it was unlawful for
women, who had that gift, to speak in the church, how were they to communicate
what was revealed to them? If by speaking, what could this be termed, but the
most excellent preaching?

Fourthly, The simple fact seems to be this, that though prophesying sometimes
means predicting, or foretelling things to come, yet in the places which I have
quoted, it only means preaching in the common acceptance of the word; and
whenever it is used in the The much admired M. Henry, in his comment on Acts
ii. 18.
understands it in both these senses, and, I think, he is also full to the
point, respecting the lawfulness of women's preaching.

By the Spirit they shall be enabled to foretell things to come, and to preach
the Gospel, without distinction of sex, not only your sons, but your daughters;
without distinction of age, both your young men, and old men; and without
distinction of outward condition, even the servants and handmaids shall
prophesy.

J. Lock, in his paraphrase on the Chapter we are treating of, gives another
sense in which the word Prophesy is to be understood. When any one (says he)
sung to God, by the immediate motion, and impulse of the Holy Ghost, which was
one of the actions called prophesying, they sung alone. And indeed how could it
be otherwise? For who could join with a person so prophesying in things
dictated to him alone by the Holy Ghost?

Here we see the nature of singing in the primitive Church. former sense, it
always includes preaching, as publishing these predictions to those concerned.
Hence, under the law, such persons were styled Nebiaim, prophets, (from Ba,
which signifies to come, and to go) because of their coming and going between
God and the people. So under the gospel dispensation, they are called Prophets,
(from pro, and phemi, dico, I speak, or utter forth) because Ministers are the
Lord's messengers, to publish his word of reconciliation to the people. He has
committed unto us the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. v. 19.
is the language of an inspired apostle; and therefore he adds, We pray you, in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

The other scripture, I suffer not a woman to teach, or usurp authority over
the man, has no relation to public teaching, but to her private character,
which is very evident from the context. In this sense J. Lock explains it.
Treating of 1 Cor. xi. 34. and 1 Timothy ii. 11. He says, What in the one is
expressed, by keeping silence; and not speaking, but being under obedience, in
the other is called, being in silence with all subjection, not teaching nor
usurping authority over the man. I apply the prohibition of speaking only to
reasoning and purely voluntary discourse, but suppose a liberty left women to
speak, where they had an immediate revelation and impulse from the Spirit of
God.

5. I might have taken a shorter method to convince some persons, that there is
nothing unlawful in women's preaching, by saying, there are several female
teachers in the Methodist society; and hence I concluded, in the beginning of
this letter, that the objector has changed his sentiments in this particular.
If he has not, there seems a manifest inconsistency in his suffering women to
preach.

The eleventh proposition treats of religious Worship, of which Barclay says,
All true worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate moving of his
own Spirit, and all worship, which man sets about in his own will, is
will worship.

1. It is well worthy my friend's particular notice, that although the writer of
that letter objects to, yet he grants the whole of this proposition, when,
adopting Barclay's words, he says, 'It is true indeed,' That all true worship
to God is offered in the inward and immediate moving of his own Spirit, and
that we cannot truly worship God, unless his Spirit move or incline our hearts.

If so, the dispute is at an end; as all that Barclay contended for, is granted.

The objector's desinition of inspiration is this. God moves man, whom he has
made a reasonable creature, according to the reason he has given him, He moves
him by his understanding, as well as his affections, by light, as well as by
heat. He moves him to do this or that by conviction, full as often as by
desire. And he does truly move you to preach, when in his light you see light,
clearly satisfying you it is his will.

I reply, Let the Holy Spirit move the heart in what manner he is pleased; for,
I believe, that when the 'affections' are divinely moved, so is the
'understanding;' and when there is divine 'heat,' 'light' and 'conviction,' are
its inseparable attendants. But this moving of the Spirit on the minds of men
must be considered, as something which we have not at our own command, but is
distinct from, and very superior to, the mere exercise of the rational
faculties. This distinction, I think, the objector has not sufficiently
attended to, or he would not have given us, what appears to me, an illustration
of the subject, which explains away the very nature of inspiration. He says,
You are as really moved by the Spirit, when God convinces you, you ought to
feed him that is hungry, as when he gives you ever so strong a desire, impulse,
or inclination.

I answer, If this assertion is confined to the action of feeding the hungry,
or to any other civil or relative duty, it is an undoubted truth. But if it is
intended to illustrate the doctrine of inspiration, I object to it as very
foreign to that subject, as it confounds things of a very dissimilar nature.
The fallacy of this way of reasoning lies, in taking for granted, that they are
similar cases, and consequently, that there is no more need of divine
inspiration, to qualify us to worship the divine Majesty, or preach the Gospel,
than to feed the hungry; the reverse of which appears to be the truth; for I
know it to be my duty at all times to assist the distressed; nor need I wait to
be moved by the Holy Spirit to enable me to perform an action, which is in the
power of bad as well as good men. But the case is widely different with regard
to religious worship, or preaching the Gospel, which require very different
qualifications. The scriptures inform us, that we know not what to pray for as
we ought: Rom viii. 26.
And that the preparation of the heart, in man is from the Lord. Prove. xvi. 1.
Whereas the above illustration, as well as the practice of the objector, seem
to inculcate this doctrine, That without immediate divine inspiration, we are
as well qualified at any time to pray or preach, as to feed the hungry. To this
kind of inspiration, I apprehend, there is not any infidel, who can have the
least objection.

But how does this agree with his assertion, God truly does move you to preach,
when in his light you see light, clearly satisfying you it is his will? Has
Barclay said any thing stronger on the subject? The question therefore is,
should any, stand up to preach, without this clear satisfying light? Several
persons have frankly acknowledged to me, that they have attempted to preach,
when not only this clear light has been absent; but when they have had a clear
sense of being disqualified for the work; and have bewailed the necessity they
were under, of acting contrary to their own judgment. And this, I believe, (for
I speak from experience) must frequently be the case with well-meaning men, who
sit or unfit, are in the practice of preaching at certain stated times. I fear
there are others, who are strangers to, feel no want of, and therefore do not
wait for the divine aid, to qualify them for this great work. To such persons
the words of our Lord, on a similar occasion, are quite pertinent, My time is
not yet come: but your time is always ready. John vii. 6.


Again: If that only is true worship, which is offered to God, when his Spirit
moves and inclines our hearts, it naturally follows, that all other worship,
which is performed when the heart is not thus moved and inclined, must be false
worship. It is therefore our indispensable duty, to wait till his Spirit move
and incline our hearts, without which we shall fall under the charge, This
people draws nigh to me with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me. Mat. xv. 8.
Therefore it is that we have so many solemn cautions against inconsiderately
rushing into the presence of the Lord. Keep thy foot, says Solomon, when thou
go to the house of God. Eccles. v. i.
That is, let thy mind be deeply and awfully sensible of the perfections of the
supreme Majesty, in whose presence angels veil their faces, and in silent
adoration bow before him. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart
be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and thou upon
earth: therefore let thy words be few. ver. 2.
What a check, and just reproof is this to the forwardness of the creature,
who, without waiting for divine aid, which qualifies for worshipping the Lord
in the beauty of holiness, 1. Chron. xvi. 29.
presumes like Nadab and Abihu, to offer strange fire before the Lord! Lev. x.
i.


Hence we see the duty and reasonableness of silent waiting on the Lord, as the
preparation of the heart is from him, Prove. xvi. i.
without which we shall incur the censure of offering unto God the sacrifice of
fools. Eccles v. i.
This is strongly enforced in the following words: We know not what to pray for
as we ought; but the Spirit itself makes intercession for us with groanings
which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the heart, knows what is the
mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the saints according to
the will of God. Romans viii. 26.27.


2. But of this silent waiting the writer of that letter asserts, In this there
is a manifest difference between Quakerism and Christianity. This is
will worship, if there be any such thing under heaven. For there is neither
command nor example for it in scripture.

I answer, This is merely begging the question. For, if there is such a
manifest difference between Quakerism and Christianity, in this particular,
then some scripture condemns it, which scripture should have been produced. But
should it be granted (which I must deny) that there is neither command nor
example for it in scripture; yet unhappily this proves too much, and may be
retorted with greater success, that there is neither command nor example,'
under the Gospel Dispensation, for liturgies, singing men, organs, and all
those superfluous ornaments, which have been borrowed from the Church of Rome,
and are diametrically opposite to the simplicity of the gospel, being the
inventions of men, and introduced into the Church in the times of apostasy, to
supply the want of the divine presence. We may therefore safely conclude, This
is will worship, if there be any such thing under heaven; for there is neither
command nor example for it in scripture; nor did it take place in any Christian
assembly, till the inward glory had, in some degree departed from it. 1 Samuel
iv. 21.


3. All the objections, that are brought against this silent waiting on the
Lord, arise from not rightly considering the true nature of religious worship;
which may be justly defined, a simple act of the mind; and all external acts,
are at best, only so many outward expressions thereof.

If this be granted, which, I think, is self-evident, it will follow, that as
there may be external acts of devotion, which do not arise from the internal
actings of the quickened foul, so, on the contrary, the mind may be reverently
exercised in divine worship, when there are not any verbal expressions. Thus
our blessed Master defines the nature of all true worship: God is a spirit; and
they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. John iv. 24.
It therefore highly concerns all, who desire to worship the divine Being
acceptably, to beware of sparks of their own kindling, Isa. 1. xi.
and of the too common, but fatal deception, in supposing divine worship to
consist in mere outward acts, while the heart remains insensible of these
divine feelings, contrition for sin, poverty of spirit, and filial gratitude to
the Father of mercies. If we are destitute of these dispositions, however
specious our performances may appear, and however frequent we may be in the use
of them, we shall only resemble the carnal Jews, who fancied, that religion
consisted in the splendour of their temple, and outward acts of devotion, while
they neglected to cultivate that rectitude of mind, which renders our offerings
acceptable in the sight of the divine Being.

4. From what has been said, I think it is evident, that the necessity of
silent waiting upon the Lord has its foundation in the nature and fitness of
things. For, as it is the Holy Spirit which helps our infirmities; and we know
not what to pray for as we ought, Romans viii. 26.
till we are thus assisted; it follows, that we cannot truly worship God,
unless his Spirit move and incline our hearts; a silent waiting therefore, for
the moving of the Holy Spirit is not only reasonable, but our indispensable
duty; and the not waiting for this divine assistance, before we begin, any act
of religious worship, is no less absurd, than it would have been for a diseased
person, at the pool of Bethesda, to have stepped into the water before the
angel came down to trouble it. John v. 4.
So that were the scriptures perfectly silent on this head, the nature of the
duty fully evinces its expediency. And I may safely add, that all those, who
are unacquainted with that reverential awe, which expresses itself in the
silent breathings of the soul, in humble gratitude, to the Author of our being;
and is what the scripture emphatically styles, pouring out the soul before the
Lord, 1 Samuel i. 15.
are but outward-court worshippers, who have not yet entered into the holy of
holies.

I confess, that to natural, and I fear, to some who are called spiritual men,
it appears the foolishness of folly, to see a congregation waiting upon God in
silence; and therefore they are ready to condemn, and speak evil of that which
they do not understand; so true is the declaration of an inspired writer, The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned 1 Cor. ii. 14.
Whereas to the englightened mind, it appears not only scriptural, but highly
rational, and is at once an acknowledgment of all the divine perfections; the
omniscience, omnipresence, almighty power, and boundless goodness of our
gracious Creator and Benefactor; as well as of our entire dependence on, and
expectation of receiving spiritual good, immediately from him. And why should
it be thought incredible, that, that infinitely exalted, and happy Spirit,
whose offspring we are; and in whom we live, and move, and have our being, Acts
xvii. 28.
should manifest his divine power and presence to the waiting mind, without the
medium of an outward instrument! We must assent to this, or deny the
scriptures, which abundantly declare it; the experience of Christians who bear
testimony to it; as well as derogate from the infinite perfections of the
Almighty Creator. Let us not then, imitate the Israelites, who said to Moses,
Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak to us, lest we die.
Exodus xx. 19.
Rather may it be the language of our hearts, Let all creatures in heaven and
earth keep silence, that that still small voice, 1 Kings xix. 12.
which proclaims, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth Exodus xxxiv. 6.
may be heard and known, as it were, in the very center of the soul. Here is
the Lord's holy mountain, where he makes unto his redeemed people a feast of
fat things, a feast of wines well refined on the lees; that is, pure, spiritual
enjoyments, free from creaturely mixtures; and where he destroys the covering
and veil that are spread over all nations. Isa. xxv. 6,7.


4. All that the objector has urged, respecting the lawfulness of appointing
times and places for public worship, falls to the ground, and only proves that
he has mistaken Barclay's meaning in these particulars; for the uniform
practice of the people called Quakers, from the beginning, has fully
testified, that they consider it as a duty to appoint times and places for
their religious assemblies.

Many persons also greatly misapprehend Barclay, in supposing, that he pleads
for entirely silent meetings, when he only pleads for a retired waiting for the
divine aid, which alone qualifies to pray or preach.

5. Let us now more minutely consider preaching, as it cannot properly be
styled worship; and yet so ignorant are the generality of mankind, that it is
looked upon as almost the whole of religious worship: And at the same time so
vitiated is the taste of many professors, that they cannot distinguish the
chaff from the wheat; Jer, xxiii. 28.
nor can they relish any other kind of preaching, than that which has a
tendency rather to amuse, than profit the hearers.

But in order to understand the true ground of the ministry, let us look back
and consider, on what foundation the first ministers stood. The scriptures are
abundantly clear on this head. They inform us that holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Pet. i. 21.
As the Spirit gave them utterance. Acts ii. 4.
Of the ability which God gives, 1 Pet. iv. 11.
they Prophesied one by one, being so attentive to their gift, that if any
thing was revealed to another sitting by, he that was speaking held his peace,
the spirits of the prophets being subject to the prophets. 1 Cor. xiv. 30.32.


From these passages of scripture we may infer the following particulars.

First, That their discourses were not premeditated; but they delivered to the
people what was immediately given them from the Lord; so that in truth, they
could say, Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ:
And the things which we declare unto you, we have heard, we have seen with our
eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life, John i. ver. 1.3.
even that living word manifested in the heart, which David compares to fire;
for, says he, While I was musing the fire burned, then spoke I with my tongue.
Psalm. xxxix. 3.


Secondly, As they prophesied one by one, there must have been some time of
silence, to prevent two or three speaking at once.

Thirdly, The present mode of one man's preaching for an hour, without the
Gospel privilege of admitting as many as are moved by the Lord to deliver his
message, was not known among the first ministers.

Fourthly, The practice of the people called Quakers, in the ministration of
the word, corresponds in all these particulars, with the conduct of the
primitive ministers of Christ.

And, if it is not too absurd an idea, let my friend picture to himself, one of
the Apostles writing down his sermon; conning over some old commentator; --
picking out a sentence, here and there; committing them to memory; -- and then
retailing them to his auditory for the word of God. -- But I have done; -- as
the very supposition is so absurd, that to name it, is sufficient! -- For these
ministers were to be so led and influenced by the Holy Spirit, that they were
enjoined, Take no thought, how or what ye shall speak for it shall be given you
in that same hour what ye shall speak. Mat. x. 19.
And as all true ministers stand on the same foundation, having the same
commission, as well as the same gracious promise, Lo, I am with you always to
the end of the world; Matt. xxviii 20.
it follows, that they should live in a state of continual waiting and
dependence on the Lord; speaking from the ability which God gives, and not in
the enticing words of man's wisdom. 1. Cor. ii. 4.
Or as the Apostle has it in the same chapter, Which things we speak, not in
the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches. ver.
13.
Assigning this reason, That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God. ver. 5.
Here we have a clear distinction between the true and the false minister. The
former under the divine influence, publishing the counsel of God, in the
demonstration of the spirit; the other only amusing the people with his own
inventions. Bishop Tillotson makes a pertinent remark, which is quite
applicable to the last class. Speculative men wrought a great part of their
divinity out of their own brains, as spiders do cobwebs out of their own
bowels. John x. 12.


Their characters are strikingly contrasted in another instance: The one having
freely received, Mat. x. 8.
according to his Lord's command, and the example of true ministers, freely
communicates to the people. The other whom our Lord calls an hireling,
Tillotson's Works, Vol. I, Sermon. 48, Page 460, 10 edit.
being influenced by lucrative motives, desires to be put into the priest's
office, that he may eat a morsel of bread. 1 Samuel ii. 36.


They are also equally distinguished by their language. That of the true
shepherd is, I have coveted no man's silver or gold or apparel. Yea, you
yourselves know, that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and to
them that were with me. Acts xx. 33,34.
Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught; but we [two Bishops, Paul and
Timothy] wrought with labor and travail night and day; 2 Thessalonians. iii. 8.
because we would not be chargeable unto any of you; we preached unto you the
Gospel of God These. ii. 9.
How widely different is the language of an hireling? Like those of old, who
knew not the Lord, they are ready to say, Give flesh to roast for the Priest.
1. Sam ii. 15.
And should any mildly expostulate with them, that this is contrary to the
injunction of Christ to his ministers, Freely ye have received, freely give:
Math. x. 8.
They are ready to reply, Nay, but thou shall give it me; or if not, I will
take it by force. 1 Samuel ii. 16.


And they are very conspicuous in a fourth particular. Our Lord having drawn a
striking picture of the true and false Teacher; Of the latter he says, They
desire to walk in long robes, Luke xx. 46.
-- They love the uppermost rooms at feasts, -- The chief seats in the
synagogues, -- And to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi, Math. xxiii. 6.
-- That is, they sought to be distinguished by their dress, as well as by
titles; -- Were ambitious of the chief places in church and state, -- To be the
head of a party; -- Head of their brethren; -- Lords over God's heritage; 1
Pet. v. 3.
-- Expecting implicit faith and passive obedience from their hearers; -- This
spirit early crept into the church, and was severely reprehended by our Lord.
When there was a strife among the Disciples, who should be the greatest, he
said to them, The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they
that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you:
but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant. Mat. xx. 25,
etc.
And his particular charge to them was, Be not ye called Rabbi; [Doctor, or
Master] for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren. Neither
be ye called Masters. But he that is greatest among you, shall be your servant.
Math. xxiii. 8, 10, 11.


The twelfth proposition treats of Baptism, on which Barclay observes, "That as
there is but one Lord and one Faith, so there is but one Baptism." Ephesians iv. 5.
And that this one Baptism is not an outward one of water, I think he very
fully demonstrates.

To which proposition, the writer of that letter objects, 'Yea, one outward
Baptism which you deny.' Here therefore is another difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.

I reply, That this way of proving things, by simply affirming, or denying, is
very far from being satisfactory; and yet I cannot find any thing else offered
as a proof here.

But as this is a subject of considerable moment, and several persons, not
rightly understanding it, have run into great errors themselves, and at the
same time have charged the people called Quakers with being no Christians; it
may be necessary to examine this matter to the bottom.

1. Since life and immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy i. 10.
there is an end to all shadows, signs and figures, which were only imposed
'till the time of reformation. Heb. ix. 10.
Thus I understand our blessed Lord, in his conversation with the woman of
Samaria, Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. John iv. 21, 24.
A plain intimation of the entire removal of all types and shadows, they being
no longer necessary, when the substance is come.

2. It is confessed on all hands, that Water Baptism is only a sign, or figure.
And the sign, and thing signified by it, are two distinct things. This is
granted by the objector. For I suppose, when he says, Yea, one outward Baptism,
he would not be understood, that this 'outward Baptism' of water, was the one
Baptism, which the Apostle intended. And yet he must do this, or hold two
Baptisms. R. Barclay makes this one Baptism, an inward Baptism of the Holy
Ghost. The objector allows this inward one, but says, Yea, one outward Baptism,
in direct opposition to the Apostle's assertion, one Baptism.

3. That water baptism was not instituted by Christ, as some ignorantly affirm,
is very clear, when we consider that it was used by John, before our Lord made
his public appearance. Not only so, but it is well known, by those who are
acquainted with the Jewish customs, that it was one of their ceremonies;
therefore calling it, "an institution of Christ," tends to mislead the
ignorant, and is contrary to truth.

4. Taking things for granted, without examination, is the reason that some not
only say, It is an institution, of Christ, but that he commanded it, when he
commissioned his disciples to go and teach all nations, baptizing them in (or,
as some render it, into) the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Math. xxviii. 10.
This, I grant, is Christ's baptism; but look at the text, and see if water is
mentioned in it. That nothing of such an outward, superficial nature could be
intended by our Lord, is evident from the nature of his superior dispensation,
which is all spirit and life. John vi. 63.
Nor is it reasonable to suppose, that our Lord should abolish some shadows and
outward figures, and substitute others. I consider therefore the baptism
enjoined by the Founder of the Christian religion, as contra-distinguished to,
and essentially different from John's. The one outward, of water; the other
inward, by the Holy Ghost. Were it not that the covering or veil is spread over
all nations, Isa xxv. 7.
and that the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
ii. 14.
we should marvel that the words of Christ have been so commonly interpreted in
the most gross and outward sense; especially in this instance, as John the
Baptist in the clearest manner distinguishes between water baptism, and the
baptism of Christ. I indeed, says he, baptize you with water; but he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. Math. iii. 11.
And this exactly agrees with the prophecy of Malachi, who prophesying of the
Lord Jesus, whom he styles, The Messenger of the covenant, he adds, For he is
like a resiner's fire, and like fuller's soap. Mal. iii. 1.2.
So his people know him, when by the brightness of his glorious inward
appearance, he consumes the man of sin; These. ii. 8.
and they feeling the painful operation, pointed out by the expressive emblem
of fire, are ready to ask, in the striking language of the prophet, Who may
abide the day of his coming! And who shall stand when he appears! When he
sits as a refiner, and purifier of silver, Mal. iii. 3.
not to destroy, but to purge them as gold and silver, from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. vii. 1.
for this great and gracious purpose, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering in rightcousness. Mal. iii. 3.
The parallel text to this, and which seems to be a beautiful illustration of
it, we find in the prophecy of Ezekiel, which contains a gracious promise of
that change of heart, which is productive of all holy tempers, as well as
uniformity of conduct. The passage is peculiarly expressive, and may every mind
not only discover its beauty, but earnestly desire to experience the full
import of these words, I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A
new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flest, and I will give you an heart of
flesh. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25.


Here our Lord's words appear in their true, spiritual meaning, Go, teach all
nations. That is, instruct them fully into the great and gracious designs, for
which the Son of God was manifested; and baptize them into the name, that is,
into the nature of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Math.
xxviii. 19.
This interpretation seems to be confirmed by the words of the apostle Peter:
And as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them. Then remembered I the
word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Acts xi. 16.


If it be objected, That to baptize in this sense of the word, is the office of
the Holy Spirit, I answer it is true; but ministers may be said to baptize
instrumentally; and in this sense we must understand the Apostle Paul, when he
says, I have begotten you through the Gospel. 1 Cor. iv. 15.


To call any thing short of this, the baptism of Christ, must prove, and indeed
has proved a fatal mistake to many. For multitudes have erred, by falsely
concluding, that as they had been sprinkled with water in their infancy, or
immerged when adults, they were thereby "regenerate, and grafted into Christ's
Church," In the office of Baptism used by the national church, it is taken for
granted, that all who are sprinkled with water, are thereby "regenerate and
grafted into the church of Christ." This supposition appears to me,
unscriptural, absurd, and highly dangerous.
though remaining entire strangers to the mind which was in Christ! Phil. ii. 5.
To all such the Apostle Peter declares, Not the putting away the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good constience toward God, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. iii. 21.
This is the real inward baptism, which unites to, and makes us mystically one
with Christ; of which the Apostle Paul treats, when he says. Know ye not, that
so many of us as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death. Romans
vi. 3.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Gal.
iii. 27.
By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, and have been made to drink
into one spirit. 1 Cor. xii. 15.
The baptism here treated of, cannot possibly mean an outward one of water, for
many who have been sprinkled with, or immerged in water, have not put on
Christ, nor do they walk as he also walked. 1 John ii. 6.


Again, The same Apostle, writing to Titus, says, Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Titus iii. 5.
And lest any should apprehend this to be some external washing, he guards
against so dangerous a delusion, by adding, which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior, ver. 6.
This is that baptisim, which qualifies for the enjoyment of God here, and for
his glorious kingdom hereafter: And the lip of truth has declared, Except a man
be born again, [which is only another word for baptized] he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. John iii. 3, 5.
For, He that believes and is [thus] baptized shall be saved. Mark xvi. 16.


That I have put no false gloss on these scriptures, is abundantly confirmed by
the words of our Lord to his Disciples, after his resurrection; John truly
baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many
days hence; Acts i. 5.
which promise had its accomplishment, when on the day of Pentecost, the new
gospel dispensation was opened, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.
Acts ii. 4.


5. That water baptism was sometimes used in the Apostles days, is not denied;
and it is equally true, that circumcision, and some other parts of the
ceremonial law, were not only in use, but pleaded for, by weak Christians.
Shall we from hence infer, the necessity of our coming under those shadows,
which are termed, weak and beggarly elements? Gal. iv. 9.
And if the practice of some in the use of water baptism, (for I think it is
proved, that they had no precept for it) is obligatory, what reason can be
assigned, that their practice in circumcision should not be equally binding on
us?

6. Some persons ignorantly plead, "That Christ himself "was baptized," and
therefore enforce it as the duty of all his followers. By the same way of
reasoning, we may conclude, that as Christ was circumcised, so should all
Christians.

7. Others have laid a great stress on the following scripture, supposing that
it proves to demonstration, the necessity of water baptism. Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. John iii.
5.
But, if this must mean elementary water; must it not, when it is said, He
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, mean also elementary fire?
Or rather, are they not both figurative expressions, pointing out to us, the
necessity, and nature of that change of heart, so fully expressed in these
words, Without holiness, no man shall see the Lord? Heb. xii. 14.


8. In the Acts of the Apostles, and in the several letters to the Churches, we
are informed of the very extensive labors of the apostle Paul in planting
churches. But what was his practice, with respect to these gathered churches?
To be sure, if he understood his commission, To baptize all nations, to mean
water baptism, he would have been particularly careful, not even in a single
instance, to transgress his Lord's command. But he not only assures us, that he
was not in the practice of it, but says, I thank God, that I baptized none of
you; but Crispus, and Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. i. 14.
adding, that water baptism was no part of his commission: Christ sent me not
to baptize, [that is, with water] but to preach the gospel. verse 17.
Words cannot more clearly point out in what light the apostle Paul considered
waterbaptism.

9. Besides, it would puzzle the ablest disputant, to prove, that the Apostles
themselves were baptized with water. It is very clear to me, that they were
not. For who could baptize them? The scriptures assure us, that Christ baptized
not: And, if they were not baptized, according to the present mode of
reasoning, they were not Christians; and consequently, incapable of
administering, what they call "An ordinance of Christ."

The thirteenth proposition treats of the communion of the body and blood of
Christ; which Barclay considers as inward and spiritual, of which the breaking
of bread by Christ with his disciples, was a figure.

It will help my friend to answer the objections brought against this
proposition, by considering.

1. That as our blessed Lord was born under the law, he became subject to all
its rites and ceremonies. His last act therefore, was the observance of the
passover; so that this was no new institution, but as one of the Evangelists
informs us, eating the passover with his Disciples; Mark xiv. 14.
which is confirmed by our Lord's words while they partook of the supper: With
desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Luke xxii.
15.
And as it was the common practice for the master of the feast, after supper to
take bread and the cup, and after giving thanks to God, to distribute them
among the guests, our blessed Master conformed thereto, desiring them to do
that act in remembrance of him. Had it been a duty to be continued amongst
Christians, no doubt but our blessed Lord would have been more explicit; for,
from what then passed, as recorded by the Evangelists, we can only consider the
command as confined to that single action performed by the Apostles. And how
can we think otherwise, when we are informed, that Christ is the end of the
law? Romans x. 4.
That is, of the shadowy dispensation. So attached indeed were some, even of
those who embraced the Christian religion, to these outward things, that it
became necessary, sharply to reprehend them. O soolish Galatians, is the
language of Paul to that church, after that ye have known God, how turn ye
again to the weak and beggarly clements, whercunto ye desire again to be in
bondage. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you,
lest I have bestowed on you labor in vain. Gal. iv. 9, 10, 11.
Not only so, but the Apostle saw it needful, to caution such superficial
persons, not to condemn those who were under a superior dispensation. Let no
man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the
new mood, or of the sabbath days; which are a shadow of things to come, but the
body is of Christ. Col. ii. 16, 17.


That many of the Corinthians, who were carnal and walked as men, 1 Cor. iii. 8.
should be fond of these shadows, we need not marvel, and therefore in
condescension to their weakness, and to prevent their relapsing into idolatry,
they were indulged in the use of this figure. Nor was this a singular case, for
in condescension to some, who were weak brethren, Acts xvi. 3.
Paul, had both Timothy and Titus, circumcised, and in several instances, he
himself conformed to the ceremonial law; Ibid. xxi. 23.
assigning reasons for this part of his conduct, in these words: To the Jews I
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews: To the weak I became as weak, that
I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some. 1 Cor. ix. 20, 22.


2. Whether it is the duty of all Christians to be found in the practice of the
supper, may be answered by asking another question.

We are informed, that our divine Master, immediately after the supper, poured
water into a basin, and washed the Disciples feet, and then said unto them, Ye
call me Master and Lord! and ye say well, for so I am. If I then, your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I
have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. John xiii.
13, 14, 15.
Here we have both the precept and example of our Lord, for feet-washing, in a
much more explicit manner laid down, than that of the supper. Is it not then,
the indispensable duty of all Christians to be found in the practi of it?

Those who are very much attached to outward ceremonies, answer this question,
by saying, That it was only a figure, by which our Lord designed to teach his
followers the important doctrines of humility and benevolence toward each
other.

And is there not the same reason for concluding with R. Barclay, that the
breaking of bread by Christ with his disciples, was a figure, by which he
intended to instruct all his followers in the necessity of spiritually eating
his flesh, and drinking his blood? As he has expressly declared, Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. John
vi. 53.
And to guard against a gross, carnal sense, which some nave put on these
words, our Lord added, The flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto
you, they are spirit and they are life. ver. 63.
And which is fully explained, when he says, Behold, I stand at the door, and
knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
sup with him, and he with me. Rev. iii. 20.


Why our Lord's words, in one place must be understood in a figurative sense,
conveying spiritual truths to the mind; and in another place, be interpreted in
the most gross and outward signification, is something mysterious.

3. But it has been pleaded, that the Apostles, who are suppoted to have known
the mind of their Master, were in the practice of water baptism, and the Lord's
supper.

I answer, This seems to be the strongest argument, which can be urged in favor
of them; but that it is not impregnable, will appear by considering the
following particulars: First, Should it be granted that the Apostles were in
the use of them, it will not follow, that it becomes a duty to us; as nothing
can be a duty without a divine precept; For where no law is, there is no
transgression. Romans iv. 15.


Secondly, The Apostle Paul's practice and declaration, I bapized Crispus and
Gaius, and the household of Stephanas; besides, I know not whether I baptized
any other. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel, quite
overturns the argument.

Thirdly, This argument falls under its own weight, as it proves too much: For,
agreeably to this way of proving things, feet-washing; anointing with oil;
lovefeasts; saluting each other with the kiss of charity; having all things in
common; yea, and cirumcision itself; must all he introduced into the church, as
they were in use with the Apostles; which may be seen by consulting the Texts
in the margin. Tim. v. 10. Jam. v. 14. Jude 12.1 Cor. xvi. 20. Acts ii. 44. and
xvi. 3.


The fifteenth proposition which is objected to, as differing from
Christianity, is most of all surprising, because that writer himself, as far as
he went, has borne a true testimony against the the evil of conformity to this
world. But why it should be criminal, to conform to the world in dress, and yet
make a manifest difference between Quakerism and Christianity, because that
people testify, that the world is equally evil in its customs and language,
must appear mysterious to every thinking mind; and the most favorable
construction that can be put upon it, is to say, the writer's own mind has not
attained to the clearness of the perfect day.

2. It appears to me, that he has not done Barclay justice, in fixing only upon
the word, thou; detaching it from the connection in which it stood; and then
holding it up as a scarecrow, as though he made the whole of the plain language
to consist in using thou instead of you. Whereas it is the very smallest and
lowest link in the chain. And I am fully satisfied, that should any one single
out from the objector's writings, some particular sentence, quite detached from
its connection, and then ridicule it, every candid mind would disapprove such
treatment. Let me, out of many, select a single instance, which seems full to
the point. The objector has wrote against conforming to the world in dress, and
pointed out the danger of an imitation in the lowest degree, saying, A ruffle,
from one, may grow to twelve inches. Now should any person single out this
sentence, taking no notice of its connection, but in a kind of triumph,
exclaim, Where do the scriptures forbid wearing a ruffle? The placing religion
in such things as these, is such egregious trisling, as naturally tends to make
religion stink in the nostrils of Insidels and Heathens. Were any person thus
to expose this well-designed caution to contempt, every fair reasoner would
condemn such a procedure.

And yet this very thing the objector is guilty of. Barclay has proved to a
demonstration, the apostasy of the Christian world; and, among other things,
that its present language and customs, are inconsistent with the simplicity,
truth, and purity of the Gospel. The dispute therefore, is not about the single
pronoun thou, whether it is more scriptural and grammatical, to use it to a
single person than you, for this is very obvious to all, who are not blinded by
custom or prejudice. For, after all the torturing of invention, to make you to
a single person proper, it can never be done, as it destroys the just and
necessary distinction between the second person singular and plural.

Besides, you to a single person, was evil in its origin, being invented to
slatter the vanity of one of the Roman Emperors, by addressing him in the
plural number, as if he was more than mortal.

It is also evil in its nature, as it is contrary to truth to use the plural
number to one person.

And, it is a departure from that scriptural language, used by God himself, and
by all holy men; to a false, flattering, heathenish language, invented by vile
sycophants, to please men of corrupt minds.

But as I hinted, although this is a part of the plain language, yet it stands
connected with several things of greater importance. Therefore the objector
should not have passed them, but ought to have proved, if it could be done,
that it is quite consistent with speaking the truth from the heart, Psalms xv.
2.
to call persons Master and Mistress; and to subscribe ourselves, their humble
Servants, when no such relation subsists between us. Not only so, but that it
is lawful, indiscriminately to give to poor, ignorant, sinful mortals, [and
some of them the most worthless characters,] the titles which belong to the
supreme Being: Such as, "reverend;" "most reverend;" "right honorable;
"worshipful;" "majesty;" "your holiness, etc." Whether this is speaking the
truth from the heart! Or, is it not, with a witness, giving flattering titles
to men? Of which, one who lived under a much inferior dispensation, said, I
know not to give flattering titles; in so doing, my Maker would soon take me
away. Job. xxxii. 22.


3. R. Barclay therefore, concludes, It is not lawful for Christians to give,
or receive those titles, your majesty, your lordship, etc. And the reason he
assigns, is, "They alone belong to the supreme Being."

To which it is objected, In this there is a difference between Quakerism and
Christianity. St. Paul gives the title of Most Noble to the Roman Governor.

From this objection we may learn, that it is not only lawful to give these
titles to men, but also, that it is very criminal to withhold them, if it makes
us differ from Christianity. This, I think, is a perfectly new discovery; and
what some would term, the opposite extreme.

That Paul once gave the title of Most Noble to Festus, Barclay grants; but
adds, He would not have called him such, if he had not been truly noble; and
indeed he was, in not giving way to the fury of the Jews against him.

To which the writer of the letter objects, The scripture says quite otherwise.
That he did give way to the fury of the Jews against him, etc.

If seems to me, that the objector is guilty of two mistakes here. First, In
taking for granted, that Festus when he asked Paul, Will thou go to Jerusalem?
was in the secret of the Jews' intention to kill him; which is highly
improbable, as the event fully proves. And the second error, is in asserting,
that the scripture says, That Festus did give way to the fury of the Jews
against him. I think, the scripture says the very reverse. The desire of the
Jews was, that Festus would send Paul to Jerusalem. But Paul's request was to
go to Rome, to be judged by Caesar. Let the scriptures then decide, to whom
Festus gave way. His words are these: Have thou appealed unto Caesar? Unto
Caesar thou shall go. Acts xxv. 12.
We may therefore safely conclude, that Festus acted nobly by Paul, in
withstanding the powerful interest of the high priest, and the chief of the
Jews, who desired favor against him, that he would send him to Jerusalem. ver.
2.


4. But it has been objected by others, that the Apostles themselves frequently
gave the appellation of Sirs to the people. As, Sirs, ye should have hearkened
to me. Sirs, be of good cheer, etc. Acts xxvii. 21, 25.


To which I reply, that it is universally allowed, that the word [ andres,
viri] rendered Sirs, has no such signification, and ought to have been
translated men, as it is literally, Men, ye should have hearkened unto me: Men,
be of good cheer. There is but one exception to this, throughout the Acts of
the Apostles. There we are informed, that the awakened jailor, when in great
distress of mind, addressed the apostles, saying, Sirs, [Gr. Lords] what must I
do to be saved? Acts xvi. 30.
This was his heathenish language, which he had not then parted with, but was
never used by the apostles.

That this corrupt language, and those flattering titles, are not "suitable to
the simplicity and dignity" of a Christian, I can prove from a comment on these
words, The elder unto the elect Lady; 2 John 1.
which, I expect, the objector himself, can have no objection to. On that
scripture the author See Wesley's Notes on the New Testament.
has this remarkable comment.

Kuria (which our translators have rendered Lady) is undoubtedly a proper name
both here, and in verse 5th. For it was not then usual to apply the title Lady
to any but the Roman Empress; neither would such a manner of speaking have been
suitable to the simplicity and dignity of an Apostle.

Here are two things granted: First, a corruption of language; and, secondly,
that this corruption of language is incompatible with the "dignity and
simplicity" of the gospel dispensation.

5. Another branch of the plain language consists in a testimony against that
spirit of apostasy, in departing from the simple, scriptural language, used by
God himself, and by holy men in all ages, in calling months and days by those
proper names, which the Almighty gave them; and adopting in the place thereof,
those heathenish, idolatrous names, which were given them in honor of their
false gods. This will clearly appear, by considering the origin of some of the
months, and of all the days of the week, now commonly used; and which may be
seen by consulting Chambers's and Johnson's dictionaries, from which I have
mostly borrowed the following remarks, respecting the change of the names of
months and days.

1. The first month was by the Romans called January, in honor of Janus, an
idol with two faces, to whom the first day of this month was dedicated by the
heathems, with feastings, dancings, masquerades, etc. In opposition to which,
the Christians observed it as a day of fasting and humiliation.

2. The second month, according to an ancient testimony, was called February,
in honor of the Prince of the infernal regions. Pliny informs us, that the
first twelve days of this month were spent in offering sacrifices to the
infernal powers (devils) to render them propitious to their deceased friends:
And as Pluto (the supposed prince of the infernal regions) was called Februus,
in honor of him, this month was called February.

3. The third month was by Romulus, one of the Roman Emperors, styled March, in
honor of his pretended father Mars, feigned to be the god of war: He therefore
commanded, that religious worship should be paid him.

4. The fourth month is supposed to have been called April, in honor of an
imaginary goddess, known by the name of Venus, who was worshipped by the
Romans, and to whom the most abominable, wanton rites were paid.

. The fifth month is thought by some to have been termed May, in honor of the
senators of Rome. By others it is supposed to have been called so, in honor of
Maia, the mother of Mercury, one of the pretended deities, whom the idolatrous
Romans worshipped.

6. The sixth month was styled June, in honor of an heathenish goddess named
Juno.

7. The seventh month has taken its name July, from Julius Caesar, one of the
Roman Emperors.

8. The eighth month was called August, in honor of one of the Roman Emperors,
who was styled Augustus. The title of Augustus (which signifies venerable,
sacred, magnificent) was first given to Octavius, one of the Emperors, as
expressive of something divine and elevated in him, above the common pitch of
mankind; and from that time all the Roman Emperors were flattered with the
title of Augustus Caesar; that is, Sacred, Magnificent King.

9. September, October, November, and December, are the old numerical Latin
names for these months, which were not changed. But it would be improper to use
them now, though quite proper before the style was altered. The Romans began
their year with the month calied March, and therefore September was the seventh
month of their year, but the ninth of ours.

And as the idolatrous Romans made these changes in the names of several of the
months, in honor of their Emperors, or false gods; so our Pagan ancestors
changed the names of all the days of the week, calling them by the name of the
idol, which they worshipped on that day. Hence

The first day of the week was called by our idolatrous Saxon ancestors,
Sunday, (the day of the Sun) because it was set apart for the worship of the
Sun.

The second day of the week they named Monday, (Moon's-day) as they commonly
worshipped the moon on this day.

The third day of the week was termed Tuesday, in honor of an idol called
Tuisco Mars, who was worcester shipped by that barbarous and idolatrous people on
this day.

The fourth day of the week was styled Wednesday, and dedicated to one of their
idols called Woden, whom they worshipped on this day.

The fifth day of the week they named Thursday, in honor of one of their idols
called Thor, whom they worshipped on this day.

The sixth day of the week they styled Friday; and this day was dedicated to,
and called after one of their idols, named Freya.

The seventh day of the week they styled Saturday, in honor of the planet
Saturn, the supposed father of the heathen gods, to whom idolatrous worship was
paid on this day.

Whether it be agreeable to the purity of the Christian religion, to retain the
names of these idols, and have months and days called after them, I leave my
friend to judge; reminding him, that God's people of old were enjoined, (when
they took possession of the land of Canaan, from whence the inhabitants were
driven, on account of their idolatry) Make no mention of the names of other
Gods, neither let it be heard out of your mouth. Exodus xxiii. 13.
For I will take away the names of Baalim (Heb. lords) out of his mouth. Hosea
ii. 17.
And I will cut off the names of the idols of out the land, and they shall no
more be remembered. Zech xiii. 2.
Then will I turn to the people a pure language. Zeph. iii. 9.


6. R. Barclay says, It is not lawful for Christians to kneel, or prostrate
themselves to any man: and the reason he assigns is, that these are the alone
outward ward expressions of our adoration toward God.

To which it is objected, If this is not lawful, then some law of God forbids
it. Can you show me that law?

I answer, That these are the alone outward expressions of our adoration
toward God, is a striking reason why it should not be done, if the Almighty
had not expressly forbidden the bowing down to any thing in heaven or earth. It
is also condemned by the apostle Peter, who, when Cornelius bowed down to him,
said, Stand up; I also am a man. Acts x. 26.
And the angel, before whom John fell down, said, See thou do it not, for I am
thy fellow servants. Rev. xxii. 9.


7. They nearly agree with regard to plainness of dress; but there is a
reflection on the People called Quakers, as though they placed it only in
color and shape.

With regard to color, it is very obvious, that they lay no stress upon it;
and as to shape, they only condemn the continually changing with every new,
useless, expensive fashion, and therefore they more nearly keep to the
primitive dress of their forefathers, which was not peculiar to them, but the
way the nation in general dressed at that time.

With respect to the quality and price of Clothes, it must be confessed, that
many of that, as well as of every other religious society, have widely deviated
from the Gospel precepts, which enjoins professors of godliness, to adorn
themselves in modest apparel; not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array. 1 Timothy ii. 9.
All which, as they prevent our attainment of, are, in the sacred records,
opposed to, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of
God of great price. 1 Pet. iii. 4.
And therefore it is, that the same inspired Penman, warns us against the fatal
consequences of imitating the corrupt customs, maxims, and fashions of the
world; as such an imitation would infallibly deprive us of the greatest,
spiritual blessings. Hence, the divine admonition, Be not conformed to this
world; but be ye transformed by the rencwing of your mind, that ye may prove
what is that good, and acceptable and perfect will of God. Romans xii. 2.


It is indeed a painful reflection, that several, who are called Quakers, have
so far departed from the purity and simplicity of the gospel, as well as from
the example of their worthy ancestors; regardless of the repeated admonitions
of those, who labor among, and are over them in the Lord; 1 These. v. 12.
yet every candid person must acknowledge, that in modesty of apparel, and
freedom from superfluous ornaments, those of that society, who are consistent
with their principles, are examples worthy of imitation. But is it not a
contradiction in terms, for a person gravely to exhort his audience not to be
conformed to this world, Romans xii. 2.
and to caution them against superfluity of dress, when at the same time he
himself, is clothed from head to foot in a needless, expensive garment, which
our Lord condemned in the Jewish teachers, and cautioned his disciples against
an imitation of them? Beware, says Christ, of the seribes, who love to go in
long clothing, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi. Mark xii. 38. and Math.
xxiii. 7.


8. Barclay says, It is not lawful for Christians to swear, as our blessed Lord
has commanded, Swear not at all. Ibid. v. 34.
And the apostle James says, Above all things, my brethren, swear not. James v.
12.


To which it is objected, Christ himself answered upon oath before a
magistrate. Yea, he would not answer 'till he was put to his oath.

I reply, Christ did not swear, but simply answered, Thou have said. Math.
xxvi. 64.
And because the high priest adjured him by the living God, to make this an act
of Christ's, and so countenance that which he absolutely forbids, is a strange
mode of wresting the scriptures. What were our Lord's reasons for not
answering, does not become us to say, as the scriptures are silent on this
head, but to suppose, that he would not answer till he was put to his oath, is
indeed a most astonishing supposition! And I appeal to my friend, whether it is
not more worthy of the Son of God, to suppose that he then answered, not to
encourage, but to discountenance swearing. For its language seems to be, Stop,
presumptuous man! No more profane the sacred name! Thou have said. That is, I
am the Son of God.

Besides, oaths are not only unlawful, as the great Master has enjoined his
servants, Swear not at all; but they are pernicious to civil society; so much
false swearing as we have in the land, having a direct tendency to harden men's
hearts, and so prepare them for every act of wickedness. For it is a melancholy
truth, that what on account of the strict nature of oaths, their frequent
repetition, and the shameful, yea, shocking manner of administering them, (few
knowing what they swear) there are hardly any offices a man can enter upon, but
he has this alternative, either to be perjured, or else ruined by a faithful
discharge of his office.

As for Custom-house oaths, little or no regard is paid to them, nor indeed is
it hardly possible for a Master of a Ship, to invoice, or clear out his vessel,
without being guilty every time, of the heinous crime of perjury.

How far oaths of Allegiance to Kings are binding, the history of our own
nation, furnishes us with awful instances. Here we are informed, of all ranks
of men, now swearing Fidelity to the prince, and shortly after dethroning him.
We may therefore safely conclude, Because of swearing, the land mourns. Jer.
xxiii. 10.


That swearing was looked upon by the primitive Christians as unlawful, we have
several clear and undoubted testimonies handed down to us; all agreeing, that
they considered swearing as forbidden by Christ. Therefore when an oath was
tendered them, the general answer was, "I cannot swear: I am a Christian."

9. R. Barclay has joined swearing and fighting together, both being prohibited
by our Lord, and contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel.

The writer of that letter says, Whatever becomes of the latter part of this
proposition, (fighting) the former is no part of Christianity.

Whether this was intended as a tacit acknowledgment, that war is unlawful; or
whether he was then sensible of the great impropriety, for one professing to be
a minister of Christ, to countenance that murderous Spirit which is gone forth
into all Christendom, cannot be determined. He has since in the strongest terms
testified against war; which testimony,
I wish to preserve, that it may be a standing witness, not only against war,
but against those tracts which he has lately published, that countenances what
he declares, to be a reproach to all reason and humanity.

The passage I refer to, is as follows, But there is a still greater and more
undeniable proof, that the very foundations of all things, civil and religious,
are utterly out of course, in the christian, as well as the heathen world.
There is a still more horrid reproach to the Christian name, yea, to the name
of man, to all reason and humanity. There is war is the world! War between men!
War between Christian! I mean between those that bear the name of Christ and
profess to walk as he also walked. Now who can reconcile war, I will not say to
religion, but to any degree of common sense?

But as wars have many advocates, who not only speak for, but also take an
active part in them, let us consider what can be said in justification of their
conduct.

As the practice is not only highly irrational, but quite contrary to the
peaceable and loving spirit, which the Gospel of Christ recommends, we must not
expect that it gives any countenance to it; and yet the abettors of war think,
they can prove its lawfulness, from John the Baptist's answer to the soldiers.
Do violence to no man, and be content with your wages. Luke iii. 14.
And our Lord's saying to his disciples, Let him that has no sword, sell his
garment, and buy one. Ibid. xxii. 36.


To the first of these scriptures, I answer, Let all soldiers take this advice,
Do violence to no man, and I am bold to affirm, that there will be a final
period to wars, for maiming and shedding the blood of our fellow-mortals, and
thereby sending them (perhaps, unprepared) into an awful eternity, is the
greatest violence we can offer them.

Should it be granted, (which I am far from believing) that John tolerated the
use of war, yet this is not to the point, as he was a Jew; and it is allowed,
that war and swearing, were lawful for them, but prohibited by the Founder of
Christianity. And as the Gospel dispensation is far more excellent than John's,
therefore our Lord asserted, that though he was the greatest of all the Prophets,
yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. Math. xi. 11.
That is, the Gospel dispensation is eminently superior to his. John was so
sensible of this, that he bore this public testimony. He must increase, but I
must decrease; John iii. 30.
which words undoubtedly referred to their different dispensations.

That divorcement, wars, and swearing, though allowed to the Jews, because of the
hardness of their hearts, Math. xix. 8.
are unlawful for Christians, is evident from the following scriptures, which
are full to the point, and need no comment. It has been said, Whosoever shall
put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement. But I say unto
you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that
is devorced, commits adultery. Again, Ye have heard that it has been said
by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thyself. But I say unto you, Swear
not at all, etc. for whatsoever is more than Yea, yea; Nay, nay, (yes, or no)
comes of evil. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but whosoever
shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. Math. v. 31.
And the Apostle James leads us to the true source of wars, when he enquires,
From whence come wars, and fightings? Come they not from hence, even of your
lusts, which war in your members? James iv. 1.


The other scripture brought to prove the lawfulness of war, is our Lord's
saying to his disciples, Let him that has no sword, sell his garment and buy
one.

To which I reply, That this scripture has its difficulty; but that our Lord
never designed to countenance fighting by it, I am as sully convinced of, as
that I have an existence. My reasons are these.

First, When the disciples answered, Lord, here are two swords, he replied, It
is enough. Luke xxiv. 38.
Which answer sufficiently evinces, that this scripture must not be confined to
a literal meaning. For what could two swords avail, against that armed
multitude, which our Lord knew was coming out against him? And the general
opinion of those, slyled the Fathers, was, that this scripture had a mystical
signification.

Secondly, This seems to be confirmed by what passed between our Lord and
Peter, who in his intemperate zeal, smote the servant of the High Priest, and
cut off his car; for which our Lord reproved him, saying, Think thou that I
cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve
legions of angels? Put up therefore thy sword into its place. As though he had
said, Peter, thou have mistaken me; -- I do not need these carnal weapons; --
No: I utterly prohibit the use of them; -- For all they that take the sword,
shall perish by the sword. Math. xxvi. 52, 53.
--

Thirdly, Wars are not only forbidden by, but are directly opposite to the
spirit of the Gospel. Here we are enjoined, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use and persecute you. Mat. v. 44.
If thine enemy hunger, seed him; if he thirst, give him drink. Be not overcome
of evil, but overcome evil with good. Romans xii. 20, 21.
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven, for he makes
his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and
on the unjust. Mat. v. 45.
When Isaiah, in vision, saw this glorious Gospel-day, he sang, They shall beat
their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning-books: nation
shall not list up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
Isa. ii. 4.
Which prophecy is in part accomplished, in every heart, where the Prince of
Peace Ibid. ix. 6.
reigns.

I sincerely wish therefore, that well-disposed persons, who have been blinded
by custom, and carried away with the current of evil example, would seriously
consider this subject, and I am satisfied, they will see the great impropriety
of setting apart times of prayer, for imploring the God of love, to give
success to destructive weapons. And I am persuaded, that with great truth, it
may be said to many, Ye know not what ye ask. Mat. xx. 22.
Or as our Lord said to his disciples, on a similar occasion, Ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of Luke ix. 55.
For it these prayers have any meaning, it is, that every bullet may do
execution, and every sword may be bathed in blood. And to return thanks to the
divine Majesty for success of this kind, argues a mind ignorant of the divine
perfections, to whom such prayers and thanksgivings are as acceptable, as the
cutting off a dog's neck, or the offering swine's blood. Isa. lxvi. 3.


That frantic mirth also, which discovers itself in public rejoicings on these
occasions, is a disgrace not only to the Christian name, but to humanity
itself. The pure principle therefore, leads to an uniform testimony against
such ungodly customs. And happy are they who are faithful to it, though they
are the derision of a thoughtless, giddy multitude, and even on account of
their truly Christian testimony, suffer the spoiling of their good. Heb. x. 34.


And all those who take an active part in wars, are highly concerned to
enquire, what is their principle of action? And, whether a dispute between
Princes, will justify them in the sight of God, for seizing on the property and
destroying the lives of their fellow creatures, even though they have the
sanction of human laws!

I know, that the common objection is, If these pacific principles prevail, our
property will become a prey to every invader. Yes; If the Lord has forsaken the
earth: Ezck. ix. 9.
But, if the Lord reigns, Psalm xciii. 1.
and we fear his name, he will be a wall of five round about us. Zech. ii. 5.
A remarkable instance of which, we have in the case of the Jews, who being
enjoined by God, Thrice in the year shall all your males appear (at Jerusalem)
before the Lord; the promise of God to them was, Neither shall any man desire
your land, when you shall go up to appear before the Lord your God thrice in
the year. Exodus xxxiv. 23, 24.
Which promise, Josephus, the Jewish historian, informs us, was so punctually
fulfilled, that though their enemies knew these stated seasons, and that their
cities and towns were then defenseless, yet at these times, they were never
invaded, the terror of the Lord being upon the cities that were round about
them. Genesis xxxv. 5.


Nor need we look so far back, as the settlement of the people called Quakers
in the Province of Pennsylvania, furnishes us with a recent proof of what I
have advanced, and which has been so remarkable, as to engage the attention,
even of infidels. The fact is this. That province, surrounded by savage
nations, and destitute of warlike instruments, either offensive or defensive,
yet for almost a century, enjoyed uninterrupted tranquillity, while the other
Provinces have been repeatedly attacked by their savage neighbors.

Not only so, but the pacific principles of that people, and their upright
conduct toward the natives, in purchasing the land from them, (though it was
granted by the crown) have made such an impression on the minds of this savage
people, that they have lived in perfect harmony with them, and speak of W.
Penn, the first Proprietor of that province, with the greatest respect.

I have now freely delivered my sentiments. I hope it has been done in a proper
temper: For although truth leads to the greatest plainness, yet it dictates no
improper reflection, much less abusive language, which are too common in some
of the most admired, controversial writings. I intended to close the whole,
with a few remarks on the conclusion of that letter; but on a review, finding
it made up of a number of mere declamatory assertions, calculated to
misrepresent and fix a stigma on a religious society of people, and totally
destitute of argument, I pass it over, as a proper answer would lead to some
degree of severity, which it has been my study to avoid.

However, I must say, that I fear some persons are more concerned, to proselyte
to a name, than to something more substantial. When alas! What do names
signify, if we are strangers to the love of God, and the love of our neighbor?
And what will it avail, that we are orthodox in our principles, while our
hearts are heterodox? We may boast of our well-composed forms of prayer, or
pique ourselves that we have laid aside these inventions of men, silently to
wait on the Lord; yet if our own hearts are not divinely changed, from the love
and spirit of the world, into the love and image of God, though we differ in name
and sentiment, we all belong to one family, and are out of the true church;
having only a name to live, while we are in reality, without God in the world:
Ephesians. ii. 12.
And should death cut the slender thread of life, the immortal spirit, which is
disunited from God, and in a state of impurity, would be incapacitated for
inhabiting his glorious kingdom; and therefore must be excluded from his
presence. 2 Thessalonians. i. 9.


I therefore earnestly wish, that all blind, party zeal may come to an end;
that instead of laboring to fix a stigma on those, who see it their duty to
dissent from us, our great concern may be, to guard against a narrow,
unchristian spirit: And may the uniform language of our hearts and lives be,
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh. 2 Cor. v. 16.
For whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in heaven, the same is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Mar. xii. 50.


This is the ardent Desire of Thy affectionate Friend, J. H.
Melksham, 3d Mo. 28, 1778.

