A LETTER FROM ********, IN LONDON, TO HIS FRIEND IN AMERICA, ON THE SUBJECT OF
THE SLAVE TRADE; TOGETHER WITH SOME EXTRACTS, FROM APPROVED AUTHORS OF MATTERS
OF FACT, Confirming the PRINCIPLES contained in said LETTER.

He that steals a Man, and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, shall
surely be put to death. EXODUS xxi. 16. Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and
the prophets. MAT. vii. 12. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL LOUDON, No. 5.
Water-Street. M,DCC,LXXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following letter was written in the year 1776, at the request of an
American gentleman, who desired to know my sentiments upon the slavery of the
Negroes, and professed an intention of restoring all his own to liberty, could
he be convinced that duty required the sacrifice. I therefore sent him the
following essay, the imperfections of which may perhaps be something extenuated
by the precipitation with which it was written. It has lain by me many years in
obscurity; nor did I choose to produce it during the progress of the American
contest. Since the happy termination of that disastrous war, I have shown it to
some of my particular friends, who have honored me so far as to desire copies,
and to suggest that its publication might not be unattended with utility. After
reflecting upon the subject, I have chosen to comply with their wishes, and
present this fragment to the public; because, whatever discredit it brings upon
my head, it may contribute to establish the sincerity of my heart: And if a
single human being should by my means be restored to happiness, it is an ample
recompense for all the dangers I may incur as an author. Should this essay ever
reach America, it may perhaps displease those who have not learned to discern
friends from flatterers, and to distinguish between the language of truth and
calumny. Those, on the contrary, who are enlightened by a more extensive
knowledge of human nature, may perhaps respect an Englishman, who, after daring
to assert their cause, through all the varied events of the late revolution,
dares now with equal intrepidity assert the cause of truth and justice, and of
that part of the human species whose wrongs are yet unredressed, and almost
unpitied. Should it be asked why I rather publish a fragment than a complete
essay, I can only answer, that I respect truth so much, that I am not inclined
to violate it even as an author; and that this letter having been really
written in the year 1776, and being still in the possession of the gentleman to
whom it was sent, I do not choose to piece it with additions in the year 1784.

SIR,
I WAS extremely surprised at receiving a letter, in an unknown hand, which
desired me to give my sentiments relative to the slavery of the Negroes; till
reading to the end, I recollected the name of a gentleman, whom I had the
pleasure of seeing with Mr. Laurens. Much as I am flattered by finding my
opinion of any consequence with a gentleman of whom I have heard so
advantageous a character* I am still more surprised, that he can ask it on such
a question; a question which I am sure his own humanity and good sense will be
sufficient to decide, if he attends, for a moment, to their dictates. I respect
you, sir, too much to doubt the sincerity of the declaration you make, when you
profess to be guided by reason and morality upon this question; for this is the
only arbitration which any man can have to consult upon a subject like this:
Where they are silent, the voice of the whole world ought to be disregarded,
and where they approve, the dissent of all mankind can have no influence upon a
mind like yours. -- But as you expressly desire to know my sentiments, I must
wave both preface and ceremony, and address you with the modest freedom that
becomes one man when he is speaking to another upon the most important question
in the universe. As a member of that society which has now made a solemn appeal
to Heaven, and taken up arms against the nation to which it owes its
establishment, you must admit that there are such things as right and justice,
to which the whole human species have an indefeasible claim. Indeed, unless
there be such a thing as justice, it is in vain we enquire about its precepts,
or refer to its arbitration. He that admits no right but force, no justice but
superior violence, arms every man against himself, and justifies all excesses.
If it be lawful to injure because we can; if we may seize the property of
another, insult his person, or force him to labor for our luxury or caprice,
merely because he is weaker; this principle will be equally fatal to ourselves,
when fortune shall strip us of that power which is our only prerogative, and
shift the plea of superiority. You are to remember that, upon this supposition,
your slaves, the instant they shall become the strongest, will have a right to
the services of yourself and every other gentleman of the southern colonies;
will have a right to force you to labor naked in the sun to the music of whips
and chains; to rob you of every thing which is now dear to your indolence, or
necessary to your pleasures; to goad you to every species of servile drudgery,
and punish you for their amusement and caprice; will have a right to exhaust
your youth in servitude, and to abandon your age to wretchedness and discases:
In one word, fir, they will have a right to use YOU, as you do THEM. Let us,
therefore, leave principles which can be maintained by no one but a professed
enemy to mankind; who would at one stroke extirpate every thing which
alleviates the evils of life, and arm every man in an eternal war against his
fellow creatures, to enquire what are the real dictates of that justice, whose
existence, I am persuaded, we both allow. You, therefore, admit there are
certain claims, which, for want of a better name, we call rights, to which the
human species has an indisputable title. To express myself in other words,
"There is a method of pursuing our own happiness in such a manner, that we may
promote the general good at the same time; or, at least not interfere with it."
This, our reason assures us, is the privilege of every created being; and while
he confines himself within these bounds, we feel the most cordial approbation
of his conduct. We love, and esteem, and sympathize with him, from the very
constitution of our nature. On the contrary, whenever any one disturbs or
injures a being acting in this manner, or prevents him from attaining the good
to which he is impelled, we feel our hatred and indignation most forcibly
excited against the aggressor. We consider such a character as armed against
the welfare of the world, and as one who is endeavoring to make the common
good subservient to his own selfishness. I appeal to the generosity of your own
nature, for the existence of these principles. Have they not, a thousand times,
animated you to acts of virtue and humanity, as well as inspired you with an
involuntary reverence for all who acted from their impulse? Have they not often
pleaded the cause of the wretch that lay trembling and defenseless at your
feet, and, in spite of the prejudices of your country and education, whispered
to your mind that one human being ought not to hold his existence by the tenure
of another's will?

Do not these principles now inspire you, and frequently impel you beyond the
bounds of prudence and safety, while what you call your country's cause
animates you to exertion? But this cause is only the united cause and interest
of every particular man; those rights which the Great Creator taught him to
discover when he gave him reason, which he urges him to defend by passion, and
which a mind like yours prizes beyond the gratifications of sense, and dares to
grasp at even while it is perishing. This appears to me to be a plain and
concise deduction of morality, which means nothing more than that method or
rule of conduct by which the whole human species may attain the greatest
possible degree of happiness. And I rather choose to express myself so, because
I thus comprehend all sects and opinions. The religious man allows that the
happiness of the species is the great end of the Deity, which he promotes by
the rewards and punishments of a future state: The disciple of Shaftsbury
understands this, when he talks of the beauty of virtue and the love of order;
and even the gloomy pupil of Hobbes, who resolves every thing into self
interest, must allow the existence of moral distinctions, so far as they
influence the welfare of the species. This universal morality appears to me to
be the only rational and legal foundation of all human government; which ought
to be nothing more than the application of this general rule to particular
societies, and the enforcing it by civil establishments. If, therefore, it be
granted, that the rights of a nation are nothing more than the rights of every
man in it, and that all just and legal authority supposes a delegated power
entrusted solely for the purpose of promoting the general good; it will appear
evident that every individual in the universe possesses certain rights, which
no man can divest him of without injustice, unless he be guilty of some crime
against society which exposes him to its vengeance. Hence it follows, that
whenever any nation attacks the rights and happiness of another nation, it
deserves to find its own destruction in the attempt; and whenever any
individual presumes to exercise this species of authority over his fellow
creatures, he must be a tyrant and an oppressor, whom it is permitted to
destroy by every possible method. Whoever would deny this, must either deny the
existence of right and justice entirely, and then it is in vain to argue; or
must show some natural distinction by which one part of the species is entitled
to privileges from which the other is excluded. The first supposition I have
already considered, and the second is altogether absurd; for all alterations
and distinctions among mankind solely arise from civil government, which has no
other just foundation than natural right; and natural right, for that reason,
must be a principle of higher authority than civil government. Whenever,
therefore, civil government tends to destroy and confound the rights of nature,
it ceases to have any claim to our obedience; it becomes tyranny, corruption,
despotism, a pest instead of a blessing, and subversive of every purpose for
which it was instituted, or ought to be continued.

I am extremely fearful of expressing myself obscurely upon so abstract a
subject, and must, therefore, though with the hazard of prolixity, attempt to
place it in a different light. -- If you imagine any number of the human
species assembled in some particular part of the globe, without any form of
government established among them; it is evident, that these individuals may
either live together in such a manner as to produce mutual comfort and
assistance, or may be the cause of continual misery to each other. No
proposition in the mathematics can be investigated with more precision than the
methods of conduct which have these contrary tendencies. Every disposition
which inclines one man to assist another, or to avoid giving him offense and
doing him injury, must necessarily contribute to the common welfare; which
would be perfect, were these dispositions cultivated in the greatest possible
degree. On the contrary, every disposition, which, either by fraud or violence,
tends to interrupt the personal security of individuals, or to deprive them of
those things which they have acquired by their industry, is detrimental to the
sum of happiness, and would, if carried to the greatest possible degree,
entirely destroy that part of the species. -- In this view of things, morality
arises from necessity, and comprehends "certain rules of conduct founded upon
the relations which beings endowed with particular faculties bear to each
other; which rules, when properly observed, produce happiness to society; but
when violated or neglected, as necessarily occasion misery, as fire or pointed
substances excite pain, when they act too forcibly upon the nerves."

I hardly think that the greatest skeptic will deny these distinctions founded
upon facts as certain as the impression of any material substance upon our
senses. If we, now, proceed a little farther, we shall find that the
dispositions which produce these different kinds of conduct are by the
moralists expressed by different names, and enforced by different motives,
according to their several systems; while natural religion adds its sanctions,
and inclines us to believe that the Deity himself, who has displayed so great
an attention to the happiness and preservation of his creatures here, may
extend his benevolence to another stage of existence, and compensate the evils
sometimes unmeritedly suffered below. But if we admit the evidence of revealed
religion, the scheme of human things is perfect as it is august; the clouds
which overshadowed our horizon are dissipated, and the gradual progress of
triumphant virtue, through dangers and difficulties, to eternal happiness, is
displayed and ascertained.

Having laid down these principles, it is easy to apply them to the particular
case in question. Slavery is the absolute dependence of one man upon another;
and is, therefore, as inconsistent with all ideas of justice, as despotism is
with the rights of nature. It is a crime so monstrous against the human
species, that all those who practice it deserve to be extirpated from the
earth. It is no little indirect attack upon the safety and happiness of our
fellow creatures, but one that boldly strikes at the foundations of all
humanity and justice. Robbers invade the property, and murderers the life of
human beings; but he that holds another man in bondage, subjects the whole sum
of his existence to oppression, bereaves him of every hope, and is, therefore,
more detestable than robber and assassin combined. But if no one who has common
feeling will commit the outrage, no one who has common sense will attempt to
justify it by argument; since it would involve him in the grossest and most
inextricable contradictions. He must allow that every man has, by nature, a
right to life, yet that every other man has a right to rob him of it; that
every man has an equal right to subsistence, yet that every other may deprive
him of all the means; and that while every individual is justified by nature
and the Deity in pursuing his own happiness by all innocent methods, every
other individual is equally justified in making him miserable. In short, it is
reducing every thing to the state before described, a state of contest and
desolation from which right and justice are equally excluded.

Of you, sir, who say you have several slaves, I beg leave to ask what are the
rights you claim over them? Have you a right to torture them when they are
guilty of no faults? Have you a right to kill them for your diversion? Is your
power circumscribed by no bounds, and are there particular beings who bring
into the world all the rights which you yourself can pretend to, but have so
entirely lost them by being transported into another country, as to be beyond
the protection both of nature and of nature's God?

Surely, sir, unless I am deceived in you, you are a man both of honor and
humanity. You start at the idea of wanton and unprovoked barbarity. You would
not murder a slave to show your dexterity, nor maim him to prove your
strength; you would not dash an infant upon the ground to feed your dogs, even
though he was black; nor would you rip up the belly of his mother while she was
suckling him, to improve your skill in anatomy. You neither would, nor dare you
commit actions like these; you feel that you have no right to do them; or, if
you have, that every other man has an equal and superior right to destroy you
like a beast of prey. What then are your rights? I anticipate your answer: You
will feed and cloth your negroes, you will treat them with humanity and
tenderness, and then you have a right to moderate advantage from their labors.
All this, sir, is well; and could I conceive that you ever had acted in another
manner, I should never have troubled you with this tedious letter. While your
negroes choose to stay with you upon these terms, this ^s a fair and equitable
compact. But what if they should choose to leave you, will you let them go? If
you do, you are a man of honor, sense, and humanity; but I fear no West Indian.

Are there no whips, no gibbets, no punishments more dreadful than death itself
for contumacious slaves? And what is this but claiming the detestable power I
have mentioned above, that of making other beings miserable, for your interest
or amusement? Who, sir, gave you a title to their labors, or a right to
confine them to loathsome drudgery? And if you have no right to this, what are
the punishments you pretend to inflict but so many additional outrages? Has a
robber a claim upon your life because you withhold your property; or a ravisher
a right to a woman's blood because she defends her chastity? Either then prove
your right to their labors, or acknowledge that the punishments inflicted upon
fugitive slaves are a flagitious insult upon justice, humanity and common sense.

Permit me, here, to examine for a moment the nature of the title by which you
claim an irredeemable property in the labors of your fellow creatures. -- A
wretch, devoid of compassion and understanding, who calls himself a king of
some part of Africa, which suffers the calamity of being frequented by the
Europeans, seizes his innocent subjects, or engages in an unnecessary war to
furnish himself with prisoners; these are loaded with chains, torn from all
their comforts and connections, and driven (like beasts to the slaughter house)
down to the sea shore, where the mild subjects of a Christian government and a
religious king are waiting to agree for the purchase, and to transport them to
America. They are then thrust by hundreds into the infectious hold of a ship,
in which the greatest part frequently perishes by disease, while the rest are
reserved to experience the candor and humanity of American patriots -- If you
have never yet considered it, pause here for a moment, and endeavor to impress
upon your mind the feelings of a being full as sensible, and perhaps more
innocent than you or I, which is thus torn in an instant from every thing that
makes life agreeable; from country, friends and parents; from the intercourse
of mutual affection with consort, lover, or child; which, possessed of feelings
more exquisite than European hearts can conceive, is separated for ever from
all it loves; that, reduced to a depth of misery, which, even in the midst of
freedom and affluence, would be sufficient to overwhelm the most hardened
disposition, instead of friends and comforters, and obsequious attendants, sees
itself surrounded with unrelenting persecutors and unpitying enemies; wretches,
who by long intercourse with misery, are grown callous to its agonies; who
answer tears with taunts, and complaints with torture! I shudder at the horrors
which I describe, and blush to be a human creature! Yet these are not the
colors of description, but a recital of facts less strong than the reality.
Can any man reflect upon these things, without unutterable remorse, Can he know
that, perhaps, while he is wallowing in luxury and sensuality, there are beings
whose existence he has embittered, mothers shrieking for their children, and
children perishing for want of their mothers care; wretches who are frantic
with rage, shame and desperation, or pining in all the agonies of slow and
painful death, who might have been at peace if he had never existed? Can any
man know this and hope for mercy, either from his fellow creatures or his God?
--

After the arrival of the surviving wretches in America, you well know in what
manner they are transferred to their conscientious masters -- how they are
brought to the market, naked, weeping, and in chains -- how one man dares to
examine his fellow creatures as he would do beasts, and bargain for their
persons -- how all the most sacred duties, affections, and feelings of the
human heart, are violated and insulted; and thus you dare to call yourselves
the masters of wretches whom you have acquired by fraud, and retain by
violence! -- While I am tracing this practice, which you and every man who has
been in the islands or the southern colonies of America, knows to be true, my
astonishment exceeds even my horror, to find it possible that any one should
seriously doubt whether an equitable title to hold human beings in bondage can
be thus acquired.

With what face, sir, can he who has never respected the rights of nature in
another, pretend to claim them in his own favor? How dare the inhabitants of
the southern colonies speak of privileges and justice? Is money of so much more
importance than life? Or have the Americans shared the dispensing power of St.
Peter's successors, to excuse their own observance of those rules which they
impose on others? If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an
American patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and
with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves.

If men would be consistent, they must admit all the consequences of their own
principles; and you and your countrymen are reduced to the dilemma of either
acknowledging the rights of your negroes, or of surrendering your own. -- If
there be certain natural and universal rights, as the declarations of your
Congress so repeatedly affirm, I wonder how the unfortunate Africans have
incurred their forfeiture. -- Is it the antiquity, or the virtues, or the great
qualities of the English Americans, which constitutes the difference, and
entitles them to rights from which they totally exclude more than a fourth part
of the species? -- Or do you choose to make use of that argument, which the
great Montesquieu has thrown out as the severest ridicule, that they are black
and you white; that you have lank, long hair, while theirs is short and woolly?

The more attentively you consider this subject, the more clearly you will
perceive, that every plea, which can be advanced upon it, is the plea of
interest and tyranny, combating humanity and truth. You cannot hide from
yourself, that every title you can allege, must be a title founded upon fraud
or violence, and supported by open and avowed injustice. Can any thing be
clearer, than that a man who is born free can never forfeit his inheritance by
suffering oppression; and that it is a contradiction to urge a purchase of what
no one has a right to sell? Nor does it make any difference, whether the
unfortunate victim pass from one to another, or from one to a thousand masters,
any more than whether a nation be enslaved by a first or by an hundredth
tyrant. There can be no prescription pleaded against truth and justice; and the
continuance of the evil is so far from justifying, that it is an exaggeration
of the crime. What would you say to a man in private life, who should pretend
to be no thief, because he only bought stolen goods; or that he was no villain,
because he did not forge a deed himself, but only paid another to do it, and
enjoyed the estate by that honorable security? Yet this is literally the title
which the Americans plead to the unfortunate inhabitants of Africa. You do not
go to Africa to buy or steal your negroes; perhaps, because you are too lazy
and luxurious: but you encourage an infamous, pitiless race of men to do it for
you, and conscientiously receive the fruits of their crimes. You do not,
merciful men, reduce your fellow creatures to servitude! No, men of your
independent spirits, that have taken up arms against the government that had
protected and established them, rather than pay a tax of three pence; that have
laid the axe to the root of all human authority, and instead of drinking the
bitter waters of civil abuses and prescriptive obedience, have ascended to the
living fountains of truth, justice and nature, would never make flagitious
attempts upon the liberties and happiness of their brethren! Yes, gentlemen,
men of liberal minds like yours, acknowledge all mankind to be their equals.
Leave hereditary tyrants and their flatterers to make distinctions unknown to
nature and to degrade one part of the species to brutes, while they equal the
other with gods! -- You know that this is the greatest of all corruptions, and
as such you detest it. -- What! are not all men naturally equal? And are not
all civil distinctions, when legitimate the permission of the people, and
consequently subordinate to their power and control? Did you not carry the
rights of men into the uncultivated desert and the howling wilderness? Not of
Frenchmen, nor of Germans, nor of Englishmen, but of men; -- men, the first and
supreme distinction, who, created for freedom and happiness, transport to every
soil the inherent prerogatives of their nature.

Rome n'est plus dans Rome, elle est par tout ou je juis.

Yes, gentlemen, as you are no longer Englishmen, I hope you will please to be
men; and, as such, admit the whole human species to a participation of your
unalienable rights. You will not, therefore, drag a trembling wretch from his
cottage and his family; you will not tear the child from the arms of his
frantic mother, that they may drag on a loathsome existence in misery and
chains; you will not make depredations upon your unoffending neighbors, and,
after having spread desolation over a fertile country, reduce the innocent
inhabitants to servitude. To do this, you must be monsters, worse, I fear, than
the majority of the House of Commons and the English Ministry Should this doubt
appear absurd, the reader is desired to remember it was written in the year
1776.
. But you are men tremblingly alive to all the rights and feelings of the kind,
and I believe some of you at least are Christians. Your worst actions,
therefore, the greatest crimes which even your enemies can object, are only
that you are the voluntary causes of all these mischiefs? -- You, you encourage
the English pirate to violate the laws of faith and hospitality, and stimulate
him to new excesses by purchasing the fruits of his rapine. Your avarice is the
torch of treachery and civil war, which desolates the shores of Africa, and
shakes destruction on half the majestic species of man!........

In confirmation of the doctrines and principles contained in the preceding
letter. The following extracts from approved authors, among many others that
might be mentioned are selected; by which it will clearly appear, how happy
these Africans live in their own country -- blessed with good understandings --
a fertile and pleasant land; -- and how many wars, and how much cruelty is
practiced amongst them, purely from the trade which the whites carry on with
them.
M. ADANSON, in his account of Gor^e and Senegal, in the year 1754, says, Which
way soever I turned my eyes on this pleasant spot, I beheld a perfect image of
pure nature; an agreeable solitude, bounded on every side by charming
landscapes, the rural situation of cottages in the midst of trees; the ease and
indolence of the negroes reclined under the shade of their spreading foliage;
the simplicity of their dress and manners; the whole revived in my mind the
idea of our first parents, and I seemed to contemplate the world in its
primitive state: they are, generally speaking, very good-natured, sociable and
obliging. I was not a little pleased with this my first reception; it convinced
me, that there ought to be a considerable abatement made in the accounts I had
read and heard every where of the savage character of the Africans. I observed,
both in negroes and Moors, great humanity and sociableness, which gave me
strong hopes, that I should be very safe amongst them, and meet with the
success I desired, in my enquiries after the curiosities of the country.

William Bosman, a principal factor for the Dutch, who resided sixteen years in
Guinea, speaking of the natives of that part, where he then was, says, They are
generally a good sort of people, honest in their dealings; others he describes
as being generally friendly to strangers, of a mild conversation, affable and
easy to be overcome with reason. He adds, That some negroes, who have had an a
greeable education, have manifested a brightness of understanding equal to any
of us. Speaking of the fruitfulness of the country, he says, It was very
populace, plentifully provided with corn, potatoes and fruit, which grew close
to each other; in some places a foot-path is the only ground that is not
covered with them; the negroes leaving no place, which is thought fertile,
uncultivated; and immediately after they have reaped, they are sure to sow
again. Other parts he describes, as, being full of towns and villages; the soil
very rich, and so well cultivated as to look like an entire garden, abounding
in rice, corn, oxen and poultry, and the inhabitants laborious.

William Smith, who was sent by the African Company to visit their settlements
on the coast of Guinea, in the year 1726, gives much the same account of the
country of Delmina and Cape Corse, etc. for beauty and goodness, and adds, The
more you come downward toward that part, called Slave-Coast, the more
delightful and rich the soil appears. Speaking of their disposition, he says,
They were a civil, good natured people, industrious to the last degree. It is
easy to perceive what happy memories they are blessed with, and how great
progress they would make in the science, in case their genius was cultivated
with study. He adds, from the information he received of one of the Factors,
who had resided ten years in that country, That the discerning natives account
it their greatest unhappiness, that they were ever visited by the Europeans. --
That the Christians introduced the traffic of slaves; and that before our
coming they lived in peace.

Andrew Brue, a principal man in the French Factory, in the account he gives of
the great river Senegal, which runs many hundred miles up the country, tells
his readers, The farther you go from the sea, the country on the river seems
more fruitful and well improved. It abounds in Guinea and Indian corn, rice,
pulse, tobacco, and indigo. Here are vast meadows, which feed large herds of
great and small cattle; poultry are numerous, as well as wild fowl. The same
author, in his travels to the south of the river Gambia, expresses his
surprise, To see the land so well cultivated; scarce a spot lay unimproved; the
low grounds divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice; the higher
ground planted with Indian corn, millet, and pease of different sorts, beef and
mutton very cheap, as well as all other necessaries of life. The account that
this author gives of the disposition of the natives, is, That they are
generally good-natured and civil, and may be brought to any thing by fair and
soft means. Artus, speaking of the same people, says, They are a sincere,
inoffensive people, and do no injustice either to one another or strangers.

Francis Moor, Factor to the African company on the river Gambia, relates, That
when the king of Ba^salli wants goods, etc. he sends a messenger to the English
governor at James' fort, to desire he would send up a sloop with a cargo of
goods, which (says the author) the governor never fails to do; against the time
the vessel arrives, the king plunders some of his enemies towns, selling the
people for such goods as he he wants. -- If he is not at war with any
neighboring king, he falls upon one of his own towns, and makes bold to sell
his own miserable subjects.

N. Brue, in his account of the trade, etc. writes, That having received a
quantity of goods, he wrote to the king of the country, that if he had a
sufficient number of slaves, he was ready to trade with him. This Prince, (says
that author) as well as other negro monarchs, has always a sure way of
supplying his deficiencies by selling his own subjects. -- The king had
recourse to this method, by seizing three hundred of his own people, and sent
word to Brue, that he had the slaves ready to deliver for the goods.

The misery and bloodshed, consequent of the slave trade, is amply set forth by
the following extract, of two voyages to the coast of Guinea for slaves. The
first in a vessel from Liverpool, taken verbatim from the original manuscript
of the surgeons journal, viz.

Sestro, December the 29th, 1724. No trade today, though many traders come on
board, they inform us, that the people are gone to war within land, and will
bring prisoners enough in two or three days; in hopes of which we stay.

The 30th. No trade yet, but our traders came on board today, and informed us,
the people had burnt four towns of their enemies, so that tomorrow we expect
slaves off. Another large ship is come in: yesterday came in a large Londoner.

The 31st. Fair weather, but no trade yet; we see each night towns burning; but
we hear the Sestro men are many of them killed by the inland negroes, so that
we fear this war will be unsuccessful.

The 2d January. Last night we saw a prodigious fire break out about eleven
o'clock, and this morning we see the town of Sestro burnt down to the ground,
(it contained some hundreds of houses) so that we find their enemies are too
hard for them at present, and consequently our trade spoiled here; so that
about seven o'clock we weighed anchor, as did likewise the three other vessels
to proceed lower down.

The second relation, also taken from the original manuscript journal of a
person of credit, who went surgeon on the same account, in a vessel from
New York to the coast of Guinea, about eighteen years past, is as follows, viz.
Being on the coast at a place called Basalia, the commander of the vessel,
according to custom, sent a person on shore with a present to the king,
acquainting him with his arrival, and letting him know, they wanted a cargo of
slaves. The king promised to furnish them with slaves, and in order to do it,
set out to go to war against his enemies, designing also to surprise some town,
and take all the people prisoners. Sometime after, the king sent them word, he
had not yet met with the desired success, having been twice repulsed, in
attempting to break up two towns; but that he still hoped to procure a number
of slaves for them; and in this design he persisted till he met his enemies in
the field, where a battle was fought, which lasted three days, during which
time the engagement was so bloody, that four thousand five hundred men were
slain on the spot. The person, that wrote the account, beheld the bodies as
they lay on the field of battle. Think (says he in his journal) what a pitiable
sight it was, to see the widows weeping over their lost husbands, orphans
deploring the loss of their fathers, etc. etc.

The following substance of an address or expostulation made by a sensible
author, to the several ranks of persons most immediately concerned in the
trade, is now republished.

"And first, to the captains employed in this trade. Most of you know the
country of Guinea, perhaps now by your means, part of it is become a dreary
uncultivated wilderness; the inhabitants being murdered or carried away, so
that there are few left to till the ground; but you know, or have heard, how
populous, how fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the
people were not stupid; not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage, treacherous, or
unkind to strangers. On the contrary, they were in most parts a sensible and
ingenious people; kind and friendly, and generally just in their dealings. Such
are the men whom you hire their own countrymen to tear away from this lovely
country; part by stealth, part by force, part made captives in those wars which
you raise or foment on purpose. You have seen them torn away, children from
their parents, parents from their children: Husbands from their wives, wives
from their beloved husbands; brethren and sisters from each other. You have
dragged them who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their
native shore. You have forced them into your ships, like an herd of swine, The
following relation is inserted at the request of the author.

That I may contribute all in my power toward the good of mankind, by
inspiring any of its individuals with a suitable abhorrence for that detestable
practice of trading in our fellow creatures, and in some measure alone for my
neglect of duty as a christian, in engaging in a wicked traffic, I offer to
their serious consideration, some few occurrences of which I was an eye
witness. That being struck with the wretched and affecting scene they may
foster that humane principle, which is the noble and distinguished
characteristic of man.

About the year 1749, I sailed from Liverpool to the coast of Guinea; some time
after our arrival, I was ordered to go up the country a considerable distance,
upon having notice from one of the negro kings, that he had a parcel of slaves
to dispose of, I received my instructions and went, carrying with me an account
of such goods we had on board, to exchange for the slaves we intended to
purchase; upon being introduced, I presented him with a small case of spirits,
a gun and some trifles, which having accepted, and understood by an interpreter
what goods we had, the next day was appointed for viewing the slaves; we found
about two hundred confined in one place. But here, how shall I relate the
affecting sight I there beheld, the silent sorrow which appeared in the
countenance of the afflicted father, and the painful anguish of the tender
mother, expecting to be forever separated from their tender offspring; the
distressed maid wringing her hands in presage of her future wretchedness, and
the general cry of the innocent, from a fearful apprehension of the perpetual
slavery to which they were doomed. I purchased eleven, who I conducted, tied
two and two; to our ship. Being but a small vessel (ninety ton) we soon
purchased our cargo, consisting of one hundred and seventy slaves, whom thou
may reader range in thy view, as they were shackled two and two together,
pent up within the narrow confines of the main deck, with the complicated
distress of sickness, chains and contempt; deprived of every fond and social
tie, and in a great measure reduced to a state of desperation. We had not been
a fortnight at sea, before the fatal consequence of this despair appeared; they
formed a design of recovering their natural right, liberty, by raising and
murdering every man on board; but the goodness of the Almighty rendered their
scheme abortive, and his mercy spared us to have time to repent: The plot was
discovered; the ringleader tied by the two thumbs over the barricado door, at
sun rise received a number of lashes; in this situation he remained till sun
set, exposed to the insults and barbarity of the brutal crew of sailors, with
full leave to exercise their cruelty at pleasure: The consequence was, the next
morning the miserable sufferer was found dead, f^eed from the shoulders to the
waist. The next victim was a youth, who from too strong a sense of his misery
refused nourishment and died disregarded and unnoticed till the hogs had fed on
part of his flesh.


them who had souls immortal as your own. You have stowed them together as
close as ever they could lie, without any regard to decency or convenience --
And when many of them had been poisoned by soul air, or had sunk under various
hardships, "you have seen their remains delivered to the deep, till the sea
should give up his dead." You have carried the survivors into the vilest
slavery, never to end but with life: Such slavery as is not found among the
Turks at Algiers, no, nor among the heathens in America.

May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as well
as those you are concerned with. Is there a God? You know there is. Is he a
just God? Then there must be a state of retribution: A state wherein the just
God will reward every man according to his work. Then what reward will he
render to you. O think betimes! before you drop into eternity: Think how, He
shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy. Are you a man? Then
you should have a human heart. But have you indeed? What is your heart made of?
Is there no such principles as compassion there? Do you never feel another's
pain? Have you no sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity for the miserable?
When you saw the flowing eyes, the heaving breast, or the bleeding sides and
tortured limbs of your fellow creatures. Was you a stone or a brute? Did you
look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the agonizing
creatures down in the ship, or when you threw their poor mangled remains into
the sea, had you no relentings? Did not one tear drop from your eye, one sigh
escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must
go on till the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the great God deal
with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their blood at your
hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than
for you: But if your heart does relent; though in a small degree, know it is a
call from the God of love. And to day, if you hear his voice, harden not your
heart -- Today resolve, God being your helper to escape for your life --
Regard not money: All that a man has will he give for his life. Whatever you
lose, lose not your soul; nothing can countervail that loss. Immediately quit
the horrid trade: At all events be an honest man.

This equally concerns every merchant who is engaged in the slave trade. It is
you that induce the African villain to sell his countrymen; and in order
thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: by
enabling the English villain to pay him for so doing; whom you over pay for his
execrable labor. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that impowers
him to go on; so that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all
your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it
never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes and stupefied
your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would
be done to? Make the case your own. Master (said a slave at Liverpool to the
merchant that owned him) what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and
take away my mistress, and master Tommy and master Billy, and carry them into
our country and make them slaves, how would you like it? His answer was worthy
of a man: I will never buy a slave more while I live. O let his resolution be
yours! Have no more any part in this detestable business. Instantly leave it to
those unfeeling wretches, who laugh at humanity and compassion.

And this equally concerns every person who has an estate in our American
plantations: Yea, all slave-holders of whatever rank and degree; seeing
men-buyers are exactly on a level with men-stealers. Indeed, you say, I pay
honestly for my goods; and I am not concerned to know how they are come by. Nay
but you are: You are deeply concerned, to know that they are not stolen:
Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot honester than him.
But you know they are not honestly come by: You know they are procured by means
nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house-breaking, or robbery upon
the highway. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of more
complicated villainy (of fraud, robbery and murder) than was ever practiced
either by Mahometans or Pagans; in particular by murders of all kinds; by the
blood of the innocent poured upon the ground like water. Now it is your money
that pays the merchant, and through him the captain and African butchers. You
therefore are guilty: Yea principally guilty, of all these frauds, robberies,
and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest in motion; they would
not stir a step without you -- Therefore the blood of all these wretches, who
die before their time, whether in their country or elsewhere, lies upon your
head. The blood of thy brother (for whether thou will believe it or no, such he
is in the sight of him that made him) cries against thee from the earth, from
the ship and from the waters. O! whatever it cost, put a stop to its cry,
before it be too late. Instantly, at any price, were it the half of thy goods,
deliver thyself from blood guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy
house, thy land, are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough;
accumulate no more guilt: Spill no more the blood of the innocent! Do not hire
another to shed blood! Do not pay him for doing it! Whether thou art a
Christian or no, show thyself a man; be not more savage than a lion or a bear.

Perhaps thou will say, I do not buy any negroes: I only use those left me by
my father. But is it enough to satisfy your own conscience! Had your father,
have you, has any living, a right to use another as a slave! It cannot be, even
setting REVELATION aside. It cannot be, that either war or contract, can give
any man such a property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen: Much less
is it possible, that any child of man, should ever be born a slave. Liberty is
the right of every human creature, as soon as he breathes the vital air. And no
human law can deprive him of that right, which he derives from the law of
nature. If therefore you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing of mercy,
nor of the revealed law of God) render unto all their due. Give liberty to whom
liberty is due, that is to every child of man, to every partaker of human
nature. Let none serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own voluntary
choice; away with whips, chains, and all compulsion. Be gentle toward all men.
And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he should do unto
you.

THE END.

