THE PATRIOT CHIEF. A TRAGEDY

Oh first and most benevolent of Powers!
Sent from eternal splendors here on earth,
Against despotic pride, and rage, and lust,
To shield mankind, to rouse them to assert
The native rights and honor of their race!
THOMSON'S LIBERTY. PHILADELPHIA: Printed for the Author, and sold by WM.
PRICHARD, at his Circulating Library, and Book-Store, in Market-Street,
MDCCLXXXIV.

PREFACE.
THE subject of the following Tragedy, which has never been acted or published,
is purely fabulous. It has human nature, but no particular nation, or
individual, for its object. The author thinks this declaration necessary, as it
may prevent malignant criticism from imputing sentiments to him, which he
abhors. He wishes to be thought, however obscure, an advocate for liberty, on
the most enlarged and liberal plan; but he is warranted, by history, in
affirming, that true liberty may as effectually be destroyed by the
machinations of a party, as by the ambition of a single person. An aristocracy
appears to him to be the most odious and oppressive of all modes of government,
nor is it destroyed without the greatest difficulty; for that monster has many
heads.

May the Citizens of this State continue to prize the generous system of
liberty, which their virtue has established! As they have bravely repelled
foreign usurpation, may they with equal success prevent domestic encroachment!
Thus shall they not at some distant period, be compelled to fly for refuge to
monarchy, from a turbulent, oppressive and tyrannical aristocracy.

Philadelphia, June, 1784.
Dramatis Personae.
DORUS, OLINTHUS, ARASPES, ADRASTUS, OTANES, ARBACES, PRIEST, ATTENDANTS.
EUDOCIA, ISMENE, CLEANTHE.
Scene Sardis, Capital of Lydia.

THE PATRIOT CHIEF. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. OTANES, ADRASTUS.
OTANES. 'TWAS weak; 'twas wrong; this turbulence forebodes
Some greater evil, and the King may soon
Repent his tame compliance.

ADRASTUS. You are warm.
Your zeal, Otanes, hurries you beyond
The bounds of reason; but the people's voice,
The voice of millions in so just a cause,
Demands the monarch's ear, and should enforce
Conviction.

OTANES. Much I fear, their factious clamors
Will gain upon the easy King to grant
More insolent demands; then may we see
The scepter wrested from the feeble hand
Of flexile majesty.

ADRASTUS. You wrong the people.
They idolize their King; his better years,
They know, were spent amidst the rage of war,
To save them from the hated Persian yoke.
Heaven crowned his valor with success, and now,
With filial piety and veneration,
They view his sacred head, hoary with age,
And bending with the weight of public cares
For Lydia's safety.

OTANES. Slightly they regard
His cares and valor; and for wealth and freedom
Repay him with the insolence of faction.

ADRASTUS. Long since has Lydia graced with full reward
The actions of her chief; with fame, respect,
Obedience and a crown. Think not, I speak
With democratic zeal; with sacred awe
I venerate the hand, that sways the scepter,
And bow before the delegate of Heaven.
His country's love, not wild ambition, roused
His matchless valor; when the Persian fled,
And freedom, the reward of public virtue,
Benignly smiled again, the warrior sought
His loved domestic ease, as if he scorned
That scepter, which the fates had destined for him.
But Lydia, urged by civil discontent,
And mindful of her hero's long-tried worth,
Placed him reluctant on the throne, and graced
His honored brows with glory nobly earned.
And shall that people, whose all-giving hand
Whose matchless bounty --

OTANES. Spare that argument;
I feel its utmost force. But grant, a King,
Best in his subjects' love, and fully warmed
With grateful sentiments, to their desires
Should sacrifice his will, why should the people
Control the father, and invade a right
The meanest hind enjoys. You know the cares,
That wring his aged heart and bow him down
More than the weight of years; the ills, that threaten
His son, his loved Olinthus.

ADRASTUS. I have heard
The tale confusedly; but the Gods will never
Desert their image; virtue is their care,
And Dorus claims their patronage; his sun,
Which in its zenith shone with so much luster,
Must set serene, unsullied with a cloud.

OTANES. I doubt it much. ( aside.) Hard were their hearts indeed,
Who could, unmoved, behold the tears stream down
His furrowed cheeks, whilst all in vain he pleaded
His former services, his present cares.

ADRASTUS. Never, Otanes, shall we see again
So great a scene. The King is more than man.
He felt as man; but like a God resolved.
Soon as the rays of truth dispelled the mist
Of weak paternal love, his frame grew larger,
As if some heavenly impulse swelled his bosom.
His sparkling eyes shone with unequalled luster;
His voice imprinted awe; but when he bent
His knees, and raised his trembling hands to Heaven,
Imploring Jove to guide his wandering steps
Through the dark labyrinth of dreaded woes,
I melted, wept -- They were not tears of sorrow;,
No, they were tears of joy, and, might I say it,
Of adoration.

OTANES. Still my heart forebodes,
Some sad disaster threats his close of life.
Have thou not heard, that awful prodigies
Alarm the priests and awe the trembling city.
When they led forth, in all the pomp of prayer,
The sacrifice for Dorus' life and safety,
The ungoverned victim rushed among the crowd,
Fled through the streets, and with unequalled swiftness,
Traversed the plain, and has not since been seen.
In great Cybele's fane strange sounds were heard,
Like dying infants' cries, as if again
Old Saturn cruelly prepared to feast
On his own offspring. Every cheek is pale
With gloomy apprehension, and the priests
Tremble with sacred horror.

ADRASTUS. To the Gods
Let us, Otanes, leave the accomplishment
Of their decrees. It ill befits frail man,
To strive, with feeble eyes, to pierce the cloud
Of dark futurity. The Gods must crown
The virtuous man with never-fading bliss.
To check the haughty, to exalt the good,
But chiefly to instruct his son to rise
By the same steps to equal heights of virtue,
These should be Dorus' cares: Futurity
Belongs to Heaven.

OTANES. The People seem to dread
A war impending.

ADRASTUS. They judge right, Otanes.
The Persian views our happy state with envy,
And meditates new chains.

OTANES. I know him loyal,
(...) still the dread of rivalry may rouse
(...) spark of envy. ( aside) Dorus is grown old,
^erspent with former toils. Occasion smiles
(...) the young Prince. He now may prove the blood
^^om which he sprung, and emulate his fire.
^ak'd from the sleep of peace, the veteran,
^^ain'd by your skill, by your example brave,
^ill joy to fight beneath his youthful banner,
^is princely spirit will inspire new courage,
and guide their swords, quick as the lightning's speed
against their foes.

ADRASTUS. In many a well-fought field.
^is true, I Have followed glory. But my tongue
^ust not be boastful. If my arm has conquered,
(...) have my full reward in Lydia's safety
And the King's smile. But could I see the Prince,
^reat as his fire, when on yon blood-stained field,
((...) then was young) the Persians saw his sword
^^ame like a comet, threatening desolation,
^^ow would I bless the Gods and bid adieu
^o arms glory, pleased to hear the crowd
^dmire his gallant actions, far surpassing
My slender fame, and rivalling his father's.

OTANES. But have thou seen the Prince in his retirement?

ADRASTUS. (...) have, Otanes; and methought perceived
The dawn of future glory. How I wished
To be Araspes thy much honored son.
The Prince doats on him. He with duteous care
Repays his master's love. One will, one spirit,
Actuate both. The chase is their delight.
How have I seen their ardent spirits rise,
Their youthful bosoms throb with fierce delight
When they have chased the stag, or roused (...)
With martial rage.

OTANES. These praises call the ^ears
Of transport down my cheek.

ADRASTUS. Happy old man!
I once had such a son.

OTANES. Thou have a daughter
Gentle and good, and blooming as the flowers,
Which nature scatters round with lavish hand.
Araspes shall supply the son you mourn,
Blessed in Ismene's love.

ADRASTUS. Thanks, good Otanes.
But I have doubts.

OTANES. What doubts? do thou reject? --

ADRASTUS. No, your alliance has my warmest wishes.
My doubts are these: The little jealous God
Smiles at parental wisdom, and derides
The prudent plan designed by sober age.
Love is the cordial drop, which sweetens life,
Without it all is bitterness and woe.
Ismene 's gentle; never yet have I
Controlled her will. Whoever wins her heart,
Wins my consent.

OTANES. O! may Araspes view
(...) charms with soft desire!

ADRASTUS. And may the God
(...) love light up such flames in either heart,
(...) warmed my breast, when first my wondering eyes
(...) held her mother! But the King approaches,
With other look, with other mien we have seen him
^^^wering like Mars, the terror of the plain.

SCENE II. OTANES, ADRASTUS, DORUS.
DORUS. (...), art thou here? Adrastus too?
(...) near, and let me on your faithful bosoms
(...) my wearied frame. Alas! I tremble.
(...) let me rest a while.

ADRASTUS. Permit me, Dorus,
(...) ask, honest zeal, whence flow those tears
^^ich stain thy manly cheek. I blush to see them.
^^^don a soldier's frankness.

DORUS. Well I knew
You would condemn my weakness. But, Adrastus,
You little know the torments I endure.
(...) monarch's glory and the father's love
(...) me by turns.

ADRASTUS. O! may almighty Jove
(...) graced opening youth and riper manhood
With valor, glory, and thy country's love,
Protect thy weak declining age; nor suffer
Mankind to pity, whom they once revered!

DORUS. There, there I feel thee. But I bless the hand
That probes my wounds.

OTANES. Have thou, great sir, retract
The unworthy orders by the crowd extorted.

DORUS. Otanes, no. When I retract my word,
May I be cursed to bear the odious name
Of tyrant!

ADRASTUS. These were Dorus' words. There (...)
The King, the father of a happy people.

DORUS. Am I their father? Yes, their love, their duty
Speak them my children; and shall I reject
Their prayers? no, never; when I shut my (...)
Against their plaints, may I be cursed to reign (...)
Over Scythian slaves, where the deluded crowd
With shouts of triumph sooth their tyran^ (...)
The scourge of human kind; like Egypt's sons
Who court destruction from the crocodile,
And deify the monster that devours them!

OTANES. I dread the oracle; the Sybil's voice
Even now with holy terror damps my heart.

DORUS. O 'twas an awful sound, and big with terror,
Thou heardst it, my Otanes, and thou sawst
My grief, my anguish. Though my soul, resolved
Still holds its purpose, hushing nature's voice,
Yet must the father feel. Olinthus' life
His country claims; my sorrows are my own.

OTANES. I then was in the camp, and since engaged
In war's tumultuous scenes, have heard the tale
Imperfectly.

DORUS. But thou shall hear it now.
Yet do not chide, Adrastus, when thou see
My bosom swell with grief. The monarch's glory,
Trust me, has overpowered the father's love.
For many a year in my Semanthe's arms
I tasted happiness; the harmony
Of soft agreeing minds; domestic bliss
Even on a throne. But still one joy was wanting.
No issue blessed our loves; with ceaseless prayers
And frequent hecatombs I craved the blessing.
At length 't was granted. Ye celestial Powers,
When to my lips ye held the cup of bliss,
Why did ye dash it with such bitterness!

ADRASTUS. Such are the wise decrees of Providence,
A constant round of happiness elates
The human mind, and makes it spurn at Jove,
As the fierce pampered steed rejects the rider,
And scorns the guiding rein.

DORUS. Fired with impatience
(O fatal curiosity!) to know
Olinthus' fate, I sought the Delphic fane.
The altars blazed; the incense reached the skies.
At length the priestess, from her tripod starting,
Full of the inspiring Godhead, thus exclaimed!
"Intrepid offspring of a martial fire.
"Will no kind Power avert the threatened stroke?
"For ah! I see the fatal steel prepared,
"Against his life. The impatient crowd demands
"His guiltless blood; his weeping fire consents.
"But fate in thickest night has hid the rest.
"Adore the Gods; be virtuous, live and hope."

ADRASTUS. 'T was terrible.

DORUS. I swoon'd, I fell to earth,
Nor saw the hated light for many a day.
But my Semanthe! O what sorrows heaved
Thy tender breast! -- she sicken'd, pined and died.
Yet e're she sought the blissful plains she hid
In yon deep solitude her darling boy,
Conjuring me, since Heaven allowed to hope,
Never to see him. -- But ye both have seen him,
And say, how looks my boy?

OTANES. Like the young eagle,
Who in his nest confined, as yet unfledged,
Still meditates a flight beyond the clouds,
And longs to perch upon the hand of Jove.

DORUS. Thy son, the loved companion of his youth,
Has won his friendship. In Araspes' favor
The world speaks loudly.

OTANES. To Olinthus' service
Adraspes holds his heart and life devoted.

DORUS. Then since my presence, like some fatal star,
Scowls on Olinthus, to the field of fame
Together let them rush, together reap
Unfading laurels in their country's cause.
Again the pride of Persia threatens war,
And tyranny with hasty strides approaches.
To thee. Adrastus, I entrust Olinthus.
Thy great example in his breast will raise
The truly martial flame, and wisely check
The mounting blaze of youth's impetuous valor.

SCENE III.
OTANES. Thus far success has crowned my deep-laid schemes,
And empire, which for many a year I have wooed
With all the warmth of love, with every art
And every blandishment, now smiles consent,
And sinks into my arms, a willing conquest.
The people, by my emissaries roused,
Demand the presence of the Prince. --

SCENE IV. OTANES, ARBACES.
Arbaces!
Welcome thou faithful friend. Thy haste has equaled
My swiftest wishes. Say, what sends Darius?

ARBACES. Warmly he wished success --

OTANES. He wished success!
And was that all? -- Curse on his empty wishes!

ARBACES. Though much he hates the King, yet much he fears --

OTANES. It Is cowardice, it is Persian cowardice,
And more than female weakness. Why did I
Request assistance from a despot, nurtured
In slothful ease and base effeminacy,
The slave of women. Where, where are the troops,
Where is the gold he promised?

ARBACES. I have brought
Such sums as will amaze thee and might dazzle
The eyes of virtue.

OTANES. Then some hope remains.
He is not wholly false.

ARBACES. A numerous army
Surrounds the borders, and but waits thy summons.
But much Darius fears, the hardy Lydians
Will boldly throng around the royal standard,
Lavish of life, as when in former days,
Roused by their chief's example, through his hosts
They scattered death and terror. Gold, he says,
Will work its way, with slow but certain venom,
Through every rank of men, and slacken all
The sinews of the state, 'till the whole frame
Relaxed and languid, totters, droops and falls.
Then will he pour, at thy behest, his troops
Resistless over the weakened land, and raise thee
To royalty, still paying yearly tribute
To Persia's throne.

OTANES. O my ambitious heart!
How do thou swell with transport at the thought
Of future glory! Thus the traveller,
Wandering with weary steps amid the gloom
Of all-surrounding night, elated hails
The early dawn, streaking the eastern sky
With purple light. Already, my Arbaces,
(...) have alarmed the superstitious herd
With prodigies. In every flying cloud
They see dire omens, in each whispering breeze
Hear horrid sounds, whilst fancy shrinks aghast
And trembles at the fiends herself has formed.
Be it thy care, Arbaces, to invent
New tales of horror, 'till religious phrenzy
Rage through the land with epidemic fury,
And loosen every tie of love, respect
And loyalty.

ARBACES. Even from my greenest years
(...) have felt the genial influence of thy smile.
When in Darius' cause my father fell,
Thy bounty raised me, a poor Persian orphan,
To ease and greatness; and when I forget --

OTANES. I know thy worth, Arbaces; in my kingdom
Thy services shall meet their due reward.
Araspes too shall love thee, and shall grace
Thy zeal with honors equal to thy merit.

ARBACES. But have thou tampered with Adrastus yet?
(...) dread his Influence.

OTANES. If he scorns to bend
Before the storm, he must be hurled to earth
Uprooted by its rage. He dies, unless
His virtue melts, when he beholds Ismene
In my Araspes' arms, the destined mother
Of kings and heroes.

ARBACES. Then I Am lost indeed ( aside)
Ismene, said thou?

OTANES. Yes, that happy union
Will doubtless draw Adrastus to my party.
His name, his valor will support my cause,
And quell the turbulent.

SCENE V. OTANES, ARBACES, ADRASTUS,
ADRASTUS. Otanes, haste!
The King demands your presence, to receive
His final orders; you must meet the Prince.
The eager citizens desert their houses
And pour upon the plain, like rolling waves.
The streets are strewn with flowers, the shout of joy
Swells in the air; glad opulence presents
The flowing cup; the crowded windows shine
With gazing beauty. Age and sickness quit
Their long-press'd pillows, eager to behold
The nation's hope, then close their aching eyes
With day afflicted. Poverty looks gay,
And misery smiles.

OTANES. I come; Arbaces, follow.

End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. EUDOCIA, ISMENE, CLEANTHE,
EUDOCIA. Yes, my Ismene; I approve thy scorn.
It Is just; it is worthy of Adrastus' daughter,
Sole offspring of that chief, who long has prop'd
The Lydian throne.

ISMENE. Even now with hasty steps
And eyes, which showed at once revenge and love
And sullen pride, he passed along in silence.
That awful silence bodes the approaching storm,
Which soon may burst --

EUDOCIA. Away with idle fear.
He dares not; though protected by Otanes,
His haughty patron, still Arbaces dreads
Thy father's fury. Let this Persian captive
Disturb no more thy quiet. Other thoughts
And prospects, brighter far, should cheer the heart
Of great Adrastus' daughter. Hark! that shout
Proclaims Olinthus nigh.

ISMENE. I often have wondered
Why thus remote from men the Prince so long
Has wasted youth, the season of instruction.

EUDOCIA. It was not wasted. With a chosen few
The awful secret rests. Again they shout.
But my Ismene, if thy mother's love,
Her soft indulgence and her tender cares,
Have touched thy heart with filial piety,
Attend my counsel. Thou art young and artless,
Unpracticed in the arts of men; then dread
The voice of calumny, respect the fame
Of thy great ancestors -- and shun the Prince.
They come; let us retire.

SCENE II. DORUS, OTANES, ADRASTUS, ARBACES, OLINTHUS, ARASPES, and Courtiers.
DORUS. My son! my son!
Rise my Olinthus; to thy father's bosom,
O let me hold thee fast.

OLINTHUS. This happy moment
O'erpays an age of absence. O my father!
Am I permitted to behold at length
That venerable form, from which I sprung.
Great author of my being!

DORUS. Hear his Voice;
Behold that face, Otanes; thus I spoke,
Thus looked, when on Pactolus' banks my sword
First shone in freedom's cause. -- Another son!
How like Olinthus! Heaven! what kindred graces
Appear in either frame. Approach, Araspes!

ARASPES. Thus, humbly thus, let me with eyes, that speak
Respect and veneration gaze upon
The god-like Dorus.

DORUS. To his heart, Araspes,
Thy King, thy kinsman holds thee. O my sister!
O my Semanthe! could ye now behold
My joy, my transports -- but unerring Fate
Has otherwise decreed -- and I submit.
But say, Olinthus, how have thou beguiled
The dreary hours, which kept thee from my arms,
But kept thee too from luxury and courts.

OLINTHUS. Armed with our spears often have my friend and I
Explored the thickest gloom of yonder forest,
And traced the ravenous monster to his haunts;
Then roused him from his den, and as he rushed,
Furious with rage and famine, boldly met him,
And stretched his horrid carcass on the earth.

ARASPES. And often over fancy's flowery wilds we strayed,
Gathering the brightest truths, with rapture viewing
How eagle-like unconquered virtue soars
Above misfortune and contending fate.

OLINTHUS. The hero's gallant deeds inflamed our breasts,
Like him we wished amidst the ranks of war,
To seize bright fame.

ARASPES. Like him we wished to die,
Crowned with immortal praise.

ADRASTUS. O gallant spirits!
These princely lions need not to be roused
To martial contest. It shall be my care
To point them out their prey. Then will they rush
Headlong amidst the horrors of the chase,
Shivering the hunter's spear.

ARASPES. Curse on the wretch,
Who loiters, when his country's cause demands him.

DORUS. Come to my arms, ye gallant youths; already
In these fair opening buds I see the assurance
Of full-blown glory. (O propitious Jove!
Avert the threatened tempest!) say, Otanes,
Does not thy heart like mine exult with joy?

OTANES. It does; 'till now I never knew those joys,
Those sweetest joys, which filial virtue gives.

DORUS. Olinthus, I have often implored the Gods
To grant a son, whose valor might preserve
The land I freed -- and they have heard my prayers.
Tomorrow's sun shall see thee shine in arms,
Thy country's champion, and the scourge of Persia,
Nor throw them off, 'till thou approve thyself
Worthy of a throne; tomorrow haste to glory,
Thou and Araspes.

OLINTHUS. On my knees I thank thee.

ARASPES. And I. As long as strength shall nerve this arm,
And active life inform my frame, bear witness,
Immortal Powers! my sword shall flame against
The foes of Dorus, Lydia and Olinthus.

DORUS. Rise, my Araspes; whether nature's voice,
Or the strong sympathy of kindred souls
Has worked this tenderness, I cannot tell;
But sure I love thee, and my heart presages,
Thou shall be great and happy.

ARASPES. Who can see
Such merit so rewarded, but must own
The power of virtue, and confess, the Gods
Raised thee to empire. They will guard thee still,
^ight in thy battles, and confound thy foes
With heaven-born terror. O my Prince, tomorrow
Tomorrow we begin to live. No more
Confined in narrow limits shall we see
^ay following day in dull succession pass
Inheeded by. Thy father bids us rush
^o arms, to fame, to conquest. Now our souls,
Like the plumed songsters, from their prisons freed,
Shall soar on high and wing their way to fame.

OLINTHUS. ^ft have we shared the dangers of the chase
With force and skill united. Now, my friend,
Together let us rush upon the foe,
And to his friend each prove a sure defense.
Know thee brave, Araspes, but I trust,
Thou will not far outstrip me in the race
Of honor.

ADRASTUS. God-like emulation! When
Two souls, devoid of envy, pant for glory,
And from each other catch the noble flame.

DORUS. Sure I was never unhappy; sure the Gods
Never threatened misery to this hoary head;
Or if they did, 'twas but to try my virtue.
But now to pine in gloomy discontent
Were rank ingratitude. Then welcome joy!
Hence every care! I leave you to the wretch,
Who joyless views his hoarded treasures rise,
Nor thanks the Gods, because some sordid trifle
As wanting to complete the sum he wishes.

SCENE III. EUDOCIA, ISMENE, CLEANTHE.
EUDOCIA. O powerful nature! how thy magic works,
Deep, secret, sure! controuling every sense
With force resistless! true to thee, the heart
Feels strange emotions, unsuspecting whence
Springs the all-ruling impulse. O complete
Thy wondrous work, whilst I in silence view
Thy mighty influence, and adore thy God!

SCENE IV. ISMENE, CLEANTHE.
ISMENE. Cleanthe, did thou mark that faultless form,
Those eyes, which spoke at once heroic ardor,
And melting tenderness.

CLEANTHE. Those eyes were fixed
On fair Ismene's charms; the Prince already
Has felt their power.

ISMENE. Talk not of the Prince.
And could thou gaze upon a star, Cleanthe,
When the fair regent of the night disclosed
Superior luster. In Araspes' form
What graces bloom! but sure that form contains
A spirit brave, though mild. The temple thus,
Though decked with all that human art can boast,
And shining with the gifts of lavish zeal,
Owes its chief glories to the powerful God,
Who deigns to dwell within.

CLEANTHE. This warmth of language
Denotes a wondrous change. At length thy heart,
Thy haughty heart, is softened by Araspes,
And all thy slighted lovers are revenged.

ISMENE. What means Cleanthe? do thou think, I love?
O no, my soul disdains the tender weakness.
It Is true, with admiration I beheld
The wondrous youth, yet often with equal pleasure
My eyes have wandered over the verdant meads,
And the gay treasures of the bounteous spring.

CLEANTHE. But when thou saw such beauties bloom around,
Did thine eyes. glisten, or thy bosom heave
With unknown throbbing? Did thy quickened blood
Rush through thy veins, now spreading over thy cheek
A crimson glow, and now each charm resigning
To death-like paleness? Did thy tongue betray
In melting accents, what thy words would hide?
These are the marks, the unerring marks, by which
I trace the progress of the Paphian God.
Already he is busy in thy heart,
And soon, Ismene --

ISMENE. O! thou wrong'st me much,
If thou can think, that such emotions sprung
From such a source. From piety they flowed,
And not from love. Again my father seeks
The fierce invading foe, again exposes
The remnant of his days to toil and danger.
And should he fall, (protect him Heaven!) should he
For whom my bosom bleeds, that gallant youth --

CLEANTHE. What youth?

ISMENE. O how my troubled fancy strays,
Perplexed, bewildered!

CLEANTHE. See! he comes.

ISMENE. Who comes?

CLEANTHE. Araspes.

ISMENE. Haste,
Support my feeble frame; conceal my blushes.
O lost Ismene!

CLEANTHE. Summon to thy aid
Thy strength of mind, thy sex's dignity,
And innate pride, which, though already yielding
Yet must be soothed, before it seems to yield.

SCENE V. ISMENE, CLEANTHE, ARASPES.
ARASPES. Pardon, bright nymph, the lips profane, that daro
Accost such excellence. O do not frown,
While I, with rash but trembling step, approach thee.

ISMENE. Do words, like these, become Otanes' son?
That favored youth, graced with the Prince's love!
Can he in terms, so humble and so distant,
Accost Adrastus' daughter?

ARASPES. Art thou then
That maid, the fame of whose transcendent charms
Pierced the thick gloom, which fenced me from the world,
And bade me wish and languish to behold thee?

ISMENE. O flattery! thou growth of every soil!
Thou b^ooming poison, and thou deadly fruit!
No longer let misjudging mortals deem thee
Peculiar to the court; even in the vale,
Where innocence and truth should only bloom,
Thou grow'st insidious; there the rural youth
Plucks thee with fell design, and to the maid,
He seems to love, presents thee, fatal gift!
Which should she, artless, taste, then shame attends,
And misery and death!

ARASPES. By all my hopes,
By Heaven and thee, my soul disdains the mean,
The unmanly office of a flatterer.
Nurtured by fair simplicity, and taught
To follow nature, from my earliest dawn,
I paid my vows to truth. I found thee fair,
Beauteous beyond my brightest, best idea,
And told thee so. If it is a crime to speak it,
Then Heaven should be adored in silence only.

ISMENE. Cleanthe, we must hence. Perhaps my father,
Engaged in preparation, needs my presence.
Thou know tomorrow --

ARASPES. Will thou leave me thus,
Thus leave me, torn with agonizing doubts?
Stay, cruel maid; but few short hours are given
To speak what I could dwell upon for ages;
My love. --

ISMENE. Araspes, do thou speak of love,
Of love to me, scarce seen, so soon beloved?
I did not think thou would insult me thus.

ARASPES. Insult thee! O Ismene, do not think
So hardly of the youth, who doats upon thee.
Love lights his flame but slowly in the breast
Damped by low pleasures, or by mean pursuits.
My breast was wholly occupied by glory.
Thus love found easy entrance. Glory soon
Welcomed the lovely stranger, owned the force
Of birth congenial, and his empire shares
With his fair sister-passion.

ISMENE. Well I know
Thy martial ardour hurries thee to arms,
And can thou think so poorly of Ismene,
That she should wish with artful blandishments,
To keep thee back from fame.

ARASPES. Sprung from Adrastus,
I know thou must disdain the abject wretch,
Who on the couch of indolence reposes,
When Mars, accoutred in terrific charms,
Summons to war. But may I dare to hope,
That when the trumpet sounds and slaughter rages,
Thou will bestow one thought upon Araspes?

ISMENE. Still must I think of thee as of a youth,
Whom virtue leads to fame; and when my fancy,
Anxious for him, from whom I sprung, shall paint
Embattled hosts, then shall I see thee fight
Fast by his side, and shield him from the foe.

ARASPES. Enchanting words! then thou will think upon me.
That thought, like cheering hope to dying sinn^^s,
Shall in the combat beam upon my soul.
Bright'ning the gloom of war, 'till horror smiles.
Yes, lovely maid, I will, with all the strength
This arm can boast, protect thy fire from death,
Or yield my worthless life to rescue his.
Ismene asks; can I refuse? But mark,
How vain thy goodness has already made me.
I was about to pray, that, if the fates
Permit return, thou would regard in peace
Thy soldier with an eye --

ISMENE. No more, Araspes.
I must not hear thee further; but remember,
That I with warmth conjured thee to protect
My father's life -- yet not expose thy own.

SCENE VI.
ARASPES. She Is gone -- ah no, she is here -- here dwells her image,
Beats at my heart and spreads through every vein.
Did she not listen to my ardent vows
With gentleness, and pray me, not t'expose
My life, as if -- O what a thought is there!
Down, swelling heart or you will burst your limits.
Gods! can I taste such ecstasy, and live!
Ismence, yes, thy wonder-working charms
Have raised me above man.

SCENE VII. ARASPES, OTANES.
OTANES. My son, I sought thee --
But ah! he sees me not -- his cheek is flushed
(...) ^ome intemperate passion --

ARASPES. Still Adrastus --
I must not think so -- hence despair --

OTANES. Araspes.

ARASPES. My father --

OTANES. Thou art discomposed -- some matter
That claims paternal confidence, disturbs thee.
Disclose thy thoughts.

ARASPES. Pardon my wandering mind,
I saw thee not; for oh! my soul was full
Of love and fair Ismene.

OTANES. Gods! I thank ye. ( aside)

ARASPES. O she is sweeter than the breath of morn,
Brighter than day, and mild as infancy;
And if my father will approve my passion,
I will pursue her with such a warmth of love,
That she perhaps may catch the tender flame.

OTANES. Love, when well-plac'd, exalts the noble mind,
And adds fresh transports to the joys of glory.
Pursue, my-son; win and possess the maid.

ARASPES. May favoring Heaven with lengthened days reward thee
For thy paternal goodness! On the wings
Of love, O let me fly to meet Adrastus.

OTANES. Restrain a while the torrent of thy joy,
And listen to the tranquil voice of reason.
Perhaps Ismene's heart. --

ARASPES. Even now I saw her,
And breathed my vows in terms so warm and artless
That she with patience heard me. Love, though hid
Beneath the sweet disguise of modesty,
Methought, looked forth, and cheered my soul with hope.

OTANES. But have thou calmly thought, what toils, what merit,
What bright success should dignify the youth,
What hopes for such a treasure?

ARASPES. If to toil
In winter camps, oppressed with cold and famine,
To pant, to thirst beneath the glowing sin,
To brook no rival in pursuit of same,
And follow danger, though she leads to death,
If these may win her -- why should I despair!

OTANES. Alas! Unpracticed in the arts of courts,
You think, that greatness must attend on valor;
But know, Araspes, every youth excelled
Becomes a dangerous foe, and weak-eyed envy
Delights to tarnish even the brightest merit,
Hating that luster, which it dares not gaze on.

ARASPES. And what base tongue will dare malign the youth,
Whom Dorus favors and Olinthus loves?

OTANES. Too often the wretch who thinks himself possessed
Of royal favor, like the gaudy bow,
Shines for an hour, and then is seen no more.

ARASPES. Such there have been. But can I think, a King
So good, so gentle, so beloved by heaven,
Can kill with cold neglect the plant he raised,
And blast the hopes that bloomed beneath his smile?
Impossible! -- But grant those evils happen,
Will not Ismene soften every woe?
In her I Will center all my happiness,
Obscurely blessed in love and conscious virtue.

OTANES. Obscurely blessed! I shudder at thy baseness.
Ismene would despise such grovelling thoughts.
I know, she is nobly taught, and great of soul.
If thou presum'st to gain her by such means,
Strive to forget her.

ARASPES. I am all amazement.
Did thou not tell me of the poisoned breath
Of envy, and the fickle smiles of power?
If these obstruct my way to fame and greatness,
What can Araspes?

OTANES. To a soul resolved --
But I have done -- obscurely blessed! -- shame, shame!

ARASPES. What means my father? O disclose the great,
The important thought, that labors in thy mind;
And if thou see me basely shrink from danger,
May I spin out a long inglorious life,
Hated by thee, and scorned by her I love,
By men detested, and by Heaven abandoned!

OTANES. Again I am myself; then hear, Araspes,
Hear what thy father, anxious for thy fame,
Has plan'd with deepest art; a god-like scheme,
Which, if performed, will raise thee to the height
Of all thy wishes, satisfy thy soul
With love, with glory, and will render thee
The theme and wonder of succeeding ages.

ARASPES. O thou have roused me. Show me fame, though placed
Upon the summit of the loftiest mount,
Whose steepy sides are smoothed with ice, and mock
The tread of mortal; led by mighty love,
Methinks, with steady foot I could ascend it,
Clasp the bright prize, and make her all my own.

OTANES. Know then (for sure I may confide in thee)
The Gods, who long have beamed upon the King
The brightest rays of fortune, now desert him.
Oppressed with age, he drags a feeble being,
And crowds no longer view him with the eye
Of love, or hail him with the voice of triumph.
Domestic ills and foreign dangers cloud
The evening of his days.

ARASPES. Impatience throbs
Within my breast; point out thy glorious project,
That thy Araspes my approve himself
Worthy of thee, and of the blood he boasts.

OTANES. Thy transports charm me, but with calmness hear me.
I saw those gathering evils from afar,
And soon conceived the happy means to raise thee,
Thee, my Araspes, to such heights of glory --

ARASPES. O 'twas a godlike thought! my warmest fancy
Could never have flattered me with such a prospect.

OTANES. A band intrepid, won by gold, by hopes,
And offices of trust, compose my party.
From Persia too a gallant army hastes --

ARASPES. From Persia, said thou?

OTANES. Yes, the great Darius
Knows my long-labor'd scheme, and hopes to share
The harvest of my toils; but Lydia scorns
A foreign tyranny.

ARASPES. Proceed, my father.
O my foreboding heart ( aside)

OTANES. The bold Adrastus
Tomorrow leads to war his wavering bands.
With him Olinthus goes. Myself at home,
Freed from the gen'ral's presence, and surrounded
By thronging friends, shall seize the gates, the palace
The King himself -- his blood perhaps -- thou startest.
He turns away his face; by Heaven he trembles.
Araspes, whence this terror?

ARASPES. Horror! horror!
( Kneeling)
If in thy breast one spark of pity dwells,
If love of virtue, if the dread of Heaven,
Avenging Heaven, are not extinguished in thee,
Ah! spare his life!

OTANES. How, do thou kneel for this?
Have I betrayed myself to thee, thou wretch!
Go to the King, relate the mighty tale,
Rise on my ruin, welter in my blood.

ARASPES. No, never, never; still thou art my father,
Spare, spare his hoary head; respect his virtues,
Think on his bounty -- O reflect upon
The infamy, the eternal infamy --
Behold me at thy feet; thy son implores --

OTANES. Hence I renounce thee; death is not more horrid
Than thy detested presence; loose me, traitor.
Then thus I cast thee off, thou stain to glory.
Haste thee and till the barren soil of virtue,
And reap contempt, disgrace and poverty.

SCENE VIII.
ARASPES (solus.) Open, kind parent, earth; O take me, hide me
From this most horrid sight, a murdered King!
Thou only art my parent; -- hold, barbarian;
Restrain thy impious hand; it is thy King,
Thy friend, the first of men; it is god-like Dorus.
-- 'Twas fancy's work -- be calm, my soul, be calm;
Left thy fierce conflicts fatally betray
What duty, rigid duty, bids conceal.

End of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
ARBACES. Ismene destined to Araspes arms!
Then what am I? a wretch, the veriest wretch
The sun beholds; for her I have renounced
Honor and virtue, plunging midst a sea
Of crimes, which shock my nature; she alone
Was all my hope, the goal of my ambition.
Love urged me on to treason; treason now
Affords no hope; and shall another clasp --
I will alarm the King, unfold the plot
That threats his life, his kingdom and his son.
But hold -- 't were vain; for though Araspes fail,
May not some other favorite of fortune --
Too cruel Gods! and must I lose her? No;
I thank thee, Heaven; it beams upon my soul,
Like some bright star, that glimmers through the gloom
Of night, and cheers the mariner with hope,
Ever yet the fury of the storm be spent.

SCENE II. ARBACES, OTANES.
ARBACES. (kneeling.) Hail, great Otanes, hail.

OTANES. What means this posture?

ARBACES. It well becomes thy faithful slave, who thus
Pays early homage to his King, to thee.

OTANES. Thy King! and lives not Dorus?

ARBACES. Yes, but lives
No longer than thy clemency permits.
Speak but the word; he dies this day. So wishes
The great Darius, who for thy Araspes
Has destined his loved daughter fair Ismene.

OTANES. Ismene for Araspes! By my hopes,
He dies this day, this hour; but say, who brings
These happy tidings?

ARBACES. Artabanes, clad
In peasant's garb; thou know his subtle genius.
Soon as he spoke his message (for he brought
No written orders, to elude detection)
For Persia he departed. Say, Otanes,
How shall the wretch expire, who wears the crown
Thy brows would dignify? Behold this dagger,
I Will plunge it in his breast. Or shall he dra^
The fatal bowl? I know a Persian slave
Versed in the trade of death, who knows no danger,
So the reward be freedom.

OTANES. Nobly thought!
Haste and collect our friends; tell them, Otanes
Now claims their proffered service, now demands
Their hearts, their hands; that at a signal given
They may rush on, and boldly hew their way
Even to the throne; first let Adrastus bleed.
Resistance then will languish. Ever the sun
Sinks in the west, this King shall fall for ever,
To know no other morn.

ARBACES. I fly.

OTANES. Yet stay.
Thy boldness charms me. Would to Heaven, Araspes
Glowed with an equal warmth.

ARBACES. Have thou disclosed
Thy great design?

OTANES. I have; but oh my friend,
He clings to virtue, that pale withered maid,
And slights for her the bright substantial joys
Of empire. Much he loves the fair Ismene.
Even by that spring I strove to raise ambition.
But 'twas in vain; he trembled, wept and kneeled;
Talked of the virtues of the King, his age,
Of honor, gratitude and infamy;
Till madden'd by such insolence of virtue
I spurned him from me.

ARBACES. 'Twas too rashly done.
I dread his wild enthusiastic spirit
(...) him to our ruin. When thou see him,
(...) and thy temper, praise him for his virtue,
And let him think, thou do forego thy purpose.
Thus will his fears subside, and thou may raise,
Against his will, thy much-loved son to empire.

OTANES. Think not, my friend, my firmer soul ever felt
The weak, unworthy tenderness of nature.
O no, by Heaven, I love him for myself,
For my own greatness, that from him may rise
A race of Kings, who shall preserve my fame,
And waft my glory to remotest ages.
But see, he comes, I will observe thy counsel;
Leave me; he knows thou art confederate
In this attempt, and must not see thee here.
Remember, O my friend, it is death or empire.

ARBACES. (aside) It Is death or bright Ismene. Oromazes,
Prosper the happy thought! Let others fight
For crowns and glory; love unsheaths my sword,
Inflames my heart and nerves my arm to battle.

SCENE III. OTANES, ARASPES.
ARASPES. Once more in virtue's cause behold me come
To tell thee thou have wronged me. Would to Heaven,
That were thy only crime! -- To tell thee further,
With all the veneration nature claims,
But with that duty, which I owe to Heaven,
Thou have conceived a project, dark as hell,
Which will degrade thy deeds and fling to earth
The trophies of thy fame, which raised on virtue,
The patriot's valor and the subject's love,
With them must fall. O deaf to honor's voice,
Do thou not hear the shouts of honest praise
The people raise to thee, to thee the second
In that illustrious band, who bled for freedom,
And fixed her empire here? Who mentions Dorus,
And does not join with his thy honored name?
O blind to all the woes, that must ensue!
Do thou not see revenge, led on by honor,
Pursue thee swift to death? -- But death alone
For such a crime were recompense too cheap.
Thy name in infamy's eternal records
Shall stand supreme; for justice must forbid,
That common murderers should share equal guilt
With him who slew his King. And can thou think
That I will live to hear thy name repeated
The scoff of clowns, the public execration?
By Heaven! whatever fate attend my father,
Death or a crown, this ready hand shall pierce
My breast, that future times may know thy son
Shrunk not at danger, but disdained to share
Thy infamy, or prop thy guilty greatness.

OTANES. My son! my glory! my Araspes! O
How shall I speak my anguish and remorse!
Thy virtue has prevailed.

ARASPES. All-gracious Heaven!
And does my father lay aside the base,
The cursed design?

OTANES. A cursed design indeed!
I do; so witness Heaven! How have I doubted,
Since I beheld thee prostrate at my feet!
Now thou have fully conquered. Virtue shines
With such superior blaze, that weak ambition
Crows dim, and loses all its feebler luster.

ARASPES. Hear this, ye Powers! The wise, the good Otanes
Again is virtue's friend; again resolves
To tread the paths of loyalty and honor,
And strengthen drooping majesty.

OTANES. My son,
I must betimes correct the ills I caused
And quench the latent sparks of wild ambition.
It Is true from virtue's paths a while I wandered,
But soon I hope to find the well-known track,
Never again to stray.

SCENE IV,
ARASPES. Direct him, Heaven!
Complete the happy change, and in his breast
Bid honor bloom again -- But see! she comes,
She who can add new luster to renown,
Or gild the gloomy hours of penury.

SCENE V. ARASPES, ISMENE.
ARASPES. Ismene! fair enslaver! art thou come
To gaze with haughty triumph on thy conquest?
The unhappy claim compassion. Often the judge,
Ever he devotes the criminal to death,
Divests his brows of stern severity,
And mixes pity with the awful sentence,
Or may I think, those softened features (...)
A language grateful to a bleeding heart,
That thou will bid me live, and cheer my soul
With some faint hope, some ray of distant bliss.

ISMENE. Still will thou persevere in this strange passion,
The offspring of caprice and youthful fancy?
What sprung so quickly may as quickly perish.

ARASPES. How shall I chase thy doubts. This solid earth
And yon celestial vault were at an instant
Drawn forth from chaos by the Almighty hand,
And formed as we behold them. Thus thy charms,
Thou heavenly maid, have in my breast created
A little world, an empire of thy own,
Where thou and love shall reign with boundless sway.

ISMENE. Even from your birth secluded from the world,
I was the first you saw, the first you fancied.
Some happier maid shall raise a lasting flame,
And build a passion on a firmer basis.
Soon will thou scorn my brittle chains, and wonder
Thy heart could be subdued without a struggle.

ARASPES. Unkind Ismene! hear almighty Jove
And all ye Powers, who cherish truth and honor,
If I prove faithless to such excellence,
Pour down your fiercest vengeance on my head,
Make me so lost, so vile, so execrable,
That parricides shall blush at being human,
And fiends lament that such a wretch was born.

ISMENE. Then hear me too, all ye celestial Powers,
(...) here --

ARASPES. Ah! speak --

ISMENE. It Is treasured in the skies.
The Gods have heard me.

ARASPES. Aid me, bounteous Heaven
Support my feeble reason, lest my brain,
Giddy with joy, should sink in endless night,
And I should cease to live, when life begins
To be a blessing.

ISMENE. Think not, my Araspes,
O think not meanly of the maid who loves thee,
That she should thus precipitately own
What caution should conceal.

ARASPES. O rather say,
Why did thou thus withhold the soft confession,
And torture me with doubt.

ISMENE. It was not pride,
Nor love of flattery that seduced my mind.
How hard the fate of woman, formed to feel
Each soft sensation, elegant desire,
And all the melting tenderness of love.
But tyrant custom shackles every thought,
Restrains the virtuous ardor of our souls,
Checks the fond sigh, forbids the impassioned look;
Chaces bright truth, and yields us up a prey
To mean reserve and dark dissimulation.
But now, sincerity, behold me here
Thy steady vot'ress.

ARASPES. Thou art all perfection.
What have I merited to be rewarded
With charms so great, such purity of mind?
Pardon the virtuous boldness of my love,
Whilst thus I hold thee to a heart, which pants
For thee -- for thee, and glory.

ISMENE. Haste to glory.
Dart on thy country's foes, whilst I in Sardis
Bend to the Gods for thine and Lydia's safety.
Thus may they prove propitious to our vows,
And smile upon our union.

ARASPES. Each kind Power
Shall from Olympus lean to hear the prayer,
Sent from the lips of innocence and beauty.

ISMENE. The same kind Powers shall guard the gallant youth,
Who, mindful of his vows, aspires to join
The hero's laurel with the lover's wreath.

SCENE VI.
ARASPES Thy father just, thy vows successful, all
Thy wishes crowned by favoring Heaven, Araspes,
Think, what a wide-extended plain of bliss
Invites thy steps, and courts thee to be happy.
The King -- he seems in grief -- be hushed, my joys,
For at a sight so awful love must droop
And gay prosperity be taught to tremble.

SCENE VII. ARASPES, DORUS, ADRASTUS.
DORUS. Adrastus, leave me for a while. I feel
Recruited strength; my mind is more at ease.
The Gods are ever just; like the kind parent,
Even to the duteous they display the scourge,
But let it fall in mercy. Seek Otanes.
Bid him prepare the solemn scene.
(exit Adrastus.) Araspes!
I am well-pleased to meet thee thus alone.
Perhaps this night we part to meet no more.

ARASPES. Or rather say, we part to meet in glory,
To boast of conquest, freedom, and renown,
When proud oppression shall no longer stalk
With giant stride, but prostrate lick the dust.

DORUS. Thy generous warmth reminds me of my youth.
Like thee, I sicken'd at inglorious ease,
And courted danger with a lover's ardor.
Beardless, unknown, I mingled with the throng
Of hardy warriors, rushing 'midst the foe,
Where death seemed busiest. One successful deed,
(Beneath my arm a valiant Satrap bled)
First raised me to renown. For twice ten years
With equal eye the God of battles viewed
The warring hosts, 'till by the general voice
Raised to supreme command, I fought and conquered.
Resistance was no more. 'Twas victory,
Pursuit and slaughter.

ARASPES. Gods! let me partake
The glory of so great a day! Then snatch me
From all the joys of youth, and just ambition!
How should I bless my fate and smile in death!

DORUS. O! what a world of woe would I have shunned
Had such a fate been mine. Sweet is the death
Of the brave youth, who falls in virtue's cause.
Unfading laurels deck his tomb; his fame
Remotest times revere. Early he breaks
Those fetters, which retard the old man's flight,
And bind him fast to earth. He shuns the stings
Of changeful fortune and low-minded envy;
He shuns -- alas! he shuns -- the pangs -- I suffer.

ARASPES. How awful are his tears!

DORUS. Possessed of all,
That might content ambition's boldest wish,
Alas! what is my meed? -- Superior cares!
Unequalled toil! precedence in woe!
Am I not raised above the crowd by sorrow
More than by royalty? reserved to see
My country ravaged by the insulting foe,
Groaning in chains! to live, because my blood
Would yield disgrace, not glory to the conqu'ror!
Condemned to breathe, yet wishing death! The first,
The last of Lydia's Kings -- and of my race.

ARASPES. O virtue, piety, success, renown!
How feebly ye support the hero's mind,
Since Dorus weeps! -- Excuse a young man's warmth.
Can such imaginary evils shake
Thy steady soul? O damp not, Royal Sir,
The glow of enterprise, which kindling runs
From breast to breast. Does not our Lydia boast
Hearts as devoted to their country's cause,
As when thy great example bade them conquer?
Does not Adrastus, Persia's dreaded foe,
The scourge of tyranny, lead on our hosts?
Does not thy own Olinthus --

DORUS. Ah! where is he?
O let me clasp him -- bear him, bear him from me.
Tear us asunder -- hurry him amidst
The thickest war -- there let him greatly conquer,
Or die by some brave hand!

ARASPES. You speak the wishes,
The ardent wishes of his princely soul.
There Is not a youth, but will aspire at glory,
Eager to emulate his glorious actions.
Myriads of slaves must shrink before the band,
Who fight in such a cause with such a leader.

DORUS. Again I am myself. Decrepit age
Is often overcast with gloomy doubts,
Which melted in the summer of our days
Before the ray of reason. Yet, Araspes,
If what my fancy fears -- my tears will flow --
If he must fall -- too cruel fate! -- on thee
Thy country's hopes must rest. Thou art in blood
Next to Olinthus, to the throne allied
By virtue more than birth.

ARASPES. Shield him, ye Powers,
Who cherish youthful merit, and reward
The virtuous parent in a happy offspring!
But if the Gods decree, the race of Dorus
With him must cease, let me not live to see
That dreadful day, and mourn the honored youth,
Whom nature, reason, duty bid me love!

DORUS. My second son! my other hope! in whom
Parental virtues join! thy father's zeal,
Thy mother's tenderness! ( embraces him.)

ARASPES. O ecstasy
Unusual transport fills my swelling heart,
As if some Power propitious stood before me,
And gave a foretaste of Elysium's bliss.

DORUS. O memory! why do thou haunt the wretch,
Who fain would shun thee? Bring not to my view
My brighter days, it is cruelty to show
The unclouded scene, then plunge me in the gloom
Of present misery! -- Yet I will indulge
The dear sensation; still methinks I see
My loved Cleone, sweet'ner of my toils.
She comes, attended by her virgin choir,
And hails me victor. Over her blooming cheek
A deeper crimson spreads, the glow of triumph.
Anon a death-like paleness clouds her beauties.
She sees my wounds, she trembles for my safety,
Then weeps, and prays, and wearies Heaven with thanks.
Thy mother too -- O I shall never forget
That awful hour, when grasping fast my hand,
Whilst all the mother struggled on her lips,
She cast a dying look of fondness on thee,
And in that look implored me to protect thee.
I will -- I will -- Thou art the legacy
She left a much-loved brother -- I will keep thee
Next to my heart -- Olinthus too demands
In me a double parent. Gods! that thought
Produces horror.

ARASPES. Why those looks of terror,
O venerable Dorus? why those eyes,
That stream with causeless sorrow, raised to Heaven
Upbraidingly? Thy frame too shakes -- Alas,
He sees, nor hears me. I too tremble. Gods!
Sure this is more than human!

DORUS. Yes they left me,
Meanly they left me for Elysium's bliss,
Alone to struggle with contending fate
And hostile Gods, to drain the bitter dregs
Of life's last cup, to crawl upon the earth,
A weak, deserted, miserable being,
O'erburthen'd with my woes!

ARASPES. Here let me kneel,
Thus prop thy feeble frame, that sinks to earth,
Nor rise, till thy returning reason bless
Offended Heaven. Look on me, speak to me,
My more than father!

DORUS. Lead me hence, Araspes.
I Am weak; I Am very weak; my mind too droops.
I fear I have been rash; did not my frenzy
Accuse the Gods?

ARASPES. Alas! your reason wandered.
You knew not what you said.

DORUS. My grief requires
A short repose. I shall be well anon.
Araspes, let this scene instruct thy youth.
Behold in me the uncertain state of man,
A King, unhappy in a well-earn'd crown,
A father, joyless in a worthy son.
Yet heaven deserves no blame. I was too happy.
Excess of bliss corrupts the noblest heart.
The richest soil throws up unnumber'd weeds.
Then treasure in thy breast an old man's counsel.
When Heaven afflicts us, let us deprecate
Its wrath with tears and humblest supplications.
We must feel sorrow; but should never upbraid.

ACT IV.
SCENE I. ADRASTUS, EUDOCIA.
ADRASTUS. Urge me no further; it is in vain; as well
Thou might attempt to shake the firm Olympus,
As sway me from my purpose.

EUDOCIA. Yet reflect
On thy Ismene's sufferings. Think thou see her
Weak, trembling, pale, expiring at thy feet,
Torn from the youth she loves.

ADRASTUS. Now by my wrongs
Thy folly more provokes me, than the scorn
Of proud Otanes. Would thou see me kneel
And strive with prayers sooth his haughty spirit?

EUDOCIA. And did he scorn thee?

ADRASTUS. Hear, and as thou hear,
Let every spark of virtuous pride be roused
And kindle into rage. Before they met,
He proffered his alliance; but when now,
Curse on my weakness, I with warmth consented,
He scarce vouchsafed an ear, then turned away
Abrupt; he even dared to frown disdainful,
And left me swol'n with rage, too big for utterance.

EUDOCIA. Otanes well deserve redoubled scorn,
Contempt and hatred; but Araspes' worth. --

ADRASTUS. I know him well, noble, sincere and valiant.
But by the immortal Powers --

EUDOCIA. O be not rash;
Thou know not all; forgive me, righteous Heaven!
He is -- he is --

ADRASTUS. I care not, though he be
The nephew of the King; for is he not
The son of cursed Otanes? Mark my counsel.
Go to Ismene; teach her to subdue
What honor must condemn; to act with firmness,
And tear the unworthy passion from her bosom.
Araspes never shall wed her; to reply
Were vain. Do this, for this alone becomes
Ismene's mother and Adrastus' wife.

SCENE II.
EUDOCIA. Impetuous man! wilder than storms he rages,
Whenever his honor suffers. Yet must I
^amely relinquish all my soul holds dear,
And wound a daughter's peace, perhaps destroy her,
Because he raves? Soon shall his haughty spirit
Confess the nobler purpose of my soul,
And wonder at a woman's gallant daring.

SCENE III. EUDOCIA, ISMENE.
ISMENE. Madam, what has caused my father's anger?
Therein have I offended? For his looks,
That pierced my heart, declare, I have offended.
He spoke with angry accent. "Hence," he cried,
"Thy mother seeks thee; learn from her my will,
"A father's will, who brooks not disobedience."
But thou art silent.

EUDOCIA. Be composed, Ismene.
Restrain thy grief; all shall be well anon.

ISMENE. Have I not cause to weep? 'Till now I Have found him
Tender, and most indulgent to my wishes.
But he is changed, -- how changed! -- In pity,
Declare the crime, the hated crime, which thus Madam,
Deprives me of his love.

EUDOCIA. Inhuman Sire!
To crush with disappointment's cruel weight,
The tenderest feelings of the heart!

ISMENE. Alas!
I feared this stroke; but am prepared; no more
My eyes shall flow, no more my bosom heave
With swelling anguish. Here behold me, Madam,
Behold me ready to perform his will,
Though death should follow. My stern father deems me
Weak, light of faith, a conquest, cheap, nay vile.
He thinks I have transgressed the bounds of prudence,
Betrayed my sex's cause, and meanly spoke
My love without a struggle or a blush.

EUDOCIA. Thy reason errs; he thinks not meanly of thee.
For well he knows, thou had a mother's sanction,
Nay more, his own consent. His calmer reason
Approved, what now his frantic rage rejects.
I will appease his wrath.

ISMENE. Ah! see Araspes!
Hither he comes; his looks are pale and wild;
His eyes are fixed upon the earth, and now
He raises them to Heaven. His cheek is wet
With tears -- I can not bear those tears, my mother.

SCENE IV. EUDOCIA, ISMENE, ARASPES.
ARASPES. Ismene, why those tears, why swells that bosom,
Where love, with peace and harmony, should dwell?

ISMENE. O speak to him, my mother; let him know
All my soul's anguish, my stern father's will,
He must not for a moment think me faithless.

EUDOCIA. When Heaven approves and fortune smooths our paths,
How swiftly do we run the race of life,
And reach the goal of bliss. But greater far
The merit of the youth, who boldly climbs
Misfortune's cliffs, and treads the thorny paths
Of disappointment, with unceasing courage.
Then happiness spreads wide her plains before him,
And Heaven relents and fortune frowns no more.

ARASPES. These are the smaller ills of life, which care
And courage must surmount. What human voice
Can still the raging of the sea? What prayers
Can sooth the fury of tumultuous pride,
When two fierce souls with equal haughtiness
Endued, disdain to bend before an equal?

EUDOCIA. Yet there are means.

ARASPES. The King --

EUDOCIA. On me depend,
On me. The mother will protect her child,
Who knows thy virtues, and approves her passion.

ISMENE. Where is my father? cruel as he is,
I Will clasp his knees; he will not spurn me from him.
He loved me fondly. Each glad day could witness
Increasing transport, and at night his prayers
Commended me to Heaven.

ARASPES. Thou beauteous mourner!

EUDOCIA. Now can thou doubt my wish to give her comfort?
And sooth her sorrows? Am I not her mother?
Man, sterner man, to rougher scenes inured
And wars discordant din, but faintly hears
The voice of nature. Pride, that dazzling meteor,
Misguides his steps and leads him often to woe.
Ismene, on thy mother's cares rely,
Nor thou despond, brave youth. The Gods will find
Some blessed occasion to reward that love
Themselves inspired.

SCENE V.
ARASPES. To their supreme decrees
With reverence I bow. Where dwellst thou, beauty?
Not in the beaming eye, the blooming cheek,
The graceful gesture, or the faultless shape;
No, in the soul thy throne is placed, and thence
With conscious dignity thou deign'st to look
On life's low pleasures and the baits of sense.
But when congenial virtues catch thine eye,
The Gods light up the purest flame, excite
The tender wish, approve the fair resemblance
And shower down blessings on the happy union.
It must be so -- its origin divine,
My passion must be blessed -- my great protector --
I Will speak my love.

SCENE VI. ARASPES, DORUS, OLINTHUS, OTANES, ADRASTUS, ARBACES and Courtiers.
DORUS. Not only in the fane,
Glowing with gold, and rich in human skill,
The Almighty Power resides. Earth's central gloom
And ocean's depths the eternal presence fills.
Feeble with age, I cannot seek their altars;
Then let us here pour forth our orisons,
Convinced that Heaven regards the pious mind
Its noblest temple. Now the car of day
Rolls down the steep of Heaven with fervid wheel.
The glowing God pants for his Thetis' breast.
Tomorrow his first beams shall rouse our youth,
And guide them to their foes. Olinthus take
This sword, the first that filled my youthful grasp,
And may it fall with fury on the head
Of cursed oppression.

OLINTHUS. As the gift of Heaven
I take it from thy hand, and as thy arm
Never wielded it but in thy country's cause,
Her soldier, her deliverer, her King,
To the same cause thy son shall hold it sacred.

DORUS. Araspes, next in love, approach. Behold
Thy future King. (such grateful Lydia deems him)
Remote from men, from luxury and courts,
Ye drank not of the intoxicating cup
Of pleasure. Friendship nobly has matur'd
What Nature first began. Thou on the throne
Esteem thy kinsman, thou revere thy King,
And let this only strife subsist between you,
Who most shall love his friend, who most his country.

ARASPES. May Heaven so love me, as I mean to prove
Myself the humblest of my Prince's servants,
To fight his battles, to relieve his cares,
To toil, to watch, to bleed and die for him.

OLINTHUS. Friend of my youth, thou shall partake my glory,
And share in every joy Olinthus knows.

DORUS. Adrastus, is all ready?

ADRASTUS. All; the troops
Have sought the frontiers, save some few, who stay
To grace the Prince's journey.

DORUS. Then receive
My last embrace, my son, my loved Araspes!
Haste at the early dawn to deeds of glory.
Go, emulate the conduct of your fires;
Be brave and mild; be just and merciful;
Nor let the rashness of the warrior soil
The hero's luster. -- Ye, who guard the just,
Who in the hour of slaughter turn aside
The hireling's sword, and strike to earth the lance
Of tyranny, accept this pure libation.
Protect these youths; they fight their country's cause;
Protect our Lydian hosts; they fight for freedom.
And thou, who rul'st the orb of day, O hear
A King, and father! If the fates still threaten,
If prayers and sacrifices have proved vain,
If I may yet pronounce his dreaded sentence,
O let him in some glorious conflict find
The hero's death; propitious Phoebus, hear!

ARASPES. Forbear to drink; behold yon trembling slave,
See, from his cheek the color flies; his lips,
Quivering betray his guilt; he shakes, he falls!

SLAVE. O mercy, mercy!

ADRASTUS. Villain, whence thy terror?

SLAVE. The cup -- O pardon!

DORUS. God of justice!

OLINTHUS. Horror!

ARASPES. Detested sacrilege!

OTANES. Despair --

ARBACES. Be calm.

ADRASTUS. Who urged thee to the deed?

OTANES. Thus perish all,
Whose villainy attempts the life of Dorus!

(stabs the slave.) ADRASTUS. O deed of rashness! who can trace his guilt?

SLAVE (dies.)
Induced by gold and O! --.

OTANES, I own it was rash;
But could a loyal spirit tamely brook
So black a crime? Ye friends of Dorus, arm.
Perhaps even now the palace swarms with traitor,
Who love your King and Lydia, follow me.

SCENE VII. DORUS, OLINTHUS, ARASPES, ADRASTUS, etc.
ADRASTUS. Remove this bloody corse.

DORUS. No Lydian heart
Planned this attempt; behold, my friends, the mean
The unmanly artifice of tyranny.
O let it nerve your arms with tenfold fury,
That in the face of Heaven, ye may repay
The arts of cowardice with noble valor.
No act of treachery, however base,
Can warrant treachery. The soldier draws
The sword of justice with steady hand,
And leaves the dagger and the poisoned bowl
To the pale trembling coward.

SCENE VIII. DORUS, OLINTHUS, ARASPES, ADRASTUS, a Priest.
PRIEST. Arm, ye friends
Of Dorus, arm! A band of traitors press
Even to the palace' gates.

DORUS. Traitors! what traitors?
Say whom have I oppressed -- Thy fears, weak Priest,
Create those traitors.

PRIEST. By the Powers I serve --

ADRASTUS. He speaks the truth; they come --

DORUS. Give me a sword --
Some ruffian band suborned by Persian gold --
Give me a sword ( he snatches one) my hand has not forgot
The task of valor; still --

OLINTHUS. What means my father?
Can thy weak arm oppose the raging torrent?
O seek some place or safety. We will guard
Thy sacred life; rush not on certain death.

ARASPES. Illustrious Dorus, leave to us, whose hearts
Beat high with youth and vigor, leave to us
The dangers of the fight; enough of glory
Thy better years have known.

ADRASTUS. This chosen band
Shall guard their King; another waits at hand.
With them, when headed by those youthful Princes,
Success is certain; listen to our prayers.

DORUS. How! fly from Danger; yet it must be so.
'Twas but a feeble warmth -- and now it is over.
Go then, brave youths; Adrastus, guard their lives.
Repel the rebel train, but in the rage
Of slaughter, listen to the voice of mercy.
Remember they are Lydians.

ARASPES. Shield him, Heaven!

ACT V.
SCENE I.
ARASPES. Horror! my guilty Sire! Gods, give me madness!
Let me not think; he called you all to witness --
Deceit, and treason, perjury and murder!
Where shall I turn? I saw him stained with blood;
He bade me join him, nerveless dropped my arm.
I fled, I left my Prince; perhaps he bleeds,
Perhaps my father -- whither shall I fly?
Hark! 't was the clash of swords; the sound approaches,
It still comes nearer; O it is Otanes;
He lives, but lives for what? Gods, must it be?
I will defend his life; against whom? the world.
Here will I stand; here die, or save my king.

SCENE II. ARASPES, OTANES and Soldiers.
OTANES. Ye fought like men, resolved on death or conquest.
Another effort, and the day is ours.
Where is Arbaces?

SOLDIERS. With a chosen band,
He storms the western gate.

OTANES. I grieve, the Prince
Escaped my sword. Adrastus too is fled.
No matter; now, my friends, complete your conquest.
By Heaven yon lurking coward bars my way.
Retire, thou foul disgrace to me and glory,
Retire, and hide thee in some cavern's gloom,
Where human eye may never see thy meanness.

ARASPES. O might indeed earth swallow me from shame.
For now each eye will glare upon thy son,
And every tongue upbraid me with thy guilt.
Desist, my father; justice may relent;
Myself will kneel; the King is merciful.

OTANES. Degenerate boy! mean dastard! -- burst the door.

ARASPES. Now by the Gods he dies, who dares approach!

OTANES. They stand aghast; will none advance?

ARASPES. Retire,
Ye slaves, retire. Here strike, and as thy sword
Thirsts but for royal blood, here try its edge.
First plunge it in the bosom of thy son.

OTANES. I will not kill thee, wretch. I Will drag thee hence.

ARASPES. My brain turns round; beware; advance not nearer.

SCENE III. ARASPES, OTANES, Soldiers and an Officer.
OFFICER. Adrastus and the Prince approach. They lead
A numerous party.

OTANES. Ha! then we must meet them.
Curse on my weakness, that could thus delay
The Important stroke; I should have forced a passage
Even through a bleeding son; unworthy boy,
When next I see thee tremble at my rage!

ARASPES. Inhuman Sire! I tremble for thy life.
The Gods will never permit such horrid crimes.
Justice must overtake him; turn, my father;
Drop thy vain sword; O save thy son from horror;
O save thyself from infamy and death.

ISMENE within. Help, gracious Heaven!

ARASPES. A woman's voice. Perhaps
Amidst the outrages of lawless fury --

ISMENE. Hence, villain! monster hence!

ARASPES. It is Ismene.

SCENE IV. ARASPES, ISMENE, ARBACES.
ARBACES. Nor prayers, nor cries avail thee.

ARASPES. Traitor turn
And find the death thy villainy deserves.

ARBACES. Araspes ha! I did not wish to meet thee.
But since thou seekst my life, defend thy own.
Now judge, ye Powers, who best deserves Ismene.

(They fight.) ISMENE. Ye who defend the weak and innocent,
Strike down the ruffian's sword; protect Araspes,
Let not this Persian slave -- the traitor falls.
He lives, he lives, my brave preserver lives!

ARASPES. Even in this dear embrace do thou not feel
Grief throbbing at my heart? Do thou not see
The marks of horror stamped upon my face?

ISMENE. I see, and fear -- why do thou gaze so wildly?

ARASPES. He was my father's friend.

ISMENE. He was a villain.
His hated love inspired the bold design,
And shook those peaceful walls with war's alarms.
But he is fallen, and treason is no more.

ARASPES. Otanes, O --

ISMENE. Thy Sire may yet relent.

ARASPES. He -- leads the rebel train.

ISMENE. Gods! can it be?

ARASPES. But death shall be my refuge. ( aside) Can thou love
The wretch, whom shame attends, whom hooting crowds
Shall hunt to deserts? Can thy tender frame
Endure rough toil and chilling penury?
Will thou not shrink before the wintry blast?
Will thou not droop beneath the sultry ray?
For no kind roof will shield thy tender frame,
Damp earth thy bed, and heaven thy only shelter.

ISMENE. All this I can. For thee I can renounce
My father's roof, my mother's loved embrace.
For thee renounce the gay parade of courts,
And all the gaudy joys which poorly please
My vainer sex. With more than female courage
(For love shall yield me strength) I Will climb with thee
The steepy mountain, tread the thorny brake,
And be indebted for support to nature.
Her bounteous forests, and her blooming wilds
Shall yield a rich repast; and when at night
Fast by some murmuring brook you sink to rest,
My wakeful eyes shall watch my only care.
At early dawn I Will chide the feathered choir
That wake my love, smile with the cheerful morn,
Kneel to the Gods, and thank them -- for Araspes.

ARASPES. No, leave me to my ruin. Will thou cling
With feeble arms around a falling column?
I am a wretch cursed with unequalled woes.
Link not thy fate with mine, lest thou with me
Should share the hate of men, and wrath of Heaven.

ISMENE. Cruel, unjust Araspes!

ARASPES. My Ismene!

ISMENE. Is thus my love requited? Go, deceiver,
Go, fly, and leave me to despair and death.

ARASPES. Too generous maid! yet, yet reflect, Ismene.

ISMENE. Hear me, Araspes. 'Twas not thy descent,
Nor yet those graces, which enchant my sex
And render thee the envy of thy own,
Endeared thee to my heart. Thy merit won me.
I saw, I heard, I wondered -- and I loved.
Heaven sure decreed, the gallant youth, whose arm
Preserved my honor, should possess my love.
Know then my firm resolve; it is to live
For thee alone or greatly die with thee;
And so reward me, Heaven, as I maintain it.
The storm of war is over; ever now my mother
Has left the temple and expects my presence.
Farewell.

ARASPES. One dear embrace -- farewell -- for ever.

SCENE V.
ARASPES. For ever! yes, my soul, be firm, and show,
Thou art allied to Dorus and to virtue.

SCENE VI. ARASPES, ADRASTUS,
ARASPES. I fear to ask --

ADRASTUS. And much it grieves my heart
To tell thee what must pain thy virtuous soul.
Otanes is no more.

ARASPES. O cursed ambition!

ADRASTUS. The Prince --

ARASPES. How! speak --

ADRASTUS. Fell in the rage of slaughter.

ARASPES. O miserable Dorus! -- tell aloud
Thy horrid tale, till from its deepest caverns,
Hell echo back the sound! the Prince is fallen,
Say next, the King --

ADRASTUS. Behold the royal mourner!

ARASPES. Gods! we are taught that virtue is your care.
Whence then this undeserved, this cruel weight
Of Misery?

SCENE VII. ARASPES, DORUS, ADRASTUS, Officers bearing the Body of Olinthus.
DORUS. Are these my promised joys?
And is it thus I meet thee? Yet even this
Affords some comfort; no dishonor stained
His blooming youth, nor was his father doomed
To see him perish by his cruel sentence.
Ye see me, Gods! oppressed with age and woe,
A weak, deserted wretch; my offspring slain,
My friend a traitor; yet I meet your wrath
With patient grief, and bow beneath the stroke.
Be merciful and grant an old man's prayer.
O take the wretched father with the son,
And let one urn contain our mingled ashes.
My son, my son!

ARASPES. Stand off -- thus let me clasp
His mangled corse and kiss those streaming wounds.
My Prince! my friend!

DORUS. Unhappy youth!

ARASPES. What hand
Accursed, with more than savage fury, gave
That deadly blow?

DORUS. Amidst my poignant grief,
I feel for thee.

ARASPES. I claim not pity, Dorus.
I call for justice, for I knew this treason.

ADRASTUS. Why did thou then conceal it?

ARASPES. Piety,
Mistaken piety at first restrained
My tongue, then tears and oaths lulled all suspicion
Strike, strike, thou once blessed father; take a great,
A just revenge. My guilty Sire destroyed
Thy only son, now punish him in me.

DORUS. Murder my sister's son, my only hope?
No, thou shall gladden millions with thy virtues.
Live, my Araspes; thou shall find in me
A second parent; O forget the former.

ARASPES. Am I then doomed to bear about a being,
Hated by all, and hateful to myself?
Dear murdered youth! we soon shall meet again,
United in our death as in our lives.
Thus --

DORUS. Hold, rash youth! unjust Araspes! stay
Thy cruel hand; has not the blood of Dorus
Already flowed in copious streams? Will thou
Increase my woes? Thy life is not thy own.
Thy friends, the King, thy future people claim it.
The Gods heap sorrows on us, but they give us
Patience to bear and fortitude to live.
Despair and rashness are the weak mind's refuge.
O drop thy sword, and must I kneel to thee?

ARASPES. Thy words subdue despair, unnerve my arm,
And give me back to reason.

(Enter an Officer.) OFFICER. Mighty King!
The people with united voice demand
Araspes' blood.

DORUS. How?

OFFICER. With increasing crowds
They swarm around the palace, and exclaim,
Araspes, as confederate with his fire,
Deserves the traitor's death.

DORUS. Return, and say,
He is innocent, abhors his father's guilt,
And has approved himself his King's defender.
(Exit Officer.) Inhuman crowd! will not his blood suffice?

(Pointing to Olinthus.) ADRASTUS. Restless as waves, and changeful as the wind,
They move obedient to each gust of passion.

ARASPES. I beg to die; I beg it on my knees;
Lead me to death through torture, for my soul
Sickens at life; oppose not their request;
It Is justice calls; I am not worth a pang.
(Re-enter Officer.) The tumult rages with redoubled fury.
They say, that treason lurks about thy person,
And rashly threaten, if thou should withhold him,
To tear him from thy arms.

DORUS. We'll die together;
They shall not part us.

OFFICER. Royal Sir, excuse
My forward zeal. This guilty paper tells
A horrid tale. Araspes here consents
To wed the daughter of the Persian Monarch,
And league with Lydia's foes. 'Twas found within
Arbaces' helmet.

DORUS. Ye celestial Powers!
What must I think? Unwonted terrors seize me,
Shake my old frame, and rend my whirling brain.
Could thou consent?

ARASPES. Let vengeance strike the blow.
Behold me ready.

DORUS. Justify thyself.
Fain would I find thee guiltless. See my tears.

ARASPES. Art thou a King, and do thou lean to mercy,
When crimes like mine demand the stroke of justice?

DORUS. Pity and justice struggle in my bosom.
Adrastus, speak; relieve me with thy counsel.

ADRASTUS. I am distressed, but since compelled to speak,
Though I behold his blooming years with pity,
And know, that mercy often adorns the crown,
Pardon me, Dorus, when I freely tell thee,
Thy country's love should quell the petty struggle.

DORUS. My country -- yes, he leagues with Lydia's foes.
He merits death; conduct him from my presence.
I can not see him bleed -- he saved my life,
And must his blood --

(faints.) ARASPES. Ye pitying Powers! assist him,
Erase each sentiment of fond regard,
Nor let him cease to think, that I was guilty.
Now lead me to my fate.

(Exit guarded.) SCENE VII.
DORUS. (recovering) Weak, suffering nature!
Why linger thus with step irresolute,
When death, the wretch's last best comforter,
Invites thee to the realms of peace and bliss?
Methought Araspes -- horror! (...) preserve him.

Enter EUDOCIA. EUDOCIA. Where is the King? I fear I come too late;
Fly, Lydians; save your Prince --

DORUS. What means Eudocia?

EUDOCIA. Let this explain; it bears Cleone's signet,
Long treasured in the Temple's holy records.

DORUS reads. "In him thou think thy sister's son, behold
"Thy own Olinthus; to avert his fate
"(Since Heaven denied not hope) I used this art.
"Cherish thy offspring; Gods, protect my son!"
O for the lightning's speed; fly, save Olinthus;
Restore him to my arms; he is dead, he is murdered,
Murdered by me! Slave, speak --
Enter a Slave.
SLAVE. O deed of wonder!
A timid virgin has preserved his life.
Amazement hushed the crowd; their fury ceased,
As if a Deity controlled their rage.
The sword was raised; she dauntless rushed between,
And struck -- behold them here.

SCENE VIII. DORUS, ARASPES, ADRASTUS, EUDOCIA, ISMENE.
ISMENE. He would have slain him;
The vile Assassin would have slain my love.
But see his blood; it smokes upon my dagger.

DORUS. My son; my son! dear offspring of Cleone!
I thought thee guilty, gave thee up to death;
But thou art saved -- and thus I thank the Gods!

Kneels. ARASPES. My father, since that tender name is thine,
(And O my heart at first confessed the tie)
I never conspired against thy life or crown,
But owned the guilt, that I might rouse thy rage,
And find in death a refuge from my sorrows.
Be bountiful and to the life you gave
Add happiness; that heavenly maid is mine,
Mine by the strongest vows --

DORUS. She well deserves thee.
She was the chosen instrument, whom Heaven
Inspired with courage far beyond her sex,
To save my soul from horror.

ARASPES. My Ismene,
Rescued from shame, restored to life and thee,
What further blessing can I ask from Heaven?
Your wondrous love shall bless the life you saved.

ISMENE. Why should I blush to own what Heaven approves?
Thy virtues charmed me, as thy valor saved,
And that I love thee is but to obey
The will of Heaven. When I preserved thy life,
I saved my own. I heard the deathful shout.
My reason vanished. Love, wild, desperate love,
Roughen'd my sex, and gave me strength and fury.
I scarce remember what my rage has done,
But sure this dagger ill becomes my hand.
My mother --

EUDOCIA. See the tears of transport slow.

DORUS. Adrastus, why that could upon thy brow?
We both have erred; we both should now rejoice,
Deriving happiness from former errors.
Now let us seek the temple to adore
The All-ruling Powers and confess their justice,
Who rouse our virtues by affliction's stings,
Rear bliss on woe, from ills elicit good,
And to the virtuous Sire preserve the son.

FINIS.

