LIBERTY AND PEACE, A POEM.

BY PHILLIS PETER'S.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY WARDEN AND RUSSELL, AT THEIR OFFICE IN MARLBOROUGH-STREET.
M, DCC, LXXXIV.

LIBERTY and PEACE.
LO! Freedom comes. The prescient Muse foretold,
All Eyes the accomplished Prophecy behold:
Her Port described, " She moves divinely fair,
"Olive and Laurel bind her golden Hair."
She, the bright Progeny of Heaven, descends,
And every Grace her sovereign Step attends;
For now kind Heaven, indulgent to our Prayer,
In smiling Peace resolves the Din of War.
Fixed in Columbia her illustrious Line,
And bids in thee her future Councils shine.
To every Realm her Portals opened wide,
Receives from each the full commercial Tide*
Each Art and Science now with rising Charms,
The expanding Heart with Emulation warms.
Even great Britannia sees with dread Surprise,
And from the dazzl'ing Splendors turns her Eyes!
Britain, whose Navies swept the Atlantic over,
And Thunder sent to every distant Shore:
Even thou, in Manners cruel as thou art,
The Sword resigned, resume the friendly Part!
For Galia's Power espoused Columbia's Cause,
And newborn Rome shall give Britannia Law,
Nor unremember'd in the grateful Strain,
Shall princely Louis' friendly Deeds remain;
The generous Prince the impending Vengeance eye's,
Sees the fierce Wrong, and to the rescue flies.
Perish that Thirst of boundless Power, that drew
On Albion's Head the Curse to Tyrants due.
But thou appeased submit to Heaven's decree,
That bids this Realm of Freedom rival thee!
Now sheathe the Sword that bade the Brave atone
With guiltless Blood for Madness not their own.
Sent from the Enjoyment of their native Shore
Ill-fated -- never to behold her more!
From every Kingdom on Europa's Coast
Thronged various Troops, their Glory, Strength and Boast.
With heartfelt pity fair Hibernia saw
Columbia menaced by the Tyrant's Law:
On hostile Fields fraternal Arms engage,
And mutual Deaths, all dealt with mutual Rage;
The Muse's Ear hears mother Earth deplore
Her ample Surface smoke with kindred Gore:
The hostile Field destroys the social Ties,
And ever-lasting Slumber seals their Eyes.
Columbia mourns, the haughty Foes deride,
Her Treasures plundered, and her Towns destroyed:
Witness how Charlestown's curling Smoaks arise,
In sable Columns to the clouded Skies!
The ample Dome, high-wrought with curious Toil,
In one sad Hour the savage Troops despoil.
Descending Peace the Power of War confounds;
From every Tongue celestial Peace resounds:
As from the East the illustrious King of Day,
With rising Radiance drives the Shades away,
So Freedom comes arrayed with Charms divine,
And in her Train Commerce and Plenty shine.
Britannia owns her Independent Reign,
Hibernia, Scotia, and the Realms of Spain;
And great Germania's ample Coast admires
The generous Spirit that Columbia fires.
Auspicious Heaven shall fill with favoring Gales,
Where ever Columbia spreads her swelling Sails:
To every Realm shall Peace her Charms display,
And Heavenly Freedom spread her golden Ray.

