THE PHILADELPHIAD; OR, New Pictures of the City: Interspersed with a candid
review and display of some first-rate Modern CHARACTERS OF BOTH SEXES:
Delineated in a friendly and satirical manner, and containing sketches of the
materials that distinguish the following places, viz. COURTHOUSE, NEW-JAIL,
THEATER, BAGNIO, HOSPITAL for LUNATICS, BELL'S-BOOK-STORE, STATE-HOUSE, and
COFFEE-HOUSE.
With other entertaining Anecdotes, humorous, moral and sentimental.

VOL. I.

Ut pictura Poesis erit.
HORACE. Should vice expect to 'scape rebuke,
Because its owner is a duke?
SWIFT. PHILADELPHIA: Printed for the Editor by KLINE and REYNOLDS, and sold at
their Printing-Office in Carter's-alley, and by all the Booksellers in Town and
Country. 1784.

DEDICATION. To the great Men of Pennsylvania.
SIRS,
THE principal author of the following sheets is under so many obligations to
you of late, that he cannot pass this opportunity of testifying his respect --
he is sensible of your favors, and particularly the obliging condescension that
some have shown in sitting for their poetical pictures -- The gallery is not
yet complete, but as soon as the circuit is over, I hope to be able to make a
larger addition to the group, for the entertainment of the winter connoisieurs.

I must also observe, that it would be presumption in me to claim all the merit
of the Philadelphiad; a judicious reader will easily perceive that it is by
different hands; and as the same gentlemen have promised their future aid,
whenever their necessary avocations will permit, I have no doubt but my next
volumn will, if possible, be more spirited and complete, as the subjects are
numerous that are yet unpainted.

I am, Gentlemen, with Respect, Your most Humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.
Sept. 30, 1784.
THE PHILADELPHIAD, etc.
Hominem Pagina nostra sapit.
MARTIAL.
HAIL! happy land where Freedom smiles secure,
Where no proud tyrant robs the thrifty poor,
No empty lordling grasps the whole domain,
Nor famished farmer tills the fruitful plain;
Each peasant's cottage is his castle wall,
And Boundless Liberty defends us all:
No pompous monarch wields a scepter here;
No sacrilegious bishop do we fear;
All unrestrained, no power but law can bind,
Columbia's sons are free as passing wind.
Time out of mind the poets used to stray
Over groves and grotts to paint the rural day,
Rumag'd each mead and garden to complete
The rough appendage of some country seat;
Or racked invention to pourtray a grove,
That only harbored innocence and love,
Or wildly painted on the grassy mound
Some simple shepherd with his flocks around --
From scenes like these, congenial to my heart,
Half pleased, half forced, some useless hours I part,
And through the city mark each vari'd scene,
Though wanton folly lists her veil between.
" Sweet Philadelphia! lovliest of the lawn,"
Where rising greatness opes its pleasing dawn,
Where daring commerce spreads the adventurous sail,
Cleaves through the wave and drives before the gale,
Where genius yields her kind conducting lore,
And learning spreads its inexhausted store: --
Kind seat of industry, where art may see,
Its labors fostered to its due degree,
Where merit meets the due reward it claims,
Though envy dictates and though malice blames: --
Thou fairest daughter of Columbia's train,
The great emporium of the western plain;
Best seat of science, friend to every art
That mends, improves, or dignifies the heart;
It Is thee I sing; thy various scenes display,
And praise or blame or bring dark vice to day.
COURTHOUSE.
" -- Yes sir, a courthouse!" -- Pray explain for what,
To mend old shoes or harbor senseless chat?
Or lodge a Prince? Or be a school for law,
Where scolding barristers expound a flaw? --
Built for the law and for the public use,
No empty head should here the seat abuse;
No mean pretender should decree the cause,
No vacant judge should here pronounce the laws;
Justice is sacred; once its course debased,
A nation's character is soon effaced;
Freedom unlaw'd may raise her banners high,
But justice only lifts them to the sky.
It Is strange to see some ciphers sit in state,
To deal the law or hear the learned debate,
Decide on matters foreign to their skill,
Led by dark precedent -- more foreign still:
Is men of worth, of real merit, scarce,
That such should act this lawful laughing farce?
Go search them out and let the laws be given
By those of genius favored most by heaven,
Clear, deep and tutored well in right and wrong,
With head and heart to prompt a ready tongue,
Bred to the bench and not for fortune made
A judge by rule, a S. C. M. by trade --
Though all are useful in their proper sphere,
But reason tells me that it is not here.
How would a cobbler judge a cobler's plea?
With partial verdict every eye may see;
Or where is the merchant when the point's his own
That would not wish his adversary thrown
To raise his gain? And self-excus'd would say,
" 'T was making money in an honest way?"
NEW-JAIL.
This is the house of misery supreme,
Where sad misfortune bears the lash of blame,
Where injured worth often finds the robbers doom
Drags the great chain or meets the dungeon's gloom,
Of friends bereft; to social converse lost --
How very few are friends when wanted most,
Robbed of the air and Heav'n-surrounding light,
To which with life all beings have a right,
And bears beside the "whips and scorns" of fate,
The proud man's censure and the mean one's hate.
Siez'd by some feelless creditor severe,
See bor'n along the victim of despair,
Torn from his friends, his wife, his children dear,
While round they cling and drop the pleading tear;
His faithful partner, tender, full of love,
Tries every art the officers to move,
But vain alas! are wife's and children's tears,
The law-led monsters hence the father bears,
Their lord, their master, sole support, their all,
Now gone the helpless family must fall --
Nor wife's solicitude nor children's charms
Now heal his grief, nor fill his longing arms;
No more the little prattlers climb his knee,
No kind domestic transport does he see
No social scene that softer charms impart,
But mournful all that strike with grief the heart,
Dark gloomy grates that half admit the light,
The clanking fetter horrid to the sight,
The surly keeper, hard unpleasing fare, --
All, all complete the measure of despair.
A CHARACTER; or A few traces in Crambo's Picture.
Yes you condemn the city and its ways,
Applaud the country and its verdure praise,
Sigh for the shade and seek the spreading trees
Or court the fanning fond refreshing breeze. --
Tell Crambo this -- it throws him in the fits;
" Lord, sir! the stupid soul has lost his wits --
" Go mix with Indians! Quit the shining town!"
He says with anger and a senseless frown;
For well he minds the time he drove the team,
Ere merchant dignified his humble name.
Then grogram jackets served in place of silk,
Instead of wine the kind nutricious milk;
Then pennys saved were pennys to the last;
He scraped and scraped, and as he scraped laid past;
The whip, the spade, the plough was his resort,
No frolicks saw him nor the mirthful sport.
Some thirty pounds to city brings the swain,
But mean low penury rewards with gain;
A merchant soon he strutted like the rest,
Spoke with the foremost, with the foremost dressed;
Cash made him bold and ignorance gave face
To follow what to others was disgrace;
Grown fat at length and politic and great,
See slaves of different colors round him wait.
With formal wig and smooth unmeaning face,
He reads the news and wishes for a place,
Thinks all the judges are a pack of fools,
Make him the chief and he will prescribe new rules
Turn wardens, sheriffs, justices out of doors
And make a law to tax the city wh-r-s --
But for the country -- name not such a place,
The very thought to Crambo is disgrace.
Think not I rail against the saving scheme,
That I applaud, but empty pride I blame.
If fortune smiles be modest and be wise,
Nor let her smiles surround thee with disguise;
Hide as you will and cover all you can
Crambo appears conspicuous in thy van:
Wit, genius, knowledge, breeding, learning, sense,
Owe naught to pride, no aid receive from thence,
And all these qualities can be displayed,
And please as well in sustian as brocade.
COUNTRY CLOWN.
Just from the plough observe the country clown
His first fond visit to the splended town,
Round all he gazes rudely with delight,
No foolish object escapes his wheeling sight:
The lofty spires that seem to touch the skies,
He wiews with wonder and with wild surprise
Each shop and store where childrens toys are sold,
He fancies magazines of countless gold,
The stalls and signs with pleasure he surveys;
Still disconcerted by surrounding drays,
And crowds and fops, and noise, and " here is the news!"
And thus he judges as the whole he views.
" La! what a power of shining whokes are here!
" It Is surely Sunday -- all in dress appear;
" A charming place for frolicks this indeed,
" No corn to hoe, nor fields of wheat to weed,
" I swear now, Jonathan, the town's delightful,
" The country nasty, stupid, dull and frightful
" And O whot kliver girls -- so fine a sight! --
" Our country hoydens is to these a fright,
" There Is Sall and Suk that shines the village toast,
" Compared with these they are negars at the most.
Poor simple soul! go tend the village team,
Keep from the city and secure thy same.
Beneath these cloths the tempting female wears,
Lurk baneful cunning and delusive snares,
And sweeter far the buxom country maid,
Whom pride and prejudice has never betrayed;
She healthful drinks the rosy-pinion'd gale,
Fresh from the blossom or the grassy dale;
Nor knows the arts the city wantons use,
Who follow fashion and the mode pursues.
Think not the toys which fondly you behold,
Because they glitter, made of solid gold;
And learn this lesson -- seek content at home;
It Is in the mind and not the clime we roam.
THEATER.
The muse with sorrow sees th'virtuous stage,
Sunk by the senseless bigots of the age;
Where social sympathy was wont to charm,
And frigid souls to kindred feelings warm;
Soft 'rose the tear, the tender sigh was heard,
And charmed spectators thanked the pleasing bard,
Each learned a lesson from the poets art
And actors skill that dignified the heart,
While sister muses struck with moving ire
The tragic note and wit-refining lyre:
This held to view the scenes of tender grief,
That taught the mind in mirth to seek relief;
One painted sinking greatness in distress,
The other drew the mirthful comic dress;
Each lent its aid and allied lore produced,
'Till wanton folly scenes of love abused. --
And for the slight transgressions of a few
Must this amusement never rise to view,
No moral scene nor virtue-winning page,
Shown by the actor, teach us from the stage? --
Reason says no: -- Go mind the faulty part,
Redress the stage and raise the actors art.
Great Shakespeare rages, Hamlet's ghost appears
And lost Calista pours her soul in tears,
The shade of Roscius round the scene does rave,
While Garrick's spirit answers from the grave;
Monimia weeps and Belvidera sighs,
Brave Pierre bleeds and tender Jaffier dies,
Alonzo doubts while Zanga aids the thought,
And Richard trembles though he bravely sought;
The mighty Brutus wields the Roman steel,
See Caesar fall! the world's great monarch reel;
Poor Barnwell dies by Millwood's tempting art,
See injured Essex from his Rutland part. --
At scenes like these the tear would grace the eye,
The soul would melt, the heart would heave the sigh
The mind impressed would find a lesson here,
And every heart would mend that dropped a tear.
Next Thalia's train, a numerous train appears,
The laughing offspring of two thousand years;
Thespis and Comus, Falstaff and the rest,
Raise the gay smile and open the sportive jest,
While scenes of love by sentiment refind,
Improve the tender touches of the mind.
See generous Bevil aid the luckless fair,
And young Sir George think Lucy worth his care;
Hear boasting Bobadil display his heart,
And simple Socia act a double part,
And solemn Joseph with devotions zeal.
Betray Those names are familiar with every lover of the Dram to whom they need
no explanation here; and those who are not its admirers will not trouble
themselves about one.
Sir Peter and his honor steal. --
But oh! it is done -- these pleasing scenes are fled
And social, liberal, sentiment is dead;
These tender strokes often painted on the stage,
Have fallen a victim to religious rage,
Not the pure dictates heavenly thoughts inspire,
But blazing bigotry's remorseless fire.
QUAKER.
The ambling Quaker glides along the street,
With thee and thou, and friend and neighbor sweet,
Rogue in her eye, religion in her look,
With even pace that wanton ways rebuke --
Just Penseroso with L'legroe's heart,
A sad Melpomene in Thalia's part.
Though seeming heedless of the passing throng,
She quaintly eyes them as she moves along,
Admires each spark and pants for every swain,
Wishes them friends or that they dressed as plain;
For daddy never could endure a man
Whose coat was cut to fashion's modish plan;
He vows such fools are perfect frights to see;
And for a wife! -- they will not find one in me;
But Simeon Steady must make me a bride --
O La! to have the statue by my side! --
I swear aunt Rachel that I Would rather die
A maid at sixty than beside him lie, --
Though daddy says he has a world of sense,
And knows completely how to make the pence
-- But then to see his coat without a collar,
His buckles just th'size of half a dollar,
His smooth lank hair cut formal round his neck,
His broad brimm'd hat that halfway shade his back,
His shirt's so plain, his cravat smooth and long,
And then, what stupid nonsense from his tongue!
No, let me die and never be a wife
Before I should with Simeon spend my life.
Such is the Quaker's self-denying ways,
They outward blame what most they inward praise,
Think it a sin that man should dress a-mode,
As if a coat or hat offended God.
Reason the matter and debate it over,
He Is still tenacious as he was before,
A perfect bigot wedded to his notion,
Who proves that silence is the best devotion;
But contradict him in his steady ways?
" Friend thee is wrong", or "knows thee what thee says?"
Yet there are some whose views are unconfined,
Who scorn the bigot principle of mind,
Who see religion in its proper view,
Knows what is prejudice and what is true,
Pursues the road which reason says is best,
And thinks the Roman with the Quaker blessed.
THE UNIVERSAL MOTIVE.
" It Is from high life high characters we trace,
" A judge in lawn is twice a judge in lace;"
A county member shines with double glare,
When he to sessions drives his new gilt chair;
Then plodding fools will take him by the hand,
The chair, like magic, friendship can command,
The self-same man on foot may trudge along,
Unknown to all the friendly knowing throng.
A worthy cobbler long might beat the stone,
Before his trade could make his merits known;
But let some god, as fable sings of old,
Descend a shower of man-betwitching gold --
Then he is equal both in sense and breeding,
(For money cancels every want of reading.).
To M-rr-s, H-p-k-ns, Maevius and the rest,
Of tip-top folks that here are thought the best.
Hail! sacred drug! thou cure for every pain,
To foolish man both antidote and bane;
Life-giving nostrum, death-dispensing rod,
That works such wonders not inspired by God,
The selfish motive for each nobler deed,
That guards the worthless while the virtuous bleed
Bribed by thy power the virgin sells her all,
The desperate heart for murder hears thy call,
For you the merchant tempt's th'dangrou's deep
For you the miser robs himself of sleep,
For you mechanics ply the forming tool,
For you the knowing knave will act the fool,
For you the lawyer proves that black is white,
For you the judge will say that wrong is right,
For you the coward fights with courage fell,
For you the general will his army fell, A glaring instance is recent to the
Americans

For you the clergy (heavenly sons below)
Will cure our sins and heal each mental woe,
For you the world, with unremitting toil,
Builds towering hopes on Fortune's faithless spoil;
And men may call their actions what they will,
But gold's their motive universal still.
A CHARACTER We suppose the author means a certain person who was characterised
in the Freeman Journal, March 17, 1784, under the head of t^^ POLITICAL CRITIC
or a Portrait of the young Haberdasher.
A modest citizen unknown to pride,
With unstained character did here reside;
His honest industry increased his worth,
And cured the humble blemish of his birth;
He lived beloved, regretted when he di'd,
By even those his honest cash supplied. --
His son alas! no more is like the fire
Than I to Jove arrayed in wrathful ire;
He shines a blockhead and forgets his breedin
A fool made more impertinent by reading;
A vain blank animal that brags of wit,
With scarce a quality for business fit;
An empty coward, -- cruel too of course,
Mean in his pleasures, in his passions worse:
Boastful he counts his dirty low amors,
His grovling spirit's pleased with common wh-
A poor deluded female of the street
To him is pleasing and to him is sweet:
To finish all and make the picture known,
His best associates in the back are thrown,
Low pimps and blackguards that can rudely talk
To harmless females as they harmless walk.
BAGNIO.
Turn we to view the Bagnio's horrid scene,
Though modest virtue lifts her veil between;
Where tender sympathy should touch the heart,
And soft benevolence distend its part,
The tender tear should glisten in the eye,
For injured innocence demands the sigh;
The social throb should faulter in the breast
To see the relics of the fair distressed,
No wanton heart should triumph over the maid
Whom some low villain roguishly betrayed,
But every aid humanity dilate,
To mourn or mend the wandering females fate.
Now see the youth by facination led,
Court the low raptures of the harlot bed,
His sad dark vigils nightly here to keep,
Where dire compunction robs the wretch of sleep;
Delusive joys betray his tender heart,
Ensnared, bewildered by the wanton's art;
The leg half-naked and the breast quite bare,
With all the studied ornament of hair,
The garments loose to raise the warm desire,
And touch the passions with a keener fire,
Her siren voice that captivates the ear,
With tempting gestures and inviting leer:
These move his heart and youthful mind employ,
'Till fated pleasure proves it is baneful joy.
Here lurks the bully, (horror in his face)
The shame of nature and his own disgrace;
A beastly pander duteous to the call,
A slave, a pimp, a tool, a knave to all.
Next see the matron's well-dissembled looks,
With pious prejudice for heavenly books,
A nun-procuress; devotee quite sad;
With good monitions but with actions bad,
Prone to deceive and watchful to beguile,
To trap the unwary female with her smile,
Or specious presents seeming fair and kind,
She ready makes to win the thoughtless mind,
Talks in one breath of minister and wh-r-,
Of young debauchers and of famisht poor,
Quotes scripture scraps to show her orthodox,
Next tells that Sall and Suk has not the p --.
MARIANA AND EDWIN.
When injured innocence attracts the eye,
Lives there a man that can repress the sigh?
Will social sympathy not lend a share,
To sooth or solace or support the fair?
Or beats the heart that cannot feel distress,
When speechless pity silent claims redress?
If such there be -- O bear the niggard soul
Where frigid seasons half condense the pole.
Sweet Mariana! lovliest of the throng,
The fairest maid that walked thy banks along,
Soft flowing Lagan! -- (where I used to leave
My youthful limbs amid thy polished wave,
And on thy margin early in the morn
With Gaston A friend to the author we suppose.
shook the dew-drop off the thorn,
Or through old Cromac sought the colar shade,
Where aged oaks their verdant branches spread,
There Thomson's page first taught me to admire
The rural scene, and string the doubtful lyre,)
-- Tall, graceful, elegant, designed to please,
A modest dignity she joined with ease,
A face as fair as beauty's queen displayed,
When yielding waves bestowed the charming maid;
These graces too accompanied sense refined,
Learning the brightest jewel of the mind:
Such was the youthful Mariana's charms,
That kindle love and sensual thoughts disarms
An early band of wealthy suitors came,
Whose lands were merit and whose gold were fame;
This wished her hand and that to gain her strove,
But among their pleadings never spoke of love,
Each thought, but vainly, his estate in land
Should all obedience and respect command.
Among the rest young Edwin If this was not a true story, it might be thought a
plagiary from Goldsmith's Hermit.
gently came
And bashful blushing told his tender flame,
Sweet Mariana listened as he spoke,
And soon the sigh of self-conviction broke;
Her fault'ring breath could scarce the word compose,
While over her cheek the vermil symptom glows,
Her wounded heart with palpitations strong,
Robbed of its eloquence the nimble tongue.
But Edwin ignorant in ways of love,
Thought not his words of artless truth could move,
Simply he deemed they some offense conveyed,
And bowing pleaded pardon from the maid.
A candid passion cannot be long concealed,
And soon their mutual wishes were revealed,
Revealed alas to be their mutual smart
Not the solicitude that charms the heart.
What bounds can hold the heart when love inspires,
What object stay or turn the fond desires
Not all Potosia's riches laid to view
Could swerve the lover when his passion's true;
Teem India's treasures to his ready eye,
And heedless still he will for his mistress sigh:
Reason itself with love has little force --
It surely rises from some noble source.
Young Edwin's fortune was but charms and sense,
And Maria's father doated on his pence;
A wealthy match was all his heart desired,
Heedless if love or tenderness inspired;
So when his daughter's wishes first he knew,
He swelled with anger and in passion flew,
Rage filled his bosom and revenge his heart,
And quickly planned the faithful pair to part.
War then with horror spread its dread alarms
Took sires and sons from wives and mothers arms,
This fell a victim, that with dread beheld,
The frightful terrors of the embattled field;
Then Mariana's father laid it so
That proved young Edwin to the King a foe,
Straight had him seized and charged as for a spy;
Himself the judge the injured youth to try.
What could he hope from innocence itself,
When perjured prejudice for worldly pelf
Filled the broad seat where justice should prevail,
And hold aloft her ne'er-belying scale? --
Doomed to the gallows see the victim led,
While round the crowd their tears unceasing shed
The sob of sympathy in every breast,
Their tender pity and their grief confessed. --
He fondly begged but just to see his love,
But all in vain, his pleadings could not move:
Tore from the world in perfect bloom and health
He di' d a sacrifice to sordid wealth.
At home made fast, by servants too secure,
Soft Mariana must her lot endure.
But guess, if narrow fancy can compose,
The pangs of anguish and the wrings of woes,
That tore her heart and every sense awoke,
When first her sire of Edwin's murder spoke!
Life hing'd on hope will fall when hope's no more,
The spirit wandering seeks some happier shore;
So Maria's hopes unhinged no more could turn,
But falling verg'd distractions hopeless bourn.
Her eye was closed -- it opened -- shut again --
Then life restored her to severer pain.
Too late alas! the father loosed his child,
When she as quickly all his hopes beguiled,
She left his house and sought a better fare,
Than that she found beneath his feeless care.
First to the city, by distraction led,
With heedless steps the luckless mourner sped;
Here soon a noted matron marked the maid,
And soon as marked her hopeless heart betrayed;
She saw her innocence and played her part,
With all the cruel cunning of her art,
Deceived the mournful fugitive of love,
From kinder hopes of happiness above,
Undid, seduced and ruined every charm
That 'waits on virtue or can vice disarm.
Innur'd in all the horrors of her fate,
Reflection touched her -- but alas! too late:
When sleepless conscience 'woke the busy though
Dire dissipation its condolement wrought;
" Another spoiler and another came,
" The first was welcome and the last the same,
'Till every tender feeling was effaced,
And in their place sad anguish filled the breast
Nor now the Bagnio's troubles did she dread,
For all her softer sentiments were fled --
Yet if some youth should ask what bro't her there
The question drew the involuntary tear,
And keen rememb'rance swelled her troubled breast;
But true repentance was a transient guest.
Chance turned it so her brother met her here,
But she so changed and altered did appear,
He knew her not. He harrass'd through the wars,
So strangely altered, and disguised with scars,
She never suspected 'twas her brother pressed,
In amorous dalliance oe'r her injured breast --
But passion pausing stopped to hear her tale,
Else had the scene been horrid to reveal.
" Beside the Lagan, gentle flowing stream,
" My father lived, a man of wealthy fame,
" Two rising children claimed his kindest care,
" A daughter -- I, and only son his heir.
" A sordid lover wished to gain my hand,
" My father too prefer, d his strict command;
" But oh! my heart was to another given,
" And Edwin's charms were all my hopes of Heaven,
" No wealth he had, and this my father saw,
" Devised his murder through perverted law --
" Then nothing pleased deprived of joys so dear;
" I fled my father and was flattered here." --
-- " Oh! Heavens it is she! my dear lost sister see,
" That brother mentioned and that heir is me
" But leave this house where sin and death do dwell,
" Retrieve thy ruins from the jaws of hell --
" O Mariana! injured and distressed!
" Come child of sorrow to my willing breast
Restored again to glad relations arms,
And raised to virtue with its kindred charms,
She fled the world and all its tempting wiles,
Where cunning cruelty the wretch beguiles,
And by repentance and conviction true,
Where holy sisters hallowed rites pursue,
Deep in the convent injured Heaven to please,
She passed a life of piety and ease.
HOSPITAL FOR LUNATICS.
What various pictures changeful man appears
In youth, in love, in learning and in years,
In arts, in arms, in genius, madness last;
What then is youth, love, genius, learning past;
Great Swift the pride and terror of the world
Sunk to this state, by madness he was hurled,
His daring flights were levelled with the low,
Down to a moving spectacle of woe;
Then admiration ceased and pity came,
Awakened keener by his shining fame, --
Yet all his piercing genius could not save
His understanding from confusion's grave.
God lent him genius, art supplied him lore,
But robbed of reason these could shine no more.
Reason's the man, whatever, the fool may say,
It clearly guides him from each beastly way:
Take this, what then? he is beast or what you will,
A human figure without human skill.
Reason's to life what life is to the man,
It humanizes nature's skillful plan;
Without it man is but the human form,
That wears his shape like bird, beast, fish or worm.
Here see the maniac raging round his cell,
And to the walls his roving sorrows tell,
Still in his eye he sees the talking crowd,
And questions freely and converses 'loud;
Strongly impressed by some distresses past,
The only thoughts that haunt him to the last --
Then he complains -- scarce thinks about his fate --
Sometimes he is happy in this mournful state,
Counts over his lands, his houses, fortunes, friends
In nameless thousands on his finger ends;
Then doubtful reason wakes him from his dream,
Lost are his lands, his fortunes, friends and fame,
'Where am I! it is not my wonted home indeed,
He says, and then his heart begins to bleed;
Distress o'erwhelms, madness comes again,
And 'wakes a new the mental roving flame --
He starts -- then pauses -- stares then looks around --
Then talks -- now stops and listens for a sound,
Lost state of nature! awful madness hail!
Muse snatch the phrenzy and its flights reveal.
Ah! see the ruins faithless love has made
In the 'lorn damsel wantonly betrayed,
The sad deceiver of her youthful heart
Completes the mournful measure of her smart
Still in her mind the foremost and the last,
She doats unceasing on their moments past.
With hands enclaspt and low dejected eye
Speechless she sits and vents the rising sigh;
But seldom weeps; for grief when most severe
Is never distinguished by the falling tear;
And silent hears her visitors request
To know the loaded troubles of her breast --
But if they chance the perjured dog to name,
The faithful fool is boundless in his fame. --
" Yes he was fair -- and promised fairer too --
" He Is married now -- are you his wife? -- be true? --
" And tell me right -- Oh no, he is dead they say,
" But yet me thought I had him the other day --
" Go fetch him quick, and say Maria sends --
" No stop -- 'twould get him anger from his friends. --
" Sweeter than roses! -- yes I pulled these flowers
" To deck my lover! -- but he is gone ye powers.
" He Will surely come to night -- ah no he will not,
" Poor lost Maria is by him forgot.
" My little angel too is gone to heaven --
" Won'tall our sins -- yes yes they will be forgiven."
Thus floats her brain as fleeting fancy teems
Her frantic pictures over her waking dreams.
IRISH BEAUTY.
An Irish beauty's not a thing so rare,
But Irish virtue often makes us stare;
The charms of face are little to the mind,
It Is from the sentiments the soul we find;
The noblest actions are the best displayed
When foiled by fortune and when undismayed;
But he who bends at fortune's worldly shrine,
Scarce ranks superior to the grovling s-w-i-n-e:
The man who sells his happiness for gold,
Should like a Smithfield horse himself be sold;
A worthy action adds to charms of face,
But sordid marriage marks it with disgrace.
THE FOP.
At every corner and in every street
Some gaudy useless animal we meet,
Resembling men in nothing but their shape,
Their truest lineage is the friskful ape:
These are distinguished by the rank and name
Of Well bred gentlemen, that notice claim,
But those who judge with reason on their side.
Conclude them Fops and of their worth decide.
Observe the thing its gaudy pinions spread,
Pride in its eye with sense inverted head;
Vain son of folly empty child of show,
Proud of the blank distinction of a beau.
Now nicely dressed, just from his barber loose,
The stalking semblance of a country goose;
Mark how he walks, as if he trod on eggs;
Now views his waistcoat, then surveys his legs,
His dogskin shoes (for calf would hurt his toes)
His knees adorned with party colored bows,
His monst'rous buckles, just the Paris mode.
Their use unknown, except his feet to load,
Or when he walks with nicely picking tread,
Perhaps the serve for ballast to his head;
His scarlet coat, that every one may see,
Mark and observe and know the fool is he,
With buttons garnished, sparkling in a row
On sleeves and breasts and skirts to make a show,
His waistcoat too with tinsel shining over,
His cravat knotted in a bow before,
His empty head with powder loaded deep,
Wings to the same of formal cut and sweep,
With three-cock'd hat and loop and button bright,
And open mouth to show his teeth are white,
With spread umbrella -- not to guard from rain,
Nor shade the sun...but just complete his train,
For sun or rain he seldom dare invade,
One spoils his face, the other spoils his head, --
Now to complete the figure nice and vain,
Send quick to Paris and procure a cane,
With head of ivory and gold inlaid,
A pinchbeck ferril by some artist made,
A spangled tassel to put round his wrist,
Green kid-skin gloves to guard his lilly fist: --
This is the picture of a modern beau,
Which men of sense despise as well as know.
No doubt, good reader, you have seen displayed,
A soapy bubble that an atom weighed,
Blown from a pipe by some inventful boy,
To please his gazing brethren with the toy;
Just so the fop with every gew-gaw rare,
Shines forth a bubble empty as the air.
Show one a book and prove't has wit enough,
Why, Lard sir! sure you do not read such stuff
The whole day long I never read a page;
I vow the present is a stupid age;
We'll soon be Goths and Vandals without breeding --
What! quit the ton and follow musty reading!
No, dam'me, no! we lads of spirit live
In all the joys which art and fashion give.
MISFORTUNES OF A FOP.
Tom Tug a tar, with toddy half-seas over,
Espied Jack Tinsel just arrived from Dover,
Zounds, Dick, says he, observe the fail ahead,
Full rigged by Jove, with all his canvass spread,
Though damn his eyes, the bouger's not from France --
Come, lend a hand, we'll learn him how to dance.
Tom straight accosted in the seaman's style,
And Jack -- your humble Sir -- with modern smile;
"What ship, my heart!" The fop he looked about;
Tom wanted nothing but to have a rout.
" Come strike my lad, and show your neat disguise,
" What -- finer than our Captain! damn your eyes!"
Jack trembling stood and wondered what I meant,
Pray, d to the pope and then invoked each fair.
But all in vain, for Tom must have his bout,
When grog is in all nonsense will be out.
Strip! was the word, and Jack must here comply,
Poor fine dressed gentleman! observe him cry
While mirthful Tom and comrades laugh to se
Half-naked Jack appear in true degree:
His fine lace ruffles to his finger ends
From half bleach'd sheeting thin and raw depends;
Nor in his waistcoat backs of any kind;
His green silk breeches grafted blue behind,
With all his trappings of a piece with these,
Behind a fright, before designed to please. --
But Tom thought Jack had punishment complete,
To be the scoff and scandal of the street,
Turned him a-drift and charged him as a friend,
His dress to alter and his sense to mend;
It costs you more, by Jove, to make you fools,
Than 'twould to get you learning from the schools.
THE SON OF NEPTUNE.
Worth in whatever sphere, should have a nitch,
Although it is seldom gained but by the rich,
The fault is owing to misguided pride,
That judge's merit with blind fortune's guide.
When Britain held the bold tyrannic rod,
And cried "Ye slaves obey our sovereign nod,"
The patriot sons of virtue took the flame,
And filled the lists with hardy deeds of fame:
Amongst the first, the boldest and the best,
Brave Barry stands intrepidly confessed.
BELL's BOOK-STORE.
Just by St. Paul's, where dry divines rehearse,
Bell keeps his store for vending prose and verse,
And books that is neither -- for no age nor clime,
Lame languid prose begot on hobb'ling ryme.
Here authors meet who never a sprig have got,
The poet, player, doctor, wit and sot;
Smart politicians wrangling here are seen,
Condemning J effries or indulging spleen,
Reproving Congress or amending laws,
Still fond to find out blemishes and flaws;
Here harmless sentimental-mongers join
To praise some author or his wit refine,
Or treat the mental appetite with lore
From Plato's, Pope's and Shakespeare's endless store:
Young blushing writers, eager for the bays,
Try here the merit of their newborn lays,
Seek for a patron, follow fleeting fame,
And begs the slut may raise their hidden name.
Poor helpless race of mortals here below!
With hearts to feel and melt for others woe:
Harmless, often useless; indolent, often vain;
How very few have found with genius gain!
How very few has genius raised from want! --
Fortune to genius deals her favors scant.
It Is ten to one had genius fired my breast,
I had been poor and needy like the rest,
Pinched for a meal, or for a dollar su'd,
By some mean creditor with feelings rude;
But thanks to fortune for her shining store.
I Am rich enough and seldom wish for more.
LAWYER LEWD-IS.
A man unprincipl'd in virtues school,
That acts iniquity as if by rule;
What can be hoped from such a man as this,
That takes his -- to be his miss! --
And then when both his appetite disgust,
In Mrs. C-II -- s he can put his trust,
That noted matron still can find a wh -- e,
There Lawyer L -- ligs with Hannah Moore. --
In court he stalks and talks without a reason,
And often against common sense commits high treason, --
This sketch may show how often k-aves grow great
When honest folks can scarce afford to eat.
The IRISH WORTHY; We are at a loss to know who the author alludes to, but
suppose it to be J. M. N. -- b-tt, Esquire.
Or Hospitable Bachelor. A CHARACTER.
Least you should think misanthrophy is seen,
Or that I write through envy or the spleen,
Or deal out satire with a wanton hand,
On those that softer touches should command;
I now produce a character to view,
One of the good and worth-distinguish'd few.
Hibernia's bowers his youthful days partook,
Till manhood came, her charms he then forsook,
Columbia hailed him -- owned him as her child;
Here wealth and grandeur over his efforts smiled:
From honest labor honest riches flowed,
And fortune's favors liberal were bestowed;
But not to spoil as often we see they do;
With these came worth and real greatness too;
And native hospitality to cheer
The numerous guests that at his board appear;
Pleased with their social converse while they sit,
He charms the glass with life-refining wit:
No dull discourse his evening hours betray,
But manly pastime or amusive play.
Friend to each art, the poets patron to,
And from him merit ever meets its due;
Distress unaided never left his door,
"For God has made him agent to the poor."
A whig from principle -- he loves his friend --
Such is the man I freely now commend.
THE EMIGRANT.
See the lone emigrant just come on shore,
Far from relations which he will see no more,
Far from his native country where he spent
The playful moments youthful pleasure lent;
Thrown here unfriended, fortune to appease,
Or endless vain cur'osity to please:
His father, mother, brother, sister dear,
Dropped at his parting many a tender tear,
And sobb'd and wished th'adventurer to stay,
Nor brave the dangers of the raging sea.
But all their kind monitions were in vain,
For fate decreed the youth to cross the main.
Some rustic relics of paternal care,
His mindful mother ready does prepare;
The woolly garments, shirts and stockings strong,
The crock of butter and the old neat's tongue,
The new laid eggs and cheese never cut before,
With bread and spirits to complete his store.
Then to the beach his com'rades true conveys,
This for his wealth, and that his safety prays,
Each in his turn sincerely shakes his hand,
And wish him safely to his destined land.
Scarce had the prow its canvass pinions spread
When dizzy sickness seized his giddy head,
Dim grows the land, the surging billows roar,
'Twas then alas! he wished himself on shore;
Sadly he gazed and took his last adieu,
Its charms but rising as it sunk to view.
Unhappy Europe! thus thy children stray
To shun thy tyrants of remorseless sway,
Down from the knavish minister of state
To kindred lackeys that around him wait,
All, all combine to hurt the needy poor,
"To spurn imploring famine from the door."
THE YOUNG HIBERNIAN We suppose the author means the Brother of the patriotic
and celebrated W. T. J. Member of the Irish Parliament for the borough of
L-b-rn.,
Or genteel Merchant.
Accept my friend the tribute of a lay,
Unknown to flattery or fastidious sway;
What friendship dictates freely here I write,
No praises deal nor censures throw through spite
Thy nicer feelings, nicely too refined,
Needs not the groveling principle of mind,
And modest worth within thy breast concealed,
Would blame the muse if she that worth revealed.
Pass then the phrases babbling bards bestow,
These juster trifles, J --, from candor flow.
Ah! cruel Delia why to J -- severe?
He claimed thy every kindest, sweetest care;
No swain so tender ever could fill thy arms
Nor taste with truer gratitude thy charms --
Witness ye bowers where both together strayed,
While sense enraptured sentiment betrayed,
The lengthening walk, 'till sober evening came,
And warned you home to save your tender fame!
Doomed by thy frown, he crossed the western main,
To beat the common beaten tract for gain.
May kindest success trown thy wishes here,
And fortune favors fortune labors cheer,
With years of health and happiness complete,
Content and ease and independance sweet.
LAWYER FILSON, Or the Spectacl'd Pleader.
When British politics ran furious high,
The dastard sons of slavery cast an eye --
A blasting eye! -- on infant freedom's cause,
And secret sought the tyrant's mean applause:
Those secret enemies were worst of all,
We little feared the cannons pointed ball --
Now we should favor those that raised the state,
Nor suffer tories freely to debate --
Then cease on W -- n, favors to bestow,
For all the city knows he was our foe.
DOCTOR R -- S H.
"Stop!" says the muse "your satire, dealing hand,
" Nor modest characters disgraceful brand,
" Deal round the lash on empty pampered pride,
" And teach presumption ignorance to hide,
" Over plodding knaves devote the scorging rod,
" And bid them fear the just revengeful God"
Enough, my muse; I own thy errless sway,
And ready still thy dictates I obey --
Worth should be sacred, merit should be raised,
For this alone our Doctor, should be praised,
Then take, my friend the praise of one unknown,
That but commends, for virtue's sake alone.
STATE HOUSE.
It Is fair that public characters should be
To private censure as to favor free,
That all may watch, that all may judge their ways,
And blame with freedom or commend with ease.
If men in office act an upright part,
Unled by meanness and unsway'd by art,
That claims no wonder from the babbling throng,
We pay for acting right and not for wrong.
If Bumbo's acts his office does disgrace,
Why -- turn the servile blockhead from his place;
Put in Aurelius, give him Bumbo's pay,
Then public money will not be thrown away.
While C -- 's merits shine with splendour bright,
Support his worth in cankered envy's spite:
Give W -- power, strip T -- of what he has,
And bid the fool go bray with brother Ass.
D -- takes a nap while some good law is passed,
And deaf-ear'd R -- with wonder cries, "what was it."
How very mean a thing may have seat,
To swell the minutes of some low debate,
While constituents think him quite profound
In state affairs and words of stately sound.
Here Cl -- r Was it not for the wit and humor of Mr. C -- whose knowledge and
oratorial abilities are a good deal above mediocrity, and the pertinent and
facetious remarks of Mr. B......who honestly speaks what he thinks is best, I
fear that the house would often fall asleep, and instead of bills for
consideration we would have dreams for amusement, extracted from the minutes of
the sleeping Assembly. This obliges Mr. C -- to speak a deal more than he
otherwise would.
talk over what he talked before,
And Br -- n Was it not for the wit and humor of Mr. C -- whose knowledge and
oratorial abilities are a good deal above mediocrity, and the pertinent and
facetious remarks of Mr. B -- who honestly speaks what he thinks is best, I
fear that the house would often fall asleep, and instead of bills for
consideration we would have dreams for amusement, extracted from the minutes of
the sleeping Assembly. This obliges Mr. C -- to speak a deal more than he
otherwise would.
set all the members in a roar,
And Colonel -- strive to mend a point,
Where sense and reason both are out of joint,
While surly Yellow-wig still bites his thumb,
And harmless, useless, J -- remains quite dumb;
But when the speaker calls the yeas and neas,
He asks what side his neighbor's judgment sways,
So he inclines -- but knows no reason why --
His friend advised him -- and he cannot deny.
Bright Tommy S -- s when arguments run scarce,
Turns the debate to some evasive farce,
Or hammers out, with dullness from his brain,
Some languid stuff that gives his hearers pain;
Idioms and blunders flow without restraint,
Till C -- starts his ignorance to paint,
Then faith I pity handkerchief and nails,
They suffer greatly when his nonsense fails.
Once, I remember, Tom was very bold,
When quoting Roman luxury of old:
" We the Gardeens of all the state," he said,
Then cough'd and haugh'd and strok'd his brainless head,
" Should banish taste and luxury from hence,
" And plays of course -- these shock all commonsense;
" Rome, Sir, was great, 'till plays reduced her fame;
" Her modern sons are nothing but a name,
" Misled by luxury's alluring shine,
" They watered plants profusely with their wine" This must certainly be a
plagiary from Paddy Whack or Sir Terence O'Shaughnessy. Wine may be turned into
Vinegar, but I would be obliged to Mr. S.....if he would favor me with the
chemical analysis for turning it into water.

Here Tully thunder....see the listening throng
Admire each accent from his pleasing tongue;
All winning eloquence he wields at will,
And speaks unawed with candor and with skill;
His country's welfare still is in his thought....
That country which his blood has partly bought;
With other sons of steady worth he toiled
Till Britain's arts of tyranny were foiled.
DOCTOR HUTCHERSHINS.
See how the Dr. waddles through the throng,
With Falstaff's belly, Liliputian's tongue,
A beef-head bully -- some has said a calf, --
And that a goose has got more brains by half --
That may be true -- and further of this nibbler,
Some folks have said that he is a party scribbler;
Of this I never shall envy him a jot
For faith I pity every scribbler's lot.
LAWYER VANNBOAST.
This pert young blade of Quirk goes through the town,
With air and gesture as it were his own,
A saucy swagger and a pampered stalk,
A wild-set hat and trudging footman's walk,
Long sweeping ruffles, handsome flaxen hair,
With open mouth and eyes that ever stare --
And to these merits set adult'ry down,
Because he often acts it in this town. --
Young men should ever modest be, you know,
Because a fool's synonymous with beau;
Fine clothes are naught but liv'ry when they are wore,
By those whose worth is not than servants more.
Dr. PHAETON alias CLAPSON.
None but a fool would fee a Doctor high,
(Even was the patient ready then to die)
Without he visited in coach and four,
For doctor Katterfelto could do more:
A splendid phaeton makes up want of sense,
And doubly serves to draw the needy pence;
For who could doubt his wondrous skill to cure,
Who drives a Phaeton and prescribes to poor?
If students dull are pinched to get degrees,
Why, Provost, Doctors, Masters must have fees,
And then you will get your grand diploma out --
Procure a coach, and raise a mighty rout;
Four firey, prancing, handsome, well-match'd greys,
Or else as many long-tail'd sprightly bays,
Then you may laugh at heaven and hell and devil,
But mind....be always to plebeians civil.
DOCTOR SKIPPEN.
Whenever your horse is troubled with the gout,
Apply to S......he can drive it out;
Give him but cash he will turn the old to young,
For S.....can do wonders with his tongue;
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
His ration actions every body knows.
Poor luckless soldiers too can tell with grief
His skillful aid, and social kind relief;
If stores could speak "they could a tale unfold
Would scare even fraud and make his blood run cold."
CAPIAS F-NL-Y.
This man demands some miscellaneous praise,
His name to publish and his worth to raise,
For all his merits never could make him known
How stupid are the people of this town! --
But jokes apart. -- The grave beef-headed blade
Might have made money at the cobbling trade,
Look in his face, it tells you all his mind,
His brains are gravy, and his wit is wind.
DOCTOR DALWANEY.
Some say the Doctor fattens in his place,
And some declare 'twill load him with disgrace,
Some say 'twas wrong to loose his member's Of Assembly
name,
But where is the man that would not do the same?
Men when they take an office in their hands,
Should place themselves in firm well footed stands,
Or else the sidelong waggish bullets thrown,
Will often knock the heedless caitiff down.
When state accounts are furnished, have a care
That Irish blunders are not notic'd there.
Enjoy the profits which preferment brings,
Though satire's bullets round thy office rings;
Laugh at the fools and act an upright part,
Then malice never shall give thee conscious smart.
PETER WHY-S-COFF.
As candor marks the characters a-pace,
Each by his favorite lineament of face,
The artless muse pourtrays them in her lines,
Where stricking looks of noted features shines.
If virtue blasted and if worth condemned
Demanded praise -- this man is virtue's friend --
For lost to every feeling of the heart,
That worthier acts of virtue can impart;
With cunning armed and gold to force his way
He strives to make the luckless heart his pray.
MISS **** **** Or the Old Maid.
See Florizel of Front-street flirt along,
The very scoff and scandal of the throng.
Patches and paints replac'd with daily care
Her fading features and her charms repair.
Not all those charms could Tommy **** allure
For babbling fame had said she was a wh --
It Is much the same, or whether right or wrong;
Sweethearts were numerous while the nymph was young,
These she despised -- her pride was to despise --
Till once she lost the luster of her eyes --
Men had their sight -- beheld her fading charms
And saw her robbed of all her cupid's arms --
No pleading swains her evening trains now swell
And soon the nymph must lead her apes in hell.
The amiable MISS NA-CY W --
In what kind region shall the wandering muse
Her soft comparisons and beauties choose,
To tell the charms that deck her lovely face,
To note her youthful dignity and grace?
Her modest looks her rising worth presage,
To gild the sober evening of her age;
And mantling blushes spreading over her cheek
Proclaim a soul of placid sweetness meek.
The aimable Miss P ***** Or Chesnut-street Charmer.
When I forget thy charms fair maid to sing,
Be my tongue mute and winter blast the spring.
No lovlier nymph Columbia's plains adorn,
Pride of her sex, beyond the wanton's scorn.
Wit without impudence, and sense refined,
In sweet Miss P***** artlessly are joined;
A nameless dignity unites with ease,
And graceful step that every eye must please.
A form so fair, so free from empty pride,
Deserves a mate superior by her side --
May some kind youth with merits like thy own
With fondest love untie thy virgin zone.
Mrs. C**** or the agreeable wife.
Give way ye dowdies 'till one face be seen,
It Is virtue's pattern and it is beauty's queen:
In Mrs. C*** the graces all combine,
To form a lovely female quite divine --
Be patient ladies! -- envy not her praise,
Her merits far exceeds my simple lays.
RECEIPT To get a Seat in the Grand Assembly.
Assembly-mongers, mind October's near,
The golden harvest comes but once a year;
Begin your canvass, -- bluster to the county,
And swear mechanics should receive a bounty:
(A tradesman's vote is equal to a lord's,
It Is not the men or money, but their words.)
Promise to mend the laws and raise the state,
And in the public business toil and sweat;
Be always sure you ever say enough --
Gain but the seat, no matter how you puff;
And libel freely all the junto round,
In this experience often reward has found;
Sensure the Censors, promise better rules,
And call the Council -- just a pack of fools.
Whenever the patriot fills thy breast with fire, --
I mean the rage that money does inspire; --
Compose thy head and write a long address,
In which all public good you must profess;
Put in some hints of public service past,
And, 'twixt ourselves, you here may safely blast --
A broad bold phrase has often done a deal;
Some thoughts and words from Junius you may steal,
Mixed with your own they will pass for your inditing,
And constituents mostly love good writing;
Hard words are best, for then they think you learned,
And wisdom only is by learning earned;
It Is true, the critics may detect your style,
But you can palm these blockheads with a smile.
Run to the papers, put it in them all, --
Next week you find the county sends a call.
Then swear again the honor is too great --
But you accept it -- just to save the state.
Then when the day of firey trial's come,
Prepare your music, fiddle, fife and drum;
Hire half the lawless blackguards in the town
You Will get a number ready for a crown,
Give each a pack of tickets in his hand,
Be sure you place him in a proper stand,
There bid him bawl at every passer-by,
Call you a God! -- No, that would be a lie --
Well, you are Lycurgus -- Aristides just,
It Is such as you the public ought to trust;
Bribe all the petty constables in town,
To wheedle votes and gull the country clown-
And last, take care their spirits well to cheer
With grog and cakes and Reuben Haines's beer
Though cyder's cheapest, -- but it wants the fire,
And grog or beer the voters best inspire --
Now all is over, and though the toil was hard,
Your seat and prospects are a great reward.
Next day the public papers show your name,
And hail you foremost in the field of fame.
Now that you are in, observe what side has power
On that your praises and your favors shower,
But never mind the men that put you there,
Make self and pelf your sole pursuit and care,
For this, secundem artem, is the way
To get in office and increase your pay.
Now party sticklers choose their tool to vote,
Were It even to cut the Constitution's throat;
They call him quite the Cic'ro of the house,
Although his sense was never worth a louse;
Their ends but gained they care not for the state,
Nor who is high or low, nor mean or great.
PRESIDENT D-K-NS-N, Or the Father of the Commonwealth.
The muse, Mecaeneas, eager still for fame,
Adorns her page with thy immortal name,
Conscious from thence her verse shall never die,
Though malice blast and envy's tongue decry;
Fain would she paint thy nobleness of soul,
Thy love of freedom that conducts the whole,
Thy piercing genius, politic and great,
Charged with the weighty business of the state,
Thy lettered wisdom, patriotic fire,
With all the thoughts that virtue can inspire --
Fain she would paint thy worthiness of heart,
But vain is every effort of her art. --
THE SENTIMENTAL IRISHMAN.
A worthy son of old Hibernia's race,
With manly port and dignity of face,
Whose native hospitality is great,
Marked with the splendid equipage of state;
Whose patriot merit points him out for praise,
That soar beyond the measure of my lays; --
Each genuine whig admires his nobler spirit,
No truer Paddy ever toasted claret.
Always secure from Fortune's faithless hand,
He holds her gilded treasure at command;
Distends the gold which Heaven has kindly sent.
His liberal hand often shows his good intent.
His native country where his youth he passed,
Lives in his heart the foremost and the last;
Its wandering sons partake his generous aid,
And feeling friendship here is best displayed,
No niggard penury betrays his soul,
But social kindness dignifies the whole;
His nobler motives from no meaness spring,
He lives like the son of some old Irish King.
COFFEE HOUSE, with a group of its well known visitors.
What various faces here we thronging view,
From Nova-Zembla down to swart Peru,
Met for the mutual benefit of each,
To gather news or useless lore to teach;
Here men of straw Men of no capital.
with men of fortune meet,
And men of neither both familiar greet:
Some form their face to plodding wisdom's guise
And what they want in head their looks supplies
Who, anxious still to take the unwary in,
Turn plain religion to a downright sin;
For all these saints of satan do or say
Is in the sober serious preaching way.
Young Bully Bragwell struts among the rest,
And Billy Button neat and finely dressed;
Grave Adam Archly comes to read the news,
To talk of goods and labels to peruse,
Tells how the nation will be overun,
The country ruined and the state undone;
What monst'rous importations now we make,
Our stores are crammed, our merchants soon must break!
The grand assembly -- nay the congress should,
Prohibit Britons -- that would do us good;
You see our dollars are a draining fast,
We'll scarce have cash to buy us meat at last. --
Was I in Congress! -- Here they laugh outright,
And Adam leaves the Coffee-room through spite.
Such is the doleful picture Adam shows,
He thinks that all the world around are foes,
And though the fool is scarely worth a pound,
He talks as big as if the town he owned.
The above as well as the following characters are well known to those who
frequent the Coffee-house.


Blank puppy John with trudging walk comes next,
His motto ignorance and vice his text;
No man with greater consequence appears,
Although the puppy's scarcely twenty years,
If cousin Sam salutes him passing by,
The empty fool will scarcely lend an eye.
Still in a hurry Johnny Pr -- g-e comes,
Within his mind computing various sums;
When news is stirring Johnny hears it all --
By G -- d, dear Sir, 'twill make the linens fall.
His thoughts are fixed on nothing but per cent.
For this he labors with a fond intent:
His looks are absent and his words are plain,
His acts are honest and without a stain,
His ways are odd, his sayings odder still,
His manners low, his sense is what you will;
He knows the earth is round, the sun is warm,
And that the planets do us little harm,
Has some shrewd guess where old Hibernia lies,
That London sits beneath Britannia's skies,
That Scotland borders on the banks of Tweed,
(Where Thomson tuned his tributary reed,)
That Paris is the gay Parisian's boast,
And that their ways are frivolous at most --
Some other hints like these make up his wit.
Which is for money more than morals fit.
See Ab-l Jemmy come with eager speed,
To look a chapman or the books to read,
With lists He made it a practice last year to go amongst the shopkeepers with
his invoice book under his arm, pimping for their custom.
and samples of the goods he sells,
And then their matchless qualities he tells;
Begs they may call tomorrow or today,
And for the cash -- no matter when they pay:
Such was the ways that Jemmy used of late,
'Till needy duns compelled him to retreat. --
Take my advice, be modest and discreet,
And let the people pass you in the street,
Or else they will think you impudent and rude,
And that your understanding is not good:
For folks are living who can rightly tell,
That all your pampered riches sprung from hell. A taylor's cabbage-hole.

With oily tongue and sober pensive pace,
To cloak a heart of knavery and disgrace,
Comes in old Cheatwell, just with parson's air,
But every one of Cheatwell should take care:
Observe this rule, whatever he bids you do,
The very opposite you must pursue.
Take his advice in nothing if you can,
For secret villainy is Cheatwell's plan.
See yonder comes the secret working knave,
The tool of infamy and error's slave;
In business failed, he is now a thing of state,
To gull the Censors and the people cheat;
He tells a tale of artful lies combined,
That both perplex and stimulate the mind;
He dreads the constitution will be broke,
And that new government would be a joke.
No pains he spares his proselytes to make,
For this all virtue's laws he will freely break,
And every compact, social and divine,
For this he will sacrifice at Plutus' shrine.
Censure this Censor, turn him from his place,
And load the knave with merited disgrace.
But yonder comes the friend of human kind,
And liberal thoughts employ his liberal mind, --
It Is honest Dealwell, of unsullied fame,
Whose gold is nothing better than his name;
His word will buy what others specie cannot,
For virtuous dealings is his sole intent.
Exaustless lines could scarce pourtray the group,
That daily here for news together troop,
Some good, some bad: the English, Irish here
With French and Dutch familiarly appear;
The Spaniard, Portuguese and sober Swede,
Meet India merchants in the course of trade,
The Russian, Prussian, Turk and Scot and Jew,
With homebred Yankees here we mixing view;
And as they pass before the candid muse,
Each country's merits in its sons she views.
Sons of our great forefathers first behold,
In virtue foremost and in honor bold;
Manly their port and open is their face,
Their dealings plain, polite and with a grace:
Wherever the prow has bore the human form,
There daring Britons have withstood the storm
Of toiling commerce, or with generous zeal
Gave social arts to raise the commonweal,
Swept over the world and bore their thunder round,
Till crouching Europe trembled at the sound,
Great Neptune owned their empire over the main
When Hawke and Russell, ruled the watery plain.
Ah! falling Britain! whether fled of late
Thy genius, spirit and thy sons so great! --
See sister Rome, she once enjoyed her day,
Her very name is sinking to decay;
Empires, like men, may flourish and grow great,
But yet their periods are prescribed by fate.
Hibernian's next, "a nation hardly used,
At random censured and by some abused,"
Bold sons of freedom, honesty and fame,
By daring deeds they dignity their name;
True sons of hospitality and worth,
Nor lives humaner children on the earth --
Give Paddy whiskey, and he is just a God,
That makes opponents dread his sovereign nod.
Observe that soft lightheaded troop advance,
The airy offspring of gay tinsel France;
Bows, scrapes and cringes are their favorite trait,
New buckles, canes and clothes for ever neat,
Fine powdered heads, long ruffles sweeping down,
The gaze and wonder of the country clown:
But yet this nation is for science famed,
Although so much for fops and fopp'ry blamed;
And friendly Louis bade his armies go
To quell the venom of our British foe.
See there the surly Spaniard as he walks,
Vain, solemn, empty, pampered as he stalks;
Dull lazy, ignorant and slothful bred,
With naught but empty titles in his head,
He boasts his long descent from blood so pure,
White and unsullied by the jetty Moor.
Here view the Dutchman, sober, dull and plain,
Laborious striving how to gather gain;
With double coats to guard the north'ren blast
That chill the borders of the Friezeland coast.
Thousands beside the painting verse demand,
But narrow bounds proscribes my wanton hand.
What various labels round the room appear,
Twould make a volumn to recount them here:
This tells us where the wine is cheap and good,
That where its both in bottles and in wood,
Here by that scrawl we see where bills are sold,
There we are informed of persons wanting gold,
Ships to be had and lodgings to be let,
Genteelly furnished, either dry or wet;
Poor luckless clerks whom fortune still despise,
For places, posts and wished employment tries,
Declare their merits, here display their hands,
And that they will wait on gentlemen's commands
" Please to enquire, or leave a line below,
" Which punctual will be noticed by O."
Such is the various scenes that here we view
Where men of business tempting wrath pursue.
MISS GOGGLE, or the Spruce-street Prude. The Editor has to apologize for
inserting this first-rate character so far back, as it was intended for one of
the front pages, but through the hurry of the Printer was mislaid.

" Is Sukey handsome?" -- Yes, she is well enough;
" And modest likewise?" -- there I end my puff.
Her handsome face is nothing when you hear,
With what disgust she mostly does appear:
She Is always plumed on what she calls her birth,
Tells over the sums her peddling father's worth,
Says that "us merchants daters should be known
" From Miss Flippanto in a Sunday gown;
" Folks now a days must dress before they eat,
" And gaudy fools now wear what should buy meat,
" And pampered Milliners must look as great
" As if their fathers owned a large estate!
" It Is strange to see how common folks appear,
" I swear they are bolder -- finer every year!" --
This sample shows what notions fill her head,
And how the hopeful gay Miss Goggle's bred. A porter one day going past her
father's, submissively asked her if she knew where Capt. -- lived in the
neighborhood? all the answer she made him was a frown, and running to her
mother said, with a disgusted look -- Ma'a! what do you think? had not that
great dirty fellow the impudence to ask me if I knew where Captain -- lived!

FINIS.
MISCELLANEOUS PIECES, BY Different Hands.

MISCELLANEOUS PIECES.
INSTRUCTIONS to a PAINTER, when going to draw a full length Picture of the
amiable Miss A -- H --.
I
Painter, tell me have thou seen,
Modest morning's smiling face,
Gently cheer the dewy green,
Brighten, sweeten every grace?
II
Have thou marked the early rose,
Bosomed soft beneath a shade,
Every charming hue disclose,
When the dew refreshed its head?
III
Have you seen the lilly too,
Blushing at the rising day,
Sprinkled with the balmy dew,
More than fragrant charms display?
IV
Have thou viewed the diamond bright,
Sparkling on the virgin's arm,
Clear and winning to the sight,
Studded round and set to charm?
V
Have thou seen a pillar fair
Just in due proportion neat,
Swelling here and falling there,
Built to bear a certain weight?
VI
Have thou seen the moddel fine, Venus of Medicis.

Naked glowing to the view,
Every shape and air divine,
Every trace sublimely true?
VII
Painter, if these charms you know,
Quickly then thy colors spread;
Teach the canvass how to glow,
Rising soft in light and shade.
VIII
First, the face with truest care
Nicely trace with steady hand;
Modest as the morning fair,
Praise and wonder to command.
IX
On the cheeks the damask rose,
Lips the same of darker hue,
And the lilly round disclose,
Charms both fair and fresh to view.
X
Next her eyes -- but ah! what art
Can so much expression paint?
Painter try -- but guard thy heart --
Try the diamonds richest taint.
XI
Arch the eyebrows next with care;
Let her tresses careless flow
Round her neck as lillies fair,
Down her bosom white as snow.
XII
Swell the breast and turn the waist,
Throw a cestus lightly round;
Cautious on the bosom feast,
Least thy heart should feel a wound.
XIII
Loosely let the garments play,
Half unfold the leg before,
In the act to move away --
Finish this and paint no more!
ODE TO SOLITUDE.
I
Hence vain pride, fantastic folly,
And hail sweet pleasing melancholy,
Attend the thoughtful swain;
Await his steps within the grove,
Or sooth his heart or aid his love,
And raise his youthful strain.
II
If love demands his willing lyre,
Inspire him with poetic fire
And kindle tender rage;
But if unknown the lyre to touch,
The Poet's rapture is too much,
O warm the prosiac page,
III
At evening sober and serene,
When silence lulls the varied scene,
(Except the tuneful trush)
Then let me to the fields repair,
Inhail the pleasing evening air,
And fragrance from each bush.
IV
There let me meditate profound
On wide creation's ample round,
With wonder and delight: --
And see where Venus rides afar,
With twinkling gems around her car,
The sparkling queen of night.
V
Or lead me by the hedge-row green,
Where clust ring roses thick are seen
To half immerse the hive;
There let me sit and hear them sing,
Their evening ditties, song of spring,
And carrols all alive:
VI.
And here them wisely plan to lay
A stock up for some future day,
When winter chills the year;
Or if too numerous to leave
Their parents, and with wisdom brave,
Begin a house to rear.
VII.
Now fluttering past with heedless flight,
Soft gaudy children of the night,
The catterpillars fly,
Around each shrub they throng and play,
Where late they escaped the solar ray
That made the lillies die.
VIII
Now see the ruins of the day
Repairing quick -- the drooping sprav
Now lifts its sunburned head;
The roses drink the healing dew,
The draught their wonted life renew,
And balmy fragrance spread.
THE SHEPHERD'S DISTRACTION.
Gentle shepherd come along,
Kindly hear my plaintive song;
Never mind thy wanton sheep,
Shepherd come with me and weep:
Cease your gambols over the plain
Come with Damon to complain.
Delia! -- ah you knew her well --
Where Is the tongue her charms can tell?
Delia like the morning rose,
Scenting Zephyr as he goes,
Fair as lillies in a bed,
Shining with a dewy head,
Brighter than the morning beam,
Spreading over the level stream --
Soon her charms my heart betrayed,
Love my heart a captive led --
Never dare I tell my mind
Least the nymph should prove unkind --
Winning, charming, cruel maid!
Delia's wedded -- I am dead,
Dead to every charm on earth --
Cease your gambols, cease your mirth;
Weeping willow wave thy head,
Cypress all thy umbrage spread,
Plunge me deep from (...) eye,
Teach me how to stop the (...) --
Delia fills another's bed!
Grief -- distraction -- Damon's dead. --
End of the First Volume.
THE PHILADELPHIAD

VOL II.

THE PHILADELPHIAD OR New Pictures of the City: Interspersed with a candid
Review and Display of some first-rate Modern CHARACTERS OF BOTH SEXES:
Delineated in a friendly and satirical Manner, and containing the following
Articles. ARTHUR SINCERE, MISS S***Y B****N, SIR ARTHUR ONSLOW, GENERAL W***E,
etc.
With other entertaining Anecdotes, humorous, moral and sentimental.

VOL. II.

It Is somewhat curious, somewhat sunny,
And the contents as sweet as honey.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed for the Editor by KLINE and REYNOLDS, and sold at their
Printing-Office, in Carter's-alley. MDCCLXXXIV.

PREFACE.
AS this work was undertaken with no evil motive, the author thinks it
incumbent on him to obviate some imputations, which he thinks he has been
unjustly laid under.

Three persons under the character of Gentlemen, went lately to the office of
Messrs. Kline and Reynolds, and requested that they might be informed of the
author of the Philadelphiad? Messrs. K and R sent for the author -- the
Gentlemen asked him if he was not the author of the Philadelphiad? -- he was
answered in the affirmitive -- They then said that it was a shame for a
Gentleman of his profession to have any thing a-do with such a publication --
the author said, indeed he was very sorry that several people had so truly
merited the censures they received -- But Mr -- interrupts one of the
gentlemen, you know that private characters should not be meddled with! -- O d
-- n it, it is a shame by G -- He was going on with this courtly dialect when
the author asked him if private vice was less censurable than public? -- He had
no argument to confound this, and upon the author's telling him that he would
have none of his impertinence, he seemed inclined to compromise matters, and
went so far as to intimate that he would furnish the author with a sum of money
if he would contradict, in his next publication, circumstances of characters
that the pointed out -- The money was refused, and the characters shall stand
as they are justly painted. -- Our opinions may sometimes be wrong, but our
judgments shall never be perverted.

DEDICATION. To the FAIR AMERICANS. Matrons, Mothers and Misses,
AMIDST the multipliciy of business which favor has heaped on me from time to
time I have just snatched a moment -- a moment that I could only devote to
charms like yours -- to request that you will use your never-failing influence
to induce your Fathers, Husbands, Brothers and Sweethearts to peruse the
following sheets, which are calculated for your entertainment as well as theirs
-- and for the information of the COMMONWEALTH in general.

The author had once given over the notion of continuing this work, but he
found the calls of the public so importunate for the second and third volumes,
and the demand for them so extraordinary, that at their solicitation he is
willing to expose vice and contribute as much as in his power to their
amusement.

I am, Ladies, With much respect, Your devoted Humble servant, THE AUTHOR
Philadelphia, December, 1784.
THE PHILADELPHIAD.
ONCE more the sportive true depictive muse,
Her city scenes and painting art pursues,
Scans over the town and in her verse she trys,
"To catch the manners living as they rise;"
To hold a glaring mirror to your eyes,
Where looks are seen without the least disguise.
Some take offense to see themselves in print
And swears the poet tries a roguish tint --
But why should people blush at meeting here
The looks with which they every day appear?
Vice only gives the conscious bosom smart,
For virtuous people lay it not to heart,
And all attempts when truth is not their aim
Are vague and pointless as unworthy name.
ARTHUR SINCERE. The Auctioneer General.
BOLD in the senate, daring in the field,
In peace a monitor, in war a shield;
Long days of toiling hardship has he past,
To drive the daring Briton from our coast;
With other sons of liberty he pressed
Where danger threat'ned every patriot breast
Bore the blue stripes where death has star' around,
And humbled Britains crosses with the groun
The guardian angels high respect his name
He early led our banners up to same.
MISS KITTY CUT-A-DASH; Or the Arch-street Flirt.
OBSERVE that foot, how nice the shoe it fits,
Her waist how slender, how her gown it sits,
How bold she walks, what fierceness in her air,
And how the crowd submissively do stare,
And hail her goddess of the beaut'ous throng
But cease good folks, your high opinion's wrong.
First at her toilette Kitty spends the morn,
To curl and patch, and face and neck adorn;
She studies fashions with religious care,
And scoffs religion with a scornful air,
Thinks that the ways to heaven are laid with gauze,
And that religion has no modern laws:
When full equipt she rambles through the town,
Or with her aunt some character runs down,
Or with an air important through the shops,
She cheapens fans and talks with ruffled fops:
The young apprentice knows her tricks full well,
For tossing goods without the hopes to sell
And spruce young milliners do often curse
Her wanton taste and coin-unsulli'd purse:
Sweethearts by dozens in her train appears,
Although the nymph is falling into years;
They come like seasons and like seasons go
This one forgets her, that one answers no:
And all despise and seek some happier dam
Less fond of dress and more unknown to same,
The babbling slut Common fame.
will loudly whispe round
That maids of stricter virtue can be found
MISS POLLY ***** or the pretty Poetess.
FRESH as the morn, as opening lilly fair,
And mild as gentle zephyrs fan the air,
A charming daughter of Apollo's train,
To sing the beauties of the rural plain, Alluding to some verses which she
wrote upon rural happiness.

Ye modern sons that strike the tuneful lyre,
Muse over her verse and immitate her fire,
Invoke the genius which her note inspires,
And plead the art poetic sons desires;
Then may your theme acquire no mean degree,
Secure of praise and from the critic free. --
O! would the fair but immitate this maid,
And 'scape the snare which empty fashions spread,
Scorn all the flippant tinsels of a day,
And but to virtue sacred homage pay: --
Ah! little think the gay light headed train,
That youthful folly brings an age of pain:
Through life's gay flutter how you pass away,
Like April snow before the rising ray:
Renounce the errors of the present age,
And look for wisdom in the virtuous page:
These (lovely daughters of Columbia's land)
Will honest hearts and husband's true command.
POLITICS.
WHEN man was man, and spoke his candid mind,
No deep laid politics was then designed,
For words conveyed the language of the heart,
Nor claimed enforcement from the aid of art;
But times are altered, and it is now the mode
Each forward fool with honors high to load,
To turn the state politically right,
And then to turn the shining day to night,
Bluster politically to the crowd,
And in the senate daring deep and loud;
Canvass politically through the town,
And knock impertinent mechanics down:
The word is great -- it bears a large import,
As how to swagger boldly through a court,
To get in office and the public cheat,
And fatten up like hogs on public meat.
By politics we are to understand,
The dark cabals that undermine the land,
For each low minion of usurped sway,
Blots its intent, and wipes its worth away;
Dark machinations cloak'd beneath its name
Some empty praise demand in place of fame,
To gloss the crimes politically done,
Before to glaring turpitude they run.
The JUDGMENT of APOLLO; Or the Assembly of Celestials.
IN Heaven of late the Gods in council sat,
Much they debated, much their wondrous chat,
Jove, Mars and Mercury were there in state,
And joined their deep opinions in debate;
Each little God and Demi-god was there,
Even soft Adonis favored by the fair:
Their converse long on heavenly things detained,
When Jove got up and thus in terms complained,
"My great copartners in these realms above,
The world of beauty and the scenes of love,
It Is said on earth that forms angelic live,
While Beauty's prize we now to Venus give:
It Is wrong in Gods to judge unfair, you know,
What if we should to wordly regions go
And be convinced? we then can judge with ease;
It Is but a trip -- the Jaunt perhaps may please" --
The Gods consent -- the whole together move,
And came to judge of beauty and of love.
A spacious plain encircled round with trees,
Cooled by a gentle fanning zeph'ry breeze,
Composed the hall -- the court was summoned straight,
The female world of beauty on them wait
Each to receive the prize her charms decreed,
And those that wanted, fresher charms to plead.
Apollo Umpire sat over all the rest,
Opened his commission and the crowd addressed.
Demanded silence till each fair was heard,
Or got the prize or suitable reward.
'Twas fervent summer pouring from the line,
And all their looks with animation shine;
Through light-laid garments and through veils of gauze
Their charms appeared and silent claimed applause:
The girls of Philadelphia all were there,
In soft assemblage round the speaker's chair,
Eager to grasp Apollo's beaut'ous prize,
While emulation sparkled from their eyes.
With dread they saw the sacred judge appear,
And some were trembling, some were mute through fear,
Till some with looks the best they ever put on
Stepped boldly up and then addressed the throne.
MISS A** ***** of Third-street. The wanton Vixen.
To you, Apollo, patron of the nine,
The judge of beauty and the arts divine,
I humbly come and beg with suppliant mein,
That you to me the beaut'ous prize will deign:
My father's English and my mother's Dutch,
My grandsire's Spanish and my grandame's Scotch,
My noble lineage, were it nothing more,
Demands the prize which wanton Venus bore:
My elder sisters copy after me,
My dress is modish, light and large you see;
My cheeks by nature are a little faint,
But that defect is well supplied with paint --
An empty puppy asked me for his wife,
And said he would make me lady during life --
But only hear! -- when I began to broach
For maids and lackeys and a gilded coach,
He hasty 'rose and in a passion said,
I must conclude he was a fool indeed;
But for the same I served him as I ought,
I scorned with coldness when my hand he sought --
Now bright Apollo give the prize to me,
My looks are aided well by art you see;
Let those who cannot cultivate their charms
Die for the joys of some old lover's arms;
Make me the Queen of all the beauteous throng,
And paint eternal still shall keep me young.
The judge disgusted eyed her from the throne,
And by his looks her just decree was known:
She stole away before her sentence came,
And left her place for some deserving dame.
MISS S*** Y B **** N Or Beauty without paint
GREAT judge of music, poetry and wit,
That in this court of beauty now does sit,
I come to claim the prize I wanted long --
I Am neither wife nor widow -- but am young,
And have a husband -- though without the game --
The wicked wags have sported with my fame:
I know each art and put on paint with skill,
And know the way a fickle heart to kill;
Leering and ogling is my greatest forte,
And now and then a bit of sensual sport --
Soft bleeding hearts are strewn arround my feet,
My praise reverberates through every street;
Kind swains by dozens dangle at my arm,
And breath their vows with protestations warm;
My charms are known to all the bucks in town,
And were they kings they would yield to me they crown --
I like to teaze -- to break their hearts wit love,
Their hasty sayings and their truth to prove
So fond they seem I doubt if they are sincere
But it is the modern language to the fair --
Now great Apollo grant to me the prize,
I claim it by the lusture of my eyes --
My shape and dress proclaim me just the thing,
Grant my petition and i will own thee king.
Apollo smiled to hear her vainly boast
The acts that blast the world of beauty most
And said indignant, for her forward mein,
That she should hide where female beauty's seen;
Her eyes were bright-tho' bright but for a day,
And were at best but highly varnished clay:
S -- heard her sentence, smirk'd away with ease,
Intent to study further arts to teaze.
MISS P**** H*******, Or the Sighing Wanton.
O Great Apollo lend thy godly ear,
My candid story and my plea to hear:
From early life I wished to be a toast,
The female envy and the female boast;
At beauty's shrine I dally homage pay,
Sigh for a charm or some allurement pray --
I have no aim, believe me judge it is true,
But man and pleasure, real life to view:
The men are shy they scarcely kiss my lips,
Which often infects me with-the woeful hips;
I try each new temptation to ensnare,
The new-formed cushion and the well-curl'd hair,
The low-cut stays, the French attracting shoe,
And yet I find that all my arts will not do.
At balls and 'semblies, parties and the like,
I show my charms where charms are apt to strike
But all in vain -- the men have hearts like lead,
They sit unmoved at all the charms I spread,
Now great Apollo hear my earnest prayer,
Let other maids be fairest of the fair, --
Give me a man -- I care not for their charms
O great Apollo fill my longing arms!
Apollo blushed to hear her strange request,
And with a smile the fervent maid addressed
" Your suit is very common with the fair,
Charms are their pride, but men are all their care;
Wherever they sparkle or wherever they go,
It Is but for men their tempting charms they show;
And were this court for such awards designed
I Would grant a husband to compose thy mind;
But beauty only is my province here --
Go to the city where the bucks appear,
There coquette like expose delusive charms,
And then perhaps you will fill some lovers arms.'
A maid came next that charmed the wondering throng.
But blasting envy said she was not young,
" Grace in her steps and heaven in her eye,"
That awed the crowd as softly she passed by.
MISS P**** G********M. Or the Looking-Glass Votary.
GREAT judge of beauty kindly hear my plea --
A beauteous maid forgotten here you see;
Each morn I study with a punctual care
My flattering mirror and the winning air:
The heedless bucks scarce eye me as I pass,
And yet I Am just an angel -- in my glass:
My Quaker cap i will fashion to the ton,
My cheeks are rosy and I still am young --
I worship beauty, try each tempting tint,
I know no god, my glass is god and saint,
My time I pass in aiming how to please,
And not like vixens that for ever teaze:
To thee I bow -- O hear my fervent prayer,
Proclaim me first and fairest of the fair,
And while I live the great Apollo's name
Shall be the constant burden of my theme.
Apollo heard with high disdain the maid
And thus in answer sharp and short he said,
'Go break your glass and by some virtuous 'book
'Set every feature and improve each look.'
Miss P -- heard and slunk in dudgeon off,
While wanton nymphs began anon to scoff.
MISS C****N; The worthy Scorner.
I Come not here Apollo to display
Charms and allurements; that is the wanton's way.
I simply come, and hope I am not rude,
To tell how often I fruitless have been wooed;
Each fair may learn a lesson from the same,
'T will raise her private if not public fame.
Some sighing puppies wept to kiss my hand,
Their hearts and fortunes were at my command;
Their prayers were earnest, but their sense was shallow,
For each turned out a self-conceited fellow:
I often wonder how some girls can bear
The powdered fop with saucy vacant air --
I scorn a man that is not a man of parts,
Well red in men as well as mystic arts,
That could betray an evening with his talk,
Or cheer the serious sweet domestic walk,
Or smooth the rugged tempest of this life,
To prove him worthy of a worthy wife,
To be a friend when friends are needed most,
Without the empty vanity to boast;
Such are the men your suppliant still admired,
To win but such she only charms desired.
A little pelf-puffed merchant there came,
And wanted me the wedding day to name --
His passion kindled quite too quick and strong
To be or candid or sincerely long;
Him I despised -- His clerk submissive bowed,
And all his soul in willing transports vowed;
Each day he begs me to be called his wife,
To taste the pleasure of domestic life --
Now, great Apollo, if in these a grace
You find to mend the features of my face --
Say that my merits far surpasses charms,
And is with lovers more resistless arms.
Apollo brightning smiled upon the maid,
And with a look encouraging he said,
Virtue is lovely -- let not wealth allure,
Without content even riches is but poor --
'T was brave, by heaven, the master to despise,
And on! is clerk to look with winning eyes.
The herald drew the brazen trump of fame,
Expecting still this was the favorite dame,
Till in her ear the judge he something said,
And mild and modest then withdrew the maid.
MISS A ****. A first-rate Terrestrial Goddess.
I came, Apollo artless to this place,
To show how nature has adorned my face;
Scarce fifteen summers have matur'd my frame
And even now the youths respect my name,
I keep my charms for some more charming youth,
Deserving virtue, innocence and truth --
Blushes but spoke, for modesty suppressed
Some conscious commendations in her breast;
Above the muse has wrote in wordless verse,
What bashful coyness could not well express.
Numbers there came of each degree and kind,
The young, the old, the wanton and the blind,
The flirt, coquette, the prude and vixen bold,
The saucy doxy and the noisy scold,
Miss C -- R -- and P -- D -- was there --
And S-lly -- D -- n with her srizzl'd hair,
And M -- y -- D -- with her painted face,
An K -- S -- without an ounce of grace:
Till evening came -- Apollo from the chair
Softly arose and then addressed the fair;
We must ad journ (the day is spent, he said)
Till the next Philadelphiad calls our aid.
Hear my decree -- Miss A -- n is the Queen,
The prettiest maid this day that I have seen,
Next court perhaps her equal we may find,
Till then let each improve her youthful mind.
The herald's trumpet echoed through the skies,
And told the crow'd Miss A -- got the prize,
Full well we read it in her sparkling eyes.
A troop of Cupids made a car of arms,
And off in triumph bore the queen of charms.
Pale grew the crow'd, contempt was seen around,
Their hopes perverted envy gave the wound.
Their first day's mission ended, up the gods
In order mounted to their blessed abodes.
The CATASTROPHE; Or Bustle among the Batchelors.
THE news of this Assembly reached the town,
And straight a crowd of heroes posted down;
The lame, the blind, the buck and rake was there,
The sot and clown and beau with powdered hair;
With hasty steps and doubtful looks they came,
Eager to snatch the lovely favored dame;
A motly group they showed upon the lawn,
But ere they came the nymph had been withdrawn
With strange surprise they looked around to find,
The maid to whom Apollo had been kind;
But nothing fairer than a common face,
Was seen or found within this thronging place.
Some asked her name -- when all the rest was grieved,
And told them lies, which they as soon believed;
Some said that Sukey B -- got the prize,
And others whispered that was only lies,
Some swore that Cl-m -- na R -- was she,
But on enquiry tales would not agree,
Others declared 'twas Venus from the shades
And that Apollo passed much prettier maids
That out of spite the God would speak his mind,
And act a part to other girls unkind --
'Twas sickening spleen that formed these scornful tales,
The muse then heard them as she now reveals.
Rank disappointment glowed in every face,
To think the favored maid had left the place
And some in doubt believed it all a lie,
The men's intentions good or bad to try.
Beau E -- swore 'twas all a female plan
Among the girls for each to get a man;
But damn his eyes if he was such a fool,
To be to any painted first a fool,
And while a bagnio yielded him a bir,
He swore that marriage was a wanton fit.
John **** with scarce a tooth to chew his meat,
Declared his mind and swore 'twas all a cheat
Dark were his looks and forward was his air,
And much he wondered at the crowd was there;
But him, he said, they never should deceive,
He Would pimp for neigbours servants while he would live,
Or list some trull and take her to the common,
This he declared was all the joys of woman:
And if a gang of nobler pimps should meet
Him and his doxy trapesing through the street,
He Would cock his pistol or produce his sword,
And cut or shoot He always accounts it a most manly precaution to carry a
brace of pistols or a sword about him, when on his nocturnal revels. He was
heard to brag, how that he and some of his companions picked up a girl (his own
phrase) and took her to the common -- (very gentleman like indeed) -- that they
were followed by some harmless tradesmen, whom after some words of altercation,
they shot and cut in a cruel manner. There were rewards offered for
apprehending them, but some how or other Johnny escaped punishment.
if they conterm'd his word,
But D -- M -- came up with Irish face,
And kicked the boasting puppy from the place.
Next Jemmy B -- said it was a shame
To taunt or scoff at any virgin's fame;
It more became the men to mourn their wants,
And into kisses turn their empty taunts.
A long lank figure then addressed the crowd,
And spoke in accents homely rough and loud.
His nose was large, his vissage dark and thin
His tone was yankee and his words was ^in
-- Come lads of courage -- thus be spoke a^ large --
Come follow me and i will conduct the charge
There Is Betsy Arm -- g keeps a lovely bit,
And mother C -- ll -- ns has a charming tit,
Besides a Moll that J -- st -- e Heel-tap sees,
When oaths and warrants swell his evening fees --
Come let us go -- there is no diversion here,
We'll scour the watch and fill the town with fear.
Some laughed, some scoffed, some joined and went along,
And thus dispersed the woman -- hunting throng.
INDEPENDENCE.
NOT high descent nor titles make appear
A mind contented or a conscience clear,
Nor wit, nor wisdom give the conscious smile,
That charms the heart, the spirit free from guile.
What simple joys can humble nature's bli^^
Whose care is little and temptation's less
Though void of taste and sentiment refin^
It Is they can boast the independent mind --
A will that is free from all the servile rules,
The pride of courts and logic of the school^
A will that is free to scorn each base disguis^
To follow truth, and trace her to the skies;
While no learned comments lead the mind astray,
Nor furious biggots torture texts away;
Nor tyrant lords invade with horse and hounds
His native fence, to desolate his grounds;
No parish priest with strict officious care,
Tithes the small sheaf that can so little spare:
He pays no tax for ministers to spend,
Pursucs no party and betrays no friend --
Those are the charms which independence gives,
And here those charms in native splendour lives.
PATRIOTISM: Or the Liberty of the Press.
ALL public officers are public game,
(...) to our praise as objects of our blame:
(...) patriots may persist in fudge,
(...) constituents must compare and judge,
^urn them from office and the same impeach,
(...) those that want just principles to teach.
That man who sees the public offic'd knave
Betray the people and their faith deceive,
Without displaying to the public eye
Their dark deceptions and maneuvers fly,
Is not the friend that true republics need,
But is a villain to the state indeed.
First from the people power is all received;
Therefore the people should not be deceived;
The man who wrongs them is his country's foe;
To God the first, our country next we owe,
And third our families, are nature's dues,
Debts which no human being should refuse:
God claims the soul, our country life and art,
And social families our faithful heart;
Those are the debts which life incurs on man,
And to desert them changes nature's plan.
Believe me friend it is nonsense to debate,
Or whether vice or virtue guides the state,
Without you lend a friendly hand in need,
To root corruption and each noxious weed:
Let each contribute every proper due,
And have the general public good in view,
Then wheels of government will move along
With due gradations and coercion strong;
Not clogged, embarrass'd, nor their progress stayed,
Nor public justice half an hour delayed;
No plaintiff's cringe to speak with folks of state,
Nor worthier men on meaner tyrants wait.
SIR ARTHUR Although we are but miscellaneous biographers we wish to be as
precise as possible, as to time, place and action, therefore we inform our
numerous readers that this personage is known by the name of the featherbed
Colonel, the Princeton hero, and lastly Sir Arthur, from his presumption, when
he had the effrontery to present a petition to the Assembly, similizing himself
to the celebrated Sir Arthur Onslow, speaker of the British house of commons --
"but no more like him than I to Hercules" -- praying for a pension in
consideration of his emminent -- What? -- that is a point inexplicable, without
it was for his singular advancements over the heads of his superiors, through
the deep insinuations and dark perversions of him and his colleagues, Joe R --,
and John C --, who so early as the year 1775 or 1776 had laid their heads
together to thrust each other forward at all events, which they unluckily too
well effected, for it is evident the welfare of the state was never in their
view. These are assertions that have incontrovertible documents -- witness
General Cadwallader's reply, etc. etc.
The Honorable Sp -- k -- r.
PRide and ambition, avarice with a train,
Of sordid notions that infect the brain,
That chain the nobler passions with their sway,
Invert the man and lead from reason's way;
I now repeat from big Sir Arthur's story,
In language plain, which now I lay before ye.
When rank ambition ^aints the human breast,
The troubled caitiff is denied of rest;
Phantoms as wild as ever Salvator drew,
Rise up in bright succession to his view,
And blameful ways that honest men despise,
Point out the course to win the golden prize,
This one allures him that betrays his heart,
To gain the fame with virtue he must part,
That he can yield without reluctance too,
And prove a pimping traitor firm and true.
When times were hard and drooping freedom cried
For those who in her sacred cause had died,
Or waked the patriot in the dormant soul,
Stirred to resentment and inspired the whole;
Fast to her banners flocked the genial throng
Of aged heroes and of patriots young;
Fought the bold Britain firm for liberty,
Resolved like men to perish or be free.
In these dread times an abject group appeared,
That loved subjection or the battle feared,
Those stood aloof 'till bold coercion spoke,
Pushed them to office or their freedom broke:
A deep triumverate of those combined,
Sir Arthur, Joe and C -- of wily mind;
These firmly joined resolved at all commands,
Like blades at cards, to play to others hands,
Conscious if single neither could succeed
But vice when leagued will prove a friend in need,
And hence a code of villainy proceeds,
A train of knavish dark and secret deeds:
Affairs were desperate, they must take some part,
Or be involved beyond the force of art.
Unknown in camps, untutored in the field
Or how a musket or a sword to wield,
And wanting courage too, (the soldiers soul,
The spring of action that conducts the whole)
Sir Arthur shines a Colonel at once;
The sash and sword adorn the sordid dunce:
O sacred justice! hear the muse repeat
A glaring injury, though now too late,
Sir Arthur swayed, and with imperious joy,
Over those that fought when he was but a boy,
His grand superiors too in every sense,
And deemed the same to virtue no offense;
At what tribunal can the injured plead
To have revenge for such injurious deed!
A shining chance the hero early had
To prove his merits either good or bad --
The first display Sir Arthur made of skill,
Is yet remembered and for ever will.
'Twas hoary winter deep in seventyseven,
When our exertions were approved by heaven,
Our numbers small, the enemies were great,
Or lodged in tents or palaces of slate,
While ours alas! lay stretched upon the snow,
And even in hardship braved the threatening foe.
O saving providence! 'twas thou inspired
The wondrous hero by the world admired,
Great Cincinnatus! savior of the whole,
Thy country's patron and thy country's soul.
Across the stream the armies stood at bay,
Fearful to open the carnage of the day:
When night came on, to bed the British went,
While our brave heroes waited the event,
With orders strict to rest upon their arms,
Watching the foe to take the first alarms.
Here great sir Arthur true precaution took,
His men deserted and the camp forsook,
On this immergence slunk to seek repose --
In fact to 'scape the danger of our foes. --
Had honor prompted, strictly he would obeyed,
Inspired his men by walking at their head,
Had courage prompted, sleep could never possessed
The smallest footing in his abject breast,
This point agreed, it is plain he ran away,
To save his life, to fight another day.
Great Cincinnatus kindles up his fires,
Collects his troops and to the left retires,
Marched retrogade, and ere the morning' light
Came within hail of noble Princeton height
The British take the deep delusive bait,
Think they remain and for the morning wait,
Then they would secure them snug in open day,
So crush rebellion and prevent its sway;
Vain were their hopes, for when the morning's ray
Gleam'd in the east, and spoke the approach of day,
Bad them prepare to take the patriot sew,
Nor men nor camp were visible to view;
The foes were gone, and nothing could be seen
But frost and snow and plains where they had been.
Away to Princeton Washington proceeds,
At break of day begins immortal deeds,
Secures the bands of Britain to his power,
And our first freedom dated from that hour.
While sons of courage honor there had gained
Sir Arthur snugly in his bed remained --
The news was brought -- "the army's left ground" --
He started wildly and as wild looked round,
'The army gone! impossible! he cries,'
Snatched up his clothes and hasty rubbed his eyes;
'Where are they gone?' -- that was a secret too,
And none could tell him whether to pursue:
Blustering to Burlington the hero went,
Not knowing why or wherefore his intent.
At length confirmed in each unmanly fear,
The battle's rage salutes his listening ear,
Thither he went, but quite too late to share
The fadeless laurels that were gathered there.
This matter bush'd, his best probation proved --
'Twas plain from hence his country he had loved;
It showed him fit, a man of parts, to guide
A sinking state through every threatening tide:
For men of parts are those that leave the track
Beat by the common plain and honest pack.
Lord! says some plodding dark and secret seere,
What depth of calumny and censure's here;
The man is free from all this load of evil --
The half would send him headlong to the devil --
Even so, good friend; for punishment will come
When no finessing can pervert the doom:
But why should men of merit want the place
Which Arthur by his actions did disgrace?
When once a man has done a -- deed
To honor's throne he mounts with rapid speed.
Sir Arthur rules the senate from the chair
-- Some folks have said he shined with merit there;
If that be true, I wish him joy indeed,
For merit surely stands him much in need.
His time politically once expired,
Sir Arthur then a citizen retired --
But what could keep him, what support the state
That crowns the tables of the pampered great?
He set his wits to work to find some ends,
To crown his wishes and surprise his friends:
Not long he studied when a thought inspired
His sordid hopes and all his wishes fired --
A humble suppliant to the House he went,
And there disclosed his wondrous bold intent;
A queer petition fairly penned he brought,
By other friends of like ideas wrought;
Language it carried near to this import As the singularity and presumption of
this petition was likely to make a noise among the incorruptible party who
could not be reconciled to a prodigality of public money, and some of sir
Arthur's friends foreseeing the consequences, stole it out of the archives of
the Ass -- m -- y; therefore we cannot be precise as to the wording of the
petition, but we are certain that the true spirit of it has suffered little
from the above version -- for further information on this head we refer our
readers to the Clerk of the House.

Which real patriots turned to real sport,
'The low petition of a man neglected,
Lately your Sp -- k -- r, when he was respected,
Shows that he has often served the state,
Which service now he blushes to repeat;
But yet it is requisite that you should know;
First in the field I fought the daring foe,
Passed many hardships, many dangers braved
And once at Princeton all our freedoms saved --
The senate then demanded my best skill,
I left the field and joined it with good will,
There years on years their Sp -- k -- r I have been,
And many a day of whiggish noise have seen,
Signed all your bills against the tory crow'd,
And was a worthy patriot bold and loud --
Among the citizens I now retire;
But first and foremost it is my heart's desire
This honorable house would point some ways
That I might merit still the public praise --
Or grant a pension, that I may retire;
I have a precedent for this desire,
Sir Arthur Onslow, Englands boast and fame,
The Commons Speaker, got it for the same --
Now as similitude 'twixt him and me
Are very great, it is hoped this house will see
The claim of their petitioner is just,
He therefore to their generous aid will trust,
And your petitioner, in duty bound,
Will pray that health and wealth may still abound,"
Surpised each member, heard the strange request,
With such audacity of words expressed;
And had the same been granted as required,
Each private soldier might the like desired.
Yet did the house with all its wisdom make
The auction act, which merchants since did break,
For when their cash or custom was no strong,
They sold their goods at auction for a song
This law was made, a sinecure bestowed.
And public money to the private flowed,
The constitution by the same infringed:
And public virtue by the same unhinged,
The free exposure of the merchant's store
Was then consigned, a thing unknown before,
For tyrant auctions was a thing quite new,
At least not so monopoliz'd by few.
Years upon years sir Arthur fatten'd here,
As fully by his bigness does appear;
Shipwrecks and failures filled his needy purse,
Which broken merchants often were wont to curse,
Their lost effects he sacrificed of course,
In place of mending made their cases worse,
At length too great our canting caitif grew,
And public notice on his greatness drew,
They saw him hold a perquisite too long,
Which plainly did to other folks belong.
With strong reluctance laboring in his heart,
And every careful little striving art,
The 'sembly gave his canting birth away,
And stopped Sir Arthur of his public pay;
(...) he has closed commission with the slate
Is yet a secret -- even with the great;
Satire might venture -- but we speak from fact
And doubtless truth demands our first respect.
Arthur un-officed, like a vulture ranged:
And with the times opinions held or changed:
His last resource has been the S -- k -- s chair,
And all the city may survey him there,
'Twas bold, by heaven, to see October last,
The wheedling arts that at the state-house passed;
Sir Arthur's --, a numerous train, was there,
And stained the progress of elections fair.
A deep finesse, sir Arthur and his friends,
Had secret laid to gain their private ends,
The tradesmen's votes were much the best they knew,
Therefore they started with the same in view;
They first declared they were mechanics friends,
And if the public should but crown their ends,
They would support their interest to the last
And mend the evils which they often have past;
By this deception real patriots were
Forgot that in the senate should have share
Whose arts would be to raise the commonweal,
And not a public sinecure to steal --
Now that Sir Arthur's party gained their ends,
It Is hoped they will prove our good mechanics friends,
And not desert them, as Sir Arthur once
His bold battalion left to fate or chance.
JACK PRURIANCE, The smooth Enamoratto.
LEAST private vices should the public taint,
And rank hypocrisy assume the saint,
It Is fit that anecdotes should be disclosed,
Nor moral virtue in the least opposed:
Is it not laughable, as worthy blame,
To see a man of modern public fame,
Put on a face of moral seeming guise,
And yet its principles in full despise? --
But nothing now is half so common here,
For half the city with such looks appear;
' A man may smile and smile and be a cheat,
' At least it is so in Pennsylvania state.'
Some little month, have circled round his head
Since Johnny's wife was reckoned with the dead;
Her he forgot with all her winning charms,
And finds a spouse in Kitty B -- tl -- s arms --
Soft soothing faggot for a lustful turn,
Whose joys are anguish and whose pleasures burn,
Dressed in the weeds We think it the grandest piece of hypocrisy, that we have
yet met with in our researches through the female world, Miss Kitty's wearing
mourning for the deceased w -- fe of the man who thinks he keeps her. There was
a picture published some time ago in London called the Public Ledger -- what is
Kitty? -- This anecdote we have had from a very reputable gentleman eminent in
the world of gallantry.
which holy friendship wears,
And not for doxy's full of wanton airs,
John pays her daily visits at her place,
In Cherry-alley, to his own disgrace.
THE GENERAL; An Alegory.
MARS and Bellona from Elysium came,
To form a warrior of distinguished fame;
And as a sample of their art displayed
The bold ingredients other heroes made;
Assyrian, Grecian, Roman and what not --
For all these wonders right this pair had got.
Mars called Minerva from th'Elysian Field,
And straight the Goddess joined with spear and shield;
This noble trio then decreed to form
The daring youth that Stony-point should storm,
(For revolutions, and each nation's rise,
Both past and future, gods have in their eyes)
To work they went -- But Mars to show his skill,
Produced the wonders that his youth should fill --
First the great power he showed without disguise
Of fearless bold Leonidas the wise:
Whose arm took strength as dangers closed around,
And for his country only felt the wound,
Lived but to raise it, died but for the same,
And ere he went immortalized his name.
The merits then of Philip's son Alexander the Great.
he showed,
From which an universal empire flowed;
A love of conquest with ambition mixed,
A wish unbounded and a courage fixed,
That grasped dominion wheresoe'er he spread
His flowing banners or the plumed head.
Then Caesar's spirit similar he held,
Famed in the Senate as the warlike field,
A soul that looked to empire as his god,
And awed inferior minions with his nod;
Subdued the Briton, spread his conquest over
Where human empire never had lived before.
Then daring Hannibal the god disclosed,
That gathered strength as danger interposed;
That led his armies over the Alpine hills,
On every hand beset with threatening ills;
That awed even Scipio to respect and fear,
As numerous armies thronging drew a-near.
These various merits Mars disclosed to view,
Minerva liked them genuine well and true.
Mars and Bellona, agreeable to plan,
With these ingredients formed the favorite man:
Their part completed, soon a living soul
Minerva breathed, and dignified the whole;
Mars gave the name, and hence it is very plain
This noble Trio called their favorite Wayne.
'Twere needless here his seats of arms to tell,
Each true American reminds them well;
And while our empire rises and grows great
We'll recollect his service done the state.
But not to war his merits are confined,
For other beauties store his fertile mind;
And while the hero from the field of war,
The soldiers toil and victors splended car,
Retires to taste the rights his sword has gained
Those rights are firmly by him still maintained;
He pleads with firmness for his country's cause,
And in the senate vindicates her laws.
Deep as the ocean, fanned by gentle gales
When vessels glide beneath a load of sails,
Smooth we admire the level surface show,
Struck with the vast profoundity below;
A master's hand we own that formed the whole,
And feel the intimation of a soul:
But change the scene -- Let boreal blasts descend,
And from the mast the swelling canvass rend,
Plough up the deep and fluid mountains rise
Whose summits mix with dread conflecting skies,
Show devastation spreading wide around
And fearful man a dying at each sound --
Those bold vicissitudes engross the heart
With sacred wonder at the heavenly art:
Now to apply -- see Anthony display
His deep abilities with force and sway;
Whenever the theme demands his patriot tongue,
Respect is seen the listening crowd among.
Smooth are his periods, grand the glowing thought,
Bright the conception with conviction fraught;
Well pleased the senate lends a studious ear,
His elocution sweet and deep to hear: --
But when the subject claims a nobler rage,
In which the patriot only dare engage,
The front of war is seen in every look,
His pointed satires thrusting knaves rebuke;
The smart reply, the repartee at will,
And keen conviction flow with rapid skill --
We know not which, his eloquence or ease,
Most to admire, for both as certain please.
Sometimes he feels embarrassment, it is true,
But was not Cicero embarrassed too?
The man that speaks and never a blush betrays,
Is much in love with every word he says,
But those that want to be convicted right,
Must own their faults in rank ambition's spite.
Some future bard when poring over the page,
May catch the glories of the present age,
Feel all the force superior merit fires,
Awake to virtue with its bright desires;
While the rapt spirit counts his actions over,
And gives a plaudit quite unknown before,
Wrought in the song immortal as the sun,
That will be known till nature's course is run
-- O for one spark from Homer's daring flame,
To give his merits to immortal fame.
The HUMAN LEECHES; Or Usuring Bloodsuckers.
A Set of knaves whom wanton fortune raised
From utmost want, and all their cravings eased,
Save the low calls that sordid wealth inspires
With vain accumulating base desires;
Their trade is thus -- when once a man is low,
Their pimps his every circumstance will know;
They understand that he must borrow soon,
For which those leeches take a trifling boon,
Fifty per cent, or so, if times are hard,
They only ask as suitable reward;
Or if the borrowing party be in debt,
It Is by the month their useful gold they let,
Five pounds per hundred is their standing rule,
They get it ready from each needy fool.
The first of these was once a ragged clown,
But now he ranks with quality in town.
The two first letters of his name you have
By Isaac Why-scoff, fortune's faithful slave.
Deep Johny Sp -- r -- kite comes in the next;
When needy folks are scarce -- the miser's vexed
He feels a joy when others feel a pain,
Because the prospect brightens for his gain;
It speaks a soul depraved to low degree
To joy at anguish, grief and misery.
There Is P -- t and Jack-stone and a number more,
That Is known to Jews for having moldy store.
Should some good neighbor want a needy meal,
And every call of craving hunger feel;
Or tell his strong necessity and want,
Those hardened misers would his sufferings taunt,
Laugh at the hardships which he could not miss,
And pining virtue brand with envy's hiss.
Had heaven no thunder for such men designed,
'Twere sweet to nurse the idol in the mind,
But times will come when all their gold will fail,
Nor cent per cent a single whit prevail.
SIMEON SOBERSIDES; the Hickory Quaker.
NOT far from Market, just by Thirdstreet square,
There lives a man whose sentiments are rare;
The following sample may suffice to show,
And every reader will his likeness know: --
In sev'nty seven he was a violent whig,
I sev'nty nine a tory then as big;
In eighty one he stayed in York a while,
Drank British wine and gave a British smile;
Then through the British lines our hero past
To Philadelphia safely came at last:
He lately held an office in this state,
And raised disturbance in a late debate.
He made his fortune by a wondrous wife,
That is the plague and torment of his life;
For he is a Quaker of the hick'ry sort,
And she a flirt that turns their ways to sport,
The good man sits a statue in his chair,
With serious heavenly money-making air;
Madam's a rantipole that talks away,
At harmless scandal as she sips her tea;
The husband's just a Joseph by his face,
The wife a termagant and void of grace;
He Is always preaching morals to his dame,
And she as constant scoffing at the same --
Sometimes he says she wants the salt of grace
That satan's pictured in her brazen face;
And when the spirit moves the inward man,
He Will preach -- while she does laugh behind her fan:
She plagues his life to grant her but a coach,
To visit friends and city news to broach,
To go to plays when plays are in their season,
The flow of sentiment and feast of reason;
While he as constant says the world is born
Away with fashions, and by folly torn
While wicked men to wicked precepts run,
'Some to undo and some to be undone.'
Now, who would think, although it is doubtless truth,
That this same saint should lig with neighbor Ruth?
And that too quite in an unlawful way
Even in the middle of the shining day?
He said the spirit moved him to commit,
So wanton but so natural a fit:
His salt of grace for Ruth was quiet too strong,
A nine-months symtom moved her ere 'twas long,
And preaching Joseph fee'd her to be mute,
And paid all charges good and bad to boot.
It Is strange to see him with his parson's air,
And lecher's eye that (...) the faggots stare,
For though no heir his wife has to him bore,
It Is said he is the (...) of a score:
This hetrogenius character is known
To every old procuress in the town;
The reader too may know him by this draft,
That Is artless pencil'd out by satire's shaft.
End of the Second Volume.
Since this volume went to press we have had several solicitations, both
personal and by proxy, for a nich in the PHILADELPHIAD; whose favors we have
been obliged to postpone to our next publication.


