The WAY to Wealth, AND A PLAN by which every MAN MAY PAY HIS TAXES.
COURTEOUS READER,
I HAVE heard that nothing gives an author so great pleasure as to find his
works respectfully quoted by others. Judge, then, how much I must have been
gratified by an incident I am going to relate to you. I stopped my horse
lately, where a great number of people were collected at an auction of
merchants goods. The hour of sale not being come, they were conversing on the
badness of the times, and one of the company called to a plain clean Old Man,
with white locks, -- Pray, Father Abraham, what think you of the times? Will
not these heavy taxes quite ruin the country? How shall we be ever able to pay
them? What would you advise us to? Father Abraham stood up, and replied, If you
would have my advice, I will give it you in short, "for a word to the wise is
enough," as Poor Richard says. They joined in desiring him to speak his mind,
and gathering round him, he proceeded as follows:

FRIEND, says he, the taxes are indeed very heavy; and if those laid on by the
government were the only ones we had to pay, we might more easily discharge
them; but we have many others, and much more grievous to some of us. We are
taxed twice as much by our idleness, three times as much by our pride, and four
times as much by our folly; and from these taxes the commissioners cannot ease
or deliver us, by allowing an abatement. However, let us hearken to good
advice, and something may be done for us; "God helps them that help
themselves," as Poor Richard says.

I. It would be thought a hard government that should tax its people one tenth
part of their time, to be employed in its service: but idleness taxes many of
us much more; sloth, by bringing on diseases, absolutely shortens life. Sloth,
like rust, consumes faster than labor wears, while the used key is always
bright, as Poor Richard says. -- But do thou love life, then do not (...)
time, for that is the stuff life is made of, (...) is necessary do we spend in
sleep; forgetting that The sleeping fox catches no poultry, and that there will
be sleeping enough in the grave, as Poor Richard says.

If time be of all things the most precious, wasting time must be, as Poor
Richard says, "the greatest prodigality," since, as he elsewhere tells us, Lost
time is never found again; and what we call time enough, always proves little
enough: Let us then up and be doing, and doing to the purpose; for by diligence
we shall do more with less perplexity. Sloth makes all things difficult, but
industry all easy; and, he that rises late, must trot all day, and shall
scarce overtake his business at night; while laziness travels so slowly, that
poverty soon overtakes him. Drive thy business, let not that drive thee; and
early to bed, and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise, as
Poor Richard says.

So what signifies wishing and hoping for better times? We may make these times
better, if we bestir ourselves. Industry need not wish, and he that lives upon
hope will die fasting. There are no gains without pains; then help hands, for I
have no lands, or, if I have, they are smartly taxed. He that has a trade,
has an estate; and he that has a calling, has an office of profit and
honor, as Poor Richard says; but then the trade must be worked at, and the
calling well followed, or neither the estate nor the office will enable us to
pay our taxes. If we are industrious we shall never starve; for, at the working
man's house hunger looks in, but dares not enter. Nor will the bailiff or the
constable enter, for, Industry pays debts, while despair increases them. What
though you have found no treasure, nor has any rich relation left you a legacy,
Diligence is the mother of good luck, and God gives all things to industry.
Then plow deep, while sluggards sleep, and you shall have corn to sell and to
keep. Work while it is called today, for you know not how much you may be
hindered tomorrow. One today is worth two to-morrows, as Poor Richard says;
and farther, Never leave that till tomorrow, which you can do today. -- If
you were a servant, would you not be ashamed that a good master should catch
you idle? Are you then your own master? Be ashamed to catch yourself idle, when
there is so much to be done for yourself, your family, and your country. --
Handle your tools without mittens; remember, that The cat in gloves catches no
mice, as Poor Richard says. It is true, there is much to be done, and, perhaps,
you are weak handed; but stick to it steadily, and you will see great effects;
for Constant dropping wears away stones; and by diligence and patience the
mouse ate in two the cable; and little strokes fell great oaks.

Methinks I hear some of you say, "Must a man afford himself no leisure?" I
will tell thee, my friend, what Poor Richard says; Employ thy time well, if
thou meanest to gain leisure, and, since thou art not sure of a minute, throw
not away an hour. Leisure is time for doing something useful; this leisure the
diligent man will obtain, but the lazy man never; for, A life of leisure, and a
life of laziness are two things. Many, without labor, would live by their wits
only, but they break for want of stock; whereas industry gives comfort, and
plenty, and respect. Fly pleasures, and they will follow you. The diligent
spinner has a large shift; and now I have a sheep and a cow, every body bids me
good morrow.

II. But with our industry we must likewise be steady, settled, and careful,
and oversee our own affairs with our own eyes, and not trust too much to
others; for as Poor Richard says, "I never saw an often removed tree,
"Nor yet an often removed family,
"That throve so well as those that settled be."
And again, Three removes is as bad as a fire, and again, Keep thy shop, and
thy shop will keep thee; and again, If you would have your business done, go;
if not; send. And again, "He that by the plough would thrive,
^
And again, The eye of a master will do more work than both his hands; and
again, Want of care does us more damage than want of knowledge; and again, Not
to oversee workmen, is to leave them your purse open; trusting too much to
others care is the ruin of many; for, In the affairs of this world, men are
saved, not by faith, but by the want of it: But a man's own care is profitable;
for, If you would have a faithful servant, and one that you like, serve
yourself. A little neglect may breed great mischief; for want of a nail the
shoe was lost; for want of a shoe the horse was lost; and for want of a horse
the rider was lost, being overtaken and slain by the enemy; all for want of a
little care about a horse-shoe nail.

III. So much for industry, my friends, and attention to one's own business;
but to these we must add frugality, if we would make our industry more
certainly successful. A man may, if he knows not how to save as he gets, keep
his nose all his life to the grindstone, and die not worth a groat at last. A
fat kitchen makes a lean will; and "Many estates are spent in the getting,
"Since women for tea forsook spinning and knitting,
"And men for punch forsook hewing and splitting."
If you would be wealthy, think of saving, as well as of getting. The Indies
have not made Spain rich, because her outgoes are greater than her incomes.

Away, then, with your expensive follies, and you will not then have so much
cause to complain of hard times, heavy taxes, and chargeable families; for
"Women and wine, game and deceit,
"Make the wealth small, and the want great."
And farther, What maintains one vice, would bring up two children. You may
think, perhaps, that a little tea, or a little punch now and then, diet a
little more costly, clothes a little finer, and a little entertainment now and
then, can be no great matter; but remember, "Many a little makes a mickle."
Beware of little expenses; A small leak will sink a great ship, as Poor Richard
says; and again, Who dainties love, shall beggars prove; and moreover, Fools
make feasts, and wise men eat them. Here you are all got together to this sale
of fineries and nick-nacks. You call them goods; but, if you do not take care,
they will prove evils to some of you. You expect they will be sold cheap, and,
perhaps, they may for less than they cost; but, if you have no occasion for
them, they must be dear to you. Remember what Poor Richard says, Buy what thou
have no need of, and ere long thou shall sell thy necessaries. And again, At a
great pennyworth pause awhile. He means, that perhaps the cheapness is apparent
only, and not real; or the bargain, by straitening thee in thy business, may do
thee more harm than good. For in another place he says, Many have been ruined
by buying good pennyworths. Again, It is foolish to lay out money in a purchase
of repentance; and yet this folly is practiced every day at auctions, for want
of minding the Almanac. Many a one, for the sake of finery on the back, has
gone with a hungry belly, and half starved their families; Silks and sattins,
scarlets and velvets, put out the kitchen fire, as Poor Richard says. These are
not the necessaries of life; they can scarcely be called the conveniences; and
yet only because they look pretty, how many want to have them? By these, and
other extravagances, the genteel are reduced to poverty, and forced to borrow
of those whom they formerly despised, but who, through industry and frugality,
have maintained their standing; in which case it appears plainly that A
ploughman on his legs, is higher than a gentleman on his knees, as Poor Richard
says. -- Perhaps they have had a small estate left them, which they knew not
the getting of; they think. "It is day, and will never be night;" that a little
to be spent out of so much is not worth minding; but Always taking out of the
meal-tub, and never putting in, soon comes to the bottom, as Poor Richard says;
(...) have known before, if they had often his advice: If you would know the
value of money, go and try to borrow some; for he that goes a borrowing goes a
sorrowing, as Poor Richard says; and, indeed, so does he that lends to such
people, when he goes to get it in again. Poor Dick farther advises, and says,
"Fond pride of dress is sure a very curse;
"Ere fancy you consult, consult your purse."
And again, Pride is as loud a beggar as Want, and a great deal more saucy.
When you have bought one fine thing, you must buy ten more, that your
appearance may be all of a-piece; but Poor Dick says, It is easier to suppress
the first desire, than to satisfy all that follow it: And it is as truly folly
for the poor to ape the rich, as for the frog to swell, in order to equal the
ox. "Vessels large may venture more,
"But little boats should keep near shore."
"It is, however, a folly soon punished:" for, as Poor Richard says, Pride that
dines on vanity sups on contempt: Pride breakfasted with plenty, dined with
poverty, and supped with infamy. And, after all, of what use is this pride of
appearance, for which so much is risked, so much is suffered? It cannot promote
health, nor ease pain; it makes no increase of merit in the person, it creates
envy, it hastens misfortune.

But what madness must it be to run in debt for these supersluities? We are
offered, by the terms of this sale, six months credit; and that, perhaps, has
induced some of us to attend it, because we cannot spare the ready money, and
hope now to be fine without it. But ah! think what you do when you run in debt;
you give to another power over your liberty. If you cannot pay at the time, you
will be ashamed to see your creditor; you will be in fear when you speak to
him; you will make poor, pitiful, sneaking excuses, and, by degrees, come to
lose your veracity, and sink into base downright lying; for The second vice is
lying, the first is running in debt, as Poor Richard says; and again to the
same purpose, "Lying rides upon Debt's back:" whereas a free born American
ought not to be ashamed nor afraid to see or speak to any man living. But
poverty often deprives a man of all spirit and virtue. It is hard for an empty
bag to stand upright. What would you think of that prince, or of that
government, who should issue an edict forbidding you to dress like a gentleman
or gentlewoman, on pain of imprisonment or servitude? Would you not say that
you were free, have a right to dress as you please, and that such an edict
would be a breach of your privileges, and such a government tyrannical? And yet
you are about to put yourself under that tyranny when you run in debt for such
dress! Your creditor has authority, at his pleasure, to deprive you of your
liberty, by confining you in gaol for life, or by selling you for a servant, if
you should not be able to pay him. When you have got your bargain, you may,
perhaps, think little of payment; but as Poor Richard says, Creditors have
better memories than debtors; creditors are a superstitious sect, great
observers of set days and times. The day comes round before you are aware, and
the demand is made before you are prepared to satisfy it; or, if you bear your
debt in mind, the term which at first seemed so long, will, at it lessens,
appear extremely short. Time will seem to have added wings to his heels as well
as his shoulders. Those have a short Lent who owe money to be paid at Easter.
At present, perhaps, you may think yourselves in thriving circumstances, and
that you can bear a little extravagance without injury: but "For age and want
save while you may,
"No morning sun lasts a whole day."
Gain may be temporary and uncertain, but ever, while you live, expense is
constant and certain; and, It is easier to build two chimneys, than to keep one
in fuel, as Poor Richard says: So, Rather go to bed supperless than rise in
debt.

(...).

(...) you have got the philosopher's (...) you will no longer complain of bad
times, or the difficulty of paying taxes.

IV. This doctrine, my friends; is reason and wisdom: But, after all, do not
depend too much upon your own industry and frugality and prudence, though
excellent things; for they may all be blasted without the blessing of heaven;
and, therefore, ask that blessing humbly, and be not uncharitable to those that
at present seem to want it, but comfort and help them. Remember Job suffered,
and was afterward prosperous.

And now, to conculde, Experience keeps a dear school, but fools will learn in
no other, as Poor Richard says, and scarce in that; for, it is true, We may
give advice, but we cannot give conduct: However, remember this, They that will
not (...), cannot be helped; and further, that If you will not hear Reason, she
will surely rap your knuckles, as Poor Richard says.

Thus the old gentleman ended his harangue. The people heard it, and approved
the doctrine, and immediately practiced the contrary, just as if it had been a
common sermon; for the auction opened, and they began to buy extravagantly -- I
found the good man had thoroughly studied my Almanacks, and digested all I had
dropped on these topics during the course of twenty-five years. The frequent
mention he made of me must have tired any one else; but my vanity was
wonderfully delighted with it, though I was conscious, that not a tenth part of
the wisdom was my own, which he ascribed to me; but rather the gleanings that I
had made of the sense of all ages and nations. However, I resolved to be the
better for the echo of it; and, though I had at first determined to buy stuff
for a new coat, I went away, resolved to wear my old one a little longer.
Reader, if thou will do the same, thy profit will be as great as mine. I am, as
ever,

Thine to serve thee, RICHARD SAUNDERS.

Philadelphia: Printed by DANIEL HUMPHREYS, in Spruce-street, near the
Drawbridge.


